Title
Review for Indochine (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Pedro Sena
This complicated story makes one heck of a film, thanks to the two actors
that pretty much carry it.  Between Catherine Deneuve, and Vincent Prez,
this film actually gets exciting.  The matriarch tries to keep a dream
alive, and the other tries to keep the politics moving forward, and as he
says in the end, the innocent go to jail, and the guilty go free... which is
as much as what the film is about as it is a love story that has become
impossible, and a political event on top of it.
Eliane ( Deneuve ) is a farm owner, who has been able to keep the workers
going, and do very well in the process, even if the communist movement is
beginning to get closer and closer to home.  Eventually, it does so, and the
war pretty much ravaged everything, not only the farms, but also the
personal lives of many people.  Camille is an adopted daughter, by Eliane,
and she is set to marry a nice kid that wants to break the bonds of rigidity
and change in his own family. And after an education in Paris, he returns,
to find that he is forced to marry Camille, and to uphold the family name
and aristocratic position.  It doesn't happen.  His stand is anti
establishment, and the communists are providing a better outlook than the
old system.  After the marriage he leaves.
And Camille, in the meantime gets accidentally involved with a French
officer who has been the mother's lover ( one of many she says ) for  some
time, which needless to say creates an impossible situation.
The officer gets reprimanded for his behavior at an upper class  gathering
by getting sent off to a far away outpost.  And the young and determined
Camille takes off after him on foot.  In the meantime the French are
beginning to lose control.  And Camille finally finds her young man, but he
makes a bad judgement and gets his own commanding officer killed in the
process.  The two young lovers leave, and try to survive for a period under
the blessings of a religious group, until their very own situation has
become also tenuous, and he is asked to leave.  Just then he also gets
captured with his own child in tow, and the story now gets serious.  The
child gets adopted by Eliane, and is raised by her in France.
Camille is captured by the communists, and as is her ability, and
determination, she also becomes one of their leaders, mainly  because she is
a heroine for having killed a French officer.
And in the end ( the story is told as a memory by the mother to the young
son, now both in Paris ).... a reminder how love can be both intense and
meaningful, as well as cruel.
It is an excellent film, very well carried out from beginning to end, and
although it is rather slow in parts, it only adds to the need to see it
resolved.
While the film steers away from the political opinions, it does make a point
of showing that it was the expensive attitudes of the colonialists, much
similar to the style of the older feudal, and religious, system that caused
the whole country to collapse, not necessarily the invading communists.  It
is evident in the film that the megalomaniac attitudes of the upper, and
ruling, classes is the real problem.  And that the new system is promising
an end to those regimes, which many are getting tired of.  In one scene a
group of farmers is destroying a whole family and their belongings by taking
back the land they deserve, rather than be owned by others.
It is a film that fits in the mold of THE LOVER, where a similar situation
also exists, but the process, or strength of the past still dominates.  Here
that structure is really seen to fall.... be it westernized or otherwise.
But the most important of the mercenaries
is the only one that has it all clear... while he has not enough  passion in
his body to be appreciated and loved by Eliane, he at  least has a better
command of his feelings, when he knows that  there is not much left to do,
but go home.
Excellent film, and really quite worth the nomination which Catherine
Deneuve received for the Oscar, and it is a shame that she did not get it,
in a very competitive year.  This film does deserves better fate than be a
forgotten exercise in film making.

Author
Ben Hoffman
There have been several films in the past that dealt with French
colonization.  ALGIERS is perhaps the finest example.
INDOCHINE starts slowly, as if it were merely the story of a French
woman, Ms. Devries (Catherine Deneuve), whose father and she own a
rubber plantation in VietNam, and who falls in love with a younger man
(Vincent Perez), a French naval officer.  She is the mother of an Asian
daughter (Linh Dan Pham) whom she adopted when the child lost her
parents.
But the film suddenly picks up its pace when it turns political, when
it shows how the French treated the Indo-Chinese as slaves, separating
families (as was done in the U.S. prior to our Civil War), how people
were weighed and examined like cattle before being sold into bondage.
Clearly, the VietNamese had enough grievances to overthrow the French
and drive them out.
The story takes another turn when the young man leaves Ms. Devries when
her daughter falls in love with him.  But the main story is the routing
of the French, the love stories being merely the vehicle to tell the
greater story of the war.
An exciting film. . . and a foreshadowing of what we encountered when
we fell into the VietNam trap from which the French had finally
extricted themselves.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  There is human drama, political
     spectacle, and beautiful scenery in this DR. ZHIVAGO of
     Vietnam.  A story of a love triangle is told against the
     backdrop of the Vietnamese revolt against French imperialism.
     Recommended.  Rating:  +3 (-4 to +4).
     INDOCHINE is a DR. ZHIVAGO for Indochina/Vietnam.  Like DR. ZHIVAGO, it
is an almost melodramatic love triangle story set against the backdrop of a
country in revolution.  It is a story of people living through the death of
one world they knew and the birth of another world where they must survive.
     Eliane (played by Catherine Deneuve) is a very independent French woman
who runs a rubber plantation in French Indochina in the 1930s.  As the film
opens she is attending the funeral of two close Indochinese friends.  She
adopts their young daughter and tries to bring up young Camille (played by
Linh Dan Pham) in the ways of the French aristocracy.  Camille tries to be
French, but we see her as much more the same flesh as the workers that
Eliane occasionally beats.  Into this relationship comes Jean-Baptiste
(played by Vincent Perez), a handsome French naval officer.  Eliane falls
for Jean-Baptiste, having a short passionate affair with him.  Then Jean-
Baptiste saves Camille from a terrorist and mother and daughter discover
that they love the same man.  The tension tears the small family apart and
Camille runs away from home.  Traveling on foot on her own gives Camille a
chance to see what the French colonial power is really doing to her country.
Eventually she becomes a  pawn in the Vietnamese revolt against the French.
     Director Regis Wargnier has an eye for the stunning scenery of Vietnam,
both natural and in the native Vietnamese cultural costumes.  The film takes
its time, 158 minutes, to tell a story that covers a long span in the
characters' lives.  While the film's sympathies are obviously against the
French occupation, the political viewpoint is somewhat understated.
Wargnier's hand is considerably more subtle than Bernardo Bertolucci's was
in films such as 1900 and THE LAST EMPEROR.
     INDOCHINE is intelligent and entertaining, certainly one of the best
films of 1992.  I give it a +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.
[Seen at the Loew's Theater in Red Bank, NJ.]

Author
Frank Maloney
     INDOCHINE is a French movie by Regis Wargnier.  It stars Catherine
Deneuve, Vincent Perez, and Linh Dan Pham.  Rated PG-13 for violence.
In French with English subtitles.
     INDOCHINE is a luscious epic set in the French Indochina of the
1930s to 1954 (when the French withdrew from Southeast Asia).  The whole
production is built around the legendary French star Catherine Deneuve.
She plays Eliane the icy owner of rich rubber-tree plantations who has
adopted an orphaned Annamese princess, Camille, played by Linh Dan Pham.
The story focuses on Eliane's life as she has to deal with a changing
Vietnam, starting to stir with nationalism and communism, and with a
corrupted and cruel colonial establishment.  Eliane sees herself as an
Asian, born on her father's estates, never having been to France, but
the Vietnamese see her somewhat differently.  Fortunately, the story
does not give us only Vietnam as seen by Eliane.  For a large middle
segment, Eliane recedes into the background as the story follows the
travels and tribulations of Camille, whose search for personal freedom
is a symbol for the parallel national experience.
     The director and co-writer, Regis Wargnier, has taken on a huge
territory to conquer in two and a half hours, the last twenty years of
France's Indochinese empire, the personal stories of two exceptionally
strong women and the young French naval officer (Vincent Perez) who
figures most importantly in both their lives.  As grand epic, INDOCHINE
is a qualified success.  Wargnier does not quite achieve a GONE WITH THE
WIND or DR. ZHIVAGO.  He is not working with an established literary
property, for one thing, and so lacks some of the structure and
direction of the Hollywood models.  But even with a certain
indecisiveness and wandering, INDOCHINE does manage to impress us
enormously as a visual epic.  Wargnier has gone out of his way to show
us a Vietnam that most of us had no idea existed -- enormously varied
terrains and landscapes, glimpses of traditional Vietnamese
civilization, a land of power and beauty.
     Then, too, Wargnier is blessed with one of the world's greatest
woman stars, Catherine Deneuve.  Deneuve doesn't make many movies these
days that get released in the U.S.  and the most recent film of any
distinction I could find a reference to was SCENE OF THE CRIME (1987;
directed by Andre Techine); in the Eighties she also allowed herself to
appear in such dubious understakings as the vampire film THE HUNGER.
Her greatest period was the Sixties, when she made some of the European
modern classics:  UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG, BELLE DE JOUR, REPULSION, to
name three.  In any case, it is wonderful to see her again in a film
completely worthy of her presence and one that fully exploits that pure
iciness that has been fascinating her fans at least since Roman
Polanski's 1965 film.  She is ideal for the part of Eliane -- mature,
sensuous, in control, strong, and deeply loving, deeply sad.  She
embodies all that the French achieved and lost in Indochina, the best
and worst of colonialism.
     Linh Dan Pham is fully up to her part as Eliane's adopted daughter,
Camille, who begins as a 16-year-old schoolgirl, the heir apparent of
her dead parents princely estates and Eliane's own kingdom of
plantations and houses.  We have a charming scene of mother and daughter
learning the tango together.  We also have Camille taking her life into
her own hands and setting on on her own epic journey of self-discovery.
Linh Dan Pham is a marvelous actor and an amazingly beautiful woman, the
ideal co-star for Deneuve.
     The third leading actor in INDOCHINE is Vincent Perez, the French
naval officer whose own odyssey is fully as strange and unexpected as
either of the women.  Perez is a fine actor and his scenes with Linh Dan
Pham are full of powerful emotions finely shaded.
     I do have one rather large cavil: there is no reference to World
War II anywhere in the film.  It is my understanding that a Vichy
administration maintained a nominal control until March, 1945, when the
Japanese imprisoned the French military and ordered the three parts of
Indochina to declare their independence.  The chronology of events in
the film is slippery and vague, except for the end.  As I say this is
really my only criticism.
     I highly recommend INDOCHINE to you, even at full ticket price.
Stunning photography, fascinating locales, high appealing stars and
supporting actors, and a history that is all too unfamiliar, considering
most recent events.  
