Title
Review for Kalifornia (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Chuck Dowling
See this review as it was intended at: http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
Cast: Brad Pitt, Juliette Lewis, David Duchovny, Michelle Forbes 
Written by: Stephan Levy and Tim Metcalfe 
Directed by: Dominic Sena 
Running Time: 115 minutes (R-rated) / 118 minutes (unrated) 
Kalifornia stars David Duchovny and Michelle Forbes as Brian and Carrie,
an artistic middle class couple with dreams of making it big in
California.  Brian is a writer trying his hand at a novel about serial
killers and Carrie is a photographer waiting for her break.  The two
plan on driving out to the Pacific coast, stopping at different serial
killer locations where Brian will gather info for his book and Carrie
will take the pictures.  However to get to California, Brian and Carrie
need another couple to split the costs with them.  Brian posts a message
on a local bulletin board, and it's responded to by Early Grayce (Brad
Pitt, about as far away from "Sexiest Man Alive" you can get) and his
girlfriend Adele (Juliette Lewis), two folks definitely from the other
side of the tracks.  Aside from their obvious class differences, a major
problem develops... Early tends to explode into murderous rages from
time to time. 
What I liked most about Kalifornia is that there's no "fluff" involved. 
Every scene serves to either advance the story or (most importantly)
develop the characters.  As a result, the people are all human beings
and every situation is 100% believable.  Also along those lines, while
the film is brutally violent, the violence is all a part of Pitt's
character and not there just to be gratuitous.  Some of the most
shocking acts of violence are merely implied, and they are the most
disturbing of all. 
The four leads in the film are perfectly cast, although special notice
must be given to Juliette Lewis.  Lewis, while able to play white trash
in her sleep, manages to add an extra layer of depth to her character. 
She ultimately becomes the film's most important character and her
performance is truly and sincerely heartbreaking. 
Kalifornia is available on DVD from MGM Home Entertainment (this DVD is
simply a reissue of the early Polygram edition, no longer in print).  It
contains the film in its original theatrical aspect ratio of 2.35:1 and
includes a fullframe option as well on the other side of the disc.  The
theatrical R-rated cut and an unrated cut of the film (running 3 minutes
longer) are available on both sides.  Extras include the original
theatrical trailer, a behind the scenes featurette, and a booklet with
notes from the film's promotional materials. 
The film is called Kalifornia because that's the way Brian spells
California on the note he posts to the bulletin board.  No explanation
is given as to why he spells it that way, and some other plot points are
equally as vague.  However, none of these ambiguities hinder the film in
the slightest.  Kalifornia is well acted, smartly written, expertly
directed, and definitely a film you need to see. 
(Note: The booklet which comes with the DVD offers an explanation as to
why the title is spelled with a K... it was simply to distinguish it
from a 1948 film called California.  However, I bet no one would ever
confuse the two.) 

Author
Kevin Patterson
The other reviews I have read of KALIFORNIA have labeled it as everything
from a brilliant insight into humanity's capacity for evil to pointless
exploitative garbage. I don't really think it's either. It's a good film
with considerably more substance than most thrillers, yet it's not quite as
successful as it could have been.
Screenwriter Tim Metcalfe has created two edgy protagonists in Brian
Kessler (David Duchovny) and his girlfriend Kerry (Michelle Forbes). Brian
has a fascination with serial killers, and believes that most of them are
not really evil but tend to be the product of circumstances that hinder
their development as moral human beings. Kerry is trying to make a living
selling erotic photography, and Brian is supposed to be writing a book on
serial killers but is getting nowhere. The down-on-their-luck couple decide
to take a cross-country trip to California, and along the way they will
stop at the sites of several well-known murders so that Brian can try to
get inside the killers' frame of mind while Kerry takes the pictures for
his book.
Since they don't have enough money to make the trip by themselves, they
decide to advertise on a ride-sharing board. Another couple, Early Grace
(Brad Pitt) and Adele (Juliette Lewis), respond to the ad. Early seems
slightly intimidating and prone to violence (he takes Brian to a biker bar
and gets in a fight, and later shows Brian how to shoot a gun), and Adele
is spacey and disturbingly submissive to Early. Brian finds himself
strangely attracted to Early's impulsive behavior, while Kerry remains
suspicious, and with good reason: Early has recently finished a prison
term, and murdered his landlord right before taking off with Adele. By the
time Brian and Kerry fully realize what's going on, they are essentially
hostages as the trip continues. Still, Brian can't resist the opportunity
to try to understand Early's motivations, wondering if an abusive father
might have instilled his violent tendencies and asking him why he kills and
how it makes him feel. Brian's own fascination with violence, and his
forgiving attitudes towards those who engage in it, are both challenged by
the living example of Early Grace.
Unfortunately, the challenge proves to be insufficient in the end. At the
heart of KALIFORNIA is the question of whether some people are truly evil
or if everyone is more or less a product of circumstance, but the material
presented can't really answer that question. Early is not, from my
admittedly limited knowledge of the subject, a serial killer. His murders
are spur-of-the-moment and are usually precipitated by anger or selfishness
(such as when he follows a wealthy suit-and-tie type into a bathroom, stabs
him to death, and takes his money). The issue of whether or not evil is
simply a more powerful force in some human beings than others cannot be
settled by the likes of Early Grace: he acts on impulse alone, and the
distinction between good and evil is essentially meaningless for him
(which, whether it was intended or not, actually seems to validate Brian's
theories).
The best way for a film with these underlying themes to conclude would have
been to unite the moral conflicts with the more immediate physical danger:
make the final showdown one between serial killer and serial killer
researcher. But since Early's characterization makes this impossible, the
only way for first-time director Dominic Sena to bring everything to a head
is to focus on the one conflict that is complete enough to drive the plot,
and it's also the simplest--Early is dangerous, and might kill Brian and
Kerry. The final moments of the film consist of a series of violent
confrontations and action scenes, some of which seem a little excessive
(which may account for the charges of exploitation from some critics). In
one sequence, for example, Early has kidnapped Kerry and driven to an
isolated house near a nuclear testing facility. Brian heads after them, and
as he approaches the house, he spins off the road as his truck overturns
and he is knocked unconscious. He awakes the next morning, walks the rest
of the way to the house, and attempts to rescue Kerry. Why not simply have
him drive up, park, and then confront Early? Well, I guess because then we
wouldn't have had the car crash scene.
Still, the filmmakers might have gotten away with this kind of incomplete
resolution if they had played their cards right. They could have
acknowledged that the issue really hinges on true serial killers or on
megalomaniacs like Adolf Hitler or Joseph Stalin, who carefully consider
and plan out the suffering they cause, and not on an animalistic thug like
Early. Unfortunately, they seem to be trying to fake it in the final reels.
In a final narration delivered without any noticeable irony, Brian seems to
think he's got it all figured it out and understands what constitutes human
evil. Personally, I think he'd better do a little more research before he
writes that serial killer book.
I have spent a considerable amount of time discussing where KALIFORNIA goes
wrong, yet it's not a bad film by any means. It's an engaging thriller with
a tight plot, sharply written characters, and some interesting ideas about
violence. It had the potential, however, to be a lot more, and ultimately
settles for good instead of great by confining the moral conflict to a
subplot and falling back on the familiar cushion of a violent action
climax. Still, there's some good stuff here, and I'll probably be keeping
my eye open for Sena's next film.
Send comments to ktpattersn@aol.com.
Film Reviews Page:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Brad Pitt, Juliette Lewis, David Duchovny, 
           Michelle Forbes
Director:  Dominic Sena
Producers:  Steve Golin, Aris McGarry, and Joni Sighvatasson
Screenplay:  Tim Metcalfe
Released by Gramercy Films
     There seem to be two ways in which films typically handle serial
killer storylines.  Either they create messy exploitation flicks with
lots of blood and gore, little plot, and even less characterization
(the FRIDAY THE 13TH series, for example); or they give a blunt,
hard-hitting view of the subject (HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER,
MAN BITES DOG).  As with any generalization, there are exceptions, but
probably no more than I can count on my fingers.  Curiously enough, the
latest mass murderer motion picture, called KALIFORNIA, falls somewhere
in between the two extremes, and may end up leaving viewers from both
camps somewhat dissatisfied.
     In the name of research for a book he's writing on serial killers,
Brian Kessler (David Duchovny) decides to take his girlfriend Carrie
(Michelle Forbes) on a cross-country car trip with stop-offs at famous
murder locations.  Hoping to find someone to split the costs with (his
car gets only eight miles per gallon), Brian advertises on a local
college bulletin board.  Only one couple answers the ad:  Early Grayce
(Brad Pitt) and Adele Corners (Juliette Lewis).  They look flat broke,
but Brian still invites them to get in the car, hoping that they can
come up with the cash.  During the first stages of the journey, Brian
gets along with the newcomers, but Carrie is wary, and for good
reason--Early is a murderer, and as the distance to California lessens,
the body count piles up.
     If you can get beyond the huge coincidence that sets up this
motion picture, you're in for a chilling ride.  Sure, it's a little
hard to swallow that a guy writing a book about serial killers should
happen to have one in his car, but this is one of only a few instances
where an obvious plot device is used.  There are other occasions when
formulas come into play (such as the ending), but they are not greatly
in evidence, and not every situation is resolved in the expected
manner.
     KALIFORNIA is a partially-successful tale about conscience and
cold-blooded murder.  The film takes the time to develop (with varying
degrees of success) all four characters, so that when the truth comes
out, events gain a resonance they wouldn't have with the lifeless stock
personalities inhabiting the average thriller.
     That's not to say that all the characters are likeable, or even
fully fleshed out.  By the end of the movie, Early Grace is still
something of an enigma, although certain elements of his brutal,
psychopathic behavior have been made clear.  Adele seems too naive to
be real, and at times her childlike whining becomes annoying.  Brian
and Carrie are the easiest to identify with, probably because they're
the most "normal".
     This is no HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER.  The impact is far
less wrenching, but some similarities run deeper than on the most
superficial levels.  Like HENRY, KALIFORNIA doesn't glamorize its
killings, opting more for the visceral than the grotesque.  There's
also quite a bit of intellectual speculation about what motivates
serial killers.  While some of that is out-of-place, it keeps the
audience constantly questioning why Early sometimes reacts as he does.
     Of the four principal actors, Brad Pitt gives the least impressive
performance, probably because of the nature of his character.  Early is
all rage and self-righteousness.  He's never likeable, and Pitt doesn't
put a whole lot of effort into showing any humanity.  There are times
when Early comes perilously close to a caricature.
     Juliette Lewis is a little better, but great range isn't required
for Adele, either.  She's pretty much a simpleminded character who
refuses to believe the awful truth about her boyfriend.  She shows all
the classic symptoms of a victim, some of which are displayed a little
too obviously.
     David Duchovny and Michelle Forbes give the strongest
performances, and since they're the ones we're supposed to identify
with, the realism invested in Brian and Carrie lends added depth to
KALIFORNIA.  These two are fascinated by killers, but that fascination
quickly turns to horror when they realize what they have with them in
the back seat.
     KALIFORNIA is disturbing, and while it doesn't overdo the blood,
neither is the violence understated.  The basic premise should be
enough to keep the meek away--if you have no desire to see a film that
follows a serial killer, stay away from KALIFORNIA.  Those who don't
mind their movies sprinkled with moments of discomfort will find that
this picture packs a little more punch than a traditional Hollywood
slasher flick.
