Title
Review for Camelot (1967)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Albert Sanchez Moreno
                    Lerner and Loewe's "Camelot" has always been one of
those underrated musicals that has always suffered from unfair comparison
to the team's previous successful effort, their monster hit "My Fair Lady".
To critics who enjoyed both "My Fair Lady" and the witty screen musical
"Gigi", "Camelot', with its basically tragic plot, slower pace, and its
lack of dialogue by George Bernard Shaw, was a letdown, as if Lerner and
Loewe couldn't be any good unless they were dulplicating their previous
successes, or at least imitating it. 
                      The screen version, produced on a huge scale by the
same Jack L. Warner who gave the world the film version of "My Fair Lady",
surpasses the Broadway version of the musical in every possible way.
Lerner, perhaps aware of some of the faults in the original show, here does
more extensive rewriting than in his "Fair Lady" screenplay, and his
revisions only serve to heighten the drama in the story. Gone, for
instance, is the silly comic interlude in the second act between Morgan le
Fay and Mordred, in which Mordred convinces his aunt to cast a magic spell
on Arthur to keep him away from Camelot during a crucial moment in the
story. Instead, this is replaced by a beautiful, magical interlude in which
Arthur reminisces in the forest and relives some of the lessons Merlin
taught him. And Lerner, not wishing to commit the so-called "breach of
faith " that he committed in the 1960 stage production (switching abruptly
from a comic first act to a somber second act) , begins the film with a
melancholy forboding of the tragedy that is to come much later. 
                            None of the stage actors recreate their roles
in the film, but that is a distinct advantage here, and I say that as
someone who became familiar with the original Broadway cast album two years
before the film's release. Richard Harris, as King Arthur, gives the
performance of his life as King Arthur, and reminds us of how tragically
this underrated, but magnificent, actor, has misused himself in most of his
later films. His King Arthur is a performance to cherish, worthy of being
ranked with Yul Brynner's in "The King and I", Rex Harrison's in "My Fair
Lady", and Robert Preston's in "The Music Man". And as a portrayal of an
ultimately tragic figure, Harris' may be the single greatest  male dramatic
performance in film musicals ever. And he can sing reasonably well.
Although he is no Gordon MacRae (and who could ever imagine MacRae as King
Arthur?) , that sort of voice isn't even required for the role, as
evidenced by the fact that Richard Burton, an actor not known for singing,
played the role on Broadway. Harris brings much more inflection and variety
to his songs than Burton ever did, and under the intimate gaze of the
camera and the guidance of director Joshua Logan, tones down his portrayal
at all the right moments, as he later would not in his misbegotten 1980's
stage performance.
                        Vanessa Redgrave, in one of her first screen roles,
is equally impressive as Guenevere, convincingly portraying a sensual woman
that any man could convincingly fall for and/or lust after. She makes the
Queen far more than the innocent young woman that Julie Andrews (from the
evidence on the Broadway album) made her onstage, and she, too, sings
surprisingly well for a non-singing actress, "acting" her numbers as well
as singing them.
                            Franco Nero plays Lancelot, and he  does not
sing. He is dubbed by Gene Merlino, who is good enough, but no Robert
Goulet. His acting is reasonably good, but not on the level of Harris and
Redgrave. However, David Hemmings, (shorn of his silly musical number) is a
thoroughly nasty Mordred, Lionel Jeffries a hilarious, lovable Pellinore,
and Laurence Naismith a completely believable Merlin.
                            Of the three film musicals that stage director
Joshua Logan made, ("South Pacific", "Paint Your Wagon" and "Camelot") this
is easily the best, although it is true that some of the time the actors
are photographed in what Mike Myers of "Saturday Night Live" would call
"EXTREME closeup". The sets are breathtaking, as are many of the locations
(much of the outdoor work was done in Spain!). Alfred Newman's
orchestrations are among his best. It is a scandal that "Camelot" did not
garner Richard Harris and Vanessa Redgrave Oscar nominations for their
memorable portrayals, and it will always be a shameful blot on the
Academy's record that the musical they chose to nominate as Best Picture
that year was not "Camelot", but the totally forgettable, critically
drubbed, and justly neglected Rex Harrison version of "Doctor Dolittle". I
guess the lobbying at 20th Century-Fox that year must have been incredible.
