Title
Review for Land Before Time, The (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Unlike the later sequels, the original THE LAND BEFORE TIME
(1988), now available on video, is "A Lucas/Spielberg Presentation."
Also unlike the sequels, it is directed by a well known director, Don
Bluth (THE PEBBLE AND THE PENGUIN, THUMBELINA, ALL DOGS GO TO HEAVEN,
AN AMERICAN TAIL, and THE SECRET OF NIMH), and the people doing the
voices are mainly known actors and actresses.  Like the sequels, but
better, it is full of the delightful merriment of childhood, albeit
dinosaur childhood not Homo sapiens.  For a sweet and simple little
picture the whole family can gather round the tube and watch with
delight, this one delivers the goods.
     As the story unfolds, the baby dinosaurs, who are to be the stars
of the film, are being born in touching and humorous pictures of them
hatching from their eggs.  Each baby dino has a unique personality and
voice.  The narrator (Pat Hingle) tells of the lead dinosaur's birth
that, "One herd had only one baby - their single hope for the future,
and they called him Littlefoot."
     This is a tale with a purpose and a destination.  The dinosaurs'
land is running out of food so they must try to find a lush and far
away place called The Great Valley.  Getting there turns out to be a
tortuous journey.
     THE LAND BEFORE TIME is peppered with lightly taught stories of
morals.  Kids watching the show will learn lessons but not in the usual
heavy handed fashion of some kids' message films.  THE LAND BEFORE TIME
teaches subtle lessons about intolerance and other issues.  Cera's
Daddy (Burke Byrnes) tells Cera (Candice Houston), "Come Cera, three
horns never play with long necks."  She learns prejudice at an early
age, but forms a friendship with one of those nefarious three horns
that lets her get beyond stereotyping.  Littlefoot's mother (Helen
Shaver) advises Littlefoot (Gabriel Damon), "Let your heart guide you.
It whispers so listen carefully."  Finally, my favorite character is
little Ducky (Judith Barsi) whose effusive philosophy on life is summed
up in his constant and charming yapping, "Yep, yep, yep."
     The best movies aimed at younger audiences are careful in the way
they handle the fears of life.  Some pictures cop out and lack tension
or interest since they are so sanitized that nothing exciting or scary
ever occurs.  Other put in frightening scenes, but overdo it.  Here the
writers, Judy Freudberg, Tony Geiss, and Stu Krieger, have a deft touch
in putting together just enough tension, but not so much that little
ones, say 3 or 4, can not handle it.  We have earthquakes, parental
separation, the dreaded Sharptooth (T-Rex), and the canonical death of
a parent, but it is all treated gingerly and with respect for young
sensibilities.  I liked the way the screenwriters had the dino kids get
words mixed up as human kids so often do.  Earthquake becomes
earthshake and tree leaf is transformed into tree star.
     The drawing style is far removed from the painstaking constructed
and dramatic realism of a Disney animated feature.  Different in this
case does not necessarily mean inferior, instead THE LAND BEFORE TIME
possesses a minimalist, but warm and natural beauty.  The animators use
stark colors of oranges, blues, and greens and then underdraw the
images to craft a simple and almost surreal landscape.  I found it
lovely.
     Perhaps my favorite part of the movie is the music.  The dramatic
music by James Horner is played with great gusto by The London Symphony
orchestra.  The main and uplifting song, "If we hold on together," is
sung by Diana Ross.
     THE LAND BEFORE TIME runs a fast 1:08 thanks to the editing of
John Carr and Dan Molina.  Not surprisingly, it is rated G, and there
is not a single bad word spoken.  This film would be fine for children
of any age although there is always some risk that Sharptooth might
scare them a little bit.  My son Jeffrey (almost 7) has liked THE LAND
BEFORE TIME for several years now and  likes the sequels (see my
reviews of them) as well.  I recommend this film to anyone young at
heart and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is surprising that Disney studios never did "cute" animation of
dinosaurs.  They have done cute versions of most familiar animals in their
various films:  dogs, cats, pigs, mice, birds, fish, insects--and those were
just "bit parts" in cartoons; that does not count as continuing characters.
But the only time Disney ever did dinosaurs was in FANTASIA and there they
were just big, meaty blood-and-thunder engines of destruction who crashed
into each other to the tune of Stravinsky's "Rite of Spring."  As much as
children love dinosaurs already, Disney never animated a dinosaur that was
even remotely likable.  Not that it was a void that really needed filling,
but Disney animation department veteran Don Bluth, who specializes in
imitating Disney's animation heyday, has made an almost-feature-length
animated film, THE LAND BEFORE TIME, about the adventures of some likable
baby dinosaurs.  And Bluth uses "flat animation" in what may be the only
serious attempt of such animation since FANTASIA and a good while before.
The field of animating dinosaurs has been very nearly the exclusive province
of dimensional animators such as Willis O'Brien, Ray Harryhausen, Jim
Danforth, and David Allen.  In spite of the principle that flat animation
offers the artist greater freedom of expression--admittedly at the cost of
some realism--it has very rarely been used for dinosaurs.
     But I rather suspect that the real inspiration for THE LAND BEFORE TIME
came from the dinosaur art of William Stout, particularly as seen in his
1982 book THE DINOSAURS (Bantam Books, $12.95).  Unlike most dinosaur
artists who try for a realistic,almost photographic style, Stout's art is
more stylized and almost comic-book-like.  He tries more for caricature
rather than for realism and so is able to put more expression into his
dinosaurs.  I do not remember if Stout's name appeared in the credits of THE
LAND BEFORE TIME, but several of the illustrations from THE DINOSAURS are
dramatized in the film, including an appealing camarasaurus baby hatching
from an egg.  Another illustration shows ultrasauri standing among trees.
The top of the painting cuts off the heads but a visual analogy between the
necks and the treetrunks is implied.  This scene also appeared in the film.
     It is difficult to decide when THE LAND BEFORE TIME would have taken
place.  One needs to identify exactly what dinosaurs we are seeing.  I have
heard the main character, Littlefoot, described as a "brontosaurus."  If
that was what was intended then Bluth and company were hopelessly sloppy.
Most of the dinosaurs in the film did not live until the late (or Upper)
Cretaceous Period--sort of the grand finale of dinosaur life that brought
into existence familiar dinosaurs such as triceratops and tyrannosaurus.
That is entirely the wrong era for "brontosauri"--more accurately called
apatosauri.  But then, the dinosaurs of the film had more rounded faces than
apatosauri would have had.  They had the rounded faces that brontosauri used
to be portrayed as having.  Also, apatosaurus died out in the late Jurassic
era; even camarasaurus, which outlasted them and lived only into the EARLY
(or Lower) Cretaceous was not contemporary with late Cretaceous animals.
Littlefoot could have been some lesser-known species of sauropod, some of
which did live late enough to be contemporary with triceratops.  The
stegosaurus also is an Upper Jurassic dinosaur, but some of its similar-
looking relatives could have been alive in the mid to late Cretaceous.
Before you decide that the questions of era are trivial matters, realize
that the Upper Cretaceous has been over for 70 million years and you can see
how much animal life has changed since then.  Go back another 70 million
years and you are just about at the end of the Jurassic period with the
Cretaceous soon to begin.  "Bigmouth," incidentally, is a parasaurolophus
who is respectably Upper Cretaceous.  And what appeared to be a dimetrodon
that should have died out 150 million years before this story was more
likely an Upper Cretaceous spinosaurus.  Stretching a point, all these
dinosaurs could have been contemporaries, but it still seems unlikely.
     Even more questionable is the geological background of the film.  Yes,
the Earth was geologically active at that time, but nowhere near as active
as shown.  In a short space we see the characters encountering powerful
earthquakes and unrelated volcanos, and they struggle with a tar pit.  Even
in a geologically active era, this is entirely too much activity to be
credible.
     The story of THE LAND BEFORE TIME is about a baby sauropod of some
sort--they call themselves "long-necks"--who is born in a time when food is
scarce.  His mother wants to take him, along with his grandparents, to the
"great valley," where for some reason food is still plentiful in spite of
the fact that every dinosaur and his brother is headed there or is already
there.  Along the way he meets a cute, pugnacious little girl triceratops,
but the parents of both know that mixed species relationships rarely work
out.  Each gets the sort of reaction you would get if you told your parents
you were really good friends with a sheep.
     Through circumstances I will not describe, Littlefoot finds he must
make the journey without his elders.  Instead, a set of lost young dinosaurs
band together to make the trip as group.  The story could be reasonable but
the characterization is not.  The characters are not well-developed.
Littlefoot goes through all kinds of tribulations without giving up, then
suddenly at some point, gives up entirely: possible, but unlikely behavior.
And if you doubt that real characterization can be done in an animated film,
see WATERSHIP DOWN or THE PLAGUE DOGS.
     THE LAND BEFORE TIME is a short film, even by animated film standards.
It is just 66 minutes long--so short, in fact, that it is always shown with
a cartoon, "Family Dog."  The cartoon, by the way, is the first half of
"Family Dog," the February 16, 1987, episode of Steven Spielberg's AMAZING
STORIES television show.  If it seems like it ends a trifle abruptly, that
is why.  If it means anything, they have chosen the best piece of the
original broadcast.  Apparently they could get the cartoon cheaply since
Spielberg was one of the executive producers of THE LAND BEFORE TIME.
     THE LAND BEFORE TIME does boast a nice score by James Horner and an
okay song sung by Diana Ross.  But it still does not show the effort of
other animated feature films.  And padding the length with part of an
episode of AMAZING STORIES is no substitute for the kind of story-telling
that Disney Studios or even Bluth himself have done in the past.  Rate THE
LAND BEFORE TIME a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
