Title
Review for Way of the Gun, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Christopher Null
     In case you're utterly dense and stupid (and some of my hate mail
indicates that if you're reading this, you just might be), know that
with a title like The Way of the Gun you are getting yourself into a
very, very violent film.  I do not mean a couple of cap guns and a blood
pack under someone's shirt.  I mean more shots fired per foot of film
this side of a Rambo movie.  Bring your earplugs.
     This is not to say that violence can't be stylish or clever. 
Movies like Pulp Fiction have proven that a gun can be poetry.  Or it
can just be a gun.  Writer/director Christopher McQuarrie (best known
for writing The Usual Suspects; Gun is his directorial debut) has set
out to make a Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid for the millennium. 
>From its all-bad-guys cast (except for the girl) to the arch, black
comedy to a south of the border shootout, the homage is pretty sincere. 
Too bad it didn't quite work out.
     This crime thriller weaves the story of two thugs (Ryan Phillippe
and Benicio Del Toro) looking to make their big score.  Opportunity
arises in the waiting room of a sperm bank, when they learn of a very
pregnant surrogate mother (Juliette Lewis) who is being paid big money
to carry the child of a wealthy couple.  A kidnapping/ransom plot is
hatched, and complications ensue.  As it turns out, the man can pay such
a rate for his new son because he's dirty, and he sends the goons out en
masse in order to recover his property -- an unborn baby boy.
     Subplots and side roads abound, as the kidnappers find themselves a
bit out of their depth, resulting in a chase across Mexico, filled with
double-crosses and trickery galore.  Notable among the players is James
Caan as the "bagman" on the case -- the guy sent in to try and trick the
kidnappers into an even worse situation by offering solace.  Caan's
aging gangster is intentionally hilarious, sporting a Members Only
jacket and followed by a crew of aging henchmen that look straight out
of Palm Beach.
     The drama plays out at a suspiciously familiar-looking Mexican
brothel, with Lewis giving birth (her doctor -- I'm positive -- played
the jerky redheaded kid from Dead Poets Society) amid a hailstorm of
gunfire.  When it's over, it's amazing the place is left standing. 
Suffice it to say that few members of the cast are.
     Ultimately, The Way of the Gun is flecked with many laughs despite
its gruesome storyline.  As a cinematic experience, it's also
competently made, but something just doesn't sit right, and the picture
never reaches the echelon of the Reservoir Dogs of the violence-in-film
world.  This is largely because though Gun is clever, it's considerably
over-plotted and, as a direct result, interminably slow as detail after
detail is explained at length.
     But perhaps its biggest failing is that Gun gives us absolutely no
one to root for.  And it takes some doing to make a pregnant woman
unsympathetic.
Director: Christopher McQuarrie
Producer: Kenneth Kokin
Writer: Christopher McQuarrie
Starring: Ryan Phillippe, Benicio Del Toro, Taye Diggs, Juliette Lewis,
James Caan
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Laura Clifford
Parker (Ryan Phillippe, "Cruel Intentions") and Longbaugh (Benicio del Toro,
"The Usual Suspects") have tired of petty crime and want to make one big
score for early retirement.  While picking up easy cash by donating sperm,
they overhear a story about a surrogate mother who's being paid a cool million
to carry a couple's child.  Bingo!  The two manage to kidnap Robin (Juliette
Lewis) away from her bodyguards only to discover she's carrying the child
of Hale Chidduck (Scott Wilson), a powerful bagman with an amoral team of
his own in "The Way of the Gun."
Writer/director Christopher McQuarrie was frustrated to learn that even
after winning an Oscar for writing "The Usual Suspects," he couldn't sell
a script outside the crime thriller genre.  "The Way of the Gun" is 
an exercise in proving himself to Hollywood.  While this new story isn't
as slick as the previous, it's still satisfyingly twisty, even if the 
ending gets a bit bogged down.  McQuarrie also proves himself as a director,
getting solid performances out of his cast and achieving a retro-Western
look for his film.
Parker and Longbaugh end up in a massive shootout when they attempt to
kidnap Robin in the lobby of her doctor's office, only getting away with
the hugely pregnant woman when she tries to make a break from her own
bodyguards.  Chiddick brings in his bagman Sarno (James Caan), who disparages
Robin's bodyguards Jeffers (Taye Digs, "How Stella Got Her Groove Back") and 
Obecks (Nicky Katts, "Boiler Room") and forms his own team beginning with
suicidal Abner (Geoffrey Lewis, father of Juliette).  They make contact
with Longbaugh at a Mexican motel where Longbaugh demands $15 million for
the child.  Sarno advises that things will end badly.  Meanwhile Parker
is philosophizing with Robin and Chiddick's trophy wife Francesca listens in 
to various underhanded conversations when she's not dallying with Jeffers
or watching prenatal videos.
Absolutely everyone outside of our two 'heroes' in this story has a different 
agenda than appears on the surface.  Even Dr. Painter (Dylan Kussman, "Dead
Poets' Society"), Robin's gynocologist, has more than one hook into the
proceedings.  Everyone but the Chiddicks themselves will end up across the
border for a drawn out and bloody finale.
The cast is excellent.  Ryan Phillippe discards his golden boy shallowness
to play a suddenly God-fearing tough guy with scrubby facial hair and a
low growl of a voice.  Del Toro personifies cool as the elder, more goal
oriented of the pair.  Juliette Lewis is a fighter who keeps punching through
every obstacle thrown in her way until an unwanted C-Section is forced upon
her in a remote brothel.  Caan is the most complex character as the experienced 
and rueful bagman.  Diggs is suave, all killer cool while his counterpart
Katts is darker, brawnier.  Geoffrey Lewis creates a surprisingly sympathetic
oddball with little screen time.
The script features some great dialogue ('$15 million is not money - it's a
motive with a universal adapter on it.') and even some hilarity (Parker and
Longbaugh's sperm donor interviews).  McQuarrie and his director of
photography Dick Pope ("Topsy Turvy") use visual irony and Western style
earthtones to good effect, recalling the films of Peckinpah.  "The Way of 
the Gun" also offers up the most unique car chase (idea creditted to Benicio 
del Toro in the press notes) in movies since "Bullitt" and "The French 
Connection."  Score by Joe Kraemer inventively employs castanets.
If you can take a heavy dose of violence, blood and a pregnant woman
in peril, "The Way of the Gun" is like a mystery tour where the journey
is more exciting than the destination.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
Christopher McQuarrie's "The Way of the Gun" is a noirish crime story without 
the post-modern irony of Quentin Tarantino. Although this may be a refreshing 
conceit, the film is nothing more than disposable, mean-spirited, 
one-dimensional hogwash with no redeeming qualities whatsoever.  
The convoluted story deals with two amoral sociopaths, Mr. Parker (Ryan 
Phillippe) and Longbaugh (Benicio Del Toro), who will either resort to petty 
crimes or minimum wage jobs. Thoroughly unsure of themselves, they head to a 
sperm bank where they overhear about a pregnant woman, Robin (Juliette 
Lewis), who has agreed to a $1 million fee to carry the baby of a wealthy oil 
tycoon and his desperate, gold-digging wife. The terminably stupid sociopaths 
decide there is a bargain here if they kidnap the pregnant woman for a 
fifteen million dollar ransom. Problem is they are new at this kind of crime, 
and have no notion on what to do next (heck, Robin is quicker at defending 
herself with a shotgun than they are). 
Naturally, a cleaner or "adjudicator" (essentially a smooth hitman played by 
James Caan) pursues the trio, along with two bodyguards (the appealing 
coolness of Taye Diggs and the tactful Nicky Katt, who played a grimier, 
similar role in "The Limey"). This leads them to the seediest kind of motel 
just south of the Mexican border where Parker and Longbaugh are holding Robin 
hostage. And, to remind some of good old Sam Peckinpah, there is an overlong, 
tedious shootout involving the antiheroes and bag men, culminating in an 
empty fountain with broken shards of glass. 
The film starts well enough, particularly the kidnapping scene amidst lots of 
gunfire where Robin makes the mistake of not following the bodyguards' 
orders. Unfortunately, as written and directed by McQuarrie (who wrote the 
superior "The Usual Suspects"), there is scant character development and the 
personalities of the sociopaths are nonexistent - they are merely cartoonish 
types used as props to advance the plot. There isn't a single character the 
audience could possibly identify with except for Juliette Lewis's humane 
Robin, faced with carrying a baby while evading bullets, and screaming and 
hollering with pain through the whole movie while in labor. Lewis makes her 
character sympathetic but since she is not the main focus of the film, we are 
left with far too many ugly, emotionally corrupted people taking center 
stage. Boy, do I miss Kevin Spacey's Verbal Quint from "Usual Suspects." 
James Caan adds a touch of vulnerability to the proceedings and has some 
clever lines (Examples: "$15 million is not money. It's a motive with a 
universal adaptor on it." "Let's just say I deal in the fine art of 
adjudication.") He also has a touching scene with Geoffrey Lewis, a suicidal 
drinking buddy. In fact, it was nice to see Geoffrey Lewis share one scene 
with his real-life daughter Juliette, though I would have hoped for more than 
seeing them in another typical shootout. As for the leading troublemakers, 
Phillippe hardly has much going for him except for a noticeable accent, and 
Del Toro seems to be in a leftover drug-stoked haze from "Fear and Loathing 
in Las Vegas." You want to see these two murderers rubbed out within the 
first half-hour, and that does not say much for McQuarrie. He makes the 
mistake of not instilling any humanity in these characters, so if he doesn't 
care, why should we?
Conflicted and burdened by repetitive shootouts and silly twists and turns, 
"The Way of the Gun" is an empty void with an ugly, interminable streak of 
meanness. Film noir at its most fatalistic tells us there is no escape from 
the world. Fortunately, you have the option of escaping from this travesty by 
way of the theatre exits.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Christopher McQuarrie
Written by: Christopher McQuarrie
Mr. Parker (Ryan Phillippe) and Mr. Longbaugh (Benicio Del Toro) are two 
lazy fellows who spend their days unemployed and making cash off petty theft 
and trips to the sperm bank (I think their names were an homage to 
Tarantino's "Reservoir Dogs"). One day they hear about a woman, Robin 
(Juliette Lewis), who is carrying the child of a millionaire named Chidduck 
(Scott Wilson). So, the two decide to kidnap Robin and ransom her back to 
Chidduck for fifteen million dollars. The catch is, Chidduck works with the 
mob and soon has his army of goons, led by the world weary Joe Sarno (James 
Caan), after our daring duo. So the two and their kidnappee are now on the 
run, and right on their tails are Sarno, Chidduck's two chief bodyguards 
(Taye Diggs, Nicky Katt), and a young doctor named Allen Painter (Dylan 
Kussman), who may be more than just Robin's doctor. In the meantime, 
everyone is backstabbing everyone. One of the bodyguards, Jeffers (Taye 
Diggs), is sleeping with Chidduck's wife, Francesca (Kristin Lehman); Allen 
Painter is plotting against everyone; and Sarno has a personal interest in 
the affair and is willing to kill anyone for his own inscrutable purposes. 
In fact, the only people who aren't scheming are Parker and Longbaugh.
Sound a little confusing? Well that's because it is. Yet nearly every fault 
with Christopher McQuarrie's (writer of the brilliantly twisted "The Usual 
Suspects") "Way of the Gun" can be attributed to one man: the editor, 
Stephen Semel (he also edited "Three to Tango", which explains a lot). "Way 
of the Gun" is a good movie which could have been a lot better if about a 
half hour of its running time had been cut out. The film starts off with a 
bang, as our two protagonists get mobbed in a fight for sitting on a guy's 
car. After the rather long opening credits it stays interesting as the duo 
plans the kidnapping and then carries it out. Yet just as I was getting my 
hopes up things start to lag - a lot. So my hopes began tumbling through the 
floor, and things pick up again. Then come crashing back down. You get the 
general trend here? This keeps happening till the film's climax, which 
actually managed to run longer than the climax to "What Lies Beneath". The 
climax, while entertaining, wears out its welcome after about fifteen 
minutes (yes, it's that long). Then, finally, after this roller-coaster ride 
of a movie, the film just sort of stops. I was starting to think Hollywood 
writers, particularly an intelligent Oscar winner like McQuarrie, had 
learned how to end a movie. Guess I was wrong.
"Way of the Gun" does feature an impressively large and talented cast. 
Leading the cast is Ryan Phillippe ("Cruel Intentions"), who I usually think 
has about as much acting talent as your average parking meter. Yet he proves 
me wrong here, giving an adequate performance which might even have 
qualified as good if it wasn't held up next to Benicio Del Toro's ("The 
Usual Suspect") performance for comparison. Del Toro gives an awe inspring 
turn and I only hope he is recognized by at least one awards committee out 
there at year's end. Next up we have Juliette Lewis ("What's Eating Gilbert 
Grape"), playing the film's only truly sane character. She does a good job 
with her speaking lines, but her portrayal of a pregnant woman just doesn't 
work. I've seen pregnant women walk, even women due to give birth at any 
time, and they don't waddle around like large penguins. James Caan ("Mickey 
Blue Eyes") does a surprisingly good job as the bag man, Sarno. Taye Diggs, 
who was the very definition of cool in "Go" plays a similar, though far 
colder character here. The only weak link (but what a weak link it is) is 
Dylan Kussman ("Dead Poets Society"). It doesn't help that this guy gets the 
film's only really bad dialogue (a monologue about how his life turned out), 
but I think he could have made even the best dialogue sound like your 
average highschool playwright wrote it. Nicky Katt ("Boiler Room") is given 
very little screen time as the other bodyguard, but watch for a quick 
appearance by SNL's Sarah Silverman as a raving girlfriend.
Let me first cover the things that really work in "Way of the Gun". First, 
the dialogue is quite wonderful. McQuarrie's dialogue in "The Usual 
Suspects" was good (who doesn't know the line about the greatest trick of 
the devil?), but some of the dialogue in this film puts it to shame. One of 
my favorite lines was: "You wanna know what I'm gonna tell god when I meet 
him? I'm gonna tell him I was framed." There's also a great scene where 
Parker, Longbaugh, and Robin sit down to play hearts. Longbaugh and Parker 
explain the rules to Robin, but everything they say has an intentional 
double meaning about her situation. "Do you understand the game?" Parker 
coldly asks, and Robin breaks down crying. Second, the story is strangely 
interesting, if a little bizarre. No, I don't mean interesting like, "Gee, 
I've never seen a building fall down like that before." I mean McQuarrie 
takes what could have been a basic kidnapping story and turns it into a 
clever, Tarantinoesque tale where everyone is plotting against everyone, and 
there's a surprise waiting around every turn. Finally, the film's score, by 
composer Joe Kraemer, is a wonderful blend of Spanish style music; soothing, 
slow segments; and fierce melodies used during the many gun fights.
On the downside, we obviously have the editing. All I can figure is the film 
was made and released before Stephen Semel even had a clue what was going 
on. I don't mean the movie was poorly edited, I mean it appears to have 
skipped the editing process entirely. The film also suffers from a fairly 
poor ending. Not only does it go on far too long, but the gunfights go from 
being interesting and even realistically made, to tedious and video game 
like. This becomes even more true when a group of bag men show up at the 
film's end for no other purpose than to act as human targets. Last we have 
McQuarrie's direction. Was it bad? No, it was actually rather promising. 
However, this being his first time in the director's chair, his inexperience 
is painfully obvious in the way he paces the film. So, while I enjoyed "Way 
of the Gun", I have no desire to see it again. If you are interested in 
seeing it, I'd suggest catching a matinee or waiting for video (given its 
poor performance at the box office it shouldn't take long to get there. The 
film runs far too long at 119 minutes, which could easily have been cut to 
100 if not 90. I give it three and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, screensavers, trailers & more, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Writer/director Christopher McQuarrie seems to have taken quite a bit of
time off after his 1995 Oscar triumph for Best Screenplay for THE USUAL
SUSPECTS. McQuarrie was apparently being asked to do another crime film
wherever he went, and decided to make one himself so that "no one would ever
ask him to make another crime film again". Hmmm...strange wish, but okay!
Now let's see how Chris handles the directing end of things.
PLOT:
Two out-of-luck schnooks looking for a fortune to save them from their dead
end lives, kidnap a surrogate mother with hopes of demanding big-time moolah
from the rich parents of the baby upcoming. Of course, things never go off
without a hitch, and the two boys quickly have to deal with problems
arising. This includes the two bodyguards who were hired to protect her, the
bagman, who wants to make a deal with them, and the surrogate mother
herself, who turns out to be more than a handful.
CRITIQUE:
This film's got plenty of style and blood to spare, even a couple of decent
rat-tat-tat scenes tossed here and there, but the plot is just too elaborate
for its own good. Coming from the writer of THE USUAL SUSPECTS, I certainly
expected some confusion, although not to this extent, but I damn sure didn't
expect this film to be so boring at times. Yeah, that's right, there is a
whole stretch at the center of this movie that is just plain tedious. The
film features about three very cool shoot-out scenes, a very funny opening
scene and fills the rest of its time going back and forth between way too
many characters all bitching about who's gonna do what to do whom
next...over and over and over again. "And here's my
motivation"...bla-bla-bla-bla-bla...can we get on with it already!? Of
course, the biggest problem is that you just don't care about any of these
characters, so while they're all going on and on about what they want to do
and what they think should be done next, you're just left wondering why the
film isn't keeping you all that interested. Add to that, the fact that many
of the characters eventually start revealing connecting relationships to one
another, and it all starts feeling a little too much like a giant soap opera
with bullets.
Overall, I would say that I was disappointed with the film. I suppose that
my expectations were a bit too high and few of them were met. Sure, Benicio
Del Toro was good as usual, the score appropriately dour, reminiscent of the
Leone flicks with that extra Tex-Mex feel, and the shoot out scenes really
loud (and I mean LOUD!) and bloody (Peckinpah anyone?). But with so much
downtime and overwrought dialogue, a lot of which just felt "written", I
just didn't like enough things in the movie. It's also the kind of film that
seems to want you to see it a couple of more times in order to fully absorb
its convoluted plotline. What a shame. A great trailer, some really cool
actors, including Diggs and Caan who both come off very well, but ultimately
way too many stupid side characters, like the dweeby doctor and the
completely one-dimensional bitchy wife, and the film erodes under its own
over-ambition. And even though blood never really bothers me, though it
might bother some people after this movie, I was particularly taken aback by
one bloody "operation" scene near the end of the film that just grossed me
out completely. A little "overdone", I thought.
All in all, I suppose I was not "taken" by as much of this film as I had
hoped but certainly wouldn't qualify it as a bad picture. Others may enjoy
it for their own reasons, and I will admit that it does contain many
positive elements, including a memorable score, solid directing and some
great shoot-out scenes. Check it out and let me know what you think.

Author
Jon Popick
The directorial debut from The Usual Suspect Oscar-winner screenwriter
is wildly derivative and painfully uneven, but The Way of the Gun is
still an extremely stylish crime flick that is a lot more entertaining
and original than most big Hollywood action films released this summer.
I lost count of how many films Gun reminded me of, but that was probably
because the outrageous amount of thunderous gunplay kept distracting me
from my tally.
Gun's opening scene may be the best I've seen this year, and it does a
great job establishing the film's two main characters, who we learn go
by the phony names Longbaugh (Benicio Del Toro, Fear and Loathing in Las
Vegas) and Parker (Ryan Phillippe, Cruel Intentions).  Using The Rolling
Stones `Rip This Joint' and a cacophony of side-splitting vulgarities,
Longbaugh and Parker open a Sam's Club-size can of whoop ass on a nerdy
guy with hair like Columbian soccer star Carlos Valderamma.
Longbaugh and Parker are small-time hoods looking for the big score that
would lead to a life of luxury, and, thanks to overhearing a telephone
conversation while making a sperm bank deposit, they catch wind of an
unusual situation.  It seems there is a wealthy couple that wanted to
have a baby, but the wife didn't want to be inconvenienced with a
nine-month pregnancy.  The result is a surrogate mother named Robin
(Juliette Lewis, The Other Sister), who is carrying the baby to term and
will, theoretically, hand the kid over to the proud parents once it's
born.  Longbaugh and Parker learn that the proxy mother is getting a
cool million for being the baby's temporary host, so they figure the
parents will pay much more if both Robin and the unborn child are
kidnapped.
The doctor's office kidnapping scene is a thing of beauty, showing that
Longbaugh and Parker definitely know their craft.  The two men are
pursued by two of Robin's hired bodyguards (Taye Diggs, House on Haunted
Hill and Nicky Katt, Boiler Room), who could have been a young version
of Jules and Vincent from Pulp Fiction.  One of the most inventive car
chase scenes follows, and before long, Longbaugh and Parker learn that
the baby's father is a very powerful crime lord named Chidduck (Scott
Wilson, Clay Pigeons).
The rest of Gun is packed full of all of the backstabbing,
double-crossing and secret identities that you'd expect from the guy
that wrote Suspects.  There isn't a big sucker-punch ending like
Suspects, but there are smaller ones that occur more frequently
throughout the film.  Some of Gun's best scenes involve Joe Sarno (James
Caan, Mickey Blue Eyes), Chidduck's cool bagman who reminded me a lot of
Harvey Keitel's `cleaner' in Fiction, or even Barry Newman in The
Limey.  In fact, Chidduck lived in a well protected home in the hills,
just like Peter Fonda's character in The Limey.  The big shoot-em-up
finale looked like it could have been an outtake from Deperado.
Interestingly, there is one scene in Gun where a car radio plays a
barely audible news report about somebody named `Singer' involved with
underage boys and a shower.  The blurb is an obvious reference to
director Bryan Singer and the hot water he landed in while filming
several naked young teenagers in Apt Pupil.  Singer also directed the
McQuarrie-penned Suspects and, most recently, topped the box office
charts with X-Men, a film that McQuarrie was rumored to have had a major
hand in writing as well.
1:58 - R for strong violence/gore, adult language and sexual content

Author
Chad Polenz
Remember back in the mid 1990s when crime and macabre movies were all the 
rage? "Pulp Fiction" and "Fargo" both managed to get Oscar nominations for 
the Best Picture, and not surprisingly, a slew of rip-offs followed in the 
years thereafter. That fad seems to be over but here comes Christopher 
McQuarrie writing and directing "The Way Of The Gun" that at first glance 
looks like another of those wanna-be's but upon closer inspection doesn't 
look like anything comprehendable. It's a crime story so wrapped up in its 
own little world it has a claustrophobic atmosphere - a film that won't allow 
the story much room to expand outside its handful of characters and somehow 
still manages to turn a simple premise into something so complex its 
ridiculous. 
Complexity should come as no surprise to anyone who's familiar with 
McQuarrie, he wrote "The Usual Suspects," which has become a cult favorite 
despite little critical acclaim. That film had a great story and was well 
directed but had such an elaborate, confusing screenplay it leaves many 
viewers scratching their heads after repeated viewings. You have to wonder if 
McQuarrie really had everything mapped out or if he was going for the 
Hollywood idea that "if it's really confusing and about criminals and cops 
that makes it fascinating." With "The Way Of The Gun" McQuarrie seems to be 
capitalizing on the same idea, but this time the story is far less commercial 
- a shame because maybe that would have helped. 
The film tells the story of two drifters with no ambition and barely a reason 
to live but aren't hell-bent on death either (played by Ryan Phillipie and 
Benecio Del Toro). They get lucky when they hear about a scheme between a 
big-shot exec guy and his trophy wife who are going to have a baby through in 
vitro fertilization. They figure they can kidnap the surrogate mother (played 
by Juliette Lewis) and get a nice ransom. Along the way we continually learn 
of the shady dealings between the exec, his wife, their hired goons and the 
"bag man" (played by James Caan - the only actor in the film who looks like 
he knows what he's doing). The exec is some kind of money launderer so he 
obviously can't call the authorities for help. His goons and the bag man are 
on the kidnappers' trail and each make different offers to get the mother 
back. The exec's son is a doctor who also gets pulled into the fray and wants 
to make sure his patient is all right. Meanwhile each of these characters has 
something hidden up their collective sleeves and the double-crosses, secret 
love affairs and torrid pasts come as no surprise even though little of it 
has any relevance at all. 
McQuarrie doesn't know the meaning of the word simple. He seems to be more 
interested in showing us how clever he is than making a good movie. 
Everything has to be complicated and confusing, so much so that it's to the 
point of surrealism. Nothing is what it seems in this reality, it's one of 
those movies where you get dropped right into the middle of the criminal 
world and are expected to know most of the industry's rules and regulations. 
Every scene with Caan's character exemplifies this perfectly - the kidnappers 
already know who he is and even chat with him, getting into conversations 
about "the business" and how it works and we're hardly given a clue as to 
what they're talking about. 
These characters are probably supposed to be great criminal sketches but 
they're more like ideas ripped-off from sketches found in David Mamet's 
trash. No one here really acts like a real person, and the story is even 
further removed from reality. It's like a dream without any appeal. 
Take the opening scene for example; the Phillipe and Del Toro characters are 
in a parking lot across the street from a bar or a club counting their money 
and stuff. They sit on a brand-new Mercedes and the car alarm goes off, the 
owner is waiting in line and yells at them to get away from his car but they 
don't move. The guy and his loud-mouth, potty-mouth girlfriend and about 20 
other people cross the street and gang up on them. You'd think Phillipe and 
Del Toro are going to pull out guns and scare them away but they don't, 
instead Phillipe throws one punch and the two get beat down by a mob. There's 
a lot of things I didn't understand about this scene: first of all the owner 
of the Mercedes isn't some yuppie or old rich snob, he's like a hippie 
straight out of the 60s. Secondly, the two main characters seem to believe 
that they can actually take on the mob unarmed. Lastly, it serves no purpose 
in the long run because later in the film the two are packing more artillery 
than a small country's army. If they were suicidal they wouldn't have gone on 
the kidnapping job in the first place (and where they get all those guns is 
never explained either). 
There's a lot more I could pick apart about this film but that would be an 
exercise in futility. What it all comes down to is that nothing here is what 
it seems - which would be great if this movie were about pretty much any 
other story than what it is. Absolutely none of the characters are likable or 
believable. And it's all coated with a thin layer of black comedy which is 
good for a chuckle here and there but this film is definitely not a flat-out 
black comedy and its use of such seems like a desperate attempt to kill 
screen time. 
With any film you see, whether you like it or not, you can at least 
understand what the appeal was to it, why someone would want to make it and 
why someone would want to see it. I can't say either for "The Way Of The 
Gun," because it has very little going for it and I can't imagine anyone 
intelligently defending it. 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-60AA-A67A22B-39D80838-prod5 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

WAY OF THE GUN, THE (director/writer: Christopher McQuarrie;
cinematographer: Dick Pope; editor: Stephen Semel; cast: Ryan Phillippe
(Parker), Benicio Del Toro (Longbaugh), Juliette Lewis (Robin), Taye
Diggs (Jeffers), Nicky Katt (Obecks), Scott Wilson (Hale Chidduck),
James Caan (Joe Sarno), Kristin Lehmann (Francesca Chidduck), Geoffrey
Lewis (Abner), Dylan Kussman (Dr. Allen Painter); Runtime: 118; Artisan
Entertainment; 2000)
A modern noir story whose task seems to be to romanticize violence, with
the film looking too much, at times, like a Tarantino-clone. But there
are scenes that are fresh and invigorating, filled with a deadly
explosiveness, but somehow the film fails to put it all together to get
at what it is trying to unearth from all the gunplay. The opening scene
is a good case in point at how misguided the film's direction was: two
thugs are seated on a couples' car while they are standing on line at a
nightclub; and, when cursed out in really foul language by the vulgar
woman whose car it is, a mindless fight takes place, where the woman
gets punched out by one of the thugs and then the thugs get beaten up by
the angry crowd. It looked at that point, that the film would be very
energetic, since that scene was so powerful and so crass -- and
original. But the filmmaker fell in love with the violence and couldn't
control his bad impulses to do the entire film as an exercise in
mindless violence.
Armed with a highly polished script, lots of arty gunfights, and a
convoluted, labyrinth story line, more interested in double-crosses and
twists in the plot than human feelings,  the film turned off on too many
dead-ends to fulfill its potential. If you like gunplay done as
choreography, as in  recent Hong Kong action films or in Sam Peckinpah's
"The Wild Bunch," and films that prefer violence to sex, action to
thinking, and films that discard humor for references that film buffs
can go bananas over, a film that models itself after classic movies of
criminals on-the-run, then you could be on board for this one, at least,
more than other viewers who might find this film is not as good as the
films it is imitating.
The two crazed gunmen kidnappers are the scruffy bearded Parker (Ryan
Phillippe) and the placid psychopath Longbaugh (Benicio Del Toro).
Parker does the voiceover explaining his amoral actions as something he
can't help doing and expects no mercy from God. Parker and Longbaugh are
the real-life surnames of Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid. Their
escapade as career criminals is explained by Parker, saying it was
either a minimal wage job or life as a petty criminal.
A shapeless story and an unmoving character portrayal of its anti-heroes
get in the way of "The Way of the Gun" for director-writer Christopher
McQuarrie, who won an Academy Award for his unusual script in the
overrated "The Usual Suspects." He has come up with a reasonably
intricate script here for his debut film as a director, but it lacks a
certain flow and credibility for it to be a bravura debut. There was a
stop-and-go flurry in the action causing the story to grow dull, with
guns always the answer to whatever the problem, and its situations took
on a suspension of disbelief, leaving a huge void onscreen amid the dark
ambivalence of the story line. But what was always absorbing was the
actors spouting lines that seemed to come out of their mouths in an
unnatural manner, yet had a touch of playfulness, as they mugged for the
camera.
Parker and Longbaugh kidnap a pregnant surrogate mother, Robin (Juliette
Lewis), who is to receive $1 million for her services. In a bloody
shoot-out with her conniving bodyguards, Jeffers (Taye Diggs) and Obecks
(Nicky Katt), at her obstetrician's office, Dr. Painter (Dylan), she is
taken by the thugs and held for ransom. She is having the child for a
wealthy couple, whose wife (Kristin Lehmann) can give birth but doesn't
want to go through the trouble of having a child. Mr. Chidduck (Scott
Wilson) is the ruthless tycoon who is connected with the mob, as he
launders their money through his legitimate business interests, and is
faced with the daunting problem of getting back his prospective son
alive without being allowed to pay the ransom, because the money can be
traced to the mob and he doesn't have their permission to pay the
ransom. To the rescue comes help from the mob -- his bagman, someone who
is the mob's enforcer, the old-timer Joe Sarno (James Caan), and his
henchman Abner (Geoffrey Lewis), who was playing Russian roulette before
Joe called for help. Joe is someone who explains that he is an
adjudicator, showing off his polysyllabic profundity, which matches the
exaggerated style of language the gunmen speak.
All the characters are born liars and self-deceivers, the only innocent
one is the expected child. Unfortunately, the film doesn't have any
touching moments to fall back on and there is no one worth caring about,
so in the midst of all the violence, it is fair to ask what is it all
about, besides being a parody on such films.
The story hits a dry spell when the gunmen flee across the Mexican
border and wait to collect their ransom, knowing that the bagman is
coming after them, which he does in a final shoot-out in a Mexican
whorehouse. The violence and gore that ensues, plus the twists to the
story, offer no big surprises. In fact, it almost seems like hundreds of
other "B" films, contrary to what the director might think. He comes out
with nothing that is astounding, only the sight of the dead bodies as
they pile up seems to bring about a certain ugliness.
James Caan was great to watch ... his role took him in and out of the
film, as it didn't seem to matter what he was spouting, he could have
been doing the script to another film it wouldn't have mattered, he
still was the film's source of charisma even if he was cast in a
supporting role. I was amused with his definition of karma, saying karma
is just a belief in justice where you don't even get the pleasure of
seeing justice in your lifetime. It's an inaccurate definition of karma,
but it was one spot in the film that made you think. When Caan was
onscreen, he took over the film and seemed to be the surrogate star.
But basically this is the type of film that gives ammunition to those
who are bashing Hollywood for its exploitive tendencies to sell
violence. In the last third of the film Juliette Lewis is a bloody mess,
having a baby all the characters pretend to have an interest in, even
the fatalistic Parker becomes concerned about the baby, but while she is
having an excruciatingly painful delivery, one of the film's many
shoot-outs is taking place. It seemed the film was more interested in
the shoot-outs than in getting to anything else to say.
The film was pleasing in the most superficial of ways without offering
anything to say about the inner workings of the two thugs who are the
centerpiece of the film. The camerawork was superb, and even though the
gunplay was phony it filled the screen with stylized action scenes that
were mindlessly diverting. The film could be viewed as a guilty pleasure
for those who realize that the script let them down but the actors came
through with flying colors. They got the graphic violence down pat for a
few sparkling thrills, and the film showed that violence is so pervasive
in society that even a woman gets punched in the nose by the gunmen,
which I guess, goes for equality in this film! A film that has future
cult popularity written all over its ambivalent signature, as the
violence had an unsettling nature to it that will probably grow on
art-house viewers of thrillers who will catch it on video. There is
something intangible about this film that is a reflection of present day
society and its ever-increasing nihilistic ways. What the film doesn't
do, is go beyond exploiting this nihilism.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Way_of_the_Gun_ (R) *** (out of ****)
        With his directorial debut _The_Way_of_the_Gun_, Christopher
McQuarrie, Oscar-winning screenwriter of _The_Usual_Suspects_, has said
that he "set out to make a crime film in a way that no one would ever ask
me to make another crime film again."  A number of critics and viewers
will doubtlessly hope no one does after witnessing all the buckets of
blood shed in this quasi-neo-Western.  But if one looks past the carnage,
one can see a solid entertainment further distinguished by fine
performances.
        Despite his Academy-endorsed writing skills, McQuarrie's script
is one of the weaker elements of the film.  The plot curves that he
throws into the story--in which Parker (Ryan Phillippe) and Longbaugh
(Benicio del Toro), a pair of small-time crooks, kidnap young surrogate
mother Robin (Juliette Lewis), to fetch a ransom from the child's wealthy
biological parents--aren't as clever (and, in my minority opinion, not
nearly as aggravating) as the ones that characterized the famously twisty
_Suspects_.  The wealth of the unborn baby's father, Hale Chidduck (Scott
Wilson), comes from predictably shady sources; gradually revealed are all
sorts of hidden entanglements are between the large cast of
characters--which also includes Chidduck's wife Francesca (Kristin
Lehman); his hired gun Joe Sarno (James Caan); the bodyguards hired to
protect Robin, Jeffers (Taye Diggs) and Obecks (Nicky Katt); and Robin's
doctor, Allen Painter (Dylan Kussman).  There is a sense of inevitability
to how some of the various developments come about, which doesn't so much
make the twists any less interesting (which they are) than less effective
in generating suspense.
        Another complaint likely to made about McQuarrie's script are the
fairly shallow characterizations, namely that of Parker and Longbaugh. 
The audience never learns anything about these guys except that they're
criminals (and not especially good ones), and they live by the way of the
gun.  But I don't see this as a flaw; so many films try to force some
psychological reasoning as to why certain people are bad that it's rather
refreshing to see a film that simply takes them at face value and leaves
them at that.  And with Phillippe and del Toro giving better performances
than usual (Phillippe's blankness is well-suited for such a cipher of a
character; del Toro mercifully doesn't indulge in his usual verbal tics),
the lack of insight into the pair is made even less of a problem.
        That general idea, taken on a larger scale, is why
_The_Way_of_the_Gun_ works--the shortcomings of the material is
compensated by the execution.  While everyone in the cast does a fine
job, the standouts are a nicely subtle Caan as the world-wise and -weary
bagman and especially Lewis--doing her best work in years--as the fragile
and very pregnant woman at the center of the whole mess.
        Of course, the strong work of the ensemble is just reflective of
the overall directorial job by McQuarrie.  Although it lasts a minute
under two hours, the film progresses at a steady pace and especially
comes alive during the exciting and often inventive action sequences. 
The most unusual and intriguing of these occurs early on: a slow-speed
(and I mean _slow_) car chase in which Jeffers and Obecks pursue Parker
and Longbaugh, who dangle their legs from the open doorways of their
vehicle--that is, when not abandoning it altogether at certain junctures.
        But McQuarrie naturally saves the biggest blowout for the end,
closing _The_Way_of_the_Gun_ with 30 minutes of raw gunplay and even
rawer bloodshed (not all caused by bullets).  For a number of viewers,
the sequence's unflinchingly excessive violence will be what ultimately
does in the film; but for others--such as myself--the over-the-top mayhem
closes the film on an electrifying high.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Christopher McQuarrie from his screenplay. Starring Ryan
Phillippe, Benicio Del Toro, Juliette Lewis. Running time: 140 minutes.
Rated R for extreme violence by the MFCB. Reviewed on September 12th,
2000.
It would be easy to dismiss "The Way Of The Gun" as just another rip-off
of Quentin Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction". Indeed, it would also be quite easy
to praise it as a worthy successor, and reviewers have taken both
approaches. But the similarities between the two movies are superficial at
best, limited to their avant-garde approach to violence, mixing bloodshed
with clever dialogue. Whereas Tarantino's masterpiece was an essay in
absurdism -- contrasting discussions of European fast food with a brutal
mob hit, for example -- "The Way Of The Gun" is more a reinterpretation of
a genre than a subversion. "Way" is, at its most essential, a post-modern
western. The movie by which it is most inspired is not "Pulp Fiction" but
rather "Butch Cassidy And The Sundance Kid".
"Way" and "Butch" share a number of similarities. Most obviously (if
somewhat obscurely for those not intimately familiar with the 1969
film) is the fact that the main characters in "The Way Of The Gun" go by
the names Mr Parker and Mr Longbaugh, the civilian identities of the Paul
Newman and Robert Redford characters in the earlier film. Both movies
feature likeable outlaws who give up their traditional way of life in
search of greater glory. "We stepped off the path," says Parker in "Way",
"and went looking for the fortune we knew was looking for us." In both
pictures, the main characters concoct ambitious plans which go
unexpectedly and appallingly awry. And the two films each portray the
passage of the western into new times: "Butch" was set at the sunset of
the Wild West era, "Way" depicts a western of modern times.
Parker (Ryan Phillippe) and Longbaugh (Benicio Del Toro) are drifters in
search of the big prize. While earning small change donating sperm, they
learn of a woman (Juliette Lewis) who is being paid one million dollars to
act as the surrogate mother for the baby of the wealthy Chidducks. They
decide to kidnap the woman and hold her for ransom. But what they do not
realise is that Chidduck (Scott Wilson) is a money launderer with 
nefarious ties. Soon they are being pursued by Chidduck's singleminded
bodyguards and his veteran bagman, Joe Sarno (James Caan).
"The Way Of The Gun" was written and directed by Chris McQuarrie.
That McQuarrie assumes both key creative roles is the movie's blessing and
its curse. McQuarrie clearly understands the intricacies of his story
intimately. This results in a number of wonderful scenes of delightful
originality, often railing against the cliches of the genre. Every crime
movie must have a car chase, for instance, and McQuarrie obliges. But when
the scene comes, it is not a typical reckless race down a busy city 
street. Instead, McQuarrie's take slows the spedometer down to just a few
miles an hour, and takes place not on a freeway but in labyrinthine
alleyways. It is less a chase than a cat-and-mouse game, and is a
marvellous slice of cinema.
It would be tempting, indeed, to label "The Way Of The Gun" as a "thinking
man"'s crime movie. This is true not so much because the plot is
particularly complicated -- it isn't, and what twists and turns McQuarrie
does throw at the viewer are mostly related to character rather than
incident -- but because the film is populated by thoughtful, 
well-conceived individuals none of whom feel as though they've been  
summoned up out of stock.
The best of these is probably James Caan's Sarno, a wise master of the
business who has learned to divorce business from personal time. At one
point, he confronts his prey (Longbaugh) in a bar, and the two spend the
night conversing about their shared trade. "The only thing you can
assume" about a man his age, Sarno tells Longbaugh, "is that he's a
survivor." McQuarrie's script is peppered with such gems.
McQuarrie also demonstrates that he is as capable a director as he is a
writer. There are some well-crafted shots in "The Way Of The Gun", such as
a slow pan from a crowd of Chidduck's subordinates, setting off in hunt of
Longbaugh and Parker, up to Chidduck's wife, watching from a window.
But, as indicated, McQuarrie's role as both scripter and director is a
mixed blessing. This is most evident in the pacing of the movie, which
feels sluggish from start to finish and is especially torpid in the middle
third, before the action moves to a Mexican hacienda and even more "Butch
Cassidy" comparisons are invited (whether this includes Parker and
Longbaugh sharing the fate of their namesakes is left for the reader to
discover). "The Way Of The Gun" is a movie desperately crying out for an
objective viewpoint amongst its creators, somebody to recognise the
strengths of McQuarrie's screenplay while cutting down on his excesses.
The result is a film that lacks momentum, that spends so long in transit
that it is easy to miss the pleasant stops along the way. This is not
helped by the fact that, apart from Caan, none of the other actors quite
manage to establish themselves in the movie (though Del Toro comes 
closest, and his scene with Caan is especially impressive). Phillippe and
Lewis, amongst others, are disappointingly inconsistent -- very good in
places, never less than okay, but often fading into the background. Dylan
Kussman, as a gynecologist with secrets of his own, feels as though he's
just stepped off the bus from the prep school.
The result is that "The Way Of The Gun" is wildly uneven. It possesses
some truly remarkable moments, but these are trapped in an undisciplined
concoction, like nuggets of gold peeking out from the mud. McQuarrie
clearly has all the tools needed to be both a fine writer and a fine
director, and I have little doubt that he will one day create a movie 
which showcases both disciplines at their best. "The Way Of The Gun"
demonstrates that that day isn't here quite yet.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/TheWayOfTheGun.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
James Brundage
I just can't do it.  I just can't rubber stamp Jerry Maguire as a perfect
romance/sports movie, let sleeping dogs lie, and recant the bash that I
first wrote of it back when it was released.  I'd like to say that I want to
recant and am being stopped by higher journalistic ethics, but that's not
really it.  I just didn't like Jerry Maguire, and can't honestly send anyone
to a film that compromises its own integrity so many times while claiming to
be about integrity, ethics, ideals, and romance.
Jerry Maguire concerns (!you guessed it!) Jerry Maguire (Tom Cruise), a
sports agent who makes Arliss Michaels look like a two-bit hack.  Maguire,
faced with a kid who curses at him, decides to write a mission statement
that states `fewer clients, less money.'  When reality hits, he is fired for
writing this statement (before you think of the conglomerate agency he works
for as evil, remember that he is advocating something directly against
business ethics he is basically kamakazing himself), Jerry makes the sudden
switch back into money-grubbing sports agent.  Of course, a very public
nervous breakdown that caused the mission statement kind of gets in the way
of getting as many clients, so he's left with just two.  And, when one of
these clients drops him due to double talk by another agent, he's left with
linebacker Rod Tidwell (Cuba Gooding Jr) as his only income, no money, and a
single-mother employee Dorothy Boyd (Renee Zellwegger) to support.
>From here on in, the film is about as clear-cut as they come.  Rod triumphs,
Jerry triumphs, Dorothy triumphs and we're left listening to `shelter from
the storm' as the end credits roll.  But how does everyone triumph?  By
directly recanting on every moral stance they've taken, becoming the
money-grabbing schmucks they loathed, and marrying to make medical plans
simpler.  Who are we kidding?  Really?
Yes, Jerry Maguire sweeps you off your feet if your not looking for it,
because Jerry Maguire is inundated with all of those things that sweep
viewers off their feet.  Nice sports scenes, decent sex scenes, memorable
lines, vapid humor, and a soundtrack that you just want to own, but none of
this holds up when placed under even the lightest of scrutiny.  The acting
may be wonderful, but the script is so uncreative and illogical that you
might as well not ever bother.
Then, of course, you consider all of the little pet peeves that can annoy
the hell out of any techhead.  Take the sound mix.  How the hell did an
ex-Rolling Stone editor come out with such a terrible sound mix?  In a
restaurant, when the camera shifts back 5 feet, the sound is almost
completely washed out.  Dorothy, Jerry, and Rod are consistently overlit, so
much so that if this is an artistic technique Crowe is using it to overkill
levels.  What happened with this Cameron Crowe fluke?  Why does this film
exist, and why was it nominated for Best Picture?  Where the hell are
Singles and Almost Famous when you need them?
Yes, some level of Jerry Maguire applies to me.  I'm not a completely
callous critic, immune to all sweet talking movie stars and devoid of a
sense of romance.  Nor am I a football-hating intellectual.  But does this
film complete me?  I don't think so.
Director: Cameron Crowe
Writer: Cameron Crowe
Starring: Tom Cruise, Renee Zellwegger, Cuba Gooding, Jr., Jay Morh
Short Stuff short film review:
http://www.othercinema.com/~jbrundage/

Author
Susan Granger
   Screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie, who won an Oscar for
"The Usual Suspects," makes an auspicious directorial debut with this
crime thriller about two small-time crooks who call themselves Parker
(Ryan Phillippe) and Longbaugh (Benicio Del Toro), the real surnames
of Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid.  They're raising capital by
selling their sperm in L.A. when they overhear a conversation about
Robin (Juliette Lewis) who has been hired for $1 million by a wealthy
couple to be a surrogate mother. Immediately, they concoct a
kidnapping/ransom scheme. But when they unconventionally abduct the
waddling, very-pregnant Robin from her obstetrician's office, despite
the presence of her bodyguards (Taye Diggs, Nicky Katt), and hide her
in a hotel in Mexico, complications begin, and she gives birth in the
midst of a gunfight. What the inept, sociopathic thugs don't know is
that the biological father (Scott Wilson) of the newborn boy, the man
they're shaking down for $15 million, launders money for organized
crime and that he's hired a mob-connected "fixer" (James Caan) to take
care of the situation. (Curiously, the "fixer" has an assistant who in
real-life is Geoffrey Lewis, Juliette Lewis's father). One of the
menacing Caan's better lines is "I can promise you a day of reckoning
that you will not live long enough to never forget." As you might
expect from a Christopher McQuarrie script, the confusing plot twists
and turns, tricky double-cross following tricky double-cross, within
back-stabbing sub-plots, and nothing is ever exactly what you expect
it to be except, perhaps, the shoot-'em'up finale. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Way of the Gun" scores a slow-paced but
grimly stylish, snarling 4, profane and violent from start to finish -
with not one likable character.

Author
Ron Small
Starring: Ryan Phillippe, Benicio Del Torro, James Caan, Juliette Lewis, Taye 
Diggs, Scott Wilson, Nicky Katt, Dylan Kussman, Kristen Lehman
WAY OF THE GUN is brimming with surprises, some good, most bad. One of the 
good ones is Ryan Phillippe's surprisingly halfway decent performance. After 
the actor gained much attention by posing and preening through teen swill 
like I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER, he hinted at a bit growth in last 
year's CRUEL INTENTIONS with his amusingly contemptuous John Malkovich meets 
James Spader performance, though his acting in that film faltered around the 
third act mark, precisely when the screenplay made his character grow a heart 
(presumably to appeal to his training bra wearing fans) and start bellyaching 
about how he'd fallen for his "target". It was a dramatic shift that neither 
Phillippe nor the film's director could negotiate. But he seems to be trying 
and that shouldn't be overlooked (or probably over praised) seeing as how, at 
this point, he really isn't required to do much but look pretty. Here, 
Phillippe has procured a five day growth of beard, his hair askew and his 
affect altered to sound something like James Cagney in all his "Look here, 
see" glory. It's tough to believe a pretty boy like Phillippe as a hard ass, 
but his performance actually helps with the illusion. Unlike Ben Affleck's 
puppy dog approach in REINDEER GAMES, Phillippe is believable and not too bad 
at that.
As for the plot, well, that's one of the bad surprises; Phillippe and the 
great Benicio Del Torro play two moronic (and not even remotely likeable) 
criminals (introduced to us in the parking lot of a rave where they stupidly 
pick a fight with about twenty people) who hatch a scheme to kidnap a 
surrogate mother (Juliette Lewis) after overhearing that she's carrying the 
baby of Painter (Scott Wilson), a very well connected wealthy man. The 
kidnapping devolves into a laborious shoot out where much damage is done and 
many are killed. But the anti-heroes escape with the woman while an aging hit 
man (James Caan) and two scheming bodyguards (Taye Diggs and Nicky Katt) 
remain in pursuit.
Directed by Christopher McQuarrie, the screenwriter who won an Oscar for his 
work on USUAL SUSPECTS, an overrated piece of crime noir in many circles 
(this one included), WAY OF THE GUN is a hodgepodge of crime thriller motifs 
that just oozes eye rolling familiarity. Unlike Phillipe, McQuarrie doesn't 
seem to be growing at all; he fills his flick with a sprawling labyrinth of 
plot all snatched from movies I know I've seen before and worse, it feels 
like it. The film lacks even a fresh approach (like what Soderbergh did OUT 
OF SIGHT or THE LIMEY) to its clichés, all of which are spewed before us in a 
picture that tries so desperately to be hip and gritty without bothering to 
notice how common it is. It features characters living by a code they seemed 
to have picked up in Sam Peckinpah 101 rather than any thing resembling life. 
Even attempts at emotional weight feel strained like in preposterous scene 
where enemies James Caan and Benicio Del Torro stop in their tracks to have a 
cup of coffee and pontificate on life, philosophy, etc. I didn't like the bit 
much when it first appeared in HEAT, here, it's even more self consciously 
"dramatic".
USUAL SUSPECTS, which also featured a bunch of low lives that 
seemed to live by a code they learned from the movies, worked to some degree 
because of that astonishing twist ending. Nowadays an astonishing twist per 
ending is de rigeur, never mind if it deems all that transpired before it 
completely inconsequential. Thus, nearly every character in WAY comes with at 
least one dirty little secret (most amateurishly projected before they 
appear) and it too has an ironic little twist at the end (nothing earth 
shattering, like in the USUAL SUSPECTS) but I admit, I didn't see it coming, 
and I smiled. However most of the movie feels exactly like the interrogation 
scenes between Palminteri and Spacey in USUAL SUSPECTS: a lot of faux huffing 
and puffing with no rhythm or reason. Or substance.
It's just as overplotted as SUSPECTS, and often dull as any overplotted movie 
without interesting characters, a distinctive style, or a good script would 
be. Even the good stuff, most of which involves James Caan (doing a fine 
job), feels odd and out of place in a movie that thinks lines like "Karma is 
only justice with out the satisfaction" are clever. At one point Caan laments 
"Need is the ultimate monkey" a line so inexplicable he might as well have 
said "love is like hippo ass". I've seen porno with better dialogue. And some 
with better plot lines too. But rarely has porn offered up such a talented 
cast (I mean, can you even compare James Caan to Ron Jeremy). Caan slips into 
this role with seeming ease, he could do this kind of soft-spoken tough guy 
in a coma, but he manages to give his character depth and weariness. Benicio 
Del Torro is always welcome, though here he plays it fairly straight (rather 
than another oddball character creation like the ones the actor gave us in 
USUAL SUSPECTS and EXCESS BAGGAGE), adopting a Brad Pitt-esque quizzical pout 
to go along with his heavy swaggering. Speaking of Pitt, his ex, Juliette 
Lewis, is a weak link, either shouting her lines with ear shattering 
shrillness, or waddling about like a silly goose. Nicky Katt was brilliant in 
a brief role in THE LIMEY, here his role is just as brief only he seems 
wasted; he's only kept around for his cold presence. Taye Diggs has a similar 
function, cool as ever, but never a character, though the guy has one helluva 
death scene.
For the most part WAY is incessantly talky with no reason to give a hippo's 
ass about any thing that transpires since its characters are never more than 
simplistic pawns. It's vaguely Tarantino-ish, but in a bad TRUTH AND 
CONSEQUENCES NM way, with Phillippe, in one scene, leaping into a stupid rant 
about "faggots" migrating to Los Angeles. You know the routine. The final 
shoot out is pure bargain basement John Woo (who himself seems to be doing 
bargain basement John Woo) with interchangeable bad guys lining up to be shot 
at. But those gun shots sure crack like thunder. Just the other day I was 
watching an old DIRTY HARRY movie on cable and was stunned to hear the weak 
elephant grunt-like sound that emanated from Harry's fetishized Smith and 
Wesson. Oh how far we've come.
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
Steve Rhodes
WAY OF THE GUN, written and directed by Oscar-winning writer Christopher 
McQuarrie (THE USUAL SUSPECTS), is a migraine headache of gunfire.  With 
thousands of expended bullets, the movie is a Quentin Tarantino-like 
fantasyland of two-bit hoods, bagmen and organized crime, all firing at 
each other with a vengeance.  Interrupted by regular spurts of 
video-game shoot-'em-ups, the uneven film generally drags along as if it 
were trying to approximate slow motion without actually resorting to 
modifying the speed.
An ambitious movie with a dense storyline of competing characters who 
have complicated allegiances, it promises more than it delivers.  The 
setup and the action sequences are imaginative, but, overall, first-time 
director Christopher McQuarrie shows more skills as a writer than a 
director.  Key sections of the movie sag when they should sizzle.  
Others sizzle but are allowed to overcook.
The plot features a couple of low-life losers, Longbaugh (Benicio Del 
Toro) and Parker (Ryan Phillippe), who figure that they are bound for a 
minimum-wage job or a life of petty crime unless they go looking for the 
fortune that is looking for them.  Visiting a sperm bank to raise a 
little cash, they hit upon their big idea.  They hear about a woman, 
Robin (Juliette Lewis), who is carrying a rich couple's child so that 
the biological mother will not have to be bothered with the pain of 
pregnancy and childbirth.  Our two Einsteins (Longbaugh and Parker) 
figure that all they need to do is kidnap Robin and demand a fortune for 
her return.  They take the time to find out that the baby's father is an 
A-list bad guy.
The frequent stupidity of the kidnappers is a plot thread that never 
really pays off, save providing fodder for one of the film's best lines.  
"Is he the brains of the outfit or you?" Joe (James Caan) asks Longbaugh 
about Parker.  "To tell the truth, I don't think this is a brains kind 
of outfit," confesses Longbaugh.  In general the story's tone is deadly 
serious, which is underscored by sober music, heavy on the low 
registers.  The few comic lines are welcome changes of pace.
The best sequence in the movie is the opening bar fight set outside a 
nightclub.  As Longbaugh and Parker sit on a long-haired guy's new 
Mercedes, the owner and his girl friend threaten them.  Using non-stop 
profanity, the guy and his girlfriend tell them just what they will do 
to them if they don't move immediately.  The resulting action is 
surprising and hilarious.  And, like the rest of the film, very gory.  
McQuarrie seems to pride himself on devising new ways to make the 
audience squirm.  His staging of an "operating room" scene may have even 
those with the strongest stomachs heading for the exits.
But even with its many problems, WAY OF THE GUN isn't a bad film.  The 
story is intriguing, and we are never quite sure what will happen next.  
McQuarrie does a masterful job of creating an unusual mood and 
atmosphere for the movie.  The actor's performances are all good in 
revealing so little of their unsympathetic characters that we want to 
know exactly what they are thinking.  
After about an hour or so, we are more than ready to bid our players 
goodbye.  The concluding part, when it finally arrives, feels like it 
will never end.  We want everyone to die in the final bloodbath so we 
can finally get the movie over -- its intrigue having long-since given 
way to tedium.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Way of the Gun (2000)
Ryan Phillippe, Benicio Del Toro, James Caan, Juliette Lewis, Taye
Diggs, Nicky Katt, Dylan Kussman, Scott Wilson, Kristin Lehman, Geoffrey
Lewis. Written and directed by Christopher McQuarrie. 118 minutes.
Rated R, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
When Academy Award winning writer ("The Usual Suspects") and first-time
director Christopher McQuarrie sat down to block out "a kidnapping saga
as a contemporary western awash in film noir overtones," he had an
agenda. It seems McQuarrie was unhappy with the way mainstream Hollywood
screenplays handle characters when they behave badly.
"The thing that has continually bothered me about films today is this
skewed sense of justice, this false sense of accountability," stated
McQuarrie. "In reality, people die all the time and the score isn't
evened, their death isn't justified. What's frustrating with Hollywood's
approach is that you see someone do a bad deed and they're punished for
it 10 times over. Not only is that not reality, but you're telling
people that their judgment about anything is okay."
Thanks a heap, Chris. After watching and reading countless news stories
about human beings doing unspeakably horrible things to other human
beings and getting away with their deeds, what a comfort it is to know
that you are out there, striving to insure that movies are just as
repulsive as real life.
"The Way of the Gun" follows two creeps as they kidnap a surrogate
mother-to-be, only to learn that the target of their ransom demands is a
money-laundering, union-busting bagman with a slew of thugs in his
employ. The story takes place in some alternate universe, where innocent
bystanders stare numbly at gunfights until they are instructed to flee,
where men race about shooting at each other with little visible concern
over the flying bullets and where no one ever calls the police.
Oh yes, Christopher McQuarrie has this hard-edged reality business down
pat.
In his alternate universe, women merely seethe or shriek, while the
men-folk pontificate endlessly, lobbing around quotes like:

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE WAY OF THE GUN
(Artisan)
Starring:  Ryan Phillippe, Benicio Del Toro, Juliette Lewis, Taye Diggs,
Nicky Katt, Scott Wilson, James Caan, Dylan Kussman, Kristin Lehman.
Screenplay:  Christopher McQuarrie.
Producer:  Kenneth Kokin.
Director:  Christopher McQuarrie.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  119 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     THE WAY OF THE GUN -- the directing debut by Oscar-winning
screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie (THE USUAL SUSPECTS) -- opens the way
you always hope a film will open: with so much energy and potential that
the whole theater seems electrified. In that opening, a pair of career
criminals identified simply as "Parker" (Ryan Phillippe) and "Longbaugh" 
(Benicio Del Toro) perch on the hood of a car in a nightclub parking lot,
drawing the ire of the car's owner and his loud-mouthed female companion. 
The scene is violent, profane, surprising and hilarious. As a tone-setter,
it's marvelous; as a stand-alone piece of writing and directing, it's
hella-fun.
     Filled with individual moments of loopy creativity, genuinely
unsettling violence and wicked dialogue, THE WAY OF THE GUN should have
been one of the best films of the year (though in a painfully lackluster
2000, it still has a shot at that dubious honor). The only reason it's not
is a fundamental narrative miscalculation on McQuarrie's part: There's no
good reason for Parker and Longbaugh to be the film's ostensible
protagonists. The story follows the pair as they launch their latest
scheme, which involves kidnapping a nine-month-pregnant surrogate mother
named Robin (Juliette Lewis). They know the baby's biological parents are
paying Robin $1 million for the child, so they know there's money to be
had. What they don't know is that the father, Hale Chidduck (Scott 
Wilson), launders money for organized crime. They also don't know that
Chidduck can call on associates like Joe Sarno (James Caan), who has a
knack for dealing with problems like Parker and Longbaugh.
     For at least the first half-hour, THE WAY OF THE GUN is so skillfully
rendered that it seems destined for glory. From Parker and Longbaugh's
torment of a clerk at a sperm bank, to the unconventional staging of the
kidnapping itself, to the splendid slow-speed chase that follows,
McQuarrie twists the crime caper genre 90 degrees at virtually every
opportunity. Even playing the Tarantino comparison card doesn't entirely
do justice to McQuarrie's ability to throw a wrench into expectations. The
connections between the characters become evident only after a bit of
reflection; there's no guarantee that bad-asses still won't get their bad
asses kicked, or that those who appear likely to take the most punishment
might not end up dishing it out. It's almost never exactly what you expect
it to be.
     And, in at least one case, that's not exactly a compliment. As THE
WAY OF THE GUN unfolds, it gradually becomes evident that the true
protagonist of the story is not Parker and Longbaugh. That distinction
goes to Caan's Sarno, a veteran tough guy with his own priorities in the
whole kidnapping episode. While a flurry of sub-plots spin through the
film -- attempts by Chidduck's two chief bodyguards (Taye Diggs and Nicky
Katt) to double-cross their boss; the manipulations of Chidduck's young
wife (Kristin Lehman); the obstetrician (Dylan Kussman) with a tragic past
-- it's ultimately Sarno's story. McQuarrie, however, never seems aware of
that fact. He lingers on Parker and Longbaugh as though they were the
modern-day Butch and Sundance suggested by their names, despite the fact
that we're almost never allowed inside the criminals' heads. Telling the
story largely from their perspective isn't a celebration of the
anti-hero; it's a narrative blunder.
     Is that blunder enough to throw THE WAY OF THE GUN entirely off
course? Fortunately not. The climax at a Mexican brothel showcases both a
nerve-wracking episode of impromptu surgery and a good old-fashioned
shoot-out (with a couple of new-fashioned variations). McQuarrie's
compositions are unusually rich for a writer-turned-director -- watch for
Mrs. Chidduck appearing in the background and at the edge of the frame --
yet he still ends on a kicker of a line of dialogue. The only thing
missing from THE WAY OF THE GUN is soul, the soul that would have been
provided by Sarno as its center. It's a good film that's a 90 degree twist
away from greatness -- the one 90 degree twist McQuarrie didn't take.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Seems that every time a critic or a regular guy talks about
this movie, the first words out of his mouth are "violent, man."
Maybe I'm inoculated against shock from blood, whether it be
spilling from a woman having a difficult birth (as does Juliette
Lewis in "The Way of the Gun") or from landing like a prep-
school high-jumper into a sandbox that has been laced with
broken glass (as does Ryan Phillippe in the same feature) . 
What will separate those who go for Christopher McQuarrie's
new film from those who stay the distance but are not wildly
enthusiastic rests on one's craving for densely-plotted, cynical
noir drama with twists and turns, in this case featuring a
narrative so copious that two movies' worth of motifs are
implanted--and not effortlessly.  Mixing an oddly sentimental
theme revolving around the feelings of several people for a
nine-months' old fetus about to emerge, with an examination
of the depths of ruthlessness to which some folks will go,
"The Way of the Gun" is too weighed down by its strains to
command unfettered attention.  I can think only of the
comment in Peter Schaeffer's play "Amadeus" by a nobleman
who criticized Mozart by declaring his symphonies and
concerti beset with "too many notes."
   Still "The Way of the Gun" is nothing of the brain-teaser of
Christopher McQuarrie's previous screenplay, "The Usual
Suspects," in which five criminals are put into a police lineup
for a crime they did not commit--a film that critic Leonard
Maltin called "too clever for its own good."  This--and not
excessive violence--is the reproach one could correctly apply
to "The Way of the Gun."
   In the role of Parker and Longbaugh, Ryan Phillippe and
Benicio Del Toro are a couple of scuzzy characters who
simply refuse to look forward to a life of minimum-wage jobs. 
They cannot even land a few bucks for donating their sperm
because they cannot resist wiseacre comments to the
interviewer.  They plan  the big one even while sensing that
their design has only a meager chance of succeeding.  These
are criminals who tempt the fates and have no fear of a
violent death.  They abduct Robin (Juliette Lewis), who is
now nine months' pregnant--the surrogate mother of the
wealthy Hale Chidduck(Scott Wilson)-- who shares a criminal
outlook with the interlopers.  Chidduck is hooked up with a
mob, which includes his bag man, Joe Sarno (James Caan)
and protects his family with two highly trained bodyguards
(Taye Diggs and Nicky Katt) whose attire must come straight
out of GQ. 
   Aside from the always competent acting of James Caan as
a mysterious fellow whose loyalties seem always in question,
the principal draw of the movie is McQuarrie's screenplay--
which features such aphorisms as "There's always free
cheese in a mousetrap" and gives the cryptic Caan some key
words to intone throughout such as "adjudicate."  At one
point, he tells the kidnappers--who from the moment they
confront Joe Sarno know they're in over their heads--"I can
promise you a day of reckoning that you will not live long
enough to never forget."  
   Caan's proficiency as a noir actor cannot be matched by
any of the others in the cast--who could be called his prey--
though Juliette Lewis comes away with an alternately tough
and vulnerable role of a woman proceeding with a most
difficult childbirth with only the most primitive operating
conditions at her behest.  More bullets, fewer words, and a
shorter story could have made for a more entertaining night
at the movies.
Rated R.  Running time: 118 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Homer Yen
In many ways, "TWOTG" does for tough-guy movies what
LA Confidential did for police stories.  There's
savviness in its writing and a mature patience in
allowing the material to unfold.  But, I suppose, we
wouldn't expect less from Christopher McQuarrie, who
was responsible for giving us "The Usual Suspects". 
His writing talents are still in tact as he brings to
us a bloody yet intellectual tale of two unabashed but
dimwitted thugs and a plan gone awry.
The two goons are Parker and Longbaugh (Ryan Phillipe
and Benicio del Toro).  These two men show the
hardened wear of those who have always had it tough. 
Their troubled youths have forged two nihilistic souls
who use their amazing gunplay skills to survive. 
Given the choice of minimum wage or petty crime,
they'll always choose the latter.  Yet, they are
incredibly foolish planners.  Actually, these two
never really have a plan.  They just improvise along
the way, hoping that their bravado and arsenal of guns
will take care of anything that they might have
overlooked.
Their next scheme, which they cook up about as fast as
a McDonald's burger, is to kidnap some surrogate
mother named Robin (Juliette Lewis) that was hired by
some well-to-do family.  If all goes well, they'll
receive a nice bit of ransom money and life goes on. 
What Parker and Longbaugh do not realize is that Robin
is carrying a baby for the Chidduck family, whose
patriarch is a feared crime boss.  Moreover, two
bodyguards (Nicky Katt and Taye Diggs) constantly
escort her.  These two protectors find an eerie sense
of pleasure when being confronted and tested in life
and death situations.  They would rather die than
fail; thus their bravado level is equally high.  But
it seems that the testosterone levels of Parker and
Longbaugh are a bit higher, and they employ some
unusual but fun-to-watch tactics to pull off the
kidnapping and to outrun the pursuers in a sort of
slow-motion car chase down a series of alleyways.
The next hour or so, we watch the Chidduck camp
regroup and assess their situation.  During this time,
additional plot lines come into play and more and more
details are revealed.   Because the Chidduck's can not
go to the police and because of the special
circumstances involving the kidnapping, we are
introduced to more characters that will help to
influence the outcome.  We discover that not everyone
in the Chidduck camp is loyal to the cause.  As a
result, there are undercurrents of a conspiracy, and
elements of betrayal and subterfuge.  The sepia-toned
atmosphere is made all the more fascinating thanks to
a terrific soundtrack which emits velvet forebodings,
shrills of intrigue and crescendos that tell us of
life and death situations that are about to occur.
The momentum and the coolness of the film, however,
begins to fizzle in the last 30 minutes, which
featured an overly extended shootout where our two
desperados try to make their way off with the ransom
money.  You can expect lots of bloodletting and an odd
denouement.  In fact, you may admire this film more
than you like it.  Yet, for the most part, "The Way of
the Gun" stays on target.  It feels cool with its
elements of conspiracy and gunplay, and smart for its
invective dialogue and tough guy poetry.  
