Title
Review for Restaurant (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/16b0ca3b85bae527882568ab005bf109?OpenDocument
They might as well have called this movie J. T. MCCLURE'S, which is the
name of the "restaurant" where all the film's characters work.  That
would have at least helped to add a little mystery and some flare to
such a pitiable title.   Thankfully, the film itself is a whole lot
better than the name might indicate.  RESTAURANT, directed by Eric
Bross, spins the story of a group of young twenty-somethings struggling
to reach their dreams of fame, while working at an upscale bar and grill
in Hoboken, New Jersey.   It's got that sort of SWINGERS humor and
mentality, mixed with a diverse cast and much more serious themes.
Our protagonist is the restaurant's bartender, Chris Calloway (Adrien
Brody - SUMMER OF SAM, SIX WAYS TO SUNDAY), a struggling playwright
weaving his real life problems into his first play -- a work in progress
that he can't seem to finish.  When he meets the newest waitress Jeanine
(Elise Neal - MISSION TO MARS) and they hit it off, he's faced with his
second interracial relationship (the first being Lauryn Hill, who we see
mostly as a picture on the refrigerator).  Chris can't figure out why he
likes black women so much, especially after his Italian father raised
him to be a bigot.  This dilemma is portrayed in his unfinished play,
which is the story of a white man that can't deal with the external
pressures of having a black girlfriend, even though he's madly in love.
As he tries to make sense of his feelings, he gets caught up in the past
when his ex (Hill) shows up at a friend's wedding.  Because his
relationship with her ended on such a bizarre note, he can't put it
behind him, which prevents him from devoting his heart to Jeanine, and
finally, thwarts him from finishing the play.  Whew!
Fortunately, the movie is not as mushy as the plot may sound.  Chris has
some pretty interesting friends who all face issues of their own.
Malcolm Jamal-Warner, from "The Cosby Show," is a Howard University
graduate who is relegated to the position of waiter because he's black,
even though he's a qualified bartender.  Jesse Martin, from "Ally
McBeal," is an intelligent man stuck as a line cook who offers
rationalizations regarding the white stigmatization of the N-word.
David Moscow (NEWSIES) plays Reggae, the head chef content with his
existence as a pothead, soliciting prostitutes with regularity, and
considering himself to be from "the hood" even though he's white.  Ethan
(Michael Stoyanov) is also a waiter, but happens to be homosexual and
finds he can't get promoted even after years of loyal service.  The
whirlwind of tumult causes the movie to run a little long, but it's
actually much needed in order to make its powerful statement for racial
tolerance.  Essentially, the film comes to grips with a plethora of
controversial issues that we've all heard about in after-school specials
or seen in other movies before, but it's still entertaining thanks to a
blend of humorous dialogue and good acting.
At its core, RESTAURANT is an important movie for at least offering
another perspective on interracial relationships beyond Spike Lee's
JUNGLE FEVER.  I recommend it, and even non-Gen X'ers, at whom the film
is directed, are sure to get something positive from the movie.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
