Title
Review for Palm Beach Story, The (1942)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
One of a series of successful comedies written and
directed by Preston Sturges, "The Palm Beach Story"
is funny and entertaining throughout.  The depiction
of the wealthy as eccentric and generous doesn't
always ring true, and sometimes the silliness gets
out of hand, such as when the rowdy gun club members
go on a rampage.  Still, all is forgiven in the
film's second half, which has Mary Astor and her pet
Toto (Sig Arno) in hilarious form.
Joel McCrae plays a struggling entrepreneur, whose
marriage to gold-digger Claudette Colbert is failing
due to money troubles.  Colbert leaves him with nothing
but the dress on her back, but through her feminine
wiles soon ends up in Palm Beach as the love interest
of bookish zillionaire John D. Hackensacker III
(Rudy Vallee).  The eternally grouchy McCrae arrives
to win her back, but instead is foisted upon Hackensacker's
aggressive, outrageous sister (Mary Astor).
I have always identified Astor with her role as the
femme fatale in "The Maltese Falcon".  But comedy is
her true genre, and she is given a marvelous character
and some great lines in this film.  Toto, her gibberish
speaking sidekick, is a marvelous comic invention, and
the sight of him with a tennis racket is a side-splitter.
McCrae's slow burn is also entertaining.  He spends
the entire film seething.
Colbert is not quite as effective, but her character is
more problematic.  She has the dual goals of leaving her
husband and making his fortune, and she has to walk the
line between keeping her honor and perpetuating a con
on Vallee.  The story would work better if Colbert would
dump grumpy McCrae and instead marry wealthy airhead Vallee,
but such an ending would break the code of 1942 Hollywood.
Sturges gets around this problem with a last minute plot
twist, which I won't spoil for you.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
