Title
Review for Lara Croft: Tomb Raider (2001)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Steve Rhodes
So what is the value of a video game that can only be watched?  Especially one
with long patches of leaden and ridiculous dialog such as, "My ignorance amuses
me."  In the case of LARA CROFT: TOMB RAIDER, a non-interactive video game
released on celluloid, the value was almost fifty million dollars in a single
weekend.  The secret of this movie, which speaks directly to our inner
(12-year-old) child, was summarized succinctly by my appropriately aged son.  He
says that its star, Angelina Jolie, is "hell a hot."
The plot involves a special event that occurs when all of the planets align,
which, we are told, only happens every 5,000 years.  (Hmm, does that mean the
studio will spare us a sequel until the year 7001?  We're probably not going to
be that lucky.)  Lara Croft (Jolie) is given a mission by her dead father,
played by Jolie's real-life father, Jon Voight.  Among the movie's "memorable"
moments is an attack sequence that looks like something from THE PLANET OF THE
EASILY BROKEN STONE APES.
The convoluted story is unimportant since the movie has only two modes, killing
people with guns, feet and fists and killing time with dopey dialog.  Croft is
an indestructible fighting machine like a typical video game character.  Even
when she is unarmed, she is more than a match for over a dozen hardened
warriors, each armed with sleek machine guns. 
"Lara's overrated," one of the characters remarks.  Boy, I'd say.  Save yourself
the money, and go watch a neighborhood kid play one of the Lara Croft video
games.  That way, when you quickly get bored and leave, you'll have saved
yourself time and money.
LARA CROFT: TOMB RAIDER runs a long 1:40.  It is rated PG-13 for action violence
and some sensuality and would be acceptable for kids around 9 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave the movie ****, saying the action was great and the
plot was pretty good.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Homer Yen
How much you'll enjoy "Lara Croft: Tomb Raider" will
depend on a couple of things.  If you are an avid fan
of the buxom, video heroine and just can't get enough
of straining your fingers by pressing those tiny
buttons on your Nintendo handset, then you won't be
disappointed.  "LC:TR" offers lots of elaborate
sequences that game players can only wish that they
could execute on their video consoles.  The most
impressive scene features our heroine utilizing a
bungee cord to fend off a group of armed mercenaries
(and if I was trying to do this on the game console,
sweet Lara would have died a thousand times at my
control).  Also neat is the singular motion she
executes to reload the ammunition clips of her twin,
semi-automatic pistols.  
Meanwhile, movie watchers who are enrapt with special
effects extravaganzas and big film budgets like "Pearl
Harbor" or "The Mummy Returns" ("LC:TR" reportedly
cost $100 million to make), will have their hunger for
eye candy satiated.  This is probably the most
handsome looking film thus far this year.  Whether
Lara is battling stone statues come-to-life, exploring
some lost city, or fleeing though jungle foliage, the
film pays a great amount of attention to atmosphere. 
For example, most scenes are bathed in a golden luster
to connote a world of power and wealth, while locales
of adventure are draped with a mysterious fogginess. 
The team behind the art direction, set design, and
special effects deserves much applause.
So far, so good.  But what if you don't fall into
either of those two categories and your taste demands
more?  As long as that taste is for hot, buttered
popcorn, then you'll be fine.  LC:TR is a good summer
film.  But it's not much more.  It features separate
and distinct acts, each featuring cool combat or some
other action sequence.  It doesn't overcomplicate us
with plot.  And it gives us a great heroine who is
lithe and athletic.  The goth Jolie portrays her well,
bringing an alluring dimension of seriousness and
sexuality.
Lara Croft is James Bond and Indiana Jones rolled into
one.  Born into wealth and groomed at the most elite
schools, she has an appetite for adventure.  She
travels to dangerous locales around the globe in
search of lost crypts and long-forgotten empires.  Her
greatest quest, however, challenges her to find two
halves of an ancient artifact buried in space and
time.  So with her thigh-high holsters, body-hugging
outfits, and the help of her butler and a weapons
designer, she travels from England to Italy to
Cambodia and a few lost cities in between.  Luckily,
its brisk pace, it's watchable heroine, and the film's
gorgeous look makes us forget about the video
game-like plot.
What Lara Croft really lacks, however, is a soul. 
There is a noticeable lack of humanity in this film. 
Perhaps Croft comes across as so invulnerable that it
didn't matter who wanted to kill her or how many
people were going to try or what it meant if Lara
should fail.  But as this was adapted from a video
game, you can arguably say that the film kept its
spirit intact.  Fans certainly won't be disappointed. 
All others may feel something lacking.

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     In the great tradition of such classics as Mortal Kombat, Super 
Mario Brothers, and Wing Commander comes Tomb Raider, the latest entry 
in the video-game-to-movie sweepstakes.  And to give credit where credit 
is due, this one makes the transition with flair and invention.
It's a genre that has a built-in problem to overcome: video game 
addicts are used to doing, not just watching.  Here they'll have to rely 
on Lady Lara Croft (Angelina Jolie), the game's heroine, to take care of 
the action for them.  And they couldn't have found a better substitute.
Jolie is tough, athletic, cocky, brilliant, sexy, and a little 
vulnerable.  When I say vulnerable, I don't mean all soft and girlie.  
But prick her, and does she not bleed?  Evoke the image of her dead 
father (played by her real father, Jon Voight), and does she not become 
misty-eyed?  Otherwise, she's pretty invulnerable - she can swing 
through a withering hail of bullets with devil-may-care insouciance and 
never get a scratch. 
But she's tough on the set and the props.  She'd rather go through 
a wall than open a door, and if she wants to take a clock apart she uses 
a hammer.  At one point she reduces an ancient tomb to rubble, and when 
it turns out to be a private training facility in the basement of her 
manor house, one shudders at the thought of what the budget for her 
workouts must run per year.  Figuring she does these training exercises 
at least once a month, and estimating repairs and construction of new 
tomb sets, with overtime, at about $5 million per, the only way it 
becomes cost effective is because she's in the business of saving the 
world.
The video game's producers insisted on star approval, and their 
other deal-breaker was a ban on nudity.  So it was a pleasant surprise 
to come upon a shower scene early in the action, following which Ms. 
Jolie drops her towel in front of her butler (Chris Barrie), who primly 
reproves her, noting that "A lady should be modest."  "Yes," she 
ripostes with saucy irony, "a lady should be modest."  There is equal 
time for admirers of the other gender in a shower scene featuring one of 
the male leads (Daniel Craig), who plays an entire nude scene Peter 
Sellers-like, with the area between hip bone and mid-thigh cannily 
obscured by camera angles and furniture.
There is a plot, and it is constructed along the conventions of a 
video game, with the player facing challenges of increasing degrees of 
difficulty.  The goal is to find the two severed halves of an icon 
called the Triangle of Light before the bad guys do.  The bad guys are a 
secret society called the Illuminati that wants to, would you believe 
it, rule the world, which they will be able to do with this gizmo 
because it controls time.  The catch is that the two halves are hidden 
in secret tombs in far corners of the globe, and they must be joined at 
the precise moment of the alignment of all the planets, which is 
happening in a couple of days and then not again for five thousand 
years.  The Illuminati have set rival tomb raider Manfred Powell (Iain 
Glen) on the trail, and if you didn't already know he was a bad guy your 
alarms would flash when he says patronizingly to Lara "I hear you're 
quite the little archaeologist yourself."
Tomb Raider borrows with good-natured liberality from a lot of very 
recognizable sources.  At the head of the list is Raiders of the Lost 
Ark, with plenty of James Bond stirred (not shaken) in.  There's a cute 
riff on the Pink Panther movies, with an electronic Cato robot 
programmed for surprise attacks Lara. 
Tomb Raider stomped the competition over the weekend, raking in 
nearly 50 million  at the box office, which lends a prescient quality to 
a line uttered by the chief Illuminatus:  "If one tomb raider is good, 
two tomb raiders will be even better." 

Author
Laura Clifford
Lady Lara Croft (Angelina Jolie, "Gone in 60 Seconds") lives in a
mind-numbingly huge British estate with her butler Hilary (Chris Barrie of 
the British series "Red Dwarf"), who attempts to get her to dress more
femininely, and personal techno-geek Bryce (Noah Taylor, "Shine"), who
devises things like a huge killer robot (straight out of "Robocop") to
keep Lara at the top of her game.  That game is tomb raiding for antiquities,
a career taught her by her beloved, now deceased dad (Jon Voight, Jolie's
real father).  A once-every-5,000 years convergence of the planets combined
with the discovery of a ticking 'key' sets Lara off on her latest worldwide
adventure to stop the evil Illuminati from stealing the power of time itself in
"Lara Croft:  Tomb Raider."
Having never played the videogame, I have a question - is the name Lara Croft 
code for Large Cups?  Angelina Jolie, with the help of some bust boosting,
personifies the vidgame heroine - a tough, motorcycle riding chick with an
inhuman figure encased in tight clothing and a personal arsenal.  She can
apparently hear the ticking of a clock encased within a stairwell from 100
yards and a sound sleep, pull in favors from secret ops groups and beat the
living daylights out of a score of men firing a hail of bullets at her without
suffering a scratch, yet doesn't have the sense to employ Bryce to protect
the key to earth's destruction from being stolen.
Screenwriter Michael Colleary ("Face/Off") has provided an idiotic premise
that trots Lara to Cambodia (where huge stone temple creatures come to life
only to be shattered like clay pots by a bullet or two), Venice (for no reason
whatsoever other than to have a conversation with bland bad guy Manfred Powell 
(Iain Glen, "Beautiful Creatures")) and Iceland (to look cool dog-sledding
before an inane climax right out of "The Avengers").  His one good idea is
to surprise the audience when a second shower scene doesn't pan down to the
figure we expect.
Cinematographer Peter Menzies Jr., blessed with these exotic locations, 
serves up a muddy looking, visually bland film.  Simon West's ("Con Air," 
"The General's Daughter") direction is so flat-footed, that boredom sets
in just as Lara's adventure is beginning.  Not a single member of the cast
is given an opportunity to breath life into their characters, although
Daniel Craig ("I Dreamed of Africa") shows a glimmer that somehow got past
West as Lara's former boyfriend, mercenary tomb raider Alex Marrs.
Sitting through "Lara Croft:  Tomb Raider" had me wishing I'd brought a 
PlayStation to the theater because the entertainment sure wasn't on the 
screen.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Angelina Jolie, Noah Taylor, Iain Glen,
Daniel Craig, Chris Barrie, John Voight. Directed by
Simon West. Rated PG-13.
The official title of this long-awaited video game
adaptation is Lara Croft Tomb Raider. Just like that.
No punctuation, not even a comma or a colon. It's a
bad omen; fortunately, it's just about the only
sloppiness you'll see in this sleek, almost
embarassingly entertaining summer blockbuster. The
critics ripped the movie apart, but it's a great
time-waster, perfect for taking in casually on a
Saturday afternoon and forgetting an hour later. And
I'm a sucker for completely gratuitous shower scenes,
especially if the showeree is the likes of Angelina
Jolie. Sue me.
The plot is nonsense about a fight for 2 pieces of
some mysterious talisman that, at the appropriate
planetary alignment that only occurs every 5000 years
or so, will give its possessor the power to change the
fabric of space and time. Or something like that. Lara
Croft, a famous Tomb Raider (the movie never defines
exactly what a "Tomb Raider" is), is saddled with the
task of stopping the Illuminati, a secret organization
of shady old men, from obtaining the parts of the
triangle. Her opponent: the suave, evil, Manfred
Powell (Iain Glenn), who is committed to giving the
Illuminati what they want. Working with Powell is Alex
West (Daniel Craig), also a Tomb Raider and,
apparently, Lara's former love interest.
This is silly, of course, but you can follow it --
which is much more than can be said for the
inexplicably better-reviewed Swordfish -- and all
that's left to do after that is watch Jolie fire
multiple guns at a time at weird robot-like creatures.
The subject matter here is mythical mumbo-jumbo, but
director Simon West (Con Air) makes an interesting
decision: instead of approaching it with the childlike
awe of The Mummy, he treats it with a sort of
ultra-hip indifference. Jolie has a constant smirk on
her face and so, it seems, does the director; the
movie doesn't make fun of the plot or acknowledge its
prepostrousness, but it sort of dismisses its own
story as just another day in the life of Lara Croft.
The action sequences are fluid and exciting, and the
special effects don't call attention to themselves.
I'm not a big fan of the climax, which is a bit too
goofy even for my tastes, but everything that precedes
it is good fun. To risk overreaching, Jolie may be the
best action heroine I've ever seen; she's confident
and comfortable with the material, either overcoming
or just plain ignoring the bombshell status placed on
her. She doesn't have much dialogue and she doesn't
need any; the movie avoids making an embarassment of
itself by keeping it to a minimum.
There's a subplot involving Lara Croft's father
(played by Jolie's real father, Jon Voight) that works
to provide motivation for a crucial decision Croft
makes in the climax. None of it is meant to be taken
seriously, of course, and there's no pathos to speak
of, but it's good to see the history of the character
mentioned (Mummy's Rick O'Connell seems to have popped
out of nowhere).
In a summer when a surprising amount of big-budget
movies are just plain clunky, Tomb Raider is
well-made, confident and entertaining
through-and-through. People have harangued it for
being pointless, but what's the point of such an
argument against a movie like this? 

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Lara Croft: Tomb Raider (2001)
Angelina Jolie, Daniel Craig, Iain Glen, Chris Barrie, Noah Taylor, Jon
Voight. Screenplay by Patrick Massett & John Zinman. Directed by Simon
West. 98 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
At the end of an action scene in "Lara Croft: Tomb Raider," a wall
collapses near the nubile warrior. With her face on the floor, she gazes
into the rubble, then grins abruptly and says "Oh, my car keys!" I
mention this scene because it was the only moment in the whole damned
production that made me smile.
Based on an incredibly popular video game, "Lara Croft: Tomb Raider" is
a lousy movie. The structure goes like this: Poorly-staged action
sequence, boring exposition, poorly-staged action sequence, boring
exposition, etc. etc., The End. Basically, the film exists to showcase
Angelina Jolie's puffy lips and enhanced tits. Close-ups are framed
oh-so-carefully to include her million dollar bazooms. Running scenes
highlight her bouncing breasts in vintage "Baywatch" fashion. There's
even include a shower scene that offers a brief side view of them.
But the filmmakers are so inept they can't even flash the audience
correctly. The one extended display of nudity is of - get ready for this
- a guy. For no particular reason, a muscular supporting character
strolls around naked for about 30 seconds, with each shot composed to
barely cover his package, ŕ la "Austin Powers." Now, I enjoy a good
looking male body as much as the next gay guy, but what the hell is
beefcake doing in a T&A flick aimed at heterosexual males?
Of course, what else should one expect in a film that does virtually
nothing right? "Tomb Raider" sets up elaborate action set pieces, then
renders them incomprehensible with needless jump cut editing (a
promising dual bungee cord battle is ruined by excessive cuts). It
promises a series of exotic locales, then delivers cavernous sets and
grimy matte paintings with smoggy skies. Throw in some bargain basement
computer graphics and you end up with the ugliest movie to come down the
pike in many moons.
Intended to be a rousing "Indiana Jones" style adventure, "Tomb Raider"
lacks any sense of tension. The low point comes when Lara is
"threatened" by statues of monkey warriors and a giant multi-armed Shiva
figure that come to life courtesy of CGI. Easily the lamest menaces I
have ever seen, the creatures move like snails and fall apart with a
single shot from a gun. If you ever have to be chased by monsters, pray
that you get the monkey warriors.
"Tomb Raider" tells a story, sort of. Once every 5,000 years, the
planets align. A group of very bad men are out to find two halves of an
object that, if reassembled just as the planets align, will give them
control OVER TIME ITSELF. Lara's goal is to stop them and rescue her
long-missing poppa (Jon Voight, Jolie's real life dad). None of this
matters though, because stunning gaps in internal logic assure that the
plot of "Lara Croft: Tomb Raider" is as lame as ever other aspect of the
film  except Angelina Jolie's lips and breasts.

Author
Robin Clifford
Lady Lara Croft (Angelina Jolie) is a rich and pampered heiress whose
hobbies are travel, photography, foreign language and visiting remote
archaeological sites. But this is just camouflage for her real passions:
raiding tombs, foiling bad guys and, now, saving the world in the
long-anticipated "Lara Croft: Tomb Raider"
Good, bad or indifferent it doesn't matter a hoot what critics think about
the live action adaptation of the most popular interactive video character
in history. Lara Croft has been a fantasy figure to millions of horny
teenage boys and a role model icon to a like number teen girls, so no
matter what anyone says, this is going to be a big hit. I'm talking
franchise.
Unfortunately, there is little more than a video game in this star vehicle
for Oscar-winner Jolie. Angelina does a fine job with her extreme physical
performance, doing many of her own stunts. She is capable, smart and sassy
and shoots really big guns. Director Simon West and cinematographer Peter
Menzies work hard to keep the statuesque actress front and center for most
of the film. There isn't much depth to Jolie's performance, thesp-wise, but
she cuts a good action figure.
As if anyone that is going to see "Tomb Raider" really cares, there is a
story here. Every 5000 years, all of the planets in our Solar System come
into alignment at the precise moment there is a solar eclipse. At that
instant, when the eclipse is full, a power will be unleashed that will give
man the power of God, the power to control time. The Illuminists, an
ancient cult that has prepared (apparently for 5000 years) for this moment,
need to find the two halves of "the all-seeing eye" and join them at the
height of the alignment to take command of time.
Lara's dad, Lord Richard Croft (Jon Voight), it turns out, was one of the
Illuminists, but secretly worked to stop the cult's plan and save mankind.
His mysterious death leaves Lara in a quandary until he returns to her from
the grave in the form of a read-this-after-I'm-dead letter. The clues he
leaves point her to the plot of the Illuminists and daddy appoints Lara to
take on his quest and put a stop to the menacing scheme.
Lara has to contend with bad guys, of course, and is prepared to go
toe-to-toe with the cult's chief henchman, Manfred Powell (Iain Glen), a
suave, handsome, ruthless adventurer who has plans of his own for the
all-seeing eye. It's a race against the clock, the planets  and Powell as
Lara must travel to the corners of the Earth to find the two pieces of the
ancient triangle before the bad guys do.
The cast is a bland mix of unexciting characters that have little do except
help or hinder Lara. Noah Taylor (the young David Helfgott in "Shine") is
Lara's sidekick, Bryce, who is supposed to be some kind of techno-geek, but
comes across as just a plain geek. Iain Glen is a good-looking villain and
I thought a love/hate relationship was going to develop between him and
Lara. It turns out to be hate only. Chris Barry is given little to do as
Lara's loyal butler, Hillary, wasting what could have been a good
character. Daniel Craig, as Croft's once-colleague/now-adversary Alex West,
is underutilized. Finally, in typical Hollywood style, Jon Voight, Jolie's
real-life dad, gets work playing the same role in the movie. (One editorial
note: Jolie's breasts should have received their own billing, they are so
prominent in near every scene, with a tantalizing hint of exposure in more
than one scene.)
Production is uneven. There are lavish sets throughout, but there is a
fakeness to most of it that makes me think "soundstage" not "far-flung
ancient archaeological sites." The fight sequences are pretty good and will
entertain the fans as Jolie brings Lara Croft to life. A whole passel of
writers were involved in creating the story and the script and it feels
stilted. It's a succession of action-story-action-story sequences that have
the feel of the video game that spawned it all.
Fans will be in heaven as they watch the personification of their
electronic idol on the big screen. For the rest of us, go to another movie.
It's pretty much what I expected and, not being a fan, I give "Lara Croft:
Tomb Raider" a C.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
        On paper, it looked like Hollywood finally figured out how to
make a live action film out of a video game.   A hot Oscar-winning star
(Angelina Jolie) and a name-brand (if not exactly acclaimed) action
director (Simon West) would join forces to bring to the screen an
interactive character (adventurous archeologist Lara Croft of the `Tomb
Raider' series) with real potential for a life beyond player-controlled
pixels.  Despite the promise for being something more, the much-hyped
_Lara_Croft:_Tomb_Raider_ ends up playing exactly like a video game
committed to film--and, no, that's _not_ a compliment.
        Compliments are due Jolie, who ably fills out Lara's figure in
every way.  Not only does she amazingly resemble her computerized
counterpart and do a spot-on British accent, the role offers her an ideal
vehicle to channel her off-screen `wild child' persona.  While Lara may
be born a `lady' of privilege, she doesn't act the part.  She's less at
home all gussied up in fancy dresses in her large country mansion than
she is sporting form-fitting hotpants and tank tops while facing various
dangers in booby-trapped (no pun intended) caves.  Jolie clearly enjoys
the character and shows great potential as a badass action star.  But
there's nothing to the Lara character beyond Jolie and the ready-made
personality she brings to the part.  Even Lara's key vulnerability--her
desire to see her long-dead father again--is intrinsically tied to Jolie:
Lord Croft is played by none other than Jon Voight, Jolie's own father.
        So the movie Lara is not much different from the empty digital
shell that stars in the video game, and the film's basic plot (by West,
five other credited hands, and who knows how many others) reads like the
outline for a game scenario.  Lara has to prevent the evil Illuminati
from rejoining the two halves of a legendary triangular idol that grants
its possessor the ability to control time.  Of course, the way to stop
them is to collect the pieces herself first, so we get a series of
glorified video game stages masquerading as action sequences.  Lara's
mansion is invaded, and she has to dispose of the bad guys while tied to
bungee cords.  In the central sequence set in a cave in Cambodia, Lara
must complete a number of tasks to collect the elusive first piece: turn
a key, swing on a log to reach an urn, do away with all the warrior
statues that come to life with the piercing of the urn, then battle the
cave's biggest statue, which must be defeated in order to advance to the
next level--er, scene.
        The mechanical feel of _Lara_Croft:_Tomb_Raider_ would have been
easier to swallow if the filler between action scenes were the slightest
bit tolerable.  Whenever the mayhem dies down, the film commits a bigger
crime than being boring--it tries to be funny.  Not a single would-be
comic touch elicits so much as a grin: not the one-note `eccentric' side
characters like Lara's stuffy butler (Christopher Barrie) or her nerdy
gadget designer (Noah Taylor); not feeble culture-clash scenes such as
Lara asking a monk if he knows where to find a phone.  (The only time the
audience laughed was when it was tricked into thinking they were going to
be treated to a second gratuitous Lara shower scene late in the film;
alas, the camera panned down from the shower head to reveal the face of
her rival archeologist Alex, played by Daniel Craig.)
        It's interesting to note that the only thrills to be found in the
PG-13 _Lara_Croft:_Tomb_Raider_ are of the prurient kind: the previously
alluded-to Lara shower scene, which bares a bit more skin than expected;
and a slo-mo Lara running scene that's downright _Baywatch_-worthy. 
Nearly $100 million was spent to make things blow up and fill the screen
with loads of fancy special effects, but all anyone talked about at
length when walking out of _Lara_Croft:_Tomb_Raider_ is something anyone
can figure out after shelling out a couple of bucks on a video rental of
_Gia_ (which offers real dramatic substance in addition to ample nudity):
Angelina Jolie is one hot babe.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Tomb Raider.  Fun?  Exciting?  Challenging?  Given the unprecedented
popularity (especially among teenage boys) of the video game that sports an
uber-buff, pistol packin' babe who raids, well... tombs, you have to
believe it's these three things and more!
        "Lara Croft: Tomb Raider," the big screen variant of said video game,
which features a pumped-up Angelina Jolie (the OscarŽ winner for "Girl,
Interrupted" no less) in the title role is, however, none of these things.
It isn't fun, it isn't exciting, and the only challenge is seeing how long
you can stay in your seat (I suffered through to the bitter, bitter end;
the wife opted for Barnes & Noble at the 45-minute mark).
        Directed by Simon West with the same subtlety he brought to "Con Air,"
"Tomb Raider" is an empty-headed, big budget bore.  The story borrows
unintelligently from that mother of all turkeys "Hudson Hawk" (the same
hokum about planetary alignments and sacred stones that, when brought
together, well... who the heck cares?) and it makes "Super Mario Bros."
(Bob Hoskins' ill-advised career move) look like "Rocco and his Brothers"
(that classic of Italian neo-realism).
        I'll go out on a limb here and say I suspect there's actually more
character development in the video game than the movie proper.
        This is where the Jolie defenders/video game nuts jump in and say this
movie isn't about character development it's about kicking serious butt (or
bum, since Ms. Croft hails from England's green and pleasant).  With lips,
breasts, and biceps all inflated to the max, Lara Croft is all about
posturing, and Jolie has a hard time simply standing still without trying
to look tough.
        OK, let's forget challenging.  Shouldn't "Tomb Raider" be, at the very
least, fun and exciting?  Shouldn't our butt-kicking heroine also encompass
the sophistication of, say, James Bond with the wit of Indiana Jones?
There's no humor to be found anywhere in "Tomb Raider," even though it
tries hard from time to time.  Even "The Mummy Returns" didn't take itself
too seriously.  The villain here is noticeably lacking, the special effects
are ridiculously overblown and unnecessarily complicated, and the script is
non-existent.
        To liven things up (perhaps), Jolie's live father Jon Voight puts in a few
minutes as Lara's dead father Lord Croft; talk about a stretch.  One thing
I hadn't expected from the film is that Jolie affects a slightly better
English accent than her Pa (although I suspect that thin-looking moustache
he's forced to wear gets in the way some).
        Unsuccessful?  Not entirely.  If anything, "Lara Croft: Tomb Raider" makes
you want to check out the video game itself to figure out exactly what all
the fuss was about.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
TOMB RAIDER (2001)
Rated PG-13; running time 101 minutes
Genre: Action
Seen at: Jack Lokes' Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.tombraidermovie.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0146316
Written by: Patrick Massett, John Zinman
Directed by: Simon West
Cast: Angelina Jolie, Jon Voight, Iain Glen, Daniel Craig, Noah Taylor,
Chris Barrie
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamstombraider.html
Of all the sins in the world of motion pictures, the most unforgivable
sin is to bore the audience to death.
Which is why TOMB RAIDER is damned to hell.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Based on the best-selling videogame series, TOMB RAIDER stars Angelina
Jolie as Lara Croft, Butt-Kickin' British Archaeologist Babe.
  [insert silly Hollywood plot about how Lara is The Only One who can
   possibly save Earth from the Evil Plan To Rule The Earth And All The
   Other Little Planets by greedy little pissants like Illuminati member
   Manfred Powell (Iain Glen) and Powell's cohort in the person of
   traitorous American archaeologist Alex Marrs (Daniel Craig), using
   only her manservant Hilary (Chris Barrie), TechnoGeek employee Bryce
   (Noah Taylor), The Force carried around by her dead father Lord Croft
   (Jon Voight), and most of all, her handy-dandy Big Guns - oh yeah,
    plus her pistols - here].
The Upshot (WARNING: **DEFINITE spoilers contained below**):
Beyond all the MysticMumboJumbo, beyond Lara's SuperPowers (chief among
them, her PerkyTits), beyond the total lack of character development in
this completely plot-driven movie (Not A Good Thing, when the plot
stinks), there is a question that I kept asking; one similar to the
question Spock had in the similarly-bad STAR TREK 5 when he asked, "why
would God need a starship?"
My question?  Why in the world would someone who had the capacity to
give someone else The Power Of God, do so?  No, really; I need to know.
If you had The Key, the only way to unlock The Mysteries Of The
Universe, something no one else could force from you, because you could
always call a Do Over - would you just say "right; here ya go, mate".
WTF? I mean, WTFF?
Nothing else about this movie mattered to me beyond that question.  It
didn't matter that Patrick Massett and John Zinman wouldn't know a good
story if it fell on its knees and offered them a Lewinsky, or that Simon
West apparently only watched the second, gut-bustingly awful "Indiana
Jones" flick [maybe the much-superior first and third installments
weren't available at Blockbuster that weekend], or that Angelina Jolie's
Humorous Bits were delivered in such a staccato voice, they may as well
have been absent, or that NOT ONE of the supporting characters'
backstories, made the slightest bit of bloody sense (not that their
front stories were any better).  No, none of that mattered, nor did the
admittedly well-executed stuntwork of TOMB RAIDER - all because of that
damnable question.  Or, more to the point, because of its only logical
answer.
Thanks, guys, for trashing another hero of mine, with illogic, bad
plotting, and useless background characters.  Thanks a bleepin lot.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I'm pissed.  Sorry, but there's no better way to put it.  I'm completely
ripped.  I had anticipated this movie for so long - mostly because I
thought Jolie was absolutely perfect for it.  And this is the thanks I
get?
I'm just glad Hollyweird has no interest in developing a QBert movie.
TOMB RAIDER (rating: flashing redlight):
The upside?  It's pretty much a sure bet that there won't be a "Tomb
Raider 2".  How could there be?  They've already used up their Power Of
God chip; where would one go from there?

Author
Christian Pyle
You'd think that after awhile Hollywood would stop trying to make movies out 
of video games.  It hasn't worked so far.  "Street Fighter?"  "Super Mario 
Brothers?"  "Wing Commander?"  "Mortal Kombat?"  Not a watchable film in the 
bunch.  Still I held out some hope for "Tomb Raider."  After all, the game's 
premise is heavily influenced by the Indiana Jones trilogy and all the mummy 
movies, so there are cinematic elements imbedded in the concept.  However, 
despite the potential of the project, "Tomb Raider" proves to be yet another 
bomb.
The plot is a convoluted accumulation of nonsense probably borrowed from a 
dozen bad movies.  There's a once-ever-5000-years alignment of planets coming 
up, and the Illuminati have to find both halves of an ancient triangle that 
controls time in order to take over the world.  Of course, the ancient folks 
who divided the triangle buried the halves in tombs on opposite sides of the 
world.  Our heroine, Lady Lara Croft (Angelina Jolie), finds the key that 
opens the tombs in relics that her dead father (Jon Voight) dug up.  She 
figures that if she gets the triangle, she can bring her dad back from the 
dead.
Of course, no one was expecting much of a plot from this movie anyway.  In 
both video games and action movies, the plot is just an excuse for the action 
sequences.  However, the action in "Tomb Raider" shows little style or 
originality.   There's lots of shooting and some kung fu fightin', but none 
of it progresses beyond the level of a cheap direct-to-cable flick.  The 
other goofy archeologist flick of the summer, "The Mummy Returns," was much 
better; it had its flaws, but its action was creative and large-scale.
Since winning her Academy Award for "Girl, Interrupted," Jolie hasn't taken 
any projects that would display her acting talents.  "Tomb Raider" seems to 
be more interested in displaying her breasts; so much attention is drawn to 
them that it's a shame there's no Oscar for Best Performance by a Wonderbra.
While we don't see much of her acting ability (with the exception of a 
wonderful upper-crust British accent), we do get a hint of Jolie's less 
savory side.  Considering the rumors of incest that hang over Jolie and her 
supposed obsession with death, having Lara be obsessed with resurrecting her 
dead father (and uninterested in any of the living males around her) seems a 
poor choice.  Having Jolie's real life father Jon Voight play the dead dad 
makes it even creepier.
I haven't decided what to make of director Simon West yet.  His first feature 
was the star-studded disaster "Con Air," but my opinion of him improved with 
"The General's Daughter," which was thick with sultry atmosphere.  Now this 
train wreck.  I hope he improves again because his next project is the big 
screen version of the cult TV series "The Prisoner."  Hollywood has already 
screwed up "The Avengers," and "The Prisoner" represents a chance for 
redemption.
(By the way, speaking of British TV, "Red Dwarf" fans should look for Chris 
"Rimmer" Barrie in his first major film role).
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Saying Lara Croft: Tomb Raider is the best film to ever be adapted from a
video game isn't really that much of a compliment.  There have been too many
Wing Commanders and Double Dragons to make that statement mean anything at
all.  Here's the skinny:  Tomb Raider is a blast and will likely be one of
the summer's better action films.  Sure, it makes less sense than Swordfish,
and when its over-the-top action isn't at full-throttle, the flick is kind
of a bore.  But does any of that matter when Angelina Jolie gets to wear so
many cute outfits?
Jolie (Gone in 60 Seconds) stars as the titular Lady Lara Croft (with the
emphasis on "titular"), a wealthy Brit with a knack for busting into tombs
Indiana Jones-style.  Her mum is dead, and her treasure-hunting father
(Pearl Harbor's Jon Voight, Jolie's real-life dad) has been missing for 15
years. Lara is a little like Bruce Wayne, in that she lives in a giant
mansion, complete with a doting butler (Chris Barrie), and lives somewhat of
a double life.  Tomb Raider's first scene establishes Lara as a major-league
ass-kicker, complete with a penchant for John Woo-esque double-fisted
gunplay as she battles an insect-like robot that turns out to be a training
device created by her chum Bryce (Shine's Noah Taylor, who is basically
playing an Aussie Seth Green).
Without going too much into the plot for a couple reasons (one, it barely
matters; and two, I still don't understand most of it), Tomb Raider revolves
around a rare astrological event in which all nine planets of our solar
system align and create a total solar eclipse.  The blackout, which only
happens once every 5,000 years, allows the world access to a magical
triangle with an all-seeing eye that gives its possessor the ability to
manipulate time. The catch is that several years ago, the triangle was
broken into two pieces and hidden at opposite ends of the earth to keep it
from falling into the hands of an evil madman.  Coincidentally, a group of
evil madmen called the Illuminati (led by a guy named Richard Johnson...no
joke) is after the triangle pieces to, presumably, do some really bad stuff.
Manfred Powell (Iain Glen) is put in charge of finding the triangle and
returning it to the Illuminati.
Lara gets dragged into the whole thing when she begins to find clues left
behind by her dead dad (one involves - get this - a mysterious clock hidden
inside another clock hidden under the stairs).  Powell and his band of
soldiers bust into Lara's pad and steal the clock, but not until we're
treated to a nifty action sequence involving Ms. Croft, a pair of white
pajamas (with only the top button done) and a bungee cord, which enables her
to fly around like Zhang Ziyi while she's cracking skulls.
She's flying through the air.  She's sporting a buff British accent.  She's
riding motorcycles.  She's even taking a shower!  Is there anything this
girl can't do?  Jolie even looks like Lara a few times, and did I mention
she gets to wear a bunch of cute outfits, to boot?  And as silly and
implausible as most of the action was in Tomb Raider, I never once rolled my
eyes and said, "Cripes, there's no way she could have done that."  Is she an
Indiana Jones rip-off?  You bet, but Indy never looked this good when he was
covered in sweat.
Tomb Raider is full of the things that made Raiders of the Lost Ark a cool
ride.  There are plenty of booby-trapped tombs (emphasis on "booby"), secret
doors and the like.  There are a couple of scenes that make Ark's giant
boulder look downright laughable at this point.  Plus, like Indy, Lara has a
really old father who used to be an actor, like, a hundred years ago.
There are negatives, though.  The action-packed peaks are wonderful, but the
valleys are atrocious.  Glen is the least threatening bad guy since Dougray
Scott stunk up the joint in M:I-2, and he's practically interchangeable with
Daniel Craig (I Dreamed of Africa), who plays another treasure hunter (and
I'm still not sure if he was a good guy or a bad guy).  Tomb Raider is also
packed full of product placement, which will always result in a lower
overall rating (except with Wayne's World).
Tomb Raider was directed by The General's Daughter's Simon West and written
by a hodgepodge of scribes; most of them are rookies, but two penned the
equally far-fetched but totally enjoyable Face/Off.
1:32 - PG-13 for action violence and some sensuality

Author
Norm Schrager
The now-classic video game Tomb Raider is a geek boy's dream -- a hot
heroine with Barbie-like measurements goes on adventures and kicks ass. 
The film adaptation, starring the buxom and bored Angelina Jolie, is
nobody's dream.  It's billed as an action fantasy, but possesses no
physical excitement or wonder.  OK, maybe some wonder, as in, "I wonder
how Paramount actually feels about this film."
Even the teen hormones that live in all us guys are squashed by this
one.  Jolie, trying to play our heroine Lady Lara Croft as sexy and
supercool, just looks mildly amused by the goings-on.  I half expected
her to check her watch while on camera, searching for lunch or a better
project.  [Never underestimate crafty film editing. -Ed.]
And it wouldn't take much to find the latter.  Somewhere in Tomb Raider
exists a loose story about two parts of a single rune that, when joined
together, can cause major cosmic tragedies when the planets next align,
which is soon (this only happens every 5,000 years, so this is
important!)  Lady Lara needs to keep the pieces from the enemy, or hide
them, or something, but since the script is so painfully bad, we can't
really tell or care.
The screenplay, credited to six contributors including director Simon
West (Con Air), is not only uninteresting, it is devoid of any style. 
If the film is supposed to be tongue-in-cheek, where are the laughs?  If
it's got a heavy-duty comic-book slant, where is the camp?  Tomb Raider
takes itself almost too seriously, by a group of writers who reduce the
humor of this movie to Lara's sidekick whining because his ass muscles
fall asleep.  These guys even cast Jon Voight (Jolie's real-life father)
as Lara Croft's father... and then make absolutely no reference to the
in-joke.  Talk about a lost opportunity to add some fun and levity.
At least you'd figure the shoot-em-up sequences would make up for the
lack of an entertaining script.  Not so.  Save for a somewhat creative
showdown during the finale, this dud's got your standard running,
jumping, and gunplay, lifted from better movies you've already seen. 
The fight choreography is so tired that Lara appears to be rehearsing
for some off-screen gymnastics event.
And while you're watching the action, be careful!  The filmmakers
believe you might not be sure something cool is just about to happen. 
To help you along, West provides two hints: 1) The film is in slow
motion, and 2) There's something resembling techno music in the
soundtrack.  Of course, the slo-mo is more reminiscent of a Billy Joel
video than The Matrix, and the music sounds like your Mom's techno,
generic and palatable enough to be in a movie commercial or an elevator,
rather than in a feature film (funny, considering West began directing
commercials).
If it's action with zip and spice you're looking for, try the  at least
passable Mummy Returns.  If it's just a hot babe wearing a closet-full
of tight shirts, this movie just might do.  But if it's Tomb Raider you
really want, keep your Playstation plugged in.
Director: Simon West
Producer: Lawrence Gordon, Lloyd Levin, Colin Wilson
Writer: Patrick Massett, Simon West, John Zinman
Starring: Angelina Jolie, Daniel Craig, Leslie Phillips, Mark Collie,
Rachel Appleton, Chris Barrie, Iain Glen, Julian Rhind-Tutt, Noah
Taylor, Jon Voight
http://www.tombraidermovie.com/splash_frames.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Simon West. 
Cast: Angelina Jolie, Daniel Craig, Iain Glen, Chris Barrie, Noah Taylor, Jon 
Voight. 
2001 - 98 minutes 
Rated PG-13 (for violence, profanity, and brief nudity). 
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 16, 2001. 
It has been said that no motion picture based on a video game can be any 
good, because to watch a movie with live-action characters and surroundings 
isn't even remotely the same, or as satisfying, as directly interacting with 
their digital counterparts. With 1995's "Mortal Kombat" being the only 
feature film I can think of to break the video-game-to-movie curse, "Lara 
Croft: Tomb Raider," drearily directed by Simon West (1997's "Con Air"), has 
no such luck. 
This latest potential summer blockbuster has a lot riding on it; not only 
could the movie catapult Academy Award Winner Angelina Jolie (1999's "Girl, 
Interrupted") to superstar status, but it could be the first in a potential 
big-screen series. Never having played the video game, but with a brother who 
is a fan, he couldn't have summed it up better as we left the theater: "Aside 
from a few of the action scenes, the rest of the movie is sleep-inducing." 
Rarely has such a big-budget action movie been as utterly boring as "Tomb 
Raider" is. 
Lara Croft (Angelina Jolie) is a tomb raider (whatever that is) who lives in 
an 85-bedroom mansion, complete with a servant, an assistant (Noah Taylor), 
and a pet robot, passed down to her from her deceased father, Lord Croft 
(Jolie's real-life dad Jon Voight). Just as all nine planets are about to 
align (an occurrence, we learn, that only happens every 5,000 years), Lara 
stumbles upon a clock her beloved father hid in the house that holds half of 
the key to taking control of time. The other part--a Triangle of Light broken 
into two pieces--has been hidden on opposite sides of the earth, something 
that the evil Manfred Powell (Iain Glen) has set out to locate in time for 
the eclipse. With not much time remaining, Lara ventures off after Powell and 
his henchmen, determined to do her dear dad proud. 
The convoluted plotting of "Lara Croft: Tomb Raider" doesn't make a whole lot 
of sense, but that wouldn't matter if the movie was at least absorbing and 
exciting. It isn't, however, so what we get is a slow-moving snoozer that 
features so much dull exposition it hardly has time for what the viewer has 
come for--action. At 98 minutes, the film feels as if it is well over two 
hours, with little of interest occurring at any point. In their attempt to 
explain who Lara Croft is for the uninitiated, screenwriters Patrick Massett 
and John Zinman spend far too much time setting things up, and even then, we 
still don't get a true idea of what makes Lara tick. 
Angelina Jolie is physically perfect for the coveted role of Lara Croft, but 
as a person, she is nothing more than a blank slate. Jolie has been a 
terrific actress in the past, and even has an Oscar to prove it, but she 
isn't able to give us an idea of who her character is, or why we should even 
like or care about her. Aside from the fact that her father died and she is 
crafty with weapons and fighting, Lara is an uninteresting, underdeveloped 
presence, and the part gets no help from Jolie. Though no fault of the 
actress, one other problem with Lara is, funnily enough, her breasts. At 
almost no point throughout do they ever look remotely real, and for Jolie's 
body frame, they are humorously too large and stand directly out, rather than 
naturally slope downward. I mention this minor criticism because Jolie's fake 
breasts serve no purpose for either her character or the movie; they're 
merely exploitive. 
"Tomb Raider" has two good scenes amidst the creative dead zone that 
surrounds them. One involves stone statues coming to life in a tomb, which 
Lara has to fight off, and the other is the climactic action sequence set in 
a snowy cave, which is appropriately taut and well-shot. They not only hint 
at the thrilling movie this could have been, but expose the other lifeless 75 
minutes for what they truly are: a waste of time. 
  - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman 
    http://us.imdb.com/reviewsby?Dustin+Putman
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/dustinputman.htm
http://www.atnzone.com 

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Simon West. Screenplay by Patrick Massett and John Zinman,
from a story by Sara B Cooper, Mike Werb and Michael Colleary, adapted by
West. Starring Angelina Jolie, Iain Glen, Daniel Craig. Running time: 100
minutes. Rated PG for frightening scenes and mature theme by the MFCB.
Reviewed on August 22nd, 2001.
Synopsis: When adventuress Lara Croft (Jolie) finds an ancient clock 
hidden by her long-lost father (Jon Voight), it sets in motion a desperate 
search for an ancient artefact called the Clock of Ages. Competing against 
Lara in the globe-spanning quest are Manfred Powell (Glen), agent of the 
insidious Illuminati, and Lara's old flame, fellow relic hunter Alex West 
(Craig). But the race also brings to light secrets from Lara's past, and 
even she may not be prepared to uncover the truth about her father.
Review: The video-game-to-film transition is always a dicey proposition.
These films are often unable to appeal beyond arcade aficionados, and 
suffer a rapid slump into rental store obscurity. "Tomb Raider", though, 
is a bit different. Not only does it largely eschew the fantastical 
tendencies of most video game properties, but it evokes another movie 
franchise, its lead character being essentially a well-endowed modern-day 
Indiana Jones. Make no mistake, Jolie is very good as Lara, achieving a 
nice mix of upper-crust panache and two-fisted determination. West brings 
the excitement of the game to life, and many shots look as though they 
were lifted right off the computer monitor. But West's adherence to "Tomb 
Raider"'s roots ultimately proves to be the film's Achilles' heel as well. 
So rapid is his pacing that any sense of thoughtful filmmaking goes out 
the window. Characters flit by without development: we are expected to 
jeer Manfred Powell, but mostly because we're told to. The behaviour of 
wild card Alex West just seems to follow the whims of the plot. And 
although the writers have come up with an entertaining modern-pulp 
storyline, it is bereft of much of the charm that made Indy's adventures 
so endearing. Ultimately, the experience of viewing "Tomb Raider" is 
hardly more satisfying than watching someone else play the computer game.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Lara Croft is British, rich and kicks a lot of ass. She also likes to 
raid tombs but when the Illuminata discover that all nine planets are 
about to stand in alignment for the first time in 5000 years, and that 
Lara holds the key to time, well, needless to say, they want to nab it 
from her. Oh yeah, Lara also likes to sport a lot of tight 
shirts...hummana-hummana-hummana...
CRITIQUE:
Angelina Jolie was great in this movie. There were also about three 
"action scenes" that were pretty cool to look at in this film. Uhhhhhm, 
unfortunately the rest of the movie sucked! Bad dialogue, generic 
sidekicks and bad guys, a lame mystery, Yoda-esque moments with 
mumbo-jumbo being sprouted about and even some crappy CGI near the end. 
All in all, this movie wasn't the horror show that some of the early 
reviews had warned us about, especially since every other scene does 
feature Jolie's torpedoes begging to burst out of her lucky shirts, but 
it was quite the letdown nonetheless, especially when you consider the 
major opportunity that the filmmakers had here to create a cool, hip 
woman hero, based on a popular video game. I don't know, I guess you 
have to put most of the blame on director Simon West, who didn't really 
tie the whole movie together all that well. The film lacked energy, a 
consistent pace and well...a fun time! I felt kinda depressed while 
watching this movie. All that "father" crap was horrible and the 
dialogue given to poor John Voight to recite was just plain embarrassing 
(and I'm not even gonna mention his moustache...hehehe). Why have this 
shite in the movie at all?!?
I especially hated the scenes in which some ghost-like figure, friend or 
child would ramble on about Lara Croft's father while all the time, I'm 
not giving one ounce of crap as to what they're talking about. I guess 
that's called lack of "character development", right? That's when a 
movie builds enough background into the characters on the screen, so 
that we could actually "get into" it and care about them. I didn't care 
about anyone in this movie, and was bored during most of its "let's 
explain why we're doing all this gobbledygook" moments. And even though 
I thought that Jolie kicked some mighty ass (damn, did she look sexy 
blasting those guns or what?!?), everybody else around her was so 
goddamn boring! Her butler was a throwaway with no personality, her 
side-kick was supposed to be funny but just annoyed me every time he 
said the word "bugger" (and he says it a lot, trust me!) and all of the 
so-called bad guys just spewed one-dimension! They had no spark, no 
energy amongst them, and even though a few of the action scenes in the 
movie were cool (see the trailer and you'll know which ones I'm talking 
about), the overall picture was lame and the dialogue and mystical 
bull-crap just buried it even further.
Also, for a movie that's supposed to be about all of these exotic 
locations, I wasn't necessarily impressed by any of its exterior shots, 
and even less so with its interiors, which all looked like they were 
shot in the same room. Mind you, I won't go as far as to say that it's 
the "worst movie of the year" (remember that I actually have to go see 
Freddie Prinze Jr. movies also!), but it's definitely the worst film 
that I've seen during this summer movie season (of course, it's still 
early and I'm sure there are a few more garbage heaps coming down the 
pike). Skip this one altogether and rent any of the INDIANA JONES movies 
instead...trust me, you'll miss the boobs but end your night with some 
rock-solid porn and it's all good!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Raiders of the Lost Ark (10/10) - The Mummy (8/10) - Lost in Space 
(7/10) - The Mummy Returns (6/10) - The General's Daughter (3/10) - 
Romancing the Stone (7/10) - Wild Wild West (3/10) - Mission Impossible 
2 (7/10)
