Title
Review for Two Can Play That Game (2001)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "TWO CAN PLAY THAT GAME" (Screen Gems)
  Since the success of "Waiting to Exhale," there have been several
romantic comedies about African-American professionals. This female revenge
fantasy, Vivica A. Fox plays Shante Smith, a stunning ad exec who seems to have
reached the pinnacle of success: a mansion, a sporty car and an idyllic
relationship with a hunky, hot-shot lawyer, Morris Chestnut. She's at a point in
her life when she dispenses advice to her grateful girl-friends (Mo'Nique, Wendy
Racquel Robinson, Tamala Jones). "When your man messes up, no matter how small
it is," she smugly decrees, "yuh gots to punish him." So when she catches her
hot man dancing at a bar with a smart and sexy rival, Gabrielle Union, she
devises her own version of "The Rules," a 10-day "tough love" emotionally
punishing plan to get him back. Unfortunately, writer/director Mark Brown ("How
To Be a Player") breaks the cardinal rule of romantic comedy: you have to like
the protagonist - and shrill, self-congratulatory Shante Smith is a smirking,
superficial, spiteful shrew who doesn't realize that rational rules cannot
always be applied to love. Having her talk directly into the camera gets stale
very quickly and the "Day One," "Day Two" title-card device underscores the
tedium. Comic Anthony Anderson scores as Chestnut's boisterous best-friend, and
singer Bobby Brown does a cameo as a scuzzy mechanic who's given a smooth
makeover by Ms. Robinson. But the out-takes over the closing credits contain
more humor than the film itself. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Two Can
Play That Game" is smarmy if slick 4, filled with misogynistic attitude and
blatant product placements (Coca-Cola, Miller Genuine Draft) but little else. In
this R-rated (for explicit sexual language), pseudo-hip battle of the sexes, the
audience loses.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
Two Can Play That Game turns love into a brutal battleground of the
sexes.  It's not about relationships as much as it is about the "rules"
they abide by (or don't abide by).  A twisted version of Angela Bassett
in How Stella Got Her Groove Back, Vivica A. Fox stars as a successful
businesswoman named Shante Smith.  She's a player, as she explains in
the opening scenes, knowing as much as there is to know about the
"rules" of love.
Shante has a bunch of friends, and a handsome, charming boyfriend named
Keith Fenton (Morris Chestnut), a successful lawyer himself.  One night,
Shante finds her love dancing with another woman at a nightclub -- and
so begins the vicious battles of the sexes.  Will the two get back
together, or will this be the end of their relationship?
As is obviously intended, Two Can Play That Game is sure to hit big with
the African American audience, but it should also be treasured as a
great date movie for the moviegoing public at large.  It's got the kind
of friskiness that makes you exchange glances with the stranger seated
next to you because both of you know how many things it gets right about
relationships.  With as many twists and turns as this romantic comedy
takes, you're sure to have a good time.
Still, while the production contains all the correct ingredients, it
uses them in the wrong recipe.  It hits a humorous bulls-eye with plenty
of cultural issues, but it lacks the very substance it's made of: True
love.  The film, written and directed by Mark Brown, makes a common
Hollywood mistake of confusing sexuality with true passion.  Not that
this destroys the film; in fact, for an R-rated sex comedy, this is very
tame material.  This production takes risks, but for a movie that
concerns itself so much with romance, it just doesn't get any of that
across convincingly.
With frequent soliloquies, intrusive narration, and a central character
that very much takes center stage, Shante does not just narrate the
film, she explains it.  Throughout the journey, she speaks directly to
the camera.  Seldom do filmmakers gamble their success on such an
unusual style, but the conceit gives the movie a sense of independence,
attitude, and a unique, experimental flavor.  Fox's performance keeps
energy alive, even when she knows her mouth is running a little too
much.  It's surprisingly entertaining. 
Alas, the film does not really earn its ending.  It doesn't persuasively
prove the characters' sudden realizations.  But who cares?  Two Can Play
That Game is still light-hearted and fluffy.  It exists solely to please
the audience, but it also works as a social commentary.
Director: Mark Brown
Producer: Paddy Cullen, Doug McHenry
Screenwriter: Mark Brown
Stars: Vivica A. Fox, Morris Chestnut, Anthony Anderson, Tamala Jones,
Wendy Requel Robinson, Gabrielle Union
MPAA Rating: R 
http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/twocanplay/index2.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Shante Smith is a woman with a program -- a ten-day program to get her man back.
 Vivica A. Fox, who has had the bad luck to be in some pretty miserable movies,
including IDLE HANDS and BOOTY CALL, as well as an occasional winner like
INDEPENDENCE DAY, plays Shante with a wonderfully compelling mixture of comedic
verve and rock solid self-assurance.  Morris Chestnut (THE BEST MAN), who is
almost as handsome as Fox is beautiful, plays Shante's man, Keith.  Both are
successful professionals: Shante, an ad exec, and Keith, a lawyer.
Shante spends most of the time talking directly to us to explain her program,
which she does with a winning smile that's hard to resist.  Sometimes she shares
advice with her girlfriends, Diedre (Mo'Nique), Karen (Wendy Raquel Robinson)
and Tracye (Tamala Jones).  "A man is like a stray dog," Shante tells Karen, who
is having some man troubles of her own.  "You feed him.  If he comes back, he's
hooked."  Generally optimistic and unflappable, she doesn't abide other women
enticing her man, as does the fetchingly attractive Conny Spaulding (Gabrielle
Union, BRING IT ON).  Shante allows as how, "Every gal's got a little 'ho in
her," but Shante thinks that there's too much of it in Conny.
Even if writer/director Mark Brown's TWO CAN PLAY THAT GAME is rather like a
sitcom, it is like a really good sitcom.  Think "Friends."  The characters are
all so likeable that you feel sorry to see them leave when the ending credits
roll.  One of the movie's small jokes is the flagrant product placements, which
could be considered the sitcom's commercial breaks.  The movie's look, however,
from the lush cinematography to the colorful clothing is head and shoulders
above anything you would expect to find on television.
Although this is Fox's film, the rest of the cast is superb.  Her counterpart in
the love strategy game is Keith's friend and coworker, Tony (Anthony Anderson). 
Like a boxing manager, he whispers every move into Keith's ear.  "Energy is
neither lost nor destroyed," Tony tells Keith, applying physics to love.  "It is
merely transferred from one person to the next."  All Keith needs to do is to
learn how to properly channel Shante's energy, and Shante has enough energy to
power a small nuclear reactor.  You'll be pretty charged up too after watching
TWO CAN PLAY THAT GAME.  It is an upbeat film with a wonderfully sweet sense of
humor.
TWO CAN PLAY THAT GAME runs a fast 1:42.  It is rated R for "language including
sexual dialogue," and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Two_Can_Play_That_Game_ (R) *** (out of ****)
        Any film that opens with its protagonist saying directly to the camera,
"Oh hey!  I didn't see you there!" courts disaster.  That
_Two_Can_Play_That_Game_ turns out to be far from one is less a measure of the
efforts of writer-director Mark Brown than his leading lady, Vivica A. Fox,
whose considerable charms are able to make the film's less appealing qualities
rather tolerable.
        And how fortunate is that, given that two potentially repellent elements
lie front and center in the film.  First is the excessive breaking of the fourth
wall.  Main character Shanté Smith (Fox) directly addresses the camera so
frequently that the audience can be considered another cast member, playing the
best friend/sounding board role.  More problematic is the character of Shanté
herself.  A sexy, successful professional woman, Shanté is also characterized by
a self-confidence that creeps dangerously close to off-putting
arrogance--particularly in the relationship department, which is the focus of
the film.  The ostensible plot has Shanté suspecting her boyfriend Keith Fenton
(Morris Chestnut) of cheating, and the remainder of the film has her outlining
to the audience her allegedly foolproof ten-day plan, which entails lying and
all sorts of psychological manipulation, to get any man in gear.
        Given her penchant for self-centered scheming, Shanté could have easily
come off as an icy bitch.  Yet she never does, and that's a tribute to Fox.  Her
natural warmth and instant likability adds an invaluable layer of sincerity to
the character.  While some of the games she plays seem a bit extreme, Fox's
sympathetic portrayal paints the behavior as more misguided than mean-spirited;
her Shanté may be a little cocky and deluded, but she clearly has her heart in
the right place and does truly love Keith (contributing mightily to the latter
is Fox's convincing chemistry with Chestnut).  As deserved as Shanté's
inevitable comeuppance is, Fox is able to connect with the audience so strongly
that one cannot help but feel for the character when her strategy starts to
backfire.
        But _Two_Can_Play_That_Game_ isn't all about sweet sentiment.  Its
bigger concern is simply fun, and Fox and her equally appealing supporting cast
lend the familiar proceedings a sassy, spunky zing.  Standing out from the pack
are Mo'Nique (as one of Shanté's girlfriends) and Anthony Anderson (as Keith's
co-worker and "coach" in the ways of women), who get the best of Brown's
dialogue in the designated comic relief roles.  _Two_Can_Play_That_Game_ makes
no bones about being as insubstantial and disposable a film as one can find, but
it's a cute little trifle that delivers on the good time it promises.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23
