Title
Review for Mars Attacks! (1996)
Number of Reviews
30

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
Director Tim Burton, who brought us such celluloid treasures as
"Beetlejuice" and "Edward Scissorhands", now stepa into the
extravaganza spotlight with his science fiction spoof, "Mars Attacks!"
Starring just about everyone in Hollywood from Jack Nicholson to
Natalie Portman, "Mars Attacks!" is base on the Topps trading card
series of the same name from the early 60's.
Burton, using the card series for his basic story, pays homage to the
grade B alien invasion films of the 50's, but, with a major difference
- a $70 million budget lavishly spent on the truly spectacular special
F/X!
While "Mars Attacks!" is not the out-and-out hoot that I had high
hopes for, it IS a high calibre homage, by Burton, to those campy
sci-fi alien invasion classics we grew to love in the 50's and after.
(I watched a marvelously bad example of the genre, recently, call
"Robot Monster". It is so jaw-dropping bad that I found it impossible
not to watch. I understand and embrace the decades-long affection we
have for this kind of film and why Burton would want to do such a
project.)
"Mars Attacks!" does capture the campiness of the originals pretty
well. The quality of the cast is many notches above thos in the films
"Mars Attacks!" spoofs, but, they get down and dirty, anayway, and
have a hell of a good time with their roles - particulary Annette
Bening as the ditzy, new-age, 12-stepper, Barbara Land, who believes
in the ggodness of Martian-kind, and Jim Brown as an
ex-boxer-turned-Las-Vegas-casino-greeter, who goes one-on-one
with a Martian leader, and WINS! 
Glenn Close give an amusing, but brief, turn as the First Lady.
Everyone else appears to be there for the fun of it.
But, the real star of of "Mars Attacks!", and the thing that dulls the
camp edge Burton strives for, are the collection of absolutely
fabulous special F/X.  They are so seamless and eye-popping
outstanding that the rest of the film takes a back seat. The homage
that Burton intended is lost on the razzle dazzle of the effects. The
studio, to say the least, overdid it by giving Burton way too much
money. I would rather he had a smaller budget and used
that brilliant imagination that has brought Burton so far.
Prior to the appearance of the Martians, the movie builds slowly for
the first 30 minutes. But, once the bug-eyed, big-brained, little
green men arrive on screen, you can expect a wild and wooly
rollercoaster ride that lasts right up to the end.
The evil aliens are great and their presence represents some of the
best melding of live action and animation to date.
This may not be the best or funniest effort by Burton. It is his
biggest, and a lot of fun, too.
"Mars Attacks!" isn't great, but good, and I give it a B.
"Mars Attacks" is a big goofy spoof of 1950's B Sci-fi movies given
the megabudget treatment by quirky, childlike director Tim Burton ("Ed
Wood", "Batman", "Edward Scissorhands").  Burton also handily manages
to skewer some of this past summer's blockbuster films such as
"Independence Day" and "Twister" and wastes no time doing it - when a
couple of farmers think they smell barbeque, the approaching glow on
the horizon turns out to be a stampeding herd of cattle fully ablaze!
It looks like everyone in Hollywood wanted to be part of the fun.
"Mars Attacks" stars Jack Nicholson in dual roles of the President of
the United States and a sleazy Las Vegas hotel developer, Glenn Close
as the Nancy Reganish first lady, Annette Bening as a new age flake,
Pierce Brosnan as a clueless scientist, Danny DeVito as an obnoxious
gambler, Martin Short as the on-the-make President's press secretary,
Sarah Jessica Parker as a ditzy talk show host, Michael J. Fox as her
journalist boyfriend, Rod Steiger as a Dr. Strangelovish general,
Lukas Haas as a doughnut shop worker (and savior of the human race),
Sylvia Sidney as his grandmother, Natalie Portman as the President's
daughter, Jim Brown as an ex pro fighter, Pam Grier as his ex-wife,
Lisa Marie as a Martian woman and Tom Jones as himself.  This isn't a
film about great acting, it's more a chance to watch a huge cast
having a great time, but there are a few standouts. Annette Bening is
particularly amusing as the new age wacko who believes the Martians
are coming to save earth.  Pierce Brosnan is perfect as the alien life
specialist - he does a terrific parody of his own image. Glenn Close
has perfect timing in her second comedy outing of the season.
Technically, "Mars Attacks" is first rate, boasting top notch special
effects (the Martians were entirely computer generated).  Tim Burton's
regular scorer, Danny Elfman, offers suitably retro music.  Costume
designer Colleen Atwood produces eye-popping outfits and production
designer Wynn Thomas provides the perfect locales for the action to
take place.
Screenwriter Jonathon Gems has written a script that keeps things
moving along at a brisk pace accented by weird bursts of humor (a
Martian ship zaps the Washington Monument and then nudges it in
several directions in order to get it to land on a boy scout troop)
and a truly bizarrely satisfying method of defeating the Martians
(let's just say that it involves yodelling).
This is a good bit of fun, but I wonder if it was sound filmmaking
judgement.  Tim Burton was able to run free in a $70 million dollar
playground which had another $30 million of marketting dollars thrown
at it, but I suspect "Mars Attacks" will draw mostly the core cult
audience of "Ed Wood".

Author
Keith Lee
        Well, I bit the big one this Sunday and saw "Mars Attacks" at
the nearby RB Mann's Theatre and boy, was I dissappointed.  What with
all those big stars and grandiose FX, the writers forgot two simple
parts of the story -- like plot and characterization??!!
If your love stereotypes of those who are and aren't so
powerful, then you will love this movie.  For example, I didn't know
that most people in Kansas were pickup truck driving, tobacco chewing,
trailer park living, TV watching, rifle toting, fat goobers who waved
the flag and thought all Californian's were weirdos. According to this
trash hash of a movie, no one who has indoor plumbing should go to
Kansas.  Also, did you know that every CNN-like talk show host out of
the east was a vacuam head who couldn't find their rears with both
hands?  Same with the President and his staff:  this was every
Reagan/Clinton stereotype that you could think of. Everyone in the
White House is a self-centered power-monger who strives for more and
more fame and money no matter who gets in their way.  Wow, sure makes
me feel good about the ol' US of A!!
We do have some heroes and heroines in this insipid piece of
garbage.  The nerdish son of a Kansas guerilla fighting wanna-be saves
the day with his Grandmother (put in a resthome to vegitate and be
forgotten by her bible-toting bigot of a son).  The president's
daughter plays a cute version of Chelsey who falls in love with the
long-haired nerd and helps him fight off the evil Martians.  With all
of these one-dimensional characters, it's a shame the Martians didn't
win!!
There were some good parts in this movie.  Rod Steiger played
the stereotypical (in this movie, oh no) warhawk of a General who goes
down fighting to his last breath. Underneath his Patton persona, he
gives a speech that gives out the best attributes of rugged American
individualism.  Also, Jim Brown does in this movie what he has been
doing in real life: reminding us how important men are to a family
unit.  He plays a down and out ex-prizefighter who works hard in Vegas
to keep his wife and children fed and clothed in Washington DC.  While
Steiger and Brown couldn't help this turkey get off the ground, they
gave excellent performances for two actors unfortunately forgotten by
Hollywood's youth-crazed system.
Now, should I tell you how I REALLY feel about this movie?? :-)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "It is an awesome sight.  The Martian spacecraft hovering in the
Nevada desert like a giant hubcap," reports breathless and brainless TV
talk show host Nathalie Lake (Sarah Jessica Parker).
     Yes, Tim Burton (ED WOOD, EDWARD SCISSORHANDS and BATMAN) is back,
and this time he turns his considerable creative talent to a spoof
called MARS ATTACKS!.  He tries to make a parody of a science fiction
movie, but instead comes up with a film that plays more as a parody of
a parody.  The picture is laced with sag gags from end to end, but most
manage to fall as flat as the spoken humor from screenwriter Jonathan
Gems.  Like a well-constructed bad painting, there is much to admire in
the film, but the net effect leaves you dispassionate.
     The movie, which has some similarities to the vastly superior
INDEPENDENCE DAY, has the president as the central character.  Jack
Nicholson plays President Dale as well as hard drinking, Las Vegas
developer Art Land.  Actually, Jack Nicholson plays Jack Nicholson
doing his usual shtick.
     Like the president in INDEPENDENCE DAY, President Dale has his big
speech to the nation when the aliens, in his case Martians, are
spotted.  In a singularly trite address, he proclaims to his people,
"It is profoundly moving to know there is intelligent life out there."
     Accomplished costume designer Colleen Atwood (LITTLE WOMEN, THAT
THING YOU DO!, and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS) designed the costumes for MARS
ATTACKS!.  She uses badly contrasting pastel colors to make the already
ditzy cast seem even more so.  Parker plays a role reminiscent of her
kid's TV show part in THE SUBSTANCE OF FIRE.  Here, her clothes are
even more outlandish.  The sets by Wynn Thomas are a panoply of bad
taste.  Parker's character, for example, sets in egg shaped black and
white checkered chairs while doing her interviews.  The chair's
contrast with her clothes will probably short circuit a few picture
tubes when the movies goes to video.
     Lukas Haas as Richie Norris is the only sincere character in the
movie.  He also gets the best line.  When the Martians land, everyone
assumes that they are friendly.  After the Martian Ambassador makes a
circular motion, Richie says, "Wow, he made the international sign of
the donut."
     Most characters in the film do little set pieces having only
tangential relation to the rest of the story.  Annette Bening plays a
rich new ager named Barbara Land.  As the Martians disembark for the
first time, she sets lotus position on top of her Mercedes convertible
while holding a Crystal pyramid.
     Martin Short is presidential press secretary Jerry Ross.  After
the Martians slaughter hundreds of army soldiers and innocent
civilians, he wants the president to hold a town meeting to get
America's opinion before making a decision on how to respond.
     As shown in the trailers, the Martians vaporize the entire
congress.  Not unpleased, the President says, "I want the people to
know that they still have two out of three branches of government and
that ain't bad."
     This is one of those Hollywood casts of thousands movies.
Everyone who is anyone gets a part.  Even Tom Jones, playing himself of
course, comes to the rescue.  For the record, the movie also has Glenn
Close, Pierce Brosnan, Danny DeVito, Michael J. Fox, Rod Steiger,
Natalie Portman, Jim Brown, Lisa Marie, Sylvia Sidney, Christina
Applegate, Joe Don Baker, Pam Grier, and Paul Winfield.  See what I
mean.
     I am not against using large numbers of stars in a picture.
Earlier that day I saw the new and absolutely marvelous four hour
Hamlet.  In it Kenneth Branagh uses a large cast of acting's luminaries
to great effect.
     MARS ATTACK! is a violent film.  Most of it is semi-cartoonish
with hundreds of people vaporized with their skin being eaten away
until only a red or green skeleton is left.  Why some end up red and
others blue is the story's chief conundrum.  In a scene lifted straight
out of an R rated horror movie, one character's finger is realistically
eaten and then the bloody stump is thrown in a fish bowl.  The camera
moves in for a close-up to make sure we see it.
     Taken as a film for adults, the violence is not a problem, but
considering this film is rated PG-13, there will be many frightened
grade-schoolers.  It certainly frightened my son badly, and I have not
seen him scared at a movie in over a year.  As a son of movie critic,
he sees many films.  He has been to the theater 26 times this year, but
none of them affected him as this one did.
     I did enjoy portions of MARS ATTACKS!, but its whole is less than
the some of the few good parts.  At least it has a totally
unpredictable ending.  Even an experience alien fighter will not be
able to figure out the Achilles' heel of these Martians.
     MARS ATTACKS! runs 1:42.  It is rated PG-13.  There is no nudity,
but there is brief sex, some profanity, and lots of violence.  My son
Jeffrey, age 7 1/2, gives it a "thumbs 55 percent down and 45 percent
up."  My ever affable son, tends to like every movie, but not this one.
He said the film is "for kids 7 1/2 and up because I really was scared,
and I get scared easier than most kids my age."  I think the film is
for kids 9 or 10 and up.  I can not recommend it, but I do give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jack Nicholson, Glenn Close, Annette Bening, Pierce Brosnan, Sarah
Jessica Parker, Martin Short, Jim Brown, Pam Grier, Michael J. Fox,
Danny DeVito, Lukas Haas, Sylvia Sidney, Rod Steiger, Paul Winfield,
Natalie Portman, Tom Jones, Joe Don Baker Director: Tim Burton.
Screenplay: Jonathan Gems
"The Look" is probably the most distinguishing feature of any Tim Burton
movie. There is no exception with this finished product of alien
carnage. "Mars Attacks" carries a unique feel which is the handy-mark of
Burton's direction - everything from the decor of the pock-a-dot
interview chairs, to the shadows behind the president's curtains, and
the very interesting "paisely" wallpaper at the old folk's home
(eye-catching).
There isn't much to reveal about the plot which isn't already
encapsulated by the title of this movie. These Martians haven't come to
share philosophical discourses on the origins of the universe. There's a
big name cast which is too numerous to mention, but briefly, Pierce
Brosnan and Sarah Jessica Parker learn the concepts of intellectual
stimulation when decapitated. Two thumbs up for Martian-Human
experimentation. Those who get fried by Martian lasers are "con man"
Danny Devito, "My hair looks good" reporter Michael J. Fox, the American
Congress, a dove and lots of humans. The President of The US of A, Jack
Nicholson, gets impaled by a Martian "conquerors" flag and pole. The
president's wife, Glen Close, is squished beneath her favourite
chandlers; but happy to say "New Ager" Annette Bening and Tom Jones
escape safely to some hidden caves in Bali. Such is Martian Justice.
Not hilariously funny, but quietly amusing. Unfortunately there isn't
any aerial "Martian flying saucer - human jet fighter" dog fight's which
made ID4 interesting. The humans are too easily squelched by the
dazzling Martian laser-works display, and the Martians are too easily
defeated by the crooning sound of 50's music.

Author
Bryant Frazer
I'm not quite sure what to say about MARS ATTACKS!, which is
obviously the work of a deranged genius. When Tim Burton's
twisted alien invasion comedy really works, it's breathtaking
and hilarious in equal measure. And when it doesn't work,
it's just dull. I'm not even sure it works more often than it
doesn't, but where it counts -- that is, when this gleefully
evil invading force from the red planet gets down to the
business of blasting us to kingdom come -- MARS ATTACKS! is
brilliant.
MARS ATTACKS! is based on a rather unsavory series of trading
cards released by Topps in the 1950s, and it takes its cues
from the same sources as this summer's INDEPENDENCE DAY --
old alien invasion flicks, disaster movies, and big-budget
special effects extravaganzas. But unlike INDEPENDENCE DAY,
which was a painfully middle-of-the-road appeal to the
hearts, minds and wallets of America, MARS ATTACKS! has a
fully developed and very personal sense of wonder about it.
The big difference is that while INDEPENDENCE DAY celebrated
the resilience of human beings, MARS ATTACKS! portrays us as
the greedy and hapless schmucks that we are.
The title sequence is just splendid -- an incredible swarm of
flying saucers rises out of the canals of the Red Planet and
then storms Earthward through the solar system in formation.
The spinning metal saucers are dead ringers for the invading
forces of movies past, and their first appearance on the big
screen in combination with Danny Elfman's thundering,
theremin-driven score is absolutely jaw-dropping. It's so
overwhelming that, I swear to you, I had trouble breathing.
The movie lays low for the next 40 minutes. We get a glimpse
of the alien leader, resplendent in a purple-sequined cape,
when a television message is broadcast to the people of the
world -- naturally, the only way to communicate with
earthlings is to preempt our regularly scheduled programming.
But mostly, the first act is spent developing characters,
setting up mildly comic situations, and drawing a quirky but
dishearteningly drab picture of America according to Tim
Burton. It's a good thing that the most compelling
personality in the movie belongs to the aliens, because
Burton's just not interested in making more than caricatures
out of his human stars.
Anyone who comes to MARS ATTACKS! expecting to see a lot of
one favorite actor is bound to be disappointed -- with few
exceptions, these characters are dispatched as the film
progresses. Jack Nicholson is a lot of fun as the President
of the United States but fizzles as a sleazy Las Vegas hotel
developer. Rod Steiger does an amusing enough take on Dr.
Strangelove's Buck Turgidson, Glenn Close brings some star
power to the role of the First Lady, and Martin Short is a
Presidential aide who meets the Martians in the White House's
"Kennedy Room," a secluded nook where he unwittingly tries to
seduce an alien dressed up as a big-haired, pointy-breasted
sexpot (Lisa Marie, the Burton flame who played Vampira in Ed
Wood) -- in an earlier scene, it's made clear that the aliens
studied human sexuality in the pages of an old issue of
Playboy.
Sarah Jessica Parker hosts her own TV show and Michael J. Fox
is her newsman husband. The octogenarian Sylvia Sidney has a
funny part as the old woman who cackles, "They blew up
Congress!" and plays a decisive role in the defeat of the
alien menace. Jim Brown and Tom Jones are the film's
Vegas-based heroes, and director Barbet Schroeder (REVERSAL 
OF FORTUNE) has a funny cameo as the unfortunate French
president. Also on hand and underutilized are Annette Bening,
Pierce Brosnan, Pam Grier, Lukas Haas and Natalie Portman(the
latter two also show up in Woody Allen's EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE
YOU).
The real stars, of course, are the computer-generated
Martians, and they're fantastic. With bare brains glistening
atop their grinning skull-faces, round egg-eyes with red
pupils darting this way and that, these animated invaders are
malevolence incarnate -- Joe Dante's GREMLINS are the closest
equivalent in recent memory, but Burton's little monsters are
more inventive. The film's raison d'etre are the scenes of
crimes against mankind -- the most famous monuments of the
world crumble under the alien assault, Easter Island is
turned into a bowling alley, and the nasty little buggers
perform hideous medical experiments on captured humans. The
sheer level of mayhem is staggering, especially when the
aliens make their first attack, blasting human beings into
iridescent skeletons. Parents are urged to pay special
attention to the PG-13 rating -- it's earned.
The special effects vary from charming to astonishing to
deliciously cheesy, and at least a couple of shots of mass
destruction seem to have been engineered specifically in
response to INDEPENDENCE DAY, although MARS ATTACKS! was in
production long before that film's release. Cinematographer
Peter Suschitzky, who makes the most of Wynn Thomas's wildly
imaginative production design (Thomas helped define the Spike
Lee style), actually took time off from his MARS ATTACKS!
regimen to shoot CRASH for David Cronenberg. Cronenberg's
movie will almost certainly be more somber -- it won't be
released in the U.S. until early next year -- but MARS
ATTACKS! is surely a similarly elegant nightmare. This is not
a nice movie. (And which studio executive was duped into
giving Burton $70 million to make it?)
By setting the film's final scenes in the nearly empty,
holocaust-ravaged America that INDEPENDENCE DAY conveniently
avoided, Burton's invasion epic suggests that the world we've
got may not be worth saving until many of the people on it
are dead. The victims of his invasion are naive, greedy, or
disastrously self-absorbed -- and a good thing, too, since
the movie's wicked charm is dependent on our ability to take
this invasion partly as a wish-fulfillment fantasy. The
surviving cast members are the innocents and the
entertainers, who triumph by determining that the alien
invaders -- the ultimate elitists -- are actually susceptible
to the kitschiest strains of American pop culture.
Ultimately, this messy masterpiece is the year's funniest
comedy and a weird, winking affirmation of the power of the
people.

Author
Enrique Conty
At one point in Mars Attacks!, director Tim Burton decided to use
1970's B-movie stock footage to show crowds running away from the
Martian onslaught.  It was at this point that I knew the movie had
its heart in the right place.
Mars Attacks! is based on the notorious 1950's trading card set from Topps.
Said card set depicted an invasion of Earth (well, mostly the US) by aliens
from the red planet, who are eventually beaten by humanity (well, mostly
red-blooded American men).  The cards lurid illustrations depicting
things like a Martian incinerating a dog as its young owner watches in
horror were considered too extreme for their time, so the card set was
removed from the market shortly thereafter.  Through the decades (maybe
because of the controversy?), the Mars Attacks! cards have become an icon
of counterculture Americana, like the B-grade sci-fi films of the era
and "gentlemen's magazine" model Betty Page.  Given Tim Burton's penchant
for wonderfully grotesque humor and the same "cheesy is good" sensibility
that made shows like Mystery Science Theater 3000 so popular, it was
natural that he eventually would get around to try his hand at some sort
of B-movie spoof.
In Mars Attacks!, bug-eyed little green men from the rocky red planet
board their shiny flying saucers, and come to Earth under the guise of
peace, but their sinister intentions are revealed as they pull out their
bright primary-colors disintegrator pistols and start shooting death rays
at everything that moves.  Yes, there is a certain sense of *innocence*
to the Martians, who carry on with child-like glee as they play gruesome
practical jokes and generally have fun blowing up things.  At the same
time, one wants to keep seeing them go through their antics, and be
soundly defeated (they're *evil* martians, after all).  It's a strange
and quirky brew, certainly not suitable for everyone.  But if you're the
kind of person who can find the humor in a scene where the martians
topple the Washington Monument and push it around juuuust right so it
lands on top of a Boy Scout troop trying to run away, you'll find
Mars Attacks! a rewarding experience.
Like a disaster movie, the story has *4* major arcs, and plenty of "hey,
I know that actor!" faces in the cast:
- Two vacuous TV reporters from NYC cover the aliens' arrival.
- A redneck family from Kansas whose older son is on "Martian detail" at
  the Martian landing site in Pahrump, Nevada (an actual place!).
- A motley cast of Las Vegas wheelers and dealers (including Tom Jones as
  himself) flee the martian troops.
- The President Of The United States and various cabinet members
  deal with the situation (including Pierce Brosnan as a perfectly dashing
  and smarmy Science Advisor).
This is the movie's fatal flaw:  there is just too much stuff going on in
the movie, and too much time wasted introducing the large cast.  I'd have
cut 1/4th of the movie's cast, and tightened up the pace of their
introduction:  most of them are eventually going to be vaporized, crushed,
clobbered, stabbed, mutilated, defenestrated, and otherwise disposed
of anyway.  Bring the martians on, they're the true stars of Mars Attacks!.
Don't get me wrong, though:  I enjoyed Mars Attacks! quite a bit, and many
of my sci-fi fan friends absolutely loved it.  But, again, it's not for
everyone.
--
Enrique Conty  |  conty@cig.mot.com  | http://www.mcs.net/~conty
Come to Anime Central, the Midwest's Best Anime Convention!
April 3-5 1998, Holiday Inn O'Hare, Rosemont, IL. (A suburb of Chicago)
Visit our website at http://www.mcs.net/~docangst/3w/ac/

Author
Shane Burridge
I've looked forward to Tim Burton's credit sequences ever since the
delirious, operatic opening moments for BATMAN RETURNS.  On this
score, MARS ATTACKS! doesn't disappoint  - that he can make so much of
so little (namely, hokey-looking saucers flying through space) is
ample proof of his talent.  Unfortunately, it's so tantalizingly
powerful that - for a while at least - the rest of his film appears to
suffer by comparison.
The story, inspired by a series of trading cards, is so by-the-numbers
that it hardly seems worth recounting here, but for the record:  A
fleet of alien spacecraft take up position in orbit around the Earth. 
 The US president (Jack Nicholson), mistakenly persuaded of their
peaceful intentions, finds himself running for cover as the White
House and most of the surrounding neighborhood are suddenly laid to
waste.  He isn't the only one - the storyline jumps between several
characters in different locations, all faced with the same crisis.  If
you think this sounds like the same plot used in INDEPENDENCE DAY,
you're right - and this provides another rather troublesome area of
comparison.  ID4 was a megahit of a movie, a huge, global rocket-ride
with big effects that netted big box office.  MARS ATTACKS! is
deliberately cheesy, a skewed marriage of mainstream pop and Burton's
own eccentricity.  But Burton's film has a significant saving grace:
it is directed by Tim Burton.  While the aliens of ID4 leveled entire
cities with anonymous blasts from their huge starships, the Martians
of MARS ATTACKS! work on a more.....*personal* level.  It is at the
point when the Martians make their first appearance that the story
begins to pick up:  they are hilarious, but also provide the film with
an unexpectedly vicious edge.  Under any other circumstances, Burton's
grotesqueries would come across as merely violent (I don't doubt that
many younger viewers in the session I attended gathered enough
material for a few week's worth of nightmares) but his idiosyncratic
goofiness still presides.  
It's very likely that MARS ATTACKS! won't be as funny as some
moviegoers would hope, nor provide the big-budget sci-fi thrills that
others may be expecting.  The main reason to see it is to behold
Burton at work, once again re-inventing the pop culture that defined
his childhood.  And of course, there is the appropriately stellar cast
he has assembled - as if he didn't have enough to contend with while
wreaking havoc on the planet he also has to juggle enough screen time
for the likes of Nicholson, Pierce Brosnan, Glenn Close, Annette
Bening, Rod Steiger, Michael J. Fox, Sarah Jessica Parker, Martin
Short, Danny de Vito, Tom Jones, Natalie Portman, and Joe Don Baker. 
It's amazing that the Martians even get a look-in - but they'll be who
you remember most afterwards.

Author
Christopher Null
     We've already had three movies based on TV shows this year, plus a
film based on a TV commercial, but I think it's a really bad omen when a
film is based on a series of trading cards.
     The film is MARS ATTACKS!, and with it Tim Burton serves up the
worst production of his once-blossoming career, a movie wherein he
indulges every excess of his demented psyche, pays no attention to
entertaining the audience, and recycles every joke he can get his hands
on.
     The joke recycling would be okay, even appropriate, given Burton's
predilection for shtick, if only the jokes were *funny*!  But they're
not.  Nothing much is funny in MARS ATTACKS!, whose mildly amusing "War
of the Worlds" story can best be described as... Mars attacks.
     Burton obviously started this production in the casting -- Jack
Nicholson as the president, Glenn Close as his uppity wife, Annette
Bening as a New Age freak, Pierce Brosnan as a sophisticated science
advisor.  You get the idea.  I guess Burton figured that throwing Tom
Jones (as himself) into the mix would make it all better.
     And maybe it would have, except the performances look like they're
cobbled together from the days off that the cast of some 15 "name"
actors happened to have.  Bits and pieces of what should be on the
editing room floor have somehow made their way into the final print
instead, and in no particular order, either.  Only one running joke
stands out as worthy -- a flirtation between two disembodied heads (I
won't say who).
     I realize that MARS ATTACKS! was supposed to be a tongue-in-cheek
homage to the cheesy, old sci-fi flicks (but Tim, you *already* made ED
WOOD), but MARS ATTACKS! isn't even any good as a farce.  The movie just
plain looks bad -- too bad to be taken seriously, but not bad enough to
look bad on purpose.  And Burton's use of ultra-campy stars like Lisa
Marie and Pam Grier?  Puh-leeze.  Where's Richard Roundtree, Tim?
     Got the point yet?  Because I'm tired of writing about this dead
film.  I wonder if we'll ever know what Burton had in mind when he put
together this giant waste of time, but then again, who cares?
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Tim Burton
Writers: Jonathan Gems and Tim Burton (based on the trading cards)
Starring: Jack Nicholson (twice), Glen Close, Pierce Brosnan, Annette
Benning, Rod Steiger, Lucas Haas, Natalie Portman, Martin Short, Jim
Brown, Pam Grier, Michael J. Fox, Sarah Jessica Parker, Tom Jones,
Sylvia Sydney, Joe Don Baker, Lisa Marie, Danny DeVito, Christina
Applegate
Back before this came out, I was proclaiming that without a shadow of a
doubt that Tim Burton's "Mars Attacks!" was to be the "Dr. Strangelove"
of the 90s.  I mean, the previews looked like it would be hysterical,
cartoonish, and even contain some good old Kubrickian satire.  So much
for hype.
"Mars Attacks!" was probably the biggest let-down since the second
season of "Twin Peaks."  I mean, no, it's not a bad movie, and yeah,
it's pretty much over-bashed (even Kevin Smith said his "Mallrats"
wasn't nearly as bad as this - I kinda disagreed).  But all I wanted was
some good laughs and some satire.  Yes, it suceeds in spoofing disaster
flicks, which have been waning as of late (sob), but it's just not that
funny.
Based on some ultra-violent collecting cards from the 50s (the most
original source I've heard in recent memory), the film tells the story
of aliens arriving from, well, Mars, and giving a kind of neutral
message to earthlings.  Scientist Pierce Brosnan says they're
intelligent, and just want to chill with us.  General Rod Steiger (not
his real title) is convinced they're more belligerent than those aliens
in "Starship Troopers," and we should just nuke them.  President Jack
Nicholson (again, not his real title) seems to be just confused.
After about a half hour or so of unfunny jokes, we FINALLY get to the
first meetings with the aliens.  In a brilliantly executed scene, the
part-Woodstock/part-military peace mission turns into a gorefest, with
the aliens shooting everyone in sight with these weird ray guns, which
ignite people into skeletons.  Another meeting to see if it was a
"mistake" (since a dove was the catalyst in the aliens' anger) results
in another one.  The second one (which was in the great previews) isn't
nearly as funny as the first one, but things take off from here.
Now, if you've seen enough disaster flicks, you know that the most
interesting part is not really the special effects, but the wildly
eccentric amount of characters we get to know.  From Shelley Winters as
a diver in "The Poseidon Adventure" to the hapless Fred Aistaire in "The
Towering Inferno" to, well, Randy Quaid in "Independence Day," the film
rests on the characters...or, sorry, characateurs.  And we get some
funny ones, and some boring ones, but none wacky enough for the film.
To also staying with disaster pic spoofing, the film intercuts between
several locations, including Vegas, the government (and the "Dr.
Strangelove"-esque war room, although hardly as menacing), a hick town,
and even the alien ship.  And we, of course, get the wide variety of
wacky and eccentric chracters that congregated in the disaster epics,
and subsequently died, so we could all get off on a big star (like
Charlton Heston) dying.
But when it ends, and you feel violated.  I mean, the previews were
probably the best of the season, in ways of how cool they made the movie
look.  But, really, the film isn't nearly as funny as they were.  Most
of the funny jokes are in the previews (how rare!).  But when the aliens
turn up, it's pretty enjoyable.  Also, the film kind of cheated us with
prayers of satire.  Not only is the word "nuke" tossed around as much as
"commie" was in Dr. Strangelove, and Nicholson has two roles (one less
than Sellars did in "Strangelove"), but it arrived in the wake of the
"ID4" phenomenon, promising to crack the hell out of it.  And when that
didn't deliver, I felt a tad let-down, to say the least.
In short, "Mars Attacks!" may be Tim Burton's worst flick, but it's not
THAT bad.  But it could have been so much more.  Oh well.  "Superman
Lives" comes out soon.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Paul W. Cashman
Summary:  see it at a matinee price; it might not be for everyone.
I'd only seen one quick ad for this film before seeing a sneak preview
on December 1st, so I had few preconceptions about it.  I knew that
Tim Burton was involved and that it looked like a send-up of B-movies,
a genre with which I'm passingly familiar, but that's about it.
For me, this film didn't -quite- work.   There were some really funny
moments, but many of the stereotype portrayals were a bit over the
top, at least for me.  Jack Nicholson turns in a truly scary
performance as the President -- I'd be scared if he were in office! --
and the lampooning of various other institutions, groups and cultures 
continues, to the point where underneath its veneer the movie seems to
be lecturing us.......
--Which would be fine if it weren't trying to be uproariously campy 
at the same time, and it was trying.  Maybe TOO campy; some of the effects
were intentionally cheesy but distracted from the flow because of
that.   Some scenes were so over-the-top campy that the audience could
do nothing else but groan.  Unfortunately, the average movie-goer
won't get all the gags -- some will get fewer than half -- and so we
doubted afterwards the movie would "fly."
MARS ATTACKS! includes cameo performances from a number of actors
including Danny DeVito (fine if somewhat predictable, in-character 
as a Vegas shark) and crooner Tom Jones (also part of the Vegas scenes).
No major complaints about the acting, but we wondered afterwards what
some of these 'big guns' were doing in this particular film. 
Overall, I thought the movie was so-so.  It didn't quite work for me
but for other genre fans, especially those more familiar with the
lurid pulps and B-films, it might appeal more.    The score, by Danny
Elfman, is almost worth a matinee admission price in itself.  Elfman
and Burton received applause during the opening credits.
It's hard to give a best scene without revealing a spoiler, but the
scene where the Easter Island statues are bowled over -- literally --
by the Martians is pretty funny.  Many of the best scenes already 
appear in the previews, anyway.    
Conclusion:  see it with genre-loving friends at a matinee price.  
You could wait for it to come to video, but some of the effects 
-are- worth seeing on the large screen, and Elfman's score is worth
it, too.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This year has reeled from two major films made that are tributes
to George Pal's 1953 film THE WAR OF THE WORLDS.  INDEPENDENCE DAY is,
of course, already one of the most financially successful films of all
time.  Tim Burton's MARS ATTACKS! is just now being loosed on theaters.
     Following the release of WAR OF THE WORLDS, a whole generation of
fantasy film fans grew up with the images from that film engraved on
their memories.  The images of the planet Earth being trounced by the
weapons of alien super-science inspired imitations like EARTH VS. THE
FLYING SAUCERS, THE MYSTERIANS, and BATTLE IN OUTER SPACE.  In another
medium, Topps Bubble Gum released a series of trading cards to cash in
on these images.  The "Mars Attacks!" cards were an updating of the
gratuitous sadism of the earlier "Horrors of War" trading cards.  They
added a generous injection of imaginative science fictional weapons to
more effectively melt the flesh from the poor victims' bones.  The most
memorably card shows a pet dog being turned into a skeleton.  There was
not a lot of plot to the story told on the back of the cards except
that the Martians came and blasted away at everything, so (if I
remember correctly) we Earthlings went to Mars and blew it up.  Now
inspired by this rather rudimentary but image-rich story Tim Burton has
made a film with his own version of the story.  It seems like a natural
matching since Burton films specialize in being image-rich with
rudimentary stories.
     This is a wedge-shaped film with its highest point in a genuinely
nightmarish image before the opening credits.  I was tempted to feel at
this point that perhaps Burton really did understand the style and
kinky imagination of the "Mars Attacks!" cards and was steeling myself
for harrowing and delicious film experience.  This is followed by a
nearly as impressive image of a vast armada of flying saucers picking
up from Mars and converging on our own green planet.  Good stuff so
far.  From there the film introduces us to several groups of
characters, a sort of cross-section of America in a sort of hideous
mosaic.  We see a trailer park family from some prairie state.  We meet
a vulgar entrepreneur wanting to build a Las Vegas casino. And as a
sort of first among equals we meet the over-ripe President of the
United States (Jack Nicholson) and his weird entourage.  Then for a
half hour the script bogs down as we meet all these people and the
people around them without getting to know them very well.  Then for a
while the story is fun again.  But only for a while.
     The real problem with MARS ATTACKS! is the deterioration of the
script.  It starts with a serious plotline, then begins treating the
plot in a tongue-in-cheek manner.  From there it starts adding jokes,
and finally the whole plotline turns into a joke.  Eventually the film
is doing anything it can to milk laughs from the material in the worst
traditions of THE CANNONBALL RUN.  Each step is away from the
imagination that made the cards exciting to adolescents and towards a
sort of smirking patronization of the spirit of the source material.
     The film sports a hefty cast of familiar actors, though certainly
not for the challenge of the roles.  Typical is to have an actor like
Rod Steiger playing a high military official who yells his strategy at
the President ("Kill!  Kill!!  Exterminate.")  Nicholson is his most
overripe playing a very un-Presidential President of the United States.
Also on hand are Glenn Close as the First Lady, Danny DeVito, Martin
Short, Tom Jones, and Michael J. Fox.  One unexpectedly creative bit
involves the fate of Pierce Brosnan and Sarah Jessica Parker.  But on
the whole we have familiar actors standing around to wait for a
screaming death scene given to them compliments of the Martian invaders
who turn out to be by far the most believable characters in the film.
     With a little more respect for the original material, Burton could
have had a wonderful little film instead of this tiresome comedy with
one or two good moments.  I give it a low 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
David Wilcock
A sci fi/comedy starring Jack Nicholson, Pierce Brosnan, Annette Benning,
Glenn Close, Martin Short and other stars.
The martians have landed in this hillarous Tim Burton movie. Before
entering the cinema, I was initially a little bit nervous about what
this film would be like. Many people were saying that this film was
silly rubbish, and there was no point to it all. How wrong they were. I
left this film feeling much happier than I was before I entered the
cinema.
The story is about Martians attacking Earth. Using ray guns (hooray!)
they generally cause havoc around the U.S and other countries.
Nicholson plays the president who must try to stop invasion, and also
taking advice from his loopy officials.
But, basically, its a load of set pieces showing the Martians
destroying Earth. The way people are killed by the ray guns is great,
they is a hillarous (and mildly disturbing scene) involving a Martian
lady, a mad general who just wants to nuke the aliens away, (and ends
up getting squashed by an aliens foot) and a gory finale involving lots
of alien heads exploding.
But, most of all, this film is fun. The Martians are full of character,
the performances are spot on, and the all star cast help make the film
more enjoyable. The film is a million times better then the dire
INDEPENDANCE DAY, and is a real tribute to the tacky '50s invasion
movies.  They are is a great score by Danny Elfman, and lots of laughs.
This has to be the best invasion I've seen for a long time.

Author
Walter Frith
It helps a great deal to have a movie come out at the end of the year that
is a reminder of the year's biggest box office hit which came out in the
summer.  'Independence Day' has skyrocketed to #6 on the all time box
office list and that film about an alien invasion of Earth was a tense
filled and dramatic telescope of filmmaking.  A complete one hundred and
eighty degree turn is completed with 'Mars Attacks.'  An idiotic President
of the United States (Jack Nicholson) and his hopelessly materialistic
wife and U.S. First Lady (Glenn Close) are caught in a dilemma when
Martians attack our planet and a wacky handful of characters are caught up
in the frenzy.  Visionary director Tim Burton ('Pee Wee's Big Adventure,'
Beetlejuice,' Batman,' 'Edward Scissorhands,' 'Ed Wood') has cooked up a
delicious mix of camp humour and visuals and has crossed the finish line
with a movie which is not for all tastes but Burton's films usually aren't
and 'Mars Attacks' has the director in the uncompromising position of
telling his story with a mixed bag of lunacy.  The funniest thing about
this movie is that Nicholson not only plays the leader of the free world
but also a sleazy and hard boiled Nevada real estate developer named Art
Land.  Yes, I'm certain the selection of this characters name was no
co-incidence.  His wardrobe alone is worth the price of admission for the
amount of pure belly laughs that it delivers.  Combine that with some
ingenious computerized special effects and the cultural lessons of all
those tacky flying saucer movies of the 1950's and 'Mars Attacks' delivers
some surprisingly inventive gags and justice is done to the characters in
the picture that you'll love to hate.  I must admit that this picture
caught me off guard as I was prepared for an 'Independence Day' rip off
but it isn't that way at all.  At the conclusion of this movie you'll find
the end result comes from the most unlikely character and this one is
destined to become a cult classic.  Other cast members include Pierce
Brosnan, Martin Short, Rod Steiger, Annette Bening, Jim Brown, Sarah
Jessica Parker, Lukas Haas, Michael J. Fox, Danny De Vito, Natalie
Portman, Sylvia Sidney, Lisa Marie and Tom Jones.
Coming Soon:  Reviews of 'Beavis and Butthead Do America' and 'My Fellow
Americans.'  SEE YOU AT THE MOVIES !

Author
Michael Dequina
        After his excellent 1994 biopic of the worst filmmaker of all time,
Ed Wood, it was only a matter of time before Tim Burton made an Ed Wood
movie of his own.  Two years later we have Mars Attacks!, a darkly humorous
sendup of and affectionate homage to B-grade sci-fi epics of the 1950s.
        Like all alien invasion epics, Mars Attacks! follows a pastiche of
characters and how they cope with a hostile Martian invasion.  The players
include the President of the United States (Jack Nicholson); the First Lady
(Glenn Close) and First Daughter (Natalie Portman); a stuffy White House
scientist (Pierce Brosnan); the skirtchasing Presidential press secretary
(Martin Short); a ditzy fashion reporter (Sarah Jessica Parker); her vain
reporter boyfriend (Michael J. Fox); a Kansas teen (Lukas Haas) and his
grandmother (Sylvia Sidney); an alcoholic Vegas casino owner (Nicholson
again); his New Agey wife (Annette Bening); an
ex-boxer-turned-costumed-Vegas-casino-attraction (Jim Brown); his estranged
wife (Pam Grier); a rude gambler (Danny DeVito); and, yes, Tom Jones himself.
        With so many characters on the canvas, the Burton and screenwriter
Jonathan Gems understandably take a while to establish them and get the
picture going.  But after all the setup, it is quite disappointing that a
number of the characters do not have the most satisfying of payoffs
(Nicholson's casino owner in particular).  But unlike a certain alien
invasion picture that came out in the summer, all of these original, wacky
characters do make their distinct impression; none blend into a forgettable
blob.  And unlike that nameless blockbuster, even the aliens are allowed to
show some personality--the sight of them vaporizing buildings and people
with maniacal gusto while saying "Don't run!  We are your friends!" says it
all.  It's that quirky Burton mix of camp and macabre humor that makes Mars
Attacks! so much fun; ironically, that's also what will probably end up
hurting the film at the box office, like it did Ed Wood.  The imagination
and wit behind oddly clever way the humans end up getting the better of the
Martians will likely be lost on most mainstream moviegoers; in fact, most
people would probably call it a letdown.
        What will not be lost on mainstream viewers, however, is the
impressive visual effects of the piece.  The diminutive green Martians with
enlarged brains are  certainly a sight to behold, and the massive
destruction they cause is all done very convincingly.  The most brilliant
touch is how the effects, as elaborate and expensive as they are, do not
betray the look and feel of, say, a Plan 9 from Outer Space.  The flying
saucers don't have any visible strings holding them up, but they do
resemble, as Parker's character puts it, "flying hubcaps."  When people are
vaporized, we see their flesh and other entrails dissolve into the air, but
their whole skeletons are left behind--in either green or red, no less.
Martian brains explode but not without spurting green sludge.  Some crucial
effects involving Parker and Brosnan could not have been accomplished in the
1950s, but the idea behind them is something you would see in a movie from
that time, albeit done with a straight face.  Burton also doesn't resist the
use of that staple of Ed Wood movies, stock footage.  This attention to
detail makes Mars Attacks!, its satiric qualities notwithstanding, a knowing
and loving tribute to those cheesy B-movies.
        After the phenomenal success of Independence Day, I am not so sure
that Mars Attacks! will be able to find an audience even half the size of
that film's.  It's not that the films are too similar, far from it; it's
just that the majority of moviegoers, looking for something straightforward
like an ID4, won't quite "get" the unconventional Mars.  But anyone who is
willing and able to buy into the film's eccentricities is sure to enjoy Mars
Attacks!.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Michael Redman
The bubble gum cards that this film is based on were released in the
early sixties to criticism of their violent and explicit scenes of death
and destruction. Thirty years later this is played for laughs.
Tim Burton who gave us "Beetlejuice", "Batman" and "Edward Scissorhands"
attempts a difficult task: making a purposefully bad big-budget science
fiction film funnier than the unintentionally hilarious B films. How can
you outdo "Plan 9"? An admirable task, it's unfortunate that he doesn't
succeed. "Mars Attacks" starts off extraordinarily slow and doesn't get
much better.
Despite dozens of big name stars (Jack Nicholson, Glenn Close, Michael
J. Fox, Jim Brown, Tom Jones, Rod Steiger and many more), the one-joke
film falls on its face. With such a big cast, characterization is
difficult and here it's not even attempted. When the main characters get
fried one by one by the invaders, it's a big ho-hum.
Burton obviously believes that excess is the road to success, but in
this film it's just the superhighway to even more excess. Everything is
big and bright from the destruction of Congress to the red and green (in
celebration of Christmas?) glowing skeletons that remain after the
Martians scorch earthlings with their death rays.
There are a few amusing bits and excellent effects. But they're only
impressive the first time you see them, not the second, and certainly
not the twentieth.
The film does almost work on a conceptual level. True to its origins,
the movie sports grand visuals. Many of the scenes are borrowed directly
from the cards and look great on the big screen. The project is much
like a series of moving trading cards. Here's a cool picture -- the
stampede of burning cattle is breathtaking. And there's another. I'd
trade two of these for one of those. Just like cards, they look great,
but then what do you do with them?
In the best of all worlds, you'd take the images and design a humorous
engrossing story around them. We don't live in the best of all worlds
and what we get is a tedious movie with tiresome aliens that look like
the puppets they are in a story inspired by "Gremlins" as much as by the
gory drawings on cardboard.
The film goes from one vignette to another with little connection
between them. Remarkably enough for such a flashy movie, it moves at a
slothful pace. And it goes on and on and on and...
I'm perfectly willing to admit that there will be many who love the
film, but Burton lost me with "The Nightmare Before Christmas". Perhaps
I just don't get it, but I suspect that there's nothing there to get.
This is a movie that the subject of one of his films, Ed Wood, could
have made.
The microscopic bacteria recently found on rocks possibly from Mars show
more life than this film does. The search for extraterrestrial
intelligence continues.
[This was published in the "Bloomington Voice" 12/26/96. Michael Redman
can be contacted at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Craig Good
Tim Burton has clout. That's obvious because he was allowed to make
"Mars Attacks", a hilarious, no-punches-pulled comedy spectacle. I'm
glad that Burton now has that kind of clout, and that technology has
pretty well caught up with his vision.
>From the opening images I was hooked. These are flying saucers the way
flying saucers are *supposed* to look. And there are the right number
of them -- finally! ILM has delivered both Martians and effects big
time: I mean both quality and quantity. The animation of the Martians
is, in many places, the finest character animation ILM has ever done.
And Burton has delivered a fun set of characters in the form of an
all-star cast.
Nobody is spared. Everybody is lampooned. From the opportunistic
President, mugged to a fare-thee-well by a gleeful Jack Nicholson, to
the Newage (rhymes with sewage) pyramid-and-crystal bimbo burbled by
Anette Bening, to the hawkish general emoted by Rod Steiger, everybody
gets a jab.
I don't want to go into any detail here, but I do want you to go see
the movie. There are images (and sounds, thanks to Randy Thom's design
work) which I confidently predict you will not forget. Heavens, *I* nearly
forgot Danny Elfman's inspired, theremin-rich score. And some gags
that work on a truly grand scale. Oh -- and gags you won't believe they
took *that* far. In short, it delivers everything the bloated and
ultimately lame "Independence Day" should have, plus a lot of belly
laughs in the process.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Tim Burton loves to indulge himself. His BATMAN films 
steered the venerable superhero out of his usual comfort zone and 
into Burton's own brooding vision of Gotham, his ED WOOD was 
one man's homage to the worst movie director ever, and this film, 
MARS ATTACKS, is Burton's own bizarre, campy take on the 
science-fiction genre. Five months after INDEPENDENCE DAY, 
this movie offers an even more caricaturistic take on aliens attacking 
Earth, one which has a deliciously mod art direction and a great 
sense of humor.
        Another thing linking INDEPENDENCE DAY and MARS 
ATTACKS is the star-studded ensemble cast that doesn't take itself 
the least bit seriously, although this film's cast blows ID4's out of the 
water. Jack Nicholson stars as both the President and a seedy Vegas 
land schemer. Glenn Close -- the second-billed star who has maybe 
five lines tops -- plays the First Lady, with Natalie Portman as their 
teenage daughter (if Chelsea Clinton was this cute, we'd have to 
throw the two-term limit out the window), Martin Short as the lusty 
press secretary and Pierce Brosnan as the professor optimistic about 
alien life.
        Outside of the White House are Michael J. Fox and Sarah 
Jessica Parker are married journalists with jobs at competing TV 
stations. Blaxploitation star Jim Brown is an ex-boxer who makes a 
living dressed up as a pharoah at the Vegas casino Tom Jones 
headlines. Yes, Tom is part of the MARS ATTACKS ensemble, and 
even gets a few lines in when he's not singing "It's Not Unusual." 
Danny DeVito and Lukas Haas are also in there somewhere. With 
a cast this big, most of the stars don't get a whole lot of screen 
time.
        The Martians themselves are a main part of the cast. A 
mixture of computer and stop-motion animation, they walk funny, 
have huge heads and bleed green. Obviously, they don't come in 
peace -- how much fun would it be if they did? No, these guys start 
an all-out war on the human race which includes disentigrating 
Congress (whether this is good or bad for humanity is debatable) 
and re-sculpting Mount Rushmore into their likenesses.
        Certain parts of MARS ATTACKS are Burton at his finest -- 
brightly colored sets and costumes, juvenile sight gags and corny 
lines delivered straight. But don't mistake this for a parody along the 
lines of SPY HARD or HOT SHOTS, this is more of a satire of an 
entire genre, a satire that relies more on over-acting and a mixture 
of incredible and purposefully-bad special effects. The alien saucers 
are little more than spinning pie plates but, as in ID4, various 
worldwide monuments are convincingly destroyed.
        MARS ATTACKS, serious or not, makes for a good disaster 
epic. That it actually has a sense of humor is a bonus. The rating on 
this movie would be much higher if not for the slow first half of the 
film. The last forty-five minutes or so is all four-star material, but 
MARS ATTACKS takes its sweet time to get started. It takes a certain 
amount of time to introduce the characters and set-up the invasion 
and attack. Here is where we could have used a lot of laughs, but 
Burton plays most of the opening scenes surreal yet basically 
serious. A lot of talent and potential comic material goes to waste 
there, which is a disaster in itself.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Tim Burton's new movie is strangely sedate, which is a polite way
of saying that it's boring even though it's not supposed to be.  His
elaborate (but never engaging) sci-fi/monster/disaster-movie spoof,
adapted from the vintage (and violent) trading card set, has two things
going for it:  fabulous art direction and the director's gleefully
grotesque sense of humor.  The latter, with its many playful sequences
of torture and gore, is almost certain to be lost on the masses.
Audiences may have cheered INDEPENDENCE DAY, but scenes of burning
cattle and other crispy critters are sure to send them in the direction
of other holiday movies.  Obviously Mr. B.  doesn't care.  He appears
willing to do almost anything for a sick laugh, including killing off
most of his cast.  Almost two-dozen stars appear in this one, from Jack
Nicholson (in two roles) to Sara Jessica Parker to Jim Brown.  Most of
their characters are so boring, though, that you won't even mind when
they're turned into toast.  Ack ack ack ack! 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
I admire Tim Burton as a director, even if I don't always enjoy his movies.
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS is a beautiful example of what can happen
when his imagination is given free rein. MARS ATTACKS! on the other hand,
feels like a dry run -- a $50,000 cheapie that someone decided to make for
$50 million. 
See, if MARS *had* been one of the cheapies it pretends to send up,
it would at least have camp value. But this is a) an expensive Hollywood
production by a director whose last project was a dramatization of the life
and times of a director who made just such movies, so the results seem
curiously dadaistic in a way, and b) an attempt to send up camp -- which is
basically bringing coals to Newcastle. Campy movies aren't worth sending up
because they have already done the job for you.
MARS is supposed to be campy, but it only manages to be a shaky
imitation of camp. It also tries to be funny -- tries too hard, in my
opinion, and is only funny in moments. As a whole, it's not funny, it's
irritating, because it blows so many of its best moments by not bothering
to develop them. For a movie that cost *that* much to make, it's
astonishingly lazy.
One of the first things we see is lots of Martian flying saucers
approaching Earth -- LOTS of them, in a nicely done CGI job. What struck me
is that someone went to great, loving lengths to make the saucers look as
much like a mid-50's bad-SF movie flying saucer as possible. It reminded me
of Warhol's soup can paintings, somehow: we are at a point where just
presenting an icon is supposed to evoke something: laughs. In this case,
it's camp, but as I said before, sending up camp is something of a fool's
errand. You can't kid a kidder.
The plot is about what you'd expect. The aliens come, there is some
kind of diplomatic misuderstanding no thanks to a screwed-up translation
machine, and the war is on. Actually, the movie is so clumsy in its
handling of its plot that it's never clear if the Martians were just
playing with our heads from the beginning, or if in fact the translation
machine is screwed up, etc. Purists would no doubt insist that it's sort of
beside the point, but the movie makes such a big deal out of some of these
things in the first place that afterwards we wonder why they even bothered
talking about them in the first place. To get laughs, of course, but the
usual cliches about how the machine is "almost ready this time" aren't
funny; they're hardly even groundwork for a good joke.
The biggest problem with the movie is the story, or lack of one.
Any one thing that's funny in a movie is even funnier when it's given a
context, and the contexts in MARS ATTACKS! were skimmed over, skimped on,
or handled with a clumsiness that made me wonder if the movie had received
some kind of major editing-room surgery at the last minute. Some of the
scenes just drift off into space, or are so jarringly contrasted with
others, that it almost feels like we're channel-surfing.
The Martians aren't interesting as villains, and the Earthlings
that we get to see aren't that interesting as heroes. (An example: Rod
Steiger plays a bullet-headed warmongering general. Period. No attempt is
made to make his character *functionally* interesting: he's just an excuse
for Steiger to indulge in the usual actor's business.) This is not the same
as the DR. STRANGELOVE approach, in which everyone is more or less equally
buffoonish; here, they're too dull, really, to be buffoonish. We don't see
why the movie is wasting time with them.
I mentioned the effects are clearly expensive and very well-done,
but they don't serve much more of a purpose than to frantically kick the
movie in the ass and drive it along. Subplots come up, are re-examined in
cursory and unsatisfying ways, and many of the scenes play out to no real
purpose. As a result, every joke becomes a throwaway. The movie quickly
reduces itself to a pattern where lots of cameo characters are set up in
walk-ons, reappear to deliver one-liners, and then get annihilated when
they meet Martians.
One good example of how the script wastes its time is a scene in
which one of the alien bodies is being dissected. The entire punch line of
the scene has the scientist character (played by Pierce Brosnan) sticking
his hand into the alien's skull and coming away with a fistful of green
slime. "Curious," he mutters. End of scene. This scene could have been a
great source of laughs -- for instance, why didn't they take the chance to
make fun of the recent "Alien Autopsy Footage!" scam? Now right there is
one more funny idea, I bet, than most of the ones you could find in the
movie.

Author
Joe Blenkle
Almost predictably so, MARS ATTACKS!, a new film by Tim Burton and
Warner Brothers Pictures is dumb and mindless, but to such an extent
that the film is really funny.
Basically the premise behind the movie is that a bunch of little green
men with very large heads decide that they like Earth a whole lot
better than Mars and set out to conquer the planet. 
MARS ATTACKS! is actually based on a set of trading cards that were
released for a short run in 1962. Due to the horrifying images on some
of these cards, they were pulled from the stores and vending machines
after only a few months. I personally remember these cards as a kid
and they scared me to death!
Fortunately, "MARS ATTACKS!" takes a lighter approach to the alien
invasion theme and although some of the scenes might scare the younger
children, they by in large are more humorous than anything else.
The film is headlined by an all-star cast including the likes of Jack
Nicholson (as the President), Martin Short, Pierce Brosnan, Sarah
Jessica Parker, Michael J. Fox, Danny DeVito, Glenn Close and Tom
Jones.
"MARS ATTACKS!" clearly spoofs some of the great old science fiction
"B" films, as well as some of the newer releases. 
SF aficionados will clearly see a lot of elements from that classic
EARTH VS. THE FLYING SAUCERS as well as the more recent INDEPENDENCE
DAY. But the silliness of the film is still its main attraction.
After a fleet of flying saucers is seen heading toward Earth, it's
marked as either the greatest event civilization has ever known or a
precursor to impending doom.
A meeting is set up between the aliens and representatives of the
United States, at which time the alien ambassador and his guards open
fire on the thousands of people gathered at a remote desert site.
The President (Nicholson) thinks this may have just been a "cultural
misunderstanding," so he beam a message into space inviting the aliens
back. They come back to address Congress and offer an apology, at
which time they again open fire, wiping out most of the legislative
branch of the U.S. government.
It finally sinks in that these aliens aren't nice guys and it's Earth
vs. Mars in an all-out war of the worlds.
I don't want to give too much of this film away because half the fun
is seeing it on the screen and not quite knowing what to expect next.
The special effects in the movie are very well done and the actors put
in a superb performance fighting little green men and spaceships that
weren't actually there. The Martians were created as three-dimensional
computer generated characters by Industrial Light and Magic, which has
previously done the effects on movies like TERMINATOR 2: JUDGEMENT
DAY, FORREST GUMP, and JURASSIC PARK.
"I was very lucky to have such great actors working against imaginary
green men," says Burton, whose credits also include PEE-WEE'S BIG
ADEVENTURE, BEETLEJUICE, BATMAN, and ED WOOD. "That was the most
surreal thing. All of these great actors came in, and they basically
reverted to play-acting. They all got into the spirit of it and it was
a joy to watch them."
If you are a sci-fi fan in general, the movie may leave you with a bad
taste in your mouth. But if you're a fan of all those old "B"
science-fiction movies from the 40s and 50s, you'll love the look of
MARS ATTACKS!. It's just dumb enough to work and just good enough to
hold your interest, although some of the scenes are a little slow
developing and leave you wishing they'd get on with it.
MARS ATTACKS! runs 105 minutes and is rated PG-13. The film stars:
Jack Nicholson, Glenn Close, Annette Benning, Pierce Brosnan, Danny
DeVito, Martin Short, Sarah Jressica Parker, Michael J. Fox, Rod
Steiger, Tom Jones, Lukas Haas, Natalie Portman, Jim Brown, Lisa Marie
and Sylvia Sidney (most of whom are disinigrated at various points in
the movie). Directed by Tim Burton. Produced by Tim Burton and Larry
Franco. Screen Story and Screenplay by Jonathan Gems.
This review, photos, upcoming attractions, links and more can be found
on my movie review web page at: http://www.calweb.com/~jblenkle/movies
- stop by and visit! Guest reviews welcomed - email me at
jblenkle@calweb.com

Author
Chad Polenz
1996, PG-13, 106 minutes [1 hour, 46 minutes]
starring: Jack Nicholson (President Dale, Art Land), Pierce Brosnan (Donald
Kessler), Martin Short (Jerry Ross), Jim Brown (Byron Williams), written by
Jonathan Gems, produced by Tim Burton, Larry J. Franco, directed by Tim
Burton, based on the Topps trading card series.
seen on home video by myself on Saturday, October 11, 1997 at 7 p.m.
It's funny how a punctuation mark can make or break a movie. From title
alone, you'd think "Mars Attacks!" would be a cartoony black comedy or some
kind of thrilling sci-fi movie, but to understand how the film really works,
just drop the exclamation point. Mars attacks - so what?
As with any alien invasion story, this film sets up its framework by showing
characters all over the country who are somehow connected. Of course numerous
sub-plots are established, but since this is a satire we're not asked to take
much of anything seriously. 
First there's Jack Nicholson who seems depressed playing the role of
President Dale - probably because Dale is the calmest character he's ever
played. Dale's staff is made up of generic characters including Pierce
Brosnan as Donald Kessler, a scientist who tells the president not to panic
when Martians surround Earth. Not surprisingly there's also the bossy,
hyperactive general who keeps saying we should "nuke 'em!" (this routine is
so old and unfunny it's almost sad). There's also Martin Short as White House
Press Secretary Jerry Ross who does his typical spiel (enough said). In fact,
it's really not worth mentioning all the characters here because there are so
many of them and they're all boring, familiar caricatures. They're meant to
be zany but the atmosphere is so dull nothing seems witty enough to be funny.
It takes over a half hour before any real action takes place, and although
the special effects are fantastic, they don't do much to save the lame
screenplay. The Martians are weird-looking aliens who blast humans with ray
guns and quack like ducks. It's obvious their malevolence is a parody of
aliens in films like these, but the film doesn't go far enough to make them
the funny cartoons they are meant to be. Remember how the evil "Gremlins" had
individual personalities? That should happen here, but doesn't. And even when
this is attempted, it doesn't really work.
This movie probably wasn't intended to be just a live-action cartoon and/or
a spoof of sci-fi movies, it's meant to be a humorous political statement
through satire. Burton attempts to make some themes about the obsession of
the media, but he doesn't nearly utilize the potential. After the halfway
point, the film is just small chunks of pointless scenes meant to be funny
but aren't. For example: the rednecks with guns who say, "They're not taking
the TV," or the hotel mogul Art Land (Nicholson again) who says, "Even aliens
gotta sleep somewhere."
"Mars Attacks!" is like a glass of flat soda where the taste is still there,
but there's no pep to it. The same thing happens here - it's a film with an
all-star cast, and a story that should be easy to satirize, but everybody
seems too bored to make an effort.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 160
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Jerry Saravia
The absolute worst is expected when a celebrated Hollywood director is given
the reins to a multi-million dollar project after having helmed a small-scale
cult film like "Ed Wood." I hate discussing what the budget of the film is but
"Mars Attacks!" cost $80 million to make, and was expected to gross over $120
million (which it didn't) - in other words, it should have been a financial
blockbuster. Truth is that when you hand the reins to a dark, twisted genius
like Tim Burton, anything goes. "Mars Attacks" did not fare well at the
box-office and it is just as well - it is a hilarious, witty, nihilistic satire
of those old Martian invasion movies from the 40's and 50's. This is not
"Independence Day." Its tongue is firmly placed in its cheek. 
"Mars Attacks!" begins when a flaming herd of cattle makes its way into a
typical all-American small-town - a flying saucer has just had an accidental
run-in, but are they here for peace? When the Martians land in the middle of
the Nevada desert to be greeted by The President of the U.S. (Jack Nicholson)
and other gleeful citizens, the aliens begin blasting everything in sight. When
the President decides to greet them at the White House sensing that this was
all a misunderstanding, the Martian ambassador proclaims, "We come in peace."
Unsurprisingly, the ambassador and his cohorts zap everyone with laser guns and
burn all Congress officials into toast. 
"Mars Attacks!" doesn't just end there. Burton brings on his magic bag of
tricks by mocking all those alien-invasion disaster movies and adding his own
bizarre sense of humor. Based on the gory Topps "Mars Attacks!" cards that were
banned in the 1950's, the movie is an assemblage of in-jokes, cheeky dialogue,
offbeat gags, dozens of special-effects, and sheer comic mayhem and
destruction. Nearly the whole cast is demolished but it filled me with
cartoonish delight to see how they are demolished. Watch Michael J. Fox melt
while trying to reach Sarah Jessica Parker's hand! See the incredible sight of
a dog's head being grafted on Parker's body! The movie reads like an
outrageously zany comic-book with amazing sights, indeed.
The cast is first-rate for this material. We have wicked Jack Nicholson as not
only the straight arrow leader of the U.S. but also as a sleazy, leering Vegas
businessman; Glenn Close as the nervous First Lady; Annette Bening as a New Age
freak obsessed with meeting the Martians; Danny DeVito as an unctuous lawyer
who tries to reason with them; Jim Brown as a former boxer who takes them on;
Sarah Jessica Parker and Michael J. Fox as unctuous media reporters; Lisa Marie
as the memorably slinky alien in disguise who woos Martin Short; and the
hilarious (alien-like) Sylvia Sydney as the elderly grandmother of the trailer
park family. There are dozens of other cameos, but the aforementioned actors
are the most facetious. 
What's most outrageous in Burton's fantasy are the Martians themselves - they
are green, skeletal aliens with large brains and bulging eyeballs protected by
a shield so they can breathe on Earth. They zap everyone and everything in
sight, laughing like gremlins at the expense of human lives. All they have to
say is "Ack, ack, ack, ack, ack." 
"Mars Attacks!" doesn't start off well. For one, the Martians grow tiresome
after awhile - all that "Ack, Ack" business is not very imaginative or funny.
But then, the movie incredibly gains a fast-paced, inventive comic spirit and
gets funnier by the minute. There are also some great lines, such as Lukas
Haas's response to the Martian's interpretation of earth: "Hey. He made the
international sign of the donut." I also like the President's heartwarming
"Can't we all get along" speech to the Martians. And seeing Tom Jones playing
himself in Vegas and confronting the aliens causes one to smile despite the
ridiculous scenario. 
"Mars Attacks!" is not Tim Burton's best film but it is more savagely funny
and subversive than "Beetlejuice" or "Batman." Burton has fun with the sci-fi
genre and cleverly attacks it at the same time. This is definitely no ordinary
studio blockbuster film.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
Faust667@aol.com 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Jack Nicholson, Annette Bening, Pierce Brosnan, Glenn Close,
Danny DeVito, Michael J. Fox.
Screenplay:  Jonathan Gems, based on MARS ATTACKS! by Topps.
Producers:  Tim Burton, Larry Franco.
Director:  Tim Burton.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, profanity, brief sexual situations).
Running Time:  105 minutes
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I really wanted MARS ATTACKS! to be the movie INDEPENDENCE DAY
wasn't.  Tim Burton's malevolent alien invasion saga faces such obvious
comparisons to 1996's other malevolent alien invasion saga that it would
have been a pleasure to find that this one was The Little B-Movie Homage
That Could, juxtaposed with The Big B-Movie Re-tread That Couldn't.  I
came ready for delight, and instead I found disappointment.  MARS ATTACKS!
is a more inventive film than INDEPENDENCE DAY, but it is also a sluggish
one, in addition to having a surprising streak of nastiness.  If you
didn't know MARS ATTACKS! and INDEPENDENCE DAY were made at about the
same time, you might swear that Tim Burton had a chip on his shoulder
about having to follow a blockbuster.
     MARS ATTACKS! begins with the discovery that flying saucers from Mars
are headed towards the earth in massive numbers.  President Jimmy Dale
(Jack Nicholson) is concerned and hawkish General Decker (Rod Steiger) is
ready to launch the nukes, but Dr. Donald Kessler (Pierce Brosnan) assures
everyone that such an advanced civilization is almost certain to be
peaceful.  The Martian visitors find the red carpet rolled out for a
diplomatic greeting in the Nevada desert, but the historic close encounter
turns into a bloodbath when the aliens open fire on humans.  The president
and Kessler believe that it was all the result of a cultural
misunderstanding, and try to make peace.  Unfortunately, it seems that the
visitors are only interested in making pieces, as they launch an all-out
attack on the earth.
     Like INDEPENDENCE DAY, MARS ATTACKS! follows groups of characters in
several different locations as they face the threat of extra terrestrial
assault.  In Las Vegas, recovering alcoholic/New Age adherent Barbara
(Annette Bening) joins forces with ex-boxer/casino photo opportunity Byron
(Jim Brown) and singer Tom Jones (himself); in Kansas, donut shop employee
Richie (Lukas Haas) joins forces with his senile grandmother (Sylvia
Sidney).  What is surprising is that these stories are played so straight,
and with nearly as little character development as INDEPENDENCE DAY.  Each
character is given an eccentric moment, after which he or she generally
disappears either entirely for a long time.  No one really gets a chance
to _do_ anything, notably Natalie Portman (re-visiting Winona Ryder's
morose teen from BEETLEJUICE as the First Daughter).  Pierce Brosnan and
Sarah Jessica Parker are entertaining as the unctuous Kessler and a dim
fashion reporter, respectively, but their appearance is most memorable
because they share a tender love scene as severed heads.
     That moment highlights what is both best and worst about MARS
ATTACKS!, which is the perverse visual humor.  Burton tosses out some
truly twisted gems along with just-plain-silliness, and the deliberately
cheesy visual effects are both effective on their own and as a source for
an internal joke involving a Godzilla film.  The problem is that nothing
really builds in MARS ATTACKS!; the jokes are often stand-alone vignettes
un-related to anything which precedes them or anything which follows them,
making for a film which jerks along unsteadily with little momentum.  MARS
ATTACKS! is based on a series of trading cards by Topps, and appropriately
enough that is the way the movie feels:  you flip over one scene, chuckle
at it, then forget it almost before you flip over the next one.
     The one thing Burton and screenwriter Jonathan Gems do much better
than INDEPENDENCE DAY is allow us to get to know the aliens, and what a
bunch of leering interplanetary sociopaths they are.  The scenes on board
the flying saucers show the Martians' delight at duping humanity and
wreaking havoc, and while the malicious Martians provide their share of
laughs, the whole concept is strangely mean-spirited.  The entire invasion
consists of variations on the aliens seducing humans with a friendly word,
a teary eyeball or a pleasing form, then finding new and creative ways of
stabbing them in the back (sometimes literally).  Burton almost seems to
share this smirking disregard for his characters (and an unexplainable
hatred of birds) as he reduces them to scorched skeletons in scenes which
may be too graphic for youngsters.  There is plenty of imagination in MARS
ATTACKS! (the aliens' downfall certainly does not involve a computer
virus), but the ideas prickle rather than tickle.  Something seemed to be
annoying Tim Burton when he made MARS ATTACKS!, and he's probably going
to be more annoyed if audiences decide it isn't the movie INDEPENDENCE DAY
was.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
A fleet of flying saucers had set off from Mars and surrounded
Earth. The President (Nicholson) wants to greet them with open
arms, reassured by his chief scientist's (Brosnan) claims that
every advanced civilisation is peaceful. His chief of the armed
forces (Steiger) seethes anger, asking for a pre-emptive strike.
Those little green guys just can't be trusted.
"Mars Attacks" came out too close on the tail of
"In-duh-pendence Day" for the former to be intended to be a send
up of the latter.  But that's what it is, a boisterous
celebration of all the cliches of oldtime (and not so old) scifi,
with angst-torn Presidents, intrepid reporters, gun-nuts,
peacenik scientists, whooping and creaking "electronic
tonalities" by Danny Elfman and of course the sadistic,
treacherous Martians.  At times the film even has that bleached
out, over-exposed look of an 50's SF film.
The Martians are a pure delight. Conversing in a strange
honking language, with bulbous and veiny skulls, exploding in a
shower of green ichor, they cheat, they lie, they gleefully run
riot with rayguns (with deathbeams of two different colours, no
less), monotonally chanting stock phrases: "Don't run away - we
are your friends".  Their computer animation is a triumph - it
may not look realistic (come on - dayglo little green men in blue
suits?)  but it is very effective. They twitch and sneer and cry
and laugh, in a completely expressive way. Their tinny flying
saucers and gothic interiors are also wonderful.
"Mars Attacks" is loaded, even over-loaded, with name actors
of whom some do amazingly good work for such a silly movie.  Jack
Nicholson acts for perhaps the first time in years, putting in a
surprisingly complex portrayal of the President.  Pierce Brosnan
and Sarah Jessica Parker are amusing, if one note, as a
pipe-puffing boffin and air-headed reporter respectively.
Annette Bening confirms that she is perhaps one of the most
under-valued actresses in Hollywood with her alcoholic new-ager.
Rod Steiger delights as a warhawk general screaming "Attack!
Attack!  Kill!  Kill!".
But this is perhaps where the big problem with "Mars Attacks"
is: there's just too much going on with little of it getting
anywhere.  The opportunity to use all these big stars seems to
have clouded Burton's judgement (and he is not a disciplined
filmmaker at the best of times), with each getting their five
minutes of screen time.  Bening, delightful as she is, and
Nicholson's second role (as a Vegas entrepreneur) should have been
snipped altogether, as could Glen Close (in a thankless role as
as the First Lady), Pam Grier and Michael J Fox.  This might have
given the remaining sections the development they sorely need at
times.
Sometimes rushed or crowded, often batty and probably for movie
and SF fans only (others are unlikely to appreciate the jokes),
"Mars Attacks" would make for a great video night with the right
audience, cheering it and themselves on.  [***/interesting] and
"coruscating beams of destruction" on the Sid and Nancy scale.
"Mars Attacks"
Directed by Tim Burton
Music by Danny Elfman.
Starring Jack Nicholson, Glen Close, Michael J Fox, Sarah
   Jessica Parker,Annette Bening, Jim Brown, Pam Grier, Danny DeVito,
   Pierce Brosnan, Tom Jones, Lukas Haas, Lisa Marie, Martin Short,
   Rod Steiger, Joe Don Baker, Natalie Portman.
Released 1996.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jack Nicholson, Glenn Close, Annette Bening, Pierce Brosnan, 
      Sarah Jessica Parker, Martin Short, Jim Brown, Pam Grier, 
      Michael J. Fox, Danny DeVito, Lukas Haas, Sylvia Sidney, 
      Rod Steiger, Paul Winfield, Natalie Portman, Tom Jones, 
      Joe Don Baker
Director: Tim Burton
Producers: Tim Burton and Larry Franco
Screenplay: Jonathan Gems
Cinematography: Peter Suschitzky
Music: Danny Elfman
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     What do you get if you use Tim Burton, the inspired and irreverent 
director of BATMAN and ED WOOD, to combine an invasion force of bug-
eyed, big-brained Martians, a star-studded cast featuring some of the 
biggest names in Hollywood, and a huge special effects budget?  Sadly, 
one of 1996's most disappointing motion pictures.  MARS ATTACKS!, 
Burton's half-satire/half-homage to '50s B-movies, is a stillborn affair 
that could have been -- and should have been -- a whole lot hipper and 
funnier.  If you've seen the two-minute theatrical trailer, you've seen 
nearly everything that's worthwhile in the feature.
     MARS ATTACKS! depicts a Martian invasion of three parts of the 
United States:  Washington D.C., Las Vegas, and the plains of Kansas.  
Along the way, we meet a gallery of underdeveloped (or, in many cases, 
completely undeveloped) would-be-characters.  In Washington, there's 
President James Dale (Jack Nicholson), his wife, Martha (Glenn Close), 
and his daughter, Taffy (Natalie Portman).  In the face of the attack, 
the Commander-in-Chief is not-so-ably assisted by a bumbling staff, 
which includes a sex-obsessed speech writer (Martin Short), a "nuke-em-
now" general (Rod Steiger) and his peace-loving counterpart (Paul 
Winfield), and a clueless scientist (Pierce Brosnan) who knows nothing 
but says a lot.  Meanwhile, in Vegas, the Martians encounter real estate 
mogul Art Land (Nicholson), his alcoholic-turned-spiritualist wife, 
Barbara (Annette Bening), a rude gambler (Danny DeVito) who could care 
less about the invasion, a former heavyweight champion (Jim Brown) 
trying to get back together with his wife (Pam Grier), and the 
irrepressible singer, Tom Jones (himself).  In Kansas, we're introduced 
to a smaller group:  teenager Richie Norris (Lucas Haas), his daffy 
grandmother (Sylvia Sidney), and his gun-loving father (Joe Don Baker).  
Finally, there are the two New York-based reporters who cover the 
Martian situation:  hair-obsessed Jason Stone (Michael J. Fox) and his 
vacuous girlfriend, Natalie West (Sarah Jessica Parker).
     With such a mammoth cast, it's not surprising that only a few 
actors get more than token attention. Even Glenn Close, who is billed 
second, has a total of ten minutes of screen time and only a handful of 
lines (memorizing dialogue must have been exceptionally undemanding). 
Jack Nicholson, who has by far the most number of scenes, splits his 
time between two personas, halving (rather than doubling) his 
effectiveness. There's absolutely nothing in any of these characters for 
an audience to latch on to. 
     There are a few nicely-executed comic performances.  Natalie 
Portman gives us a bored First Daughter who has perhaps the best line 
(taken in context) in the entire movie ("I guess it wasn't the bird").  
Rod Steiger effectively emulates George C. Scott's war-mongering General 
Turgidson from DR. STRANGELOVE.  Pierce Brosnan and Sarah Jessica Parker 
make for a fun-but-brainless (or maybe that should be "body-less") pair.  
And Jim Brown does a fine job playing off of his Blaxploitation image by 
punching out aliens left and right.
     MARS ATTACKS! contains a number of genuinely funny moments that 
occur both through the dialogue and as a result of the visual approach 
(there's a Godzilla cameo, the "bowling over" of Stonehenge, and a 
sequence where the Martians toy with the Washington Monument before 
toppling it).  Unfortunately, too many attempts at comedy don't succeed, 
creating long stretches between laughs.  Another problem is that, on 
more than one occasion, when Burton finds a gag that works, he overuses 
it.  And, instead of going for truly corrosive, DR. STRANGELOVE-type 
satire, the focus is on less-vicious, more obvious forms of mocking.  
     In addition to its other faults, MARS ATTACKS! is not well-edited.  
In fact, there are portions that border on incoherent.  The movie 
lurches disjointedly from scene-to-scene as the tone careens from turgid 
to fast-paced.  Plot doesn't really matter, which is a good thing.  
Burton has used a 1962 Topps trading card series as his inspiration, 
combining WAR OF THE WORLDS-like Martians with images and scenarios 
familiar from bad 1950s alien invasion flicks.  Many of the special 
effects (especially those involving flying saucers and mass destruction) 
have an intentionally cheesy edge, and Danny Elfman's score contains 
throwback elements.  The overall problem is that the idea of MARS 
ATTACKS! works a lot better on paper than in practice.  
     A word has to be said about the relationship between MARS ATTACKS! 
and this summer's phenomenally successful INDEPENDENCE DAY.  Although 
the two films were developed separately and during the same time frame, 
the temptation exists to say that this film is satirizing the earlier 
blockbuster.  While that's not the case, MARS ATTACKS! does lampoon the 
genre that spawned ID4.  Of course, that won't prevent the Warner 
Brothers marketing department from connecting the two.
     I was anticipating a lot from MARS ATTACKS!, but what I got was a 
shell of my expectations.  There are too many characters, too little 
story, and too much unfunny and repetitious material.  The first half is 
painfully slow, forcing us to suffer through the needlessly laborious 
exercise of meeting and learning something about each of the characters.  
Despite Burton's effort and ingenuity, there's never an effective comic 
or sci-fi payoff.  From time-to-time, MARS ATTACKS! gives us tantalizing 
glimpses of brilliance, but those moments only illustrate how flawed and 
unsatisfactory the rest of the film is.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Chuck Dowling
Mars Attacks! (1996) ***** out of ***** - C:Jack Nicholson, Glenn Close,
Annette Bening, Martin Short, Danny DeVito, Rod Steiger, Pierce Brosnan,
Sarah Jessica Parker, Michael J. Fox, Jim Brown, Pam Grier, Joe Don Baker,
Natalie Portman, Christina Applegate, Lisa Marie, Tom Jones.
This is director Tim Burton's finest film to date. Many will compare this
tale of Martians who invade Earth to Independence Day, but even though the
stories are similar, they really are two distinctly different films. However
as a whole, Mars Attacks is much more entertaining than ID4, and I loved
ID4.
You really have to be in the right frame of mind to enjoy this film. It is
completely wacked-out and unlike anything you've ever seen. Once the silly
tone of the film is set, it's easy to just sit back and throw logic out the
window because logic and comedy just don't mix.
The plot is simple: Martians invade the Earth. But it's different than any
other invasion film. Usually it's the evil aliens versus the heroic humans.
This time however, it's the goofy aliens versus the equally goofy humans.
The Martians, who are all computer generated, are just about the funniest
things I've seen in a long time. They look funny, they move funny, and their
"language" is hilarious.
And about the special effects. The effects in Mars Attacks! are just about
the most flawless ones I've seen to date. The computer animation of the
martians combined with the goofy personalities they are given makes them
seem 100% real.
There are just a couple of scenes that don't work, mainly those involving
Sarah Jessica Parker and Pierce Brosnan on board an alien ship. Also, Glenn
Close overacts tremendously in her (thankfully) very limited screen time, so
much so that I actually applauded silently when her character meets her
demise. But there are many big laughs in the film, as I said, if you are in
the right mood. Could it have been funnier? Certainly. Was it funny enough?
Yes. Was I entertained? Absolutely.
On a personal note, I'd like to thank whomever cast Rod Steiger (my favorite
actor) in the film as war-crazy General Decker. Finally, after many very
small parts in direct to video garbage and minor TV roles, Steiger is back
on the big screen in a real movie that many people will see. While he's not
given the type of role that you can give a real "performance" in, he does
the job well and has some good lines of dialogue. The preview audience I saw
the film with really seemed to enjoy him.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
MARS ATTACKS! (1996)
Jack Nicholson, Glenn Close, Annette Bening, Pierce Brosnan, Danny DeVito,
 Martin Short, Sarah Jessica Parker, Michael J. Fox, Rod Steiger, Tom 
Jones, Lukas Haas, Natalie Portman, Jim Brown, Pam Grier, Paul Winfield, 
Sylvia Sidney, Lisa Marie, Joe Don Baker, Christina Applegate, Barbet 
Schroeder. Directed by Tim Burton.
Rated PG-13, **** stars (out of ***** stars)
"Mars Attacks!" is the kind of movie your parents desperately tried to 
keep you from seeing when you were little. In fact, this deliriously 
trashy film from director Tim Burton may be the ultimate "this-junk-will-
rot-your-brain" movie ever made. Go see it as quickly as possible.
Burton, who presented such quirky gems as "Pee-wee's Big Adventure", 
"Beetlejuice", and "Edward Scissorhands," as well as the first two 
"Batman" films, based "Mars Attacks!" on a series of trading cards issued 
by the Topps Company in 1962. The cards, which showed bug-eyed Martians 
invading Earth, were quickly pulled off the market due to outrage over 
the lurid images of violence, particularly a card depicting a Martian 
using a ray gun to disintegrate a dog. Burton acquired the rights to the 
card series and began work on turning the images into a movie. He boasted 
that "We developed the script painstakingly by taking the cards and 
throwing them on the ground, and picking the ones we liked."
His haphazard vision is brilliantly realized on screen, through rich 
cinematography, art direction built around primary colors, stunning 
computer animation, and a delightfully overwrought score by longtime 
collaborator Danny Elfman. This is great eye and ear candy. 
After a gorgeous opening sequence showing the Martian armada approaching 
Earth, Burton spends considerable time introducing the massive all-star 
cast, which includes Jack Nicholson, Glenn Close, Annette Bening, Pierce 
Brosnan, Danny DeVito, Martin Short, Sarah Jessica Parker, Michael J. Fox,
 Rod Steiger, Paul Winfield, Lukas Haas, Jim Brown and Tom Jones. In 
classic disaster movie fashion, the characters are spread over several 
locations, primarily Washington DC, Las Vegas, and a small town in Kansas.
 The cast play their characters broadly, as human caricatures. Burton 
recognized that, had they played it straight, it would have been 
difficult for the audience to relax and enjoy the cartoonish murder and 
mayhem.
The real stars of the film are the Martians, and the fun kicks in when 
they finally arrive. President Nicholson informs the country that 
extraterrestrials are on their way in a hilariously vague and inept 
speech. The Martian's initial landing in Pahrump, Nevada turns violent 
over an apparent "cultural misunderstanding." Following hasty 
negotiations by the hapless President, the aliens land in Washington to 
address Congress. In short order, their deadly intentions become crystal 
clear and full scale planetary war begins.
Burton tries the patience of the audience with the lengthy set-up, but 
delivers a whopping pay-off. The Martian assault is thrilling, 
technically dazzling, and extremely funny. In scene after scene, Burton's 
wonderfully bizarre vision virtually leaps from the screen. The computer-
generated aliens are mesmerizing as they cackle with maniacal glee at 
humanity's attempts to make peace, then skitter around the planet, 
incinerating people with the coolest death rays I've ever seen. 
Highlights among the film's many striking images include the destruction 
of Las Vegas (incorporating the real implosion of the Landmark Hotel and 
Casino), Lisa Marie's unearthly gliding movements as an undercover 
Martian temptress, a flying saucer playing games with the Washington 
Monument, and a love scene between two victims of the Martians' twisted 
experiments. The latter will certainly go down as one of the strangest, 
and funniest, images in the history of film.
Burton succeeds in maintaining a consistently good-natured humorous tone. 
The film is an comedic homage to sci-fi and disaster films, not a satire. 
Even in the wonderfully cheesy closing scene, Burton resists the urge to 
smirk. His skilled hand also makes the many scenes of death and 
destruction easy to take. There is no malice in his vision, this is 
simply the work of a naughty little boy. 
Despite the very slow start, "Mars Attacks!" delivers the goods. Over the 
years, Tim Burton has presented many wonderfully peculiar moments in 
uneven films. "Mars Attacks!", in all of its gory, goofy splendor, is his 
best work yet. And trust me, your parents would be appalled.

Author
Paul Miller
As I went to the ticket window, I found myself very excited about Tim
Burton's new film, Mars Attacks!.  I thought this was going to be one of
the best films I have ever seen.  This is why they invented theatrical
trailers.  They make it look like the movie will be entertaining,
energetic, and fun, but this isn't always the case.
I'm sure if you've seen the trailer at one time or another, you would be
compelled to see this movie.  This is what sucked me in.  Congrats
Warner Bros., this is a super trailer.
Enough about the trailer, on with the movie.
The movies' first 45 minutes or so are about the most boring I've ever
seen.  Basically, it introduces most of the characters and manages to
kill off a few.  I was very disappointed when Michael J. Fox, who played
a news reporter, was killed off in the first half hour.  This set a sad
tone on the movie that would not be soon forgotten.
Anyway, the Martians surround Earth and they send us a signal that they
are friendly.  They land in a desert in Nevada and after a dove was let
off as a sign of peace, the ambush begins.
After a fake apology, the Martians take out Congress and the rest of the
movie unfolds as you might think, with different personalities joining
the mix.
This movie (in terms of structure) could be compared to From Dusk till
Dawn, in that there are two stories in one movie.  Dusk was critized
because the beginning developed characters masterfully then they got to
the bar only to fight vampires.  What I mean is the second part of this
movie is what I thought the whole darn thing would be like, funny,
imaginative, and hip.  But this is not what happened.
If the whole movie could have been like the second half, we could be
talking classic, but unfortunately this didn't happen.  As much as I
enjoyed the second part, the terseness of the first part overshadows
this and makes the movie worse than it should have been.
Another thing that upset me to a point was how the filmakers mislead you
before you even went inside the theater.  Glenn Close was given second
billing when actually she was only given about 15-20 minutes of screen
time.  Another thing was Danny DeVito was given fifth billing when he
was in the movie no more than three minutes.  Heck, Tom Jones and Jim
Brown were in the movie more.
All these criticisms seem make it seem like I hated this movie.  This
was not the case.  Simply, the movie was not as good as it could have
been, or actually should have been.

Author
Andy Wright
Let's not mince words here; Director Tim Burton's big budget sci-fi
spoof is, at first glance, a real mess.  After an awesome credit
sequence, the first half of the movie wobbles along like one of Ed
Wood's spaceships, with an all-star cast (including Jack Nicholson in
2 roles, Glenn Close, Michael J. Fox and a multitude of others)
seemingly unsure of what exactly is expected of them. (Only Pierce
Brosnan, as a perfect distillation of every stiffly handsome eggheaded
scientist from the great `50s monster movies, really seems to be in on
the joke.) Not that this narrative sloppiness is exactly out of
character for this director (Let's face it, based on prior evidence
like BATMAN RETURNS and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS, the odds of Tim Burton
ever turning out a film with a completely coherent storyline are about
as likely as Stanley Kubrick making a movie about kickboxing), but
it's still disappointing, considering all the talent involved.  But
just when you're about to give up hope, suddenly the aliens land, the
gags start flying faster and faster, and the movie gets great in a
hurry. Whenever the bubble-domed, big-brained Martians are on screen,
this movie achieves the kind of surreal, anything goes quality
previously found only in the classic Warner Brothers cartoons or the
best issues of MAD magazine, as Burton and co.  tweak virtually every
invasion flick ever made. (One of the best gags - involving the
Washington Monument, a malevolent UFO, and a slow moving Boy Scout
troop - is lifted directly from the Ray Harryhausen classic EARTH vs
THE FLYING SAUCERS.) Not all of the jokes work, but the ones that do
make it more than worth your while (the Martians' um - unique method
of dealing with a nuclear missile is far and away my favorite movie
moment of '96).  By the time that Tom Jones and Jim Brown have joined
forces to stomp some alien butt, this movie has attained a giggly type
of weirdness that's impossible to resist; it left me ack-ing for days.
Copyright 1997: The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Author
Scott Mendelson
Jack Nicholson, Glenn Close, Annette Benning, Pierce Brosnan
Jim Brown, Sarah Jessica Parker, Lucas Haas, Natalie Portman
Tom Jones, Sylvia Sidney, Rod Steiger, Paul Winfield,
Martin Short, Michael J. Fox, Danny Devito, Joe Don Baker,
Pam Grier, Lisa Marie, Jack Nicholson, The Martians
This article should probably be taken with a grain of salt due to the
fact that I believe Tim Burton to be a God among men, incapable of error
and my idol in the filmmaking world.
"Ack-Ack-Ack-Ack!"  translation:  Mars Attacks! is not only the
funniest film of  1996(but, for artistic merit, Fargo is tops for 96),
but the funniest film that I've seen since Airplane!!  It's a terrific
mixture of top-notch writing and acting, THE best computer animation I
have ever seen, and, best of all, a healthy dose of VERY macabre bad
taste.
After thousands of martian ships are spotted surrounding Earth, the
President(Jack Nicholson), the First Lady(Glenn Close), the
scientist(Pierce Brosnan), the press secretary(Martin Short), and the
generals(Rod Steiger and Paul Winfield) try to decide what to do. 
Brosnan and Winfield suggest a peaceful welcome while Steiger suggests
they declare war on these bug-eyed, big brained "things".  An official
meeting is set up in a desert, several of the martians step out to greet
the thousands of on-lookers, and they declare that they come in peace.
At this point, they whip out their ray guns and take out hundreds of
earthlings, including several of the big stars. 
In fact, one of the main pleasures of this epic is the growing
realization that few of your favorite stars are going to make it to the
end credits. This being a Tim Burton film, the survivors consists of
those whose standing in society is lesser.  While politicians and
entrepreneurs are blown to bits, a down on his luck boxer and a southern
kid, who rush to save their grandmothers, live.  As usual, Burton sides
with the outsiders.  We love him for it.
Be warned, this is a very, very sick movie.  Millions of innocent people
die horrible deaths: men, women, children(a group of cub scouts in one
really funny but twisted scene), none are spared!  And yes, unlike ID4,
this flick has the guts to kill animals!  And, again, unlike ID4, where
popcorn was thrown at my head for doing so, you can root for the aliens,
because Burton is rooting for them too.
        Technically, the martians look great. With greenish-blue skin tone,
bulging eyes, and huge brains, they don't speak English, they do
understand when earthlings talk.  They speak in some kind of gibberish,
and Earth uses a translator to communicate with them: "ACK, ACK, ACK,
ACK, ACK!"  translation: "We Come in Peace!"
        The best thing about this film is that, unlike most invasion flicks,
where they just feel like props, the aliens actually have a personality.
The FX are so convincing, and the invaders are so unique in nature that
the martians become full-blown characters.  The martians are not truly
evil, but fiendish little pranksters who basically set out to destroy
the Earth because it'll be a fun way to kill a weekend(pun intended).
They actually take time to enjoy the mayhem while performing demented
experiments on those poor earthlings(wait till you see what happens to
Pierce Brosnan and Sarah Jessica Parker) and destroying many a famous
landmark(the Easter Island statues, the Eiffel Tower, etc.) with glee.
At times, they seem to be like a distant cousin to the Gremlins, but a
lot smarter. 
        While the film's first 40 minutes introduces its many human characters
and thus, is occasionally dull(grade: C+) the last hour is pure
"Burton-ion" craziness(A+++).  And although I wanted the martians to
triumph,  the way that the martians finally meet their doom is one of
the decade's best gags(and certainly more creative than ID4's: "let's
give them a computer virus" snore).   While obviously not for all
tastes, the film has  probably got the most creative way ever for
disposing of a hydrogen bomb.                                                                                                A+
Note:  Despite my many objections, it may be worth noting that I did
enjoy Independence Day as fun, slick, big-budget, garbage.  But Ronald
Emmerich  is no Tim Burton.
