Title
Review for Stalingrad (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     From the producer of the highly acclaimed film about German subs
in World War II, DAS BOOT, we have STALINGRAD.  Like DAS BOOT, it
attempts realistically to portray the rank and file of the German
soldiers during WW II.  Like the even better movie DAS BOOT, which I
thought was fascinating, STALINGRAD is a chillingly effective picture.
The grunts who fought on the German side had a lot of misery to bear,
and this movie puts you in their boots.  STALINGRAD by director Joseph
Vilsmaier is an effective anti-war film that has more in common with
ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT than with any other film.
     DAS BOOT develops its story by focusing in on the commander of
U-boat so that we get to know him personally.  We then learn of his
crew and the small world around him in his claustrophobically tiny
submarine.  In contrast, STALINGRAD is an ensemble piece (Fritz Reiser
(Dominique Horwitz), Hans von Witzland (Thomas Kretschmann), Manfred
"Rollo" Rohleder (Jochen Nickel), GeGe (Sebastian Rudolph), Irina (Dana
Vavrova), General Hentz (Martin Benrath) and Otto (Sylvester Groth))
where we don't really know any one soldier as much as we get into their
collective psyche.  The film is so anti-war, that you leave the theater
wanting to find a newspaper, pick the first war you read about, and
leave to go protest against it.  Very effective.
     STALINGRAD, as you may will have guessed, tells the story of one
of the bloodiest battles of World War II, the German siege of
Stalingrad.  We become brothers with the German grunts as they are
pinned down fighting for their lives while freezing and starving.  We
see the humanity on both sides during a brief truce to pick up the dead
bodies, and we witness the mistrust as the truce is shattered.  We
learn that "God be with you" was on the German army's belt buckles, and
we pray with them before battle.  It seems that they thought God was on
their side too.  They even sing "Oh Tannenbaum" on the way to one of
their battles.
     Gore, mein Gott, does this show have gore.  Given what they were
depicting, I do not think the violence is gratuitous, but you may want
to bring one of those airline barf bags with you to the show.  You will
see lots of limbs blow away with bloody cartilage dangling in the wind.
In one scene we see a war time amputation with a less than sharp knife.
Blood flows everywhere.  There is no glorification of war in this movie
whatsoever.
     All of the gore notwithstanding, much of the show is about the
German soldiers trying to survive the cold and keep from starving to
death.  There is a long sequence about some of them trying to go AWOL
that is reminiscent of CATCH 22.
     The show is genuine in its emotions.  When a young soldier
accidentally shots his friend, he wants to be shot himself.  An old
timer consoles him by telling him, don't worry, I've done it myself.
     The cinematography (Rolf Greim, Klaus Moderegger, and Peter Von
Haller) deserves lots of awards.  Two of the best images are the red
hot of the explosions in the fight in the factory and the bleak images
of the tank battle in the snow.  In the tank battle, we have Russian
tanks being fought by German foot soldiers who were German prisoners
for screwing up in a previous battle.  One of the soldiers asks, "where
is our artillery" and the other answers, "you're the artillery!"
     Although the film is realistic, the music (Norbert Juergen
Schneider) is overdone and would fit better in one of those pseudo-epic
films.  The costumes (Ute Hofinger) and the sets (Jindrich Goetz and
Wolfgang Hundhammer) effectively illustrate the horror of that time and
are excellent.
     Like DAS BOOT, the small items add realism.  As both sides are
trapped in a factory building, the Germans get their letters from home
and their inedible slop that goes for food.  One letter from home is a
classic Dear John; another brings the latest soccer scores.
     The German soldiers laugh at the lies in Hitler's broadcasts.  He
paints a winning picture of the battle with light resistance, but they
know the Russians are fighting hard.  The movie depicts all Germans
above the level of captain to be sadists.  Although Russia was ruled at
the time by the equally sadistic Stalin, the Russian high command is
never mentioned.  In a typical scene, starving German soldiers in
German prisons on Christmas Day are offered a piece of bread as a
treat, but must agree to "say pretty please" to the evil German officer
in charge first.
     STALINGRAD runs 2:12, but the effective editing by Hannes Nikel
makes the time go by fast.  It is in German with easy to read English
subtitles.  This gut wrenching film is unrated, and knowing the MPAA
they would probably give it an R.  Personally, I think it is definitely
NC-17.  It would probably be okay for mature teenagers over 16.  I
recommend this show to you, but I think it sad to say that probably few
people will ever see it.  The theme of this movie cries out to be seen.
Finally, I award the film ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Thomas Kretschmann, Dominique Horwitz, Jochen Nickel, 
      Sebastian Rudolph, Dana Vavrova
Director: Joseph Vilsmaier
Producers: Hanno Huth, Guenter Rohrbach, and Joseph Vilsmaier
Screenplay: Juergen Buescher, Johannes M.M. Heide, and Joseph Vilsmaier
Cinematography: Rolf Greim, Klaus Moderegger, and Peter Von Haller
Music: Norbert Juergen Schneider
U.S. Distributor: Vision International
In German with subtitles
     It's so easy -- too easy, in fact -- for a war movie to turn into a 
celebration of blood, death, and mayhem.  Exploitation of wars and their 
dehumanizing affects has become a staple of American action films (FIRST 
BLOOD, MISSING IN ACTION).  Occasionally, however, a rare and powerful 
war movie reaches the screen -- one that delivers a visceral anti-
violence message with the force of a punch to the gut.  STALINGRAD, a 
1993 German/Swedish co-production from Guenter Rohrbach, the producer of 
DAS BOOT, is such a picture.  In the tradition of APOCALYPSE NOW, 
PLATOON, and A MIDNIGHT CLEAR, it uses graphic violence to condemn war.
     STALINGRAD, which takes place between August 1942 and January 1943, 
chronicles Hitler's failed invasion of the Russian city -- one of the 
miscalculations that lost the war for Germany.  More than one million 
died in the bloody struggle, the fatalities caused by wounds, disease, 
and the same bitter cold that stopped Napolean's forces more than a 
century earlier.  STALINGRAD faithfully re-creates the principal 
historical aspects of the battle while telling a more intimate tale 
through the eyes of a small group of German characters.
     They are Hans Witzland (Thomas Kretschmann), a clean-cut lieutenant 
making his first trip to the front, and Manfred "Rollo" Rohleder (Jochen 
Nickel) and Fritz Reiser (Dominique Horwitz), two hardened veteran 
enlisted men.  Together, these three make the long, weary trek down the 
road of senseless violence and death, losing bits of their humanity 
along the way.  The horrors of STALINGRAD irrevocably destroy these men, 
strafing their souls and crushing their spirits.  By the end, it no 
longer matters whether they live or die -- in almost every way, they're 
already gone.
     The psychologically destructive power of war is most clearly 
illustrated through the changes undergone by Hans.  When STALINGRAD 
opens, he is a patriot serving the Fuhrer and Fatherland 
unquestioningly.  Soon, however, loyalty to his country is supplanted by 
loathing as he sees the inhumane treatment accorded to Russian prisoners 
of war.  Then, as the battle becomes desperate, with the German army 
losing scores just to capture another street, the most basic of animal 
drives -- the need to survive -- asserts itself.  Ultimately, even that 
runs dry, and Hans finds himself groping to save a tiny vestige of the 
man he once was.  
     There isolated moments of human triumph in STALINGRAD -- like a 
Russian and German exchanging bread for meat, and Hans setting a woman 
free instead of raping her.  But these are exceptions.  STALINGRAD's 
disturbing power comes through its portrayal of the horrific -- 
decapitations, amputations, grizzly deaths, and mutilations.  Nothing is 
gratuitous; everything is effective.  Director Joseph Vilsmaier pulls us 
into the trenches with these men, who are no different from soldiers on 
any side in any war.  STALINGRAD is packed with tension, and the battle 
sequences are startlingly realistic, but it's the inescapable message 
that lingers.  

Author
Gareth Rees
     There is a documentary that gets shown from time to time on the
BBC consisting of archive film footage taken by the Russians during the
siege of Stalingrad.  After seeing these pictures of Russian soldiers
desperately defending every street, every building, every room of their
town (and dying in the hundreds of thousands) no fictional account of
the battle for Stalingrad can ever have the same emotional power.
     However, director Joseph Vilsmaier has made a courageous attempt,
courageous both because the current political climate in Germany may
not be appreciative of an epic account of one of Germany's worst
military defeats and because it is a difficult task to engender the
audience's sympathy for soldiers fighting for the army that killed
twenty million Russians.
     The film focuses on Hans Witzland, an officer in the German Sixth
Army newly arrived in Stalingrad.  Concerned about the treatment of
POWs he is branded a Russian-lover and from that point we see his
disillusionment with the war grow as he sees corruption among the
higher officers, worthless words from the leaders back in Germany, his
men provided with medals instead of food, and the terrible carnage on
both sides.
     Some of the scenes are very effective--a stupidly suicidal attack
on a machine-gun emplacement; soldiers hysterically attempting to get
medical help for their dying comrade; soldiers in a penal battalion
prodding gingerly with sticks at a snow-bound road in an attempt to
find anti-personnel mines.  There is a marvelously epic feel of the
tragedy of the war produced by the gradual attrition of Witzland's
company.  He arrives in Stalingrad with four hundred men, and
inexorably disease, frostbite and combat take their toll until at the
end all that remain are two men holding each other as they die of
cold.
     But the film founders on its lack of characterisation; the
characters aren't differentiated or individual enough to emerge from
their uniforms and from the horror of their experiences to stand out as
people and to enable the audience to empathise with them.  Instead of
being a harrowing and emotional experience, STALINGRAD is merely
numbing.
