Title
Review for Gridlock'd (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     GRIDLOCK'D is a seemingly low budget film that covers the same
ground as TRAINSPOTTING, but not as imaginatively.  Both films are
comedies about heroin addicts.  Almost all critics, but not this one,
loved TRAINSPOTTING.  The main claim to fame for GRIDLOCK'D is that it
stars the murdered rap singer Tupac Shakur.  The picture is the
directorial and screenwriting debut of the actor Vondie Curtis-Hall
(Captain Prince in the recent ROMEO AND JULIET), who also plays the
part of the major bad guy, D-Reper.
     After Cookie (played by Thandie Newton who was the star of
FLIRTING) has a drug overdose and appears on the verge of death, Spoon
(Shakur) decides to give up drugs.  He even coerces his friend Stretch
(Tim Roth) to give up drugs too.
     The premise of the show is a Kafkaesque tale of their inability to
fight through the bureaucracy to get on Medicaid so they can get into a
drug detox center.  After they sell a non-existent camcorder to
D-Reper, the parallel plot in the show has D-Reper and his henchman
(Tom Towles) trying to kill Spoon and Stretch.
     As they have trouble getting their Medicaid cards, they enjoy many
a pleasurable moment shooting heroin up their arms.  The show never
made me believe for a minute that these guys had any intention of
giving up something that sent them into such ecstasy.  Spoon, for
example, talks in glowing terms about "his first time" -- to shoot up
that is.  "It was like going back to the womb," he dreamily describes
it.  "It was peace."
     I did believe that they were finding the government rules to be an
infinite maze and government workers to be lazy and uncaring.  Of
course, that Stretch would scream and cuss them out probably did not
motivate the clerks whose help they needed.  My favorite scene in the
entire film has one clerk using their own language back at them to tell
them off.
     Although highly derivative, many of the scenes are funny.  One
features a blind Vietnam vet (Howard Hesseman) with a dog named Nixon.
He trashes a social services office and accidentally provides the cover
for our protagonists to make a fast exit from the law.
     Too much of the film is one long chase scene.  At least we do get
the great director and sometime actor John Sayles in a cameo role as
"Cop # 1."
     GRIDLOCK'D runs 1:31.  It is rated R for frequent hard drug usage
of various forms, for violence, for lots of profanity and for nudity.
I do not think the picture is appropriate for teenagers.  Personally,
I would have rated the film NC-17.  I laughed some, but can not
recommend the movie.  I give it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Tim Roth and Tupac Shakur are both fine in this unfortunately
contrived tale of two junkies on the kick.
The worst thing about GRIDLOCK'D is that it takes a basically
interesting idea and surrounds it with prefab plotting, and the idea
is forced to surrender. Sad, but that's probably the way it goes: I
doubt many people, let alone filmmakers, would want to sit still long
enough for an absorbing story about two musician/junkies. I know I
would.
Tim Roth ("Stretch") and Tupac Shakur ("Spoon") are the
musician/junkies of the title. Based on what we see, they're talented,
but they also have a disgustingly narrow world-view: drugs, gigging,
and crashing afterwards. They share a loft with their singer, Cookie
(played splendidly by Thandie Newton) and have an existence that's not
as hellish as TRAINSPOTTING, but is still pretty grungy nonetheless.
One night they get a bad hit of something after a gig, and Cookie
plunges into a coma. Cookie winds up in a hospital bed, and Spoon
decides it's time to get off the junk. Stretch doesn't
empathize. Yet. These opening scenes and the moments in the hospital
that follow are brilliant: they're both funny and desperate, and they
strike a uniquely black tone for the movie's humor. In another scene,
the two of them try to injure themselves to get into an emergency
ward; all they've got is a crummy little penknife that probably
wouldn't be good for whittling down pencils.  But they use it anyway,
in a scene that's both funny and agonizing.
The two of them then get plunged into a maddening bureaucratic hassle
in an attempt to get into detox. Trouble is, you can't get into detox
without Medicaid, and you can't get Medicaid without being on welfare,
and you can't get on welfare without... and so on. There is one scene
where they try to intimidate a social worker by trying to comvince him
they're psychotic and need to get into detox NOW, GOD DAMN IT, and
then in a reversal that's the movie's trademark, THEY get the living
Christ intimidated out of *them*. There's also a cameo by Elizabeth
Pena as an ER nurse who gets her own sadistic little form of revenge
on the two of them when they show up for treatment in her ward not
once but twice. But then the movie slowly drifts into a stupid
shrink-wrapped plot about a drug dealer, with the attendant chases and
shoot-outs (at least it doesn't end with the bad guy being shot a
dozen times), and for me the real magic of the movie was lost.
The core of the story -- the Shakur/Roth byplay -- is solid. It shows
off both actors as being comfortable with the material -- especially
Shakur, who would certainly have gone on to do more interesting acting
had he lived. Shakur has one remarkable monologue about the first time
he popped coke, which sounds improvised, and has its corners and
cracks filled in with the nuances of a good-and-soon-to-be-great
actor. At the end, I reflected on how good the best parts of the movie
were, how senseless it was to clutter the movie up with its stupid
thriller plot, and on how we seem to be losing a few too many good
young actors these days.

Author
Ben Hoffman
You could have fooled me.  Not being a fan of either most rock or rap
music, I was bowled over by the tragi-comedy that is GRIDLOCK'd.  I
laughed at the absurdities I heard coming from Spoon (Tupac Shakur) and
Stretch (Tim Roth).    They were saying very funny things but all
contained more than just a bit of the truth. "Life,"  sang Cookie
(ThandieNewton) "is a traffic jam, " and it certainly held true for
those three members of a nightclub band.
The first time I saw Thandie Newton was in the beautiful 1992
Australian coming-of-age film, FLIRTING, where she was a lovely
teenaged innocent in love with a white boy.    Adorable.  Here, in
GRIDLOCK'd, she is a spaced-out junkie. Thandie is utterly believable.
Tim Roth is a fine, versatile actor, his latest film being Woody
Allen's EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU.   In GRIDLOCK'd, he has a
terrifically funny scene with a couple of policemen whom he latches
onto because there are a couple of drug dealers who are nearby and who
would like to kill him.  "How do you become a policeman?" his
spaced-out character asks one of the baffled cops.  "I've always wanted
to be a policeman," he says with his stupid grin.
Sadly, Tupac Shakur was only 25 when he was killed only a few months
ago.  Watching his antiocs on the screen, seeing the goodness in the
man come through, one could not help but see the irony in his death.
In this film, he is the more sensible of the Stretch-Spoon duo, always
rescuing his friend from the predicaments he keeps getting into. Their
color-blind friendship flows so naturally.
The story that carries the film is about trying to get into a hospital
when you do not have insurance; the bureaucracy, the indifference of
the employees to the plight of those who must come to them for help.
And all of it presented in a hilalrious, witty series of exchanges.
Hey, If *I* liked this film, you are going to love it!
Directed with a sure hand by Vondie Curtis Hall.

Author
Michael Dequina
Before his untimely death last year, rapper-actor Tupac Shakur left
behind a number of completed films in the can.  The first to see the light
of day is Gridlock'd, the energetic and enjoyable screenwriting and
directing debut of actor Vondie Curtis-Hall (Broken Arrow, TV's Chicago Hope
and Cop Rock).
After his girlfriend Cookie (Thandie Newton) falls into a
drug-induced coma, heroin junkie Spoon (Shakur) decides to lay off the dope,
forcing his comrade-in-blow Stretch (Tim Roth) to join him in detox.  This
simple decision sets off an exhausting chain of events where Stretch and
Spoon run around town dealing with bureaucrats of varying rigidity and flee
from a drug kingpin (Curtis-Hall) and the police, who suspect the two when a
fellow drug fiend and his girlfriend are murdered.
Sounds like pretty heavy stuff, and sometimes it is.  But like the
big heroin-themed film of last year, Danny Boyle's Trainspotting, the film
is often quite funny, deftly walking the thin line between the harrowing and
the hilarious.  And the humor does not come out of nowhere and feel out of
place; like life itself, comedy sometimes spring forth naturally from
tragedy, with some inherent dark humor being found in what can be seen as
the most serious of moments.  But this is not to say that Curtis-Hall
glosses over heroin addiction.  Spoon and especially Stretch are seen for
what they are--loser junkies--living in a dirty, cluttered apartment and
getting into messes they could easily have avoided, often getting out
through sheer luck alone (which results in some overly contrived moments).
Curtis-Hall does add some interesting visual flair to the proceedings, using
flashy editing and whatnot, but nothing here is as flashy as Boyle's
sometimes surreal work in Trainspotting, and the entire film's look is
appropriately grimy and gritty.
But even with Curtis-Hall's able efforts behind the camera,
Gridlock'd could not have possibly worked without a convincing, charismatic
lead duo, and Shakur and Roth fit the bill perfectly.  Roth has the showier
role, playing pathetic, dirty, and just plain wacky Stretch, and he pulls it
off as well as one expects (even though his natural British accent sometimes
slips into his on-screen New York accent).  Shakur's more sensible Spoon is
the straight man, but he is far from upstaged, holding his own with his
confident, commanding presence; he truly had a bright future in film.  Roth
and Shakur's rapport is so natural, so effortless that you have no problem
believing that they are longtime friends.  It's too bad that a reteaming of
the two is out of the question.
The pileup of films currently released amounts to one big traffic
jam at movie houses, but the entertaining Gridlock'd should have no problem
clearing a path to box office success.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tim Roth, Tupac Shakur, Thandie Newton, Vondie Curtis Hall, 
      Bokeem Woodbine, Howard Hesseman
Director: Vondie Curtis Hall
Producers: Damian Jones, Paul Webster, and Erica Huggins
Screenplay: Vondie Curtis Hall
Cinematography: Bill Pope
Music: Stewart Copeland
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     GRIDLOCK'd is about people caught in one of life's most absurd 
traffic jams, and the lengths that they'll go to in order to get moving 
again.  It's a darkly humorous, vicious satire, and, like all the best 
satires, it works because so much of what transpires on screen not only 
could happen, but does happen -- every day in every major urban area 
across the country.  First time writer/director Vondie Curtis Hall sees 
the comedy in the situation and uses it to deliver a blistering attack 
on the social system and its attendant bureaucracy.
     Who among us hasn't had to deal with needless paperwork and 
frustrating run-arounds?  It's a universally shared affliction, and 
that's why Terry Gilliam's brilliant BRAZIL resonates so forcefully with 
viewers. GRIDLOCK'd, which approaches the same subject from a 
considerably different point-of-view, strikes a similar nerve.  We may 
not be able to identify with the specific circumstances of the main 
characters, but we can understand their anger and dissatisfaction with a 
system that seems more concerned with spilled ink than spilled blood.
     Spoon (Tupac Shakur) and Stretch (Tim Roth) are a '90s odd couple.  
Spoon is a mature, even-tempered black man; Stretch is a childish, 
borderline-manic white guy.  Yet, even though their personalities are 
180 degrees apart, they're as close as brothers.  They work together, 
live together, get high together, and, when they decide to free 
themselves from drugs, they try to kick the habit together.
     The occasion for this momentous decision is an overdose by Cookie 
(Thandie Newton), Spoon's lover and the third member of their 
performance art group.  While she lies in a coma at a nearby hospital, 
Spoon and Stretch come to grips with the precariousness of their lives.  
"I don't want to go out like that," laments Spoon (his words eerie in 
retrospect, considering the fate of the actor speaking them), "Lately, 
I've been feeling like my luck's running out."  Getting into a detox 
program, however, proves to be next-to-impossible.  Spoon and Stretch 
spend one long day racing from social service locale to locale, taking 
blood tests, filling out forms, waiting on lines, and being chased by 
both cops and drug dealers -- all in a hopeless attempt to get a little 
help to "kick it."
     All buddy movies need solid chemistry between the leads, and 
GRIDLOCK'd has it.  Shakur and Roth (along with Newton, during the 
flashback scenes) have an easy rapport that comes across as real and 
very believable.  Both actors are good, treading the fine line between 
grimness and absurdity.  Shakur (POETIC JUSTICE), the recently-murdered, 
controversial rap artist, plays against type.  His Spoon is calm, 
rational, and low-key.  Roth, who has portrayed his share of head cases 
before, is right at home as a druggie who will do almost anything to get  
his blow.
     The weakest aspect of GRIDLOCK'd is a rather silly subplot 
involving a drug dealer (Vondie Curtis Hall) who's out to recover his 
stolen goods from the two protagonists.   This leads to several 
unnecessary, routine chase sequences that don't accomplish much more 
than to distract us from the movie's more effective elements.  
Fortunately, the film makers relegate this part of GRIDLOCK'd to the 
background, allowing us to direct most of our attention to better 
things.
     In his first outing behind the camera, veteran actor Curtis Hall 
has crafted a fine motion picture.  The film addresses race relations, 
although not in a heavy-handed or preachy way (at one point, Spoon is 
forced to remind Stretch, who has adopted a number of black mannerisms, 
that his skin is white).  In a fashion not entirely unlike that of 
TRAINSPOTTING, it approaches the realities of drug use.  And, best of 
all, it mercilessly tears into the United States' so-called social 
services system.  This particular attack culminates in a wonderful rant 
by Stretch against government workers. 
     GRIDLOCK'd is refreshing because it's different.  The subject 
matter isn't new, but the approach and tone are.  For Vondie Curtis 
Hall, this is the promising beginning of what will hopefully be a long 
and fulfilling career.  For Tim Roth, it's another fine performance to 
add to his ever-growing resume.  And for Tupac Shakur, who displays 
genuine talent here, it's a fitting epitaph.   Hopefully, GRIDLOCK'd 
won't get lost in the traffic jam of low-quality, mid-winter releases 
that surround it. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Gramercy)
Starring:  Tim Roth, Tupac Shakur, Thandie Newton.
Screenplay:  Vondie Curtis Hall.
Producers:  Damian Jones, Paul Webster, Erica Higgins.
Director:  Vondie Curtis Hall.
MPAA Rating:  R (drug use, violence, profanity, nudity)
Running Time:  91 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Call 911 for the Cliche Police if you must, but the eyes are the
window to the soul.  The finest actors working in films are those who can
command the screen with a gaze:  Paul Newman, Ralph Fiennes, Anthony
Hopkins, Morgan Freeman.  You look at these men on screen and you can tell
without them saying a word that there is something going on in their
minds, that the characters they play are real human beings.  We will never
have a chance to discover if Tupac Shakur could have been a great actor,
but he had that unique quality in his eyes.  In GRIDLOCK'd, an oddly
effective combination of gritty drama and social satire, Shakur and his
co-star Tim Roth take sketchy characters and make them exciting to watch
through the pure energy of their talent and chemistry.
     Shakur and Roth play Ezekiel "Spoon" Whitmore and Alexander "Stretch"
Rome, two Detroit buddies who share a spoken word/jazz trio, an apartment
and a drug addiction with Cookie (Thandie Newton).  When a New Year's Eve
party ends with Cookie comatose after a drug overdose, Spoon and Stretch
begin to wonder if they are living on borrowed time.  They soon make a New
Year's resolution to get into rehab, but that proves to be easier said
than done.  As though the temptation to fix were not hindrance enough,
Spoon and Stretch also find their attempts to get clean hitting a road
block of bureaucracy, confusion and red tape.  The government might be the
least of their obstacles, however, as they find themselves suspects in the
murder of a drug dealer, and on the run from a nasty thug (Vondie Curtis
Hall).
     In order for you to buy into GRIDLOCK'd at all, you have to accept it
as a surreal odyssey rather than as urban realism; unless Spoon and
Stretch sleep through an entire day at the hospital after bringing in
Cookie, they are going to government offices on New Year's day, in which
case they should be thankful they get any help at all.  GRIDLOCK'd may
actually be a response to the fatuous social commentary of another urban
odyssey, 1991's FALLING DOWN, which found a besieged middle class white
male venting his righteous anger against the system during a trek through 
inner city Los Angeles.  In FALLING DOWN, Michael Douglas' D-FENS (the
character's personalized license plate, echoed in GRIDLOCK'd by the drug
lord D-REPER's plates) whips out a gun because he can't get breakfast at
McDonald's; in GRIDLOCK'd, Spoon and Stretch are unarmed against the
demands placed on them before they can get into a rehab center.  And where
the unhinged D-FENS became a heroic surrogate for audiences,
writer/director Vondie Curtis Hall refuses to let Spoon and Stretch off
the hook for their own part in the situation.  One bureaucrat responds to
a tirade from Stretch with the question, "Do you expect the world to
stop...just because you picked _today_ to clean up?"  The world in
GRIDLOCK'd is just as frustrating as the world in FALLING DOWN, but the
cathartic moments yield no easy answers this time.
     Hall has some interesting things to say about what we expect from The
System, but perhaps not enough of them.  A significant chunk of GRIDLOCK'd
is devoted to Spoon and Stretch's flight from D-REPER and from the police,
and those sub-plots serve up some thoroughly predictable moments.  In one
scene, Stretch scares off D-REPER by getting chummy with a police officer;
another presents that old chestnut of the two mistakenly-suspected heroes
in a public place watching a television news report of the crime which
shows their pictures.  The entire sequence of events seems designed merely
as an excuse to get Spoon and Stretch running, while the other primary
plot has them standing in line or sitting down much of the time.  Hall
also plays with gratuitous inserts of drug paraphernalia and flashbacks to
the day before the film's main events, perhaps making a particular effort
to point out the talent the characters are wasting through
self-destructive behavior.
     Oh, the irony of it.  Tupac Shakur made a career in music and movies
playing the hard case, and living the life to back it up.  In GRIDLOCK'd,
Shakur gets the chance to play someone who has seen enough of the way his
life could go to know that it scares him.  Spoon is an idea for a
character at best as written by Hall, but Shakur displays an intelligence
and survival instinct which struggle with his addiction.  Mostly it comes
through those eyes, eyes with none of the hardness you might expect from
the infamous gangsta.  It is Spoon who plays conscience to Stretch's pure
appetite, and Roth plays Stretch with a gleeful self-destructiveness (he
reveals that he is HIV positive even as he is preparing to shoot up again)
which is as much an obstacle to Spoon's goal as any agency or enemy.
GRIDLOCK'd's most cruelly comic scene finds Stretch "helping" Spoon get
into an emergency room by repeatedly stabbing him with a tiny pocket
knife, and it becomes an appropriate symbol for how the company he keeps
has slowly drained the life out of him.  With friends like that, Spoon
doesn't need enemies, and Shakur looks at Stretch with the tired eyes of a
man who has seen too much.  The tragedy now is that we won't get more
chances to see those eyes again.
