Title
Review for Twenty-One (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Bruce Atherton
     I've been going through serious withdrawal from lack of seeing a 
film festival (Vancouver's is in August).  I could have gone to
Melbourne  for the film festival there, but I opted to drive the three
hours to Seattle instead, and I spent the weekend seeing seven movies.
     Here is what I caught.  A rating based on four stars follows each
micro-review.
HERMAN (Norway) - D:Erik Gustavson. Anders Danielsen Lie,
    Elisabeth Sand, Bjorn Floberg, Linn Aronsen, Jarle Kulle.
This is a movie about a young 11-year-old boy who is going bald, 
and how he deals with it.  It reminded me a lot of MY LIFE AS A 
DOG, but this character is much more interesting.  I was 
surprised at how much I enjoyed this movie.  ***1/2.
TWENTY-ONE (Great Britain) - D:Don Boyd. Patsy Kensit, Jack
    Shepherd, Patrick Ryecart, Rufus Sewell, Sophie Thompson.
Katie is 21 years old in New York.  Addressing the camera, she 
explains the events which took place in England that caused her 
to leave.  This reminded me a little of SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT. 
Patsy Kensit is marvelous in the lead, straightforward and 
humorous.  ***.
(World Premiere)
CROOKED HEARTS (U.S.A.) - D:Michael Bortman. Vincent D'Onofrio,
    Jennifer Jason Leigh, Peter Coyote, Peter Berg, Cindy Pickett.
A movie about members of a family that are all a bit too 
dependent on one another.  I love Peter Coyote as an actor but 
here his character is very flat so there is not much he can do 
with it.  Of the others, only the narcoleptic daughter was very 
interesting.  I think the lead (Peter Berg) was terribly miscast.  
His voice-over put me in mind of BLADERUNNER (yes, that bad).  *1/2.
THE BORROWER (U.S.A.) - D:John McNaughton. Rae Dawn Chong, Tom
    Towles, Don Gordon, Antonio Fargas.
I love campy humour, so I was looking forward to a movie about an 
alien criminal sentenced to Earth who has to steal the heads from 
people and wear them in order to survive.  Unfortunately, there 
is not a lot of camp here, just lots of blood and guts and gore 
and veins in the teeth.  If you find blood funny, maybe you'll 
like this movie.  I didn't.  1/2.
BLOOD OATH (PRISONERS OF THE SUN) (Australia) - D:Stephen Wallace.
    Bryan Brown, George Takei, Terry O'Quinn, John Bach.
The credits said BLOOD OATH, the programme said PRISONERS OF THE 
SUN.  Whichever title this movie is released under, go see it. It 
is a very moving drama about prosecuting Japanese for war 
crimes on a little island called Ambon just after WWII.  Out of 
1100 Australian prisoners, only 300 survived over a two-year 
period.  A fascinating look at justice and how little there is
in a war, this was nominated for nine Australian Film Institute 
Awards.  ****.
(World Premiere)
RUBIN AND ED (U.S.A.) - D:Trent Harris. Crispin Glover, Howard
    Hesseman, Karen Black, Michael Greene.
This was my favorite movie of the weekend, but then I like some 
pretty strange things.  This movie is one of the stranger ones. 
Rubin (Crispin Glover) loves his cool mod-striped bell-bottoms, 
his enormous platform shoes, and his dead cat that he keeps in 
his refrigerator until he can find the perfect place to bury it.  
His mother (whom he lives with) doesn't think he is social 
enough, so she takes away his privileges until he brings home a 
friend for supper.
Ed (Howard Hesseman) is a loser trying to make good in a Zig 
Zeigler-type self-help program.  He has to bring in someone to a 
seminar to prove his worthiness.  If ever two characters were 
destined to meet, it's these two.  I won't mention what comes 
next except to say that if you like bizarre, you'll love this 
movie like I did.  Crispin Glover spoke afterward and he seems 
every bit as weird in person as on screen.  ****.
(World Premiere)
STAN AND GEORGE'S NEW LIFE (Australia) - D:Brian McKenzie.
    Paul Chubb, John Bluthal, Julie Forsyth, Margaret Ford.
This is a light, sweet, funny, and harmless movie.  It is about a 
40-year-old barber who decides he needs a new career and joins 
the Weather Bureau.  He hopes to meet a girl so that he can get 
married and move out of his parent's home, and sure enough he 
meets a woman named George, a kindred spirit.  The characters are 
all interesting and the movie has some good laughs.  It manages 
to be touching without being sloppily sentimental.  **1/2.

Author
Mark Santora
     The film TWENTY-ONE is an excellent piece of filmmaking.  In all
respects, this film stands as one of the best films I have seen this
fall season as most of the film releases have been fallen short of many 
expectations.  But this film's simple storyline, a 21-year-old British
woman's look back at her love life, is charming, funny, and even a
little sad.
     The lead character is played by Patsy Kensit, who should be
remembered from LETHAL WEAPON 2.  She is quite excellent in the role of
Katie, a distraught, cynical woman who is already fed up with life at
21.  And this role will undoubtedly bring many scripts to her door.
     The film starts off in New York City.  Here Katie is living in her
very nice apartment, by herself, and converses directly with the
camera.  This creates a sense of intimacy with the character of Katie.
Katie is quite frank.  She says what is on her mind.  In the course of
the film she talks about sex, her parents, her friends, lovers, and
herself.
     Katie's love life includes an affair with a married man whom he
flirts with at his wedding.  This affair is completely a sex-oriented one.
Another affair is with a heroin addict.  This is an affair of love,
with no sex.  Hence her affair with the married man.  This is all
handled quite well without any "Hollywoodizing" of the sex scenes.  This
is an adult-themed film, and it is treated accordingly.
     TWENTY-ONE is an excellent film.  It stands alone in its field, for
lack of any other flims like it at present.  Patsy Kensit controls the
film with a high degree of screen magnetism.  The rest of the cast
supports her character accordingly and the entire cast plays off
each other very well.  This is an excellent film and is not one to be
missed.
