Title
Review for Eraserhead (1977)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ERASERHEAD (director/writer: David Lynch; cinematographer: Frederick
Elmes/Herbert Cardwell; cast: Jack Nance (Henry Spencer), Charlotte
Stewart (Mary X), Allen Joseph (Mr. X), Judith Anna Roberts (Beautiful
Girl Across the Hall), Jeanne Bates (Mrs. X), Hal Landon Jr. (Pencil
Machine Operator), Jack Fisk (Man in the Planet), Laurel Near (Lady In
Radiator), V. Phipps-Wilson (Landlady), Allen Joseph (Mr. X), Jean Lange
(Grandmother), 1977)
David Lynch's nightmare debut film is shot in wonderful B&W (in the
expressionist mode of a German horror film). It took him five years to
complete the film. It features a unique soundtrack that is mostly made
up of constant shrill sounds that might destroy your inner peace
(clangs, hissings, whistles, street noise, etc.), but it also has a
lovely little song tract, sung by the deformed Lady in the Radiator
(Laurel Near), with the catchy lyric, "Everything is fine in heaven," as
it is meant to offer hope to the despondent hero of this dream, who is
probably thinking about suicide as an answer to his problems.
The film is a long dream-sequence about an awful urban smoke-infested
industrial city and other terrible things. The illogical story gives way
to a surreal world of fantasy, covering feelings about loneliness,
sexuality, nuclear families, love, urban decay, and an inhuman monster
for a child. This weird tale is an original, personal, and provoking
work, capturing the darker side of modern urban life for the have-nots
and the dark side of the dreamworld for the dreamer. The story makes
little sense in the real world of things, but has its own logic within
the contexts of the film. At least, certain experiences drawn from its
little episodes can be related to one's own experiences, as it makes a
striking impact on one's fragile modern psyche.
This is what a cult film is supposed to be like, and in that sense,
there is a certain ready-made audience for this film, who should be
accepting of it even if they don't know what the film means in total.
And, that's not so bad a thing in the case of this movie. Those who like
their films with a solid narrative, will not find what they are looking
for here.
The film is about a loner, Henry (Nance), who is walking home in the
dark and sordid confines of the railroad tracks and the factories, until
he reaches his cheerless apartment building. He has a distinct nerdlike
look, featuring a Bride of Frankenstein hairstyle and in his lapel there
is a plastic-holder for his pencils and pens. In the hallway, his
neighbor (Judith Anna Roberts) tells him that Mary (Charlotte Stewart)
called on the pay phone and wants him to come over to her place for
dinner and to meet her parents.
The forced dialogue between Henry, Mary, and her parents at their dinner
engagement, is  insipid, as Henry appears to be both serene and up-tight
about the triviality of it. The conversation is so slow in coming forth,
that it is painful to listen to. Mary's mother (Jeanne Bates) finds out
that Henry is a printer in Lepell's factory, and this is his vacation.
That this is how he spends his vacation (dreaming), showing no interest
in doing what most workers do, such as travel, makes him appear to be
even odder than he looks, as he seems to be without any friends or
things to do. Mary's father, Mr. X (Allen Joseph), is a plumber with a
numb arm and is very talkative and seems to have a permanent simpering
grin, while saying nothing that is important. In fact, by Henry's
stiffened expression, you can tell Henry doesn't really care for him or
his perverse wife, who tried to sexually come-on to him. And speaking
about stiffs, there is the shot of Mary's grandmother (Jean Lange), who
seems like she's as stiff as a board, sitting in the family chair. She
could be dead.
Finally, the point of the visit is disclosed, as Henry is informed that
Mary gave birth prematurely to his baby and that he will have to marry
her. The baby is a devouring monster, who is always crying after they
are married, which drives Mary away from the apartment to live with her
mother.
Being a loner, with no one to talk to about his problems, he is troubled
by Mary's rejection of married life, and he is also troubled about his
responsibilities as a father.This inward tension, results in a dream
within a dream, which shows Henry's head being lopped off and made into
a pencil-eraser, whereby the film gets its title from.
There is also the man in the planet (Jack Fisk) to be explained in
Henry's vision, who is some kind of higher force that Henry is
controlled by. He is seen appearing in a rock, slightly above Henry's
facial features.
As for the twisted worm Henry plucks from between his teeth, that could
mean a lot of different things. This is a film not made for strictly
entertainment value, and to get the viewer involved in thinking about
what all these symbols mean, requires some imagination on their part to
interpret the dream. I would hazard a guess and say that the worm has
something to do with the deformed baby and the concept of Original Sin.
What it all means, is probably anyone's guess. But it is visual and
shocking to the intellect. It is one of the more imaginative efforts put
forth in an American film, reminding me most of a Bunuel film. That as
illogical, tedious, and repulsive as it may be, there is still something
there that grabs our attention before we can turn away from it. It's the
simpatico feeling we have for Henry, as he seems to be a rather civil
chap, willing to do the right thing, have a nice steady job, lead a
normal and quiet life, and yet he is subject to being a victim of an
environment that is not friendly to the urban people who live there and
to a wife who can't offer him her love, and worst of all, he is subject
to his own worst fears. Somehow I get the feeling there are lots of
people who can identify with Henry, even if they will not admit to being
nerds.
I just loved the idea of the film, admittedly more than I loved watching
the film (I saw it on video, where the images were sometimes too dark).
Yet I found this imaginative work to be one of the more interesting
films to come out of the '70s.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Kevin Patterson
David Lynch's debut film "Eraserhead" is without a doubt one of the most
bizarre films I have ever seen. There isn't really much of a plot, other than
the fact that the main character, Henry Spencer (Jack Nance), is having a
difficult time caring for his deformed illegitimate child and generally has an
unpleasant life. "Eraserhead" could probably be best described as an abstract
character study: the character of Henry Spencer is revealed through a series
of loosely connected images and scenes. 
To describe "Eraserhead" as "surreal" would be an understatement: most of what
happens in this film does not seem to be bound by any semblance of realism.
The film's best-known scene is a dream sequence (I guess) in which Henry's
disembodied head suddenly falls out of a window, is discovered by a young boy,
and taken to a nearby factory where it is made into pencil erasers (hence the
film's title). And the metaphysical distortions don't stop there. The
enigmatic "Man in the Planet" character appears occasionally and seems to be
controlling Henry's bizarre experiences somehow. Henry has recurring visions
of the "Lady in the Radiator" who performs a song for him, promising that "In
Heaven, Everything Is Fine" until she is interrupted by worms falling from the
sky. In a scene that is at once hilarious and unsettling, two chicken legs
somehow come alive on Henry's dinner plate and do a little dance as static
electricity buzzes ominously in the background. In fact, the entire film is
scored by a "white noise" that is a kind of mix of wind gusts and electric
humming. 
Surprisingly enough, "Eraserhead" actually works as a surreal psychodrama that
takes place in a world shaped around Henry's fears and obsessions. This
material probably would have collapsed into an Ed Wood-style
"so-bad-it's-funny" mess in the hands of most directors, but somehow Lynch
actually gets the audience to take all this cinematic lunacy seriously.
"Eraserhead" is visceral and disturbing where, with only a tiny misstep, it
could easily have become ludicrously incoherent. Lynch has admitted that the
atmosphere of tension and fear that dominates "Eraserhead" grew largely out of
his own experience living in a dangerous area of downtown Philadelphia and
trying to care for his daughter Jennifer, who herself was born with clubbed
feet and had a very difficult childhood. This personal attachment of the
director to his material is probably what makes "Eraserhead" work: Lynch
clearly cares about Henry, and by the end of the film, so do we. 
I am awarding "Eraserhead" three and a half stars, but I will stop short of
recommending it firmly because most people I know would probably hate it. I'll
put it this way: If you enjoy unconventional films, or if you want to see the
on-screen exorcism of David Lynch's personal demons, then by all means make
"Eraserhead" your next rental from the video store. If not, you should
probably stay away. 

Author
Zach Douglas
(Note: I highly recommend reading Ray Wolf's excellent web guide for his 
insights on Eraserhead. I left out a lot of information because I couldn't 
bring myself to regurgitate all the things I read on Ray's page and instead 
tried to bring forth a few new elements that I didn't find there or 
elsewhere. Other recommended readings on the subject is Danny's Pearry's 
review in his book Cult Movies. Here is Ray's web page:
http://members.aol.com/RayWolf1/eraserhead/index.html 
It's been a long time since I have watched a film as intricately detailed, 
thought provoking,  and scary as Eraserhead. While my opinion of David Lynch 
was was somewhat mixed after having seen all of his films except for The Lost 
Highway, it has become apparent to me that having some understanding of the 
meanings of his films is of up most importance to the enjoyment of them. Many 
will say Lynches films are "visually entertaining" or "bizarre" enough to be 
entertaining but don't fully endorse the films because they can't fully 
embrace just what the hell the film meant. That is understandable. Lynch 
himself says that people should not try so hard to understand his films in 
absolute terms. I will agree with him so far as saying that precise 
interpretations of films such as Eraserhead are impossible.  However, I 
refuse not to give up that easily and not attempt to grasp at an 
interpretation and contribute my thoughts, regardless where it leads, how 
misguided it might be, or how much time on a nice Saturday afternoon it might 
take me to do so. 
I've read a few different ideas on the meaning of Eraserhead. I can for the 
most part agree with them, but I must seek to fill in some crucial and what 
seems to me - obvious elements that seem to me missing from many 
interpretations. To add to the popular theories concerning Eraserhead I (like 
others) have turned to the Auteur theory (1.) for insight. With what 
understanding I do have of Lynch's other films and also with a general 
knowledge that many of our greatest film makers continually made
autobiographical works wherein they cast leading men who resembled 
themselves. Another aspect in Eraserhead of which I am not sure exists in his 
other films are visual puns to be explained later. Going back to leading men; 
Lynch would later utilize Kyle McGlaughlin as his alter ego, it is Jack Nance 
in Eraserhead who is Lynch. If we imagine Lynch telling his own story of 
troubled days in a hellish area of Philadelphia when he was 21, then this is 
what I believe Eraserhead is saying: 
As Henry lies prone at the first of the movie, we see him yawn and from his 
mouth he emits a sperm-like worm. The yawn is the first pun - Henry has had 
intercourse or "slept" with a woman who turns out to be Mary. We see the man 
at the window looking down. The man pulls the levers of the great machine and 
we see the sperm head toward a swirling black pool and enters. Yes, it's God. 
>From here see Henry's life. We don't know much about it but know he is a 
depressed, sad man. Henry then meets his girlfriend Mary's parents and they 
declare he is to be married because he and Mary had
intercourse. It's notable that Henry doesn't have any say in the matter and 
just accepts his fate as if he has no control over it. Henry's premature 
mutant baby comes. Henry looks at the radiator and sees a funny puffy cheeked 
woman. This woman is death, and Henry is contemplating suicide when he thinks 
of her and sees her singing her happy tune, "In heaven, everything is fine". 
Mary leaves Henry. Henry takes care of the baby when it gets sick. But Henry 
soon wants to leave but baby won't let Henry leave. Henry has sex with the 
bad lady across the hall. Things then get really bad for Henry as his head 
falls off. From Henry's neck comes the head of the child. Henry later kills 
the baby and goes on to be with the puffy cheeked lady (and embraces death). 
Now, a smaller point of interest before getting to what my main point is what 
Lynch is saying about old people. From Blue Velvet we can see that Lynch 
likes to poke fun at American traditions such as family, religion, teen 
romance, and the like. In Eraserhead we see a strong contempt for the family 
of Mary X and perhaps for the elderly in general. Lynch says they are are 
stupid, frightening, and useless. "Grandma" sits motionless, posed as 
Whistler's Mother, except with a cigarette dangling from her mouth
reinforces her pathetic pose. Her uselessness is shown by her "helping" 
mother X make salad as Mother X puts the bowl in her lap and then tosses the 
salad herself, reaching her arms under Grandmother's to toss the salad. 
Father X is near senile and beats his arm which he tells Henry he has lost 
use of and lost feeling in. Lynch obviously finds it disgusting, yet somewhat 
comical that old men often are overly eager to relate their physical 
infirmities to others. Once Henry and Mary are "married" the in-laws are 
removed from the picture. 
The new focus is on the "Baby" that enters their lives. Another key is the 
statement that the baby is premature which is important later. Mary can't 
stand the baby and leaves. Henry begins to look toward the radiator (suicide) 
as an option. He tries to take care of the baby. Finally, he steps on the 
stage with the woman from the radiator and it's at about this time that Henry 
loses his head. I find it easiest to apply the most basic of visual metaphors 
(the puns) to the following key sequences after Henry's head falls off. 
First, Henry has "Lost his head". Equivalent to Lynch thinking that he is 
crazy to have been married (or living with someone) and having a child in the 
prime of his life. When his head is found by the boy, he takes it in to the 
shop. Before they use the material in Henry's head the proprietor of the shop 
first drills in to the head to get a core sample of the material inside. He 
says that it is "OK". Lynch is saying that someone in their prime should 
"have their head checked" if they become shackled by wife and child. This is 
backed by the proprietor's findings: That the material in Henry's head is 
grade A
material for making pencil erasers. It is now confirmed that Henry (Lynch) 
must have been very stupid to make the decisions he made. It is this point 
that seems to have gone unspoken in deciphering Eraserhead's meaning. Perhaps 
we are too sympathetic toward Henry (because he must endure such a hellish 
life and appears like a scared boy) or toward Lynch (because he is an artist 
we respect) to make that statement to say that being an Eraserhead means 
being an idiot. That's my main point. 
To further iterate, we see that from Henry's body has sprung the tiny head of 
the baby. Remembering now that the baby was premature, we again see now that 
it is also Henry/Lynch himself who was premature in their decision (or lack 
of a decision) to take on a wife and child. 
Now, of course there is a lot left unexplained that I won't go in to, or 
perhaps can't go in to. Does Henry die? Why is the lady behind the radiator 
so grotesque if she represents a beautiful way out of the hellish life? Why 
does she kill the worms? Is she like an angel? Does that make the lady across 
the hall a demon? There are many other questions, but once you have a tiny 
grasp of what might be happening in this film, it becomes really fascinating 
to dig deeper and deeper as Eraserhead is so intricate that new aspects will 
surface with each viewing. I think I have done about all the digging in to 
the film and my mind that I can do on this viewing, so perhaps when I watch 
the film again someday I will return with some more thoughts on Eraserhead. 
Postscript: Do I like Eraserhead? Yes. I think it is one of the most 
monumental achievements in modern film history. I really don't know of any 
other full length, live action film that so fully creates such a singular, 
visceral, and personal world as Eraserhead. The closest works I can think of 
might be films such as Fellini's 8 1/2 or La Dulce Vita and the works of 
Louis Bunuel who's nightmarish surrealist films might be Eraserhead's only 
equals.  I take that back, one other film that I can think of is Tetsuo: The 
Iron Man.  Check that out some time if you dare.   Also, I don't know of many 
other films who's soundtrack (consisting of what Sounds like saws, grinding 
metal, and other various industrial noises) has been so carefully 
constructed. Only the Kubrick films such as 2001 and The Shining come to 
mind. The only thing more disturbing than watching Eraserhead might be to 
listen to it. 
1. - Auteur Theory. Critical theory on films originated by Francois Truffaut. 
The theory focused on the director's of the films rather than stars, plot, or 
production company. The theory states that by becoming more familiar with all 
the works of a director, that familiar themes would arise from the 
filmmaker's personal visions, desires, and sensibilities. These themes can 
then be used to explain individual films which might, when viewed as singular 
works, be hard to explain otherwise.  
Any comments or corrections are greatly appreciated.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: David Lynch
Starring: Jack Nance, Charlotte Stewart, Allen Joseph, Jeanne Bates,
Judith Anna Roberts, Laurel Near
I'm not the most intelligent person on the face of the earth, or
anywhere near to it, I admit.  Maybe that accounts for why when I don't
understand a movie, I don't immeadiately jump to the conclusion that
IT'S the one confused, or that it's just crap.  Or maybe I'm just a nice
guy or something.
But, anyway, David Lynch's first film, "Eraserhead," is a film combined
of scenes that individually make almost no sense the first billion
times.  And even entire parts of it (the whole spiel about the baby)
make almost no real sense, and may never.  But as a whole, this film
gives off mood, and perhaps even a message, which may be totally
different for each person.  While "Lost Highway" was ambiguous in that
annoying way, "Eraserhead" is ambiguous in that magnificent way.
Don't ask me what this film is really about.  There is no one sentence
that could describe this film.  As much as I can understand, it deals
with a very depressed man named Henry Spencer (played by the recently
deceased Jack Nance), who lives in what seems to be a post-apocalyptic
future of sorts.  During the tenure of the film, he's on vacation from
his stupid job (which we never see him do), and finds out that a woman
(Charlotte Stewart) he once (or several times) boinked has given birth
to a...something.  And it's his.  This is only the first 30 minutes of
the film.
Soon Henry is married to this girl, living in his crappy and
claustrophobic apartment with this...thing, which is like a monster
baby.  Shaped like a tiny dinosaur or something, and wrapped in a tight
cloth, it looks absolutely hideous, yet makes authentic baby sounds. 
After awhile, his new wife has left him with the baby, and we start to
see Henry go gradually insane, although we start to suspect that from
the first time we see him.
Henry Spencer is one of the most interesting of film characters.  Kind
of in between of sincere and bizarre, he almost willfully accepts taking
care of the baby when its mother up and leaves it, for no other reason
than it's making a lot of annoying noise (which it is).  And he is
equipped with hair that seems to stretch towards the sky, hinting that
he is reaching for heaven, and also that he might be in some kind of
personalized hell.
As I said, this film is highly ambiguous.  That is an understatement. 
Of all the films I've ever seen, this film is one of the top five (if
not the most) ambiguous films ever made.  Of course, the other four are
probably Lynch films too.  This flick gives us numerous unsettling
images, scenes, and characters, which we are to figure out on our own. 
Lynch is not up for spoon-feeding us what he thinks are his takes on
everything.  Watching this film is like negotiated viewing: he gives us
only partial information, and we are to make our own assumptions or
explanations for it.  This makes "Eraserhead" one of the more
interesting of films to watch.
So what is my take on it?  Well, I've only viewed it once, but what I
got out of it was that the film is about the inability to escape from
reality, which can be hellish or heavenly - it's all how you view
things.  Henry says he is on "vacation," but this seems to be a metaphor
for dreaming, explaining some of the more weird aspects of the film
(i.e. the baby), as well as why his fantasies are in this flick (like
his bizarrely erotic love scene with the sex-pot across the hall as they
fool around in a tub that seems to suck them in).  There is also a bit
about a girl inside a radiator who sings about heaven, but is in a
radiator, which seems to be hell.  At the end, he has grasped the girl
in the radiator, and has a big smile on his face, as he seems to be
enjoying life.  Or maybe I looked way too much into it.
Although I'm not a huge fan of Lynch (I didn't like "Blue Velvet,"
"Dune," and "The Lost Highway," and only saw a bit at the end of "The
Elephant Man," which I liked), I will agree that he is one of the most
intereseting directors.  And I actually loved "Eraserhead."  Granted,
it's not one of my all-time favorite movies, like "The Graduate" or
"Annie Hall," but it's a fantastically interesting film, which offers so
much to look into, and decipher for yourself.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
"A Dream of dark and troubling things." -- David Lynch
There are those who say "Eraserhead" makes little sense, and then there are
those who say that "Eraserhead" isn't supposed to make sense.  I'm with the
second camp: if "Eraserhead" made any sense at all, it wouldn't be nearly as
interesting.  "Eraserhead" is allegedly a horror movie, but I put it instead
on that small shelf of films that abandon all pretense at being entertainment
and just give you an experience: "Begotten", "The Reflecting Skin" and
Alejandro Jodorowsky's head-trips ("El Topo", "The Magic Mountain") are close
cousins in spirit to this film.
There is a story, sort of.  Henry Spencer (Lynch regular John Nance) is a
nerdish, creepy-looking man living in a squalid little apartment.  He's
accidentally impregnated his girlfriend, and the baby turns out to be a vile
little creature that looks something like E.T. after thalidomide.  The news
about the pregnancy, by the way, comes out during a dinner where the main
course consists of chickens the size of one's fist that still move and spurt
blood when sliced into.  There's also a strangely deformed woman who seems to
live in Henry's radiator... and by this point you're either shaking your head
in dismay or wondering where to find the movie.  I guess that means I've done
my job.
"Eraserhead" needs to be seen on the big screen to work properly.  On TV, the
black-on-black photography -- this is the single darkest movie ever made, and
I don't just mean in terms of subject matter! -- reproduces very poorly. 
Also, on TV, the black and white images don't saturate the senses the way
they do in a theater.  There's also the most creative use of sound in almost
any movie I've ever seen: not a single scene in the film is silent.  There's
always something rumbling, hissing, clattering, bubbling, booming away in
either the background or the next room over, and it has the same effect on
the audience's nerves as a dentist's drill.
Before David Lynch started screwing with America's mind via "Blue Velvet"
and "Twin Peaks", he spent five years, on and off, making "Eraserhead".  It
shows.  There is a level of obsessive care in every frame of this film that
many movies costing hundreds of times more don't show at all.
People may wonder: If this thing's so weird and so repulsive, why did I give
it three and a half stars?  Because it dares to be different and succeeds.  I
don't automatically reward every movie that's "experimental" with a positive
review, but they sure deserve the benefit of the doubt.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
