Title
Review for Die Hard: With a Vengeance (1995)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Chris Hilkene
     It's no wonder that Hollywood wanted to cash in on the success of
the "Die Hard" legacy, but I would have thought that they could have
produced something much better than DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE.  I got
the same feeling watching this film as I did watching THE
SPECIALIST.  Actually, it wasn't a feeling, I just plain fell asleep
in both films.
     After waking up I tried to piece together why this film is so
bad.  Poor editing is one reason I came up with.  Even though there is
lots of action and special effects the editing makes the film drag.
Another problem is that the film is so cliche that it verges on
banality.  But perhaps the biggest flaw of the film is the
re-orientation of the John Maclaine character.  In the previous films
Maclaine was the wrong guy, in the wrong place, at the wrong time, who
was forced to take action because his wife was in danger.  It was the
chance element and his ablility to persevere even though he was
overwhelmed by his situation, and in doubt about his ability and
motives that made the Maclaine character captivating.  In the new film,
Maclaine is the super human cop (despite efforts to portray him as
burned out).  The bad guy specifically makes Maclaine a target because
of his prowess.  This is where the movie falls apart.  The film makers,
and Bruce Willis, do not develop a mechanism by which to negotiate the
two radically different personalities.
     The chance element enters into the story via Samuel Jackson.  For
all intents and purposes he is the Maclaine of the earlier "Die Hard"
films.  He is thrust into the plot by unfortunate circumstance.
However, his character's ability to immediately fit into the role is
too contrived.  Jackson's acting in the film is commendable, but even
this doesn't help to make the character believable.
     DIE HARD 3 is a pathetic offering that detracts from, rather than
adds to, the "Die Hard" saga.

Author
Lewis Stiller
     The title sequence of DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE introduces the
film's many misdirections with an unexpected and uncentered explosion.
Cut to the police department where Chief of Detectives Walter Cobb is
framed partly out-of frame while talking on the phone:  we only see a
quadrant of his face.  The widescreen image seems almost unable to hold
all the action, an impression augmented by the frequent whip pans.  The
cinematography (Menzies) throughout uses a lot of whip pans,
out-of-frame compositions, and shorter length lenses than would be
common, giving the scenes a sense of dynamism, immediacy and at times
surrealism.  The effect is increased in the notorious Harlem scene when
whip pans, aggressive rack focus, Dutch angles, and a brief dolly zoom
disorient the viewer.  Throughout the film, interesting crane shots
abound, and the camera moves very fast.
     A highly elliptical editing (J. Wright, M. Miller) technique is
used, relying on the viewer's familiarity with genre action films to
elide pleonastic narrative; cuts are always straight cuts or whip pans
with neglible lapping.
     Portions of the soundtrack are interesting, particularly during a
long and directorially virtuoso sequence of the breaching of the
Federal Reserve set to "When Johny Comes Marching Home" (or "The Ants Go
Marching In," as I learned it at camp).  The drums in the melody
actually begin well before the actual melody, though this would not be
noticed by the casual viewer.
     Foley and sound engineering is good, with the Dolby Digital
Surround lending considerable subwoofer and surround oomph to some
scenes.  Relatively few theaters, of course, have B-chains remotely
capable of reproducing accurately these effects, whether they have
digital A-chains or not.
     Inspired use of regional and international accents provide an
undercurrent of humor and verisimilitude; I especially enjoyed the
hapless manglings of Gruber's Dutch alias--Gruber's commentary on
U.S.  parochialism, perhaps?--and the New York accents.
     The plot is both more original, more ambitious, and less
consistent than standard for the genre.  It begins to meander back to
triteness in the last quarter of the film, however, and some of the
obligatory car chases and gun battles are gratuitous.  The acting and
dialogue are quite good, except that the ambiguous portrayal of the
cops again resolves into cliches during a school scene.  Nonetheless
there's a refreshing lambency in spots.
     The film was well-directed, enjoyable, fun-to-watch.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 5/19/95 
Running Length: 2:08 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
Cast: Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Jeremy Irons, Graham Greene, 
      Colleen Camp, Larry Bryggman, Sam Phillips 
Director: John McTiernan 
Producers: John McTiernan and Michael Tadross 
Screenplay: Jonathan Hensleigh 
Cinematography: Peter Menzies 
Music: Michael Kamen 
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox 
     Perhaps the best way to describe the third segment in the popular 
DIE HARD series is by comparing it to the previous two.  That should 
give an adequate assessment of how far the adventures of John McClane 
(Bruce Willis) have fallen.  The original DIE HARD took place in the 
confined space of a high rise building.  The first sequel widened the 
field to an airport.  This one zigs and zags all across New York City.  
Apparently, the greater the scope, the less engaging the movie.  Then 
there's the character of Holly McClane, played with warmth and appeal by 
Bonnie Bedelia.  She and John had a lot of interaction in the original.  
In part two, they were separated by the few thousand feet, but she was 
still there, circling Dulles International Airport in a plane low on 
fuel.  In DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE, Holly is nowhere to be seen.  These 
things, amongst larger issues (like script quality), help explain why 
the second DIE HARD wasn't quite as good as the first, and why this 
installment doesn't deserve to be mentioned in the same breath as the 
1988 and 1990 episodes.   
     When formulating a sequel, the film makers should attempt to 
recapture the style of their movie's predecessor without regurgitating 
specific plot twists.  While DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE transpires in a 
vastly different setting than the first, that doesn't prevent it from 
shameless pilfering.  One chief "surprise" this time around is nearly 
identical to an element of the original.  There are also fragments 
borrowed liberally from the likes of SPEED and BLOWN AWAY (not 
surprising, considering that those pictures, like this one, deal with 
mad bombers).  And, of course, coming in the wake of the Oklahoma City 
tragedy, there are times when the explosive excesses of this film seem 
in bad taste, even though it was in the can long before that April 
morning. 
     In the first two DIE HARDs, John McClane was an ordinary Joe caught 
in extraordinary circumstances -- a hard-working cop trying to save the 
lives of his wife and whole lot of other people on Christmas Eve.  Now, 
McClane is one step from alcoholism, Holly is living on the opposite 
coast, and it's the middle of the summer.  There's a guy out there 
called Simon (Jeremy Irons) bombing buildings, and he wants to play a 
game of "Simon Says" with McClane.  Each time he gives an instruction, 
it has to be carried out or some new target will be blown to 
smithereens.  Along the way, McClane picks up an ally in a Harlem shop 
owner named Zeus (Samuel L. Jackson), who gets involved when he saves 
McClane from a street gang.  Simon makes Zeus part of the cat-and-mouse 
game which turns into a wild goose chase.  There's a bomb in one of over 
1400 New York schools, and it's up to McClane to find out which one. 
     John McTiernan, the director of the first DIE HARD, is a great 
crafter of action sequences.  All the explosions and fights are filmed 
with consummate skill, and are thrilling in their own right.  But that's 
where it stops.  The pacing is erratic and the level of tension ebbs and 
flows.  While parts one and two built momentum to an exhausting, 
exhilarating climax, part three has too many peaks and valleys (and, it 
seems, more of the latter than the former).  Worst of all, the hero 
doesn't have to be John McClane.  It could be any hungover cop able to 
utter a few, widely-spaced one-liners. 
     Samuel L. Jackson, one of the best actors around today, rises above 
the material.  Even more often than Willis, he is the central 
attraction.  Jeremy Irons is no better than adequate as the suave 
villain.  The nature of his character automatically resurrects the ghost 
of Alan Rickman's first-part antagonist, but it's not a favorable 
comparison.  Of course, Irons is handicapped because Simon doesn't 
appear in the flesh until half-way through this film.  Meanwhile, Graham 
Greene is horribly underused as just another face in a crowd of one-
dimensional cops. 
     After the second DIE HARD, Bruce Willis stated he would never do 
another.  He should have stayed firm in his resolve.  If quality is any 
indication (and it may be, with all the available blockbusters), box 
office returns will be disappointing this time around and, if nothing 
else, that will do to John McClane what dozens of assorted bad guys 
couldn't manage:  kill him. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE is the latest and hopefully last of the
DIE HARD movies.  Once again, we have tough cop John McClane (Bruce
Willis) down on his luck, with a three day old beard, and "one day away
from becoming a full fledged alcoholic." Into the world steps trouble,
and, of course, it goes looking specifically for him.
     This time trouble is named Simon (Jeremy Irons) as in "Simon
says." For the first time, however, McClane doesn't have his wife,
Holly (Bonnie Bedelia) to help him since Bedelia (best in HEART LIKE A
WHEEL) had a salary dispute with the studio.  As a replacement helper,
he gets a black Harlem shopkeeper called Zeus Carver (Samuel L.
Jackson).
     I am sorry to say that this DIE HARD tells the story of a mad
bomber who is blowing up large public buildings causing massive
destruction and who threatens to blow up even more if McClane and Zeus
do not follow his every instruction to the letter.  I say I am sorry
because the horrors of the Oklahoma bombing were too fresh in my memory
to let me enjoy the special effects.  They were just too real.  On the
other hand, most of my opinion of the movie would have been the same
even if it were in not released in such close proximity to the Oklahoma
tragedy.
     In this highly derivative movie, we have two plots.  One is taken
from BATMAN and has to do with Simon's riddles ("who was 21 of 42"
figure it out within 3 hours or hundreds of children die) and with
childhood ("shouldn't have done that, I didn't say 'Simon says'").  The
other is a rehash of Die Hard 2 where McClane tries to figure out what
the bad guys (Germans) are really up to.
     DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE is directed by the same one, John
McTiernan, who did the original DIE HARD rather than DIE HARD 2's Renny
Harlin.  The real different is the writer.  For the first time, we have
Jonathan Hensleigh instead of Steven E. De Souza who was the lead
writer on the first two DIE HARDs.  De Souza is a much more seasoned
writer starting with his first movie, 48 HRS. whose success was a
tribute to his funny, intelligent and imaginative script as much as to
Eddie Murphy's acting debut.
     The good news about this most recent DIE HARD is that we have lots
of action, some funny lines, great special effects of mass destruction,
and exhilarating car chases.  The bad news is that you have seen and
heard this all before in so many other movies.  The script has little
new in it other than some new ways to destroy people and buildings.  I
must admit, I really did like the plot twist around the motive for the
second major bombing.
     As far as the acting goes, it was fine, but nothing fresh.  Bruce
Willis is the same in every role.  He has a single character he can
play, although in some movies, he does shave.  I loved DIE HARD and DIE
HARD 2 and thought he was terrific in each.  Here he is too much of a
retread.  In many of his movies (don't see COLOR OF NIGHT for example),
he becomes a parody of an overacting actor.
     Samuel L. Jackson (from PULP FICTION among others) does okay with
a poor script that kept falling back on racial insults in a poor
attempt to prop up weak writing.  Jeremy Irons (DAMAGE, REVERSAL OF
FORTUNE, DEAD RINGERS, and most of all BRIDESHEAD REVISITED on TV) is
one of the most talented actors living today.  Here he does the most he
can with the character he is given.  He does a good villain.
     By half way through this overly long picture, I was getting
exhausted by all of the games Simon was making McClane and Zeus perform
like puppets.  It got extremely repetitious and monotonous watching a
very bloody and sweaty McClean accomplish the impossible every five
minutes.  I kept hoping that the make up department would run out of
all of that disgusting blood.  Simon was driving them like raw recruits
in boot camp.  I got as tired as they did, but I was not being paid
millions and millions of dollars to endure this as WIllis and Jackson
were.  When the credits finally rolled, I was worn out and ready to
leave.
     DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE runs a debilitating 2:10 thanks to
editor John Wright.  It is correctly rated R for massive amounts of
blood, gore, and destruction.  There was no sex or violence to intrude
on this mayhem.  This is only for older teenagers I think, but I am
sure that kids way too young will see it in droves.  I do not recommend
the show, but since there was a fair amount in the first half that I
liked, I award it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are plenty of people who have good reasons to hate
terrorists, and American filmmaker John McTiernan is one of
them. In 1993 his film THE LAST ACTION HERO had to have its
publicity campaign redesigned because of the first WTC
bombing. Two years later, McTiernan's film DIE HARD: WITH A
VENGEANCE, the third instalment in the series started by
1988 DIE HARD, suffered at the box-office because the US
public after Oklahoma City bombing didn't appreciate a plot
dealing with mad bomber blowing half of New York city.
Today, after New York has suffered even worse terrorist
outrage in real life, watching of DIE HARD: WITH A VENGEANCE
is probably unbearable for American audience.
The protagonist of third DIE HARD film is still New York
policeman John McLane (played by Bruce Willis), reluctant
hero who always happens to land in the wrong place at the
wrong time, wreck various terrorist schemes and saves his
family in the process. This time McLane is in worse shape
than in previous two films - wife left him, he had started
to drink, and, as result, is expected to be kicked out of
NYPD. His career is, at least temporarily, rescued by a
terrorist who targeted McLane himself - after the series of
bombings all over New York City, police receives a call by
someone who calls himself Simon (played by Jeremy Irons) and
wants to play game with the detective. McLane must complete
the series of bizarre and often life-threatening tasks, and
Simon would in exchange give the locations of various
explosive devices scattered all over New York City. McLane
is in his quest joined by black storeowner Zeus (played by
Samuel L. Jackson) and two of them slowly discover the true
motive of Simon's actions and diabolical plan that lies
behind the whole mayhem.
Seeing that DIE HARD created whole new sub-genre of action
films, McTiernan and his scriptwriter Jonathan Hensleigh not
only abandoned the DIE HARD formula, but also turned it
upside down. Instead of having action at a single, usually
claustrophobic location, they scatter it all over town and
forcing protagonists to rush from one location to another.
This was an excellent opportunity for numerous exciting and
breath-taking action scenes in which McTiernan again showed
his great talent for this brand of filmmaking. For a while,
viewers are so overwhelmed with spectacular on-screen action
that they forget the fact that the main character is reduced
to cardboard cut-out of himself, at least compared to two
previous films. Some supporting characters are much better,
though - Samuel L. Jackson brings a lot of "buddy buddy"
dynamic to the relationship between Zeus and McLane, while
British actor Jeremy Irons obviously has a lot of fun
playing suave and deadly villain, although he can't compete
with Alan Rickman in the first film. Unfortunately, the film
looses pace in the last segments, the action, albeit
spectacular, is rather predictable and the film nearly
collapses in the finale. The ending, that could have been
perfect with Bad Guys winning (and thus leaving the room for
further sequels and providing McLane with adequate
archrival), is totally uninspiring and lacks any kind of
catharsis seen in previous two films. However, although DIE
HARD: WITH A VENGEANCE represents a huge disappointment for
all those who had expected high standards of original film
(and even compared to 1990 sequel), it is still a good
example of a talented action director displaying his talents
in an entertaining way. It is a shame that for millions of
people this film is not as entertaining as it was only five
weeks ago.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Eric Grossman
     Back in 1988, I remember sitting in a darkened theater watching the 
preview for a new action movie called "Die Hard."  It starred Bruce 
Willis as a New York cop named John McClane who gets stuck in a 
skyscraper filled with terrorists.  At the time, Willis was known mostly 
from the hit show "Moonlighting" and less known for his unsuccessful 
feature outings in "Blind Date" and "Sunset." The audience booed and 
hissed at the screen and I shared their skepticism.  Well, as the say, 
the rest is history.  "Die Hard" turned out to be a seminal action film 
that made gobs of money and spawned a sequel which made even more.  
Countless imitators sprang including:  "Speed" (Die Hard on a Bus), 
"Passenger 57" (Die Hard on an Airplane), and "Under Siege" (Die Hard on 
a Battleship).  The latter, beat the third "Die Hard" to the punch since 
it was supposed to take place on a cruise ship.  The filmmakers were left 
with a dilemma.  First off, all of the good Die Hard concepts had now 
been taken.  Second, how do you justify the same character falling into 
another incredible situation.  
     The answer that director John McTiernan (who directed the original "Die 
Hard" as well as films like "Predator" and "The Last Action Hero") and 
screenwriter Jonathan Hensleigh come up with is a disappointment.  It was 
a good move to bring McClane back to the big apple to fight bad guys.  In 
this case, it is Jeremy Irons playing a sly, mad bomber named Simon, who 
likes to blow up department stores and subways.  But it was a horrible 
move to turn it into a buddy picture.  Samuel L. Jackson plays Zeus, a 
shopkeeper who McClane meets in a contrived scene in Harlem.  The 
Zeus/McClane relationship is a rehash of all the "Lethal Weapon," "48hrs" 
movies.  Not that Jackson isn't good, he's always good, but his character 
is unnecessary and cliche-ridden.
     Although weak, "Die Hard With A Vengeance" is not without its few 
eye-popping moments.  There are some amazing stunts and an 
edge-of-your-seat scene where McClane is trapped in a tunnel with a wall 
of water screaming towards him.  The audience cheered when McClane killed 
a bunch of baddies in an elevator but the climax, involving a helicopter, 
fell remarkably flat.
     The biggest problem is that the film is so over done with 
explosions, stunts, and sound effects that Willis becomes lost in the 
chaos.  He is not given enough snappy dialogue (no yippee-kai-yea line 
either) and his character appears less intelligent than he was in the 
other films.  Most important of all, he doesn't get to kick enough butt!  
     Perhaps the most interesting aspect of this film is that when the painful 
comparison is made to the first film, we can really see just how things 
have changed in seven years.  Pop culture is one the best mirrors our 
society has.  In the first film, McClane bonds over the radio with a 
black cop named Powell.   There was not one word mentioned about race 
between them.  In this film, it predominates McClane's and Zeus' 
dialogue.  "You think all black people can shoot" shouts Zeus.   McClane 
has accompanying dialogue about how Zeus hates him just because he's 
white.  The 90's are too preoccupied with things that have no place in a 
film like this.  I'm beginning to think that there won't be a truly good 
action film until the next decade.
     A few months ago, when I saw the preview for "Die Hard With A Vengeance," 
everybody cheered in anticipation.  We all got it backwards.  The stunts 
are great, but ultimately,  just like its explosions, this movie blows.

Author
Bryant Frazer
Director: John McTiernan
Editor: John Wright, A.C.E.
Starring: Bruce Willis, Samuel L.  Jackson, Jeremy Irons
     It's about midway through DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE when Zeus,
played by Samuel L. Jackson, asks Bruce Willis's John McClane, covered
with distasteful grue, if he's okay.
     That pretty much sums up the operating principles of DIE HARD 3, a
focused bloody action machine of a movie.  The film is so tightly
trained on Willis's cop caricature that nothing else beyond his status
as everyday guy caught up in extraordinary
circumstances--again--matters.  No mention is made of the number of
casualties when a New York City department store is blown to bits in
the middle of the day; we're told no one is killed when an explosion
sends a subway car careening through a Wall Street station; subsequent
acts of brutality are just par for the course.  McClane gets bloodier
and grimier, but he just likens himself to the Energizer Bunny and
takes on another thug.
     Only when the mad bomber suggests that schoolchildren will be the
target of his next attack does anybody's death seem to matter.  Oh,
yeah--the mad bomber.  The story, such as it is, concerns a German
military type (Jeremy Irons) who blows up a midtown Manhattan
department store and then phones in to police headquarters demanding to
speak to McClane, who has been suspended from the force in an alcoholic
haze.  A police shrink explains to the cops and the audience that this
German guy is a psychopath with an obvious vendetta against McClane.
Somehow McClane got on the terrorist's bad side, and the bomber's now
out to make his life hell, sending him charging uptown and downtown,
beating the clock and solving riddles and brain teasers to find and
defuse bombs in the city.
     The first half of the movie is delicious--especially so, I
suspect, for New York audiences, who are treated to a terrific paranoid
fantasy set in familiar locations.  One great scene involves a pay
phone and a trash can at 72nd and Broadway, and another shows why the
quickest route downtown is through Central Park.  It's a little
disconcerting to see Willis wandering through Harlem in his underwear
and a sandwich board boasting a racial epithet--the bomber's first
attempt at humiliating him and perhaps getting him killed--as though
Quentin Tarantino has now made movie houses safe for slurs.  It's not
so much the use of an ugly word as it is the feeling that the scenario
was borne from laziness, a need to jump-start a script (by allowing
pawn-shop owner Jackson to save Willis's life) that takes a few
halfhearted NYC-style swipes at racial issues.
     Fortunately, DIE HARD 3 has inventive performers backing up
Willis's star turn, since they have to make up for Jonathan Hensleigh's
script, which is lacking in almost every regard.  Jackson extracts a
real soul from Hensleigh's Angry Black Man (With a Heart of Gold) paper
doll, and becomes the high-strung nerve center of this movie in the
same way that he was the pumping heart driving Tarantino's PULP
FICTION.  Irons -- ever the trooper--has it even worse, in a role that
should be clever and snide but is instead reliant on Hensleigh's rote
dialogue.  Worse, we're never sure whether his stated intention of
revenging himself on Willis is a red herring, since the connection
between them is so incidental and contrived that it matters not one
whit to the story (which was not originally a DIE HARD film).  Irons
never has the good sense to have his adversary shot in the head when
the opportunity presents itself, but at least the script never puts him
and Willis together in a little room to beat the crap out of one
another.  That's something.
     But let's face it.  The script, tepid as it is, is just a coat
hanger for Willis's bloody, grimy, T-shirted exploits, and the exploits
are pretty fantastic.  DIE HARD director John McTiernan, brought back
alive after his foray into megabomb territory with THE LAST ACTION
HERO, takes some interesting chances with straightforward material.
The best scene by far is an ultraviolent set piece in an elevator that
shows the clear influence of Hong Kong crime films, perhaps by way of
(him again) Tarantino.  The culmination of one long scene in an
aqueduct is a cartoony coincidence that qualifies oddly as dream
logic.  Editor John Wright undertakes some energetic cross-cutting as
the New York police force and Willis, many miles away, both work to
defuse an especially nasty bomb, and we get some artsy time compression
in the weirdest places, courtesy a series of jump cuts and funny
dissolves.
     The verdict?  What we have here is a pretty good movie that falls
apart as it moves toward its episodic conclusion, as though whole sections
of the story were dumped.  The story and especially the dialogue are major
liabilities (as is Michael Kamen's stupid, militaristic score), but we're
treated to the work of performers who can pull it out in a pinch.  Did we
mention Bruce Willis?  Anyone who still has the chutzpah to argue with
Willis-as-working-class-hero just doesn't understand American action
movies--and his solid performances in PULP FICTION and the wonderful
NOBODY'S FOOL prove that he is, indeed, very talented.  This one's a good,
exciting flick, and it probably bodes well for the future of action movies
that have a little more there there, if you know what I mean.  And I hope
these folks understand that we really, really, don't need to see DIE HARD
4. 

Author
Eric Sansoni
     DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE cruises confidently through the familiar
territory of the urban action thriller genre.  In these movies, the
chief ingredients are cops, bombs, and high speed chases in which motor
vehicles travel the reverse direction down a one-way street at least
once before the curtain falls.  We go to see a movie like this to be
wowed by stunts and action, which DIE HARD 3 gleefully provides.
     In its first fairly suspenseful hour, some bows are made in the
direction of a storyline.  A mad bomber played by Jeremy Irons is at
work in New York City.  He phones in demands to the police station for
one John McClane to appear under dangerous circumstances in a ghetto
neighborhood, for no reason more logical than that there can't be a
"Die Hard" sequel without Bruce Willis.  Here he teams up with Samuel
Jackson.  The bomber decides to manipulate both him and Willis with
further challenges prompted by nursery rhyme-inspired riddles.   Once
Irons has every cop (and librarian) in New York City distracted with
his bomb threats, he enacts his truly devious plan.  Willis, having no
more information than anyone else in the city, deduces what that plan
is and, with Jackson, spends the second half of the movie attempting to
foil it.  Jackson works longer with Willis in this movie than any sane
New York City civilian would.  Of course this is necessary so that they
can trade one liners back and forth and rescue each other from certain
death, as is required by the conventions of the buddy picture genre.
     Willis and Jackson make for a lively crime-fighting pair.  Willis,
who at the outset of the movie is separated from his wife, suspended
from the police force, and suffering a hangover, once again portrays an
everyman hero who invites our sympathy.  Jackson, fresh from PULP
FICTION (with a  lineup of recent roles reminiscent of Joe Pesci's
versatility in films ranging from GOODFELLAS to LETHAL WEAPON 2 and 3),
creates a likable streetwise personality who's along for the ride and
enjoys most of it.  Some racial tension surfaces between them, good for
some comic relief, but the screenplay isn't interested in resolving
human dramas of this sort.  Irons is convincing as a deviously
intelligent villain for these men.  In fact, he is the only noteworthy
one in a screenplay that gets curiously economical with Irons' love
interest's dialogue.  She must be in at least half of his scenes, but
doesn't voice more than one or two lines.  Female roles don't play a
big part in this genre entry, with even Willis' wife having been
written out of the series.
     Implausible plot developments have become a staple of this genre.
I'd be surprised if audiences haven't started looking forward to them
by now as part of the fun.  DIE HARD 3 has several, including one which
rivals the eighteen circling planes of the previous DIE HARD or the
highway gap leap of SPEED's L.A. bus.  Irons has issued a bomb threat
on one of 1,400 schools in the New York City area.  Clues lead the
police to the threatened school and the bomb is discovered.  Rather
than immediately evacuate the building, the authorities lead the
schoolchildren to the auditorium and have them wait there while the
bomb squad attempts to defuse the bomb.  Only when the time counter has
almost reached bottom do the police send everyone out of the building.
It's done to provide some contrived suspense in a movie that never
quite convinces us it hasn't been manufactured, but which stands as a
mostly well-built construction nevertheless.
     Director John McTiernan, with a resume including THE HUNT FOR RED
OCTOBER, PREDATOR, and the original "Die Hard" adventure, is an old pro
at this kind of movie.  With DIE HARD 3, he gets back in style after
the forgettable outings MEDICINE MAN and LAST ACTION HERO.  The action
set pieces soar by at a breakneck pace, covering more ground with more
chase scenes than John McClane's previous adventures.  The vehicles of
choice for the action include cars, taxis, subway trains, helicopters,
ocean liners, and garbage trucks.  All are choreographed, photographed,
and edited into smoothly exciting showcases of kinetic energy.
Characters jump from one stunt sequence to another breathlessly enough
that the movie breezes past all questions of likelihood, providing
slick, diverting entertainment and leaving you asking "Wait a
minute..." only after the lights go up.
--
     ----- Eric Sansoni ----- sanson08@futures.wharton.upenn.edu -----

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Time has worked in favor of DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE, the first gas- 
guzzling action sequel of the summer.  We've had over five years to 
forget the formulas of both DIE HARD (1988) and DIE HARDER (1990), so we 
don't really notice that the new film isn't set at Christmastime, and 
that it doesn't involve the character of McClane's wife.  We've also 
forgotten the *follies* of the first films-- such as continuity errors 
and tone problems.  (Remember the Pacific Bell telephones in DIE HARD 
2?) So, even with the original DIE HARD director John McTiernan back at 
the helm, the new DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE feels different-- like a 
second-cousin to the source material.  And it feels fresh, thanks to a 
strong cast, a great plot, and the best location for filming on the face 
of the earth.
     Bruce Willis is back as John McClane, the New York cop known for ending 
up in the wrong place at the wrong time.  These days he's not doing too 
well-- he's on suspension, estranged from his wife, and suffering from a 
hangover that lasts the entire film.  His salvation from self-destruct- 
ion is a Harlem repair-shop owner (Samuel L.  Jackson), who becomes 
McClane's reluctant partner in a battle of wits against a riddle-toting 
bomber (Jeremy Irons).  Jackson's character seems to be written as 
McClane's "human side," but their relationship is never adequately 
fleshed-out.  They don't bond.  The casting of aristocratic actor Jeremy 
Irons as the villain is a nice touch, though.  He has a grand old time 
hacking his way through a bad German accent, even if he isn't terribly, 
ahem, animated.
     The plot of DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE plays more like a caper-film than 
anything else.  The superbly staged action sequences are little more 
than bookends to a marvelously intricate heist that recalls a certain 
1964 James Bond film.  The car chases and subway explosions are a gas, 
to be sure, but what's really neat is watching the bad guys march right 
through Wall Street in an audacious daylight robbery.  (The rest of the 
plot has Willis et al tracking down chemical bombs.  Its an amusing 
division.)
     Not surprisingly, DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE runs low on steam at the 
end.  When the caper concludes, all that's left is for the bad guys to 
get theirs.  Unfortunately, the last two sequences, involving a ship and 
a helicopter, are rushed and they don't deliver the expected emotional 
payoff.  Instead of flash, its a fizzle.  The movie just ends.  There 
are other examples of bad editing, such as the many small plot details 
that need more explanation.  For example, just how *does* McClane manage 
to muster cross-jurisdictional support at the very end of the story?  A 
tighter film (ala SPEED) wouldn't care, but DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE is 
too big for that sort of nonsense. Blame the rushed production schedule.
     The most enjoyable aspect of DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE is, of course, 
New York City.  The villains blow up Wall Street, the heroes careen 
through Central Park, and everyone keeps asking about last night's 
lotto.  There's flourish after flourish, from spectators gawking at fire 
engines to dump-truck drivers who know obscure presidential trivia.  For 
a good ninety minutes, Bruce, Sam, and Jeremy play opposite the film's 
most colorful character, the City.  Who can say what's more exciting, 
subway trains exploding, or *New York* subway trains exploding?

Author
Christopher Null
     To make the long and extremely silly plotline of DIE HARD WITH A
VENGEANCE short, it breaks down like this.  John McClane (Bruce Willis) is
back in New York City where he's separated from his wife.  The brother of
Hans Gruber, from the original DIE HARD, is out to get McClane and make
some cash for himself in the process, bringing a pack of East German
stooges with him to cause trouble.  Add to this the character Zeus (Samuel
L. Jackson), a Harlem shop owner, who becomes McClane's unlikely sidekick,
and a whole lotta bombs exploding all over the city, and what do you get?
Well, I still haven't figured that out.
     I was a big fan of the original DIE HARD and had high expectations for
this third entry into the series.  Unfortunately, the only real similarity
to the former (besides the main character and a bunch of explosions) are
the jokes, which the creators felt were so good the first time around that
they'd go ahead and use them again.  Even worse, they borrow material from
PULP FICTION when the original jokes have run out.  I guess it was supposed
to be clever, but it reeks of unoriginality.
     The point of an action thriller like this is that it's supposed to be
exciting and keep you on the edge of your seat.  DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE
does neither.  Most of the time it's boring because the story is almost
pure nonsense.  Seriously, is no one going to catch on that Jeremy Irons
(as Simon Gruber) and his thugs are *not* from around here?  And what's
with Simon's fetish for ancient brain teasers to keep McClane running
around, searching for bombs?  Unfortunately, I don't have the answers to
these questions, and the bottom line is that the plot just doesn't gel.
Wait until you see how ridiculous it is when they find the bad guys'
hideout at the end.
     Not to be completely scathing, there are a few good points.  Jackson
is excellent in his role, and he is solely responsible for redeeming this
film from the one-star basement.  (Surprisingly, every other character is
completely one-dimensional, and even Willis looks tired.)  Oh, and the
explosions are pretty cool.  The time goes by fairly quickly, so you never
feel stuck in one of those endless movies, but all in all, by the time you
leave, you certainly won't be screaming for DIE HARDER WITH A VENGEANCE.

Author
Steve Kong
The third in the Die Hard Trilogy, Die Hard: With a Vengeance marks the
return of John McTiernan to the series. Vengeance also marks the first time
that Die Hard has veered from it's original formula. There really is no
enclosed space in Die Hard: With a Vengeance. In Die Hard it was John
McClane in the Nakatomi building. In Die Hard 2 it was John McClane in the
Dulles Airport. There is a hint of sticking to the original formula, but
that is a long draw of the imagination, Die Hard: With a Vengeance is John
McClane in New York City. In Vengeance McClane is no longer alone either
and it is also not Christmas.
John McClane is down and out in New York. He's on suspension from his
department and he's lying around at home drinking and well, lying around.
That is until someone takes an interest in him. This special someone wants
to be called Simon and Simon wants to play a simple game with McClane,
"Simon Says". Though this set up is pretty simple as the movie progresses
we begin to see what is really happening and why Simon is playing games
with McClane and the rest of the New York Police Department.
Forced into the situation is Zeus (Samuel L. Jackson) Carver, a black
storeowner who saves McClane's life early on in the film. Zeus is a great
add-on and provides much of the comic relief with McClane. The two of them
squabble like the Odd Couple but they are forced to work together by Simon.
And together they must solve a few puzzles that Simon has set out for them;
or else something big will blow up.
The opening sequence for Die Hard: With a Vengeance packs a mighty punch. I
have not seen any movie open quite like Vengeance, the opening sequence
literally grabs your attention and holds on to it. I commend McTiernan for
such a great opening.
The one thing that I did not like about Vengeance is its running time. The
movie runs almost two and half-hours, which is a bit long for an action
movie. Though there is a lot of story to be told in Vengeance, some stuff
could have been cut out for time issues. The biggest thing that shows this
is the anti-climatic ending. I thought the film was over, but then the film
continued on for, it almost seemed, another 15 to 20 minutes. This is OK
though because McTiernan is able to set up some good action sequences with
the puzzles that Simon has set up. My favourite of this film includes
McClane surfing and a wide ride through the park.
Though a bit long, Die Hard: With a Vengeance packs a punch that starts
from the opening scene and lasts till the end. There is enough action
packed into this film to satisfy two films, but it never wears the audience
out. And that is the brilliance of Die Hard: With a Vengeance, it is a well
put together film that is good enough to keep the audience in check while
still blowing them away with some pretty spectacular action sequences.
McTiernan shows that he still has the eye for good action. Don't miss Die
Hard: With a Vengeance.

Author
Rob Furr
     Last week, I saw a Jackie Chan movie in a theatre for the first
time.  Aside from the incredible non-stop physical comedy, the most
notable thing about DRUNKEN MASTER was the extent that Chan made of his
surroundings.  Where an American action film would simply have two
characters enage in a stand-up fight, possibly but not probably using a
chair as a weapon, Chan and his antagonists constantly made use of
their environment; chairs, tables, trees, rocks, doors, windows, pots,
jugs, sticks, anything and everything in their surroundings could be
and was used and involved in the fight sequences.
     I was reminded of DRUNKEN MASTER while I watched DIE HARD WITH A
VENGEANCE, the third installment in Bruce Willis' caper-film series.
The distinguishing factor of all DIE HARD-like films is their use of
their environment; last summer's SPEED and the first DIE HARD are
possibly the best of the sort in their use of their premises.  Like
Chan, the combatants in a DIE HARD film make use of or are affected by
their environments--and usually these environments are strictly
limited.  The hero is on a bus, or in a building, or on a battleship,
or a plane.  DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE, on the other hand, shares its
stomping ground with THE TAKING OF PELHAM ONE TWO THREE: New York.
     That's both the problem with DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE and its
best aspect.  The problem is that the tight confinement that comes with
planes, buses, buildings, and boats limits the screenwriter's options
and thus improves the Chan-like action.  Instead of having to ask the
question "Okay, what does the hero obtain to solve this problem," the
screenwriter merely has to ask "How can the hero use what is available
to solve the problem," which usually provides a far more interesting
answer.  John MacClane (according to the end credits of this film; I'd
thought that the hero's name was John MacClaine in the previous
outings.  Que sera sera...) was handed an extremely limited set of
options in his first appearance, and it made for one of the all-time
great action movies.  His options and choices were enlarged for DIE
HARD 2: DIE HARDER, and the tension was reduced.  His third film is set
in an extremely large place ... and it *is* harmed by it, when compared
to the majesty of the original.
     However, ... this *is* New York.  Everyone in the *world* knows
New York, just like everyone knows what a building is, or a plane, or a
boat, and the potential for creative use of New York is endless.  We
*know* what Central Park is, we know Harlem, we know Wall Street ...
and when DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE is *using* New York, it almost
reaches the heights of its illustrious predecessor.  Just as we're
astonished and amused when Jackie Chan fights off a horde of enraged
waiters with chopsticks, we can be entertained by creative use of New
York, and we are.  Or, at least, I was when DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE
showed me the fastest way to go ninety blocks in a cab, when it
demonstrated exactly what the wrong thing to wear on 121st street was,
what the best way to get fourteen dump trucks sixty miles north was,
and so on.  The creative use of New York in DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE
is easily the equal of SPEED's creative use of the L.A. highway
system, and far superior to THE TAKING OF PELHAM ONE TWO THREE's use of
the New York subway system.
     So we have the down side--an enormous place for action to take
place in--and the up side--a really good enormous place for the action
to take place in.  On the down side, we also have the fact that this is
a DIE HARD movie, and therefore the glorious surprise of the original
DIE HARD is no longer possible.  DIE HARD 2: DIE HARDER tried and
failed to shock the audience with the creativity of its caper, and DIE
HARD WITH A VENGEANCE doesn't even really try.  We know very early in
the film what the scam is and how things are supposed to go ... at
least initially.  This removes another element of tension from the
movie, but it's replaced by the finest in Hollywood skill.  DIE HARD
was a demonstration of John McTiernan's genius; DIE HARD WITH A
VENGEANCE is a demonstration of his masterful craftsmanship.  While it
won't be studied in years to come in film class, it will in no way
subtract from his reputation and it is in no way a black mark on his or
anyone else's record.  The special effects are, for the most part,
excellent, primarily because of their subtlety.  The direction is crisp
and assured, the cinematography is uniformly good, and there are some
*damn* good roles in this movie.  Instead of giving us another
character in the mold of Dwayne T.  Robinson (played by Paul Gleason in
the original film) or William Atherton's Thornburg (the two false notes
in an otherwise perfect movie,) DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE presents us
with competent and engaging, if not deep, characters who are played by
actors in full command of their abilities.  Of especial note is a
character whose name I unfortunately did not catch and could therefore
not look up in the credits: the role of the bomb disposal expert, which
could have been a cheap joke, is filled by an actor who I've never seen
before but look forward to seeing again.  The music is also of note:
just as Beethoven was used in the original, "Johnny Comes Marching
Home" is a recurring and highly effective theme in this film--I plan on
buying the soundtrack, which, considering that the last soundtrack I
bought was for THE RIGHT STUFF, is saying something.
     There are, of course, some leaps of logic, some coincidences, and
some rather silly events that happen, but for the most part, DIE HARD
WITH A VENGEANCE moves forward with assurance, with a reasonably good
story (which I have carefully tried not to spoil.  The problem with
writing a review of this sort of movie is not ruining it ahead of
time,) decent if sketchy characters, and a high level of
craftsmanship.  DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE may not be the summer's
biggest hit, but I can definitely say that it begins the summer season
on a relatively high note.  On the Furr Scale (of quality and
ambition:  I rate films based on how well they achieve what they want
to do.  A four-star one star film, such as EVIL DEAD II cannot be rated
on the same scale with any justice as a one-star four star film such as
HEAVEN'S GATE.  Suffice it to say that I consider ROBOCOP to be a
three-star three star movie, or, a reasonably ambitious movie that
fufillis its ambitions well.  THE SPECIALIST was a one star three star
movie, or a reasonably ambitious movie that failed utterly, and LOCAL
HERO was a four-star two star movie, or a movie that didn't aim too
high, but did what it tried to do *insanely* well,) I give DIE HARD
WITH A VENGEANCE the rating of a three-star three star movie.

Author
Jeffrey Haber
     Having enjoyed the first two "Die Hard" installments, I was really
looking forward to this new sequel.  With John McTiernan returning to the
director's chair and Jeremy Irons and Samuel L. Jackson in the cast, my 
hopes were high.  But what a huge disappointment it turn out to be.
     The movie stars Bruce Willis as John McClane, the blue-collar hero 
who always seems to be up against impossible odds.  This time, we find him 
separated from his wife, down on his luck, and back with the New York 
Police Department.  McClane's precinct gets a call from a mysterious
German named Simon (Jeremy Irons) who turns out to be the brother of 
Hans Gruber, the terrorist from the first film.  Simon has already 
blown up a department store, and threatens to go ahead with more 
bombings unless McClane goes to Harlem wearing a racist sign.  McClane
obeys, and is reluctantly saved by a white-hating electronics store
owner, Zeus Carver (Jackson).  For most of the film, Simon phones in
cryptic riddles and leads McClane and Zeus on a wild chase around 
Manhattan to diffuse bombs at various locations, including parks,
subways, and schools.  All of this, however, is designed to keep
the cops occupied while Simon's gang steals $100 billion from the 
Federal Reserve vault.
     One of the problems with "DHWAV" is that it never really generates
any tension between McClane and the bad guys.  Unlike the first two films,
there are surprisingly few gunfights and hand-to-hand fisticuffs; even
those that do appear in the film are awkwardly shot (annoying, jerky 
camera movements are used in some of the scenes).  Most of the action
comes from generic explosions and car crashes, and after seeing this 
for a while, it no longer holds up as a source of excitement.
     Jonathan Hensleigh's script needed a serious rewrite.  There are
acres of plot holes (where did Simon's army come from? How did they
break into the Federal Reserve so easily?), the ending is conveniently
slapped on, and the characters are poorly conceived.  McClane loses a 
lot of his likability; the script unwisely gives him a hangover at 
the beginning of the film, so instead of the street-smart, take-charge
character from the first two movies, we are given a sluggish, slow-footed
McClane.  Meanwhile, Samuel Jackson's role is written as a wide-eyed,
disbelieving black guy who can't stand the white cop he must work with.  
The relationship plays out like a bad ripoff of the Mel Gibson/Danny Glover
"Lethal Weapon" tandem.
     Could "DHWAV" have been done better? Absolutely, and that's the shame 
of it all.  Considering the talent involved and the previous history of
the "Die Hard" films, it's disconcerting to see such a bomb go off.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This is no ordinary movie review. It's a movie review _with a
vengeance_. Well, no, actually it is just an average review. There's not
much vengeance in this good-natured all-American teenage boy. Who
am I kidding, I shot a convenience store clerk last week because they
were out of Lemonheads.
        This third installment in the guy-who-just-won't-die series
has the usual contrived explosions and death traps. Sure, I use the
word "contrived" in a negative context all the time, but when milked
for eye-popping effects and genuine suspense, contrivances can be a
great blessing to a movie, a substitute for logic, intelligence or
poignancy. DIE HARD, LETHAL WEAPON, TRUE LIES and other
such action movies realize their audiences love the far-fetched plots
and one-in-a-million odds of survival for the main character.
        This time around, Bruce Willis's McClane character (not the
New Age guru) is caught up in a cat-and-mouse game with villain
Jeremy Irons (the evil Scar from THE LION KING, though it could be
argued Elton John was the real villain of the movie), who leads Willis
on a series of missions to avoid detonation of bombs in public places.
On the first such mission, where Irons sends Bruce Willis to Harlem
wearing a huge racial slur on his shirt (the only more dangerous place
I can think of to wear such a shirt is the halls of a public high school).
That's where he meets up with Zeus (Samuel L. Jackson), who saves
him from destruction by a knife-wielding street gang (again,
reminiscent of a public high school), only to be drawn into the
cat-and-mouse game.
        DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE quickly becomes a buddy
picture, with Willis and Jackson against Irons, who soon loots all the
gold from the Federal Reserve Bank while all the city cops are called
to locate a bomb in--you guessed it--a public school (you knew I was
going somewhere with that "public school" stuff). Jackson is a
welcome addition to the DIE HARD series. He would have seemed like
a blatant Danny Glover LETHAL WEAPON clone if his character
hadn't been a racist, the black-man-with-a-grudge-against-whitey
stereotype you wouldn't be surprised to see wearing a black suit and
hood. Sad to say, that's all there is in the way of a character sketch for
this guy, but he's still not completely wasted here.
        Part 3 may not be as good as the other DIE HARD movies,
but it is good, non-stop action and explosions. Check your brain at the
door (if you have one--a brain, not a door, though it could reasonably
be argued that without a door, there would be no place to check you
brain, but it doesn't take a brain to figure that out... or a door) and
enjoy.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at http://www.missouri.edu/~c6677=
78/movies.html

Author
Stephen Rafferty
Directed by John McTiernan
Starring Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Jeremy Irons.
Screenplay by Jonathan Hensleigh
     At it's best, the third installment of the "Die Hard" series is a
hair-raising, non-stop ride.  At worst, it is a terribly cliched action
flick, with a horrible villain.  Luckily, the film seems to stay on the
first course, but is brought down every so often by the latter.
     Bruce Willis returns as John McClane, the New York cop who we've
seen defend the Nakatomi building in LA, and an airport in the
mid-west.  Now he is back in NYC and is on suspension, when a bomb goes
off in downtown Manhattan.  A mysterious bomber called Simon, (Jeremy
Irons with a horrendous German accent) saying he wants to play a game
with John McClane or he'll set off more bombs.  It turns out that Simon
is the brother of the the terrorist that McClane threw off the Nakatomi
building in DIE HARD 1.  Thus starts a goose chase which pits McClane's
wits against Simon's.  At the first installment, McClane runs into a
shop owner in Harlem called Zeus, played by Samuel Jackson.  Zeus saves
McClane's life and is thrust into the game with him.  The pair are asked
to work out mathematical and word riddles in order to keep Simon from
blowing up more buildings.
     Eventually we find out Simon is not motivated by the cause we
thought, and is simply trying to steal from the Federal Reserve.  Of
course, McClane figures this out quickly and works to subvert the
ex-army leader Simon.  The action culminates in a confrontation outside
a motel in Canada.
     This film has some of the best car chase scenes I've ever seen,
including a wild short-cut through Central Park.  Willis is again adept
as the constantly mischievious cop, and he performs physically even
better than in the original film.  Late in the film he is covered with
blood and grease, and it is so vivid that one can almost smell and feel
it's sticky, engulfing aaaggghhh!  Willis and Jackson are paired well
together here, with a lot of chemistry on screen.  Willis shines
brightest when he is playing off Jackson, and Jackson is so on top of
his craft right now he needs no-one, he's just plain good!  However,
that can not be said for Jeremy Irons, who is easily the worst part of
this film.  He can't pull off a believable German accent, and postures
so theatrically he looks like a statue.  For a man who so often dazzles
us with fine acting, I have to wonder what happened to Irons here?
Could John McTiernan just not handle him, or did he want such a cheesy
performance?  Regardless, it does not work, and Irons really brings the
film down a notch
     It's not the best of the series, but I do recommend DIE HARD WITH A
VENGEANCE for anyone who wants to see some great action, and some nice
work between Willis and Jackson.

Author
Nizam Ahmed
     When Renny Harlin's DIE HARD 2 hit the big screen several years
ago, it was to universal criticism.  Christmas Eve again?
Single-handedly saving an entire airport again?  Most negative views
centred around the film's huge body count and it's lack of screen
sophistication and subtlety.  But never believe the hype: DIE HARD 2 was
as exciting, action-packed, adrenaline-pumping and fun as the first, if
not more so.  DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE has attracted similar criticism
to it's predecessors.  But history has repeated itself: the film is
Hollywood entertainment at it's best, a roller-coaster ride that is the
most satisfying movie of the summer.
     There are big changes this time round: no Bonnie Bedelia (as
McClane's estranged wife), no enclosed setting, no ventilation shafts.
But there is Samuel Jackson as a Harlem businessman with an acid
tongue, accidentally finding himself running around New York with
McClane at the beck and call of a German mad bomber with explosives
planted in one of NY's 500 schools.
     The whole thing is ridiculous fun, stretching credibility to the
limit with a taxi drive straight through Central Park, surviving a 100
foot drop onto concrete, outrunning a million-gallon torrent of water
in a truck (in reverse).  This is where it suffers in comparison to DIE
HARD and DIE HARD 2.  Even amongst all the mayhem, there was still some
contact with reality there.  Some of the events depicted here are so
over-the-top they're laughable.  The dialogue between Zeus and McClane
is funny at times, though never quite as snappy as it could have been,
and the bad guys are not as mean as in the first two.
     But forget that: this is still suspense, excitement, adventure on
every level.  Lightning has struck yet again.  Watch this and the last
thing you will have is a bad day.
