Title
Review for King Is Alive, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Laura Clifford
A missed plane changes the itinerary of a small group of European and American
tourists so they're put on a bus to make their next connection.  Liz (Janet
McTeer, "Tumbleweeds") frets that the journey is taking too long and is fed
comforting words by her husband Ray (Bruce Davison, "X-Men").  But when night 
turns into day, they discover that the compass bus driver Kanana (Peter 
Kubheka, "The Air Up There") has been relying on doesn't work.  Stranded in an 
abandoned mining town 500 miles from anywhere, English actor Henry's (David 
Bradley, "Prick Up Your Ears") idea of staging 'King Lear' sets the stage for 
the full range of human emotion in "The King is Alive."
Cowriter(with Anders Thomas Jensen)/director Kristian Levring is
the fourth founder of Dogme 95 (along with Lars von Trier, "Breaking the 
Waves;" Thomas Vinterberg, "The Celebration;" and Soren Kragh Jacobsen, 
"Mifune"), making his feature directorial debut with "The King Is Alive."
The ensemble cast create unique and complex characters that form a
microcosm of society.  Jack (Miles Anderson, "Cry Freedom") is the adventurer,
who gives the group the five rules of surviving in the desert before setting 
off for help.  Henry is the artist whose exercise of writing out the roles of 
King Lear from memory casts him as the group's director.  Drawn to him is 
Catherine (Romane Bohringer, "Colonel Chabert"), a young French woman who 
fancies herself an intellectual yet turns down the offer of 
Cordelia's part.  That goes to Gina (Jennifer Jason Leigh), an
American vamp disdained by Catherine but looked upon fondly by Henry (and 
lasciviously by the other white males).  Paul (Chris Walker) is a coarse, loud 
Englishman accompanied by mousy wife Amanda (Lia Williams) on a trip designed 
to bond with father Charles (David Calder, "The World is Not Enough").  Ray and 
Liz are a married couple whose suppressed accusations don't withstand the 
first evening's alcoholic blowout.  Ashley (late character actor Brion James, 
to whom the film is dedicated) is the initial Lear, done in by the DTs.  
Local Kanana is the object of scorn, lust, revenge and racism.
Moses (Vusi Kunene, "The Air Up There") is a hermit found in the village who 
acts as the story's narrator.
Levring and Jensen use 'King Lear' as a springboard for alliances,
cliques, divisions, betrayals and ultimately madness.   Yet for all the 
fascinating behavior so finely created by the cast, the screenwriters 
overindulge with several melodramatic sexual alliances - lust in the dust 
indeed.  These people may have something to prove, but Levring so ably 
makes us feel his characters discomfort ('I feel like a pig! I want
a bath!' proclaims Liz) that sex seems an unlikely outlet for them.  Gina's 
sacrifice for her 'art' via a most unlikely pairing plays especially false 
despite the actors' craft.  Still, the dialogue is often devastating.  Newly 
awakened Amanda tells Paul 'I knew you were nothing special but I 
didn't let that bother me because I wanted a peaceful life.'
Using three handheld digital video cameras, Levring achieves a
rich, color-saturated look at his exotic location of Kolmanskop, Namibia which 
is truly the star of his film.  The ever shifting sands provide texture, Gina's 
lip gloss and chartreuse satin shirt reflect light and splotches and streaks of 
paint on interior concrete walls provide both character definition and a 
modern art background.  Editor Nicholas Wayman Harris makes offbeat, 
unusual choices.  A one second cutaway of a woman's midriff from a
closeup of her face punches up the montage.  The sudden lack of sound during 
aerial shots intensify the utter isolation while allowing us to soak in the 
spectacular beauty of the terrain uninterrupted.
"The King Is Alive" attempts to encompass the human condition via a
woefully off course tourist bus.  Despite a couple of wrong turns, it takes us 
to places both known and uncharted.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The fourth and final of the original Dogme 95 films, and the first to both
be shot outside Denmark and feature non-Danish acting talent, The King is
Alive is just as ambitious as its heavily hyped cinematic brethren, but like
the last two (Mifune and The Idiots), it just doesn't measure up to the
first (The Celebration). It does, however, come the closest.
[Dogme, in case you've been held captive in a multiplex for the last three
years, is the experimental Danish film aesthetic (created by that Dancer in
the Dark madman, Lars von Trier) that, among other things, demands directors
use handheld cameras and shoot their scenes sequentially while forbidding
the use of artificial lighting, sound (including music) and props.]
The film begins in the North African desert (it was shot in Namibia), where
a bus with ten international tourists hurtles through the barren, sandy
terrain. But the onboard compass is on the fritz, and the bus has traveled
several hundred miles off course before driver Moses (Vusi Kunene) notices.
To make matters worse, when the bus stops to refuel, it is discovered that
the giant petrol cans in the storage area are empty. The passengers now find
themselves stranded in an abandoned German mining town that offers only
shelter and a potentially crazy old man named Kanana (Peter Khubeke), who
narrates the film in Swahili (it's subtitled - don't panic).
Aussie passenger Jack (Miles Anderson), the only experienced outdoorsman of
the lot, decides to try his luck at hiking to the nearest town, which,
according to Kanana, is over 150 miles away. The remaining travelers choose
the houses they want to call home and have a big party their first night in
the middle of nowhere. But after several days pass with no word from Jack,
it becomes clear the vacationers might be in for an extended stay. They
survive on canned carrots abandoned by the Germans and dew (as in
condensation, not Mountain). Kind of makes the soupy rice from the Kucha
tribe sound pretty good, huh?
If you were stranded in an abandoned town, staging a production of King Lear
would probably be the furthest thing from your mind, but that's just what
Henry (David Bradley) decides the group should do to take their minds off
their potentially grave predicament. He knows Lear by heart and begins to
handwrite parts for his fellow castaways. The play, however, is merely the
catalyst for all of the wanton sex acts and post-coital jealousy you'd
expect in such a tiny community. Envy and lust run unchecked among the group
of seemingly self-destructive men, leaving the women in a rare leadership
role. Lear, at least according to strandee Liz (Janet McTeer, Tumbleweeds),
is the perfect play to produce because "nobody has to fall in love, and
everybody gets to die in the end."
This isn't the breathtaking desert we saw in The English Patient - it looks
like it could eat you alive when the sun goes down (in fact, if this was a
Hollywood film, something would probably be stalking them once it got dark).
Although The King is full of stark images and vivid colors, it looks its
best at night, when the group is gathered around their fire Director
Kristian Levring, who co-wrote the film with Mifune's Anders Thomas Jensen,
and his digital camera catch every flaw on the face of each actor's
weather-worn skin. It's as gritty as the Mexican portion of Traffic, but
with more color than yellow. There also seems to be more editing than the
previous Dogme films.
You could think of The King as a combination of The Blair Witch Project and
Survivor targeted toward a highbrow arthouse audience instead of the
teeming, unwashed masses. The film reminded me of so many other things -
Cast Away, The Lord of the Flies, Hitchcock's Lifeboat, Apocalypse Now -
that it's easy to think The King will follow one of their trajectories, but
it really doesn't.
The King was shot in the summer of 1999 and wrapped just a few days before
brilliant character actor Brion James, best known for his work in Blade
Runner, died of a heart attack. It's ironic that his character is the first
of the film's passengers to experience any type of physical ailment.
Although the acting here is more than solid, Jennifer Jason Leigh (eXistenZ)
and beautiful French actress Romane Bohringer are the standouts.
1:49 - Rated R for sexuality (nudity) and language

Author
Steve Rhodes
Since she used to work in the theater, Gina (Jennifer Jason Leigh) 
eagerly accepts the chance to play the central role of Cordelia in "King 
Lear."  Her unexplained theatrical job might well have been at a place 
called something like the Pussy Cat Lounge, but Gina is nonetheless 
delighted.  The problem, in Kristian Levring's THE KING IS ALIVE, is the 
circumstance which causes this opportunity for Gina to arise.
As Gina travels with a random collection of tourists, the bus gets lost 
on a dirt road and runs out of gas in an extremely barren section of the 
African desert.  Luckily they find an abandoned mining town nearby where 
they can take shelter until the hoped for rescuers arrive.  In order to 
pass the time, a Shakespearean trained English actor among them suggests 
that they put on a production of "King Lear."  Some find the idea 
complete folly, but eventually most of them begin to take part.  Most of 
the lines of the play, of course, seem to apply to their situation.
The hot desert sun quickly fries their brains and nerves, causing them 
scandalously to say exactly what they are really thinking rather than 
the polite blather that we usually take for conversation.  In the superb 
cast, Bruce Davison and Janet McTeer play Ray and Liz, a sad, childless 
couple.  She's a bitch, and he's a cynic, a fact to which they both seem 
unhappily resigned.  "You don't have to worry, you know," Liz tells Ray 
about the play, when she wants to take part but he doesn't.  "Nobody has 
to fall in love, and everyone gets to die in the end."
The acerbic script by Anders Thomas Jensen and Kristian Levring has 
characters generally going after each other with words rather than 
showy, emotional outbursts.  The film, shot according to the strict 
Dogme 95 rules, features all natural lighting and sets.  It is one of 
the few Dogme films that is actually enhanced by the technique.  Here 
the harsh lighting and the intimate, handheld camerawork blend in 
perfectly with the austerity of the setting.  
The picture, however, does have its logical and technical problems.  The 
characters stay outside and get parched by the glaring sun when it would 
only make sense to perform the play indoors.  And why cinematographer 
Jens Schlosser keeps framing scenes so that people's eyes, the most 
expressive part of one's anatomy, are chopped off remains a mystery.  
As their strength wanes and it looks like no one will ever come to save 
them, the story gets more and more intriguing.  And, as their minds 
become focused on survival, the human drama ratchets up in intensity.  
The ending will not be satisfying to everyone, but this isn't the type 
of picture that is made to appeal to the masses.  Suffice it to say that 
it worked for me.
THE KING IS ALIVE runs 1:45.  It is rated R for sexuality and language 
and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 8, 2001.  
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Robin Clifford
A disparate band of travelers is stranded in a remote part of northern
Africa. They take the only means of transportation, a bus, across the
desert to safety. But, a faulty compass causes them to stray 500 miles out
of their way when the bus breaks down. One intrepid member of the troupe
heads off, alone, for help. The rest are left to fend for themselves in
latest of the Dogma 95 manifesto films, "The King Is Alive."
Helmer Kristian Levring provides the fourth installment in the
stripped-down film aesthetics of the Dogma 95 movement founded by the
director and Lars Von Trier. The intent of the movement is to bringing
filmmaking back to its essence - no artificial props, lighting or sets, no
sound effects or special visual F/X,  location shooting only, etc. Levring
is fulfills the dictates of the Dogma Manifesto with his story of a journey
of lost souls.
When the dozen or so passengers find themselves stranded at an abandoned
mining town hundreds of miles from nowhere in the middle of Africa's Namib
Desert, they have nothing. The man with survival experience, Jack (Miles
Anderson), treks off to find help after explaining the five rules of
survival to those remaining - find water, find food, find shelter, stay
visible and keep your spirits up.
One of the group, Henry (David Bradley), a stage thespian, realizes the
dire strait they are all in and begins to write out all the roles to
Shakespeare's "King Lear," mainly to kill the time and keep his sanity.
When he suggests to one of the others, a feisty French girl named Catherine
(Romane Bohringer), they read the play and learn the parts as a panacea for
their dilemma, she glibly turns him down. But, as things get worse and
their isolation continues, the appeal to take part in the play increases
amongst them all, with each succumbing to the relief the project offers.
As Henry's idea unfolds and takes shape with the players, there is
dissention in the ranks as infighting breaks out. Husband and wife Ray
(Bruce Davison) and Liz (Janet McTeer) are in conflict as Liz,
disillusioned with Ray, humiliates him by openly trying to seduce the other
men in the troupe. Amanda (Lia Williams) soon realizes that her significant
other, Paul (Chris Walker), is a bully and a pig and wants nothing to do
with him. Catherine thinks that Gina (Jennifer Jason Leigh) is just another
clinging, needy American, while older Charles just wants carnal knowledge
with Gina to prove his masculinity - to himself. Ashley (Brion James) is an
alcoholic who, because of the forced isolation without the benefit of
booze, is suffering from a severe case of the delirium tremors. The
problems facing the stranded travelers do not recede at all and the
readings begin to have the cathartic effect that Henry hoped for.
Lenser Jens Schlosser ably captures the wind and sand blown location of the
African desert with the gently rolling, and incredibly cruel, sand dunes
bringing a flowing grace to the panoramic photography. There are a couple
of scenes, obviously shot from an airplane, that show the stark vista of
the desert that reminds of the striking desert photography used in "The
English Patient" and Bertolucci's "The Sheltering Sky." And all this with a
hand-held digital camera.
The story, by Levring and Peter Aalbaek Jensen, required much dedication of
purpose by the cast, but tends to keep the viewer at arm's length. There
are so many subplots and intrigues between and among the characters, it
becomes difficult to empathize with any of them. Not enough time is given
to any one player to allow you to know or care about them. The actors do a
solid job in each portrayal, but there is not enough time to really flesh
anyone out to three-dimensional proportions.
The whole Dogma 95 movement may be a filmmaking tempest in a teapot, but
there is a sincere honesty in the craftwork and artistic thought to the
story that make a film like "The King Is Alive" an intellectual treat in
the desert of Hollywood's summer fare. I give it a B-.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Stranded in Africa's equivalent of the Australian outback, a busload of
tourists decides to stage an impromptu performance of Shakespeare's "King
Lear."
        Now perhaps group therapy through artistic expression wouldn't be the
first order of business for you or I under these circumstances, and indeed
there are some passengers who question the wisdom of all this, but then
again we're not appearing in a movie by Danish director Kristian Levring,
and don't have three hand-held cameras constantly thrust in our faces,
Dogme 95-style.  
        "The King is Alive" is the latest offering from the Danish movement
pioneered by the likes of "Dancer in the Dark"'s Lars Von Trier, a movement
which strips "modern day" filmmaking of what it considers to be trippy
conveniences--tripods, lighting, non-source music, and directorial credits,
resulting in a pure and "natural" film experience.
        If anything, the Dogme 95 style works especially well in "The King is
Alive," since the drama is played out amid the rough-lit dunes and
abandoned mining shacks of an arid North African landscape, where grainy,
gritty camerawork heightens the experiences of our marooned protagonists.
And indeed the play's the thing, with Levering and his international cast,
among them Jennifer Jason Leigh, Bruce Davison, Janet McTeer, and Romane
Bohringer, making the production entirely believable given the available
options (how quickly would *you* feel left out if someone else got to play
Cordelia?).
        Where the film breaks down, however, is in its characterizations.  Not one
of these people is anyone you would want to spend time with, let alone
perform alongside.  They're whiney and unpleasant, mean and hostile, and
this makes their ultimate fate--and that of the film--meaningless, since we
care very little about what happens to them.
        The cast gives it their all, and it's fascinating seeing how quickly the
sexual power struggles come to a head (and, especially, how quickly Levring
manages to avoid pretentiousness), but in the end "The King is Alive" more
closely approximates another of Shakepeare's works, at least in name: "Much
Ado About Nothing."
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Zentropa Entertainments 5 & Newmarket
 Director: Kristian Levring
 Writer:  Anders Thomas Jensen, Kristian Levring
 Cast: Jennifer Jason Leigh, Janet McTeer, Bruce Davison,
Miles Anderson, Romane Bohringer, David Bradley, David
Calder, Brion James, Peter Kubheka, Vusi Kunene, Chris
Walker, Lia Williams
   Robert Zemeckis' "Cast Away" explores what happens one
an individual is trapped and isolated with nothing but a
volleyball for a companion. Alfred Hitchcock's "Lifeboat"
reveals what happens when shipwreck survivors are adrift in
a lonely lifeboat during World War II, trapped not only with
their compatriots with a Nazi whom they take on board.
Kristian Levring's "The King is Alive" joins the many films that
explore what happens when people are trapped, either alone
or together, for extended periods of time.  This type of setting
is the essence of theater: put a few people in a room
separate from the rest of society and watch the fireworks. 
What happens?  What do you expect!  All sophisticated film
buffs realize that civilization is but a gossamer tapestry which
could unravel under trying circumstances.  Trap any group of
people together for an extended and life-threatening period,
whether they'd known one another or are strangers.  Watch
them tear one another apart, giving vent to their bottled
resentments, frustrations, angers, and feelings of self-pity.
   Kristian Levring gives his view of such an event in a
theatrical piece co-written by Anders Thomas Jensen, adding
emphasis by sticking to the Dogme 95 manifesto.  Levring
strips away not just his characters' veneer of civilization: he
pares down all pretensions of fancy cinematography to focus
exclusively on the bare bones of story.  Using some
improvisations of his talented and experienced actors
together with the screenplay, Levring knocks out what could
be called an intellectual horror story which unfortunately could
remind us of the ghastly hit, "The Blair Witch Project," both in
the dizzying use of handheld cameras and the unresolved
conclusion of the tale.  The skills of such major performers as
Bruce Davison, Janet McTeer, Romane Bohringer and
Jennifer Jason Leigh are not exactly wasted, but because of
the predictability and repetitive nature of the story, our own
patience is challenged and we in the audience summon up
our own belligerence toward the work on the screen.
   Filmed on location in the deserted southwest African
mining town of Kolmanskop, Namibia, "The King is Alive"
takes us on a small busload of people of mixed nationalities
on a desert safari that goes awry when the electronic
compass is find defective and the vehicle veers hundreds of
miles from the beaten path.  After Jack (Miles Anderson), an
Australian confers with an aging African who watches all
(Peter Khubeke), he decides to walk off alone for help letting
the others know that he expects to be back within five days. 
As the anxiety-ridden vacationers wonder whether this will be
their last trip, a former actor and writer Henry (David Bradley)
copies "King Lear" from memory onto rolls of paper to distract
the group from their plight.  As Ashley (Brion James, who
died a month after the completion of the film), Catherine
(Romane Bohringer), Ray (Bruce Davison), Charles (David
Calder), Gina (Jennifer Jason Leigh), Liz (Janet McTeer) and
bus driver Moses (Vusi Huhene) rehearse their parts, the
women tend to keep their control as though figures from a
Lina Wertmuller movie while some of the men become
emotionally (as well as physically) devastated by what
transpires--particularly by the ways that the women release
pent-up venom against them.
   As we were leaving the screening, one member of the
audience commented, "Isn't it something how a single actor,
Tom Hanks, could hold and audience for about hour as the
sole performer on the big screen in 'Cast Away?'  And how
this accomplished band of thesps in "The King is Alive" are
mired in the sand by a script that simply travels in circles--like
lost, compass-less voyagers who run through a one hundred
ten minutes' story as though it were a twenty-minutes'
journey five-and-one-half times told?
Rated R.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
