Title
Review for Secrets & Lies (1996)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Ben Hoffman
     While there are some similarities between SECRET AND LIES and the
recent A FAMILY THING, each stands on its own and approaches their
stories from different angles.   In the latter, a sixty-something
white man (Robert Duvall) discovers that the woman he thought was his
mother and who has just died is not his real mother.  He sets out to
find the blood-family he never knew or had heard about.  He discovers
they are black, with a half-brother played by James Earl Jones.
     SECRETS AND LIES, on the other hand, is about Hortense (Marianne
Jean- Baptiste) a young black woman who is an optometrist in London.
She knows the parents with whom she has been living until they died
were her adoptive parent, not her "real" parents.    When she gets a
sudden urge to learn about her real mother she is given the files the
adoption agency  has on her..   When she finds her mother, who is
white, the mother, Cynthia (Brenda Blethyn) is shocked and
disbelieving until Hortense comes up wiith enough detail to convince
her that they are, indeed, mother and daughter.
     While Hortense and Cynthia take a liking to each other, there is
the rest of the family who have  to be wooed.   Cynthia has another
daughter, Roxanne, (Claire Rushbrook) and how will she take the news
that she has a black half-sister?

Author
John Bauer
Not since attending an Ingmar Bergman retrospective a few years ago
have I seen a film as uncompromising in its portrayal of emotional
truth as SECRETS & LIES.  Like Bergman, director Mike Leigh is
interested in probing his characters' inner depths through
hypernaturally blunt confrontations.  Also like Bergman, Leigh engages
in frequent closeups of his characters' ravished and wracked faces.
And the prominent mournfulness of a cello on the soundtrack recalls
Bergman's own use of a Bach cello suite in an earlier film.  All that
is missing is a discussion of God.
Which is not to say that SECRETS & LIES is nothing more than an homage
to the Swedish master.  In fact, it is quite possible Leigh had no such
intentions in mind.  Nonetheless, what we get is so far removed from
the average moviegoing experience -- even from the reason we go to the
movies in the first place -- that it takes some effort to adjust to the
film's rhythms.  Once the adjustment is made, however, there are great
rewards.
One such is the chance to see life on the screen as it really is.
Though Leigh may have adopted some of Bergman's stylistic touches, most
obviously in an early scene of terse cross-cutting during a married
couple's strained conversation, as well as in that somewhat obtrusive
score, the overall feeling of the film is that it eschews any "style"
at all.  Whereas Bergman uses artifice as a tool to expose reality,
Leigh makes the camera a mere observer, almost as in a PBS
documentary.
The effect of this is to focus all of your attention on the actors.  It
is a tribute to everyone involved that, despite such scrutiny, only
infrequently are we aware that anyone *is* acting.  Much has been made
of Brenda Blethyn's performance, and rightly so, but it is only when
you remind yourself that you are watching a fiction that you realize
how good she is.
There are a few missteps.  For one, except for one scene (tragicomic,
as it happens), there is scant humor in the film.  This leads to a
certain monotonous tone throughout.  And occasionally (as with Bergman)
the bluntness of the situations can seem forced.  For all that, this
longish film manages to keep hold of your attention.
It is unfortunate that the audience for SECRETS & LIES will most likely
be limited to an intellectual elite, for there is nothing inherently
intellectual about this film.  In fact, it might easily resonate more
strongly for millions of working class filmgoers who will likely never
see it.  There is even a sweet but significant irony in the film's
unspoken take on race relations, something an American audience at
least would do well to observe.
Nonetheless, SECRETS & LIES is not for the faint of heart.  Though
there is nothing physically horrific to make one squeamish, the
exploration of common human frailty can be so raw and unsparing that it
is tempting to turn from the screen.  Needless to say, it is also very
depressing at times.  But for many of us, of course, so is life.  And
though the film is too honest to tack on a phony happy ending, that
same honesty allows it to admit that things can also get better.
April 25, 1997  

Author
Martin Rich
'Secrets and Lies', the latest film from Mike Leigh, is a complex story 
built around a simple theme.  It asks how effectively we can live behind 
secrets, and looks at how little we might actually know about others in 
our own family.  Its message, if it has one, is that openness helps - 
even if it's painful, and that even when the truth is ugly we're better 
for knowing it.
It centres around three households in very different parts of London: a 
young, black, single woman working as an optometrist, an upwardly mobile 
photographer and his wife, and a mother and her road-sweeper daughter 
living in a tiny, run-down, terraced house.  All are connected, though to 
say why would be to give away too much of the film.
Like all Mike Leigh's films, this one was built up using improvisation.  
But its plot has a direction and a coherence which belie the method used 
to create it.  There are points where Mike Leigh plays tricks on the 
audience, sometimes by involving us in the deceit that's at the centre of 
the film, sometimes by presenting us with scenes which may, or may not, 
be significant in the rest of the narrative.
Interestingly, the strongest dynamics in the film are between the women; 
even though the photographer is an important part, he acts as a foil to 
the other characters' arguments, most effectively while serving the meat 
from a barbecue.  All the performances and characterisations are good - 
and the actors have resisted the temptation to develop into caricatures. 
 Marianne Jean-Baptiste, as Hortense, the optometrist with the incredibly 
mobile face, and Brenda Blethyn as Cynthia, the nervous single mother 
both excel, but Timothy Spall as the photographer, and Phyllis Logan as 
his prim, obsessive, wife are also good.
Throughout the film there are incidents which touch on the themes of 
truth and honesty, moments where you wonder whether characters are 
telling the truth or not.  What about the photographer's client who 
ascribes her facial injuries to the seat belt breaking in a car accident 
(she needs the picture to claim compensation)?  And do we believe 
Hortense's friend who brags in the kitchen about her sexual exploits?
'Secrets and Lies' opens this week in the UK, and the interest that it 
generated at Cannes should ensure a reasonable international release.  At 
a preview this weekend, the audience broke into a spontaneous round of 
applause as the credits rolled, applause which was well deserved.

Author
Tim Voon
Like most families we carry secrets which are best left behind cobwebs,
and we have told lies to help shield us from the painful truth. After
years of bitterness and distrust, and generation upon generation of ill
feeling and underlying falsities, a sense of brooding contempt and
dysfunction results.
This is the subject of this Mike Leigh movie, where the characters are
the movie itself. Imagine the scenario of a singe white middle-aged
Anglo-Saxon woman, living with her rebellious adult daughter. Her once
close, but now distant younger brother has been stolen away by a
seemingly cold and resentful sister-in-law. Leigh masterfully portrays
this sad and lonely woman, who has apparently failed in every aspect of
life, until a beautiful Anglo-African woman, refined and well achieved
in the field of optometry, enters her life. To her amazement she
discovers that this was the daughter who was given up for adoption many
years ago.
Don't snigger. If you dig around your past a little, you may
accidentally discover that your dad was an axe murderer, and your sister
is actually your mother. God forbid. Weirder things have happened. Muddy
waters are stirred, and chaos and confusion ignites in a household
already swamped with its fair share of bad weather. What initially
appears to be a natural disaster, becomes the catalyst that opens an old
festering wound in need of salting.
The climax amounts to a luncheon birthday party, where dusty rugs are
aired with more than a cough and a sneeze. With screaming, yelling,
crying and finally hugging, Mike Leigh bends this broken family back
into the twisted shape of a circle.

Author
Dave Cowen
"Secrets and lies!" spouts Maurice (Timothy Spall) at a family 
gathering with the most terrific sense of combined contempt and 
concern of any outburst I've ever heard in a film.  The title is 
what the film is about: the ways that people hold things from the 
people who are close to them, and how those things can burst 
back to the surface at any moment, disrupting everybody's lives.
If only viewing the first third of SECRETS & LIES, one would be 
tempted to call the film "Smiles and Frowns" -- the film darts between 
shots of Maurice doing his business (photography, eliciting strange
and artificial expressions from his clients) and the rest of his
immediate family who he is not able (except, on a picture hanging
on his mantle from 16 years ago) to elicit smiles from: his wife
Monica (Phyllis Logan) who works on stencilling their house, his
sister Cynthia (Brenda Blethyn), a factory worker who appears to 
be suffering from a nervous breakdown, his niece Roxanne (Claire 
Rushbrook) who is just turning 21 and never speaks with Cynthia, 
and Hortense (Marianne Jean-Baptiste), who is just about to become 
part of the family.  The contrast of the artificial smiles and 
the sulking, brooding nature of everyone in the family is striking
and occasionally very funny.  
As in other films by director Mike Leigh, it's the performances 
that hold SECRETS & LIES together.  Brenda Blethyn's nervy, love-
starved Cynthia strikes just the right note: a scene in which she 
tries to get a hug from her brother Maurice is touching but truly 
pitiable, and her first encounters with Hortense are filled with
a shaking and trepidation that I've never seen portrayed quite 
so realistically in film.  In a role such as Cynthia's, it's hard
to create just the right balance of sympathy and disgust to 
understand the other characters actions toward her, but Blethyn 
hits the target dead-on.  The other actors, especially Jean-Baptiste,
do an admirable job, and a family barbeque scene which under 
lesser actors could be maudlin, in SECRETS & LIES can tear your 
heart out.  
SECRETS & LIES is a realistically bleak picture, but not as much so 
as Leigh's last film, NAKED.  The characters move through a flux 
in which their actions and revelations can either be heartwarming
or heartbreaking, moving from anguish to contentness in the kinds
of surprising but smooth transitions that we see in real life.  
Mike Leigh's celebrated style of storytelling has always struck 
me as being amazing in its own right: the concept of starting with 
a basic idea and then having the characters improvise the parts until
the characters become fully developed and a script can be written 
seems tremendously risky -- but Leigh's work is nearly invariably 
brilliant, and his films end up painting a much more full portrait
of his characters than any other directors' film could.
SECRETS & LIES is one of the rare films that ends on a happy note 
that doesn't seem contrived, as though the characters had purged
themselves of all of the underlying anxieties gnawing at them
and causing the conflicts present throughout the rest of the movie.
SECRETS & LIES is a film of wonderful realism, and is definately one 
of the best released this year.
-- 
signed: ESCHATFISCHE, david     h t t p : / /w w w . f i s c h e . c o m
(esch@fische.com) ------------------------------------------------------

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Highly acclaimed writer and director Mike Leigh's (LIFE IS SWEET
and NAKED) latest film is SECRETS & LIES.  The picture won the Palme
d'Or at this year's Cannes Film Festival, and the lead actress, Brenda
Blethyn, got the best actress award for her work in the film.  The
picture is an incredible character study, that goes from morose to life
affirming.  It is a complex picture that is both tragic and comedic.
Most of all, it is a highly involving and rewarding film for the
audience.
     In the press kit, Leigh describes it thus, "SECRETS & LIES is
about roots and identity, the ever changing images we all have of
ourselves and each other, and our compulsive need to reaffirm
constantly who and what we are, and where we come from.  It is also a
tale of love and caring and deep longings, and of the awesome
relentlessness of the passage of time."
     As the show started, I was not sure if I was going to like it or
not.  The lead actress, Brenda Blethyn (from A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT)
as middle-aged Cynthia, seemed about to give one of those performances
like Crissy Rock's in LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD where the character is so
unlikable that watching the show becomes a challenge.  For the record,
I loved Crissy Rock and LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD even if it is hard to
stomach.  In SECRETS & LIES, this did not turn out to be the case, and
the audience develops both an empathy and a love for Cynthia.
     Cynthia's brother Maurice (Timothy Spall from LIFE IS SWEET) is a
prosperous photographer.  Although his specialty is weddings, he will
photograph anyone.  Like a Woody Allen film, there is an hilarious
sequence where we have short clips of different people having their
pictures made.  The subjects range from a little boy who keeps picking
his nose to a middle aged woman who laughs at herself dressed in
clothes for her boudoir.  It had all of the critics at the screening in
stitches.
     Maurice's wife Monica (Phyllis Logan) stays at home spending his
money on their pristine house (sets by Alison Chitty).  She explains
the details down to the choice of the color peach for the bath since it
has an aura of tranquillity.  When showing off the house she scurries
around closing toilet lids as she shows off each of the bathrooms.  It
is the classic house made not to be lived in.
     Cynthia is an unhappy, depressed, and unattractive factory worker
who lives with her grown daughter Roxanne (Claire Rushbrook), who is a
street cleaner and seems to be nothing more than a younger clone of her
mom.  Cynthia looks at her swollen legs and remarks that they are as
pretty as a teenager's.  She doesn't believe it, but it stops her from
crying.  When she talks, she squeaks, but she spends most of the first
part of the film crying.  For a while, I didn't think she would ever
stop crying.
     Soon the show cuts to a black optometrist named Hortense (Marianne
Jean-Baptiste).  More on the character's name at the end of the review.
Hortense is an orphan, and now that her adopted parents have died, she
wants to find her birthmother.  Since the late 70s, the law in England
says she can read all of her old birth records.  She does and finds
that her mother is the white Cynthia.
     Hortense had a happy childhood, and she is a successful, college
educated professional.  The difference in the color of their skins is a
metaphor for all of their many differences.  Hortense has the
self-confidence that her birth mother lacks.  Parts of the mother
reminded me of Ratzo Rizzo from MIDNIGHT COWBOY.
     When Hortense telephones her mother, her mother tells her to never
call again.  Given their apparent incompatibility, the audience almost
wants to cry out, forget it already.  The rest of the show is about
them getting to know and like each other and coming to terms with their
differences.
     The script is intelligent and never predictable.  It tackles
sensitive issues, and although the director lets the actors hang out
their souls for all to see, it is never exploitive and always
sensitive.  It is also so funny that it would be possible to view the
show totally as a comedy and ignore the messages, but that would be a
pity.  The sad cello music (Andrew Dickson) serves notice that the
picture is to be taken seriously not matter how big the laughs.  The
one criticism I have is that some of the scenes go on too long, and the
film would have been better had editor Jon Gregory been more vigorous
in his approach.
     The show is aptly named.  When Cynthia sees that Hortense is
black, she seriously believes that Hortense can not be the daughter she
gave up at birth.  The script makes this and all of the other secrets
and lies in the story quite plausible.
     The show can be enjoyed for the big story or the small ones.  When
a once gorgeous crash victim comes in to get her photo made for her
solicitor, a touched Maurice tells her, "Life isn't fair then is it.
Somebody always draws the short straw."  Maurice is a sensitive guy
with a beer belly and his own secrets and demons.  At one point in the
show, he excuses one of the character's actions with, "She can't help
it; she never had enough love."  After telling another of the family
secrets, he confides, "Secrets and lies.  We're all in pain."
     The show is a grand collection of complex characters, and all
become sympathetic by the end.  Each has a story that will touch or
amuse you or both.
     SECRETS & LIES is a bittersweet comedy and tragedy that is wrapped
up effectively.  When it is over, you realize you have seen some
incredible performances and a magnificent directorial job.  I hope to
see Brenda Blethyn's name when the Oscar nominations come out.
     I do have to note that if I was a girl, my mother seriously
intended to name me Hortense after her favorite doll from childhood.
Personally, I can not imagine a more horrible name, apologies to all of
Hortense's out there in the world, and I thank my lucky stars that I
was born male with name I like rather than female with a name like
Hortense.  The excellent actress playing Hortense at least made me feel
a little bit better about my close call with that hideous name.
     SECRETS & LIES runs a little too long at 2:22.  At the time of the
press screening, it had not yet been rated by the MPAA, but the little
bad language in the show has a few F words so it will probably get an
R.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence, but it is a very intense
show.  It would be fine for any teenager, but not younger.  I give the
film a strong recommendation and award it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Julian Lim
Directed by: Mike Leigh
Produced by: CiBy 2000/Thin Man Films/Channel 4 Films.
Cast: Timothy Spall (Maurice), Phyllis Logan (Monica), Brenda Blethyn
(Cynthia), Claire Rushbrook (Roxanne), Marianne Jeane-Baptiste
(Hortense)
Run Time:141 minutes
Rating: ****1/2 out of *****
Theatres: Lido
Jarvis Cocker of Pulp once said that he wrote Common People after
noticing Mike Leigh box-sets on the video shelves -- he had a feeling
that economic deprivation was becoming a tourist experience for the
well-off. Maybe it's a classic case of displacement : it's easier to
see Jarvis' own lyrics (obsessed with acrylic and wood chip on the
wall) as a fetishization of lowlife, rather than Leigh's films. But
it's worth being reminded that drab interiors and a couple of
working-class characters don't make for a guarantee of 'authenticity',
let alone a good film. It's the triumph of SECRETS & LIES, then, that
it goes beyond gestures of sympathy for the common people into a
probing of just what it means to seek 'authenticity' and honesty in
everyday lives.
Following her adopted mother's funeral, Hortense, a young
black optometrist, sets out to find her birth mother, and is disturbed
to find out that she is white. It is Cynthia, a factory worker who
lives in a shabby house with her perpetually moody daughter Roxanne.
Cynthia's younger brother Maurice is a successful photographer who has
not seen his sister for ages, largely because of his wife's animosity
towards her. Hortense calls up Cynthia, who initially breaks down in
tears and refuses to see her. But their mutually suspicious meeting
gives way to a warm friendship eventually. Cynthia invites Hortense to
come along to a party, which Maurice is hosting...
SECRETS & LIES has a simple enough theme at its heart -- as one
character puts it, "Best to tell the truth, isn't it? That way nobody
gets hurt.". But if the film delivers much more than a trite message,
it's because we are also shown how hard it can be to face up to ugly
truths, even while the evasions and unspoken grievances slowly choke
us.
Hence, Cynthia's difficulty with acknowledging (first to herself, then
to others) that Hortense is her daughter. One of her first reactions
to seeing Hortense is a sincere denial that she has ever "been with a
black man", before a long-suppressed memory seizes her. At the party,
Cynthia's pretense that Hortense is her factory co-worker leads her to
ever more convoluted lies, as agonizing as they are funny.
Little lies seep into every corner, like Maurice pretending that he's
"just dropping by" when he visits Cynthia after much deliberation.
Maurice's job as a photographer gives the film opportunities for side
comments on the main theme - a sad-looking bride that Maurice coaxes
to smile, a couple who pose awkwardly with a prominent wedding ring
and argue about his spectacles. One of the most startling images is of
a beautiful woman with large scars on her face : she says she needs
the photo to look "as bad as possible" to collect insurance money, yet
the short scene leaves you wondering about what untold story lies
behind the scars.
There are occasionally hilarious moments, as when Cynthia attempts to
give her daughter some unwelcome advice on contraception, "I've got a
Dutch cap floating about somewhere upstairs"; or when Cynthia stares
at her own rather pedestrian legs and tells Roxanne, "If you've got
it, flaunt it, is what I say."
As played by Brenda Blethyn, Cynthia comes close to being a
caricature, with her nervous, somewhat disconnected way of talking.
But she's really just right for the role of someone who inspires
sympathy and yet strains the tolerance of those around her, precisely
because she's so needy of love, perhaps. Indeed, the whole cast gives
warmly rounded, detailed performances. The script was developed partly
through improvisations, and the fusion of cast, script and director
shows best in the party scene - seemingly everyone is talking at the
same time, and yet many subtle observations are being made throughout.
In a very different way, but also using a long single shot, the scene
of Hortense and Cynthia's first meeting in a lonely caf=8A achieves a
touching intensity, all the more for their reticence and unspoken
feelings.
The film's climax - with all the secrets and lies finally spilled out
in Ibsen-esque revelations, and everybody hugging each other - is the
one thing that seems false about this film. However, it's a film that
truly earns its happy ending after the misery and repression of the
character's lives. When Cynthia says near the end, This is the life,
innit?, you get the sense that, following the cynicism of his last
film NAKED, Leigh has rediscovered that life can be sweet after all,
without comforting illusions.
THE FLYING INKPOT's rating system:
 * Wait for the video.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
___________________________________
This review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT
.">http://bizdir.com.sg/inkpot/>. We're inkier! We're pottier! We're
wordy! All flying bricks welcome.  Leave your penguin at the door.

Author
Vince Waldron
British director Mike Leigh's latest examination of class and the human
comedy in his native land may well be his most successful film to date,
which--in a long line of esteemed comedies that includes Naked, Life is
Sweet and the justifiably lauded High Hopes--is saying something. 
Beatuifully modulated performances and a deceptively complex screenplay
make this Leigh's most satisfying and accessible film yet, a work of
unassuming ambition, this one will sneak up on you.   Highly recommended,
go see it (or--sigh!--rent it if indeed that's the only way this worthy
film is distributed in your home town.)

Author
John Schuurman
"O what a tangled web we weave when first we practice to deceive!" Sir
Walter Scott first wrote it --  Mike Leigh and his superb movie have
shown us the truth of it. 
This is (appropriately) a complicated movie; guile and duplicity have
made it so. The story unfolds with evidence of the tendrils and shoots
of deceit cast all about and we need to have our wits about us as we
watch. The film does not make unreasonable demands on us but the
attuned observer will quickly become aware that there is a lot of
submerged hurt lying around. The main action of the movie is to take us
through a marvelous and simplifying exercise in unearthing the pack of
lies that make for pain. From cemeteries and slums; from secrecy and
deceit the hurt is nudged and beckoned to the surface and in the end we
say with the characters, "This is the life ain't it?" "Yeah....Yeah." 
Ironically, the integrity of it all is the most compelling thing.
Writer/Director Leigh has drawn his characters so fully and so candidly
that he makes us forget it is a movie about lies. Indeed, the great
accomplishment here is that we forget that it is a movie at all. I
can't remember a film that called me into it quite so thoroughly. 
It is a movie that shows people all fouled-up with misunderstanding --
of both their own and others doing -- slowly coming to terms. Despite
their inherent dimness of soul, they slowly turn up shiny. 
Me too. It was something like a earnestly said and deeply felt service
of confession and reconciliation in a church service: I felt clean as I
walked away. 
for other reviews by John Schuurman see:
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html

Author
Pedro Sena
To watch this film, or any of Mike Leigh's films, one really has to
appreciate the finer points of acting, in its most developed moments, as is
done in the world's best stages. In this sense, Mr. Leigh is the best
theatre director in film at work today, if Peter Brook has retired.
Some say, that acting is a method, that is learned through a few clever
movements, and actions. Some say that acting is a living truth of some sort
that brings about an internal response, which the actor can not avoid in any
way, and acts with. Mr. Leigh's films, are about the best that one can get
out of the acting, in its furthest point. The result is rather unusual for
film standards, in that it is not exactly a "showy" exercise, or a "fun"
thing, specially when the moments get serious and troublesome for each
character. Taking a slight clue from film makers like Jean Luc Godard and
Francois Truffaut, this director keeps the camera on the actors longer, thus
avoiding the standard crossover conversational shots, and the results are
one of two styles... we either get bored because we have to live through
someone's catharsis, or we just get tremendously excited, because we can
really feel the whole thing, and the director did not quit on the story, or
actor, thus making the film come off much less as entertainment, and a lot
more as a serious exercise in some form of internal psychoanalysis. The
latter is not a favorite American style at all, where many audiences thought
the film "boring", and "slow'.
Life is not always a Hollywood movie on steroids and madness, or a Disney
fantasy, trying to help us escape our very own dreary lives, something that
Hollywood has been guilty of ever since its beginning. In Europe, film is
not always entertainment, and its directions tend to be towards the
"literary" side of things, or to the "artistic" sides of things, which is
always over looked in America due to its top ten money making film
mentality.
But few films can even stand up to the incredible ensemble acting work that
this film provides, that would make the best theatre people of the 20th
century so proud that their craft has developed so beautifully.... the
material may not exactly be Ibsen, or Shaw, or Albee, or Williams, but the
results are no less different and strong. If you had been through an evening
of such strong acting, you would have given the actors a standing ovation.
This is the story of a young woman that goes out to meet her birth mother.
She had been adopted when she was young, and her adoptive parents chose not
to hide anything and let her know that she was adopted, and where she was
acquired from. And when her parents finally die, her journey starts. She
goes after the company that took care of her adoption. The counselor ( the
weakest of all the actors in this film ), is a bit of the 60's mentality in
hipness, but not in content. Like all doctors she also lives in her own
world, and do not really believe people can handle their own affairs. But
Hortense is stronger than that, and she continues on her search.
It leads her to a rather dysfunctional family, who happens to have kept it
all a secret in regards to this particular adoption, that even the mother
does not remember, thus suggesting that she might have had other children
also given away. Cynthia, in her earlier days, seems to have had numerous
affairs, and enjoyed herself. But as she graces into her fifties, her
ability to deal with the past is catching up with her. When she finally
agrees to meet the young woman, she is convinced that she does not have
another child. She finally remembers, that when she was fifteen, she was
forced to put a child she had up for adoption, and that the father was a
young American black boy, she vaguely remembers. However, this is only the
beginning of the story. Here her family plays a major role. Her second
daughter is pregnant and about to get married. And she has a problem with
her mother, which seems to be stemming from some dishonest feelings. The
mother's brother has helped all his life, and has helped keep all the
indiscretions hidden from her family. But when Hortense shows up, the whole
thing gets rather complicated, specially towards the end, when the younger
sister realizes she has another sister, and that she is black, which is a
major shock.
If anything, one would have loved to see this film as a part of the "living
theatre" scene, since it's story and material could easily become endless.
Film tends to tie up things cleverly a la Moliere, just so we do not have
questions. And although this film answers the main questions about its
story, it raises others, and this is so true of life and its daily
moments... call this cinema verite, rather than just another entertainment
story.
What really sets apart this film, is without a doubt, Brenda Blethyn, as
Cynthia, the mother who has had a daughter adopted, but has never really
dealt with her feelings in he matter. She is un-employed and a "victim" of
sorts of the system, in that she is un-educated, and pretty much out of the
realm of possibilities in life to learn a whole lot more. But while she is
in denial, her maternal instincts take over, and she befriends Hortense,
which adds a nice touch to the whole thing... the problem is how to break
years and years of lies to the rest of her family. Hortense has always been
a part of the truthful side of her life and feelings... the others have not.
Few films stand out for their knicks and knacks. If one is mostly interested
in catching adventure stories and fantasies, please avoid this film, so you
don't have to say anything not nice. If one appreciates the further
development of the acting styles, as an art form, few films will ever stand
up to this one. And fewer directors still will ever allow such great
freedoms to let the characters be who they are.
Quite worth seeing. Very well designed, even from a conceptual stand point.
The camera is mostly on hand, and staying with each character... and even
though it can be "pressing" it never "abuses" the character at all. It
allows for the character to have some space, something that even the likes
of Godard and Truffaut did not do. by comparison, they were very mechanical
in form, style and substance, if not eccentric.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, R, 142 minutes [2 hours, 22 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Brenda Blethyn (Cythia), Marianne Jean-Baptiste (Hortense), Claire
Rushbrook (Roxanne), Timothy Spall (Maurice), produced by Simon
Channing-Williams, written and directed by Mike Leigh.
Films about families tend to be overly dramatic because very bad or very
good things are always happening to the characters. "Secrets & Lies" is an
exceptional drama about a shaky family who is suddenly thrown an even
stranger problem than they are used to. Surprisingly enough, this is not a
sappy story of tragedy, it is an exercise in characterization as it shows
realistic people dealing with problems you never see in the movies.
The basic story is of a black woman named Hortense (Jean-Baptiste) and her
search for her natural mother who turns out to be white. But the film is not
just about Hortense's search, it is really about her mother Cythia (Blethyn)
and her already rocky relationship with her family.
Cythia is a middle-aged factory worker in London who shares a small flat
with her daughter Roxanne (Rushbrook). The two really do seem like mother and
daughter as they constantly fight with each other, but always seem to work
things out. We learn a lot about their characters from their conversations
and arguments. They so much more believable than other film characters
because they're not talking about those pesky aliens or natural disasters.
We also meet Cythia's brother Maurice (Spall) who is a professional
photographer, and Leigh goes out of his way to establish this character and
his importance. There are some humorous scenes involving Maurice at work, and
they are interesting to watch simply for the dialogue. Maybe the film spends
a little too much time on Maurice's job and his relationship with his wife
and sister, but at least it done for the sake of characterization and not
melodrama.
Not much of a plot begins to develop until the second half of the film, but
at no point does the story become uninteresting - time just seems to fly by.
Hortense tracks down Cythia and gives her a call, but of course neither are
able to deal with it. The two meet in person and a real sense of tension and
uneasiness can be felt. Even though we might not be able to relate to these
characters personally, the atmosphere has been so well defined you know what
the characters are thinking. 
It is obvious the story is leading up to a boiling point, and this of course
happens in the final act. Cythia and Hortense become the best of friends but
the other family members suspect something funny is going on. Maurice throws
a small party for Roxanne's 21st birthday and Cythia brings along Hortense,
saying she is her friend from the factory. The scene in which Cythia finally
tells the family the truth is one of the most tense moments I've ever
endured. It's not so much about race relations as it family relations, but
the race issue can't be ignored. I can't help but wonder if the family's
reaction would have been different if Hortense was white?
"Secrets & Lies" is a good film that presents a situation unlike anything
I've ever seen. It shows just how important the family is and how petty some
of our differences can be. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom/France, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 10/96 (limited)
Running Length: 2:22
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
     By wedding comedy with tragedy in intricate, realistic unions, Mike 
Leigh has become one of the foremost film making voices for the British 
working class.  Yet, even though his movies bring a certain social 
viewpoint to the screen, this in no way limits the universality of 
Leigh's themes.  SECRETS AND LIES, 1996's Palme D'Or winner at Cannes, 
represents the director at his best -- unsentimental yet powerful, funny 
and poignant, and, in the end, undeniably satisfying.
     The film will resonate with anyone who has ever hidden a secret or 
told a lie (that should cover everyone).  This isn't overblown 
melodrama; rather, it's the kind of starkly believable tale that could 
happen to anyone.  Nothing in SECRETS AND LIES demands even a momentary 
suspension of disbelief.  In fact, the film works best for those who 
approach it as a reflection of life.  We can all relate to the issues 
being raised -- simple truths like adoption, infertility, and 
mother/daughter friction.  
     SECRETS AND LIES opens with a funeral, then quickly switches to a 
wedding.  During the former ceremony, Hortense (Marianne Jean-Baptiste), 
a 27-year old black optometrist, is burying her mother.  In the next 
scene, we meet Maurice (Timothy Spall), a 38-year old white photographer 
who's taking pictures of a nervous bride.  It takes nearly the entire 
movie before these two characters come face-to-face, but what happens 
during that meeting represents the climax of Leigh's beautifully-
realized film.  Hortense and Maurice are crucial to unraveling the 
entire sequence of secrets and lies.
     Hortense was adopted.  She has known this since she was seven years 
old, but it's not until both of her parents are dead that she feels 
compelled to seek out her birth mother.  Despite being warned by a 
social worker to anticipate unpleasantness or disappointment, Hortense 
is shocked to learn that her mother is white.  Her name is Cynthia 
(Brenda Blethyn), and she's a 42-year old neurotic living in a dark, 
gloomy rowhouse with her 21-year old daughter, Roxanne (Claire 
Rushbrook).  Cynthia is disliked by just about everyone who knows her, 
except perhaps her brother, Maurice.  Even Maurice's wife, Monica 
(Phyllis Logan), hates the idea of spending a day in Cynthia's company.
     SECRETS AND LIES chronicles Hortense's initial approach to Cynthia, 
their first meeting, and the development of a tentative bond.  Each 
offers something unique to the other:  Cynthia has lost her "real" 
daughter's love and respect, and is desperate to find a surrogate -- who 
better than the grown-up child she once gave away?  Hortense, on the 
other hand, feels rootless now that the two people who brought her up 
are dead, and, while she doesn't look to Cynthia for parenting, she is 
curious about, and, ultimately, sympathetic with the disappointments 
that have defined her biological mother's life.  There are no 
recriminations, at least not on Hortense's part.  Any guilt that Cynthia 
feels is entirely of her own creation.
     Leigh develops the story slowly, introducing us to each character, 
and, through actions and dialogue, allowing us to learn about their 
lives.  We are not force-fed facts and details.  There are no flashbacks 
nor is there a voiceover narration.  The film's almost-documentary 
quality is belied only by the care and thought put into each camera 
shot.  From beginning to end, SECRETS AND LIES is exceptionally well 
thought-out.  
     Emotional impact is crucial to the movie's success.  Leigh employs 
a number of single-camera, unedited shots to facilitate dramatic 
development by letting the depth of emotions play out on screen.  (How 
many movies cut away when things get too heavy?)  One such sequence is 
the first meeting between Hortense and Cynthia.  It's an incredible 
scene, with these two sitting side-by-side in a restaurant booth, trying 
to reconcile the past with the present, and groping for words to express 
what they're feeling.  This is all accomplished in one shot, with no 
cuts or edits.  A similar approach is used for their third meeting, and 
during a cookout near the end.
     Brenda Blethyn won the Cannes Best Actress award for her daring, 
emotionally naked portrayal of Cynthia, and, while she's excellent, it's 
hard to single out any individual in this ensemble cast.  These actors 
aren't just good, they're superlative.  Leigh has a history of getting 
the most out of his performers (look at David Thewlis in NAKED), and, if 
SECRETS AND LIES is anything to judge by, it's a well-deserved 
reputation.  This is the kind of film that is made or broken by actors, 
and there's not a false note to be found in any of the performances.  
     With SECRETS AND LIES, Leigh has surpassed his considerable 
achievements in LIFE IS SWEET and NAKED.  This film exhibits the kind of 
breathtaking power that can be unearthed in a simple story.  There's no 
sensationalism -- Leigh has ignored stereotypes in carefully developing 
the situation (wealthy black professional; underprivileged, uneducated 
whites) to dispel racial tension.  This allows the dysfunctional family 
dynamics to be the sole focus.  Maurice sums up Leigh's most pressing 
theme when he laments, "Secrets and lies...We're all in pain!  Why can't 
we share our pain?"  What the director has accomplished with this 
picture is to fashion an amazingly-textured story that grips us with 
unexpected force on the first viewing, and is sure to reveal a new 
aspect each time we come back.  Without a doubt, SECRETS AND LIES is 
worth more than one trip to the theater.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Bryant Frazer
It took me some time to catch up with Secrets and Lies, but I
finally saw it on Thanksgiving Day. The timing could not be
more appropriate, really, since that holiday is most closely
tied in my mind to family gatherings, especially reluctant
ones. Considerations of family are key to Mike Leigh's
much-lauded film, which culminates at a forced family
gathering turned nearly riotous by the presence of brothers,
sisters, in-laws, and strangers.
As the movie begins, a young black Englishwoman named
Hortense is helping bury her adoptive mother. In the
aftermath of the funeral, something inside compels her to
seek out her birth mother. A quick visit to a social worker
nets Hortense her own adoption paperwork (her mother, she
learns, is white), and a few more minutes of research give
her the address of a sad little flat in London's East End.
The resident of that flat is Cynthia Purley (Brenda Bethlyn),
a lonely woman who keeps her home stuffed full of trinkets
from her past, works in a factory, and laments the bitterness
incipient in her 20-year old daughter, Roxanne (Claire
Rushbrook). She's all but lost touch with her beloved
brother, Maurice (Timothy Spall), and his wife, Monica
(Phyllis Logan), when Maurice drops by to invite her and her
daughter to celebrate Roxanne's impending 21st birthday with
a backyard barbecue at his house. Maurice is the comfortably
successful owner of a photography studio, and Cynthia blames
Monica for having shut her out of his life while building a
comfortable, insular home for the two of them.
The mere fact of Maurice's visit is doubtless the highlight
of Cynthia's week, but her excitement is overshadowed by
shock and trepidation when she receives a phone call from
Hortense -- when she realizes she's speaking to the daughter
she tried to leave behind, Cynthia slams the telephone down
in terror. Hortense rings back immediately, intent on meeting
her mother, but Cynthia insists that Hortense must never
visit Cynthia's home or even call her again. Eventually, the
two of them agree to face each other on neutral ground
outside a tube station, and the film's revelatory centerpiece
is the ensuing conversation over tea and the profoundly
disturbing yet liberating effect it has on Cynthia. Before
the film is over, that conversation will prove to have
transformed Cynthia and indeed everyone around her.
Mike Leigh's films give "ensemble cast" an enhanced meaning.
His performers are in on the creative process, riffing on the
material they're given en route to a finished screenplay, and
while Leigh's films are distinctly his own, his characters
and situations ring with a nearly uncanny truth that seems to
indicate the efficiency of this technique. The performances
in Secrets and Lies are remarkable, and only the characters
of Roxanne and her boyfriend Paul ring a little hollow,
perhaps for lack of screen time.
Bethlyn in particular is extraordinary. I was reminded
immediately of Emily Watson's performance in Breaking the
Waves -- another 1996 picture that's utterly reliant on the
abilities of its lead performer to penetrate to the essence
of a character under the camera's intense scrutiny. Bethlyn's
Cynthia is admirable, bold, and pathetic all at once. She
places an emphasis on her character's faded youth without
overstatement and helps Secrets and Lies overcome the more
pedestrian of its urges.
Those urges bubble to the surface in a broth that is the
climactic birthday party. Cynthia has invited Hortense to the
party under the pretense that she's a friend from work. More
inexplicably, Hortense has agreed to come along. I'm not
spoiling anything by telling you that her presence leads to a
dramatic unraveling of some very tightly knotted
personalities -- the interest is in seeing how Leigh gets
them to the breaking point and what happens to these
characters when all hell bursts loose. This screeching,
sobbing kaleidoscope of emotion verges on farce, and I think
Leigh realizes that -- witness the grimace on Paul's face as
he watches the family work through this melodrama.
Mostly, it's a wise and gentle affirmation of our ability to
work through the spitefulness that can spoil a family, and a
catalog of the ways in which we can absolutely fail to
communicate with the people who need us the most. Still, I'm
bothered by the nearly glib tidiness of this resolution. It's
a fairy tale for dysfunctional adults, right down to
Maurice's speechifying at the end -- a diatribe against
mistrust that's already been telegraphed by the movie's
title. Leigh spends the movie setting up these impacted
relationships just to knock 'em down, and I'm afraid that
there's a pat structure here that puts me off in the same way
that Lone Star disappointed me. Certainly Secrets and Lies
lacks the odd narrative and skewed characters that made a
first viewing of Leigh's previous film, Naked, such a
memorable and unpredictable experience.
But don't get me wrong. Secrets and Lies is 99 percent
compelling, beautifully acted, and at times very funny --
through and through, it's one of the best films of the year,
with characters that are both down to earth and much larger
than life. More than anybody, cinephiles everywhere have
Bethlyn to thank for one raging catharsis of a performance
that reveals in a way that mere words, however carefully
scripted, never can.

Author
Walter Frith
Director Mike Leigh has the uncanny knack for making real life situations
about ordinary people sincere, heartfelt and entertaining.  His latest film
'Secrets and Lies' is no exception and could be the best film in Leigh's
career.  The movie is set in the U.K. and a young black woman named Hortense
(Marianne Jean-Baptiste) sets out to find her birth mother after she has laid
to rest her adoptive parents.  It turns out that her real mother Cynthia
(Brenda Blethyn) is a lonely, unmarried and pathetic woman who lives with her
resentful and hostile daughter Roxanne (Claire Rushbrook).  Cynthia is
shocked in a very frightful way to receive a phone call from her long lost
daughter some twenty-seven years later and the two of them arrange to meet.
 Cynthia's brother Maurice (Timothy Spall) is a successful photographer whose
wife Monica (Phyllis Logan) prefers the finer things in life and her
materialism is an unfair quality to her husband who is a 'down-to-Earth' kind
of guy.  Their life is the sub-text of this movie and the two families are
interwoven in a blistering climax which plays out like a wonderful stage play
involving a quirky and confused cast of characters coming to grips with the
realities of life.  'Secrets and Lies' is one of the best films of the year
and proves that smaller films are sometimes better than the big budget
Hollywood offerings in which executives call the shots poorly rather than
filmmaker's like Mike Leigh who call them brilliantly.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     If the ancient Greeks hadn't already defined drama as character in
action, Mike Leigh would have had to do it.  Leigh, along with Ken Loach,
Eric Rohmer and John Sayles, is in that exclusive company of film-makers
who understand that an effective story is not simply what happens to the
people on the screen -- it _is_ the people on the screen.  A Mike Leigh
film is the ultimate in low concept, the actors burying themselves so
deeply in their characters that they are able to tear out their hearts and
lay them bare.  SECRETS & LIES is about human beings, and that is what
makes it a rarity; what makes it great is how compelling the interaction
between those human beings turns out to be.
     SECRETS & LIES begins with a funeral for the adoptive mother of
Hortense Cumberbatch (Marianne Jean-Baptiste), a young black optometrist
in London.  Hortense decides that it is time to seek out her birth mother
at last, and the woman she finds is Cynthia Purley (Brenda Blethyn), a
factory worker with another illegitimate daughter, 20-year-old Roxanne
(Claire Rushbrook).  Initially in deep denial over their relationship,
Cynthia eventually warms to Hortense, and the two begin to form a
friendship.  But there is the question of how to introduce Hortense to the
rest of the family, a question complicated by the fact that tensions
already run deep and unspoken within the Purley family.
     There are so many brilliantly shaded characterizations in SECRETS &
LIES that the Oscars could find contenders in every major category if the
voters were inclined to notice.  Timothy Spall does a wondrous thing by
giving an urgency to a fundamentally decent man, a professional
photographer whose professional life is an attempt to capture moments of
serenity he is unable to find at home; Phyllis Logan invests Monica with a
reservoir of bitterness over her inability to have children, a bitterness
which spills over into contempt for Cynthia.  Marianne Jean-Baptiste's
Hortense is a quiet, centered woman who sees the life she might have led
in her half-sister Roxanne, played with a perpetual sneer by Claire
Rushbrook.  Even minor roles -- the social worker (Lesley Manville) who
gives Hortense the information she seeks; Maurice's one-time mentor (Ron
Cook), now a shattered alcoholic -- are so complete that SECRETS & LIES
grips you with its refusal to permit the intrusion of one-dimensional
characters.
     With so many superb characterizations in SECRETS & LIES, it is all
the more extraordinary that Brenda Blethyn's work leaps out at you.
Cynthia Purley is a woman whose entire life has been a desperate search
for someone to show her affection, a search which has resulted mostly in
pain, and Blethyn makes her one of the most heartbreaking characters I
have ever seen committed to film.  The scene in which Cynthia and Hortense
meet for the first time is staged by Leigh in one mesmerizing seven minute
take, with Blethyn taking us through a dizzying array of emotions:
regret, fear, anxiety, embarrassment, pride, relief.  Every word out of
Blethyn's mouth comes from the soul of a real person who wants nothing
more than happiness for herself and her family, and finds herself on the
verge of falling apart every time she is disappointed.  It is an utterly
remarkable piece of acting.
     As fascinating as all these individuals are, however, it is the way
in which they are joined to tell a story of a family in crisis which
elevates SECRETS & LIES.  The final act of the film takes place at a
birthday party for Roxanne, with Hortense attending as Cynthia's "friend,"
her true identity unknown to anyone else.  Scene after scene explores the
dynamics of familial interaction, with resentments bubbling just beneath
the surface at every moment, and shows how the things we hide from the
people who are supposed to be closest to us in our lives create mountains
of unresolved issues.  Leigh is so skillful for so long that it is a
genuine shame that the final fifteen minutes are devoted largely to an
over-wrought airing of emotional dirty laundry, with tears, speeches and
accusations flying across the living room.  He didn't need manufactured
drama of that sort, because the characters in SECRETS & LIES live lives of
everyday drama.  They, and Mike Leigh's film, are beautiful simply because
they are human.
