Title
Review for Broken English (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BROKEN ENGLISH (director: Gregor Nicholas; cast:Rade Serbedzija (Ivan),
Aleksandra Vujcic (Nina), Julian Arahanga (Eddie), Marton Csokas
(Darko), Jing Zhao (Clara), Li Yang (Wu), Madeline McNamara (Mira),
1996-New Zealand)
The film abounds in ironies, as a Croatian family moves to Aukland, New
Zealand to escape the ethnic cleansing war of their homeland, at the
hands of the Serbs, only to find that the father, Ivan (Rade), can't
handle having a Maori, Eddie (Julian), be with his favorite daughter
Nina (Aleksandra). Though the father manages to do well economically in
the building construction business, he does not feel at home with the
culture and racial tolerance of the people here. New Zealand was chosen
by the family, because of the strong Dalmatian community already here in
place and the fact that the mother is a native New Zealander, giving
them automatic citizenship.
Nina finds work in a Chinese restaurant and falls madly in love with the
new cook, Eddie. They immediately have a wildly free and reckless sexual
relationship, that results in her pregnancy. The film then uses a
multitude of different devices to emphasize the conflicting cultures and
barriers that separate this inter-racial couple, such as the different
music styles heard  at her house, as her relatives gather there to
celebrate Croatian Independence Day, their music contrasts with the more
lively music heard at her Tongan neighbor's house. Then there is the
other matter, Nina must deal with her father's hatred of Eddie for being
colored, while making her sexually exciting relationship with Eddie, be
a real and lasting one. This being after Ivan tells Eddie that Nina will
always be one of his kind and will never be right for him.
The film works on many different levels, exploring the difficulties it
is for people to believe in the love they have in their heart, when
there are so many outside forces working against them. Love is thought
of, as something only the daring try to achieve. It points out that it
is too easy for most people to go along with the prejudices and
predilections one is brought up with to change. That Nina is embarrassed
and struck with conflict over her decision to be with Eddie no matter
what her father says, since she knows that her father loves her and that
she has hurt him, and that there is no chance for him ever changing;
and, that she loves her father, no matter how much she differs with him,
which makes her decision to be with Eddie a very difficult one,
especially since her father says that if she goes with Eddie she is gone
from him forever. That part of the story was very well developed and
acted out. It would be too easy to make the father out to be a hopeless
one-dimensional person, the filmmaker made it possible, to see his point
of view, how he believes that there are only us and them in this world.
Everything is black and white for him. The only people he hates more
than the Maori, are the Serbs. And if you see where he is coming from,
then you can, at least, understand him a little better.
There is also a subplot about immigration being restrictive and forcing
people who want to stay in NZ, to resort to false marriages. This plot
was awkwardly worked into the story, using the Chinese couple as a
paradigm of hard work, who would be good to have in the country and
therefore, shouldn't be forced to have to resort to using illegal means
to get into the country. That argument didn't seem to be too
convincingly done, and besides, it drained energy from the main plot.
The film shies away from a lot of the dramatics it could have gone into
by prying into the psyches of what drives people blindly against other
people, and perhaps, it should have gone in that direction, it would
have made the background story of why the Croatian family came to New
Zealand in the first place a more meaningful one, a more graphic and
integral part of the story, instead of shooting for the safer ground, of
downplaying the heavy racial situation by bringing comic elements into
the story. Passing off the silly ethnic comments, such as, the father
calling his Tongan neighbors, coconuts, as just that, another mindless
slur. As a result we see a pretty good film, but we are not let in on
the secret workings of the family, and so we don't really know what to
make of all that was brought out into the open. We can't even be sure
that the lustful relationship between Eddie and Nina will be able to be
maintained as anything but a lustful arrangement. But we can be sure of
one thing, where there is youth, there is the possibility for rebellion.
=A9 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BROKEN ENGLISH (New Zealand, 1996) *** Directed by Gregor Nicholas. Written
by Nicholas, Johanna Pigott, Jim Salter. Produced by Robin Scholes.
Photography, John Toon. Editing, David Coulson. Production design, Mike
Kane. Music, Murray McNabb. Cast: Rade Serbedzija (Ivan, the father),
Aleksandra Vujcic (daughter Nina), Julian Arahanga (Eddie), Marton Csokas
(Darko), et al. A Sony Classics release. In several languages. 90 minutes.
Rated NC-17 (see text).
Broken English is the language spoken in New Zealand by immigrants from
many countries. The last half-dozen years have seen a wave of people who
want to become Kiwis (the nickname for New Zealanders).
Long ago, the first inhabitants were Polynesians. Much later they took on
the name Maori ("normal") to differentiate themselves from the European
colonists and settlers, mostly from the British Isles plus a hefty amount
of Dutch. Numerous Croatians arrived in waves in the 1890s, the 1950s and
the 1990s.
A family of recent Croatian emigres with their own values holds center
stage in  the movie. Dominating all is Ivan, played by a Yugoslav film and
stage star, now London-based and doing well.
One has to know the Croatian temper to understand Ivan. He is abrupt,
imperious, intractable.  He is doing well in business, yet remains in a
constant bellicose mood. Much of this is caused by his hatred of Serbs,
whose atrocities toward Croats seem to reprise older ones by another
country. Historical enmities smolder. As Ivan puts a spit through a pig for
a barbecue, he tells a little boy to watch: "That's what the Turks did to
us."
Ivan insult for the Serbs is "Chetniks." That is the pot calling the kettle
black. During the Nazi occupation of Yugoslavia, the Serbs had two
resistance movements, the royalists/nationalists Chetniks, under Colonel
Mihailovic, and the communist Partisans under Tito.The two groups fought
the Germans as well as each other. Germany and Italy set up the allied,
independent State of Croatia under Ante Pavelic, the head of the fascist
terrorist organization Ustasha who, in a campaign of ethnic "purification"
so atrocious that it even shocked some Germans, killed hundreds of
thousands of Serbs, Jews, Gypsies, and anti fascist Croats.
The apple of Ivan's eye is Nina, one of his two daughters. She is played by
first-time actress Aleksandra Vujcic, a newcomer to New Zealand who did not
even want to be in  movies. Ms. Vucjic fits her part to a t. She has
presence, earthy sexiness and good looks. In  many  shots she reminds one
uncannily of Lolita Davidovich, the actress born in Canada of Yugoslav
parents.
Nina is something of a promiscuous Daisy Mae figure sometimes trampishly
dressed. Early on, her Tata ("daddy"in Serbo-Croatian), engaged in the
national activity of talking politics, drinking, and smoking with cronies,
notices that Nina is coupling with a young  man in a parking lot. He
demolishes the car. You don't have to be an exceptionally possessive father
to act that way. Feelings run high in the Balkans. From the Danube down to
Crete, there is still a tradition of fathers and brothers who may knife to
death any man who has sullied a daughter's or sister's honor. Ivan is more
of a familiar figure than an exception.
The restaurant where Nina works is owned by an immigrant Chinese, a
"soignee" lady who is into extra-curricular money-making schemes.  Nina's
New Zealand-born mother enables the young woman to hold a New Zealand
passport. The lady boss proposes that she marry, in name only, and for a
bundle, the chef, Mr. Wu, a refugee from China in need of establishing
residency for himself and later for his also undocumented Chinese
girlfriend.
Meanwhile Nina comes on strong to Eddie, her handsome Maori kitchen-mate.
Lightning-fast sex follows, then a love-making scene. The latter got the
movie a rare and ludicrously severe  NC-17 rating. The activity is
suggested rather than seen, as it takes place in darkness.  Director
Nicholas has appealed, to no avail. It has also been suggested that the
real reason was a four-letter disparagement of the Pope (Croats are
Catholics) and his appeals to brotherhood.
Nina and Eddie live together. Furious Ivan blows hot and cold towards Nina,
now loving now mad as hell.  Still, his opposition becomes an uneasy
wait-and-see truce until it explodes and Nina is made literally into a
prisoner within a sealed room at Ivan's house. For more developments, see
the film. It is time well spent.
I was puzzled by most reviewers' recurring mention of the movie as a Romeo
and Juliet story, until I saw this comparison (plus "star-crossed lovers),
in the press-book. This is an inaccurate simplification. It would have been
valid had the lovers belonged to same-origin but warring (vendetta-prone)
tribes. But here we have a racial situation.
In spite of simplifications and cliches, the film is interesting, authentic
as an ethnographic document and as an insight into the increasingly
multi-racial New Zealand, a land of  just three-and-half million people.An
insider's job, it captures diversities and tensions, it peeps into the
colorful Croatian Kiwis.
At one point,  Nina, ordered by Tata to attend a celebration, brings along
Eddie. The situation is tense yet there's also a wonderfully warm and
joyous side to it as the extras,  including many members of the Dalmatian
Club of Auckland, sing with abandon lovely songs. And, in a nice invention,
it just happens that in the neighbors' yard, at a Maori gathering, swaying
Maori perform Polynesian songs. The musical duel and the beauty of both
ethnic repertories are cleverly , if artificially, symbolic of contrasts
and similarities.
The most beautiful and lyrical scene however, comes after Eddie has left
Nina --temporarily, don't fret. She joins him on a tourist boat he runs
with a friend, and she swims among the dolphins.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Aleksandra Vujcic, Julian Arahanga, Rade Serbedzija, 
      Marton Csokas, Madeline McNamara, Elizabeth Mavric, Jing Zhao, 
      Li Yang, Temuera Morrison
Director: Gregor Nicholas
Producer: Rogin Scholes
Screenplay: Gregor Nicholas, Johanna Pigott, Jim Salter
Cinematography: John Toon
Music: Murray Grindlay and Murray McNabb
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     BROKEN ENGLISH deals with clashing cultures in New Zealand, "the 
bottom of the world."  There's an energy in this film, the first from 
director Gregor Nicholas, that demands to be noticed, but it's not 
enough to overcome the weaknesses of a predictably shallow, derivative 
script.  The only new ingredient in BROKEN ENGLISH's approach to racial 
intolerance and strife is that the tension is between immigrant 
Croatians and native Maoris.  The basic story, however, is familiar, and 
the characters aren't sufficiently well-developed to captivate an 
audience.
     A secondary aspect of BROKEN ENGLISH addresses a father's obsessive 
need to control the lives of his children.  Like SHINE's Peter Helfgott, 
Ivan (Rade Serbedzija) is determined to keep his family together at all 
costs, and is willing to use violence to thwart any non-Croatian who 
shows an interest in either of his daughters.  However, where Armin 
Mueller-Stahl was able to fashion a multi-dimensional portrait of a torn 
man, Ivan is a distressingly flat villain.  Early in the film, there are 
shades to his personality, but, as the story progresses, he becomes 
progressively more of a one-note character, and any grudging sympathy we 
might have for him is destroyed by the time we reach the overly 
melodramatic climax.
     The premise is not inherently unpromising, despite (or perhaps 
because of) certain similarities to that of ONCE WERE WARRIORS.  
Accompanied by his immediate family, Ivan has fled the battlefield of 
his native country, Croatia, to settle in Auckland.   There, he earns 
his living by growing and distributing marijuana.  His youngest 
daughter, Nina (Aleksandra Vujcic), falls in love with Eddie (Julian 
Arahanga), a Maori cook who works at the restaurant where she's a 
waitress.  Eventually, Nina moves away from home, but Ivan's disapproval 
of Eddie isn't the only reason.  In order to help a Chinese friend gain 
residency status, Nina (who is a citizen of New Zealand because her 
mother was born there) agrees to a marriage in name only.  Ultimately, 
Nina wants to integrate all aspects of her life into one cohesive whole, 
but her attempts to reconcile with Ivan lead to violence and grief.
     Nicholas doesn't offer anything revolutionary in his approach to 
warring cultures, and the story of two lovers defying tradition and 
family wishes is older than ROMEO AND JULIET.  In fact, the basic themes 
and framework of BROKEN ENGLISH have been explored more effectively in 
films like MISSISSIPPI MASALA and DOUBLE HAPPINESS.  Racial purity and 
isolation are the issues here.  Wanting his grandchildren to be full-
blooded Croatians,  Ivan despises the idea of interracial breeding.  
This is the kind of narrow-minded bigotry that begins race wars and 
leads to attempted genocides.
     The main actors turn in solid performances.  Veteran Rade 
Serbedzija, best-known to American audiences from BEFORE THE RAIN, is 
terrific at portraying rage, but somewhat less successful at conveying 
pain and loss.  The sensual Aleksandra Vujcic is surprisingly effective 
for a non-professional in her first role.  Julian Arahanga smolders as 
Eddie, and while he and Vujcic don't have perfect chemistry, they steam 
up the screen during one particularly hot sex scene.  Some of the 
supporting players (Marton Csokas, as Nina's brother, in particular) 
aren't impressive.  Temuera Morrison (the male lead from ONCE WERE 
WARRIORS) has a small part as Eddie's brother.
     BROKEN ENGLISH -- the title refers to the common language that 
immigrants must speak in order to communicate -- was filmed with a great 
deal of energy and color.  As absurd as the climax is, it's still 
peculiarly compelling, if only because there's so much raw violence and 
hatred percolating on-screen.  Unfortunately, the characters don't hold 
the same fascination as the visual and visceral elements, and, as a 
result, the trappings of BROKEN ENGLISH are almost more interesting than 
the actual story.  So, instead of being an equal to ONCE WERE WARRIORS, 
BROKEN ENGLISH is a faint, fleeting shadow.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Set in New Zealand, BROKEN ENGLISH is a poignant retelling of the
Romeo and Juliet story.  The young woman, Nina, played by beautiful
Aleksandra Vujcic in her film debut, is a member of a large community
of Croatian immigrants.  Her lover, Eddie (Julian Arahanga from the
explosive ONCE WERE WARRIORS), is a Maori and is the chef at the
Chinese restaurant where Nina works as a waitress.
     Their love affair would have little tension were it not for her
domineering father, Ivan, played by Rade Serbedzija, who played the
leader of the Russian Mafia in THE SAINT.  Ivan is the type of father
who is willing to lock his grown daughters in their rooms if they are
caught doing something of which he does not approve.  In the opening
scene, he smashes the Jaguar of the boyfriend of Nina's equally grown
sister.  Ivan had found that Nina's sister was having sex with her
boyfriend, and that was all the justification that Ivan the Madman
needed.
     BROKEN ENGLISH tells two stories and hints at a third.  The
intensity of the all too manipulative script by Gregor Nicholas,
Johanna Pigott, and James Salter focuses on Nina's dysfunctional
family.  The father makes his living illegally growing and dealing
marijuana.  Even when not violent, Serbedzija makes you think Ivan is
about to explode.
     The family's problems are neatly laid at the foot of the war they
fled and of unnamed Serbian atrocities.  One telling scene has the
family huddled around their television set watching the latest homemade
tape of the war sent from their relatives back home at the front.
     Nina manages to look fondly back on her time in the midst of the
battle.  She liked to drink, smoke pot, and wander around as the bombs
fell.  She found freedom and independence among the devastation.  "I
wanted to do what I wanted to do, no matter what," she tells us.  "It
was my moment of freedom."  Her controlling father was so oppressive
that freedom among the explosions was an improvement.
     Nina and Eddie's romance form the second and most interesting of
the narratives.  The chemistry between them is touching and believable,
and their few love making scenes are beautifully erotic even if only
one is explicit.
     (The film inappropriately has been tagged with an NC-17 rating,
which director Gregor Nicholas protested and lost.  The press kit
explains the MPAA appeals board said that one of the film's love making
scenes contains "buttock thrusting," so they felt that they had to rate
it NC-17.  Given the massive violence in countless R-rated shows, and
the more explicit sex and more rampant nudity in many other R-rated
films, it seems strange that one motion would make such a difference,
but apparently it did.  One wonders what poses a greater threat to a
sixteen-year old: seeing someone's brains splattered on the side of a
building or a couple of "buttock thrusts?"  It would seem the MPAA
believes it is the latter since the former gets a film the more
profitable R-rating and latter condemns the movie to an NC-17.  Some
newspapers will not even carry advertisements for NC-17 films.)
     The third story, which remains no more than an outline, is about
Eddie's family, his people and his culture.  We see them from afar in a
few scenes, but we rarely venture into their world.  Only his beloved
whakapapa tree provides a link to this undeveloped part of the story.
     Another subplot has Nina about to marry her friend Clara's (Jing
Zhao) boyfriend, Mr. Wu (Yang Li), for money since Mr. Wu needs to be
married to a New Zealand citizen to be able to stay in New Zealand.
Both of these Chinese characters are so badly stereotyped that it
becomes embarrassing to watch.  Clara drones on about wanting to "make
a little kiwi" with Mr. Wu.
     The film smolders as if building to an explosive conclusion.  When
the ending comes, it is remarkably plain and unoriginal and packs
little wallop.  A bit scary, certainly, but nothing out of the
ordinary.
     With a surfeit of stories, the audience is too often shortchanged.
An overly ambitious film, it does manage to deliver on the romance even
if it too often buries it in the manipulative saga of the brutal
family.
     BROKEN ENGLISH runs only 1:30.  It is inappropriately rated NC-17.
Although there is sex, nudity, violence, profanity, and dope smoking,
the level is on a par with most R-rated films and the violence is less.
The movie would be fine for mature teenagers.  I liked the picture just
enough to be able to recommend it and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
