Title
Review for Fast Food, Fast Women (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Writer/director Amos Kollek and actress Anna Levine have teamed up to make
two pretty downbeat films (Sue and Fiona) that have each won awards at the
Cannes Film Festival.  Their latest project, Fast Food, Fast Women, is
decidedly more upbeat and plays like a romantic Big Apple fairytale.  It's
sweet, quite often funny, and is even a bit reminiscent of a Woody Allen
comedy, although Women's characters exist a few rungs further down the
social ladder than the usual denizens of Woody's New York.
Women begins with a scene that features a woman lying down in the crosswalk
of a busy intersection.  She's almost run over, and explains to the baffled
driver, "I'm just trying to put some excitement in my Sunday."  The woman is
Bella (Levine, Water Drops on Burning Rocks), a rail-thin waitress who has
abandoned a lucrative career on Wall Street to wait tables at a Manhattan
diner.  With a biological clock ticking as loud as an air horn, she's
obsessed with her upcoming birthday (the big 3-5) and worried that the
12-year affair she's been having with a married man (Austin Pendleton, Oz)
might not ever lead her down the aisle.
Bella's mother (Judith Roberts) is intent on fixing her daughter up with
more suitable men, and her latest blind date offering is Bruno (Jamie
Harris, son of Richard), a struggling novelist who pays the bills by driving
a cab.  They hit it off, but in an attempt to not frighten him off, Bella
lies and tells Bruno that she doesn't like kids.  This is unfortunate, as
Bruno's ex-wife has just run off to Tibet with her yoga instructor and
dumped their two kids on his doorstep.
In the meantime, a group of retired men who frequent Bella's diner discuss
their own love lives (or complete lack thereof).  Paul (Robert Modica) is
pretty depressed and tries his luck with the personal ads, where he finds
Emily (Louise Lasser, Requiem For a Dream), a horny widow who starts talking
about marriage after just one date.  Seymour (Victor Argo, The Yards), on
the other hand, shoots for the opposite side of the age spectrum and begins
to stalk an overeducated peep show dancer (Valerie Geffner).  Throw in a
stuttering Polish hooker (Angelica Torn, daughter of Rip Torn and Geraldine
Page), and you've got yourself an eclectic tale of lonely eccentrics.
The stories cross in unusual and unexpected ways, a credit to Kollek's
writing style.  His direction is unassuming, leaving his actors to do their
thing, which they do quite well here.  There are a bunch of good one-liners
and some pretty funny visuals, like two women talking about gravity's effect
on breasts as they squeeze melons at the supermarket.  Women, which was one
of the few American films selected to compete at Cannes, should appeal to
most viewers, but especially to those entrenched in their mid 30s.
1:35 - contains nudity, adult language and mild violence
