Title
Review for Exorcist, The (1973)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Ellen Burstyn; Max Von Sydow; Lee J. Cobb; Jason Miller & Linda
Blair
As you can probably glean by the title of the film, The Exorcist revolves
around an exorcism. Specifically, the exorcism of a little girl. When little
Regan (Linda Blair) starts to behave strangely -- like killing family
friends and float in mid-air over her bed -- her mother (Ellen Burstyn)
becomes concerned. Add to that the fact that Regan also claims to be
possessed by the Devil, and it's obvious that the family has a problem on
its hands. Her mother consults every member of the medical profession that
she can think of. None seem to be able to help the little girl, who
continues to get worse. One psychiatrist suggests that Regan's problems may
be more spiritual than mental. Since she thinks that she is possessed, he
suggests that maybe an exorcism might snap her out of it. Little do they
know, she really is sharing her body with something sinister. A Jesuit
priest who works at nearby Georgetown University as a psychiatrist is called
in to examine Regan. He decides that an exorcism is the girl's only hope.
The rest, as they say, is history. More specifically, the rest of the movie
focuses in on the exorcism. At the time, the exorcism scenes were some of
the scariest ever shot.
First let me say that I would like to nominate Ellen Burstyn for the William
Shatner award for overacting. This has got to be one of the worst
performances that I've ever seen in a film (and I've seen Pauley Shore
movies). Quite frankly, I didn't really find any of the characters in this
movie were particularly compelling. Although the performances of the priests
(Max Von Sydow and Jason Miller) who performed the exorcism, and Lee J.
Cobb, who played the police officer investigating the death of the
afore-mentioned deceased family friend, were decent. I have no idea why
Linda Blair became a star over this film. I can find nothing great in her
performance.
The Exorcist looks dated. It was made in the early seventies, and it is
really showing its age. Like most other "classic" horror films, The Exorcist
doesn't exactly fit my definition of a scary film. What might have been
shocking or even frightening nearly 30 years ago doesn't hold up today. The
characters spend far too much time talking about Regan's problems, and very
little time actually doing battle with the thing possessing her. My estimate
is that less than a half an hour is actually spent on things that might
have, at one time, been considered frightening. The only redeeming quality
about The Exorcist is that it involves the very real procedure of the rite
of exorcism. The Roman Catholic Church still practices this ritual to this
day. (In extremely limited circumstances.) I personally have always been
fascinated by this procedure, so some of the movie I found to be
interesting. But I don't generally watch a horror film for the knowledge.
Call me demanding, but I generally like a few scares, or at least a high
amount of tension. The Exorcist has neither.
The only thing that I got out of this movie was a little bit better
understanding of the Catholic Church's rite of exorcism. This is hardly a
compelling reason to recommend a horror film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
After missing its 25th anniversary a couple of Christmases ago, THE 
EXORCIST, the gold standard of horror movies, is being re-released to 
theaters.  In an expanded "writers-cut" -- Director William Friedkin was 
happy with its original edit -- the new version is being marketed as THE 
EXORCIST: THE VERSION YOU'VE NEVER SEEN.  Eleven minutes of William 
Peter Blatty's script, based on his novel, which were left on the 
cutting room floor, have been restored.  The ending has been altered 
and, so that Regan's screams can really stir up the heavens, the 
original mono soundtrack has been replaced by one in six-track digital 
stereo.
First, let me get this off my chest.  I don't enjoy reviewing a film 
considered "a classic" for whatever reason, since everyone, including 
those who haven't seen it, typically has already formed strong opinions 
about it.  Covering the plot feels redundant and a bit ridiculous.  (In 
THE TEN COMMANDMENTS, there is this guy named Moses ...)  And commenting 
on it is likely to inflame the prejudices of people who disagree with 
you.
As THE EXORCIST begins, Chris MacNeil (Ellen Burstyn) has got problems: 
rats.  She's got rats in her attic, or so she thinks.  These noises 
prove to be the least of her problems when her angelic daughter Regan, 
played with an incredible intensity by Linda Blair, begins to cuss like 
a sailor.  Nominated for a supporting Oscar, Blair was beaten by Tatum 
O'Neal, whose performance in PAPER MOON pales in comparison to Blair's.
As Regan plunges into what looks like the depths of madness, her mother 
turns to a team of doctors, who put her through the modern medical 
equivalent of medieval torture in order to diagnose her aliment.  The 
problem, of course, lies not in Regan's body but in her soul.  After 
insisting that Regan has a "disorder of her nerves," the doctors finally 
throw up their hands and recommend that Chris look to the church for 
salvation in the form of an exorcism.  Their rationale, however, is that 
it's all in Regan's mind, but, if her mind believes that the devil has 
left her body, she will be cured.
With all of the fury of a rabid pit bull, Regan torments anyone brave or 
foolish enough to come into her room.  The film releases its terror in 
carefully controlled doses, which heightens its effective.  Venturing 
into Regan's room devastates the viewers as much as the priests (Max von 
Sydow and Jason Miller) who conduct the rarely used -- so we're told -- 
Catholic rite of exorcism.  For these reasons, most scenes occur outside 
the terror chamber, which helps fortify us for the descent into hell as 
we vicariously battle along with the agents of God against the Devil.
The movie's most famous scenes -- Regan's head doing a 360, her 
masturbating with a crucifix and her using projectile vomit like a venom 
spitting dinosaur -- are scary, gross and shocking.  Just imagine how 
audiences must have felt in the much more cinematically sheltered times 
of the early 1970s.  
So does this film deserve its normally associated sobriquet of "the 
scariest movie ever made?"  Perhaps.  As one who found THE BLAIR WITCH 
PROJECT lame and tame, I have a high tolerance for shock.  I don't know 
if THE EXORCIST is the most frightening ever, but it would certainly 
rank high on most people's fear scale.  And, maybe most shocking of all, 
I've never seen the film before other than a few excerpts.  When it was 
originally released, I believed its detractors and avoided the film 
entirely.  A bad move, which I have now corrected.
THE EXORCIST runs 2:12.  It is rated R for strong language and 
disturbing images and would be acceptable for those 17 and over.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
John Beachem
Regan MacNeil (Linda Blair) isn't exactly your average twelve year old girl 
living in Georgetown. She does things like speak in tongues she's never 
learned, send objects flying around her room with her mind alone, and even 
makes her head twist around backwards. Her mother, Chris (Ellen Burstyn), 
has tried every doctor she can find, but they've been no help. After a 
psychiatrist tries hypnosis and is attacked by Regan, it is suggested she 
try more unorthodox methods. She gets in touch with Father Damien Karras 
(Jason Miller), a psychiatrist/priest at a local church. Father Karras is 
going through a spiritual crisis of his own, since his mother died just 
recently and he is questioning his faith. Nevertheless, he decides to visit 
Regan and determines she may, in fact, be possessed by a demon. The church 
decides to attempt an exorcism to remove the spirit, but that means calling 
in Father Merrin (Max von Sydow), the only man they know of who has 
performed one before. So Father Merrin travels to Georgetown, despite his 
health problems, and teams up with Father Karras to take on the demon in 
Regan.
While watching the "new and improved" version of William Peter Blatty's "The 
Exorcist", it occurred to me that I probably should have gone back and 
watched the original one more time. Afterall, I haven't seen the original 
for about six or seven years. So, I had to decide if I was going to review 
the film based on the changes, or simply review it as I would an original 
cut. Frankly, I still can't decide, so I'm going to try both. Even now, 
twenty seven years after its release, it's difficult to put your finger on 
just what it is that makes "The Exorcist" so eerie. Yes, I say eerie rather 
than scary. I know it scared audiences stiff back in '73, but "The Exorcist" 
has been downgraded from terrifying to really creepy over the years. Don't 
get me wrong, it's still an excellent film, it just can't compete with 
modern scares. So what makes the film so creepy? I know part of it is the 
way Friedkin sets up shots, but I think what really gets to us is the 
script, and specifically how well the characters are drawn. These characters 
seem like real people, with real problems, and as a result it hits close to 
home when things happen to them.
A lot of what makes the film's characters so real is that the actors 
portraying them are quite gifted. First up we have Jason Miller ("Rudy"), 
who almost underacts as Father Karras. I was sorry to see that Miller 
decided to go on to a career in writing rather than acting, because he 
brings a real humanity and depth to his character. On the other hand, we 
have Ellen Burstyn ("Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore"), who overacts with 
abandon. If I had any faith in the Academy awards, I'd have been shocked by 
the fact that she received a nomination for her part in this film. Next up 
is Linda Blair (who has gone on to do nothing of import), who does an 
admirable job for being so young. Frankly, I'm a little shocked that her 
parents allowed her to appear in this movie. I can't help but think some of 
her actions here are what influenced her to go into the exploitation films 
later in her career ("Red Heat", anyone?). Lee J. Cobb ("How the West was 
Won") is excellent, if sadly underused, as the likeable Lt. Kinderman, who 
investigates a murder Regan may have committed. Finally we have Max von 
Sydow ("Needful Things") himself. I hate to use '90s jargon, but I simply 
have to utilize this term in regards to Sydow: he is the man. From an early 
scene where he squares off against a satanic statue on a hill, to a scene 
where Regan throws up on his face while he keeps reading from his bible, you 
know this is the guy you want to call to fight the forces of evil.
I said I was going to point out the few changes I actually noticed, so here 
goes. First, the infamous "spider walk" has been integrated into the film. I 
know peoples' opinions of this scene vary drastically, but I belong to that 
camp which finds the scene impossibly creepy. That one, brief scene alone 
gave me nightmares back when I first saw it, and I still can't handle seeing 
it now. Don't ask me to explain why I react that way, because I can't. 
Second, the film's ending has been altered slightly, and this was a bad 
idea. In the original version, Ellen hands Father Dyer (Reverend William 
O'Malley) the medallion dropped by Father Karras. Father Dyer walks to the 
house with it, stares down at those menacing concrete stairs, and the 
picture fades. In the new version the above events occur, but Father Dyer 
gives it back. No, wait, it doesn't stop there. He then meets up with 
Lieutenant Kinderman and the two talk about going to lunch and a movie. They 
wander off together and the film ends. Why these changes? I haven't the 
foggiest, but it ends the film on entirely the wrong note. The only other 
change I noticed was a minor one, but I'll note it anyway. In the middle of 
the exorcism, Father Karras and Father Merrin sit at the top of the stairs 
and have a philosophical discussion. It's an interesting discussion, but I 
don't think it was a necessary addition. It detracts from the action that 
takes place before and after.
I've often heard that the only people who will find "The Exorcist" scary are 
those who have deep religious beliefs. I don't think that's quite true. I 
don't have any deep religious beliefs (I'm a deist), but when I first saw 
the film it scared me silly. I've decided that a lot of the film's scares 
come from two elements: the set design, and the soundtrack. I didn't think 
it was possible for a simple concrete staircase to look eerie, but Friedkin 
pulls it off. A lot of his success is due to keeping the film's lighting low 
and giving each set a claustrophobic feel. As for the music, well, the music 
is everything. Jack Nitzsche's original score is brilliant, but I'd never 
want to buy the soundtrack since I'd never be able to sleep at night. I 
didn't think it was possible for "Tubular Bells" to inspire such feelings of 
dread. Are there flaws to "The Exorcist"? Of course, but they're negligible. 
The most prominent is the amount of time spent on the film's setup. It takes 
about an hour to get to the really spooky stuff. There is one scene I want 
to point out, one which makes me laugh like a madman whenever I see it. 
Regan is floating above the bed, the two priests are throwing holy water at 
her and shouting "The power of Christ commands you." They yell it over, and 
over, and over again. I didn't count the number of times but it must have 
been at least fifteen. I just want to reach in, shake Father Merrin, and 
shout "We get the point!" Oh well. The original version of "The Exorcist" 
runs a full 122 minutes. The new version runs a long 131. I'd recommend the 
film to those who want to see how to make a classic horror film and give it 
four and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
    When "The Exorcist" first opened in 1973, lines formed
around the block at the only New York theater screening the
mother of all Satanist films.  I recall waiting in twenty-degree
weather on a Saturday morning for two hours, the longest
period of time that I ever tarried to see a film.  The crowd
was mixed.  All ages were represented.  Perhaps the
marketing campaign was supremely successful, or more likely
the congregation assembled because "The Exorcist" was
viewed as the first major film on an individual's possession by
the Devil.  Though the film was critic-proof--as is probably as
true today as then--reviews were on the whole positive
anyway, with Leonard Maltin awarding three stars for an
"intense, well-mounted adaptation of William Peter Blatty's
best-seller, calculated to keep your stomach in knots from
start to finish."
   Given the voluminous number of horror movies since that
time, and the strong representation of Satanist melodramas,
are we now so habituated to the thrills and scares of "The
Exorcist" that we find the film either laughable or bland? 
Quite possibly.  The reason William Friedkin's work will
continue to involve us and make us think about the nature of
faith is that the director had mastered all aspects of
film-making to such an extent that John Boorman's and
William Peter Blatty's attempts to mount sequels in 1977 and
1990 failed miserably from confusion and a greater weight of
absurdity than the genre could bear.
   One of the virtues of "The Exorcist" is its leisurely pace--
slow, but not sluggish.  By keeping the tempo leisurely,
Friedkin gets to develop all of his principal characters so that
we care about them.  Even more important we believe that
the mayhem caused by the possessed 12-year-old is real and
an event as ghastly as the dominion by Satan within a lovely,
innocent child is possible.  We don't see aliens with eels
crawling out of their bellies for half the movie and in fact we
see only a single diabolical spirit throughout the film's
substantial time of 132 minutes.  We learn, as well, that with
the exception of an exorcism that Father Merrin (Max von
Sydow) performed in Africa--just a single such event and one
which lasted for an entire month--was the only known case of
such an incident since the Sixteenth Century.   We might not
find difficulty  believing that such a cataclysm could indeed
occur once or twice every four hundred years.  The discovery
of a small, ghoulish statue by Father Merrin was not a
contrived, chance event.  We believe in the power of the relic
because Friedkin spends considerable time in the opening
quarter hour or so to situate his action in Northern Iraq, the
scene of the biblical treasures of Nineveh where a large
number of local people are digging under the supervision of
the American churchman.  And the people speak Arabic!  
   The Georgetown (D.C.) home of Chris MacNeil (Ellen
Burstyn) and her daughter Regan (Linda Blair) is lavish,
equipped with a butler, a cook and a nanny. This too is made
painstakingly credible when Friedkin does not simply have
someone state that Chris makes her living as an actress in
major studio movies but actually shows us a substantial
scene involving a student demonstration taking place
presumably between 1968 and 1973.  No expense is spared
to make us accept the details of the narrative, which this time
around includes eleven minutes never seen before including
the best single shot--a few seconds that will startle
arachnophobics and others alike.
   While a majority of the audience for this digitized re-release
of "The Exorcist" will have never before seen the movie on
the big screen but only on the absurdly inadequate
technology of videotapes, the re-release is a godsend (no
pun intended).  Folks in high school and college and some
perhaps on their first job will get to see what a real horror
movie is like before the fast pace of video games made pure
sensation a requirement for big box office among the prime
movie goers.  Some viewers in their teens and twenties might
even try to figure out a line by a detective in the homicide
bureau (Lee J. Cobb) who asks a potential companion to
accompny him to a movie, "Othello," with Groucho Marx in
the title role and Debbie Reynolds as Desdemona.  
  While we credit the movie for avoiding the usual cheap
frights of the Friday the 13th series and the like, we lament
that this film, for all its artistic attributes, may not invoke
screams from a benumbed audience.  But what a pleasure to
see that a horror film can be exquisitely and lovingly made in
an age of cheap shots and shoddy thrills.  Ian Waldron-
Mantgani, a major online critic in a Liverpool suburb, notes
that the film is still banned on video in the UK because of
fears that children, who would then be able to see the movie
at home, could be affected for the worse.  The jury is still out
on the influence of violent movies on the impressionable
young, particularly one that features a 12-year-old
sporadically cursing, urinating in public, vomiting green stuff,
twisting her around completely around, and generally making
a case that Ritalin is not all it's cracked up to be.  
Rated R.  Running time: 132 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Chad Polenz
** (out of 4 = fair)
1973, R, 122 minutes [2 hours, 2 minutes]
[horror/drama]
starring: Jason Miller (Father Damon Karras), Ellen Burstyn (Christine
MacNeil), Linda Blair (Regan MacNeil), Max von Sydow (Father Merrin), written
and produced by William Peter Blatty (based on his novel), directed by
William Friedkin.
"The Exorcist" puts itself forward as a completely logical story that just
happens to be about demonic possession. Unfortunately, the harder it tries
not to be a mindless horror flick, the more it becomes one.
The story is simple; an innocent 12-year-old girl,  Regan MacNeil (Blair),
becomes possessed by a demonic spirit. At first, her mother Christine
(Burstyn), along with some medical doctors think she has a lesion in her
brain which is causing her to act so strange, but when no physical evidence
is found, they assume it's a psychological disorder. Then the possibility of
spiritual possession is brought up. At first Christine scoffs the idea, but
then believes it after finding no other explanation. 
Now, this story is fine and the film does a good job in creating a
suspenseful mood since we seem to be the only ones who can see the obvious.
Horror stories thrive on this kind of element, so when the evil things happen
we can say to the naysayers, "Told you so." However, the manner in which the
film actually breaks down the plot and uses this element is quite
exploitative.
The entire first act moves very slowly. There are scenes intended to
establish the setting as everyday normality, but don't add up to anything.
Since this is a horror movie there are also short scenes intended to scare us
but don't. For example, Christine hears constant rumblings in the attic and
believes it to be rats, but when she checks to see if the traps the butler
set are working, they turn out to be empty. Another scene shows the lights in
the house flickering for no reason, but no one seems to notice.
There is also a sketchy scene in which Regan shows her mother a Ouija board
and says something about communicating with a being of another existence.
When Regan ultimately becomes possessed, is it because the Ouija board is
actually a demonic game? Whatever the reason is, it doesn't seem believable
she would become possessed at all.
Although the film tells its story seriously and presents the horrific as
plausible, the way it comes across is too transparent. I found it impossible
to believe no one thought Regan might be possessed after she speaks with a
demonic voice that is straight from the horror cliches, or when she flops
around her bed uncontrollably, or when her face and body start to mutate and
her eyes glaze over (there's medical evidence for all of this!?). Even her
own mother nor a priest is convinced when the furniture starts moving on its
own (nah, that happens all the time!).
Where there is evil there must be good to counter it, and the film's good
force is represented by Father Damon Karras (Miller). Unfortunately, Karras
is having self doubts, and when his mother dies he feels guilty and weak.
Christine goes to Karras for help, but he warns her he could end up causing
more harm than good. The doubting religious servant in the midst of trouble
is such a cliche and the film placates to the audience by using him as a weak
good force to combat the powerful evil. Even Karras' first name is obviously
symbolic.
The demon inside Regan could have been a much more interesting "character."
When it overpowers Regan's body and attacks people, it screams obscenities
which sound like the demon learned from watching horror movies. Father Karras
even engages in dialogue with the demon, and I think it would have been
interesting if he had asked it about the specifics of Hell. Or more
importantly, why, out of the people in the world did it choose to posses
Regan? If the devil is supposed to be so smart, why not posses someone more
important and powerful? These questions aren't even asked, let alone
answered. Instead, the demon blatantly tries to get under Karras' skin by
reading his mind. 
The last few scenes aren't nearly as intense as they should be. A world
renown exorcist, Father Merrin (von Sydow), is called in to help Father
Karras exorcise the demon. The actual ending itself could be seen as a great
poetic victory, but because everything seems so cheesy it doesn't work well.
The true horror to "The Exorcist" is supposed to be derived from the film's
basis in reality. Compared to most horror films, it is realistic, but there
are simply too many unbelievable aspects and other flaws to take it
seriously, and thus it isn't scary. (4/23/97) (6/11/97)
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE EXORCIST  (1973) (new cut, 2000) ** 3/4 . Directed by William 
Friedkin. Written and produced by William Peter Blatty, from his 
novel. Photography, Owen Roizman. Editing, Norman Gay, Jordan 
Leondopoulos, Evan Lottman, Bud Smith. Production design, Bill
Malley. Music, Jack Nitzsche, Mike Oldfield ("Tubular Bells").  Cast: 
Ellen Burstyn (Chris McNeil), Jason Miller (Father Karras), Max Von 
Sydow (Father Merrin), Linda Blair (Regan McNeil),  Lee J. Cobb (Lt. 
Kinderman), Kitty Winn (Sharon), Jack MacGowran (Burke), Vasiliki 
Maliaros (Karras's mother), Mercedes McCambridge (Regan's satanic 
voice), et al.  A Warners release. 132 minutes. R (obscenities, 
upsetting images.)
The film was a mega-hit in 1973, and is no doubt the best of the 
Exorcist films that followed. Now it is reissued with some extra 
11-12 minutes taken from footage that was not included in the 1973 
release. (The never-shown preliminary version ran about 139 minutes.) 
Primarily, restores some extremely coarse language by Regan (Blair) 
who was already plenty foulmouthed in the 1973 release. It also 
contains a gratuitous, wrong, mood-killing, "humorous" scene at the 
very end.
The mono soundtrack of this 27-year old work has been skillfully 
turned into stereo --which adds something to the movie. But the 
sounds of at least one scene (Burstyn and Miller talk while unseen 
kids make noises) come out of the side speakers artificially.
The film's admirers were and still are legion. I was not a big fan 
then, I am not now. Yet, though I realize that this "enhanced" 
reissue is caused by filthy lucre, I am glad to see revivals on the 
big screen finding a new public. There's another bonus too. Alongside 
awful movies for cable TV, the proliferation of multiplexes also 
encourages much junk to be shown in theaters. So, we may assume that 
whenever an oldie significant for any reasons  is resuscitated on the 
big screen, it takes the place of some lamentable new item.
Except for older persons, too many vintage picturesare "terra 
incognita." For those titles, videos, laser disks or DVDs do fill a 
gap, but this is not as important as having  "true" projection.
Most film-viewers know that "The Exorcist" is about 12-year old 
Regan, the daughter of divorced movie actress Chris.  The girl 
becomes possessed by the (or a) devil, does horrible things and looks 
horrible too. Tentative medical diagnoses settle on a lesion of the 
temporal lobe. Surgeries (most graphic!) do not help. Matters go from 
bad to worse. Exorcism is suggested. It is performed by youngish 
Catholic priest Father Karras (Jason Miller in his film debut) and 
the experienced, older Father Merrin (Max Von Sydow).
The opening, set in Northern Iraq, is splendid.  From a minaret, a 
muezzin calls the faithful to their hourly prayers. In a large 
archaeological dig, discoveries are made. Father Merrin ( in 
civvies), frail of health and serious of mien, is involved. Iraqi 
places and people are shown  creatively, not as touristic sights but 
as atmospheric sites. This footage,   shot on location in Iraq, sets 
a very special mood.
The story shifts to the USA where it becomes a novel type of horror 
movie. To this day, a great many spectators claim that it is the 
scariest film ever made. That's where I part ways with them --no 
doubt because I do not scare easily in most movies of that genre.
I am affected by well-made "horror" films that suggest rather than 
depict, where the horror is more implicit than explicit. Of course, 
sometimes a literal kind of horror does work but it leaves no residue 
as a general rule. Let me me put it this way, with some examples off 
the top of my head.
"The Cat People," "The Invasion of the Body-Snatchers" (both 
versions,),"The Night of the Hunter," "Rosemary's Baby," and such, 
are much more chilling than any "Alien" or "Aliens" or most special 
effects movies. "Psycho" and "Blade Runner, so different from each 
other, in spite of some explicitnessfactual get their main impact 
from powerful atmospheres. And so on.
Even more frightening are movies in other categories that are not 
specifically labeled as horror. These range from  sociological works 
to political fictions, semi-fictions or documentaries. And they can 
show super-horror, as in the factual "Night and Fog" which deals with 
WWII deportations and extermination (genocide) camps. There are so 
many true horror works that fiction pales before reality. Man's 
inhumanity to man, the abomination of wars, terrorism, neglected or 
forgotten humans, injustices, inequities, and much else grip you in 
(at random) "The Grapes of Wrath," " I Am a Fugitive From a Chain 
Gang," and many more.
Two recent examples I caught on TV. A new German documentary on how 
the Nazis brainwashed Hitler Youths, then turned them into 
kid-soldiers (as young as 12) whom they sacrificed in vain. That's 
true horror. I also saw for the fifth time "Memphis Belle," that 
heart-rending documentary about true heroes, young airmen of the 8th 
US Army Air Force who, in WWII, bombed Germany over and over, and had 
a horrendous rate of attrition.
Of course, there are exceptions to the exceptions, meaning literal 
scenes that horrify. In my own case, this goes back to the the very 
first feature I ever saw.  It was a scene in a reissue of the old 
"Trader Horn," one of the first movies ever shot mostly in Darkest 
Africa. A native porter falls off a liana bridge to the river below 
and is killed by a crocodile. I had nightmares for months.
Back to "The Exorcist."  I am tepid about it not only because every 
horror is spelled out but because the story is unconvincing, 
arbitrary and has weak connections between its component parts. I 
don't believe in devils either--other than human -- or in 
telekinesis, levitation, etc. But I do confess that after its 1973 
screening I avoide green pea soup for weeks. And, to be fair, the 
special effects, while seeking sensationalism and cheap thrills, 
remain impressive.
In 1973, Pauline Kael, the then monarch of reviewers,  wrote: "The 
demonic possession of a child is treated with shallow seriousness. 
The picture is designed to scare people and does so by mechanical 
means." I add to this that there seems to be no real pity for Regan's 
giga-predicament, while there was for King Kong, for the victims of 
Dr. Moreau or Count Dracula.
Lastly, there are too many unexplained matters and loose ends. A 
minor case occurs when Chris, hearing weird noises, explores her 
attic by the light of a candle. (This goes against my belief that 
everyone involved incertain situations should carry a lighter, a 
flashlight and a Swiss Army knife.) Or else the peculiar fact that 
movie actress Chris seems to be living permanently in Georgetown 
rather than in Los Angeles or New York. I may have missed something.
A major puzzle concerns Father Karras, this "sacerdote de la triste 
figura." He is very clearly of Greek descent. His mother speaks 
perfect Greek, with a genuine accent.  She is played by Vasiliki 
Maliaros, a totally Greek name. (I have found no other credit for 
her). But then, how and why did Karras get into Roman Catholicism, 
since  practically all Greeks are hard-core Orthodox Christians?
All things and flaws considered however, the film is worth seeing, 
but more for its sensationalism rather than its logic or feelings.

Author
Jon Popick
It's been 27 years since The Exorcist forever changed the nation's
perception of pea soup.  The film, which was nominated for 10 Oscars,
including Best Picture, Best Director and three acting roles (it won for
sound and screenplay), allegedly caused some people to flee theatres in
a horrified panic.  But since its theatrical release in 1973, The
Exorcist has only been seen via badly edited TV versions and fading,
crusty old copies of the videotape.  The fact that the film spawned two
lousy sequels (one from The General's John Boorman, and one from The
Exorcist's author and screenwriter William Peter Blatty) didn't help
either.
Thanks to the wonders of modern technology, The Exorcist has been
restored with a cleaned-up picture, completely overhauled sound and
about a dozen additional minutes that didn't appear in the original
version (although some were on a recently released DVD).  But one
lingering question remains – will viewers today be as affected by the
film as they were back in 1973?
The answer is probably not.  The screening I attended was plagued with
mocking laughter and people leaving out of sheer boredom.  I should
mention that the screening was sponsored by a local `modern rock'
station, and most of the crowd was made up of young men and women that
have been weaned on a steady diet of slasher flicks that prominently
feature a grisly murder before the opening credits roll.
What these little douche bags don't understand is that you don't need a
high body count, gallons of fake blood and things making you jump every
five minutes to make a suspenseful film.  In fact, that's the alluring
part of The Exorcist.  Director William Friedkin (Rules of Engagement)
paces the film so slowly, the ending almost becomes a reward in
patience.
Just take the opening scene, where Friedkin takes a brief, five-page
epilogue from the book and audaciously transforms it into a 12-minute
segment that has little to do with the rest of the film.  In it, we are
introduced to Father Merrin (Max von Sydow, Snow Falling on Cedars) an
elderly priest on an archaeological dig in Northern Iraq.  He finds a
creepy idol (not unlike the one Greg had in The Brady Bunch's
multi-episode Hawaiian vacation) and begins to shake uncontrollably
while reaching for both the drink and his nitroglycerine pills.
Meanwhile, movie star Chris MacNeil (Ellen Burstyn, Requiem For a Dream)
and her 12-year-old daughter Regan (Linda Blair) are temporarily living
in Georgetown while Chris shoots a film.  They rent a lovely home
(complete with a staff of three), but their lives are interrupted by a
demonic spirit that decides to take up residence in young Regan.
Thinking there is something physically wrong with her daughter, Chris
drags Regan to a bunch of clueless doctors that run a lot of pointless
tests before sending her off to a shrink.  It's really funny to watch
the doctors whip out cigarettes while they give cheesy explanations for
Regan's odd behavior (Ritalin is their treatment).  They blow smoke in
Chris' face while they blow smoke up her ass.
Looking for alternatives to medications and asylums, Chris turns to
Father Damien Karras (Jason Miller, Rudy), a Jesuit priest and
psychiatrist struggling with his faith after the death of his mother.
Damian's freaky nightmare montage of his dead mother emerging from the
subway entrance is one of the best ever.
Friedkin takes his time developing the characters, which makes the
ending that much more emotional for the viewer.  It's over 30 minutes
before anything makes you jump, 45 before anything remotely supernatural
occurs, and an hour has passed before the real hijinks start.  The
spooky events are spaced far apart and grow more disturbing as the film
progresses.  You begin to dread each time Chris runs up the stairs and
into Regan's room.
Purportedly based on true events, The Exorcist was adapted from Blatty's
best-selling 1971 novel.  The film's acting, especially from Blair and
first-timer Miller, are fantastic.  At that year's Academy Awards, the
14-year-old Blair lost to 10-year-old Tatum O'Neal (Paper Moon).  The
redone sound is marvelous.  You can even hear the aquarium in Regan's
room, which is kind of exciting because you can barely tell she has an
aquarium in the tape at your local video store.
2:15 – R for adult language and violence

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/15a92dead179a8878825695f00043152?OpenDocument
Green vomit.  Unnatural head twisting.  Unlikely use of a crucifix. 
These images from William Friedkin's The Exorcist have become so
memorable, so iconic, that they almost carry an air of humor (even
spoofed by Linda Blair herself in 1990's Repossessed).  They're no
longer just parts of the movie, they are the movie.  But now that Warner
Bros. has given the film a Friedkin-enhanced re-release, it's time to
see The Exorcist again as a complete film, beginning to end, with the
gory details intact and in context.  The result is that 27 years after
its controversial release, The Exorcist is nothing short of a taut,
American classic.
People may forget that The Exorcist, recently screened at the Boston
Film Festival and now hitting wide re-release, was a wildly independent
movie when that particular movement was really getting in gear. 
Shocking and blasphemous-beyond-words in 1973, the story of a sweet
little girl's demonic possession still has a renegade feel today -- the
introductory exposition takes nearly forty minutes, the use of profane
language is disgusting and thrilling, even by today's standards, and the
long battle at the film's end is relentless.
For the most part, Friedkin's eleven minutes worth of added sequences
work, and Exorcist fans (me included) are already familiar with most of
them via its laserdisc release.  First, there's more time spent with
young Regan in the medical offices, giving a broader evolution to her
"sickness," though this isn't really needed, especially when young Linda
Blair's acting is below par.  (Some of the doctor talk gets some healthy
chuckles when he discusses an unknown drug called Ritalin.)  There's
also a fresh ending that gives a little more credence to William Peter
Blatty's outstanding screenplay, a signature Friedkin once publicly
wished he had initially included.
Then, there's the infamous "crabwalk."  Known to most fans, and only
previously seen in a rough cut, it is a physical stunt that Friedkin and
Blatty originally planned to use to further illustrate Regan's
mind-jarring body sacrifice.  In short, Regan "crabwalks," speeding
backwards on just hands and feet, to the horror of a few witnesses.  In
the director's "new" version, it's used to punctuate an already gripping
scene with a huge, eye-popping exclamation point.  If you think you've
seen it, you haven't really until this.
One of the biggest factors that really sets this movie apart from what
we've come to know as "horror" is the acting.  Ellen Burstyn, who would
go on to win an Oscar a year later for Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore,
is nearly perfect, setting the stage as the doting, atheist mother,
having us shriek along with her at the terror that takes over her life. 
Lee J. Cobb is steady as the unknowing Detective Kinderman, and God only
knows what little Linda Blair had to endure.
But if you asked me in 1973 (though I was only 5), I would've guessed
that Jason Miller, in his film debut as the tortured Father Karras,
would come away with the most successful career.  With a movie star
countenance and a gruff voice, he plays Karras as intense, eternally
conflicted, and totally believable.  He is the true center and morality
of the movie.  I wonder why his other notable roles have been so few,
including those in two Friedkin movies, the cult classic The Ninth
Configuration and a reprisal of Father Karras in The Exorcist III.
The powerful acting stands up after all these years, and Friedkin has
even supervised a new surround sound mix (as if the sound effects aren't
scary enough).  I could do without some of the added music, and those
new scenes can be hit and miss, but you find me another director that
handles a movie with such gravity, suspense, and style, and I'll see his
pictures every time.
Director: William Friedkin
Producer: William Peter Blatty
Writer: William Peter Blatty
Starring: Ellen Burstyn, Max Von Sydow, Lee J. Cobb, Kitty Winn, Jack
McGowran, Jason Miller, Linda Blair, Reverend William O'Malley, Barton
Heyman
http://theexorcist.warnerbros.com/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Stian M. Landgaard
THE EXORCIST (based on the novel by William Peter Blatty)
A 12-year-old girl, Regan MacNeil (Linda Blair) starts to behave
rather strangely. She loses control of her body, and strange telekinetic
phenomena occur in her bedroom. Her mother, Chris MacNeil (Ellen
Burstyn), believes her to have a mental illness. Regan is examined by
medical personell, who at first seemed to think she had a somatic
disease; she is then assumed to have an inexplicable mental disturbance.
Seeing as how the doctors can't help, and beginning to believe that her
daughter might be "possessed", Chris attempts to get in touch with an 
"exorcist", a person capable of dispelling evil spirits from a human's 
body by a religious ritual, and thus meets with Father Damien Karras
(Jason Miller), a Catholic priest and psychiatrist. Meanwhile Regan's 
body has been seriously twisted by the assumed demon inside of her, and 
she speaks with a strange, devilish voice. Father Karras believes her to 
be possessed by a demon, and finally agrees to perform exorcism on her, 
if he can get permission by the Catholic Church. But the bishop decides 
to hire another priest, a more experienced exorcist, for the job. Father 
Merrin (Max von Sydow) arrives, and the painstacking act of exorcism can
begin ...
I think THE EXORCIST truly is a powerful movie, even today. When it was 
released, it set a new standard for acceptable violence and gore on the 
screen. Although it's a bit slow in the beginning, and contains very few 
reminders of a "horror genre movie", it certainly builds up to the
inevitable and breath-taking ending. The way be follow Regan's 
transformation from a beautiful young girl to a horrific half demon, 
half human, is very well pictured. The demon's behaviour and speeches 
are less realistic. Especially all the "bad language", which rather than 
impresses us, makes us believe that Satan is a street punk!
The end of the movie is dramatic, and both von Sydow and Miller do a
tremendous and breathtaking performance as exorcists. Maybe the final
ending is a little cheap, and there are many unanswered questions. 
Perhaps, like several other movies that are based on novels, the 
audience feel that the story moves a little too fast forward, since the
length has been shortened down, and all the subplots and continuity of a
novel has to be thinned or cut.
Still, a very interesting and "afterthought-kind" of movie. Unlike the
slasher movies of the 80's, which for the most had no intelligent plot 
at all, THE EXORCIST brings up a fascinating story and very talented
 actors.
Reviewed by Stian M. Landgaard, March 11th, 1998

Author
Bob Bloom
The Exorcist (1973, 2000-reissue) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Ellen
Burstyn, Linda Blair, Jason MIller, Max Von Sydow and Lee J. Cobb.
Written by William Peter Blatty. Directed by William Friedkin. Rated R.
 Time has not been kind to "The Exorcist."
 What was controversial and stomach churning back in 1973 seems almost
quaint today.
 "The Exorcist" still packs a wallop, but it has been blunted because
over the past 27 years our senses have been assailed with images much
more horrifying - both on and off the screen - that our systems we have
been dulled to the point of numbness.
 It is ironic that the most uncomfortable scenes in "The Exorcist" have
nothing to do with demonic possession; rather, they are the sequences
set in the hospital where poor little Regan (Linda Blair) is put through
various painful medical procedures to try to determine what is causing
her spells and outbursts.
 Nor does the addition of new scenes help the movie; it only makes it
longer.
 As a brash young reporter in Springfield, Ohio, I reviewed "The
Exorcist" upon its initial release. I said then that the movie was
overhyped, that it was nothing more than an overblown horror film. For
my trouble, the irate local theater owner tried to get me banned from
his movie houses. Not likely.
 More than a quarter-century later, I still stand by that first
impression.
 "The Exorcist" is a nerve jangler, to be sure, but it is neither the
first nor last word in horror films. I still would rate such films as
"Halloween" and the original "Alien" as much scarier outings than
William Friedkin's frightfest.
 "The Exorcist" offers many fine performances, including Ellen Burstyn,
Jason Miller and especially young Blair.
Friedkin's direction is crisp and keeps the audience at seat's edge.
 But, unfortunately, the movie does seem dated. The jumping bed, the
pea-soup vomit, Regan's spinning head, today look like what they are -
movie trickery.
 "The Exorcist" still is potent in some scenes, but overall the magic
and mystery are gone.
 Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net.
Reviews by Bob Bloom can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Brandon Herring

The Exorcist: The Version You've Never Seen  * * * * out of * * * *
Starring: Linda Blair, Ellen Burstyn, Jason Miller, Max Von Syndow, Kitty
Winn, Jack MCGovern.
Directed by: William Friedkin
Rated R: violence, gore, language, brief sexuality.
Running Time: 132 minutes
What is a scary movie anyhow? Is it a movie where a person gets ripped to
shreds? Is it where a person is being chased by some damned teenager who
wants revenge? Possibly its some guy with a hook who wants to know what you
did last summer. What ever happened to horror movies, where the horror was in
the atmosphere, and in the characters. Movies like "Halloween" and "Psycho"
which revolutionized horror genre forever, but wait in 1973 came a movie
based on the bestselling book by William Peter Blatty, entitled "The
Exorcist", the movie opened to rave reviews, and scared audiences to death,
now in the year 2000 "The Exorcist" comes back to the big screen in a version
you've never seen complete with six channel digital surround sound, and
fifteen minutes of new footage never before seen as long as a new ending.
Chris McNiell is an actress living in Georgetown Washington with her twelve
year old daughter Regan. While working on a new film, Chris still stays close
to Regan, but starts to wonder why her bed shakes at night, and why Regan
starts to have convulsions all of a sudden. When Chris finds out that Regan
is possessed by a demon, she shuns at the fact of it, but considers getting
a priest to help her daughter. Father Karras (Jason Miller) is the man they
bring in, his mother has just died, and still in mourning he decides to help
this little girl. Christ, Father Karras, and their nanny Sharon (Kitty Winn)
have to sit and wait until a man shows up, that man is the Exorcist, and that
man will help this little girl.
Excrutiatingly scary, The Exorcist is a classic horror film, which twenty
seven years later still scares audiences half to death. Now we get to the
experience "The Exorcist" the way it was meant to be seen in a director's cut
which incorpates fifteen minutes of new footage cut by Friedkin at the time
of the release for content and time, a new ending has been added as well, and
adds more of a lighter feeling to the movie, which I prefer the original
darker ending more. The movie has also been remastered in a wonderful Six
Channel Digital Sound mix, and is amazing. The voices are all clear, the
music pours out on you and engulfs you in richness.
As a director Friedkin has been well known for other films, but his standout
film is "The Exorcist" nominated for several Academy Awards it one a few, but
was somehow doubted Best Picture, Best Actress (Ellen Burstyn) and Best
Supporting Actress (Linda Blair) who at the age of I believe thirteen does a
wonderful job of being a little girl, alone, possessed and unable to stop
what is going on. Ellen Burstyn I think gives her best performance to date,
and can be seen currently in "Requiem for a Dream" to which she is getting
rave reviews for. Jason Miller (Jason Patrik's dad) is amazing as Father
Karras, and his performance will be forever embedded in my mind, to me he is
the character who makes the entire film float along.
I was saddened when I saw this film with an audience of mostly younger people
to see them laughing at this movie, I in no way, think that this movie is
comical, yes some of the stuff Regan says is funny, but they were laughing at
her head spinning, and the green pea soup, come on people this is some creepy
stuff! Anyway the re-release of the film has managed to make $40 million
dollars, and is still going. Hopefully one day they re-release it again in
twenty years for more generations to come to enjoy.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring 10-10-00
