Title
Review for Two Much (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Antonio Banderas, Melanie Griffith, Daryl Hannah, Danny Aiello,
      Joan Cusack, Eli Wallach
Director: Fernando Trueba
Producer: Cristin Huete
Screenplay: Fernando and David Trueba based on the novel by 
      Donald E. Westlake
Cinematography: Jose Luis Alcaine
Music: Michel Camilo
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     In general, this kind of brainless farce is either a brilliant 
triumph or a dismal failure.  There's no middle ground.  TWO MUCH, an 
English-language release from BELLE EPOQUE director Fernando Trueba, 
conforms to this precept.  Had it been thirty minutes shorter, TWO MUCH 
would simply have been boring.  However, at nearly two hours, it's a 
grueling experience.  Even fans of Antonio Banderas may find it a chore 
to endure this motionless picture.
     Banderas plays Art Dodge, a Miami-based con man who tries to trick 
widows into buying modern artwork.  At the funeral of a mob boss, the 
dead man's son, Gene (Danny Aiello), reacts angrily to Art's scam, but, 
before things get nasty, Gene's ex-wife, Betty (Melanie Griffith), helps 
him escape.  Twenty-four hours, after a night of sex, Betty and Art are 
engaged.  Then Art meets Betty's sister, Liz (Daryl Hannah), and, 
suddenly, he's in love.  Since Liz can't stand Art, he invents a twin 
brother, Bart, who's more to her liking.  Things get complicated, 
however, when Art and Bart are required to be in the same house at the 
same time.
     With someone of John Cleese's comic aptitude, this film might have 
worked, but Antonio Banderas is out of his depth.  At his best, he's 
almost adequate.  Comedies like this live or die based on timing, and 
Banderas doesn't have the knack.  Even considering his limitations, 
however, he's better than his co-stars.  Melanie Griffith and Daryl 
Hannah both look bored, which is inevitably how everyone in the audience 
will feel watching them.  There's no spark, romantic or otherwise, 
during the entire sluggish two hours that TWO MUCH is on screen.
     The only one with any presence is Danny Aiello, and he acts like 
he's playing the heavy in a gangster drama.  Gene is a sinister 
caricature, and his presence casts a pall over every scene he's in 
(especially one where things turn violent).  This isn't the best mood 
for something that's intended to be lighthearted.  But, as ill-advised 
as the tone is, the pacing is worse.  This film drags, and there aren't 
enough laughs to fill up a five-minute short, not to mention a full 
length feature.  Ultimately, the real problem with TWO MUCH is that it's 
much, much too little.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin (or) http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This should have been called "Too Long."  Not only was the
two-hours film boring but it was entirely derivative and predictable.
Everything that you have ever seen in a comedy film (good or bad) was
thrown into this mess. When you see the comic hero (Antonio Banderas)
running out of a house which has a pool, you know he is going to end up
in it. Remember the famous scene in the Marx Bros. film where they are
facing each other as if they were looking in a mirror?  That was a
work of genius. This silly thing tried to imitate it with a variation
that was just a poor imitation.
     An art dealer/cum con man, Art (Dodge. . . is that a pun for
Dickens' "Artful Dodger?") pretends he is a twin brother to Bart.  Both
parts are played by Antonio Banderas.  As the twin, he lets his long
hair down and puts on glasses.
     The cast consists of well-known names.  Aside from Banderas, there
is Melanie Griffith, Daryl Hannah, Joan Cusack, Danny Aiello and Joan
Cusack.  What a waste of talent.
     Question, when is Aiello going to refuse to play a mafia-type
surrounded by bone-breaking bodyguards?  He has the talent but he has
been typecast as an Italian gangster and apparently the money that part
brings him overshadows the fact that he is a good actor and ought to
insist that his agent find him a new role.
