Title
Review for Amator (1979)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jerzy Stuhr, Malgorzata Zabkowska, Ewa Pokas, Stefan Czyzewski, 
      Jerzy Nowak, Krzysztof Zanussi
Director: Krzysztof Kieslowski
Producer: Wielislawa Piotrowska
Screenplay: Krzysztof Kieslowski and Jerzy Stuhr
Cinematography: Jacek Petrycki
Music: Krzysztof Knittel
U.S. Distributor: New Yorker Films
In Polish with subtitles
     Call CAMERA BUFF a case of art imitating life.  Although director 
Krzysztof Kieslowski admitted that this film doesn't tell his own story 
("I made films because that was my profession, and I was too lazy or too 
stupid or both to change..."), it will undoubtedly strike a responsive 
chord with many amateur and professional film makers.  Yet, while the 
movie is about the love of a craft, this isn't a nostalgia-drenched 
account of that appreciation.  Kieslowski developed CAMERA BUFF's 
deceptively complex script so that it addressed weightier themes:  
obsession, censorship, and the battle between artistic integrity and 
personal sacrifice.
     Before making CAMERA BUFF in 1979, Kieslowski was an unknown 
outside of his native Poland.  And, although he had been making movies 
since 1966, the Lodz Film School graduate had only released one 
previous, full-length theatrical feature (THE SCAR).  CAMERA BUFF, which 
exposed Kieslowski to the world, changed the man's artistic direction.  
After this, his attention was increasingly focused on fictional films, 
as opposed to the documentaries for which he was (at the time) better 
recognized. CAMERA BUFF was the movie that set Kieslowski's feet on the 
path that would eventually lead to NO END (1984), DECALOGUE (1988), and 
the three colors of BLUE, WHITE, and RED (1993-4).
     Fans of Kieslowski's later style (which began to emerge in NO END) 
may find CAMERA BUFF's light, occasionally playful tone disconcerting.  
Although the film deals with serious themes, Kieslowski never allows the 
proceedings to grow maudlin or overly-introspective.  The script is 
peppered with serio-comic incidents that leaven what could have been a 
staid, sober story.  Nevertheless, the manner in which the plot unfolds 
and the interconnected issues are confronted announces CAMERA BUFF as a 
picture of considerable substance.
     The main character, Filip Mosz, is played by Jerzy Stuhr, an actor 
whose collaboration with Kieslowski lasted for more than twenty years, 
from THE SCAR to WHITE.  In anticipation of his new baby's birth, Filip 
spends two months' pay on an 8 mm camera to record of his child's first 
few years.  But, from the moment he looks through the lens, Filip is 
hooked.  He begins filming almost anything that moves, including family, 
friends, neighbors, and strangers.  His boss at the factory (Stefan 
Czyzewski) appoints Filip as the establishment's official chronicler.  
At first, the manager is pleased with the films, and, with the exception 
of a few editorial "suggestions", he allows Filip to proceed as he sees 
best.  But, when the films begin to attract attention, winning amateur 
prizes and appearing on TV shows, the manager attempts to restrict 
Filip's work.  Heedless of the personal cost (his wife leaves him) and 
risking his job, Filip pushes forward, only to stumble into a trap set 
for him by the factory's management.  In the end, he faces a painful 
choice:  destroy his own work or allow it to be used for a purpose he 
cannot condone.
     All the dilemmas in CAMERA BUFF center on Filip.  He becomes so 
obsessed with film making that he neglects his family, eventually losing 
not only his wife, but his young daughter and unborn child.  When his 
wife demands to know why he's ruining his life, just when he has 
everything he wants, he replies, "I need more than peace and quiet.  
[Shooting films means] more than a home and family."  But facing an 
empty apartment at night isn't the most painful consequence of Filip's 
newfound passion.  He also confronts censorship when his manager demands 
that scenes be edited out to make a film more complimentary to the 
factory.  Eventually, when his employers attempt to suppress an entire 
movie and determine the content of another, Filip faces a crisis of 
conscience.  Why does he make films?  And do they mean anything if they 
are reduced to propaganda pieces instead of genuine depictions of the 
world as he sees it?  When his immediate boss is fired because of a 
film's content, Filip finally sees how serious his "harmless" hobby has 
become.
     This all sounds rather grim, but, perhaps surprisingly, CAMERA BUFF 
may be the funniest of Kieslowski's features (although both DECALOGUE 10 
and WHITE have their moments).  None of the humor is excessive or 
intrusive, but there are moments of the absurd that maintain a relaxed 
tone, and Filip's enthusiasm is infectious.  Kieslowski isn't attempting 
to bludgeon us with preachy morality lessons; his intent is to explore 
certain issues in an entertaining manner.  And, while CAMERA BUFF lacks 
some of the artistry evident in the director's later projects, it's 
worth seeing not only as an example of Kieslowski's early work, but as 
an important film in its own right.
Kieslowski quotes are from KIESLOWSKI ON KIESLOWSKI, Faber and Faber, 
1993.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Gareth Rees
     When his son is born, Filip buys a Russian-made hand-held movie
camera to record his child growing up.  His boss discovers the camera
and commissions him to make a documentary about a business meeting.  In
no time at all he is hooked on movie-making, rapt by the power he has
to point his camera at someone and turn life into art.  His enthusiasm
prompts others to join him in a film club at the factory, and
encouragement from professional film-makers leads him to believe that
he can use his camera as a force for good, to expose corruption at his
factory and in the Communist Party.  What he discovers is that things
the camera can make issues simple, but that it lies in doing so; life
is more complicated than he had thought.
     The cinematography and camerawork in CAMERA BUFF is very
effective.  The opening mimics perfectly the conventions of realistic
documentary, resembling early Kieslowski shorts such as Hospital: the
cutting is rapid, the people mutter indistinctly among themselves, the
dialogue is naturalistic.  This style is the simple, mimetic style of
amateur cameraman Filip as he shoots his first film.  As the film
progresses, Filip learns more about the art of film-making, develops
his own sense of aesthetic and of the duty that a film-maker has to be
true to his convictions.  A bereaved son is comforted by Filip's film
of his mother ("A person is dead, but here she still lives") and Filip
discovers that there are "things a man needs more than peace and
quiet".  Mirroring this internal change, the style of Camera Buff
changes, becoming more consciously dramatic and cinematic.  People talk
in turn, give speeches; the framing of the shots is more beautiful,
more contrived.  By the end, when his wife and child have left him,
when his personal life has been ruined and he realises that his crusade
to expose corruption by making films about it was naive and misguided,
the realism dissolves away completely and Filip points the lens only at
his own troubled head, no longer able to see things around him with the
clarity and simplicity of vision that initially inspired him to be a
film-maker.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
CAMERA BUFF (AMATOR) (director/writer: Krzysztof Kieslowski;
screenwriter: Jerzy Stuhr; cinematographer: Jacek Petrycki; cast: Jerzy
Stuhr (Philip Mosz), Malgorzata Zabkowska (Irka Mosz), Ewa Pokas (Anna),
Jerzy Nowak (Osuch), Stefan Czyzewski (The Director), Tadeusz Bradecki
(Witek), Krzysztof Zanussi (Himself), Andrzej Jurga (Himself),
1979-Poland)
To make artistic films in a repressed country is very difficult, but to
make documentaries   for an amateur filmmaker can work simply because he
is an amateur and is not expected to be after something politically
dangerous, therefore he is thought of as less of a risk to those
governments.
This film is about how a factory worker, Philip Mosz (Stuhr), who bought
himself a cheap hand-held 8 mm Russian camera (costing him two months
salary) for the birth of his daughter to record her birth and infant
years. His boss (Stefan Czyzewski) spotted the camera and asked him to
make a movie about the factory. From that humble beginning, as soon as
Philip felt the things he could do with the camera, he knew that this
would be his vocation. He thought he could make a difference in society
by pointing out how things really are, exposing any corruption, and
giving people a record of how they are living.
Kieslowski went from making documentaries to making this fictional film,
and in some ways this film is semi-autobiographical, as it is about what
power there is in the camera, especially for one who is an artist.
Philip is the central focus of the film, as he undergoes a
transformation of personality. We first see him as a picture of
contentment: he is satisfied with his job as a procurer, travelling
around Poland buying products for his factory, and we see him satisfied
with his marriage--he even mentions, "If someone wants only one thing in
life, he'll get it." And he shares with his wife what they both wanted,
a simple and quiet existence.
When he shows the completed film to his boss about factory life, it is
met with approval except for four minor changes the boss insists upon.
The naive new filmmaker has no qualms about getting rid of the pigeons,
but he doesn't understand why he can't leave in the film the men coming
out of the lavatory, or the men taking money behind a curtain, or
showing the little man with glasses in many of the scenes.
After winning third prize for the film in a contest sponsored by the
film club, the movie bug has really bitten him. He has joined the film
club where he gets romantically interested in one of the club leaders,
Ana (Ewa), who makes it her personal business to see that he gets help
in his new film career. His wife becomes displeased with him for
spending so much time away from the family and threatens to walk out on
him, which she will shortly do. But Philip can't stop filming anything
that moves, as his techniques and artistic plans grow. To get help, the
club introduces him to Krzysztof Zanussi for advice and to have the
famous director talk to his film club, and they also get him a meeting
with Andrzej Jurga, who tells him to make a film about a worker and
he'll see that it gets on TV. This turns out to be a bitter-sweet trap
for Philip, because he gets his work on TV and it is met with success by
his friends and neighbors who watched it, but his boss is displeased
that it is about a cripple in the factory, and does not blame Philip for
doing it because he is young, but blames his superior, the elderly and
kind-hearted Osuch (Nowak), whom he forces to resign his post as head of
culture and coerces him into early retirement. It seems that even though
he didn't intend to, he hurts those who are not responsible for what he
does.
This is a political spoof on the artist's role and limits in Communist
Poland and a comedy, as it comically exaggerates the film buff's growing
pathology and voyeuristic tendencies. The power in the story was in the
subtle reminders, showing that behind the obvious censorship, there is a
real censorship problem for everyone, it is not only in the conflicts
between the artist and the authorities-- but, for both the artist and
the viewer who must demand that the truth and integrity of the work be
preserved. Poland is a good example of such a battlefield, with the then
state-owned film industry in charge of funding projects, documentary
films are sometimes the best records of such history, unless you have
the artistic deftness, like Kieslowski has shown, to make a film as
wickedly ironical as this one is and get it past the censors.
Since the film's theme has been done many times before, and the comic
efforts of the film were rather flat, what made this film provocative,
was the absorbing performance by Jerzy Stuhr, who would become a regular
in many of the director's later films, which spanned a career of over 20
years. Stuhr was able to make this political tale into a human interest
story, something that deceptively caught the artist's struggle,
highlighting the conflict over his compulsion to film and his personal
sacrifice of losing his family.
For the filmmaker, as Kieslowski sees it, home-life is secondary. And
for showing that struggle through Stuhr's eyes, the film is memorable,
though it is not one of the director's top-flight artistic works, yet it
is still worth seeing.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
