Title
Review for Blade (1998)
Number of Reviews
30

Author
Michael Redman
Occasionally I'm in the mood to forget about art, story, characterization and
everything that makes a film worthwhile. During those times, I'm content to
just sit in a dark room watching glitzy pictures flash by on the big white
wall. Fortunately this was my state of mind while viewing "Blade".
Blade (Wesley Snipes) is one tough SOB. Half-vampire, half-human, he has all
the strength and speed of the bloodsuckers and none of their weaknesses to
garlic, sunlight or silver. He's armed with silver stakes, big guns with
silver bullets and a huge sword. Revenge for the death of his mother is his
motivation for turning the world's fiends into dust.
The film's opening scenes follow a woman leading her male friend into a
secret hip disco. (You can tell that it's hip because there are lesbian
couples dancing and a threesome making out on a couch in the corner.)  The man
is digging the techno beat, flashing lights and overt sexuality until blood
starts raining down from the sprinkler system. Then he realizes that he's been
brought to the rave by his vamp paramour as prey.
Enter Blade. Single-handedly he starts wiping out the dancers. One after
another, they are blasted by his shotgun and dissolve into sparkling
ectoplasmic powder.
Later he rescues Karen (N'Bushe Wright), a hematologist who has been bitten.
She is what passes for the love interest in the movie, with the exception of a
subsequent episode that would make Oedipus blush. His only other human contact
is crotchety urban hermit Whistler (Kris Kristofferson) who rescued the young
Blade and makes his weapons for him.
Deacon Frost (Stephen Dorff), the leader of the angry young vampire Turks, is
Blade's nemesis. Turned into an undead by a bite, Frost also opposes the staid
older vampires-from-birth international cartel who meet in a boardroom like
the suits that run IBM. Commenting on their secret negotiations with humans,
he asks why they make deals with their food.
He isn't content to coexist with what he considers lower life forms. He wants
to rule them. The Goth Generation X vampires are like decedent spoiled
children of the rich, dancing and feasting the night away.
Frost has secretly been translating ancient writings that describe how to
summon the Blood God who will bring about the vampire jyhad. Blade finds out
and realizes that this could put a crimp in his plan to destroy the evil
vermin. They eventually meet at an inevitable brutal Hong Kong style showdown
in an enormous underground ancient-future cathedral.
The acting is nothing to write home about, but fitting to the film. Snipes is
as wooden and emotionless as you might expect an obsessive killer to be. Dorff
is snappy as he sneers his lines reminiscent of Keifer Sutherland in Lost
Boys. Rhodes scholar-turned songwriter-turned rock star-turned actor
Kristofferson, a personal favorite, is always entertaining but under-used
here. His eccentric character provides some of the humor especially in a scene
where he slops gasoline around while lighting his cigarette.
Director Stephen Norrington's filmmaking is stylish to the extreme and it
works in this film. Extremely short cuts of vampires snarling and glimpsed
beings scurrying around are like things seen out of the corner of the eye. The
jerky super-speed moments are surprisingly effective.
The sexual aspects of vampirism are used well. There's a lot of licking and
messy wet sliding around. One particularly eroticized incident features the
female victim gasping in ecstasy as her blood is drained away. Her seducer
howls in gratification when he finishes.
The movie has more than its share of faults. Seemingly every object in every
set is made of glass just waiting to be shattered. None of the characters are
real. The underground vampire structure is centuries old and looks cool, but
it just happens to exist in the same US city as the rest of the story? 
There are scenes lifted completely from "Raiders Of The Lost Ark" and other
films. The computer effects occasionally look poor and are redundant. Seen one
exploding head, seen 'em all. There's a huge hole in Frost's plan. If everyone
is transformed into vampires, what do they eat? The Blood God is a disappointment.
The biggest disappointment is the climax of Blade and Frost's battle. After
all of the high energy action during the movie, the last minute or so of that
are a letdown. It was so low-key that I kept waiting for more.
There is an interesting subtext of elite groups engaging in war while
regarding the rest of the world as inferiors. The vampires see everyone as
blood machines. Blade regards most other humans as ignorant and beneath his
attention. He savagely beats a vampire-collaborator cop in the middle of a
busy street without the least thought to on-lookers. He's in a secret war zone
and the mundanes don't matter.
His attitude is what terrorists must feel. Their cause is righteous and if
innocents get in the way, too bad. Hidden wars have a long history: the CIA
vs. the KGB, the Tong and Mafia wars, the struggle between criminals and law
enforcement. It's interesting to get an inside look at what goes on around us.
This is a poorly plotted ridiculous film, but it's a well made poorly plotted
ridiculous film. Sometimes on these blistering dog days, that and air
conditioning are enough.
(Michael Redman has scrawled these words of wisdom for over 23 years and seems
to have emoved with the paper's name change. Point your electrons to redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 8/26/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "BLADE" (New Line Cinema)
  Watching "Blade" made me wonder what parents are thinking
when they give their youngsters "movie money" and drop them to see
this sci-fi horror film. Rated R, "Blade" had more kids in the
audience than adults.  Kids who were not only hearing a steady stream
of vulgarity and profanity spew from the screen but watching frenzied,
non-stop violence, perpetually drenched in blood. Wake up, parents!
Even though it's based on a Marvel comic book series, "Blade" is not
appropriate for kids.  In fact, Blade is a vampire, an extraordinary
dude with an attitude. In a prologue, set 30 years ago, there's a
woman dying from a vampire attack just as she gives birth to a
son. Flash forward to today and that baby has grown up to be Wesley
Snipes, a hybrid who has all the strength of a vampire but none of its
weaknesses. Which means he can walk in daylight and eat a pizza with
extra garlic. Given his supernatural genetic disposition, his career
counselor headed him in the right direction. He's a leather-clad
vampire slayer, skilled in the martial arts as he wields a samurai
sword made from titanium. Adapted for the screen by David S. Goyer and
directed by Stephen Norrington, the story goes for the jugular,
meaning that it opts for mindless violence, action over coherence. It
seems the Eastern European vampire race, led by sadistic, sneering
Stephen Dorff, has moved into pivotal positions of financial power -
and must be stopped. Snipes's mentor in this quest is a chain-smoking,
idealized father-figure, named Whistler, played by Kris Kristofferson,
and his romantic interest is a doctor, N'Bushe Wright, who happens to
be a hematologist. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Blade"
barely bites a 3. It's a gruesome, gore-filled fang-fest.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: August 21, 1998
Starring: Wesley Snipes, Stephen Dorff, Kris Kristofferson, N'Bushe
Wright, Donal Logue, Udo Kier
Directed by: Stephen Norrington
Distributed by: New Line Cinema
MPAA Rating: R (strong, pervasive vampire violence and gore; language;
brief sexuality)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/blade.htm 
There have been several disappointing and unfulfilling movies both this
year and last that have received the "comic book" label - a heavy blow
from the critical community. The film is then perceived as low-class,
unintelligent, and thoughtless entertainment. There is a dedicated
audience who will see those movies anyway - the ones that actually do
read comic books - but overall the movie founders on rough waters.
BLADE, too, is worthy of such a title. But instead of being among the
bottom-feeders, this movie epitomizes the comic book action subgenre. It
is surely a testament to its source, as well as a welcome achievement
for genre fans. 
The movie opens with a young man being led to an underground nightclub
by his newfound date. Intent on getting some action, he doesn't realize
anything's wrong until the techno/hip-hop music climbs to a fever pace
and blood begins to rain down from the ceiling. He's scrambling for his
life, surrounded by vampires, until he runs into the thick black boots
of Blade (Wesley Snipes). Impossibly clean and immaculately tailored in
black leather, Blade is our hero. Nicknamed the Daywalker by the
bloodsucking breed, he is a hybrid vampire-human who kills as many
vampires as he can to avenge his mother's death to the nasties. Aided by
an aging partner named Whistler (Kris Kristofferson) and a hemotologist
(N'Bushe Wright), he must stop a young vampire named Frost (Stephen
Dorff) who plans a complete revolution in the ranks. 
The opening scenes are almost entirely action and have little to do with
vampire legend or lore. Although vampires are a popular fantasy element,
BLADE ignores this initally and thus resembles something of a more
serious BATMAN. At times, one wonders if this might've been the road
that the Dark Knight features would've taken if they hadn't succumbed to
the goofy direction of Joel Schumacher. As it progresses, though, the
movie turns increasingly to its fantasy roots - there are certain rules
to putting a vampire in his grave, and even when you follow those you
still get a lot of gore. Moments of excessive gore or non-sequitous sex
appeal are mostly unwanted but do not detract from the overall value.
But by the final scene, the movie has left any Earthen setting and
instead prefers a MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE-esque swordfight to decide
all. 
The characters are written in an acceptably melodramatic fashion. Like
New Line's other comic book adaptation from last year, SPAWN, this one
is more dark than it is light. Unlike SPAWN, however, BLADE manages to
become more realistic through characters that are more easily accepted
as well as better defined. Snipes gives us an expectedly stoic Blade,
and though not outstanding, he acts consistently for two hours. Dorff's
bad guy Frost is mostly uninspired until the closing half-hour, when
Dorff allows wit to take over. Then he becomes a more lifelike character
rather than a pale, cigarette-smoking upstart. Despite minor setbacks
such as these, it's no wonder that everything in BLADE manages to fall
into place. Topped off with absurdedly Oscar-quality sound and visual
effects, BLADE is a well-spent trip to the theater.
FINAL AWARD FOR "BLADE": 3.0 stars - a good movie.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BLADE is the picture for those of you who have avoided Jackie Chan 
movies because you think he's a wimp.  As that fearless vampire killer 
known simply as Blade, Wesley Snipes kills more men in a single scene 
that Chan attacks in an entire movie.  This over-the-top action is, of 
course, either totally cool or completely ridiculous depending on your 
point of view.  
     Arguably the most fascinating part of the movie is the carefully 
constructed vampire world that writer David S. Goyer lays out for us.  
At the top of the vampire hierarchy are the pure bloods.  These elite, 
who meet in expensive board rooms to manage their investments, wear blue 
suits that would make them look like Wall Street brokers except for 
their walk, which gives the appearance that the suits are starched.
     In BLADE the vampire social structure is in the process of being 
upset by a group of rebellious youngsters of a less than pure strain.  
Stephen Dorff plays their leader, Deacon Frost.  Frost likes to take his 
minions to hidden raves in which blood pours from the fire sprinklers as 
the DJ plays heavy metal music.  Frost even arranges the procurement of 
humans for some late night snacks.
     Snipes, who has a wide acting range from action heroes (MURDER AT 
1600) to lovers (ONE NIGHT STAND), rarely gets offered the best 
material.  Regardless of the quality of script, he manages to put so 
much energy into it that it is usually worth watching.  Some actors 
possess great natural talent, but with Snipes it is more his intensity 
and commitment that make the difference.
     BLADE's director, Stephen Norrington, clearly wants to make a 
fast-paced, no-holds barred bloodfest, and he succeeds.  If vampire 
pictures are your cup of tea, this is one of the better ones.  
(Personally, I don't think I'll ever see a better one than HABIT, which 
I reviewed earlier this year.)  The problem with Norrington's approach 
is that it soon becomes highly repetitive.  A half-hour would probably 
suffice for most viewers, and some will be so grossed out by French 
kissing vampires with blood drenched mouths that they will leave before 
the film is over anyway.
     As Abraham Whistler, Kris Kristofferson plays an old character who 
makes the weapons for Blade to use in his attempt to wipe out the 
vampire nation.  Even if the guns are sleek and powerful, Blade's noisy, 
old black Dodge Charger provides as much visceral thrill as its aging 
mufflers growl.
     Although we learn that silver bullets and essence of garlic are the 
best vampire weapons, there are others.  The movie leaves you with a 
reason not to throw out that old cancer-inducing sunlamp you have in the 
back of the closet.  One ancient vampire, who would make Jabba the Hutt 
look svelte, is fried with just such a weapon.
     BLADE runs 2:00.  It is rated R for strong violence and vampire 
related gore and would be fine for most teenagers.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        I'd intended to start this review with a really lousy pun--
something along the lines of, "Being a vampire is a real pain in the
neck."  Fortunately, my good sense intervened and reminded me of two
very important things: not only do many people despise puns, but, if I
wasted a joke like that on this review, I would be expending far more
creativity than any critical analysis of "Blade" deserves.  Perhaps a
more appropriate opening line would be, "Hey d00d, vampirez are kewl!!!"
        Wesley Snipes *is* Blade, a sword-toting vampire hunter who spends
much of his time sneering at people, then chopping them up.  A half-vampire
half-human hybrid, he has the speed, strength, and heightened senses of a
nosferatu, but is able to walk around in broad daylight.  He hangs around
with Whistler (Kris Kristofferson), a remarkably grizzled inventor who
creates the weapons that Blade uses to fight his foes.  Whistler also
periodically injects his friend with a special serum, designed to alleviate
the cravings generated by Blade's non-human half.  But after many years of
these injections, Blade's body is beginning to build up a resistence.
Soon he may start to experience the same bloodlust which afflicts the
creatures he has vowed to destroy.
        That sounds like an intriguing concept for an action movie, but
screenwriter David Goyer (Dark City) and director Stephen Norrington
(Death Machine) have little interest in building on it; instead, their
emphasis is solely on the construction of one frantic fight sequence
after another.  I can hardly blame them.  A good plot has never been a
prerequisite for a financially-successful action movie; knowing this,
Norrington and Goyer haven't wasted any time developing one.  The result
is a film that flings chunks of kinetic energy at the audience like
watermelon fragments at a Gallagher show.
        In all fairness, these scenes are well-done: their pacing is
satisfactory, the photography is innovative, and the performances are
sufficient.  The physically buff Snipes is more than able to convey the
strength and agility that his character supposedly possesses, even if
Blade himself undergoes no emotional development whatsoever during the
course of the film.  But after seeing the movie's 200th vampire slaying,
most of the novelty had worn off.
        "Blade" tries to hide the fact that it's an incomprehensible mess
via quick editing; it's a rare shot indeed that lasts for more than a
couple of seconds, and the action sequences explode by with such rapidity
that I actually found a few of them difficult to follow.  In that regard,
"Blade" echoes "Armageddon": it's spliced together as though it were a
trailer, rather than the feature itself.
        Stephen Dorff is horribly miscast as Deacon Frost, an ambitious
young vampire who dreams of conquering the world.  Even if Blade weren't
out to stop him, there's no way he'd get very far.  First of all, the guy
is a twig.  It's hard to be intimidated by someone who looks like a
strong gust of wind could knock him on his skinny little bottom,
particularly when beefcake Blade is so physically intimidating.  Deacon's
most frightening trait: he can sneer just as effectively as Blade.  During
one scene, in which hero and villain have a lengthy chat, so many sneers
were exchanged that I feared one of them would injure a facial muscle.
        Deacon isn't the smartest guy in the world, either: his fiendish
plan consists entirely of summoning a Vampire Blood God, or some equally
silly nonesense.  As he explains his evil plan to a hostage (looking for
all the world like a whisper-thin, blond Snidley Whipflash as he does so),
he boldy proclaims, "The vampire god will turn ALL humans into vampires!
Everyone you know and love will become one of us!"  Um, excuse me Deacon.
You've just spent the first half of the movie talking about how humans are
merely "cattle" (ie, vampire food).  Let's think about this: if you turn
all of us into vampires, what're YOU gonna eat?  To the best of my
knowledge, vampires can't just sit at home and pop a Lean Cuisine meal
into the microwave.  No humans = vampire crash diet, right?  Maybe I'm
crazy, but it seems like a pretty significant problem.  (Did no one on the
film's production crew catch this?)
        The movie flirts with sophistication in a couple of places,
teasing us with plot twists that could've sparked the audience's interest:
in addition to Blade's growing immunity to the serum, our heroine, Karen
(N'Bushe Wright), may be turning into a vampire herself, and Whistler is
being eaten alive by cancer.  All three of these sub-plots deserved more
time than the film gives them.  None are resolved satisfactorally, and the
one involving Karen is so ham-fisted that I actually laughed at its
resolution.  (She "borrows" an entire roomful of blood-processing
equipment from the hospital in which she works, in order to create a cure
for vampirism.  Yeah, okay.  I can see how the local hospital would loan
her all their most expensive, state of the art blood-research gear.  It's
not like they ever use it, right?  Remind me never to stay at that
hospital.)
        And yet despite all that, "Blade" is kinda fun.  The movie, which
is based on the popular Marvel comic of the same name, succeeds in creating
a comic-book world in which anything is possible.  Bold, striking visuals
leap from the screen.  Shadows are used to great effect, while the camera
spins dizzily, suggesting an off-balance world.  Even the day scenes are
drenched in darkness, a small cinematic touch that I loved.
        The extreme violence of "Blade" will probably not bother too many
viewers, either: it's so over-the-top that it stops being "real" and
instead becomes an exercise in surrealism.  This effectively enhances the
movie's comic-book flavor.  (Check out the scene in which a man's skeleton
comes to life and claws its way out of his body, through the mouth.)
        "Blade" is no masterpiece, but it does take great joy in sharing
its vision of a realm in which nothing is as it seems.  I actually enjoyed
much of it, while simultaneously laughing at its many flaws.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Take some SHAFT (7.5/10), toss in a couple of pieces from the original
CROW (8.5/10), slap in some special effects a la SPAWN (6/10), and top
it off with some LOST BOYS (8/10) and BATMAN (8/10) wanna-bees, and
you've got yourself this summer's dark superhero flic via New Line
entitled BLADE. 
PLOT:
An underworld of vampires is living amongst us, and they are no longer
satisfied with being second-best. They are ready to take over the
world, and only one half-man/half-vampire named Blade can stop 'em. 
CRITIQUE:
Regurgitated plot line from a dozen better pictures, superb action
sequences, half and hour too long, and one bad-ass mutha' as the
superhero carved by way of Wesley Snipes, makes this comic-book based
movie bearable, but far from highly recommendable or rewatchable. If
you like the martial arts and the crazy special effect action
arrangements, this movie might be moocho enjoyed by you. If on the
other hand, you are one of those rare people who still likes to sink
their teeth into a little plot once in a while, you might as well wait
for the video version of this toothless story.  
Having said that, Wesley Snipes was totally kickass in this role, and
rocked the house in every scene in which he appeared: cool and f-ckin
scary! Unfortunately for the audience, Kris Kristofferson joined the
fray as some wise old fart there to help Blade or something, but God
knows Blade didn't need help from some boring actor with a fake bum
limp (And aren't we all sick of these superhero movies that always seem
to contain the proverbial sensible ol' saps there to aid our hero in
their quest for goodness? I know I am.) Add that to the contrived
over-acting by Stephen Dorff, whose career is going nowhere and slow,
the uncharismatic N'Bushe Wright who can't seem to muster any interest
into her unnecessary character, and the rest of the no-names who
delivered their cheezy lines much like the dead bodies on which they
gorged. 
Luckily for us all, Blade does spend a lot of time kicking people's
ass, and splattering blood wherever he roams, so that pretty much
dragged me over the more tedious moments in this overly long film.
Snipes was super-cool, and much like Shaft, I'm not afraid to admit
that he was one bad mutha! (Shut your mouth!) The style of the film was
basically in MTV mode, with all the required flashing lights and
electro music following close in tow. I thought the soundtrack could
actually have been much better, instead of what seemed to be the same
electronic beat dancing through all of the action scenes (see THE CROW
soundtrack for a much better mix). All in all, this film is lightly
recommended on the action scenes and Wesley Snipes' performance alone.
On the other hand, if you do not like blood, Snipes or action
sequences, skip this dull knife, crack open a couple of cold ones, and
dunk your fat face straight into a pile of nachos, and call it a night.
Your primordial senses will thank me in the morning.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Wesley Snipes practices Capoeira, a Brazilian form of martial arts. He
is also a 5th Degree Black Belt. 
This film was originally titled BLADE, THE VAMPIRE SLAYER.
Writer David S. Goyer also half-penned the mysterious DARK CITY (8/10)
and the putrid follow-up to the original tale of the black bird, CROW:
THE CITY OF ANGELS (4/10).
Stephen Dorff was born on the 29th of July, 1973. His father is
musician Steve Dorff, and his brother is also a musician named Andrew
Dorff. Stephen appeared in Aerosmith's "Crazy" video opposite the
soon-to-be-cutey-pie-of-the-year actress Alicia Silverstone.
Starting at the tender age of 15, Traci Lords is known to have appeared
in over 80 porno flics by the time her life chime struck lucky 18.
After shooting one more skin flick on her 18th birthday, Traci tossed
in the ol' nutmunch, and pursued a career in the "serious" world of
acting. Her real name is Nora Louise Kuzma.
One of the executive producers of this film is the creator of the
Spiderman and Fantastic Four comic series, and mainstay at Marvel
Comics for over sixty years, Stan Lee.

Author
R. L. Strong
New line Cinema presents an AMEN RA FILMS production
in association with Peter Frankfurt a Stephen Norrington  Picture  
Wesley Snipes  Stephen Dorff  "BLADE"
Kris Kristofferson   N'Bushe Wright   Donal Logue  
Co-Producers: Andrew J. Horne and Jon Divens
Costume Designer: Sanja Milkovic Hays  
Music by Mark Isham  
Edited by Paul Rubin, A.C.E.
Prodcution Designer: Kirk M. Petruccelli  
Director of Phography: Theo Van De Sande, A.S.C.
Executive Producers: Stan Lee, Avi Arad, Joseph Calamari, Lynn Harris
Produced by Peter Frankfurt, Wesley Snipes, Robert Engelman  
Writen by David S. Goyer
Blade and Deacon Frost characters created for Marvel Comics by Marv
Wolfman & Gene Colan
Directed by Stephen Norrington
Translating the world of the graphic novel or comic to the screen has
never been an easy task. Most filmmakers don't understand the
intricacies and character development which are the life blood of this
form of art. Most films of this type either go for high camp ('Batman
& Robin'), or wallow in excessive nihilism ('The Crow'). With the
release of New Line's new film "BLADE", there is hope that the genre
may becoming more involving.
"BLADE" opens with a young woman in 1968, her throat torn open going
into labor. Flash forward to present day New York, where a young man
is being led to an underground rave by a ravishing young woman (Traci
Lords). Once inside the club, the young man is buffeted and confronted
by most of the congregation. Shortly thereafter, the true purpose of
this gathering is revealed when the D.J. turns on the stage lights
illuminating a banner which read "Bloodbath". Immediately, the
sprinkler system inside the club starts spraying everyone with
blood. It is now that the young man realizes that he is going to be
the next victim of a troupe of vampires.
Screaming for his life, the young man cowers in the center of the
club. Suddenly everyone steps away from him except for one lone man in
black. The rain of blood stops. As the young man looks up, he sees
Blade (Wesley Snipes) standing in front of him. He picks the boy up
and tells him to get out. Blade systematically starts to kill and maim
all of the vampires in the club.
Blade is half human/ half vampire. The product of his mother's death
at the hands of a vampire. He has become a one man demolition squad,
determined to eradicate all vampires.  It seems that the vampires (in
the mythology of this film) have existed along side man for centuries,
working with high ranking officials to gain monetary control of the
worlds riches and power yet never venturing out into the open,
preferring to remain secretive and unobserved.
This conflicts with the desires of one vampire, Deacon Frost (Stephen
Dorff) who plans to rule the world of man by reviving the ancient
demigod, the Blood Demon.
The plot for "BLADE" is very complex and invigorating. For once, here
is a film of fantasy and action that wants you to pay attention to
it's plot. While not being as tightly constructed as it could have
been, "BLADE" earns a nod for attempting something different. While
there are marvelous plot constructions in the film, and the action
scenes are some of the best we've seen on U.S. screens in years,
"BLADE" ultimately fails to deliver the promise of it's goal, by not
having a soul.
The problems with "BLADE" are two-fold. Firstly, it's plot is so
intricate and delicate that the slightest misstep causes one to forget
relevant pieces of information.  Secondly, scenes and characters are
developed without any emotional content.
Wesley Snipes is a fine actor, possibly one of the cinema's most
underrated performers. But here, in "BLADE", he is not called upon to
do anything other that stand stoically and / or fight. N'Bushe Wright,
is fine in what is basically a woman in distress role. Again the same
situation exits for her performance as for Blade, no one is remotely
concerned about their fate. This is brought to fore most painfully by
the character of Abraham Whistler (Kris Kristofferson), Blade's weapon
supplier and mentor. Whistler, it is revealed near the end of the
film, to be dying of cancer. But there is no urgency to the character,
no rush to complete his calling. It's as if everyone is not the least
bit concerned with their own impending demise.
This brings us to Stephen Dorff as the vampire Deacon Frost. Mr. Dorff
is riveting. He is one of the best screen villains since Gary Busey in
the original "Lethal Weapon".  When Mr. Dorff is on-screen, "BLADE"
comes to life (if you'll pardon the pun).
The Cinematography by Theo Van De Sande is remarkably inventive. There
is a subtlety of color used in the film with the exception of blood
(which has never been redder). There is a very interesting use of
under-cracking during the fight scenes, reminiscent of the action
films from Hong Kong which give "BLADE" the kinetic energy that it
needs. All of the tech credits are very well served in the film. The
art direction and special effects are models of both creativity and
function. The demise of the vampires as they are killed is remarkable
inventive, eliminating the always troublesome flaw in most films of
this type, ie: the massive amounts of severed body parts that no one
ever seems to question or find.
Director Stephen Norrington has staged an interestingly flawed
film. Some scenes drag out for much longer then they should strictly
for shock value (the torture of the horribly obese Vampire Librarian
with an ultra violet lamp is a prime example). Other scenes are
glanced over (Karen's realization that she may yet become a vampire
and have to take her own life). And one glaring misstep relating to
Blade's past which has no emotional dimension to it at all.
Blade is one of those films which is really hard to review. These are
filmmakers that obviously cared about what they were doing and worked
hard to deliver a spectacle equal to their desire. While "BLADE" looks
and moves with a great amount of energy and style, what it really
needs.. is a beating heart.
On a scale of *****, "BLADE" rates **1/2
Copyright 1998 R.L. Strong
Nothing in this review may be copied of duplicated either in whole of in part, without the express written permission of the author.

Author
David Wilcock
Wesley Snipes both stars and produces in this silly action flick. Snipes
plays 'Blade,' a half man, half vampire who's goal in life is to avenge the
death of his mothers by blowing the hell out of the blood suckers. In the
opening scenes, we can see he does this with particular gusto. Blade somehow
gets involved with rebel vampire Deacon Frost (Dorff) who feels that vampire
should take over the world. Blade tries to stop this, with help from
scientist friend Abraham Whistler (Kris Kristofferson) and female co-star
Karen (N'Bushe Wright. Yes, that is her name.) Blood, guts and explosions in
follow, all wrapped up in a big MTV type package.
The main problem with Blade is the fact that it's too tied up in it's own
stupid mythology, and this bogs down the whole film. While the audience is
waiting for the next mass homicide by Blade, we're instead 'treated' to
Frost and co. babbling on about some mystic vampire chronicle, and how the
blood beast (or something) will take over the world. I suppose this is all
fine if you're a fan of the Marvel comic, but the average audience member
may want some more bang for his/her buck.
When the action comes, it's pretty good, directed in a hyper kinetic, 'music
video' way. Unlike some other movies, where hyper kinetic means
'unwatchable,' the British director Norrington handles it all pretty well.
This film is not really for the faint of heart: there's a lot of blood
spurting, and in a homage to Scanners (1981) there's a few heads blowing up
in particularly graphic (yet obviously fake) way.
The performers are O.K, with Snipes seemingly having a good time as the
larger than life hero. However, he's a bit too serious for his own good in
this movie, and comes across as a bit boring. Dorff is much more fun as the
bad guy, even if he is a bit one note. He's suitably evil, however.
Kristofferson delivers a 2D performance, and Wright is pretty good in the
action babe role. Overall, the cast is slightly weak. While in other action
movies this wouldn't be so bad, because there's so much script in Blade, the
character flaws show up more. And in some cases, characters appear without
being explained at all!
The film also suffers from a overlong running time, and the fact that the
action is too far and few between. It's a shame, because when the action
does come up, it's well handled and pretty exciting. Had the film been less
concerned with the story, and more with the action, Blade could of been a
far more enjoyable movie. Sadly, though, Blade gets too bog down in plot,
and is nothing more than an average film.
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!
"You know, for kids"- Norville Barnes

Author
Curtis Edmonds
Of the major horror sub-genres, vampire movies are easily the most
adaptable.  Think about it.  Frankenstein movies haven't changed all
that much because they still need that mad-scientist-in-Bavarian-castle
setting.  If you made a Frankenstein movie today, you'd have to have the
monster be a virus or something -- and outside of Michael J. Fox, there
aren't any actors that could play a virus convincingly.  Movies about
mummies would still have to be set in Egypt.  There's not much you can
do with werewolves except take them to London or Paris, unless you want
to have a teenage werewolf or something.  (And there's that Michael J.
Fox thing again.)
But you can have vampires do anything, and you can place them in any
genre you want, just about.  You can have traditional vampire movies
(Bram Stoker's Dracula) or have the Anne Rice version (Interview with
the Vampire), or play it for laughs (Vampire in Brooklyn).  You can put
vampires in locales from sunny Southern California (The Lost Boys) to
squalid Mexican dives (From Dusk Till Dawn) to your local high school
(Buffy, the Vampire Slayer).  Were it not redundant, you could have a
movie about a law firm full of vampires. Any day now, I expect we'll see
a movie about a vampire third baseman who has to decide whether to play
a day game in order to break the home run record.
Or, you can insert the vampire legend into a Hong Kong action movie --
and when you do that, you get Blade.  Wesley Snipes has the Chow Yun Fat
role in this movie -- the silent, expressionless hit man who destroys
everything in his path.  In this case, the everything happens to be
vampires that explode into CGI shards instead of dead, bleeding
corpses.
Snipes has less to say here than as the fugitive in U.S. Marshals, but
does a demonstrably better job here as a half-vampire wreaking vengeance
on the bloodsuckers.  Blade is a silent, brooding presence, laying waste
to vampires without a shred of remorse.  He is as cold as his
silver-bladed sword, as single minded as his garlic-filled bullets.
Yet, he's not without quirks:  Blade drives a battered muscle car and
has to glean Rolex watches from his vampire victims in order to stay
solvent.
Like any good Hong Kong movie, Blade is heavy on the chopsocky action.
For some reason, Blade spends a lot more time using his kung fu artistry
than using the traditional anti-vampire weapons of garlic and silver.
(Blade dismisses a man-portable arc lamp as being too heavy, although it
looks to be a more efficient tool to dispatch vampires.)  Unfortunately,
the guiding hand of John Woo is absent from this film, relegating Blade
to the status of The Replacement Killers, which it most strongly
resembles.
The Replacement Killers is the last movie I saw that I didn't review --
mostly because it made no impression on me, and I couldn't remember
anything other than noise, violence, and the intensity of Fat's
performance.  Blade has a little more going for it, and has the vampire
myth to draw from -- but other than that, it's the same kind of movie --
exciting, with well choreographed action scenes, but with no
resonance.
With a stronger villain (Stephen Dorff is (pardon the pun) curiously
bloodless as the head vampire, leaving us to wonder what Denis Leary
might have done with the role), a wittier script, and a strong
supporting cast, Blade might have been able to rise beyond the level of
commonplace summer entertainment.  As it is, Blade is an average action
movie that serves to do nothing but remind us that the summer movies
just keep getting dumber and the vampire movies just keep multiplying.
Movie Reviews: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Curtis+Edmonds
Hollywood Stock Exchange: http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"Tabasco sauce is to bachelor cooking what forgiveness is to sin."

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     As Blade, the title character, observes just after the climactic
moment of the film, "Some motherfucker's always trying to ice skate
uphill."  That pretty much sums up the film.  It sounds sharp and
polished.  But do not think about it too long.  How many places can you
name where the ice is smooth enough to skate on and goes uphill?  BLADE
is polished, visually very appealing, and enjoyable as an action film.
But do not stop to think about it too hard.  BLADE is at once a good
action film and a bad piece of fantasy.
     This is a dark world in which vampires are something very
different from what used to be in the old Universal horror films.  The
world is basically engaged in a secret three-sided war.  There are
humans, there is the old aristocracy of vampires, and there are the
young rebellious vampires struggling to wrest control from the old
guard.  The older vampires are in a cold war with humans.  Some humans
know of their existence but try to cover it up in an uneasy truce.  The
young vampires know they can take control in a new order that will rule
humans and older vampires.  Tipping the balance in the wars is Blade
(Wesley Snipes), half human, half vampire.  Actually a vampire took his
mother just hours before he would have been born. This was sufficient
to change his DNA--I told you not to think about it too hard--so that
he has all the best parts of humans and all the best parts of vampires.
Actually, saying he has the best powers of both humans and vampires
does not explain him.  It is not clear if it is his human or his
vampire heritage that allow him to get a silver stake in the base of
his neck and seconds later again be a perfect fighting machine.  He
also seems to have the powers of an action hero.
     Visually this is a very striking and polished film.  While it
starts with some overly familiar time lapse effects, it has some well-
filmed fight sequences early on.  I am not an expert on martial arts,
but friends who know considerably more tell me that Snipes does his
stuff very well.  There was some suspicion that the fighting was
speeded up and there is no doubt that special effects were added to the
fight sequences.  But the fighting would not have looked this good
without Snipes knowing his stuff.  Digital effects are integrated
flawlessly with the live action.  Stephen Dorff as Deacon Frost is an
acceptable villain without generating a lot of excitement.  Kris
Kristofferson plays the modern equivalent of Van Helsing.  He provides
the brains, Blade is the muscle.  As far as his acting he does not push
any new buttons or pull any new levers.  With the possible exception of
Snipes, nobody does.  I would say that it is nice to see Udo Kier still
making horror films, but it would not be sincere.  Kier has always had
non-demanding roles and has always been just adequate.  His presence in
a film has always seemed to be a kind of inside joke.
     In many ways this is a good action film.  The fights are exciting.
But the plot is a retread of ideas, several borrowed from Richard
Matheson's novel I AM LEGEND.  There are too many loose ends and open
questions for this to be a really good script.  I give it a 6 on the 0
to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Open questions, loose ends, and bad touches from BLADE:
     (Note that this film assumes that there are good scientific
reasons for vampires and they are preternatural not supernatural.  This
means that they have to obey laws of science and logic.)
     Do you have any idea what a horrible, wretched, stinking mess it
would create to pump fresh blood through a sprinkler system?  Where
would someone even get blood in those quantities?
     There is an implication that what gives Blade his powers derives
from his DNA.  Yet he was a vampire just shortly after his mother was
first bitten.  What mechanism could alter the DNA in his body cell-by-
cell in that short time?
     We are told that an autopsied vampire has "odd muscle structure
around the canines."  First of all, wouldn't any muscle structure
around the canines be odd?  If vampires can extend and retract fangs,
where do they go when retracted?  How does the human anatomy
accommodate them without any differences being obvious externally?  How
do newly bitten vampires undergo this extreme dental change?
     Many people learn about the existence of vampires in the course of
the film--the autopsy doctors mentioned above, for example.  In one
street chase we get a quick flash of a vampire who just happens to be
out biting a victim.  Anyone who happened to be on the street at that
time would see it happening.  Also, the victim would presumably
disappear.  With so many people learning of the existence of vampires
so frequently, how could the secret that they exist ever be kept under
wraps?
     Multiple times in the film people in streets wield guns and fire
them but no police come.
     Both Frost's minions and Blade seem awfully cavalier in fighting
around priceless vampire archives going back many thousands of years.
They contain information that both Frost and Blade need.  Wouldn't one
expect they would be handled with a little more care?
     Though we never see Blade have an opportunity to pick it up, he
seems to have gotten out of the archive with just the right scrap of
document.  How did he manage that?
     Blade's contact with his mother was very short.  How does Blade
recognize his mother when he sees her?
     How is it that a 10,000-year-old temple of vampires ended up in
the middle of an American metropolitan city?

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Stephen Norrington
Cast:  Wesley Snipes, Stephen Dorff, Kris Kristofferson, N'Bushe Wright,
Donal Logue, Udo Kier
Screenplay:  David S. Goyer
Producers:  Robert Engelman, Peter Frankfurt
Runtime:  120 min.
US Distribution:  New Line Cinema
Rated R:  violence, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
I never really read comic books when I was a kid.  I liked the
Transformers comics, and a few years ago I tried with futility to
collect some of the numerous Aliens series.  Other than that, my
experience is limited to glancing about the comic store once or twice a
year.  Some of the art pleased my inexperienced eyes, and from time to
time, I actually found the stories interesting.  The plots were never
coherent -- no, they jumped from scene to scene worse than a badly
edited Warner Bros. movie.  My overall impression had me dismissing
comic books as pornography for adolescents -- the only acceptable way to
indulge in violence and sex without the need of a fake ID.
In the last few years, we've had a deluge of films based on comic
books.  Blade is the newest one, and while it is easily one of the
best-looking films of 1998, it features common problems of the genre. 
It's certainly more satisfying than the dull experience of Spawn, and
infinitely more enjoyable than the laughable Batman & Robin.  The
presence of Wesley Snipes also elevates the film's odd charm.  But there
just isn't any depth -- there are many scenes of attempted depth, but
they're mostly just endless shots of a brooding Blade, staring with
numbing sincerity into darkness.  A couple of lines of convincing
dialogue would have helped out immensely.
Still, it deals with vampires, and is proficient in its us of
exploitative violence and gore.  Snipes plays the deeply disturbed
Blade, a human-looking monster, known in the vampire culture (it is
widely accepted now that vampires do, in fact, exist) as the Day Walker
because -- you guessed it -- he can walk during the day.  In fact, he's
an all-around great guy:  he has all of the vampire's strength, and none
of their weaknesses, aside from The Thirst (he looks so pleased,
immersed in wonderment, as he injects that human blood into his jugular
vein . . .).  Blade, however, hates vampires, because they killed his
mother and made him what he is today.
And that, my friends, is a bad-ass mo' fo!  A butt-kicking,
vampire-slaying, sword-wielding maniac!  Yes, Blade is very good with
his weapons and appendages, and seems rather adept at killing vampires
quickly and with as many guns as possible.  The story comes in when he
meets Deacon Frost (a pallid and unshaven Stephen Dorff), a youngish
vampire who wants to revive the Blood God and take over the human race. 
It's strange how the words "Blood God" don't sound particularly funny in
the film, but strike me as loudly amusing in text-form.  Anyway, it's up
to our main man Blade to stop this incessant vampire madness.
Well, it's the end of the summer, and my tolerance for big-budget
action has reached its yearly low (especially after last week's
un-Avenged tragedy).  It's a marvel that I enjoyed Blade as much as I
did, for it really is the essence of mindless big-budget action:  it's
well-choreographed, sharply directed (by Stephen Norrington), and
quickly edited.  It's also like the upper-echelon of action movies in
it's mock-depth approach, in which case it's clear that the screenwriter
(David S. Goyer, in this case) wanted to inject depth but was only
partially successful.  The result is gory action intertwined with
silent, motionless scenes of brooding.  If only we knew what Blade was
thinking.
But I did enjoy myself, even while admitting that I was indulging in
pornography.  The action is top-notch -- Blade finds many new and
interesting ways to dispatch of his foes.  There are also some funny
running jokes, one of which includes a vampire (Donal Logue) who keeps
getting his hands cut off.  The blood scenes are eclectic and exciting,
particularly the opening scene in a vile vampire nightclub.  Blade also
has a lot more personality than most of the action films to come out
this year, thanks to the always-appealing Snipes and his co-star, the
sometimes-appealing Dorff.  For the record, I also liked N'Bushe Wright
in the token female role, and Kris Kristofferson in the token sidekick
role.
And I suppose that, like all films, this one has to pander to a certain
audience.  Norrington is a skilled choreographer, and a visual stylist,
but he doesn't know much about characters.  I like that depth was
attempted, but it's an unsuccessful attempt:  it takes more than long
shots of nothing to convey a thought or an emotion.  And while the
beginnings of interesting themes are certainly present, none are
developed, and all are abandoned in favor of wholesale slice-and-dice. 
Don't get me wrong -- Blade is a good time at the movies, and easily the
best comic-turned-film I've witnessed.  It's a step in the right
direction, but someone needs to learn that action and depth can both be
important in the one movie.

Author
John Smyth
A review from the Stockholm Film Review
http://www.fortunecity.com/lavendar/heat/435/
Blade (Wesley Snipes) is a vampire hunter with a difference - he seems 
to be part vampire himself. With the help of his assistant, Dr. Abraham 
Whistler (Kris Kristofferson), he emerges after dark to do battle with 
the blood-sucking creatures of the night, who prey on humans. The 
vampires 'infect' humans with their bite and contaminated humans become 
vampires too. 
Based on the eponymous comic-book hero, Blade is breathtaking in its 
monotony and lack of originality. The twist, if you can call it that, is 
that the vampires consist of two classes those who have always been 
vampires, and those who have been infected, but who were originally 
human. The two factions are engaged in a power struggle, with the leader 
of one faction, Deacon Frost (Stephen Dorff) planning to overthrow the 
present leadership. And that is as complex as the movie gets, 
unfortunately.
The story of vampires has inspired many filmmakers, from schlock-horror 
hacks to A-list directors. Since F.W. Murnau's Nosferatu (1922), the 
themes of immortality, the allegory between sex and the vampire's bite, 
and the blood imagery have inspired works by Neil Jordan, Francis Ford 
Coppola, John Landis, Abel Ferrera and Tony Scott amongst others. 
However, David Goyer's script seems to be content to leave these themes 
unexplored and Stephen Norrington's heavy-handed direction consists of 
one tedious, overblown fight scene after another.
The prospect of Blade as a sort of iconic figure is simply risible. 
Wesley Snipe's performance makes one yearn nostalgically for Passenger 
57 and Demolition Man, while I hope Stephen Dorff sent a good portion of 
his fee to Kiefer Sutherland, since Dorff's performance is a leaden 
imitation of Sutherland in The Lost Boys (hardly a classic in itself). I 
can only presume Kris Kristofferson is saving up for something expensive 
as an excuse for appearing in Blade - I hope he got well paid. This is 
completely forgettable stuff.


Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4)"Movies based on comic books represent one of the last best
hopes for visionary filmmaking." -- Roger Ebert 
Ebert was thinking of DARK CITY and SPAWN, as well as BLADE, when he made
that statement. Taken together, these three make a solid foundation for a
new genre of movies.  
These films rely on, and make the best use of, the latest film technology.
Innovations in costumes, make-up, set design, editing, and computer effects
are integrated more fully in these movies than in films like GODZILLA or
ARMAGEDDON. 
In SPAWN, the costumes and make-up took center stage. In DARK CITY, it was
the use of models and set design. In BLADE, it is editing, fight
choreography, and special effects. 
BLADE is a vampire movie that modernizes the whole mythology. Vampires have
been around long enough that science is beginning to understand them.
Whistler (Kris Kristofferson) has studied them for years and knows
empirically how vampirism works. "Crosses don't do squat. Silver works.
Sunlight, UV rays, vampire mace: silver nitrate, essence of garlic." 
One of the movie's characters is Dr. Karen Jensen (N'Bushe Wright), a
hematologist. When she gets pulled into the story, she is able to shed light
on how the blood of vampires reacts. She sees a similarity between the
vampire virus and sickle-cell anemia. She may even have a cure. 
These two characters are sidekicks, interesting in their own right, but
ultimately supporting the comic-book hero, Blade (Wesley Snipes). Where
these two are thinkers, Blade is a doer. He makes his living sending
roomfuls of vampires to their permanent deaths. 
Blade has superhuman powers. A vampire halfbreed (his mother was bitten
while pregnant), he has the strength and quickness of a vampire, without the
aversion to sunlight and garlic. He is adorned with lethal and inventive
gadgets, and he wears black rubber with an overcoat that's almost a cape. 
Blade is tracking down a vampire named Frost. He knows that something big is
happening in the vampire world, and he knows that Frost's power is
increasing. He is determined to stop Frost before he and the other vampires
gain any more power over the humans. 
Frost, meanwhile, is tracking down Blade, whom the vampires call "The
Daywalker." Frost plans to capture him and use his blood to summon an
ancient vampire god. 
The plot sounds corny and adolescent, but the movie is based on a comic
book. The entire production has the look, pacing, and intensity of a comic
book. Because the movie went for it whole-heartedly, it is much easier to
accept the plot and enjoy the movie on its own terms. 
This film is very bloody. In fact, there was a bloodbath scene early on that
was reminiscent of Peter Jackson's gore-fest, DEAD-ALIVE. But whereas the
blood in that film (and other horror films) was gratuitously gross, in this
one, it serves the plot. In that one, the blood was there for its own sake,
shocking in and of itself. In this movie, the blood is not just shocking, it
is also frightening because of what it reveals. Not even in Kubrick's THE
SHINING was a visual bloodbath so effectively used. 
Because the blood is motivated, BLADE is less gory than a slasher flick, and
the movie has a lot else going for it. 
The fight scenes between Blade and the vampires are some of the
best-choreographed in recent memory, this side of Hong Kong. When Blade's
silver weapons kill a vampire, there is an interesting visual effect of
dissipation, almost too quick to see. You have to watch close to see it. And
with the audience watching so closely it's hard to pull off a fight scene
where one man takes on a roomful of enemies. Too often, the director uses
closeups and quick cuts to distract you while the bad guys pile up.
Norrington choreographed the fights, giving you a sense of what's happening
with each individual combatant. 
Snipes makes a good comic-book hero. He seems to be aware of how he will
look on-screen and exaggerates just the right gestures to make him seem a
believably imposing figure. Ebert also credits him with a sadness that
accompanies the superhero way of life, and I agree to the extent that
sadness and a neurotic drive are intermixed. Either way, Snipes captured
that emotion without lingering too long on it. 
I would also add that part of Snipes' success in the role comes from his
being a producer of the film. As a producer, he would have more control over
how Blade would be presented, better allowing his performance to match the
goals of the production. 
The music served its purpose well in this movie. It was symphonic enough to
be a film score, with enough techno-industrial beats to keep it dark and
up-to-date. There are a few scenes of Blade pondering his mother's fate
where the music takes on an eastern mystical sound. The music always sounded
good, and it always served the needs of the film. 
Blade is well-made and I really enjoyed it. But I acknowledge that it isn't
for everyone. Even though it is R-rated, it seems to be aimed at adolescent
boys, the ones who read the comic books. If there are such things as "chick
flicks" and "guy flicks," this is one of the latter, so take my
recommendation as you will. 
But if you are interested, or if you can allow yourself to enjoy a movie
like this on its own terms, by all means go see it. 
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Scott Renshaw
BLADE
(New Line)
Starring:  Wesley Snipes, Stephen Dorff, Kris Kristofferson, N'Bushe
Wright, Donal Logue.
Screenplay:  David S. Goyer, based on the character published by Marvel
Comics.
Producers:  Peter Frankfurt, Wesley Snipes and Robert Engelman.
Director:  Stephen Norrington.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, gore, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  118 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     BLADE is a comic book adaptation, which in recent years has meant you
could expect one of two approaches:  brooding and violent (THE CROW,
SPAWN) or gaudy and hyper-kinetic (BATMAN AND ROBIN, THE MASK, TANK GIRL).
BLADE is no exception...sort of.  Instead of choosing one familiar path or
the other, the makers of BLADE have chosen both -- it's brooding, gaudy,
violent _and_ hyper-kinetic.  The surprising good news is that it comes
impressively close to succeeding at both.  The bad news is that means it
doesn't entirely succeed at either one.
     The premise alone is intriguing enough to give it a fair shot.  In a
prologue set thirty years ago, we see a woman dying from a vampire attack
just as she gives birth to a son.  Flash forward to the present day, where
that son has grown up to be Blade (Wesley Snipes), a hybrid with all the
strength of a vampire but none of the weaknesses -- he can walk in
daylight with impunity, eat a pizza with extra garlic, and so on.  That
makes him ideally suited for his vocation as vampire hunter, which he and
his weapons guru/mentor Whistler (Kris Kristofferson) carry out with
extreme prejudice.  His latest challenge is a young upstart named Deacon
Frost (Stephen Dorff, the poor man's Kevin Bacon), who plans to unleash
some sort of vampiric armageddon upon humanity unless Blade can cut him
down to size first.
     All right, the latter portion doesn't qualify as any sort of
intriguing.  It's more in that gaudy and hyper-kinetic category, a
climactic conclusion to two hours of punishing, extremely sanguine action.
It's also extremely effective action, directed by former special effects
make-up artist Stephen Norrington at the kind of blistering pace generally
associated with Jackie Chan films.  Make no mistake, BLADE _moves_, with
dynamic fight sequences and a parade of gruesome special effects --
exploding vampire heads, disintegrating vampire bodies, vampire skeletons
crawling out of their skins.  With Snipes anchoring the action as the
chiseled anti-hero, BLADE's frenzied, over-the-top battles offer plenty of
visceral thrills.
     Of course, it has to pause every once in a while for exposition,
which usually is where films of this kind collapse into a puddle of
stupidity.  BLADE, on the other hand, teases with provocative concepts
that ultimately go nowhere.  The tormented hero is nothing new in the
modern "graphic novel" comic book milieu, but BLADE adds the notion of our
protagonist as (in Deacon's words) a vampire Uncle Tom, trying to pass
himself off as human because he's uncomfortable with his vampire lineage.
There are more hints of vampires as a persecuted minority in scenes of a
vampire council discussing how they have struck bargains with humans for
their mutual survival.  When the militant Deacon rejects the assimilation
tactics of his elders in favor of "vampire power," it could have been the
basis for more complex themes than you'd ever expect from a comic book
thriller.  Is Blade, for all his righteous wrath, merely engaging in a
sort of "ethnic cleansing?"  Could Deacon just be firing up a "we're here,
we're vampires, get used to it" civil rights movement?
     Interesting questions, if anyone had bothered to ask them.
Unfortunately, the politics of vampirism quickly gives way to simple,
rapid-fire good guy vs. bad guy stuff.  There's a token pseudo-romantic
interest (N'Bushe Wright), a thick-headed henchman (Donal Logue), and a
villain whose only distinguishing characteristic is his villainy.  BLADE
keeps setting you up to expect that the sub-text is going to matter
somehow, then always bails out for another round of spinning back-kicks
and shotgun blasts.  I suppose you could take a glass-half-full view and
applaud both the quality of the action and the mere attempt to give depth
to the viscera.  There's just too much viscera, and not enough depth, to
take that attempt seriously.  It's an exciting under-achiever -- to
brooding to be pure gaudy fun, to gaudy to let its brooding go anywhere
interesting.

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1998. Director - Stephen Norrington, Screenplay - David S. Goyer, 
Based on the Comic Book Created by Gene Colan & Marv Wolfman, Producers 
- Robert Engleman, Peter Frankfurt & Wesley Snipes, Photography - Theo 
Van Der Sande, Music - Mark Isham, Music Supervisor - Dana Sano, Visual 
Effects Supervisor - Chuck Comisky, Digital Visual & Miniature Effects - 
Blue Sky/VIFX (Supervisor - Richard Hollander), Visual Effects - 
Digiscope, 525 Post Productions and the Production Plant Inc, Flat Earth 
Productions (Supervisor - Kevin O'Neill), Image Savant (Supervisor - 
Richard `Dr' Brady), Post Logic & Wildcat Digital Effects, Special 
Effects Supervisor - Vincent Montefusco, Makeup Effects - Greg Cannom 
Creations, Additional Makeup Effects - Image Animation (Supervisor - 
Gary J. Tunnicliffe), Production Design - Kirk M. Petruccelli. 
Production Company - Imaginary Forces/Amen Ra Films/New Line Cinema.
Wesley Snipes (Blade), Stephen Dorff (Deacon Foster), N'Bushe Wright (Dr 
Karen Jenson), Kris Kristofferson (Abraham Whistler), Donal Logue 
(Quinn), Udo Kier (Dragonetti), Kevin Patrick Wells (Officer Krieger), 
Arly Jover (Mercury), Tim Guinee (Dr Curtis Webb), Sanaa Lathan (Vanessa 
Brooks)
Plot: In 1967 Vanessa Brooks is brought into a hospital, having been 
fatally bitten by a vampire, and at the same time goes into labour. She 
gives birth to a baby son before expiring. In the present day the child 
is now Blade, who, as a result of the bite, is half-vampire and 
half-human and can walk in the daylight but also has supernatural 
strength. Armed with titanium stakes and garlic and silver-filled 
shotgun shells, Blade conducts a single-handed campaign to slaughter all 
vampires in revenge for the murder of his mother. Blade finds a 
dangerous, new enemy in Deacon Frost, a radical vampire who poses a 
threat to the traditional vampires who own and control most of the city. 
Deacon wants to use the ancient vampire Bible to raise La Magra, the 
blood god, something that requires the spilling of Blade's half-human 
blood
Stephen Norrinton made a striking directorial debut with 1995's 'Death 
Machine', an effort that transcended its low-budget with a striking 
ferocity and energy and marked former effects man Norrington as one of 
the most promising of up and coming genre directors. 'Blade' is 
Norrington's second film and his debut in the American A-budget 
mainstream.
Although 'Blade' is not as intensive an all-out ride as 'Death Machine' 
was, Norrington succeeds in fulfilling his promise, injecting a 
considerable amount of stylistic elan into the film - notably a 
breathlessly intensive sequence with Snipes and vampires chasing one 
another through a subway tunnel alongside speeding trains and a climax 
with Snipes facing Dorff in sword combat with Snipes decapitating 
Dorff's torso and he simply regenerating it.
It is an adaption of the 1970s Marvel comic. The adaption comes from 
David S. Goyer who has been responsible for such darkly driven works as 
'Dark City' (1998) and 'The Crow: City of Angels' (1996). Goyer conducts 
some quite unique twists on vampire legend. If 'The Lost Boys', 'Near 
Dark' et al represent the transformation of the vampire into a kind of 
badass thug relishing the freedom of the modern world, then 'Blade' 
takes it to a logical extreme wherein the vampires are a kind of 
criminal underworld preying on humanity, secretly controlling the city 
and running vampire nightclubs which spray blood through the walls, 
treating would-be converts as a slave underclass even marking them as 
their own property. Indeed the film could almost read as an action film 
wherein Snipes might be a cop taking on a group of drug underlords with 
a considerable outlay of artillery fire. The plot though becomes 
considerably more cliche-driven in the latter quarter when Goyer has 
Dorff conducting cliched Lovecraftian rites to raise elder gods.
The film has been criticized as being a comic-book but the critics doing 
so seem to entirely elude the point that is exactly what it is meant to 
be. Here Norrington and Goyer do quite a decent job at capturing the 
dark nihilistic mood that drives modern screen comic-book adaptions. The 
film never quite resonates with the scintillatingly dark psychology of 
either of the first two 'Batman' films or 'The Crow', but then neither 
does it have the two-dimensional lack of depth of the 'Spawn' film or 
either of Joel Schumacher's 'Batman' abominations.
In an interesting move star Wesley Snipes also produces the film. One 
finds it hard though to understand Snipes' appeal as an actor. The man 
keeps coming across as rather thick every time he appears on screen. 
Whenever he does well in a part - in the likes of 'Jungle Fever' (1990) 
and 'Rising Sun' (1993) - it is because there is a good script on his 
side. Norrington seems to realize the limitations of Snipes' talents and 
works with it, giving him minimalistic dialogue and shooting everything 
he does as a stylized pose. He gives, for example, Snipes a fabulous 
entrance - slowly panning up from his boots to show him impressively 
decked out in shades, gleaming trenchcoat and black body armour. Indeed 
whenever Snipes removes his sunglasses and talks the character seems to 
lose much of its darkly driven mystique - the effectiveness of the 
character is a triumph of style over acting talent. On the other hand 
Stephen Dorff, although he does adequately, seems miscast as Deacon - 
the part requires someone into their thirties at least and Dorff comes 
across as far too youthful. Kristofferson is okay and N'Bushe Wright 
makes a promising debut.


Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
In the spirit of 1994's 'The Crow' and 1997's 'Spawn', 'Blade' has an
irreverent comic book style presentation lacking in any emotion or
original style.  It is, however, a fairly decent movie if you know this
going in.  Decent in the sense that it is truly brimming with excellent
action sequences, special effects to rival any vampire movie and stunt
work that cannot be dismissed as routine.  It also has a good story of
conflict and pokes fun at big corporations as the vampire cult in the
film is shown in the form of businessmen sitting around a boardroom
table in conflict regarding their next move.
The film opens in a haunting fashion in 1967 as a woman, injured and
bleeding severely is admitted to the hospital where she is about to give
birth.  The film skips forward to the present day.  A vampire cult is
bent on taking over the human race.  Blade (Wesley Snipes), is the child
of the woman seen giving birth at the beginning of the film and is half
human and half vampire who works for the forces of good as a vampire
killer.  We come to realize that Blade's mother was attacked by a
vampire which explains her injuries also seen at the beginning of the
film.  Blade relies on a formula, injected into him intravenously to
keep his human side alive but his body is weakening and a permanent cure
must be found for him to sustain his present state of being.  Blade's
sidekick is Whistler (Kris Kristofferson), who manufactures the formula
and helps Blade like Robin would help Batman.  Blade meets a blood
scientist (N'Bushe Wright), a victim of being bitten herself, who helps
him find a cure for sustaining his human side.
Blade's arch-enemy is Frost (Stephen Dorff), a chilling outcast from the
group of vampires, who has his own followers and Frost's ideas for
taking over the world are very different than some of his peers, putting
him in direct conflict with them.  He and Blade meet on several
occasions in classic comic book style confrontation.
'Blade' is written by David S. Goyer based on characters created by Marv
Wolfman and Gene Colan. Director Stephen Norrington gives the film a
look that is a cross somewhat between 'The Terminator' and 'The Lost
Boys' and the film is strangely empty in many spots, relying on its eye
candy to do most of the work.  Snipes and Dorff make for good opposites
but the story can't sustain itself to the point of remaining interesting
for its running time of exactly two hours.
Perhaps in setting a trend for the future, 1989's 'Batman' has done more
for the technical side of films and less for the academic side of them.
The triumph of the hero's accomplishments came across much more
powerfully in 1978's 'Superman', which offered sub text in its first
hour to explain the man of steel's origins.  Most comic book stories
I've seen since haven't been as expressive in giving audiences a total
look at comic book characters, only their superficial side.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
James Brundage
Starring Wesley Snipes (US Marshals), Stephen Dorff (City of Industry), Kris
Kristofferson
(Lone Star), N'Bushe Wright (Dead Presidents)
Who knew? Who knew that there was a brain beneath the thick skull of Wesley
Snipes, able to not only produce, but to choreograph? And good God can he
choreograph a fight scene. I haven't seen such elaborate ones since the John
Woo cult action Hard-Boiled (which, sadly, you must experience subtitles in
order to enjoy). I came into the lobby of the theatre with 0 expectation,
and, after being cajoled and told how great it was by one of the workers
(talk to them, people, they're good conversation), figured it might not be
so bad.
The film, based on a Marvel comic book, is about a half human, half vampire
(his mother was attacked while in labor) who psychotic evil vampire Stephen
Dorff (did he get the role in the Ray Ban commercial after the role in Blade
or visa-versa?) needs in order to become a vampire god. Check this guy out,
he looks psychotic off the bat.
It grabs you in the opening credits, showing a particularly graphic picture
of an innocent man taken into a nightclub full of vampires dancing to techno
music, then cascading into an excellent fight scene in which Blade
dispatches most all of them. If you have a hard stomach, it's a treat and
worth it.
It's not without its bad points. Like most action movies, it still needs
lines that any one of us would ever say in our right minds, characters we
can attach to, and victims we care about. But, wait a sec, this is a
hard-core action flick we're talking about. To hell with having a brain it
was FUN!

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients: Vampire society and culture, a half-vampire hero who hunts
vampires, martial arts
Starring: Wesley Snipes, Stephen Dorff, Kris Kristofferson, N'Bushe
Wright
Synopsis: 
Accepted by neither vampires nor humans, Eric (Wesley Snipes) is a
half-vampire, born of a human mother who was killed by vampires. He has
the strength of a vampire but the mortality and daylight immunity of a
human. Rejecting his vampire heritage, Eric now goes by the name of
Blade. He survives on serum rather than blood, and hunts vampires for
vengeance, using martial arts skills honed by years of training under
the tutelage of a friend named Whistler (Kris Kristofferson). Blade
slays vampires because he's hoping to find the vampire who killed his
mother. 
In BLADE, Blade makes a moral decision. He saves a hematologist named
Karen (N'Bushe Wright) against his better judgement. She has been bitten
by a vampire, and has only days to cure herself, before turning into a
vampire.
Meanwhile, Deacon Frost (Stephen Dorff), a megalomaniacal vampire with
minions of thugs, plots to capture Blade and use Blade in an evil occult
ceremony that will increase Frost's powers.
Opinion:
The visual artistry and choreography of BLADE, highlighted by excellent
color and camerawork, is superb. BLADE showcases the Filipino fighting
arts (Kali/Arnis/Escrima). The character Blade keeps his stances deep,
as in karate, begins his sword battles with a two-hand kendo grip, and
then switches to a Filipino stick fighting style as the fighting gets
thick. He also uses the occasional wrist throw or the handstand kick
(found in Brazilian Capoeira). Snipes does his own combat stuntwork, and
possesses a fast-paced eclectic fighting style. His familiarity with
martial arts and his emotional intensity as an actor make Snipes perfect
as Blade.
In BLADE all of the main characters are emotionally intriguing, whether
it is Blade (the vampire hunter who loathes himself for being part
vampire), Karen (the hematologist who learns that she doesn't have long
to live), or Whistler (Blade's human mentor). Even bad guy Frost is more
than just a cardboard cartoon: within the strict vampire society power
structure, he's fomenting a revolution against the older traditionalist
clans. 
One main strength of the movie is its excellent re-interpretation of
vampire society and mythology. The characters act the way they do
because they live in a interesting world. In the BLADE universe a
powerful international vampire society lives quietly and secretly among
oblivious humans. Mafia-style vampire clans are ruled in a hereditary
manner, consisting of born vampires who follow traditional ways. A
faction rebelling against the ancient order consists of non-hereditary
vampires: bloodsucking bite victims who have survived, who are more
attuned to human ways (dance clubs, etc.), and technology. There are
also fanatical human cultists called "familiars." Secret power struggles
and cultural revelations (clan tattoos, hieroglyphics, etc.) make the
complete vampire world of BLADE as least as fascinating as the X-Files
or Star Trek fictional universes.  
My one complaint about BLADE is the comic bookish plot, which is just
OKAY. When you have a movie where your bad guy's master plan is to
"resurrect Amagra the blood red god" it kind of narrows your marketing
audience.
SEQUEL POSSIBILITIES:
A good BLADE sequel should concentrate on three pillars: all-around
character depth, action choreography, and inner moral
conflict/temptation. The action should be plentiful and chaotic, the
gizmos uncomplicated (no batmobiles or remote control mosquitoes), and
the villains should always be emotionally deep and steeped in lore (no
cardboard). This basic formula should then be delivered through a
down-to-earth plot that offers us glimpses of a hidden 'culture' that
entertains and intrigues. 
For example, I like how the ancient and traditionally rigid vampire
hierarchy contrasts starkly with the disorderly, culturally relative
human world in BLADE. Other points of intrigue include: fast-paced
Filipino martial arts; Wesley Snipes' choreography input and acting;
uncovering hidden vampire culture, history, or power struggles, and;
deep or interesting ensemble characters all around, with many points of
internal or external conflict. 
In the sequel there could be several points of dramatic tension, such
as: Blade forging a temporary alliance with someone he hates; Blade
dealing with human weakness, tragedy, or a young child; Blade searching
for his unknown father; clashing with other "day walkers" or vampires
with abilities similar to his own; crossing paths with evil or good
non-vampires such as HIGHLANDER immortals; being approached by someone
with a fatal disease asking to be bitten in order to prolong life;
reacting to tabloid exposure; et cetera. 
For plot improvement I'd suggest a straight-shot, non-complicated plot
that's not too comic book-ish or over-the-top, with a villain that's
deliberately puzzling or enigmatic. The creators of BLADE should also
make sure not to go too high tech. Like the HIGHLANDER, Blade is
essentially a masterless samurai. He may seem to have strange powers
compared to normal humans. But the essence of Blade is that he relies on
martial valor and a personalized code of honor, while the unsuspecting
and pampered humans rely on political expedience, money, technology, and
moral relativity - - this makes the toiling Blade more human than the
humans (and stricter than the vampires).
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Yosha Bourgea
YO BOB GOES TO THE MOVIES
This weekŐs question: how is it possible for a film to be both
tongue-in-cheek _and_ completely devoid of irony?
I didnŐt mean to see _Blade_.  IŐd heard the basic
elements--Wesley Snipes, vampires--and wasnŐt especially intrigued.
Snipes hasnŐt been particularly watchable since _Jungle Fever_
(okay, it took chutzpah to do _To Wong Foo..._, but any connoisseur of
drag queen road movies will tell you what an inferior product that
was), and I doubted another superhero flick would reverse the downhill
trend.  Earlier that day IŐd finally gotten around to watching
Robert AltmanŐs great film _Short Cuts_ on video, and when my
friends Josh and Paul suggested going to see _54_, it sounded like a
suitable follow-up.  At the theater, unfortunately, we discovered that
_54_ wasnŐt starting until the next day.  Wesley won out over Drew
Barrymore and _Air Bud 2_.
_Blade_ is the polar opposite of _Short Cuts_.  The latter is an
intelligent, original film, hilarious and sad and subtle, one of
AltmanŐs clear triumphs.  It is also rife with irony.  _Blade_
shares none of these qualities, except perhaps hilarity.  I did laugh,
but IŐm still not sure how much of that was intended by the
filmmakers.
Two of the two-and-a-half stars I give this movie belong to the first
five minutes of screentime, a knockout opening sequence that ranks
with the best filmed imagery of vampires IŐve ever seen.  Two of
the two-and-a-half stars I _didnŐt_ give were out of pique at the
movieŐs failure to live up to its promise.  It just isnŐt fair
for a sequence that strong to give way to such an unrelenting
schlockfest.
It must be said that none of the principal actors are onscreen in the
first five minutes.  Night in the city: a girl leads a guy through a
meat locker into an underground techno club that turns out to be
chock-full of raving bloodsuckers.  They turn on him.  I was surprised
to feel real fear when it happened--surprised because, like most good
consumers of pop culture, IŐve been saturated with vampire
clichs courtesy of Brad Pitt, Gary Oldman (note: CoppolaŐs
_Dracula_ remains the worst of the genre) and Sarah Michelle Gellar.
ItŐs rare these days that a horror film possesses the ability,
nevermind the courage, to actually horrify.  But _Blade_ does, for a
few titillating moments.
And then, dammit, Wesley Snipes shows up lookinŐ all chocolate
cheesecake, wearing complicated latex and wielding a sword that turns
vampires into sizzling yellow skeletons.  HeŐs Blade, heŐs one
bad mother (shutcho mouth!) and no one understands him but Whistler, a
shaggy, squinty-eyed redneck played by Kris Kristofferson.  Together
they battle the undead establishment with garlic-filled silver bullets
and UV flashlights.  When an attractive doctor gets bitten, Blade
takes her to their bunker and injects her with liquid garlic to save
her, because, well, sheŐs an attractive doctor.  Not that he has
time for so much as a peck on the cheek between slaughtering his
mortal enemies.
In other words, _Blade_ becomes another superhero flick, a crashing,
blaring assault designed for maximum appeal to its target demographic.
No MTV-approved trend is left unfondled.  The music is cold
electronica, the violence is close-up gore, and every opportunity to
substitute cheesy computer graphics for live action is exploited.
While no one actually has sex, the movieŐs approach to the concept
of evil is positively pornographic: that is to say, blunt, obvious,
manipulative and shallow.
So much about _Blade_ is ridiculously contrived that _The Shadow_
seems Altmanesque in comparison.  Why is the librarian vampire an
enormous, Hutt-like slug creature?  How does the attractive doctor
survive being tossed from one skyscraper to the roof of another,
several stories below, with nary a scratch?  Why does the serum...
Okay, nevermind.  ItŐs supposed to be over-the-top fun, not a
homework assignment.  And it doesnŐt take extraordinary
intelligence to see that a lot of _Blade_ is played for laughs, not
chills.  But interspersed with moments of ghoulish humor (especially a
scene where the doctor is confronted by the shambling, rotting zombie
of her ex-boyfriend, who groans ŇDo you ever think about getting
back together?Ó) are scenes too gruesome to snicker at, too stupid
to take seriously.  I would have swallowed this nonsense as simple
lowbrow comedy if I hadnŐt caught Snipes and Stephen Dorff (a fine
actor, here slumming as the arch-vamp) trying to squeeze actual
emotion from the rubber duckies of their roles.  This movie has no
clue where to go, and further insults us by spreading its legs for a
sequel.  If _Blade II_ ever sees production, pray for us all.
You want a good vampire movie?  See _Near Dark_ or _The Addiction_. 
You want a supernatural comedy that works?  Watch _Ghostbusters_ or
_Army of Darkness_ again.
Just donŐt subject yourself to this miserable exercise in hara-kiri.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
BLADE is the single best example of a live-action movie that draws its
lifeblood from the comics.  Not only is it adapted from one -- albeit a
minor one -- it's designed from the ground up to give us the feel, the
smell, the you-name-it of a comic book's kinetics and adrenalin.  It works.
As someone else once said, "If this film WAS a comic book, my fingers would
be black from it."
Wesley Snipes stars as the title character, who was born shortly after his
mother was bitten by a vampire.  Thanks to this, he has the advantages of
both vampire and human strains, and in conjunction with his sidekick and
weapons-smith, Whistler (Kris Kristofferson, very good), he's engaged in a
one-man war against vampire-kind.  The war is about to be escalated, too:
Deacon Frost (Stephen Dorff, scary as hell), one of the young-turk vampires,
has managed to decipher information about an old vampire legend that could
unleash unbelievable power and destruction.  Blade outfits himself with some
truly savage weapons, including a booby-trapped sword that has to be seen to
be believed, and wreaks havoc.
Into the middle of this stumbles a doctor (N'Bushe Wright, also very good),
who gets mauled and infected, and must trust herself to Blade for both
protection and understanding.  She's convinced there's a way to undo the
vampire curse; he's not -- he's wrestled with it long and hard himself, and
there are signs the vampire half of him is winning.
BLADE stands out for a number of reasons.  I mentioned the look-and-feel,
but there are some subtle dimensions to the way the movie plays out.  Rather
than cap off each action scene with a hard climax, the scenes taper off
gently -- sort of the way the end of one comic issue leads into the next, to
keep you reading.  The result is that instead of having the action just stop
and eliciting applause from the audience, everything rolls smoothly along
into the next sequence.  There's also a good deal of experimentalism with
the camera -- time-lapse, stop-motion, jagged angles, but none of it is
overused or cliched.  It all feels fresh.
Snipes plays Blade as an uneasy amalgam of tough guy and scared loner.  When
he grins and postures, he slumps a second later, because for all his bravado
he's vulnerable and very alone, and he knows it.  Wright, as the doctor, is
a great ordinary-hero type: she starts off unwitting and confused, and then
learns very, very fast.  There is one scene where she verbally intimidates
Frost which, all by itself, lifts the movie up another notch.
There are other things in the movie that show smarts and creativity: the
younger vampires are clearly pattered after '90s "heroin chic" models, with
their hollowed eyes and rag-tag wardrobes.  There's also more than a hint of
a racial allegory, since most of the protagonists are black -- something
which is a nice sign that the color line in big Hollywood productions is
finally dissolving.  If it had just been an ass-kicking vehicle, that would
have been good, but Snipes and the rest of the movie's crew took this story
and pushed it up to the next level, and made it something really special.

Author
Vince Yim
Based on the relatively unknown (in comparison to Spider-Man) Marvel
Comic book, Blade tells the story of half-vampire half-human (played by
Wesley Snipes) who was born of a vampire's latest meal.  Now swearing
vengeance against all vampires, Blade hunts them all.  His latest
challenge is his biggest though...he must stop the vampire Deacon Frost
(played by Stephen Dorff) from summoning the blood god and turning the
rest of the world into vampires.
Admitedly, comic books are one of the least appreciated mediums, often
viewed as juvenile by most standards, even seen as illiterate by some.
Judging by a series of poorly recieved (financial and critical) comic
book based films (such as Batman and Robin, Steel, Barb Wire, The Crow:
City of Angels, and the list goes on), one would come to the conclusion
that comic books are the worst medium to translate into film.
To some degree, I agree with this sentiment.  Having read comic books
since the age of nine (I'm 21 right now) I can count the number of good
comic book based movies (not including Japanese manga) one hand: 1: The
Crow (1994), 2: Batman (1989), 3: Superman, 4: The Mask, and now, #5,
Blade.
("Men in Black" is not on this list because it is an extreme deviation
from the original comic book)
Why is this?  For the most part, it is because the filmmakers understand
the comic book medium and come up with an appropriate atmosphere to
match.  The Crow and Batman comics call for a dark gothic atmosphere,
which the director provided.  The Mask features a wacky superhero with
off the wall antics, which the casting and CG effects reflect.  Superman
is not over the top with colour and flash, and the film reflects this.
Blade uses common notions of vampires and incorporates them into the
film, creating an appropriate atmosphere.
This is in stark contrast to Joel Schumacher's contrived vision in
Batman and Robin, reflecting the dated atmosphere in the 1960's
television show.  Batman and Robin proved that the director failed to
realize one fundamental fact: Comics have grown up, and so has the
audience (I'm working on a scathing review of Batman and Robin and will
post it up when I'm ready).
Which brings me back to Blade.  Although he may be a familiar character
to some, due to his appearances in the Spider-Man animated show on Fox,
one will find no single trace of the warm-and-fuzzy vampire hunter as
depicted in the cartoon.  The film depicts a vicious vampire killer that
uses every single means at his disposal to reach his ends.  The end
results are not pretty by any means.
The story elements work very well -- for a comic book story.
Screenwriter David Goyer (who also wrote The Crow) incorporates
interesting elements of vampire lore, using science to explain many of
the ideas often dismissed in vampire films.  This is presented through
Karen, a hematologist portrayed by N'Bushe Wright.  This leads to
inventive use of standard medical treatments to kill vampires.  Add this
to the neat little gadgets that Blade uses (including a titanium sword
complete with an "anti-theft device"), and one has an interesting
premise.
However, the film works best as an action film.  Actor Wesley Snipes has
an extensive background in martial arts (most of which comes from
Capoeira, a Brazillian form incorporating flashy kicks), choreographing
every single move.  Proving that quick, flash cutting edits are no
substitute for choreographed fight sequences (see Batman and Robin for a
good example of that), Wesley Snipes dazzles the audience with some
incredible fight scenes.
Regardless, this film is far from perfect.  The film suffers from at
least one major plot hole, regarding the summoning of the blood god.
The ritual requires that a number of pure blood vampires are standing on
marked squares, yet one of them is viciously murdered, allowing the
ritual to pass (and the murdered vampire is later shown standing on the
square).  Obvious continuity errors also surface, especially during a
scene where Deacon Frost takes a drag on his cigarette and is not
exhaling it in the next frame (there is no trace of smoke either).
Much of the special effects are not that spectacular either.  While
vampire disintegration scenes are intriguing to watch, other CGI
(computer generated imagery) effects are almost slapped together, which
is surprising when given the amount of time the film was given to be
released (the film's release date was pushed back multiple times).
Scenes with computer generated blood look extremely fake, knocking the
believability factor down a few notches (but then, I'm really hard to
impress).  The film's R rating comes from gory violence, but the lack of
realism made me wonder why it got such a rating (for realistic violence,
watch "Saving Private Ryan").
The overuse of CGI in films has made me yearn for the days of director
George Romero and makeup wizard Rob Bottin, both pioneers in the art of
gore without extensive use of CGI.  Still, scenes involving non-CGI
special effects do surface (and look much more impressive), such as one
particularly gruesome scene where a vampire tries to use Blade's sword
without deactivating the "anti-theft device".
Wesley Snipes is the saving grace behind what would have otherwise been
a muddled mess.  While not talking much, he is a grand physical
presence, leaving other comic book superheroes in the dust.  A descent
(by comic book film standards) storyline also helps.
Rating: 7/10
--

Author
Brian Koller
"Blade" is an escapist film that combines action,
horror and science fiction.  Based on a comic
book series, "Blade" is energetic and watchable.
The special effects are excellent.  The plot
even has some depth.  Still, it has the feel of
a big budget, violent version of a Saturday
Morning cartoon show, while Wesley Snipes
demonstrates the emotional range of a gargoyle
statue.
You might not be aware of this, but there are
vampires living among us.  They own all the cops.
They hang out in designated nightclubs, where they
dance in ecstacy under showers that spew blood.
Apparently, they are all martial arts experts as well.
Snipes is Blade, who is half-human and half-some-
special-version-of-vampire.  Like Batman, he has
gymnastic abilities, a tool chest full of weapons,
and sullenly stalks his prey, which are vampires
instead of criminals.  Naturally, the vampires don't
like this and conspire to get him, especially
Stephen Dorff, who needs Blade for an evil plan
to bring a Vampire God back to life.  N'Bushe Wright
serves as requisite perfect-ten love interest,
although Snipes is too cool to make a play for her.
Those eager to accept "Blade" on its own terms will
enjoy the movie.  There is endless violence, lots
of showing off, and the usual humorless action hero
versus psychotic bad guy plot, with Life As We Know
It at stake.  Much of the budget goes for special
effects.  You've seen this movie before, and if
you enjoyed it then, you'll like it again.  If you
are interested in seeing a superior version,
try "Virtuosity" from 1995.
Perhaps the problem with "Blade" lies with the
two main characters.  Solemn Snipes is one tough
dude, but his personality is limited.  Therefore,
the bad guys (in this case, vampires) must be colorful
(i.e. eccentric) to retain interest.  This is,
after all, a comic book.  While Dorff is an evil
megalomaniac, he needs to be more over-the-top, like
James Carrey from "Batman Forever", and be given more
screen time.  What "Blade" (and perhaps Snipes)
doesn't realize is that the bad guys should be the
real stars of the film.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Wesley Snipes, Stephen Dorff, Kris Kristofferson, N'Bushe Wright,
Donal Logue.
Screenplay: David S. Goyer, based on the character published by Marvel
Comics.
Director: Stephen Norrington
In an age when sane, clean-cut superheroes like Superman, are becoming
redundant, up rises a new generation of wannabe superheroes, that are
labelled complex, on virtue of their personality disorders alone -
namely BATMAN, SPAWN and now BLADE. I guess today's generation finds a
hero with a dark psyche, more fascinating, and an anti-hero more
appealing.
In a day and age when vampire movies rarely see the light of day, a vain
attempt is made to bring life back into the genre. The creator has
decided to make Blade an extra special vamp with more blood on top. His
mom was bitten when he was still in her womb, thus giving Blade the
special powers of a vampire, yet retaining his humanity. Blade can fly
at night, but he can also walk in daylight.
This is pleasant enough, but one doesn't sense the anguish or turmoil of
what is like to be a half-breed. Wesley Snipes (BLADE) manages an
abandoned look whenever he discusses his inner torment, and convulses
adequately enough, whenever he takes a serum to suppress his blood
sucking urges; but this is a rather superficial look at a man-vampire
who is living in a nightmare. Like that other guy SPAWN (don't bother
watching), deep inside WE KNOW there is a lot more going on than just an
ability to kick butt, severe heads, dismember limbs and special effects.
Move over BUFFY, your days of coy vampire slaying are over. BLADE's
arrived and will give you a better run for your money when it comes to
high grade, state-of-the-art, artillery and weapons. Yes, the special
effects are good, and there is enough blood, explosions and noise to
satisfy the cravings of any violent viewer. A particular scene that
misuses the sprinkler system to feed vampires is not for the faint of
heart. The ending is also rather coy, where a blood sucking scene is
used to imitate love making, before BLADE is then inspired to beat the
bad guy, Frost (Stephen Dorf). Who says you shouldn't have sex before a
big match?

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
The eponymous hero (Wesley Snipes) is a half-vampire, which means that
he gets all the cool superpowers with none of the disadvantages. He also
gets a legitimate excuse to slot real vampires, including the sneering
Deacon Frost (Stephen Dorff) with muchos pyrotechnics and martial arts.
And a good thing too.
Think "Wesley Snipes", think "vampires", think "adapted from a comic".
Think "what's on in the theatre next door?"
But that would be a mistake because while "Blade" is a dumb action
flick, it's at least enjoyably and inoffensively dumb, with lots of
pretty lights and motion. The slim plot contains several colourful
vignettes. A vampire culture underlies modern society, split between the
old world corporate types (lead by professionally oily Udo Kier) and the
youthful hedonistic rebels (led by Dorff). (We know they're rebels
because they dress scruffily, listen to loud music and smoke. They're so
k3wl.) Quicker than you can say "deus ex machina" the rebels have staged
a coup, deciphered the previously undecipherable prophetic scrolls, and
get set to unleash major nastiness on the world. In between working out
with an Abdominizer, Blade acquires a new sidekick (thus signalling a
short lifespan for his old sidekick) and then kicks some butt. Fin.
But what does the film do right? First on the list are the surprisingly
adept action scenes. Fluidly choreographed and colourful, they bear
comparison to the kinetics of Hong Kong cinema. Snipes, ridiculously
buff and self-serious, is actually well suited to this genre. An actor
he isn't, but he is an impressive special effect. And while we're on
SFX, there are some nicely placed ones. Vampires shot with silver
bullets burn down to ashes in midstep. Staked vampires crumble to dust
before they hit the floor. It's a tasty if gory eye-fest. Actually the
direction of the whole film is quite eye-catching, with an elegant
selection of sped-up scenes and washed-out landscapes. Combined with
some catchy music and a few genuinely scary setpieces (especially the
opening scene in a vampire nightclub where a horde of vampires attack a
victim on a bloodsoaked dancefloor), and I think that director
Norrington (who has no track record of remark) may be a name to watch
out for.
There are a few missteps - there's little evidence of humour here, which
the more serious moments need, and as mentioned the plot borders on the
intangible. But it is a pretty and fun piece of trash. Rated as such,
it's [***/interesting] and better than a poke in the eye on the Sid and
Nancy scale.
--
Paul-Michael Agapow (p.agapow@ic.ac.uk), Dept. Biology, Imperial College
"We were too young, we lived too fast and had too much technology ..."

Author
Jason Whyte
Amazing. That describes most of `Blade', a hyper, Michael Bay-esque 
Vampire horror-action film that combines great visuals, good visual 
effects, and a very comic book storyline (well, it IS based on a comic 
book!). Don't go expecting a plot along the lines of `Saving Private 
Ryan'.
Blade (Wesley Snipes) is a half vampire, half crime fighter; when we 
first meet him, he is busting up a night club of blood thirsty vampires, 
using his powerful fighting techniques (since he is half vampire, he can 
battle the vampires. Get it?); the opening, among all the other action 
scenes, is such a visual thrill that we are injected right into the 
screen.
However, to view these great action sequences, we have to sit through a 
lame plot, boring dialogue and some boring characters. Take, for 
instance, the doctor (N'Bushe Wright), who has been bit by a burning 
vampire, and has taken an essence of garlic medicine that will hopefully 
cure it. I didn't care for her story, or what happened to her. Blame it 
on her performance, which to her seems like standing there, not 
reacting, and spurting out lame dialogue.
The film's story, while weak, is Blade fighting the evil vampire of them 
all, Frost (a great Stephen Dorff) before the vampires wreak havoc on 
the streets and take over the world. The vampires must be stopped, and 
Blade is the one to do it.
So why a B-? What is good and what is bad? You have to really look at 
this film through a comic book point of view, understanding that the 
dialogue is trite because it has to be, and that the story must somehow 
have some sort of little zinger at the end that calls for the story to 
continue. The action scenes here are the standouts, which feature 
relentless editing, fast camera angles, and even a techno-fueled 
soundtrack, which works very well.
The key performers, Snipes and Dorff, are terrific; this is the first 
time that you can actually care about a superhero. Snipes has dimension 
and even has a few good lines (the best one is when he says `what the 
f-ck' but the soundtrack has muted out his line), he is fun to watch. 
Dorff grew on me as Deacon. At first he seemed like a stock character, 
but eventually he turned into a satisfying villian. 
However, with the bad plot, comes the lame dialog, which seems even lame 
compared to the comic-strip balloons. And some performances, like 
Wrights, are lousy. I didn't care at all for Kris Kristofferson's role 
as the guardian of Blade, and all of the other vampires, whether it be a 
ditsy blonde or a working stiff. Also, some scenes in the movie make no 
sense, such as when Deacon is executing one of his vampires by exposing 
him to sunlight, and before he does so, he pulls a couple of his teeth. 
What's the point? Pulling out teeth is unnecessary when the sun is going 
to burn him to death! (plus pulling teeth is horrifying to watch, just 
see `Wild Things')
However, on a whole the movie still works. I would be more satisfied if 
the performances were smoother and the story made you think and care 
about what is happening. If not for the amazing pyrotechnics, `Blade' 
would be a dull film indeed.
Picture: 2.5 Typical New Line film stock with faded out colors and lots 
of film grain. Blacks and shadow detail are very good, however.
Sound: 5 The soundtrack, which is mixed in dts, SDDS and Dolby Digital, 
is outstanding with a rich surround presence, deep, powerful bass 
(especially in the techno section) and clear dialogue.
Photography: 2.5 While the editing is fast and furious, director Stephen 
Norrington has trouble framing Panavision properly. Most shots are too 
messy with bad framing.


Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
I was looking at the New York Times yesterday, and there was this ad
for "Microsun" light bulbs.  They're full spectrum bulbs that are made
to reproduce direct sunlight, or something along those lines.  Given
how things work in "Blade", a few of these around the house would make
a vampire's life suck.
"Blade" is the latest comic book to big screen migration.  While I
understand the project has been kicking around for many years, it was
probably the popularity of "Buffy The Vampire Slayer" that finally got
it rolling.  Actually, there was one or two other vampire movies being
previewed before "Blade": a John Carpenter film and maybe something
else (I wasn't paying that much attention).  These differ from the,
say, Anne Rice genre just before this by focusing on the "vampire
slayer", a la Buffy, rather than on vampire sex lives.  The John
Carpenter preview looked more like "Aliens" than "Dracula", actually.
Anyway, "Blade" is this superhero who's half vampire, capable of
walking in daylight, immune to garlic and such, but with a vampire's
strength.  He's pissed at all vampires for Freudian reasons, and
"pissed" is expressed in terms of large caliber guns and swords.  No
dainty wooden stake here.  There's, of course, a big bad-ass vampire he
has to go against sometime in the film, said vampire wanting to take
over the world and all.  Blade stops him at the end, after getting in
touch with his Inner Vampire.  It's a cathartic moment, capable of
making grown men cry.
Blade fares better than Spawn, the most recent comic book superhero to
go to Hollywood, at least in terms of the suckiness of the big screen
adaption.  "Blade" is actually entertaining, the action sequences fast
and well done, as opposed to the too-much-special-effects battering we
receive in "Spawn".  It's not a bad movie.
One interesting sideline they meander into with "Blade" is to have this
hematologist get bitten by a vamp.  The result is an X-Files worthy
trip into technical sounding explanations: vampires seem to have a
different blood chemistry, they drink blood because their own blood
can't sustain hemaglobins for very long, etc.  They go as far come up
with a "gene therapy" cure for vampirism.  Mystical explanations aren't
necessary for the existence of vampires: it's just a blood-borne
disease, the CDC bulletin being in the works.
Vampires also seem to be regular guys, except they have a deep thirst
for human blood.  Well, at least with the biochemical explanation,
there's no obvious reason you'd turn from being Bob the lovable office
clown one minute to Bob the homicidal maniac the next.  At least with
"Buffy", a vampire is a demon inhabiting a human body.  Perhaps
"Blade" says we're all evil at heart.  Or maybe there's a lack of
consistency.
The science bits go out the window at the end, when Demon Boy comes
down to do some damage.  I though it might have been more interesting
if this "Blood God" turned out to be a biological-warfare inspired
aerosol mist, filled with vampire cooties, turning all that come in
contact with it into vampires, as was perhaps suggested somewhere in
the film.  It would have fit in with the virus thing a bit better and
be more terrifyingly apocalyptic, but, alas, it was not the case.
Other bits of late 20th C. technology cause havoc with any sort of
vampirical mysticism.  SPF15 sunblock apparently does wonders for
vampire skin, though the good guys do have a big flash light tuned to
the UV end of the spectrum.  In this world, vampires simply tan badly.
(Interestingly, I think there might have been some UV lamps in the
disco during the opening sequence.  Care must be taken with interior
decorations.)
A Mac Powerbook is also used during the film, by the Bad Guy to decipher
such-and-such prophesy to unleash this bigger demon.  Apple has thus
far gone from being a slick tool of secret agents ("Mission
Impossible", where a Mac laptop went head to head with a PC, which
lost), to saving the world ("ID4"), and now to black arts.  Truly a
versatile little machine.  Macintosh: The Power to Take Over The
World.  Think different, indeed.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Wesley Snipes; Stephen Dorff; Kris Kristofferson; N'Bushe Wright &
Donal Logue
Blade is the movie that shows that Wesley Snipes really can live up to his
potential as one of Hollywood's premier leading men. Blade is based on the
comic book character of the same name and has that comic book kind of feel
to it. It is a very stylish movie and for the most part that style works
very well. Although, at a few points I thought I was watching a music video
as opposed to a movie. The ideas behind Blade are good, as is the basic plot
of the story. But at times, things seem to get a bit muddled, and the
writers appear to want to do too many things at once. That really doesn't
take away from the story too much, but it does hurt it a little bit.
Blade (Snipes) is half man, half vampire. His mother was bitten by a vampire
when she was pregnant with him and as a result he has many of the classic
traits of a vampire. Including a thirst for human blood that must be kept
under control by a special serum which quenches his blood lust. Blade has
spent his life hunting down and killing vampires as a sort of revenge for
the fact that one of their kind killed his mother. But this isn't as easy as
it seems, because the vampires in Blade's world are more sophisticated than
the ones that you find in most films. The government and other authorities
know of the existence of vampires, but they let them feast of the population
at large because they are taking bribes from the vampires. Where do vampires
get money? Well, in Blade, they run multinational companies in order to
finance their vampire organizations. I personally thought that this whole
secret corporate world run by vampires to be a very clever idea, and a great
addition to the movie. Blade runs up against the evil Deacon Frost (Stephen
Dorff) a maverick in the vampire community. He isn't content to live among
humans, and is convinced that the vampire race is the superior one and he
means to insure its superiority. He has managed to translate the ancient
vampire scrolls that tell of the method of making him an all-powerful
vampire -- rendering him virtually unstoppable. It's up to Blade to see that
this doesn't transpire.
Admittedly, Blade is style over substance through and through. The story is
a relatively forgettable one, but it is fun none the less. The acting in
Blade is just about what you would expect from a movie of this type. This
isn't a film that is going to win accolades for its performances, and the
actors know this. The movie is played for fun and nobody seems to think
otherwise. It's a popcorn movie, and no one involved has any illusions
otherwise.
Blade's production values are as slick as any that you will find in your
typical summer blockbuster. The combat sequences between Blade and his
vampire targets are incredibly well done. Although, the MTV-style cuts did
get on my nerves after a while during long sequences.
Blade is a fun movie with an interesting take on the vampire genre. This is
not the movie for those of you who like your vampires in tuxedos and living
in coffins in the basement of some gothic castle. What Blade excels at is
bringing the classic lore of the vampire into the next century with a fresh
outlook on life. Very cool.

Author
Vince Yim
Based on the relatively unknown (in comparison to Spider-Man) Marvel
Comic book, Blade tells the story of half-vampire half-human (played by
Wesley Snipes) who was born of a vampire's latest meal.  Now swearing
vengeance against all vampires, Blade hunts them all.  His latest
challenge is his biggest though...he must stop the vampire Deacon Frost
(played by Stephen Dorff) from summoning the blood god and turning the
rest of the world into vampires.
Admitedly, comic books are one of the least appreciated mediums, often
viewed as juvenile by most standards, even seen as illiterate by some.
Judging by a series of poorly recieved (financial and critical) comic
book based films (such as Batman and Robin, Steel, Barb Wire, The Crow:
City of Angels, and the list goes on), one would come to the conclusion
that comic books are the worst medium to translate into film.
To some degree, I agree with this sentiment.  Having read comic books
since the age of nine (I'm 21 right now) I can count the number of good
comic book based movies (not including Japanese manga) one hand: 1: The
Crow (1994), 2: Batman (1989), 3: Superman, 4: The Mask, and now, #5,
Blade.
("Men in Black" is not on this list because it is an extreme deviation
from the original comic book)
Why is this?  For the most part, it is because the filmmakers understand
the comic book medium and come up with an appropriate atmosphere to
match.  The Crow and Batman comics call for a dark gothic atmosphere,
which the director provided.  The Mask features a wacky superhero with
off the wall antics, which the casting and CG effects reflect.  Superman
is not over the top with colour and flash, and the film reflects this.
Blade uses common notions of vampires and incorporates them into the
film, creating an appropriate atmosphere.
This is in stark contrast to Joel Schumacher's contrived vision in
Batman and Robin, reflecting the dated atmosphere in the 1960's
television show.  Batman and Robin proved that the director failed to
realize one fundamental fact: Comics have grown up, and so has the
audience (I'm working on a scathing review of Batman and Robin and will
post it up when I'm ready).
Which brings me back to Blade.  Although he may be a familiar character
to some, due to his appearances in the Spider-Man animated show on Fox,
one will find no single trace of the warm-and-fuzzy vampire hunter as
depicted in the cartoon.  The film depicts a vicious vampire killer that
uses every single means at his disposal to reach his ends.  The end
results are not pretty by any means.
The story elements work very well -- for a comic book story.
Screenwriter David Goyer (who also wrote The Crow) incorporates
interesting elements of vampire lore, using science to explain many of
the ideas often dismissed in vampire films.  This is presented through
Karen, a hematologist portrayed by N'Bushe Wright.  This leads to
inventive use of standard medical treatments to kill vampires.  Add this
to the neat little gadgets that Blade uses (including a titanium sword
complete with an "anti-theft device"), and one has an interesting
premise.
However, the film works best as an action film.  Actor Wesley Snipes has
an extensive background in martial arts (most of which comes from
Capoeira, a Brazillian form incorporating flashy kicks), choreographing
every single move.  Proving that quick, flash cutting edits are no
substitute for choreographed fight sequences (see Batman and Robin for a
good example of that), Wesley Snipes dazzles the audience with some
incredible fight scenes.
Regardless, this film is far from perfect.  The film suffers from at
least one major plot hole, regarding the summoning of the blood god.
The ritual requires that a number of pure blood vampires are standing on
marked squares, yet one of them is viciously murdered, allowing the
ritual to pass (and the murdered vampire is later shown standing on the
square).  Obvious continuity errors also surface, especially during a
scene where Deacon Frost takes a drag on his cigarette and is not
exhaling it in the next frame (there is no trace of smoke either).
Much of the special effects are not that spectacular either.  While
vampire disintegration scenes are intriguing to watch, other CGI
(computer generated imagery) effects are almost slapped together, which
is surprising when given the amount of time the film was given to be
released (the film's release date was pushed back multiple times).
Scenes with computer generated blood look extremely fake, knocking the
believability factor down a few notches (but then, I'm really hard to
impress).  The film's R rating comes from gory violence, but the lack of
realism made me wonder why it got such a rating (for realistic violence,
The overuse of CGI in films has made me yearn for the days of director
George Romero and makeup wizard Rob Bottin, both pioneers in the art of
gore without extensive use of CGI.  Still, scenes involving non-CGI
special effects do surface (and look much more impressive), such as one
particularly gruesome scene where a vampire tries to use Blade's sword
without deactivating the "anti-theft device".
Wesley Snipes is the saving grace behind what would have otherwise been
a muddled mess.  While not talking much, he is a grand physical
presence, leaving other comic book superheroes in the dust.  A decent
(by comic book film standards) storyline also helps.
--

Author
Bob Bloom
 It used to be that not just anyone could become a vampire.
 Usually, you had to be an aristocrat - a count such as Dracula or Karnstein.
 To qualify, you'd have to have a modicum of sophistication, so you'd at
least look cool - or suave - when biting into some young damsel's throat.
 But today, in our overly politically correct world, any scuzzy-looking,
long-haired, unshaven lout or any spiked-haired harridans can put the bite
on you.
 By the same token, to be a vampire hunter, one had to have some sort of
medical training and knowledge of the occult or maybe perhaps be some sort
of professional soldier, or at least one who retired with honors.
 Not in these times. All you need are some sharp weapons, some bullets
forged from silver and any yahoo can be a Buffy - or a Blade.
 Without sounding elitist, the fear of vampires has greatly diminished
because of this lack of exclusivity.
 Which brings us to Blade, the latest in a long line of vampire movies in
which, it seems, half the population is putting the bite on the other half.
 Not only are there thousands of vampires, but they seem to move from city
to city, pay off police departments and, most importantly, establish their
own exclusive after-hours raves in which the highlight is the sprinkler
system going off and dousing all the occupants in a blood shower. With all
that blood, you wonder why they have to hunt for victims. You also wonder
when they get the time to get their clothes dry-cleaned and why no cleaner
ever complains about all the bloodstains.
 Blade, which is based on a Marvel comic book character, is, like a comic
book, all visual. The plot is basically Blade repetitiously slashing his
way through the vampire army seeking their leader, Deacon Frost.
 It's all hokum and nonsense, of course. But the filmmakers play it straight.
 Unfortunately, at least at the advance screening I attended, the audience
didn't see it that way and laughed through much of the proceedings.
 You know a movie is in trouble when the scenes of blood and gore that
should elicit screams of fright instead evoke peels of laughter.
 Another tell-tale sign is when the audience seems to be admiring the
hero's costume more than the hero.
 Also it seems it's not enough for today's vampire merely to have fangs. He
must also be proficient in the martial arts. Why a supernatural being, one
of the undead, needs such skills is beyond me. (Of course, this concept
dates to the 1974 Hammer Films-Run Run Shaw production of Legend of the
Seven Golden Vampires, in which Dracula is defeated by seven
karate-chopping siblings.)
 Wesley Snipes is buff as Blade. He growls his lines -the few he has - and
spends most of the time glowering - as if he was suffering from indigestion
or having second thoughts about starring in and co-producing this turkey.
 Blade is just another example of how the vampire film, a once honorable
member of the horror family, has gone downhill. This dud mostly makes you
yearn for those quaint old days when Christopher Lee could be stopped just
by dangling a crucifix in his face.
 Today's vampires lack the panache, the style of a Bela Lugosi or a
Christopher Lee. They are not even worthy enough to carry those great
bloodsuckers' capes. They are more farcical than frightful.
 This whole enterprise is one dull Blade that could have used lots of
sharpening.
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Matt Williams
Blade is the latest entry in Hollywood's continuing obsession with
vampires. Based upon a comic book, Blade feels more like Batman than
Dracula.  Packed to the gills (or should that be fangs) with
crowd-pleasing fight scenes and mindless action, Blade is a pleasant
enough popcorn movie that may not break any new ground, but has a fun
time right where it is.
Wesley Snipes is Blade, a half-human, half-vampire superhero.  He
inherited his unique bloodline when his pregnant mother was attacked by
an unknown vampire.  Due to his heritage, Blade possesses a vampire's
strength and reflexes, yet a human's tolerance for sunlight.
As an adult, Blade spends his nights waging war against vampires, who
have secretly infiltrated all aspects of our society.  Helped by his
aging mentor, Whistler (Kris Kristofferson), Blade single-handedly
destroys hundreds of the bloodsuckers every night.
But the vampires have larger plans in mind.  Particularly one young
upstart, Deacon Frost (Stephen Dorff), who sets about trying to fulfill
an ancient vampire prophecy.  Can Blade stop his nefarious plans in
time? Need you even ask?
A movie like Blade doesn't concern itself too much with reality, nor
should it. If it did, it would have to ponder such questions as what
vampires would eat after converting the last human (as is proposed at
one point in the film).  No, rather the film is pure escapism, and works
well on that level.
Blade has mastered the art of the one-strike kill, to the point that a
few of the fight scenes are overly repetitive.  At times, it seems like
the bad guys line up in a single file queue, and Blade sequentially
kills them one at a time.  Shouldn't vampires be a bit tougher to kill?
But, on the whole, the fights are enjoyable diversions.
Too bad the same can't be said of Snipes' acting.  He delivers each and
every line with the same clenched-jaw monotone.  He's proven that he can
successfully tackle a tough part, but here he is simply slumming.
The special effects in Blade are a mixed bag.   A few of the effects are
done very well, such as the disintegration of dead vampires.  However,
others are positively cartoonish, and don't blend well with the tone of
the rest of the film.
For the most part, Blade delivers on its promises.  It's got vampires,
violence, guns, swordfights, stunts and special effects galore.  If
those sound appealing, Blade fits the bill.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases
