Title
Review for What's Love Got to Do with It (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     A number of critics considered RAGING BULL to be the best film of the
1980s.  I cannot say I was all that keen on it.  While I will accept that
the acting and the style gave the film a feel of authenticity, the film
really just gave me two hours to be around people I would cross a street to
avoid.  Perhaps even a highway.  I got that same feeling of wanting to get
away from the people in WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT, without the feel of
authenticity.  This is what I would call a "dirty linen" story, like MOMMIE
DEAREST.  Tina Turner (nee Anna Mae Bullock) got divorced and is now telling
the world what terrible things her husband did and how she remained a sweet,
loving  mother to her children and all the while how terrible she felt.  Not
that I am doubting the accuracy.  I am sure Ike Turner was this bad from
Tina's point of view, and I am sure Tina was a good person from her own
point of view.  Still, she was not an unbiased observer and her character
may be a bit too good to be true albeit a little too naive.
     The story starts with young Anna Mae (played at this age by Rae'ven
Kelly) being dragged by the ear out of a rural church's choir practice
because she insists on jazzing up her singing beyond what passed in churches
in those days.  Apparently it would not be the last time she would be
physically abused for not singing the way someone wanted her to sing.  Anna
Mae goes home only to see her mother leaving home and leaving her in the
care of Anna Mae's grandmother.  Flash forward to 1958 St. Louis and Anna
Mae (now played by Angela Bassett) has come to the city to be with her
mother.  The rage with her sister is rhythm and blues singer Ike Turner
(played by Laurence Fishburne) who, as part of his act, brings women in the
audience up to the stage to sing with him.  Ike hears Anna Mae sing this
way, realizes she is a belter, and sweet-talks her first into joining his
band--named Ike Turner and the Ike-ettes--and then into marrying him.  As
they work together, Ike realizes the power of Anna Mae's voice could be his
ticket to success.  He dumps the "Ike-ettes" from the group's name, redubs
Anna Mae ad Tina, and forms the Ike and Tina Turner Revue.  The operative
wording is that he forms the group since Anna Mae is given little say.  As
they work, more and more of the brutal side of Ike comes out, until he is
beating and even raping his wife.  He insists on running both careers even
though he is making mistakes and getting hooked on narcotics.  Eventually
through a conversion to Buddhism Tina gets the strength to fight back, then
to leave Ike.
     Angela Bassett does a good acting job as a person in Tina Turner's
position, easily winning audience sympathy.  The problem, of course, is that
she does not really resemble Tina Turner and her speaking voice does not
have the same almost-purring quality.  She does lip-sync to Tina Turner's
singing fairly well.  But somehow her appearance keeps her from transforming
into her character the way Denzel Washington transformed into Malcolm X on
the screen.  Laurence (a.k.a. Larry) Fishburne does a good job in a role
that destroys his former nice-guy image.  He also does his own singing.
     I think I might have had more interest in this film had I been a Tina
Turner fan.  But for this one viewer the film rates a low +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.  Fans can adjust accordingly.

Author
David N. Butterworth
     Little Anna Mae Bullock sure loves to belt it out during her
Sunday morning gospel choir sessions, so much so that this young,
disruptive prodigy is often dragged outside.  Make no bones about it,
this kid can sing.  But life in Nutbush, Tennessee isn't all sunshine
and song.  Before we know it, her mother and elder sister have packed
their bags for St.  Louis, leaving the sad and frightened Anna Mae
behind.
     "Anna Mae who?" you may ask yourself.  "Never heard of her."  Well
maybe you know her better by her stage name.  Tina Turner.
     WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT is a straightforward but thoroughly
irresistible biopic of the sultry rock legend who finally struck out on
her own after suffering years of abuse at the hands of husband and
mentor, Ike Turner.  The film is based on I, TINA, the 1986 biography
co-authored by Turner and MTV straight man Kurt Loder, and stars Angela
Bassett in an impassioned performance as the big-haired and big-heeled
pop diva.
     Twelve years after being abandoned, Anna Mae joins her estranged
family in St.  Louis, where she is bowled over by the sights and sounds
of life in the big city.  One such sound is that of lounge singer Ike
Turner (played by Laurence Fishburne), whose band performs in the
nightclub at which sister Jackie (Vanessa Bell Calloway) tends bar.
It's open-mike night, and before long that shiny metallic object is
dangled in front of Anna Mae.  The expression on her sister's face when
Anna Mae cranks out a gutsy blues version of "(Darlin') You Know I Love
You" is priceless.  A star is born.
     Ike takes Anna Mae under his wing and before long she's on the
road to stardom with a new name and a future.  But there's a price to
pay for success.
     The film contains more black eyes and bloody noses than ROCKY.
Like SWEET DREAMS, COAL MINER'S DAUGHTER, and LADY SINGS THE BLUES
before it, WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT is a tragic chronicle of the
physical abuse suffered by one of our most beloved female
entertainers.  The scenes of domestic violence are extremely potent and
painful to watch.  Tina's explanation for enduring Ike's viciousness for
so long is "I know what it's like to have your own flesh and blood walk
out on you."  But when she finally finds the strength to fight back,
the crowd goes wild.
     Fishburne is excellent in a very unsympathetic role.  Ike Turner
could so easily have been portrayed as one-dimensional, but the
talented Fishburne gives this frightened wife-beater some depth.
     Angela Bassett, too, has done her homework.  Although she doesn't
physically resemble her, Bassett's body language and stage persona are
pure Tina Turner.  One of the film's many musical highlights is the
"Shake a Tail Feather" sequence, a loving recreation of Phil Spector's
THE BIG T.N.T.  SHOW.  Here Bassett struts her stuff with uncanny
accuracy.  The way she chases around the stage; the way she trails her
left arm behind her as she gyrates; the way she tips her head and
flicks her hair--all Tina Turner.  The lip-synching isn't always
perfect, but you'll be so caught up in the film's emotional energy that
you'll barely notice.  Turner did re-record some numbers for the film,
and her voice is as raspy and seductive as ever.
     It's a little eerie watching a movie about a rock star who's still
alive, and cutting to concert footage of the real Tina Turner at the
film's conclusion is somewhat jarring, as it tends to de-emphasize
Bassett's fine work in the film (especially when the transition from
teenager to middle-aged woman has been handled so deftly).  But it's a
small nitpick.
     Propelled by two star-making performances, WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO
WITH IT is an infectious, energetic musical experience that doesn't
attempt to smooth over the sordid details of Tina Turner's life.  It's
a success story with heart, and soul.


Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  6/11/93; wide release 6/18/93
Running Length:  1:58
Rated:  R (Language, violence, sex, mature themes)
Starring:  Angela Bassett, Laurence Fishburne
Director:  Brian Gibson
Producers:  Doug Chapin and Barry Krost
Screenplay:  Kate Lanier, based on I, TINA, by Tina Turner and Kurt Loder
Music:  Stanley Clarke
Released by Touchstone Pictures
     WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT is a biographical sketch of the life
of Tina Turner (played by Angela Bassett), concentrating on the years
between the late 1950s and the early 1980s.  The focus is primarily on
Ms. Turner's disastrous marriage to Ike Turner (Larry Fishburne), the
man who created her career while nearly destroying her life.  Her
struggles to escape from under his abusive thumb and make it on her own
fuel this surprisingly effective film.
     Going into the movie, I have to admit that I wasn't optimistic.
It's all-too-easy to put together an exploitative film based on the
life of a well-known musical figure or group, and foist it on an
unsuspecting public.  Oliver Stone proved with THE DOORS that just
because someone in the music business is surrounded by controversy,
that doesn't mean that his or her life will translate into an enjoyable
motion picture.  However, where I found the story of Jim Morrison's
life to be dull and pretentious, I discovered energy and passion in
WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT.
     The music scenes are electric.  Superbly acted and choreographed,
they are some of the best of their kind to be found in any recent
movie.  While the voice of Tina Turner covers all her own songs, it's
impossible to tell that Angela Bassett's voice is being dubbed out.
Laurence Fishburne does his own singing.  The choice of music for the
soundtrack is also noteworthy; many of the songs will be familiar to
even those who have had limited exposure to Ike and Tina Turner.
     Punctuating the film's energized performances are several darkly
violent scenes.  These are frighteningly intense and starkly graphic,
not because they are especially bloody (although blood is in evidence),
but because the participants do such an excellent job at bringing to
the surface highly- believable emotions during the circumstances.
Often, abuse scenes are over-dramatized, but WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH
IT avoids that trap.  The goal of realism is attained.
     Angela Bassett, who was Betty Shabazz in MALCOLM X, plays an
outstanding Tina Turner.  Physically, she bears only a passing
resemblance to the singer (this is reinforced when Turner makes a brief
appearance in the final moments of the film during a concert), but she
has the mannerisms, vocal patterns, and explosive energy captured
perfectly.
     Larry Fishburne was already widely-known and well-respected coming
into WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT, but his performance as Ike Turner
will enhance his reputation.  He gets to play the hero and the
villain--the slickly charismatic singer transformed by jealousy and
drugs into a brutal beast.  Any Jekyll and Hyde personae demands
ability and range, both elements of which Fishburne exhibits.  His Ike
Turner has many facets, transcending the level of the common "bad
husband" (much as his character in DEEP COVER gave that movie more
substance than the script strove for).
     WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT is an exceptionally-paced movie.
Credit director Brian Gibson for this.  He avoids the tendency of
biographies to get mired in irrelevancies.  The film, nearly two hours
long, seems much shorter than its running length.  Gibson also manages
to neatly transition his project through the turbulent decades of the
sixties and seventies, effectively capturing the essence of those
eras.  It's not just the costumes and hairdos that reflect the times,
but the attitudes of the participants as well.
     You don't have to be a Tina Turner fan to appreciate this movie,
but no matter how you feel about her music, WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH
IT cannot fail to impart an impression of her courage and inner
strength.  Although ultimately a triumphant story, this biography
doesn't see its subject through rose-colored glasses.  It takes
chances, and that's why the movie works.  Visually impressive and
aurally dazzling, WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT is a great alternative
to some of the bloated, overbudgeted summer films.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
