Title
Review for Turandot Project, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  TURANDOT PROJECT, THE (director/writer/editor: Allan Miller; cinematographer:
Tom Hurwitz; cast: Zubin Mehta, Zhang Yimou, Guido Levi, Lando Bartolini
(Calaf), Barbara Hendricks (Liu), Sharon Sweet (Liu); Runtime: 87; Zeitgeist
Films; 2000-Germany/USA) 
A thoroughly delightful documentary by Allan Miller (Small Wonders) about the
putting on of Puccini's Turandot opera. It's set in the Ming dynasty, and was
first put on in Florence in 1997 then a year later a more lavish production is
put on outdoors in the Forbidden City in Bejing. The China production features
900 hand-embroided costumes, made by 2,000 workers, that are authentic from the
Ming period. It also features: colorful pavilions, 300 regular Red Army soldiers
used as extras (they are told by their commander not to look at the ballerinas
or they will be punished), a tiny girl who puts on an energetic acrobatic
performance as she's transformed from a Red athlete into an artistic dancer,
there are scores of drummers to play the same drum rolls heard in ancient times,
and since there will be performances for nine straight nights--there will have
to be three different lead singers each with two days of rest between their
appearances because the roles are so demanding on the voice. As an aside, we are
told the soldiers thought the opera music at first sounded like mooing cows, but
later on they began to enjoy it even humming some of the tunes. 
The sophisticated and genial Bombay born Zubin Mehta is the conductor, and he
hires the esteemed, intense, methodical Chinese director Zhang Yimou (Raise the
Red Lantern) to direct the opera even though he has no experience in that area.
But the opera works as does the documentary, which is more about the intricacies
of staging it then it is about the opera itself. The film could appeal to opera
buffs as well as to those who never saw an opera, as it passionately shows the
clashes of culture between the East and the West and differences about artistic
ideas among the crew more than it does anything else. This seems to blend in
perfectly with the opera being staged, which is also overblown with passion. 
"Authenticity" is what makes Zubin jump with rosy delight as his sense of
artistic merit is realized by his moves to keep the production as a
collaboration that is an international effort. He is most proud that it is being
shown for the first time in Beijing, the place the opera was originally set in.
But Zhang Yimou looks sullen throughout, with a constant worry that something
will go wrong in this unwieldy production and it will embarrass the Chinese
people. There's a for real clash with the Italian director of opera lighting,
Guido Levi, over the intensity of the light, which adds zest to the film. Zhang,
always the perfectionist, wants the bright lights to match those of the bright
costumes, but only gets grief from the self-important Italian. At one point
Zhang gives a coaches's football-like inspirational talk to some crew members
saying: that he accepted the project "to win credit for the Chinese," and
expects them to do well. Zubin stays above all the little conflicts going on
among the nervous cast members--from those having to learn authentic Chinese
Ming gestures from Zhang when they sing, to all the staging problems that crop
up including one from the chorus--as Zubin wants them to sing a certain song
about blood in a more barbaric way. It was also amusing to watch the overweight
diva Sharon Sweet go into a snit about not wearing a tiny headdress because it
made her look ugly. 
Puccini's opera, which was unfinished at the time of his death, is about
Princess Turandot making her suitors answer three riddles. If not solved, the
man is beheaded. 
There's some pieces of opera music played which were very pleasing (such as the
aria 'Nessun Dorma'). Also interesting were the shots contrasting the opera
setting in the Ming dynasty with the routine life in modern Beijing and its new
hi-risers, and its citizens craving for consumer goods such as cell phones and
TV's as they seem to be embarked on building a totalitarian style materialistic
society. 
It was chilling to hear a sweet bureaucrat from the Ministry of Culture explain
that she is responsible for the wooden buildings of the Forbidden City, and that
if any damage occurs, she will go to jail. It was troubling not knowing anything
about those tailors brought in to make the costumes--Were they slave laborers?
Nevertheless, it was amusing to learn of the differences of watching an opera in
the West and in China. In the West, Opera is treated as a very serious work and
the theater remains quiet during the performance. While in China talking and
eating during the performance is the norm, and even prostitutes are allowed to
ply their trade there. 
Mainly this is a film about what goes on backstage when you put on an opera, and
that in itself was a treat to see. Though there is a certain ugliness to this
film production that can't entirely be ignored, like the oppressive Chinese
government using this as a propaganda vehicle for their repressive government to
gain international respect despite their history of human rights violations; it
also was frightening to look at the robotic, gung-ho soldiers in action--I
couldn't help comparing them to the Nazi Army. Yet I didn't find these
unpleasant incidentals damaging enough to interfere with Zubin's aim to
celebrate the different cultures by putting on this opera in Beijing. Zubin and
Miller had a different agenda than either the Communist regime or for that
matter Zhang, and if the gap could be bridged through music that would be of
benefit to world peace. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
In 1997, conductor Zubin Mehta hired filmmaker Zhang Yimou (The Road Home)
to direct a lavish production of Giacomo Puccini's opera Turandot set in
Florence, Italy.  Mehta knew Zhang had no experience with opera but decided
he'd be able to create a more faithful version of the story, which takes
place in the Forbidden City of Beijing and in other productions usually
resembles the interior of a gaudy Chinese restaurant.
Turandot was a big hit in Italy, and somewhere along the way Mehta and Zhang
decided to take a stab at moving the production to the actual Forbidden
City.  The documentary film The Turandot Project shows the trials and
tribulations encountered en route to the opera's opening night in a country
that has often banned Zhang's films for being too politically subversive.
In other words, this is not another Blair Witch spoof.
Puccini's opera, which was unfinished at the time of his death, is set in
the Ming Dynasty and focuses on a princess who makes her eager suitors
answer three riddles.  If each isn't correctly solved, the man is killed.
It's a precarious situation to be in.just like the limb Zhang and Mehta find
themselves dangling from throughout the production.
There are the obvious things that you might expect to go wrong, like the
melding of Italian and Chinese crew and performers (there are translators
everywhere).  The two cultures meet, but hardly ever clash, except one
memorable battle between Zhang and an Italian lighting designer.  The
intricate costumes, which number in the thousands, needed a lot of
last-minute adjustments.  And since the Forbidden City is outside, a booming
thunderstorm can't be ruled out.
But Allan Miller's (Small Wonders) documentary is still plenty interesting.
I can't decide whether my favorite part was when a group of actual Chinese
soldiers were cast in the play but expressly forbidden from looking at any
of the ballerinas, or when the performing arts director explains how she's
sure she'll eventually end up with a lengthy prison sentence because of her
involvement in the production.  Oh, the good times they had.
If you're an opera fan and are familiar with Turandot, then you probably
should check this one out.  If you'd rather be drawn and quartered than even
walk past a building where an opera once took place, you probably should sit
this one out.
