Title
Review for Dirty Rotten Scoundrels (1988)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dragan Antulov
Professional assassins are the usually the most fascinating
category of criminals on the silver screen and potentially
the most rewarding for any serious filmmaker. But in the
genre of comedy another category of criminals - con artists
- rules supreme. This is hardly surprising because they are
by definition the most charming of all criminals, and taking
advantage of other people's stupidity often corresponds with
said stupidity being the source of on-screen humour. One of
the examples could be found in DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS, 1988
comedy directed by Frank Oz.
The plot is set in Beaumont-sur-Mer, little resort town on
French Riviera, frequented by rich people from USA and other
parts of the world. This used to be the perfect hunting
ground for Lawrence Jamieson (played by Michael Caine),
sophisticated and suave British con artist specialised in
extracting money from rich and gullible women by posing as a
mysterious exiled prince. Through the years Jamieson amassed
enough fortune to afford a mansion, butler (played by Ian
McDiarmid) and co-operation of local police inspector
(played by Anton Rodgers). His idyllic life suddenly becomes
threatened with the arrival of rival in the form of Freddy
Benson (played by Steve Martin), uneducated and
unsophisticated American who earns money by telling sob
stories about his ill grandmother. Jamieson, convinced that
this raw routine might bring unwanted attention, does
everything in his power to drive Freddy out of town, but the
American keeps coming back. Finally, two men decide to make
a wager - whoever extracts 50,000 US$ from American "soap
queen" Janet Colgate (played by Glenne Headley) wins, and
the loser would have to leave town.
Not among the most remarkable films thirteen years ago,
DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS looks surprisingly good from today's
perspective. The reason is probably in the humour, which is
way above the today's Hollywood standards of comedy embodied
in the films by Farrelly brothers. The script by Dale
Launer, Stanley Shapiro and Paul Henning is very intelligent
and the film leaves the impression of belonging to another
era - 1950s or 1960s (hardly a surprise, since this happens
to be the remake of BEDTIME STORY, directed by Ralph Levy in
1963). The plot is, on the other hand, weak and serves as
nothing more than excuse for the series of scenes in which
two principal characters try to outwit each other. Another
surprise of the film is good direction by Frank Oz of MUPPET
SHOW fame; in DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS, unlike his previous
film THE LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS, he abandons special effects
in favour of authentic locations of French Riviera (and
famous Victorine studios in Nice) and allows great actors to
carry the film. Michael Caine and Steve Martin look like
they were born to play the characters; the contrast between
sophisticated European and provincial American is not only
mirrored in screen personalities of Michael Caine and Steve
Martin, but also in the different styles of acting. While
Caine, same as his aristocratic character, keeps stiff upper
lip at all times, Steve Martin often goes for the physical
comedy, although not always with the best results. The
biggest and the most pleasant surprise, however, comes in
the form of Glenne Headley, the actress who had misfortune
of wasting her talent in many disastrous films in late 1980s
and early 1990s. Her talents were not wasted in DIRTY ROTTEN
SCOUNDRELS - she simply shines in the role of naive and
innocent woman whose charm is going to enchant our immoral
protagonists. Unfortunately, she appears relatively late,
and because of that the film is slightly overlong, and the
twist ending is not as unpredictable as the authors would
like. DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS is nevertheless very funny and
entertaining film that should be recommended as an example
of something that is rather absent in Hollywood these days -
stylish and well-crafted comedy.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Enjoyable remake of BEDTIME STORY with
     only minor variations.  The contest for ascendency between
     two gigolos still makes a very funny comedy, perhaps more so
     because it has less competition than the story had in 1964.
     It is much like seeing a new production of a play you once
     enjoyed.  It loses a point for borrowing so but from the
     original but still rates a +1.
     Back in 1964 Ralph Levy, a television director, made the first of only
two theatrical films he was to make before returning to television.  BEDTIME
STORY was for the time a minor and somewhat fluffy comedy about two gigolos'
contest to see which one would have to leave a French Riviera town too small
to support more than one gigolo.  There was Lawrence, played by David Niven,
who had made Beaumont-sur-Mer his private hunting ground for finding rich
women to fleece.  And then there was Freddy, a brash young American soldier
with no respect for the culture and no affection for the women he was
preying on.  Freddy was one of Marlon Brando's most memorable roles and
perhaps the only time Brando ever got to play broad comedy.  And Brando was
hilarious throughout the film, but particularly when Freddy was pretending
to be Ruprecht, who was the retarded product of too much inbreeding of
nobility.
     With only minor changes to most of the script--if memory serves, most
of the film even has the same dialogue--the script has been effectively
recycled to make DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS.  BEDTIME STORY's script was by
Stanley Shapiro (who also produced that film) and Paul Henning.  DIRTY
ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS' executive producer Dale Launer cut some scenes (including
a few of the better gags), rewrote the ending, and put his name in front of
the other two for screen credit.  The story remains the same.  Whoever can
be the first to charm $50,000 from visiting soap queen Janet earns the right
to rule the roost in Beaumont-sur-Mer.  The loser must leave town.  The new
director, Frank Oz, does little with the principle characters that Levy did
not.  Michael Caine, the new Lawrence, plays his role surprisingly David-
Niven-ish, right down to the thin moustache.  Frank Oz seems to have known
what he wanted from the part but his ideas were formed by seeing the earlier
film.  Steve Martin puts a little more of his own interpretation into
Freddy, but in places like the Ruprecht scenes he is more mimicking Brando
than creating his own character.
     What is surprising about seeing the remake is how good the writing
seems to be today.  In 1964 one would have hardly considered BEDTIME STORY
to have had a really well-crafted script.  Yet today that same script seems
to be much closer to the caliber of A FISH CALLED WANDA than to that of
BEETLEJUICE or SCROOGED.  It deals in genuinely funny situations, not just
funny personalities.  What was ordinary writing in 1964 is well above
average in 1988.  Had this been a completely original script, DIRTY ROTTEN
SCOUNDRELS would have gotten an easy +2.  As it stands it still gets a high
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS (1988) *** 1/4  Directed by Frank Oz. 
Produced by Bernard Williams. Executive producers, Dale 
Launer, Charles Hirschorn. Screenplay, Dale Launer, Stanley 
Shapiro, Paul Henning. Photography, Michael Ballhaus. Music, 
Miles Goodman. Production design, Roy Walker. Editing, Stephen 
A. Rotter, William Scharf. Costumes, Marit Allen. Cast: Steve 
Martin, Michael Caine, Glenne Hadley, Anton Rodgers, Barbara 
Harris,  et al.  An Orion Picture. 110 minutes. Rated PG .
"Dirty Rotten Scoundrels" is the latest exception to the 
commonly held opinion that movie remakes are never as good as 
the originals. It is a thoroughly reworked remake of the 1964  
movie "Bedtime Story," which was a weak comedy starring  
Marlon Brando, David Niven and Shirley Jones. On the contrary, 
"Dirty Rotten Scoundrels" is most amusing and excellent in its 
scenario, direction and pacing. It is sure-footed 
entertainment, tightly controlled yet consistently maintaining 
an air of spontaneity. The performances are top-notch, from 
the principals' to those of the supporting cast. The 1988 
version is infinitely superior to its model.     
Michael Caine plays a suave, elegant  gentleman who, with the 
complicity of police chief Anton Rodgers (a convincing 
Frenchman for a change), fleeces rich women in the French 
Riviera town where he resides in luxury. The tricks are so 
imaginative that they raise  Caine from the level of con man 
to that of a veritable con artist.    
Caine's territory is invaded by another scoundrel, small-timer 
Steve Martin. Martin is uncouth, looks like an unkempt "Europe 
on Ten Dollars a Day" tourist in sneakers and baggy chinos, 
acts like a parody of American not-so-innocents abroad. The 
contrast between the aristocratic, low-key Caine and loud 
vulgarian Martin is like that between The Prince and The 
Pauper. But appearances are deceiving: the yokel Martin is a 
real and present danger to Caine's business.So, when the Brit 
fails in his efforts to get rid of this menace, a "modus 
vivendi" must be found... 
"DRS" has a wealth of clever situations and twists which keep 
going at a steady, clippety-clop pace, with nary a dead 
moment. From the start, the tone of a comic scam is immensely 
aided by having as Caine's first victim the terrific Barbara 
Harris. She was the con woman in Alfred Hitchcok's last 
picture, "Family Plot." Her presence here is a delightful 
homage to the Master. 
There are many more fine in-jokes and references to other 
movies. You don't have to catch them all to enjoy this film, 
but connoisseurs could  double their pleasure when those parts 
come up. Caine, while creating a new, original persona, is  
also obviously a Cary Grant figure ( notably that of "To Catch 
A Thief," which was also set on the French Riviera). He does 
an imitation of German-Swiss psychiatrist, a type familiar 
from older  Hollywood farces including Marx Brothers and 
Hope/Crosby pictures.
Martin produces a simian Jerry Lewis number. The Caine-Martin 
relationship could remind you of those animated shorts where 
an indestructible Roadrunner keeps reappearing unexpectedly...
The casting of Caine and Martin was inspired. The chic 
Britisher is like an aging Don Juan; the dishevelled American, 
like  an aging child. In the film's clever fundamental 
reversal--which operates almost like a funny scam on the 
audience--the typecast plebeian and Cockney Caine (Alfie, 
Harry Palmer, etc.) has been turned into a quiet, patrician 
gentleman. 
The changes, however, are not methodical. Martin is still the 
same old Steve. He retains his familiar wild and crazy 
character, but at the same time he is made into such a loud, 
grating interloper, that in the Caine-Martin confrontation our 
sympathies are with classy Caine. 
Since so much of the public's enjoyment hangs on the 
developments, twists and double-crossings of this movie, I 
will only mention that the basic plot principle (which works 
very well ) is that of multiple stings where the con men 
practice their scams both on outsiders and on each other. Few, 
if any, of those turns are predictable. You will, for 
instance, be lulled into the belief that American women (the 
scoundrels' customary targets) are all simple-minded, 
provincial an naive creatures, but just you wait! 
Another surprise is that the movie is unexpectedly asexual and 
free of conventional romantic entanglements. It does not deal 
with men as males and women as females, it is no battle of the 
sexes but a  battle of wits and of steadily escalating 
inventiveness. 
"Dirty Rotten Dirty Scoundrels" has three scriptwriters, of 
whom two were the scenarists of "Bedtime Story." This fact 
alone should   normally guarantee a pedestrian remake. 
Remarkably though, the way in which the 1964 text was 
rewritten is appealingly fresh. And while physically (with 
genuine location sets and crisp photography) the film is an 
update to the end of the 1980s, in spirit it is a return to 
the buoyant, airy and good-humored movies of the 1930s. 

Author
Jeff Meyer
     One of my New Years resolutions was driven home to me over the Christmas
Holidays: no more TV Movie Review Programs in 1989.  Actually, I hadn't watched
any of them for months, but upon visiting my parent's house for Christmas, I
was reminded why I have shied away from these shows in the first place.  
     For one thing, they show some of the best clips from the movie in the
previews (this was true for DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS, at any rate); secondly,
they don't seem to lose much sleep over whether they've given away the plot to
their viewers (Roger Ebert is particularly bad about that); and finally, the
new crop of reviewers are really awful.  I never thought I'd say it, but the
woman who appears across from Rex Reed on "At The Movies" actually made me feel
sorry for the old geek.  He certainly seems more reasonable when compared to
his Entertainment Tonight Reject co-anchor.
     However, don't get me wrong; DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS is not a
one-high-point film.  It carries it's load fairly evenly throughout the whole
film, wearing at the edges only when Steve Martin becomes a little too Jerk-ish
(am I the only one who sees him these days and is immediately struck that
someone has bobbed his nose?).  The script is good, though not great; I didn't
see the film with Niven and Brando that this is based on, but it seems that
someone updated it with competence, if not inspiration.
     Basically, it's an enjoyable comedy, but not something you're going to
remember for more than a few hours afterwards.  A great discount film.  $3.00
value.
