Title
Review for Piano, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Joan Ellis
     In THE PIANO, Jane Campion transports the audience to another
world and time immediately and with absolute precision.  The gray of
her New Zealand sea and sky is grayer, grander, more forbidding than
our experience of it elsewhere.  The stark image of the piano standing
in the swirling surf will endure.
     Next to the piano, waiting, sit Ada and her nine-year-old
daughter, Flora, an arranged family for Stewart, a lonely Englishman
working his land among the Maori in the New Zealand bush of the 19th
century.  Borne through the surf by canoes from their ship, they spend
the night under the hoop of her skirt, half a world away from their
native Scotland and without a notion of what may await them.
     What awaits them is Stewart who arrives with a band of Maori
bearers and his roughly silent neighbor, Baines.  The piano is too
heavy, Stewart says.  It will stay on the beach.  Ada, who hasn't
spoken a word since she was six, still manages to let the intractable
Stewart know her rage.  Silence is no indicator of this woman's power.
It is Baines who rescues the piano, Ada's voice for all she feels.
     It is in this, possibly the film's most memorable scene, that
Campion begins to pose implied questions that she leaves unanswered.
She shrouds the emotions of her characters in mystery.  Campion has the
eye of a visionary and the singular skill to capture what she sees.
The seriousness of the film is punctuated with a wit that flows from
her camera, not her words.
     Ada can earn her piano back, Baines tells her, by coming to his
house to give him lessons.  One visit for every key, he says; only the
black keys, she replies.  And so this improbable pair explores the
passion unleashed in both of them while Stewart stands by, submerged in
emotion he has never felt before.
     This is an extraordinary exploration of passion and betrayal as it
explodes in the remote bush, removed from the eyes of conventional
society, but judged with brutal intensity by the players themselves.
The cast is beyond praise in conveying Campion's vision of a woman who
speaks through her music to the two men who want her.  Without words to
distract us, we inhabit Ada's soul.
     Holly Hunter gives an achingly original performance as Ada,
playing Michael Nyman's music herself as naturally as if she were
speaking.  Sam Neill is superb as the vulnerable Stewart who loses his
protective covering, and Harvey Keitel brings startling sensitivity to
the solitary, innocent Baines.
     Jane Campion pulled her company into her vision, took them off to
the New Zealand bush and with their wise collaboration, captured it on
film.  The actors seem, as much as the characters they play, a group
caught in time and place and passion.  In perfect harmony with their
director, they draw the audience into their strikingly beautiful and
disturbing film so thoroughly that an entire audience sits numbed as
the final credits roll.


Author
Dragan Antulov
Last decade of this dying century was rather harsh for many
people who used to live in my part of the world, especially
if those people were civic-minded intellectuals or
technocrats. For them, it was natural to seek happiness
somewhere else and one spot on the other side of the globe
became very popular. New Zealand, with its nice climate,
thriving economy and plenty of job opportunities, became
sort of promised land for many people who wanted to improve
their life. Perhaps some of them would change their mind and
not see New Zealand as paradise on Earth after watching
PIANO, Award-winning 1993 melodrama by Jane Campion.
The heroine of the film, set in 1852, is Ada (played by
Holly Hunter), beautiful woman who was sent from Scotland in
order to be wed to Stewart (Sam Neill), New Zealand colonist
and wealthy landowner. With her, Ada to the cold, rainy and
muddy colony brings her 9-year (presumably illegitimate)
daughter Flora (Anna Paquin) and huge piano. For Ada, piano
is very important, because since the age of 6 she refused to
speak and the music is her only form of expression. However,
Stewart doesn't see the importance of the piano for his
bride, and he leaves her instrument on the beech. Bains
(Harvey Keitel), Stewart's neighbour, rough, illiterate man
who had adopted Maori ways, falls in love with Ada and
realises how important piano is for her. So he trades gives
some land to Stewart in exchange for piano, and later
arranges for Ada to give him piano lessons. He than offers
her to get her piano back, in exchange for sexual favours.
Ada complies, but soon Stewart finds the truth and all leads
to dramatic and violent finale.
In its time, THE PIANO was a film adored by critics, and it
is very easy to explain why. Superb cinematography by Stuart
Dryburgh with its use of blue and grey tones gives a right,
depressive tone of the film, with very good contrast
provided by warmer colours during the love scenes. Costumes
by Janet Patterson give the right period feel. Finally,
acting is excellent. Holly Hunter deserved her "Oscar", no
matter how her role of a cripple looked like standard
Academy choice for best performance. Anna Paquin, who, by
receiving the golden statuette with the age of 9, broke
record for youngest Award winner, is also very good,
although overshadowed by her better and more experience
co-worker. But the true gem of the film is Harvey Keitel,
who spares no effort in order to portray the complex and
transforming character of Bains as realistically as
possible. Sam Neill, who got the thankless role of a
husband, hardly can do anything to match their talent.
Finally, the entire feel of the film is provided by an
excellent musical score by Michael Nyman, one of the best
and most memorable in the recent decade.
Unfortunately, having many good or excellent doesn't mean
that the movie must be good or excellent as a whole. In case
of THE PIANO, it happened most probably because the writer
and director Jane Campion had the right ideas in her
"Oscar"-awarded screenplay, but lacked the ability to make
it understandable to the audience. This story was very
romantic in nature, displaying the conflict between the
individual and conformist society, and even more universal
one, conflict between passion and reason. However, for me,
this film was actually done great disservice with the
overkill of feminism (quite understandable, because the film
was made during the peak of Political Correctness era), and
by making the character of Ada too bizarre and unbelievable.
Also, the character of Flora could have easily been left out
of picture. Jane Campion makes confusion even greater with
some bad editing during the film, and by some sudden and
gratuitous violence and pointless, although visually
impressive finale that lacks any emotional catharsis, at
least when the author of this review is concerned. Many of
those flaws would be easier to tolerate if Campion had
worked a little bit harder to make this film pleasing to the
eye. Her naturalistic approach only made those flaws more
obvious. Despite that, THE PIANO is still good film to
watch, but only if we can stop thinking that it should have
been much better.

Author
Max Hoffmann
Seen in English with French subtitles at the Gaumont Gran Ecran Cinema, 
Place d' Italia, Paris
Rating: (1 to 10) ... "off the scale"...  Rated "RV" for "required viewing"
     Since causing a seven-minute standing ovation at its world
premiere in Cannes this year, Jane Campion's film has sent waves of
anticipation across the Atlantic for its impending opening in North
America.  Upon seeing it, you may wonder if seven minutes was enough
recognition for this brilliant film!  Campion (ANGEL AT MY TABLE,
SWEETIE) earned her Palm d' Or award (the first ever for a woman
director) for this brilliant, timeless film.  THE PIANO is destined to
join the pantheon of classics inhabited by CHILDREN OF THE PARADISE,
SHOP ON MAIN STREET, THE HEIRESS, and CITIZEN KANE.  Its simple
dignity and heart stopping beauty will literally take your breath
away.
     Campion's deft direction and brilliantly original screenplay have
drawn stunning performances from the unlikely cast of Holly Hunter, Sam
Neill and Harvey Keitel.  (After RESERVOIR DOGS and THE BAD LIEUTENANT,
the last place you'd expect to see Keitel is in a reverently hushed Art
House....)  The three leads form a love triangle, centered around a
mute woman, (whose unbreakable will transforms all of the
participants).  Campion exercises remarkable skill in keeping the
amazing performances subdued enough to not overpower the beautifully
tender story-line.
     Holly Hunter's heart-stopping, speechless performance demands
multiple viewings, and could well become a text for film students.
Actress and director had every opportunity to go too far in making this
a mawkish, sentimental "shoe-in" for the Oscars.  Their restraint and
subtly lets the brilliance of Hunter's performance creep up on you,
and allows you the freedom to  "take in" the rest of the film.  You
will not recognize Hunter as the "perky" gamin from BROADCAST NEWS or
MISS FIRECRACKER.  Her wan face transmits "messages" and subtexts
more effectively than any performance I've seen since the advent of
sound in films.  Unlike those of silent films, Campion's characters are
richly drawn, complex, and may leave you vacillating in your sympathy
with all of the characters.
     Though a startlingly original film, THE PIANO has a lot in
common with the best of great Silent cniema.  It has a simple premise,
a plot that maintains the clarity of a biblical parable, and wonderful
use of symbols and counterpoints ... a woman "without a voice" in a
man's world ... a piano left out in the rain ... a small child running
through the mud with angel wings ... a church pageant about Bluebeard's
wives ... the "fore-shadowing" of a limb being amputated....  The film
leaves many stunning images indelibly engraved in your memory (I saw
the film five nights ago, and it's still with me.)
     Lee Swarth's incredibly clear soundtrack captures the emotion
contained in each piano note, the incessant buzz of flies, the constant
sound of mud and rain.  (Michael Nyman is responsible for the
compelling score.)  The cinematography (didn't catch name off the
titles) is an equal match for the magnificence of story and
performance.  New Zealand literally looks like the ends of the earth
though this telling camera; often the interior scenes resemble lovingly
hand-tinted photos from the last century.
     On the surface, it would be tempting to label this a "woman's
film," this time about a wronged mail-order bride from the last
century, who has to endure the indignities of her husband's "property
rights."  Campion's screenplay, however, defines Ada (Hunter) as a
complete and complex woman, whose "will" at times attracts or repulses
you.  The men are no less fully drawn than Hunter's character.  The
performances so pull you into the present moment that you won't be able
to anticipate the film's ending.
     We only hear Hunter's voice  briefly, at the beginning of the
film, as "the voice in my mind."  (She's been mute since she was 6,
cause unknown).  Hunter's forbidding demeanor is counterpointed by her
free-spirited child-daughter (a phenomenal performance by Anna
Paquin).  At times, mother and daughter seem like aspects of the same
person, the daughter almost "the inner child" exposed to the outside
world.  They share a secret language, which supplements Hunter's
frequent need to spell out her needs with a pad and pencil.
     Hunter's character needs little interpretation for those drawn
into her orbit.  Her face tells all.  Hunter's piano is her "voice,"
which she plays with a soul-shattering touch.  (Throughout the film I
was marveling over how convincing Hunter was on the keyboard, wondering
who was "really" playing it, and deciding to buy the soundtrack--the
credits shocked me with the line "piano solos played by Holly
Hunter"--her amazing range of talents doesn't stop with acting!)
Hunter, a mute, unwed mother, is married off, sight unseen, to a
recluse in New Zealand (Sam Neill).  Hunter, daughter, and piano are
unceremoniously dumped off on a blustery, remote beach, where her
husband-to-be has missed his appointed meeting.  One of the most
unforgettable images is of mother and daughter spending their first
night ashore beneath her hoop skirt, which makes an impromptu
"igloo."  Neil hadn't planned on transporting a piano, so it is left
on the beach "to be picked up later."  Later, the look on Hunter's face
through a rain streaked window (echoing her unspeakable horror over the
piano warping on the beach) ranks with Lillian Gish's visage through
the sand-covered window in THE WIND.  (In the Paris theatre where I
saw THE PIANO, I could hear several members of a sophisticated-looking
audience suck in their breath at that point ... by the end of the film I
was very used to that sound.)
     Without consulting his new wife, Neil decides to swap the piano
(including "lessons") to back-woodsman Harvey Keitel for a few acres
of land.  Keitel suggested the deal, having had a catharsis of sorts
while watching Hunter play the piano, still boxed, on the beach.
Hunter is eventually drawn into a labrynth of negotiations and
deceptions to maintain access to her "voice."  Keitel is gradually
transformed by his "lessons," and by the film's end, you've released
every prejudice or preconceived notion you had about his character.
     The three leads are wonderfully backlight by a rich supporting
cast, (an ingredient entirely missing from big budget "star
vehicles").  THE PIANO is the type of film Hollywood seems to have
forgotten how to make.  It has every ingredient destined to make it a
classic as enduring as THE MAGNIFICENT AMBERSONS, (another film made
without Hollywood's support.)
     A seven-minute standing ovation at Cannes?  Not half long enough,
in my book, for a woman from the other side of the world who's taught
us to dream again, and who has delivered the promise that enduring film
classics can and will be made in our lifetime.

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1993, R, 121 minutes [2 hours, 1 minute]
[drama]
starring: Holly Hunter (Ada), Harvey Kietel (Baines), Sam Neill (Stewart),
Anna Paquin (Flora), produced by Jan Chapman, written and directed by Jane
Campion.
"The Piano" is a good movie but not a great movie. Taking into consideration
the elements that make up this film, it's not much more than a Victorian soap
opera, full of passion, seduction, sex, and violence. It's interesting and
well acted, but the elements that make it up and push it along aren't
anything special.
The setting is 18th Century New Zealand with Holly Hunter starring as Ada, a
pale but beautiful widow who has been arranged to marry someone she has never
seen in a country she has never been to. She also brings along her daughter
Flora (Paquin), who provides for some of the film's best moments.
Ada cannot talk, she speaks through sign language and by playing her piano.
But Stewart (Neill), her new husband, won't let her bring it into the house.
The piano is the major plot element and metaphor for just about everyone and
everything in this film. It shows how music reflects and defines mood and
attitude. When Ada is happy she plays a flowing, beautiful song, and when she
is angry she slams the keys and hits the deep notes.
Stewart is a shy and withdrawn man, he is not cruel, but he just doesn't
know how to handle the situation. His co-worker Baines (Keitel) is the
typical brute with a heart of gold, he can't read but he does understand what
art and beauty are. When he hears Ada's piano he adores the music and buys it
from Stewart and agrees to sell it back to Ada one key at a time if she
teaches him how to play. 
As Ada tries to play for Baines, he keeps making sexual demands. This
element is definitely erotic because of what it doesn't show, as it is an era
when woman wore layers of clothes - just getting one layer off would excite a
man. This is the kind of passion we don't usually get to see, and Campion
films with careful craftsmanship and detail.
The way that Hunter portrays this character, it doesn't seem like Ada likes
Baines. She is just using him to get her piano back, so they're both being
shallow. But when she does get it back, she throws herself at him and they
make love. I was totally confused, it seemed like she hated him, now she
loves him? 
Then the story becomes a glamorous soap opera as Stewart finds out about Ada
and Baines and spies on them. He chops off one of Ada's fingers and sends it
to Baines via Flora. The ending is predictable and not very appealing.
Overall, "The Piano" was somewhat enjoyable, very well acted, but much too
eloquent in its attitude.

Author
Long Che Chan
The Piano
Directed by Jane Campion
Starring Holly Hunter, Harvey Keitel, Sam Neill, Anna Paquin
Australia, 1993
Rated R (strong sexual content, intense images, adult themes)
A+
Jane Campion wrote and directed The Piano, one of the most eloquent
films about the closeness of passion and repression I've ever seen.
Yes, she is a woman but, unlike what many people have said, The Piano is
not a feminist film and isn't about women.  It is, firstly, about lust,
then restriction, and, finally but least importantly, about love.  It is
a masterpiece saturated in evocative images and a film that succeeds,
perhaps, because a woman is behind the scenes.  Campion creates an
otherworldly place in the forests of New Zealand and she understands the
emotional power of eroticism.  She doesn't go for what many so-called
feminist films employ: she doesn't victimize any of her characters or
make any of them criminals, either, which is a great asset to a film
that portrays the complexity of the situations we get into because of
passion.
A nineteenth century woman named Ada (Holly Hunter) brings her daughter,
Flora (Anna Paquin), to New Zealand.  Ada is mute, presumably by choice,
and is arranged to wed Stewart (Sam Neill), a British man she has never
met.  When she arrives in New Zealand, her husband refuses to take her
beloved piano, her only source of expression, back to his house.  He
says it is too heavy.  Flora, Ada's illegitimate daughter, is a very
vocal child and helps her mother demand the piano be brought back to the
house.  Stewart does not realize the piano, over Ada's mute years, has
become synonymous to her heart and soul.  Without it, she has no means
of speaking in the language of emotion and is completely miserable and
soulless.
There is an uneasiness between Ada and Stewart already.  Baines (Harvey
Keitel), a British immigrant who has abandoned his native land's customs
in favor of Maori attitudes of freedom, offers Stewart a good amount of
land for the piano after he takes Ada to the beach and hears her play.
Some of cinematographer Stuart Dryburgh's most beautiful images here are
those of Ada with her piano on a deserted expanse of the beach.  Baines
is struck by Ada's frightening intimacy with her piano and becomes
attracted to her.  Ada refuses to give her piano, her soul, to this man,
an illiterate.  Stewart becomes angry and tells her she must make
sacrifices for her family.
The piano, which is explored in great, stunning detail by Dryburgh's
camera, is sold to Baines in exchange for the land.  He requests lessons
from Ada but when she consents, he will not play.  Instead, he offers
her her piano in exchange for his sexual gratification.  She will "earn"
her piano back key by key if she lifts her dress and lies with him.  At
first, she refuses.  She finally accepts the offer; I'm not sure whether
if it was in a state of longing for her piano or a state of longing for
sex.  She is not a slut; what she feels is a primal human feeling.  It's
too easy to say she simply falls in love with Baines.  In the end, she
does have a deep love for him but she attains it gradually: first she
lies with him for her piano; soon, it is simply for her desire; later,
it becomes an entanglement of love and sex, maybe even of rebellion.
Stewart is portrayed as a cold man at first and Baines, an obsessed
man.  The Piano makes them deeper.  This is a thick film and we
sympathize with Stewart who cannot win Ada's love or sexual attention,
and we are allowed to witness the unexpected tenderness of Baines.  He
is truly a romantic, though he initially seeks romance with Ada through
obsessive sexual requests that border on blackmail.  Flora is
mischievous and her decisions are strange.  She is outspoken and tattles
on her mother and Baines, which leads to the most shattering sequence in
the entire film.
Shot very dramatically, this sequence has Stewart, who trusted Ada to
stay away from Baines, chopping off her finger with an ax.  We,
thankfully, don't see the actual violent act but, even more painful, we
see Ada's face turning blue and her absolute horror.
In the climactic scene, Baines, Ada, and Flora sail away from New
Zealand and away from Stewart to live together.  Ada demands her
"spoiled" piano be thrown overboard and, in a suicidal attempt, gets her
foot caught in the rope.  In a scene as haunting as the one previously
mentioned, Ada is tugged to the bottom of the ocean.  For several
moments, she simply waits to die.  Suddenly, she realizes what she has
done and wishes to live.  When she finally makes her way to the surface,
she has been mysteriously redeemed.  Her soul (her piano) lies
disintegrating at the bottom of the sea and she no longer is repressed.
Her piano-playing need not be her only source of expression and pleasure
anymore: she has discovered life, love, and passion.
Perhaps I have made The Piano seem sentimental and gooey.  It is moody,
definitely, but it is not melodramatically romantic.  It is romantic,
yes, and it sees love and passion as salvation, but it also sees love
and lust as clawing.  The Piano is about bondage and this is highlighted
by everything from the women's tight corsets to the inner struggle
within the characters.  By Jane Campion's screenplay not giving the
outlet of language to Ada, Holly Hunter is repressed somewhat.  In one
of the best performances I've seen this decade, or of any decade for
that matter, Hunter says everything with her face, body, and fingers.
One critic suggested that people are imagining Hunter's physical
expressions, however, Ada becomes real, despite the character's
enigmatic aura.
Hunter, though she gives the film's stand-out performance, is not the
only gifted actor in The Piano.  Let's not forget Harvey Keitel and Sam
Neill, men who are bound: Keitel's character by sexual and romantic
obsession; Neill's by jealousy and sexual inadequacy.  And Anna Paquin
is strange and precocious as Ada's daughter who must stand up for her
mother but is repressed by her humorous knack for telling tall-tales and
her desire to lie and tell her mother's secrets.
Stuart Dryburgh, using the photographic technique known as Autochrome,
supplies a great deal of overwhelming intensity, mysticism, and
otherworldliness to The Piano.  There are moments when the film is warm
and glowing with red, and other times when it is cold and dark blue.
Dryburgh is even able to shoot the bizarre intimacy between Ada and her
piano, Ada and her daughter, and Ada and Baines.  There is a certain
beauty about Ada's fingers gently caressing and falling upon piano
keys.  The Piano is a fiercely erotic film and there are scenes between
Ada and Baines that are heated and detailed.  These scenes are really
graphic, the most graphic I've ever seen, but they are not gratuitous or
pornographic and Dryburgh lights and frames them without flaw.  His
photography catches every nuance of New Zealand and the faces of The
Piano's characters.
Jane Campion is one of the few greatly acclaimed and successful female
directors around (I refer not to women's directorial ability but to
their obscurity in the field; sadly, I remember only Lina Wertmuller as
another such successful and talented female director, but she worked
ages ago).  There is both a universality and complexity to The Piano and
it is one of those rare films that is multi-faceted, shaking, and
engaging.  Campion's point of view on the world is extremely fascinating
and is different from a male's perspective.  She is one of the greatest
directors, male or female, of the 90s decade and The Piano is one of
the most haunting and poetic films I've ever seen.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

PIANO, THE (director/writer: Jane Campion; cinematographer: Stuart
Dryburgh; cast: Holly Hunter (Ada), Harvey Keitel (Baines), Sam Neill
(Stewart), Anna Paquin (Flora), Genevičve Lemon (Nessie), Kerry Walker
(Aunt Morag), 1993-Australia)
The tune emanating from The Piano is a passionate one, coming forth on a
desolate New Zealand coastline, far removed from European culture, where
a piano is seen as something peculiar to possess in such a backward area
of the world. It is used symbolically to represent the works of
civilization that can soothe the savage beast, if the beast is lonely
and willing to listen to something he usually doesn't listen to.
The underlying premise of the film is one of communication or lack of it
in a world that can be cold, and of how easy it is to never find love in
such a world. The coastline is a place where the sky and sea are
dismally gray, and it rains all the time; where the native Maoris, with
their tattooed faces, and the white settlers of this nineteenth century
tale are living in a marshy forest, with the settlers trying to live by
the rules they were accustomed to in Europe, but are now faced with
muddy roads and squalid living conditions, making their life almost
unbearable; and to top that off, the two diverse groups seem unable to
see each other's point of view, as the Maoris mock the settlers under
their breath and the settlers treat the natives as if they were
children.
It is a place where the characters either can't talk (the bride), or
can't listen (the new husband), or are spiteful (the daughter), in a
film that unrelentingly studies the affects of erotic yearnings in a
restrictive society... And who can forget the powerful image it leaves
the viewer, of the piano left abandoned in its crate against the forlorn
backdrop of the rushing surf and the desolate beach!
Ada (Holly) is a young mute in her early thirties, for some inexplicable
reason, she has not been able to talk since she was 6 years old. Her
voiceover says, "This is not the sound of my voice you are hearing; it
is the sound of my mind."She is seen in the film's opening arriving in
New Zealand by boat and then being rowed by canoe ashore, coming all the
way from her native Scotland for an arranged mail-order marriage at her
father's insistence. She is accompanied by her 8 year old daughter Flora
(Paquin), as she awaits on the beach with all her possessions to meet
her unseen British emigrant husband Stewart (Neill), who is trying to
make a go of it by cultivating the land in this bush country.The only
two things she cares about in life are with her on the beach: her
daughter and her piano.
The contradiction of a deaf mute playing music, is underscored by the
tremendous joyous feeling that it exudes in Ada, as it is her only real
contact with the world, and the piano is something that this fiercely
proud woman cannot live without.
She is soon met by the anxious groom, seen trying to comb his unruly
hair, but who doesn't have the presence of mind to give the ladies a
kindly welcome, instead orders the Maoris accompanying him to start
bringing all the luggage with them except for the piano. He is not
listening to his new bride who writes him anxious notes and talks in a
hand sign language to her daughter who translates, as she urgently tells
him the piano is hers and she must keep it, even, above her other
worldly possessions. But her insensitive and demanding husband, who
actually wishes for a woman who is totally mute, one who does not even
play the piano, tells her the piano can't be taken with them on their
long trek to the house because it is too heavy for the Maori laborers to
carry, and he refuses to return for it at a later date. Also at the
beach, watching these precedings, is a coarse-looking white man gone
native, tattooing his face Maori style, saying nothing about what he
sees taking place. The name of this ex-whaler now laborer, is Baines
(Keitel).
The illiterate Baines is overtaken with joy, after hearing Ada play the
piano when she  returned to the beach. She is despondent about her
marriage and refuses to offer her shy husband any affection, and thusly
plays her heart out in the only way she knows how to communicate her
feelings. Baines, thereby, decides to make a deal with Stewart for the
piano, offering him some land for it, if he can also receive piano
lessons from his wife. When the lessons begin, he tells Ada that he
wants to receive sexual favors from her. He starts off slowly, by
lifting up her skirt when she plays, and will eventually take her into
his bedroom. In return, after a series of such sexual encounters, adding
up to the number of black keys there are, the piano will go back to her.
That makes the relationship that develops between the two seem
devilishly strange. These scenes are very powerful and surprisingly
enough come across as being sensual, even if, the proposal as put-forth,
at first, seemed to be an obvious power-play against a hapless victim.
But Campion knows how to draw out the passions from these scenes and
make this unlikely romance between these opposites bloom. It all seems
plausible because their physical wants are motivating them to act this
way toward each other. In the beginning, she pretends to be repulsed by
him, but eventually she warms up to him, in fact, she looks forward to
the lessons. She does all the playing while he listens, as the music
gives off the vibes she wants to communicate. All that he knows, is that
he just wants her physically, that he feels her inside his gut; and,
that he turns out to be a more sensitive person than at first thought
possible, is precisely what gives impetus to this Gothic romance.
Possibly the most complex character in the story, is the little girl,
who is shown to be cute as a button, a seemingly loyal companion of her
mother, an able liar, and a bit of a prude. But on the spur of the
moment, one day, she fails to follow her mother's orders to deliver a
message to Baines- someone her husband has now forbidden her to see- and
does something that turns out to be devastating, betraying her mother by
impishly delivering the message to Stewart instead of Baines, knowing
exactly what she is doing, but somewhat astonished, to her regret, about
what tragedy this brings about for her mother.
Michael Nyman's astonishing score, performed by Holly Hunter herself,
expresses the explosive mood of this extraordinary visionary film. A
film whose silence and music speaks for itself as an apt way of
communicating. The two men want Ada, even though each of them is not
really suited for her, as one represents a cold and frustrated civilized
society, while the other is able to express the feelings he has inside
himself without being uptight about it, just like the natives of the
culture he adopted are able to so easily do.
With Stewart, embroiled in jealousy, fighting off his loneliness and
repressions, unable to be a warm person and fulfill his marriage duties
properly, he is seen as a lost soul, out of his elements in a wild
country he can't even begin to fathom. He is stuck in the trap he built
for himself, struggling to work the land and tame his restless soul. Sam
Neill is stupendous as the lost soul wrestling with his passions. Harvey
Keitel, masking a NYC accent by talking in some kind of Maori pigeon
tongue, is ably cast as the brooding lover who turns out to have a
gentle soul, something this loner must have felt in his heart for a long
time but now emerges inside him and gives the film a certain kind of raw
power to it. Anna Paquin, in my opinion, is the best surprise in the
film, the one with the most difficult role, and the one with the biggest
part in the film. What makes it all the more amazing is that she is a
mere child, asked to play a part on equal footing with all the
accomplished actors she is surrounded by. Holly Hunter, with a gaunt
ash-striken face, is mesmorizing in a role that she emotionally is in
perfect harmony with. Her performance is the key one; it is the one that
propels the film to give it its needed air of desperation and to outline
the passionate struggle between just surviving and living for love. She
is strangely rejuvenated by the naturalism and lack of inhibitions found
in this backward place and the passion she feels from Baines, as it
seeps into her repressed soul and transforms her.
The film is brought slowly together by Jane Campion's masterful
direction, whose understanding of the erotic desires of the characters
is right on the mark, with the result being an original and haunting
film, a story that grew more intensively disturbing for me the longer I
thought about it. Stuart Dryburgh's camera captures the internal mood of
the characters, as well as the monotonous beauty and the oppressive
reality of the countryside. But the film misses the mark, at times, as
the two main characters, Stewart and Baines, despite their fine
performances, are nevertheless too one-dimensional to give the film more
of an impact. It seems as if this is Ada's story to tell and no one
else's. This is a film, nevertheless, that will justifiably garner great
interest because of her very trying performance.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Saw THE PIANO (***) on Friday night.  If you thought how wonderful
it would be living in New Zealand a hundred years ago, this movie will
disabuse you of that notion.  This is a dark and depressing show about
the evils of life.  Depressing shows can be quite rewarding as this
film proves.
    Holly Hunter without her Southern or any accent (she does not talk)
nevertheless gives an award winning performance.  She is one of my
favorite actresses.  Her best for me will always be BROADCAST NEWS.
     Sam Neill is very good as a husband with an IQ about equal to his
age.  He was mean yet somehow you managed to feel sorry for him at
times because he just did not seem to have the brains to know better.
Harvey Keitel was excellent as the, well, as the boy friend I guess you
might say.
     I wish they had ended the show in a slightly different way a few
minutes before it actually ended.  If you see the show, you will know
where I mean.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Do not trust me on this one.  I am not someone who gets a whole lot out
of stories of people who do strange illogical things in the heat of passion.
I tend to find these tales comic at just the moment that they are trying to
be the most serious.  I have this nasty tendency to chuckle at
D. H. Lawrence stories.  But for me, THE PIANO was an incredibly overwrought
and pretentious melodrama.  When I should have been shuddering I found
myself chortling.  The critics who are liking this film so much clearly are
better able to appreciate this sort of story.
     Holly Hunter plays Ada, a woman who has chosen at an early age to
remain mute for reasons that even she does not understand.  Already we can
see that Ada gets caught up in situations where she does not understand her
own behavior and motives.  Rather than a voice she has come to express
herself through music on her piano and through sign language.  As the story
opens, some time in the 19th Century, she has a daughter of about eight (Ana
Paquin) and her father has arranged a marriage between her and a New Zealand
settler Stewart (Sam Neill).  On her arrival in New Zealand her husband
decides that her piano is wrong for life in New Zealand.  For practical
reasons, though also insensitively, he abandons it on the beach.  But
without a care for the wishes of his new wife he does not go back for the
piano even when he has a chance.  Ada goes to a crude neighbor, George
Baines (Harvey Keitel) to ask him to rescue the instrument.  That he does
but convinces Stewart to trade to him the piano for a piece of land.
Stewart agrees without even consulting Ada.  He knows how much the piano
means to her, but after all he is a man and so is insensitive to the wishes
of the wife whose affection he is trying to win.
     Baines is extremely lonely and he finds seeing and hearing Ada play
extremely erotic.  He first works a deal for Ada to teach him to play the
piano as part of the land agreement.  But as a side arrangement he tells Ada
she can buy back the piano, a black key at a time if she will give him
little sexual favors while she plays.  This arrangement sets into motion a
melodrama of sex and violence worthy of a drive-in triple feature of
exploitation films.  Perhaps writer/director Jane Campion has made this film
with a modicum more polish, but the material is no less trashy than if the
story were set on an Arkansas sawmill.
     Keitel, Hunter, and Neill are all good actors but of them only Keitel
manages to rise above the material and invest his character with real
humanity.  At his worst Baines is never far from being a sympathetic
character.  It is a bit too easy to feel sorry for poor Ada as the powerless
victim.  But still her character is top-heavy with too many weird facets for
even Hunter to make believable.  (Are there genuinely people who not only
sleepwalk but sleep-piano-play?)  Ada brings about the climax of the story
of her and Stewart in an enigmatic act of piano mutilation that was
disastrously unsuccessful, but which would have been no less a fiasco had it
gone as she planned.  Somebody would have noticed the effect on the piano
soon.  In addition the act seemed to involve a note to someone whom she
already knew was illiterate.
     At least the film is well-photographed, showing both positive and
negative aspects of life among the Maori of New Zealand in the last century.
That adds what watchable elements the film has.  But I cannot help feeling
that in years to come, once we are past the initial rush of political
sympathy, this film is going to be considered an embarrassment in just the
same way BILLY JACK has been.  I give this film a -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
For me, this is the most over-rated film of the year.  Sorry, I fully expect
that there will be many who disagree, but Harvey Keitel and the Emperor are
dressed just alike.

Author
Gareth Rees
     Time: sometime in the nineteenth century.  Holly Hunter plays Ada,
a beautiful and talented pianist.  She has a mighty will and, it seems,
has refused to speak since childhood.  Probably on account of her
having an illegitimate daughter (Flora, played by Anna Paquin) she is
still unmarried, until her father finds Stewart (Sam Neill), a
landowner in New Zealand, who is willing to marry her (English women
being scarce in that colony).
     The film opens with Ada's "inner voice" (we don't hear her speak
out loud during the film) narrating the above and then we cut to a
lonely New Zealand shore with men struggling through the surf to unload
Ada, her possessions, and her beloved piano (Ada's only means of
expressing herself).  Stewart comes to collect her, but does not
realise how important the piano is to Ada, and she is unable to tell
him.  It is left, half-uncrated, on the beach.
     Ada has trouble coping with the damp and the mud of the
settlement where Stewart lives.  She demands her piano and sulks when
she is told that she is not in Scotland anymore and that there are more
important things than music.
     Another landowner, Baines (Harvey Keitel) sees Ada and is smitten
by her.  Knowning how important the piano is to her, he fetches it from
the beach and offers it to her in return (at first) for letting him
watch her play, and (later) for sexual favours.  Improbably, she falls
in love with him, and inevitable tragedy follows.
     Director Jane Campion has said of the film (I'm quoting from
memory): "These people don't have twentieth century sensibilities about
sex; they aren't prepared for its raw power".  Certainly the behaviour
of the characters is strange from a modern perspective--Baines' lust
for Ada is easy to understand, but why Ada's for him?  I think the film
may be rooted in Nineteenth Century Romantic sensibilities more than
Campion would care to admit--Ada and Baines are supposed, I think, to
be fey and wayward people (Ada talks about being ruled by a powerful
Will and her music is completely alien to the characters in the film
other than Baines; Baines seems to have attempted to go native;
certainly he wears Maori tattooing) thrown together by an exotic and
dreamlike setting.
     In the light of this, the ending in which they find comfortable
domesticity is completely unconvincing--the briefly considered tragic
alternative ending in which she kills herself is the much more
emotionally convincing of the two.  I guess it isn't what audiences
want to see these days.
     The best part of the film, for me, was the music--Michael Nyman's
hypnotic, romantic, slightly naive piano melodies have to carry much of
the responsibility for conveying Ada's character, but I think he
succeeds magnificently.

Author
Jon A Webb
     THE PIANO is one of perhaps two films I've seen lately (the other
being THE SECRET GARDEN) which are really original, and which show
something deep and interesting about human nature.
     THE PIANO has Holly Hunter as an unmarried Scottish mother who is
married by contract to a New Zealand settler, played by Sam Neill.
Hunter is mute, and achieves self-expression through her piano, which
she takes on the voyage.
     Hunter is incredibly strong-willed; even she cannot understand
where her will comes from.  She is tamed, gradually, by Harvey Keitel,
a wild man associate of Neill's who has adopted some of the Maori
ways.
     It is the romance of Hunter and Keitel that forms the basis of the
film, and also serves as the rock on which the film's sexual commentary
stands.  This movie is mainly about sex, in the sense that it is sex
that stands between men and women, and draws them together, and sex
that divides us as individuals, and draws us together.
     This is the only film I can remember seeing which has sexual
relations as a main theme, and which is not also boring (e.g., HENRY
AND JUNE, THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING.)
     All of the acting in the movie is good, including the little girl
who plays Hunter's daughter, but Holly Hunter's performance is one of
the most remarkable I have ever seen.  She never says a word, except in
voiceovers, and yet she manages to convey a character as clearly as any
actress has.  She is really remarkable.  She should certainly be
nominated for an Academy Award on the basis of this performance.
     Susan Campion's direction is also excellent.  Watching these
people, one is struck over and over with recognition of similar events
in one's own life.  Campion keeps any one of these characters from
being stereotyped (I especially appreciated this with Neill's
character, who could easily have been cast as a greedy, insensitive
lout).
     The screenplay is filled with remarkable images.  For example, the
hoop skirt tent, Hunter being carried in through the surf, the wedding
photograph, Neill's ambiguous viewing of Keitel and Hunter.

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
Starring Holly Hunter, Sam Neill, Harvey Keitel, and Anna Paquin
Written and Directed by Jane Campion
     I wanted to wait until after the Oscars to review this film, and I
am glad that I did.  I distinguish between the labels film and movie
here with great caution, as this "piece" or "text," if you will, was a
film, and *not* a movie.  JURASSIC PARK was a movie; THE PIANO is a
film.
     Allow me to digress so that I may describe what I believe a film
to be and a movie to be (before I get any flames from die-hard JURASSIC
fans).  A movie is what I would consider to be pure entertainment with
little or no artistic content (a la DIE HARD I & II, BACKDRAFT, E. T.,
etc.).  A film is an artistic venture with little or no entertainment
content (a la 8-1/2, L'ATALANTE, PERSONA, etc.).  These are the two
extremes, and as always with film in general, there are gray areas.
THE PIANO is what I would consider to be, without a doubt, an attempt
to make a film, and not a movie.
     Now that that's out of the way, on with the review.  I mentioned
that THE PIANO was an attempt to make a film, and not necessarily a
film in itself.  These may be just semantics, but I truly believe this
film to be an attempt, and nothing more.  THE PIANO is a very
image-oriented film, filled with symbolism but lacking in overt
substance.  I found this movie to be a very good-looking movie, but
found little else in the story or the characters.  I found myself
influenced by AN ANGEL AT MY TABLE, a previous Jane Campion film,
which, while not making me do cartwheels, was an altogether good film.
THE PIANO made me feel like I was being pulled this way and that.  I
felt like Campion was saying all throughout the writing and making of
this film "Let's try this" or "This might be good."  It felt haphazard
to me, in that the story didn't seem to go anywhere.
     It had a beginning, middle, and end.  A first, second, and third
act.  It had a setup, a number of confrontations, and a resolution.
Everything a typical Hollywood screenplay would require.  But what was
the point?  The cinematography was breathtaking, the acting was
satisfactory, and the images were highly symbolic.  But why?  Most
artistic films don't follow the established "norm" of the Hollywood
screenplay, mostly because artistic films usually don't have much of a
script.  This is not to belittle art films.  On the contrary, this
absence of established norms is what provides for the freedom of
expression and individuality; the means by which to make us think in a
different perspective.  THE PIANO gave me little to think about.  Why
did a film like this, which leans so heavily towards the artistic side
of the medium, choose such a common Hollywood cliche format in which
to tell its story?
     AN ANGEL AT MY TABLE had no big-name Hollywood stars in it, yet
carried itself very well.  THE PIANO has some relatively strong
Hollywood heavyweights (Harvey Keitel and Holly Hunter).  Why the
change?  I personally got nothing from Holly Hunter's performance.  I
thought she was good, but not deserving of an Oscar.  Anna Paquin was
very cute, but I didn't think she should have gotten the Oscar either
(based on merit; I liked that she got to upstage all the other
actresses).  Harvey Keitel, again, plays a weird individual (the only
really ordinary part I have seen him play was in THELMA & LOUISE), and,
as always, pulls it off convincingly.  Sam Neill is the only
"foreigner" in this group (to Hollywood, that is, barring Anna Paquin),
and was satisfactory at best.  But I hate to speak of such good actors
in this way, because I don't believe they were given really challenging
parts to play.  One may argue with me on this point, citing a "brave
performance" by Holly Hunter, but I believe Campion made a grave
mistake in creating this character:  she let us into her head.  We had
a piece of her real character with us throughout the rest of the
picture.  No amount of acting on any actress's part (including
Hunter's) would convince me that I am learning anything new about this
person through her sign language; I know she can speak; she doesn't
have to use it.  I know her real character; everything else becomes a
facade.  I would have liked it if she expressed herself through facial
or more subtle physical expressions (when she is injured [no spoiler
attempt intended], the only way I know that she is in great pain is
through Anna Paquin and through Harvey Keitel, and through other
unmentionable things (if I'm not to spoil the film); Hunter showed me
nothing, which led me to think that anyone could have played that
part).  I believe I can recognize good use of subtlety to make a point,
a la HOWARD'S END, but even that fine film made me wonder what the
point of all this was.
     Symbolism abounds in this film, which threw me from the telling of
the story.  Then the story kicked in, which threw me from the
appreciation of the images.  Torn between two places.  What exactly was
going on here?  Images of death and rebirth in this film are well-known
to the artistically inclined; maybe they were "neato" things to the
Academy and they awarded THE PIANO its share of Oscars based on that.
Unfortunately, the Academy always awards based on politics, popularity,
and career longevity.  Never, if ever, on merit.  Anna Paquin is cute,
Holly Hunter was due again, and everybody in the Academy seemed to be
taken aback by the screenplay to THE PIANO.  These are the only reasons
I can think of to award Oscars to the categories they did.  If they
awarded on pure merit, I think the Academy would have been confused
with this film.  I unfortunately did not have the opportunity to know
the artist's intentions beforehand (it's usually easier to review a
film based on the intentions of its creator), so all I can do is raise
questions.  "What was the point" is not meant as a harsh indictment of
THE PIANO; it is simply a question.  Even artistic films have a point!

Author
James Berardinelli
     THE PIANO is a film about passion, the most basic and primal
element of human nature.  No matter how thick the veneer of
civilization is, or how deeply-buried beneath layers of social
repression those latent emotions are, passion ultimately cannot be
denied.  This is something that the three principals of this movie
learn in various, not-always-pleasant, ways.
     In the mid-1800s, Ada (Holly Hunter) arrives on the stormy shores
of New Zeland, a mute bride sold by her father to a British emigrant
named Stewart (Sam Neill).  In addition to a normal assortment of
baggage, Ada brings with her eight-year old Flora (Anna Paquin), her
illegitimate daughter, and a piano.  Initially, Stewart declares that
the piano is too bulky to move from the beach, and resists bringing it
to his house despite Ada's wordless pleadings.  Next, he sells it to
fellow Englishman Baines (Harvey Keitel), a man who has embraced the
local Maori ways.  In addition to the piano, Baines wants a reluctant
Ada as his teacher.  When he offers her a deal to get the instrument
back, she is unprepared for the price she must ultimately pay.
     THE PIANO has powerful emotional themes resonating through it, all
dealing with the release of repressed passion.  Baines, who has
embraced the native Maori methods of living, no longer clings to the
values of British society, and is therefore quite capable of expressing
himself freely--which he does, albeit in some strange ways.  Stewart,
however, views the Maori with suspicion and hostility and, in clinging
to the tenants of English society, refuses to allow himself to feel
until one violent moment when everything comes pouring out.  Ada,
hampered as much by her lack of voice as by social pressures, is
yearning to break free, and only through Baines does she find the
courage to do so.
     Jane Campion's story is often stirring and occasionally
gut-wrenching; the latter perhaps to a fault.  There is a single
visceral scene in this movie which becomes the most stark and enduring
image taken from the theater.  While definitely an expression of
passion, this is perhaps not intended as the single defining moment of
THE PIANO, although it may be remembered as such.
     Symbolism abounds, and most of it is clear enough for even the
casual viewer to grasp.  Ada's piano is obviously more than a source of
music - it is her voice; her only means of expressing herself.  The
Maori society is representative of released inhibitions.  Stewart's
rejection of this, like Baines' acceptance, defines the basis of who he
is.  The final scenes of THE PIANO abound with symbols, the recognition
of which will help in understanding all the facets of the ending.
     The three main actors give dazzling performances.  Everything
previously written about Holly Hunter is true.  To be able to convey
this much energy and emotion without ever speaking a word (except in a
pair of short voiceovers) requires someone of astonishing talent and
ability.  Hunter's Ada is every bit as powerful a presentation as
Anthony Hopkins' Stevens in THE REMAINS OF THE DAY.
     Harvey Keitel is as good, although the complexities of his
character don't allow for quite as obvious a standout performance.  Sam
Neill has the most incomplete material to work from, but he does all he
can with Stewart.
     Like their adult counterparts, child actors come with varying
ranges of ability.  Anna Paquin is one of those who shows capabilities
far beyond her years.  While not in the category of a Valentina Scalici
(from IL LADRO DI BAMBINI, and who I have stated is the best child
performer I have ever seen), Ms. Paquin is ultimately believable in her
role, and a great asset to the film.  She compliments the main trio
effectively.
     As good as Ms. Campion's basic story is, both characterization and
technical presentation are lacking.  Taken in tandem, these flaws
prevent THE PIANO from attaining its full potential.
     While Ada is as fully-rounded as she can be, the others all have
elements missing from their personalities.  Stewart never attains
three-dimensionality, despite Sam Neill's best attempts, and Baines is
occasionally little more than a sounding board for Ada's emotions to
reverberate off of.  Flora's personality undergoes a radical shift
that, at best, is only partially-motivated by what we see on screen.
     The editing of THE PIANO is choppy, at times causing the narrative
to seem disjointed or confusing.  More than one transition is jarringly
abrupt.  There were several instances when my connection with the film
was broken because of this.
     It's odd that, with a name like THE PIANO, one of the weaknesses
is the score.  There are instances when Michael Nyman's themes are
inappropriate for the scenes where they are used, and it has been
pointed out to me that the New Age strains coming from Ada's instrument
have no place during the time period in which THE PIANO is supposed to
have taken place.
     THE PIANO is a good film with a potent message and occasional
splashes of genius, but it is not remarkable experience, except perhaps
where Holly Hunter's performance is concerned.  While it's true that
individuals will attribute different importance to the various flaws,
there exists the distinct possibility that those going to see THE PIANO
with the expectation of watching the best movie of the year, will leave
the theater disappointed.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Holly Hunter, Harvey Keitel, Sam Neill, Anna Paquin.
Screenplay/Director:  Jane Campion.
     A couple of months ago, I finally saw Jane Campion's 1991 film AN
ANGEL AT MY TABLE.  I mention this only because I experienced a very
similar reaction to THE PIANO as I did to that film.  While I was not
instantly caught up in the story, its impact grew slowly, and in fact
it was not until a couple of days later that I realized what a powerful
work I had experienced.  THE PIANO is a bit less consistent than AN
ANGEL AT MY TABLE, but it is nevertheless an astonishingly literate
work, and a further step in the development of a major filmmaker.
     Set in 19th Century New Zealand, THE PIANO tells the story of Ada,
a Scotswoman who hasn't spoken since she was six years old.  At the
insistence of her father, Ada becomes a mail-order bride for Stewart, a
stolid settler among New Zealand's native Maori.  Ada brings with her a
young daughter, Flora (Anna Paquin), and her most prized possession, a
piano.  However, when Stewart arrives at the beach where Ada and her
belongings have been deposited, he orders the piano left behind.  It
comes into the possession of George Baines (Harvey Keitel), a rough and
illiterate laborer.  He offers Ada the chance to win back her piano in
exchange for some very specialized lessons, lessons which will lead to
a strange and dangerous romantic triangle.
     THE PIANO is so rich and multi-layered that it virtually defies
immediate reaction.  At its heart is a story of socially repressed
desires which calls to mind THE AGE OF INNOCENCE and THE REMAINS OF THE
DAY, but this film strengthens that theme by thrusting its characters
into an untamed setting.  In Ada, we are presented with a character
whose muteness represents the restrictions placed on her expression as
a woman, and who can only truly speak through her music.  It is only
when she finds herself in the less constrained world of the New Zealand
wilderness, and encounters a man who identifies with the more
naturalistic beliefs of the Maori, that she is able to rediscover some
semblance of her own voice.  THE PIANO is filled with images of culture
in conflict: Stewart perplexed by his inability to purchase sacred
Maori land for what he considers a fair price; a comical
misunderstanding during a melodramatic play; Stewart's outrage at Flora
joining Maori children in sexually suggestive behavior.  This conflict
lends added texture to Stewart's attempt to lock Ada into their house,
and the perplexed reaction of his housemaids.  Stewart is not trying to
keep the Maori out, but trying to prevent Ada from embracing their
world.
     As intricate as the script is, it is the intensity of the lead
performances which gives THE PIANO most of its power.  Holly Hunter has
been trumpeted since Cannes as an Oscar front-runner, and it's easy to
see why.  It's impossible to describe how expressive she manages to be,
in her face and with her body.  The literally breath-taking effect of
THE PIANO's climactic scene is exponentially multiplied by Hunter's
slow, lingering reaction.  Baines' role is less fully explained, a bit
too typological, but Keitel shows a surprising gentleness.  I may have
been most impressed by Sam Neill, freed from the straitjacket of
JURASSIC PARK to do some splendid acting.  His tormented personality is
riveting, and the scenes where he is driven to action ripple with
sublimated and misdirected passion.
     THE PIANO's only real stumble is the decision to begin and end the
film with a voiceover narration of Ada's thoughts.  Hunter's attempt at
a Scotch accent is shaky, and it detracts somehow from the experience
to be allowed inside Ada's head.  Otherwise, Campion crafts a stunning
film.  Stuart Dryburgh's dynamic cinematography helps capture the power
of coastline and forest, and Campion's voyeuristic camera placement is
thrilling.  It's no longer sufficient or appropriate to refer to Jane
Campion as one of the best woman director's working; she is simply one
of the best directors, and THE PIANO is one of the most haunting films
of the year.
