Title
Review for Showgirls (1995)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Jeffrey Haber
     "Showgirls" is the first big-budget, big-studio film to receive an
NC-17 rating.  And its release last year came at a time when Senator 
Bob Dole and other politicans chastised the entertainment industry for
promoting sex and violence.  But if "Showgirls" is any indication of
Hollywood's future, the folks in Washington should focus their attack
on a more dangerous threat to American values--bad moviemaking.
     "Showgirls" is a relentlessly exploitive look at the Las Vegas strip
scene, and the film turns out to be just as trashy as its subject matter.
Director Paul Verhoeven and writer Joe Eszterhas, who collaborated on 
another shock-value project, 1992's "Basic Instinct," follow the plight
of a young woman (teen TV star Elizabeth Berkley) determined to make a 
name for herself as a topless dancer.  It's a hackneyed premise to begin
with, so not surprisingly, all of the stock characters are trucked out.
There's the Demanding Producer.  The Loyal Friend.  The Bitchy Competitor.
Lest I forget the Scummy Club Owner.
     Of course, any attempt at character development or a coherent storyline
is just window dressing for the film's main attraction--an endless parade
of full-frontal nudity.  Unfortunately, "Showgirls" doesn't satisfy in this
department.  Verhoeven's slam-bang, in-your-face style of direction proves
neither arousing nor erotic.  To make matters worse, you'll be forced to 
sit through the movie's clothed scenes, which don't cover up for laughable
acting and some of the most absurd dialogue ever spoken in film history.
     Verhoeven and Ezsterhas deserve credit for trying to break ground, but
if it's adult entertainment you want, stay home and watch the Playboy Channel.
You'll be the wiser for it.

Author
Christopher Null
     What is Joe Eszterhas going to do *now?*  First came FLASHDANCE.
Then he shocked us with BASIC INSTINCT.  Now he writes SHOWGIRLS, an
ultra-explicit NC-17 drama about a Las Vegas showgirl who goes from
nobody to "Goddess" by playing the Power Game better than everyone
else.
     No longer the innocent wallflower from "Saved By the Bell,"
Elizabeth Berkley has been transformed (by an excellent plastic
surgeon) into Nomi Malone, a sexy vamp who is nothing but trouble.
This role is going to haunt Berkley for the rest of her life, if not
longer, largely due to the fact that she is pretty much naked in every
scene.  We're talking "Totally Nude," no holds barred.  And not just
Berkley, there's a whole harem of strippers to support her.  They
parade around in their scanties so much (and so well) that it's pretty
easy to forget about little details like plot, acting, and character
development.
     But at least these things exist in SHOWGIRLS.  The plot is typical
Eszterhas:  Nomi has a shady past and wants to start over.  A whole
bunch of slimy guys get in her way.  And Eszterhas is never one to
forget to throw in a little lesbian subplot (in this case, with Gina
Gershon, as Nomi's arch-rival Cristal).  The acting is as much as one
can expect from essentially two-dimensional characters, most of which
are carbon copies of each other.  Thankfully, Nomi holds our attention
well, and while Berkley hams up the role to an extreme, she's still
interesting to watch.  For Nomi, *everything* is a show.
     The setting really makes this film worthwhile.  Director Paul
Verhoeven (TOTAL RECALL) slices open the underbelly of Sin City for all
to see, getting behind the scenes and facades of the big casinos by
taking us directly into the action.  We're on the stage when Nomi makes
her big entrances; everything is raw and vivid.  There's no sense of
"seduction across a crowded room."  It's laid out in Technicolor
through a two word image:  pure lust.
     The dance numbers are truly incredible--this is *not* FAME.  Your
$6.50 movie ticket will get you admission to a good half dozen shows
during the course of the film.  That's a lot cheaper than Vegas.
     In closing, I feel compelled to say something meaningful about
gratuitous nudity and sex in American cinema, but I won't.  Yes, it's
extreme, but this story really won't work any other way.  (And after 45
minutes, you really don't notice any more.)  I'm glad the creators
fought to keep it this way, and I applaud the risks they took to get it
on the screen.  It's a rough world out there, especially in Vegas, and
it's a full-sensory experience that simply can't be censored.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter & Novelist
-Contributing Editor, Mike's FEEDBACK  /  Film Critic, Texas Business Weekly
-E-mail request to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Gharlane of Eddore
     SHOWGIRLS is the second major outing for the production team of
Pual Verhoeven, director, and Joe Eszterhas, writer.   Their last
effort, BASIC INSTINCT, played like the most sumptuous of classic
Hitchcock, with a dash of raw sex and sensuality that made it come
across with a hit like curry-spiced Tabasco sauce; a dish not to
everyone's taste, but certainly a well-crafted movie.  Possibly that
movie's greatest strength was that the most important events happened
offstage, prior to the movie, during the movie, and after the movie...
and that, after bringing all the plotlines together neatly, it left the
viewer with full knowledge of what *would* happen in the characters'
future, so there was no need to film it.   There was actually about
four hours' worth of screen story there, but Eszterhas found ways to
get it all on-screen in two, by leading his audience into analyzing
what was really going on; and by still holding their interest with
clever misdirection and false trails.
     The major elements that made BASIC INSTINCT work so well are
present in SHOWGIRLS.  We have attractive, sympathetic, but still
highly repellent characters; we have shows for the eyes and the ears,
plotlines that play on several levels, we have beautifully delineated
characters who are drawn from life and very believable, and we have a
story of an innocent (who may not be so innocent) who's trying to play
straight, trying to improve her station in life, who slips into
behaving the way those around her do... but recovers with a flourish,
and quits a winner.
     In this sense, the movie is a bit of a departure for Verhoeven,
who's not known for treating his characters well; but Nomi, the part
played by Elizabeth Berkley, definitely opts out of the game in a
positive way, and we're left feeling good about her future.  This is
not one of the great movies, but it's far better than we'd been led to
expect by all the negative pre-release publicity.  Verhoeven got his
first Oscar nomination in 1971, and in the last quarter-century has
pushed farther and farther, experimenting with the socially-acceptable
limits to movie-making.  His most recent three movies, ROBOCOP, TOTAL
RECALL, and BASIC INSTINCT, have been a progression of back-door access
to American culture, moving from the fantastic through the merely
psychotic to the underlying basic drives; and now he's exploring the
sleeze.  This movie may be the first movie ever made for which the
director's contract contained a specific provision that he would not
have to deliver an R rated movie.  (Verhoeven had to cut several parts
of BASIC INSTINCT to get an R rating, although his original version is
available on video.)
     Many reviewers have taken the Politically-Correct stance that any
movie which uses naked ladies as scenery is a Bad Thing; but they miss
the fact that this movie is not about naked ladies, it's about people
in an environment where naked ladies are common, and WHY such an
environment should exist.  It's about the scum who use other people as
power-trip toys, and the need to escape their power.  It's about a
world where sex is nothing and normal human values don't pertain; and
the lack of sexual excitement and passionate heat in even the most
blatant scenes is something of an accomplishment.  An NC-17 movie which
isn't sexually exciting says a great deal about the phoniness and
emptiness of a social stratum where sex has been robbed of any kind of
beauty, power, or value.  The one scene in the movie that *could* have
been a good sex scene, Berkley and MacLachlan in a swimming pool, is
not exciting, because by then we already know his character is a
callous manipulator.  If anything, it's a rape scene with a victim
who's been duped into cooperation.
     You don't make a movie about the history of black people in
America without using a few black actors; you don't make a movie about
World War II without a few guns going off and a few people getting
killed; and you don't make a movie about Las Vegas showgirls without
showing a few Las Vegas showgirls ... and in an awful lot of Vegas
shows, an awful lot of ladies wear very little clothing.  This is a
legitimate portrayal of a rather seamy side of the entertainment
industry, in a town where sex is simply a negotiable commodity.
     SHOWGIRLS de-glamorizes the Las Vegas show and sex industries with
great effectiveness.
     Nomi is played, in a very good performance, by Elizabeth Berkley,
who gives us a solid picture of a woman with limited talents who's at
the end of her rope, desperate to live a life better than the one she's
known.  She has nothing to market except her body and her limited
dancing ability, and is trying desperately not to to be a hooker,
trying to be something better than she seems destined to be.  When Nomi
realizes she's gone too far for too little, she catches herself just in
time to save the most essential part of who she wants to be.
     Gina Rivera plays Molly, a dressmaker and costumer who befriends
Nomi, providing her with what may be the one solid, positive
relationship in Nomi's entire life.  Molly is the one who makes the
difference, and provides the role model and framework Nomi needs to
verify the value system she'll be using for the REST of her life, and
Nomi's feelings for Molly are the spur that forces Nomi's decision.
Gina Gershon plays Cristal, an aging, but still very attractive
starring dancer, a reflexively competitive manipulator who's become a
villainess by internalizing the ethos of the crooks and scum around
her.  Gershon plays Cristal as a cross between Ava Gardner and Raquel
Welch; a fading talent made bitter by self-awareness.  Her character is
very well drawn and performed; in a major scene in a hospital room, she
acknowledges what she is, and, in essence, passes the torch to Nomi.
The relationship between the two of them is the most honest one in the
movie, and provides part of the impetus Nomi needs to follow a
different path.
     It is no accident that the three important parts in this movie are
women of different stripe; Molly is an honest, hard-working person who
means well, and nearly dies because she confuses the glitter and the
image with reality.  Cristal is a talented dancer who's compromised her
ideals and sold herself to be a co-operating part of the system,
exchanging self-respect for the species of stardom that can be had in
Las Vegas.  Nomi believes she can make it without selling herself,
succumbs to a degree, and then realizes she CAN make it without selling
herself, and doesn't need Las Vegas or its brand of "stardom."
     The male parts in this movie are simply props; they exist only to
demonstrate and explicate the cultural milieu against which showgirls
exist.  Kyle MacLachlan, whose single best previous work was as an
inhumanly emotionless cop in THE HIDDEN, gives us a nicely reptilian
bit of pond scum on two legs, camouflaged as a nice guy.  Glenn Plummer
plays a dancer who's working as a bellboy, and provides a bit of
alternate perspective.  Plummer's character is the only one in the
movie who's maintaining an interest in dance as a performing art, but
even he's succumbed to the cult of manipulation.  Plummer's character
is the closest thing to a sympathetic male character in the whole
movie.
     Some of Jost Vacano's cinematography is fantastic, and one
particular delineation of Nomi's character alteration, a no-dialog
scene using nothing but color changes in the lighting, is utterly
terrifying.
     This movie is rated NC-17 due to language, sexual situations, full
frontal nudity, violence, and probably the costuming as well.  I don't
see a way this particular story could have been told well without it,
and I regard it as a legitimate exercise in movie-making.  But don't go
see it if you're not in a tough mood; the only person it's possible to
like in this movie ends up in an I.C.U. on life support, and there is
probably not one character in this movie you'd enjoy meeting in
person.
Starring:  Elizabeth Berkley, Gina Gershon, and Gina Ravera,
           with Kyle MacLachlan, Glenn Plummer, and Alan Rachins.
Producers: Alan Marshall and Charles Evans, with Mario Kassar
Director:  Paul Verhoeven
Writer:    Joe Eszterhas
Cinematographer:  Jost Vacano
Music:     David A. Stewart
Choreography:  Marguerite Pomerhn-Derricks
Production Designer:  Allan Cameron
Costumes:  Ellen Mirojnick
Edited by: Mark Goldblatt and Mark Helfrich
Rating:    NC-17 (i.e. "X")
A "Chargeurs" film from MGM/Carolco, opening date 22 Sep 95.

Author
J. Neil Schulman
     Suppose you had a movie whose director and screenwriter had
previously collaborated to produce a classic in the suspense genre--a
director who had in addition produced a couple of the best
science-fiction films ever made.  Suppose this creative team had
produced a brand-new movie which was particularly dependent on the
press for box-office success because they had made a huge gamble:
producing the first serious adults-only major motion picture since
MIDNIGHT COWBOY in the 1960's.
     Now suppose that the universal critical reaction in all major
media was to attack this new movie as being incompetent in every
respect--accusing it of being badly written, badly directed, badly
acted--with critics accusing it not merely of being unprofessional,
but in essence a gross fraud upon the movie-going public.
     That was the paradox I was contemplating earlier tonight as I took
a seat in my local theater, along with fellow science-fiction author
Brad Linaweaver, to see SHOWGIRLS, written by Joe Eszterhas and
directed by Paul Verhoeven, who previously collaborated on the suspense
classic, BASIC INSTINCT.  Either I was about to see a truly awful movie
inexplicably made by a very talented creative team--or the critics were
for some reason trying to assassinate a singular masterpiece.
     As Brad and I walked out of the theater afterwards, we knew we had
just seen a masterpiece.  The only question we needed to debate was
whether the American film-reviewing industry was a bunch of short-
sighted incompetents or whether they are so morally flawed they had to
try stamping out this particular masterpiece in order to hide from the
light it shed upon their own moral corruption.
     I saw a film which stars Elizabeth Berkley, an actress whose next
role should be Helen of Troy.  Berkley is an actress who might be
called Marilyn Monroe's sister--the *pretty* one--except that Elizabeth
Berkley is already a more evocative and powerful actress than Monroe
was at her prime--and she's a dancer of powers equal to her acting
strengths.
     I saw a film, about the seedy side of show business, which
combined the raw power of Scorcese's GOODFELLAS, in its ability to
highlight the workings of evil minds, with Bob Fosse's ability to
combine the onstage and backstage life of dancers in ALL THAT JAZZ.
     I saw a film with a main character, Nomi Malone, that I would have
thought only Ayn Rand could write: a diamond in the rough, a pearl cast
before swine.  Elizabeth Berkley's portrayal of Nomi Malone, as written
by Joe Eszterhas and directed by Paul Verhoeven, evokes an innocence
that can stroll through Hell itself--emotionally scorched by evil, a
violent nemesis to evil,  but unscarred and ultimately unconquered by
it.  Malone is a Candide figure who expects the best of all possible
world in the glitter of Las Vegas--and when she learns better that the
glitter is a paper-thin covering for corruption worthy of Nero's Rome,
she walks out as decisively as a cowboy riding off into the sunset,
leaving the bad guys in her dust.
     Finally, this is a movie about power: the power of money and the
power of sex.  America has an unfortunate history in that its puritan
founders never understood that sex is not merely procreative but a core
expression of our nature as rational animals.  Ayn Rand showed in her
novels that what our bodies respond to sexually are what our minds
would have us become: if we are heroic in our ideals, we are turned on
by beauty and heroism; if we are flawed, our sexual choices reflect our
flaws.
     With Elizabeth Berkley's natural beauty combined with masterful
choreography, lighting, and direction, a man watching this film would
have to be a eunuch not to be aroused by it--and a woman would have to
be one of Germaine Greer's female eunuchs.  When critics call this
movie non-erotic, all I can think of is that they're lifelong member's
of Orwell's Anti-Sex League in his dystopian NINETEEN-EIGHTY-FOUR.
     The plot of SHOWGIRLS is more symbolic than dramatic; it uses the
background of A STAR IS BORN, FAME setting to display for us the
conflict between artistic ambition and moral integrity.  Those who seek
nothing great never experience the forces which would tempt them to
sell their dreams--and *that* is why critics, who make their living as
parasites on creative products they could never themselves create, are
so offended by geniuses who have the bad taste to show them what
artistic integrity looks like--and the worse taste to show that the
moral lesson works even in the near pornographic setting of erotic
dance.
     Nomi Malone in SHOWGIRLS is a young individualist who is unwilling
to sell herself out.  She does what is necessary to survive, even if
distasteful, but she never loses sight of the value of her own life.
When she is accused of having low self-esteem, her immediate reaction
is to spit in the eye of the man who said it--a man who truly does not
understand the nature of the insult.  Malone is capable of being
extremely violent, but her violence is well-aimed at worthy targets;
and she is generous enough to grant the boon of charity to an enemy who
probably doesn't deserve it.
     I have written in other places that we get what we pay for and do
not get what we do not pay for.  The price of having works of genius as
part of our culture--works that stand above the lowest-common-denominator
which is our daily fare--is that we not allow them to be marginalized.
Whatever the value of a great movie is to the enrichment of our culture
and the recognition of our human nature, we owe it to those capable of
producing works of original merit that we not ignore them at the urging
of the moral cripples who have seized control of the critical organs of
our culture.
     The sexually explicit SHOWGIRLS is not for children, but then
neither are matches.  Grown-ups who know that sex and violence can be
an integral part of our moral life should see this movie before the
critics empty the theaters and leave it to subsequent generations to
discover its greatness--leaving its writer, director, and star to
wonder why their virtues are being despised.
Cast:  Nomi Malone: Elizabeth Berkley Zack Carey: Kyle MacLachlan
Cristal Connors: Gina Gershon Molly Abrams: Gina Ravera Tony Moss: Alan
Rachins
Mario Kassar presentation, Chargeurs/Charles Evans production in
association with Carolco Pictures Inc., Joe Eszterhas and Ben Myron,
released by United Artists. Director Paul Verhoeven.  Screenplay Joe
Eszterhas. Producers Alan Marshall, Charles Evans.  Executive producer
Mario Kassar.  Cinematographer Jost Vacano.  Editor Mark Goldblatt,
Mark Helfrich. Costumes Ellen Mirojnick.  Music David A. Stewart.
Production design Allan Camern. Art director William F. O'Brien. Set
decorator Richard C. Goddard.  Running time: 2 hours, 11 minutes.
Rating: NC-17: No children under 17 allowed.
The preceding article is under submission.  Reproduction in computer
message and file bases is permitted for informational purposes only.
Copyright (c) 1995 by J. Neil Schulman.  All other rights reserved.

Author
Ed Powell
     For the 6 dollars I shelled out for this flick, I could have
stayed home and bought a night of the "Spice" channel ... and gotten as
much plot and more vivid images of female bodies and sex.  This film is
proof that it is hype, not plot and story, that really sells a film.
(Sad, isn't it?)
     The film revolves around a sexy young woman named Nomi (Elizabeth
Berkley) who hitchhikes to Las Vegas, to seek a career as a dancer.  I
cannot really describe the plot, because there really isn't much of
one.  The film wandered aimlessly around for two hours, trying to
interweave several weak story lines into one central plot.  It starts
nowhere ... ends nowhere ... and fills the in-between with plenty of
jiggling breasts.
     While all involved played their parts adequately ... there was
something that didn't let me believe their parts.  This may be in part
to the writing of the film:  I cannot believe that Las Vegas, or
anywhere in the world, for that matter, is *that* sleazy.  Then again,
I live in a safe little suburb on the East coast....
     Since most of the film is apparently shot in Las Vegas, the
design of the film was filled with plenty of neon and tasteful glitz
(?).  In fact, the stage shows were incredibly well done ... I wouldn't
be all surprised if they were actual shows being shown in Las Vegas
right now.
     The director should be given another chance at directing a
feature film.  The film wasn't too fancy with the shot setups, but some
of them were obviously ill-planned.  If you go to see this film, be
prepared for some badly framed shots (but you'll never have to yell
"Focus!").
     If you are looking for an evening of sitting in a movie house
watching various parts of the female anatomy wobbling, this is for
you.  Otherwise, just stay home and rent the "Spice" channel.  This is
not a film where you will find higher forms of entertainment.
* Note:  I cannot judge this film on effects or family value.
There were no noticeable effects, and scoring on family value just
wouldn't be fair ... it is an NC-17 film, after all.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
"Nothing more than a high budget masturbation fantasy" 
SHOWGIRLS (NC-17) - Contains graphic nudity, profanity, sexual situations and violence. Some people, however, keep their clothes on. 
You do not watch porn films for their intellectual values, nor do you
write reviews on them. That's why this review will be short. It seems
that this film will end up in the porn section when it hits the video
stores. There is no story, script, point or acting. Only naked bodies,
which is exactly the point.
Here is the so called plot: Nomi, the 23-year-old with a dark past as
a hooker, has hitchhiked from somewhere back east to perform in a show
where a dancer doesn't wear much more than a light coating of powder
and a big, fake smile. No one is twisting Nomi's arm. No one is
holding her grandmother hostage. She wants to do this. And that is
what she is doing till the end credits. So what's the problem then?
What's the point? What's the film about? Is there anyone whose
aspirations could inspire less sympathy? This film can be described in
one sentence: Obscene level of incompetence, excessive stupidity in
the story line, gross negligence of the viewer's intelligence, a
prurient interest in the quick buck. Believe me, after an hour with
these characters, acting and script, you'll start hoping for someone
to kill somebody.
Elizabeth Berkley makes a laughable try as the heroine of this film,
that is bad even for Eszterhas' script. Her character is the only one
that is at least half written and she could really have done
better. Her character denies the fact that she is a whore for the
industry, selling her body to the hungry eyes of the horny public. "I
am not a whore! I am a dancer", she screams, but does it in such an
over dramatized way that you'll start laughing. In fact the acting in
"Showgirls" brings terrible to a new and previously unknown level. Not
one single achievement, besides the conventional cinematography, is
worth mentioning. It is a total waste of time and money. There is not
a single moment of what you might call intelligence. The dialogue is
structured of ancient stereotypes and cliches lined up one after
another. Its attempt to even imagine to have half a brain results in a
catastrophe. "In my films," writes director Paul Verhoeven ('Basic
Instinct', 'Total Recall'), "I hold the mirror up to life." Well,
excuse me? His attempt to go behind the scenes of Las Vegas, and as he
put it "show the naked truth", is simplified and unreal. Occasionally,
between his collection of mistakes and logical irrationalities,
screenwriter Joe Eszterhas (the creator of some of the worst
screenplays in Hollywood history) inserts some lines of deep morality,
that sound something like this: "Hey, I see you. I see that you're
hiding" - "From what?" - "From you". Yes, and even the only decent
line in this film: "Nomi is what Las Vegas is all about" can't save
'Showgirls' from going under. It's a strange phenomena. It's not
erotic, because it lacks sensuality. Not dramatic, because it lacks
the acting. And not intelligent because it lacks a story. It is simply
Verhoven's bad excuse for making pornography. You want to see naked
women? Bare breasts? Full frontals? It's nothing wrong with that. But
in that case I suggest that you rent a porn film in your local video
store, and not waste time surviving through Eszterhas' pathetic
dialogue.  B qualities, while it's only a high budget porn-film.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 9/22/95 (wide)
Running Length: 2:11
MPAA Classification: NC-17 (Nudity, sex, profanity, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Elizabeth Berkley, Kyle MacLachlan, Glenn Plummer, Gina Gershon,
      Robert Davi, Gina Raveri
Director: Paul Verhoeven
Producers: Alan Marshall and Charles Evans
Screenplay: Joe Eszterhas
Cinematography: Jost Vacano
Music: David A. Stewart
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     In 1990, the MPAA introduced the NC-17 rating to provide an outlet
for legitimate adult fare--non-pornographic motion pictures with
content deemed too strong for the under-17 crowd.  The first movie
released with an NC-17 was HENRY AND JUNE, whose financial failure was
widely blamed on the new rating.  After that, all potentially-lucrative
films receiving an NC-17 made the cuts required by the MPAA to earn an
R.  Now, in 1995, there's SHOWGIRLS, the most significant test of the
NC-17's commercial viability to date.  Helmed by Paul Verhoeven (TOTAL
RECALL, BASIC INSTINCT) and written by Joe Eszterhas (JAGGED EDGE, BASIC
INSTINCT), this movie is going into wide release with the adult rating.
Too bad it's one of the worst films of the year.
     Curiosity will undoubtedly pull in a fair number of movie-goers,
especially on the first weekend.  Other than that, though, there's
nothing about SHOWGIRLS to lure viewers.  This film is like a shiny, red
apple that's rotten to the core--despite slick direction and a glossy
sheen, it reeks of decay.  SHOWGIRLS isn't a good drama, a good
thriller, or even good pornography.  It's hard to imagine that the
picture will appeal to anyone, and unclear whether there's any future
for the NC-17 rating if SHOWGIRLS rightfully bombs at the box office.
     SAVED BY THE BELL actress Elizabeth Berkley has the lead role, and
her lack of feature experience shows.  She was obviously chosen more for
what she would show than for acting ability.  And, by the end of the
two-hour plus running time, there's very little Berkley hasn't given the
audience at least a peek at.  Verhoeven has never been a subtle
director, and his fixation with naked body parts makes one wonder if he
might not have potential as a hard-core director.
     SHOWGIRLS is a cold, soulless, misogynistic motion picture.  There
isn't anything to like about the thinly-drawn, stereotyped characters,
and the situations they drift through are far from engrossing.
SHOWGIRLS has one aim only:  to suck in money.  Artistic integrity,
intelligent scripting, heart-felt acting, and sincere film making are
all absent.  Everything--from the overall plot to individual lines of
dialogue--is predictable and poorly-written.
     Nomi Malone (Berkley) is a dancer on her way to Vegas with hopes of
joining a chorus line.  Even before she gets her first job, though, she
learns that sex and drugs are the only currency anyone really uses.  But
she's a tough woman with a killer body and an ugly past, and she knows
what has to be done to make headway.  She starts working as a lap dancer
at a strip club, but has her sights set higher.  And when the big-name
star of a local show (Gina Gershon) and a hotel talent director (Kyle
MacLachlan) take an interest in her raw--ahem--abilities, her
prospects suddenly appear brighter.
     As bad as the first ninety minutes of this film are, the last
thirty are worse.  The closing quarter of SHOWGIRLS is distasteful in
every way--from its gratuitous violence to its illogical plotting.
The final scenes are intended to teach something about ethics, but
that's a hypocritical stance for a motion picture without a moral
compass.
     This year's other picture about lap dancing, Atom Egoyan's EXOTICA,
was everything SHOWGIRLS is not:  sensitive, intelligent, erotic, and
well-acted.  It's almost a disservice to the fine Canadian film to
mention it in the same review as the Verhoeven/Eszterhas monstrosity,
but certain superficial similarities are too obvious to ignore.  But,
where EXOTICA was full of mystery and emotion, SHOWGIRLS is a hollow
shell--false, mechanical, and entirely despicable in intent and
execution.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Greta Christina
[Originally published in The Spectator, October 6, 1995]
United Artists.  Written by Joe Eszterhas.  Directed
by Paul Verhoeven.  Produced by Alan Marshall and Charles Evans. 
Starring Elizabeth Berkley, Kyle MacLachlan, and Gina Gershon. 
Rated NC-17.  
     No, I mean really bad.  I can't even begin to tell you
(although, of course, I'm going to try).  The acting is dreadful,
a blend of woodenness and scenery-chewing that's generally
identified with the Movie-of-the-Week.  The writing is just
laughable; some of the most poignant moments had an audience of
hardened critics howling with glee.  I think it was trying to say
something about power and morality and the price of success, but
mostly it had a lot to say about hard nipples and gold lame and
Joe Eszterhas's girl-girl fetish.
     I guess I'd better do a quick summary here.  SHOWGIRLS is
the brainchild of screenwriter Joe Eszterhas and director Paul
Verhoeven, the same creative team that inflicted BASIC INSTINCT
on the world.  (Eszterhas was reportedly paid $3.2 million for
the script.  You have to wonder where it went.  Writing lessons,
I hope.)  SHOWGIRLS tells the gripping tale of Nomi (Elizabeth
Berkley), who comes to Las Vegas carrying a suitcase and a dream
and leaving behind a cloudy past.  She gets a job as a lap dancer
at the Cheetah Club, but soon claws her way into a place in the
chorus at the Stardust.  She ... oh, I can't do this.  Let's let
the press kit take over from here, shall we?  "Possessed of a raw
and riveting talent (yeah, right--GC), Nomi is soon introduced to
the vastly different world of the big Las Vegas shows--and the
powerful men and women who run them.  Zack (Kyle MacLachlan), the
handsome and ambitious entertainment director at the Stardust,
could push Nomi into the spotlight.  Cristal (Gina Gershon), the
glamorous star of the stage show 'Goddess,' is inexorably drawn
to Nomi's beauty and spirit and may make her ... or break her."
     The main character, Nomi, is completely indecipherable. 
She's supposed to be a wild, hot-blooded, untameable tigress, but
to me she just seems petulant and ill-tempered.  In theory, she's
driven by obscure but powerful ambitions and passions, but as
she's the kind of girl that gets shivers and goose-bumps watching
a cheesy Vegas stage show, it's a little hard to swallow. 
Supposedly she finds herself by the end of the movie, but I'll be
damned if I could figure out where she was.  Behind the sofa,
maybe?
     Even as simple, unchallenging entertainment, SHOWGIRLS isn't
very successful.  The dance routines are pretty great in a Vegasy
way, hot and fun and glitzy.  Some of the sex stuff is not bad
(more on that in a bit).  But there's a whole lot of really bad
plot in between--the filler between the dirty bits is just as
ludicrous and boring as it is in most porn flicks--and there's
more and more of it as the movie progresses, bringing the whole
thing to a grinding crawl.  It clocks in at just over two hours. 
It seems longer.
     Essentially, SHOWGIRLS is soft-core porn with very high
production values.  So that's how I'm going to review it.  After
all, I don't think you were expecting CITIZEN KANE.  You wanna
know two things:  You wanna know if it'll get your dick hard, and
you wanna know what it says about sex.
     First things first.  Will it get your dick hard?  Well ... it
might.  There's a pretty good chance that it will.  Depends on
your dick, I suppose.  If your dick likes tall, skinny, long-
legged, hard-muscled women, then it will probably like this movie
pretty well.  If it likes tall, skinny, long-legged, hard-muscled
women who prowl around backstage and do pseudo-lezzie dance
numbers in skimpy gold-lame and black-plastic outfits, then it
will definitely like this movie quite a bit.  And if it likes
deranged, erratic, power-hungry women who slam doors and carry
switchblades and have hissy-fits every twenty seconds, then it'll
probably stand up and sing the "Hallelujah Chorus."
     Your dick had better like being teased, though.  Because for
all its sexy, sleazy, boldly-go-where-no-one-has-gone-before
come-on, SHOWGIRLS is essentially a high-budget cock-tease. 
There is one--I repeat, one--fuck scene in the entire movie.  It
takes place in a swimming pool, where all you can see is some
thrashing around.  (I'm sorry, but all I could think was,
"Chlorinated water.  No lube.  Ouch."  Also, there's no condom,
unless Kyle MacLachlan had one cleverly tucked up his butt for
safekeeping.  But I digress.)
     I don't mean to say that it won't turn you on.  The lap
dancing scene, where Nomi does Zack in the lap-dance booth while
Cristal watches, is pretty spectacular.  The scene where Nomi and
James (Glenn Plummer) practice their dance number and wind up
fooling around is quite wild and nasty--as long as it lasts. 
There's a fairly sleazy bit, in which show director Tony Moss
(Alan Rachins) makes Nomi take off her bra and play with her
nipples on stage during an audition, that wasn't bad.  And a lot
of the dance sequences are pretty steamy.
     But again, it's all a tease.  It winds you up, but it
doesn't take you anywhere.  The lesbian stuff is especially
disappointing; more accurately, the lack of lesbian stuff is
disappointing.  There's lots of flirting and vamping and
attempted seduction, and lots of girl-girl erotic dancing, but
there's not one single scene in which two women actually do it. 
I was crushed.
     Maybe I'm down on this movie for the same reason that I'm
down on a lot of porn--most of the women didn't interest me.  I
like smart and imaginative and funny and fleshy.  Bony is fine if
there's brains and imagination, but bony and brainless--forget
it.  And the main character, Nomi, was a complete washout in the
clit-hardening department.  She has the face of a mall-rat, a
bargain-basement Sharon Stone, and her eyes are mean and empty
and hard.  To put it mildly--not my type.
     What it mostly comes down to, though, is that the movie
hasn't stuck with me.  I only saw it a few hours before writing
this, and already the images are beginning to slip away.  Not a
good sign for pornography; I like porn that I can think about and
jack off to for at least a few days.  With a couple of
exceptions, SHOWGIRLS has provided me with very little in the way
of jack-off material.  Big-screen production vales
notwithstanding, you might be better off with a decent porn
video.
     So enough about getting your dick hard.  What does SHOWGIRLS
say about sex?
     That's a tough one.  The movie is such an unholy mess. 
Deciphering its subtext is going to be tricky.  Hell, for that
matter, deciphering its over-text is going to be tricky.  I'm
pretty sure that Eszterhas and Verhoeven were trying to say
something about sex; I've read interviews and press notes, and
they definitely seem to have had something on their mind.  But
I'll be damned if I can figure it out.
     The movie's attitude towards sex work and prostitution, for
instance, is rather startlingly muddled.  On the one hand, it
wants to be positive about it.  One of the more comprehensible
messages is that Nomi's lap-dancing job at the Cheetah Club is
more honest than shaking her tail at the Stardust.  It's all sex
work, the movie says.  Some of it pretends to be something else,
but if you're going to do sex work, you might as well be up front
about it.
     But at the same time, SHOWGIRLS is very down on whores and
whoredom.  Nomi doesn't want to be a whore, and every time
someone suggests that that's what she's doing, or invites her to
take it a step further, she gets pissed off and flounces out the
door.  She shakes her ass and gets men off for money, but she's
not a whore.  God forbid.  (I think we're supposed to see her as
an artist, who wants to dance more than anything else in the
world--Eszterhas wrote FLASHDANCE, so this may be what he was
trying to get at--but it ain't convincing.)  SHOWGIRLS constantly
uses "whore" as a pejorative; in fact, according to the movie,
it's just about the nastiest thing you can call someone.
     So what's the point here?  Being a whore is honest work, but
it's also an insult?   Selling your talent makes you a whore, and
that's a terrible thing to do?  Sucking up to the boss is one
thing, but sucking off the boss is quite another?  There's a hazy
distinction between being a whore and making a living, but it's a
line that you shouldn't cross?
     But what struck me the most about the SHOWGIRLS world is
that nobody in it seems to actually enjoy sex.  Very few people
in the movie have sex just for fun.  They use sex for power, for
a weapon, for a manipulative tool, and of course for money.  But
they don't use it as a means to achieve pleasure.  They all want
it ... but they don't seem to like it very much.
     I'm very confused.  But in my defense, I think Eszterhas and
Verhoeven are very confused as well.  The ideas and feelings
about sex as expressed in this movie are, to put it kindly,
ambivalent.  I think they want it both ways.  I think they want
to be all groovy and sex-positive and cutting edge, but they also
want to moralize.  I think they want to glamorize sex work and
sleazify it at the same time; or, to put it bluntly, I think they
want to fuck whores and then condemn them for doing it.  The
movie loves sex, adores it, drools over it--but it doesn't seem
to think that it can make anyone very happy.

Author
ERIC WAY
Elizabeth Berkley stars as Nomi Malone, a struggling dancer trying 
to make it to the top in Paul Verhoeven's controversial movie, 
Showgirls.
Nomi is working the only job she could find, an erotic stripper at 
the Cheetah Club.  Although the pay isn't bad and she enjoys being 
able to dance, she develops a somewhat low self-esteem from one of 
her job's attributes, private lap dancing.  After Nomi is introduced 
to Las Vegas show dancing star Cristal Connors, Nomi soon gets a 
taste of cruel manipulation, but also, is given the chance to prove 
herself as a dancer.  By doing so, she is able to pull away from her 
stripping job, but she doesn't know that what she is getting into 
could be too hot to handle.  As the movie progresses, Nomi discovers 
that there is a price to pay for fame and fortune, behind all of the 
glitz and glamour.  She learns that she, too, is becoming part of the 
Las Vegas team when she becomes manipulative and opportunistic just 
like those around her.  How far will she go to get to the top?
Showgirls explores the erotic world of stripping and show dancing 
through this beautifully done picture.  Manipulation and self 
discovery are the basis for this well written, well-researched drama. 
 The story evolves around the Las Vegas show, Goddess, which is 
performed at the Stardust Hotel, portrays stylish dancing and a 
musical score that is not only spunky, but sensual and exciting as 
well.  The rest of the movie also portrays great music with its hip 
soundtrack, adding variety and rhythm to the rest of the film. 
Although harshly judged by critics, Elizabeth Berkley is not only a 
fine actress, but a well-spoken dancer as well.  Berkley brings Nomi 
a sensuous style to her dancing that few people could have done with 
the ease and grace that Berkley did.  Berkley also adds mystery to 
the character's background, hinting with small clues to her troubled 
past in different parts of the movie.  Although Nomi makes mistakes, 
the viewer can't help but sympathize for her, knowing that her 
intentions were mainly good,  noting that her actions had been 
tainted by those around her.  
Gina Gershon portrays Cristal Connors, the famous Las Vegas dancer 
starring in the lead role of Goddess.  Gershon brings out a 
manipulative side in Cristal that is very surreal to the viewer 
because she doesn't go over the top with it.  She keeps Cristal's 
mean streak oblivious to everyone but Nomi and the viewer, making her 
a sly obstacle for Nomi to overcome.  At first, Cristal looks down on 
Nomi as if she were nothing but a whore, but we later learn in the 
movie that there is something more to Cristal's interest in the young 
dancer.  Cristal sees Nomi as a mirror image of herself when she 
began many years ago and sees Nomi as a worthy follower, but she is 
determined to give Nomi a hard time climbing the ladder of fame.
Kyle MacLachlan plays Zak Carey, the entertainment director of the 
Stardust Hotel.  From minute one, we know there is something off 
about his character.  Later in the movie, we discover that he, too, 
can manipulate with the best of them.  He is also determined to have 
Nomi for himself, and manipulates anything that stands in his way, 
including Nomi.  
Showgirls is one of those movies that has to be watched with an open 
mind and all stereotypes must be put aside to fully understand and 
enjoy the film's quality  and story.  I think many people disliked 
the film because they were unwilling to accept that America's 
sweetheart, Elizabeth Berkley, had grown up from her "Saved by the 
Bell" role, and was now into a more mature, provocative role.  
Available with an R rating or an NC-17 on VHS, this film comes 
highly recommended to those who are seeking an entertaining and 
provocative movie with an intense plot and great acting.  

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
Movie reviewers have an obligation to see the good, the bad, and
the despicable. I originally wrote this review for my college
newspaper back in '95, but I wanted to re-write it because not
all retro reviews should be about the classics. We need to be
warned about some truly awful films, too. This picture was so
bad, it inspired the description for my 1/10 rating (see ratings
chart below). The only thing saving it from a 0/10 rating is that
being able to rent a movie like this is slightly less embarassing
than renting a porno. So, it does indeed have some plusses...
In fairness, Elizabeth Berkley is certainly worth seeing in the
buff. And her ability to whine and irritate us, even while nude,
was appropriate in her role as selfish temptress Nomi Malone.
This character is not smart, not interesting, and (deliberately?)
far too annoying far too often. Like in 1998s "Bulworth", when
the movie was over I didn't care one little iota about the main
character. At least Warren Beatty tried to make a statement with
his dreary and overrated film, though. "Showgirls" is too stupid
to make a statement.
Some people claim that the story is based on the legendary "All
About Eve" of all things! If exploitation expert Joe Eszterhas
was half the screenwriter that Joseph L. Mankiewicz was, he'd
be...well, he'd be a good screenwriter. Instead, this project may
have sunk his career. He wrote the (HA HA!) script and the
usually reliable Paul Verhoeven directed. The same team who
created a GOOD sex-film in 1992 ("Basic Instinct") struck out
here with their occasional violence, gratuitous X-rated sex
scenes, and numerous (and quite unnecessary) lesbian overtones.
The predictable storyline revolves around Nomi streaking into Las
Vegas to make it big as a dancer. After the supposed street-smart
young "lady" gets conned out of her suitcase by a slack-jawed
yokel in the opening sequence, she befriends a tailor of the
glamorous stage production at the "Stardust Hotel". Nomi doesn't
take advantage of this contact to break into the big-time of
dirty dancing right away. First, she becomes a lap dancer at a
scummy strip club. She sells her hot little wares at "The
Cheetah" for a short time, turning on the fictitious customers
and the actual theatre audience. Hey, I never said she wasn't a
hot number...
Maybe it's that, her body, which gets her into the big-time when
the star of the "Stardust Hotel", Crystal Connors (Gina Gershon)
stops into the strip club (it certainly isn't her brains or
pleasant disposition!). Crystal requests a private lap dance for
her boyfriend (Kyle MacLachlan). He also happens to be the
pleasure-seeking worm who runs the big show. Crystal gets Nomi
onto the "Stardust" team and, after an interminable amount of
time, Nomi "earns" the role of Crystal's understudy. The slut
then deliberately injures and hospitalizes Crystal.
It was almost laughable that Nomi had the guts to claim that
she's "not a whore". That's a phrase we hear a few different
times and it's completely ludicrous. Of course she is! She sells
her soul to make it big, but in the end we're supposed to believe
that she's a better person than that. We're supposed to root for
her. No way! She's a tramp and a back-stabber who deserved
nothing--least of all vindication in the...ahem...climax. She is
not a good person and they take over two hours to explain that
the audience should think that she is.
The sub-plot with a male dancer (Glenn Plummer) who claims to see
talent in Nomi is just a gratuitous opportunity to let her dance
naked a little bit more. It sure ain't character development!
Plummer also appeared in "Speed" in '94 in a smaller, yet better
role. This sub-plot goes absolutely nowhere except maybe to
deliver an unsubtle hint that fornicators should practice birth
control.
Kyle MacLachlan must have been promised a big pay-day or his
standards have dipped since appearing in "Blue Velvet". That
picture was weird, but some critics claim it's one of the best
movies of the '80s. Now ol' Kyle can say that he acted in one of
the worst of the '90s, too. His sleazy character is important to
"Showgirls", but we don't learn anything about him. He uses
people to get what he wants, but that only means that he fits in
well with the other characters in this movie. Is he a villain?
Who cares!
Ultimately, this movie is as tiresome as it is explicit. Everyone
must know by now about the soft-core acts of copulation,
especially the riotous romp between Berkley and MacLachlan in his
pool. What few reviewers take issue with is how mean-spirited
this movie is. Everyone's either having sex, exacting revenge, or
WISHING they were having sex or exacting revenge. It's just too
hard to take (especially for over two hours). If we must be
exposed to the evils of the Vegas world, why couldn't Verhoeven
have also made a point of highlighting the whispers, grunts, and
other sounds during the dance numbers? It's hard to care about
these people if we can't even appreciate what they're capable of
doing on-stage.
Berkley may have a future in Hollywood because she can dance and
she has a great body. After all, the world of porn is still an
active, dishonourable profession. Perhaps Berkley could join
their ranks and leave the REAL acting to Pauly Shore and Cindy
Crawford. Oops, they're bad actors, too. Well, at least, they're
not selfish and contemptable like good ol' slutty Nomi Malone.
USELESS TRIVIA--Ironically, Elizabeth Berkley played virtuous and
"holier than thou" Jessie on the teeny-bopper TV show, "Saved By
The Bell", before breaking onto the big screen.

