Title
Review for Body Snatchers (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
I don't know why anyone felt the need to produce another remake of 1956's 
classic sci-fi/horror film INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS, yet here it is, 
and the lineup of creative talent behind it is promising.  Check out this 
intriguing combination:  writer-director Larry Cohen (screenplay credit), 
writer-director Stuart Gordon (story credit), and writer-director Abel 
Ferrara (who gets the directing chore despite being the only one of the 
three to show no previous interest in the genre).  It sounds as if the 
resulting film might be a body snatcher designed by committee, but the end 
result is a fairly tight product.
Prior knowledge makes this difficult viewing - there's little suspense or 
surprise because by now we have come to know the story so well: a few people 
discover that their family, friends, and neighbors are gradually being 
'replaced' by emotionally void duplicates and then find themselves running 
for their lives.  Story is faithful to the original (and the Jack Finney 
novel) in concept only.  Its two major changes are firstly that the central 
protagonist is a 17-year old girl (Gabrielle Anwar), and secondly that the 
small-town setting (changed to a big city in Philip Kaufman's 1978 version) 
has been overshadowed by a military base.  It would seem that what we have 
here is some ready-to-bake commentary on army personnel sacrificing their 
individuality to become a gestalt of emotionless drones, bla-bla-bla, but 
fortunately the story avoids this route and takes the more personal touch of 
paralleling the invasion of the alien 'body snatchers' with the 'invasion' 
of a new stepmother into Anwar's home (a creepy performance by Meg Tilly).  
As far as Anwar is concerned, her mother has already been replaced; the 
alien-invader scenario that follows is the realization/externalization of 
her fears now brought forth for everyone else to see.  Ferrara keeps the 
human element at the forefront of the story by shooting much of BODY 
SNATCHERS in closeup and midshot, letting faces and bodies fill the frame.  
This keeps the film real and down-to-earth until the first FX sequence, 
which may or may not be an improvement on previous versions depending on 
your point of view.  One of the more frustrating elements of the 1956 film 
for me as a young, first-time viewer, was the total lack of explanation 
concerning the body-transfer from seed pod to human copy.  
Ferrara/Cohen/Gordon present a simple, workable explanation - although it 
may be argued that it is scarier *not* to know anything of the process, and 
it was this lack of  information that contributed to the nightmarish quality 
of the original.
I don't think the FX are as big a problem as the decision to have Anwar 
narrating the story in flashback from frame one, however.  Automatically we 
are assured that her character will be still be around by the end of the 
story, which robs BODY SNATCHERS of a pivotal element of suspense.  I can't 
believe a writer as seasoned as Cohen would have let so obvious a slipup get 
by him.  But then again, I find it surprising to see Abel Ferrara packaging 
a film so uncharacteristic of his usual down-in-the-dirt urban dramas.  Has 
anyone checked their backyards for seed pods lately?


Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Gabrielle Anwar, Terry Kenney, Billy Wirth, Meg Tilly.
Screenplay:  Stuart Gordon, Dennis Paoli & Nicholas St. John.
Director:  Abel Ferrara.
     Abel Ferrara's BODY SNATCHERS marks the third screen adaptation of
Jack Finney's novel THE BODY SNATCHERS, and you'd think that there
wouldn't be all that much new to say about pod people by now.  Don
Siegel's 1956 INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS captured small-town
menace; Phillip Kaufman's 1978 version transferred the story to San
Francisco for a metaphor for big city alienation.  The scene for this
latest adaptation is an army base, and the metaphor has changed as
well.  Somewhere in BODY SNATCHERS is a poke at the military mindset,
but it's buried beneath layers of atmosphere, atmosphere which works
but doesn't make that extra leap to real terror.
     BODY SNATCHERS opens as the Malone family makes its way towards
Fort Daly, Alabama.  Dad Steve (Terry Kenney) is an Environmental
Protection Agency investigator sent to check out toxic waste storage at
the base, and he brings along daughter Marti (Gabrielle Anwar), new
wife Carol (Meg Tilly) and Carol's six-year-old son Andy (Reilly
Murphy).  It's not long after they arrive before it becomes clear that
things aren't quite right at Fort Daly.  The base physician (Forest
Whitaker) notes a preponderance of paranoid episodes among soldiers and
family members, and everyone seems just a bit too serene.  Eventually,
the full extent of the invasion is obvious to the Malones, and a young
pilot (Billy Wirth) becomes the only person they can trust to help them
escape.
     Director Ferrara (BAD LIEUTENANT) has crafted a stylish and spooky
look for the film, filtered in dark ambers and deep blues, full of
shadows and twisted angles.  The issue of identity is always present,
as actors frequently appear only as silhouettes against the light, or
veiled by other shadows.  Some early scenes highlighting the pod
people's uniformity, particularly a frighteningly comic scene where
young Andy realizes the other kids in day care lack a certain artistic
creativity, are extremely well-handled.  Ferrara also manages the
tricky task of directing his actors so that the transformed characters
appear clearly to have changed without playing the stock blank-faced
automoton.  Technically, BODY SNATCHERS hits just about all of its
marks, particularly with its rather graphic image of what happens to
the remains of a human body after the transformation has taken place.
     Yet while BODY SNATCHERS held my attention, it didn't do anything
particularly interesting which seemed to warrand a re-telling of this
already twice-told tale.  The idea behind setting the invasion on a
military base is sound; if everyone in the Army starts acting like
drones with a singular purpose, who's going to notice?  The
screenwriters throw in one speech by the base commander (FULL METAL
JACKET's R. Lee Ermey) which seems designed to emphasize this point,
but Ferrara doesn't do much with it.  Familial alienation seems to be a
more prevalent theme, as Marti deals with her step-family, and her new
friend Jenn (Christine Elise) copes with an alcoholic mother.  No
single theme really drives this BODY SNATCHERS, nor are any of the
characters interesting enough to pull it along with them.
     Structurally, BODY SNATCHERS suffers from a climax which seems far
too drawn out.  Once the Malones start running, the tension should
continue to build, but too many of the scenes involving confrontations
between "real" humans and the 'Snatchers lack punch.  There is one
wickedly chilling moment of revelation, but it is isolated.  BODY
SNATCHERS does a fantastic job of establishing its tone, and it does
offer a few decent scares.  The problem with Ferrara's pacing is that
it's like the Body Snatchers themselves:  too cool when the adrenaline
should be flowing.
