Title
Review for 4 Little Girls (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The best documentaries manage to uncover truths deeper than their
most obvious subjects; the best documentarians recognize that they can use
the film medium to tell stories as compelling as anything fictional.  4
LITTLE GIRLS, a powerful tale of tragic loss turned into positive action,
is more than the sort of "talking head" video textbook most people
envision when they think of conventional documentaries.  It is the work of
a film-maker who knows how to provoke viewers while he educates them, who
has experience examining the challenging subject of race in America.  That
gentleman's name is Spike Lee.
     Lee begins at the ending in 4 LITTLE GIRLS, opening with an elegiac
remembrance of four victims of a racially motivated church bombing in
Birmingham, Alabama in 1963:  11-year-old Denise McNair, 14-year-old
Carole Robertson, 14-year-old Cynthia Wesley and 14-year-old Addie Mae
Collins.  Through photographs and interviews with family and friends, we
come to know the four girls not merely as symbols, but as individuals,
remembered fondly as vibrant lives cut short.  The prologue, accompanied
by the mournful Joan Baez ballad "Birmingham Sunday," concludes with
potent images -- the smiling young faces of the four girls superimposed
over their gravestones.
     From there, Lee launches into a history in brief of the civil rights
movement in Birmingham, one which never feels like a typical documentary.
The knowledge of the tragedy to come lends context and consequenct to the
battles of the civil rights activists; it is a battle which we know will
have its casualties.  And the knowledge of those casualties adds even more
resonance to an unforgettable moment in which former Alabama governor
George Wallace, reduced by strokes to an incomprehensibility requiring
sub-titles, desperately attempts to convince Lee that he is a changed man
by showing off his black "best friend."  4 LITTLE GIRLS creates a vivid
portrait of Alabama in the 1960s, rich with detailed characterizations
which make it feel like Lee always has his eye towards creating a
narrative.
     For all the historical detail, Lee never loses sight of the
centerpiece of the film.  The recollections of the bombing itself are
shattering, none more so than Denise McNair's mother recounting the subtle
condescension she faces when she attempts to see her daughter's body.
It's unfortunate that Lee follows those scenes with the indictment and
trial of "Dynamite Bob" Chambliss for the killings, by far the weakest
sequence in the film.  It may have provided a necessary closure to show
the criminal eventually brought to justice, but 4 LITTLE GIRLS is much
more powerful detailing how this tragedy became a catalyst for change in
the public perception of Southern racism was affected around the world.
Lee also offers frightening comparisons to the recent spate of black
church burnings in the South, highlighting his ability to make the film
many things at once -- a memorial, a history lesson, an opportunity for
healing, a warning to stay vigilant.  4 LITTLE GIRLS is a gripping
experience, an epic testament to triumph over hatred which never forgets
the very personal loss of four families who still miss their four little
girls.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     On the morning of September 15, 1963, as Sunday School was in
session at the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama,
an explosion rang out.  Long time racially-motivated bomber Robert
"Dynamite Bob" Chambliss and a band of his followers had planted a bomb
in that church with the intent of inflicting maximum damage.
     The civil rights marches were in full-swing in the south and so
were the counterinsurgents.  These mad bombers that day killed Addie
Mae Collins (14), Carol Denise McNair (11), Cynthia Wesley (14) and
Carole Rosamond Robertson (14).  While Spike Lee was still in film
school, he began to plan a movie about the bombing.  Over a decade
later, he has finally been able to deliver on his dream with a
documentary, which he calls simply 4 LITTLE GIRLS, to tell the tragedy
of those children's early death.
     Spike Lee's publicist sent me an unsolicited press video with the
goal of fostering knowledge of the film and building demand that it be
shown more widely than it has been those far.  Even though it has
gotten rave reviews, it has only played in 9 major markets in the
United States, missing the Silicon Valley and many other regions of the
country.  (All of the revenue earned from the theatrical release of the
film is being donated to a memorial fund for the 4 girls.)
     From Spike Lee's very first movie, SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT, he has
demonstrated fresh and interesting approaches to standard material.
Although his DO THE RIGHT THING, for which he won an Academy Award for
the writing, is arguably his best known film, his picture MALCOLM X,
staring Denzel Washington, remains my personal favorite.  Spike Lee's
first documentary, 4 LITTLE GIRLS, certainly ranks among his best
films.
     At the time of the bombing Birmingham was a steel town with a long
history of labor violence.  In one part of the historic film footage in
the movie the Rev. Martin Luther King calls Birmingham the most
segregated city in America.
     Although much of the South by 1963 had begun to remove some of the
more blatant examples of racism, Birmingham still had separate white
and colored sections for lunch counters, cabs, restrooms, water
fountains, movie seats, bus seats, etc., ad nauseam.  The "Commissioner
of Public Safety," what a misnomer, was the infamous Bull Connor.  Bull
was fond of using dogs, billy clubs, fire hoses and even a tank to
maintain racial order.  These white and colored signs were not to be
treated lightly.
     Describing this era of insanity, the parents of the slain girls
tell their stories in retrospective.  Denise's father, Christopher
McNair, talks about Denise's childhood.  His most vivid and moving
recollection is a simple story of woe when he had to tell his hungry
daughter that he could not buy her a sandwich because the lunch counter
at that store was for whites-only, and it did not have one for
coloreds.
     It was a time when the moderate whites in Birmingham were just
beginning to assert themselves.  When a picture of white Birmingham
hooligans beating a freedom rider made the front pages of newspapers
worldwide, local Birmingham businessmen saw it in a newspaper in Tokyo
and said that something had to be done.  The film does not ascribe any
subsequent actions to these good intentions.
     "I say segregation now, segregation tomorrow and segregation
forever!" were the notorious words said by Governor George Wallace in
his inauguration address that year.  From that scandalous scene, Lee
cuts to today where an invalid Wallace points to a black man named Al
who he says is his best friend and who travels with him all over the
globe.  Wallace claims that when he was governor he provided free
textbooks for black students.  In contemporary interviews with
African-Americans they express doubts that Wallace ever believed his
racist rhetoric.  They said he was the nicest person you'd ever want to
meet until the cameras were turned on him, and then his inflammatory
rhetoric was an expedient.
     Starting small but expanding rapidly, the civil rights protests in
Birmingham grew into something that threatened the white power
structure.  The reaction by Bull and his crew was swift and
predictable.  The protesters were put in jail with hardened prisoners,
and even little kids went to jail.
     The big event for the movement was the tragedy of the death of the
4 little girls.  Their funeral was packed with mourners and reporters
from all over the world, who descended on the town to cover their
burial.  As Walter Cronkite put it, "This was the awakening [for white
America.]"
     The movie ends with Chambliss's trial a decade and a half after
his sickening deed.  Still laughing at the cameras, he is convinced
that he will escape punishment.  The film would have been better served
with more details of the trial, particularly the investigation leading
up to it.  Also, too much footage is devoted to names like Bill Cosby
and Ozzie Davis who show up mainly to add star power to the picture.
These, however, are minor quibbles.
     Lee's powerful film works best in the stock footage from the past
for no words can adequately describe what happened then.  From images
as simple as two drinking fountains, one labeled white and one labeled
colored, to ones as dramatic as a church in rubbles, the film shocks
the viewers with their country's own history.
     4 LITTLE GIRLS runs 1:42.  The film is not rated but would be PG
for mature themes.  The picture would be fine for any child old enough
to be interested in its subject matter.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 9/12/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:42
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Violence, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Featuring Maxine and Christopher McNair, Alpha Robertson, 
      Walter Cronkite, George Wallace, Ossie Davis, Jesse Jackson, 
      Andrew Young, Coretta Scott King, Bill Cosby, Reggie White, 
      and others
Director: Spike Lee
Producers: Spike Lee and Sam Pollard
Cinematography: Ellen Kuras
Music: Terrence Blanchard
U.S. Distributor: HBO and 40 Acres and a Mule
     Basically, there are two types of documentaries:  those set in the 
present or the near-past that feature numerous video images to support 
their thesis, and those based in a time that's decades or centuries ago, 
for which only paintings or still photos remain.  4 LITTLE GIRLS, 
feature director Spike Lee's first foray into the documentary realm, is 
in the time period of the former, but uses the techniques of the latter.  
Although the central event of the film -- the bombing of the Sixteenth 
Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama where four little girls 
were killed -- took place on September 15, 1963, the only surviving 
records of the victims exist as a series of black-and-white photographs.
     It is Lee's job as a film maker to imbue these images with life, 
and that's a task he easily accomplishes.  This is probably the best 
conventional documentary since ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED.  By calling upon 
the recollections of friends and family members, Lee fleshes out the 
girls' photos, turning them into more than just the smiling faces of 
civil rights martyrs, and thus lending greater weight to the eventual 
account of what happened on that sad day in the heart of the segregated 
South.  
     4 LITTLE GIRLS begins on the morning of September 15, 1963, with 
the atrocity that brutally killed 11-year old Denise McNair, 14-year old 
Carole Robertson, 14-year old Cynthia Wesley, and 14-year old Addie Mae 
Collins.  In the absence of live footage to display the event, Lee must 
rely upon photographs taken in the aftermath.  Intercut with them are 
pictures of the girls superimposed upon images of their tombstones.  
Through it all, we can hear the voice of Joan Baez singing "Birmingham 
Sunday", a song that recounts the tragedy.
     During the ninety minutes that follow the stirring opening, Lee 
takes pains not only to detail the political climate in which this 
occurred, but, more importantly, to give us a sense of who the girls 
were and what their loss meant to the community.  The words of Rev. 
Jesse Jackson, Coretta Scott King, Rev. Reggie White, and Walter 
Cronkite establish the girls' place in history; the words of Maxine 
McNair, Chris McNair, and Alpha Robertson express the crushing impact of 
the event in personal terms.  It is a pain that, even after three 
decades, has not fully healed.  As the sister of one of the victims 
explains, "You may not remember the details, but know how you felt [at 
the time]."
     4 LITTLE GIRLS therefore works on several levels, and that's the 
true nature of its mastery.  Not only is it an excellent piece of 
historical research (no one under 40 is likely to recall the events of 
the day, except as learned from books and secondhand accounts), but it's 
also a solid piece of drama.  It's one thing to hear a talking head 
drone on about the importance of this event to the future of civil 
rights, but another thing altogether to hear the tearful, heartwrenching 
account of a mother as she tries to describe the depth of her loss.
     This is how Walter Cronkite describes the situation:  "I don't 
think the white community really understood... the depths of the hate of 
the [Ku Klux] Klan and its friends in the south... until that incredibly 
mean, perverted terrible crime of blowing up kids in a Sunday school 
basement...  At the moment that bomb went off and those four little 
girls were blasted and buried in the debris of the church, America 
understood the real nature of the hate that was preventing 
integration... This was the awakening."  And, while this is arguably the 
most significant aspect of the tale told by 4 LITTLE GIRLS, it's not the 
only angle that Lee presents, and that's why this movie bears not only 
the appellation of an "important documentary", but of a "very good film" 
as well.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Chuck Dowling
4 Little Girls (1997) **** out of ***** - Produced and Directed by: Spike
Lee.  Running Time: 102 minutes.
It was 1963 in Birmingham, Alabama.  A blast ripped apart a Baptist
church, killing four young black girls.  That's the story told in "4
Little Girls", the latest film by Spike Lee.  Unlike Lee's other films, "4
Little Girls" is a documentary, told only through old news footage and the
recollections of family and friends of the victims.
The story told is a compelling and emotional one, and for the most part it
is well presented.  A couple of times the subject does seem to wander into
broader areas, as other events in Birmingham are discussed.  This isn't
such a horrible complaint, but the film is called "4 Little Girls" and not
"Birmingham in the '60s".  I would have rather seen more stories and
memories from the friends and family.
Also on hand to deliver their thoughts are Jesse Jackson, Bill Cosby, and
Green Bay Packer Reggie White.  Thankfully, these "outsider" interviews
are kept to a minimum, leaving more time for the family members to speak. 
However, there are a few seconds of interviews with former Alabama
governor George Wallace that are oddly fascinating, and almost deserve
their own film.
I understand that all revenue from the theatrical run of the film will be
donated to a college scholarship fund in Birmingham.  So if it's playing
in your area, you can go help out a good cause and get a fine documentary
for your troubles.  This would also be an excellent film for students and
teachers studying/teaching the civil rights movement.  [NR]
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK/average)
1997, no MPAA rating, 102 minutes [1 hour, 42 minutes]
Produced by  Spike Lee, Sam Pollard; directed by Spike Lee.
Seen January 18, 1998 on home video (a special copy and press kit sent to me
from Bazan Entertainment Marketing).
        More often than not, documentary filmmakers are able to make their points and
themes by simply stating the facts and allowing the viewer to grasp the
intended concepts. Perhaps why "4 Little Girls" falls just short of greatness
is due to the fact that director Spike Lee tries to encompass so many things
that the impact of the theme is weakened in the shuffle.
        The film's title refers to four young girls who were innocent victims of a
terrorist bombing of a Baptist church in the racially-heated Birmingham,
Alabama of 1963. The opening sequence shows the graves of the girls while a
sad song about them is played. We're shown authentic photographs of the girls
- always smiling and laughing, and it's easy to feel sympathetic even though
we don't know anything about them. 
        Family and friends of the girls begin to tell stories about them, of how much
they loved them, but also of the tense, racist environment they grew up in.
One father compares not being able to tell his daughter he couldn't buy her
lunch at a white-only restaurant with the equivalent of smashing her head with
a rock himself. Other such stories are told, and you can sense the pain in the
eyes of these people 40 years after the incident. 
        The stories and images give the film a powerful, gripping atmosphere.
However, this tight storytelling is weakened severely as the direction starts
to wander with little synchronization. Within a few minute timespan, the focus
of the girls as individuals is lost and instead shifted to a broader spectrum.
I hesitate to describe the depiction of the civil rights movement and the
oppression blacks suffered in the 1950s and 60s as "generic," but I can think
of no other way to describe it. Lee uses the standard stock footage that has
been used in every other documentary of the sort: the hosing of peaceful
marchers; the police brutality, etc. Although these images are still moving
yet disturbing, they don't seem to be adding up to anything within the context
of the film. For example: we continue to meet more people who were somehow
associated with the girls, but when they talk about the racist sheriff and
Gov. George Wallace - neither of whom had anything to do with the bombing, it
doesn't seem significant.
        Actually, it's not so much that those images and direction don't seem
relevant, it's that they only skim the surface of something much bigger.
Anyone who has studied U.S. history knows the struggles against racism blacks
endured (and still do today), but the film's problem is it essentially assumes
the viewer is an expert in that area. Only a few stories of first-hand racism
are told while the stock footage is shown, and it's clear much more could, and
should be said.
        Eventually, the bombing incident is brought into the whole scheme and the
film again presents it on a more personal level. Important news figures and
celebrities comment on the situation and finally the point comes across: the
bombing of the church and the killing of the four little girls was the turning
point in the civil rights movement. The irony of it all is that the bombing
was meant to do just the opposite, and this point partially re-lights the
film's fire.
        We do learn that one of the killers was brought to justice, a violent racist
whose name was "Dynamite Bob." Plenty of people describe him as a horrific
villain, but never really give examples. In fact, this is symbolic of how the
film works in establishing the evil atmosphere and mentality which lead the
death of four innocent people: it never really answers the who and why
question, which is: who could do such an atrocious thing and why? 
        Even though the themes to "4 Little Girls" are slightly weaker than intended,
they are still important. I could certainly sympathize with the tragedy of it
all, but as a film it could have been better.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients: 
black and white photos, interviews with people, tight close-up shots of
faces, Governor George Wallace standing in a school doorway
Synopsis: 
This documentary explores the senseless bombing of the Sixteenth Street
Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama on September 15, 1963 which cut
short the lives of four children attending Sunday school: Addie Mae
Collins (14), Carole Denise McNair (11), Cynthia Wesley (14), and Carole
Rosamond Robertson (14). The bombing was a defining moment in the civil
rights movement because it awakened Americans to the real nature and
ultimate perversity of racist hatred. Interviews with people such as
Walter Cronkite, George Wallace, Coretta Scott King, civil rights
leaders, the former Mayor of Birmingham, and clergy are interspersed
with photos and film clips that locate the Sixteenth Street Baptist
Church within the context of the heated battle for racial integration
which was occurring in Birmingham, Alabama at that time. But the meat of
the story is the memories of the friends and family of the four slain
girls. They're all older now, and we get to watch them during the
interviews as they think back and explain things. Of course some details
are crystal clear and forever remembered, while others are fuzzy or lost
in time. At one point a mother stops and shows us her daughter's doll
collection, which she has faithfully kept pristine for over thirty
years. Another person says with difficulty, "It's not easy. Because we
had put so much of this behind us."
Opinion:
In some documentaries history is examined without emotion as if it
happened in limbo to people we don't know - - to people who wear black
and white clothing on grainy film. Not in this documentary. In '4 Little
Girls' Spike Lee foregoes dramatization or chronology and instead opts
to do this material as a set of interviews showing the plain and simple
(or even contradictory) truth the way people remember it. As real flesh
and blood folks ramble on about the people and events of Birmingham in
the 1960s, the camera allows us to watch every unconscious tick of the
muscles on their faces - - including the parents' and siblings'
determined efforts to keep a stiff upper lip and hold back tears.
Through this documentary Spike Lee reminds us that history is neither
impartial nor located in the past. History is today, living life as we
live it.

Author
Brian Koller
"4 Little Girls" is a Spike Lee production and his first
documentary.  The film is about a 1963 terrorist bombing 
of a church in Birmingham, Alabama by segregationalists,
killing four black children who were attending Sunday 
school. 
"4 Little Girls" is like no other Spike Lee film.  He
stays behind the camera, and the political, social and
racial aspects of the bombing are downplayed.  The focus
of the documentary is on the victims, their short lives,
and their family members and friends who continue to 
grieve to this day. 
Through the 1950s to mid-1960s, Birmingham was one of the 
most segregated city in the South.  Many members of the
police force were also members of the Klan.  The 1963
church bombing was the twenty-first for the city.  The
hate-filled segregationist that was responsible was
well-known, but was not put on trial until 1977.  He had
committed many such bombings, but moved with impunity
because segregation was the law of the land.  Even the
state Governor, George Wallace, was a hard-core segregationist, 
and is shown in an old video clip blocking the entrance to a 
school, surrounded by state guardsmen. 
The political conflict between the segregationists and
civil rights leaders such as Dr. Martin Luther King, and
the demonstrations led by young adults (one scene has
police turning fire hoses on them) are the most interesting
parts of the documentary.  I would have graded this documentary
higher had this subject been the film's focus. 
Instead the focus is on the four girls killed in the church 
bombing.  There are exhaustive interviews with friends and 
family.  When a friend breaks from telling a rembrance to sob, 
the camera makes certain to capture the lengthy moment of 
private grief for permanent video preservation.  The mother 
shows her daughters' scout uniform, her dolls, her toys.  
These scenes, drenched in grief, are significant only because 
the daughter was brutally murdered, and the murder itself is 
significant primarily as a milestone in the struggle for equal 
rights. 
One element that bothered me about the documentary is the 
depiction of the four victims as young children.  Three of
the four were fourteen years old: teenagers, not little girls.  
The fourth victim was eleven.  The reverend Jesse Jackson 
refers to them as "innocent babies."  Certainly they were 
innocent, and no one of any age deserves to die in an act of 
terrorism, but they were not babies.  Bill Cosby has a brief 
scene where he states that the victims could have been Harvard 
graduates and could have become doctors.  Well, they could have 
become U.S. Presidents, but it isn't necessary to speculate
about their future in order to get across the tragedy and 
injustice of their deaths. 
I know that I come across as insensitive by criticizing 
"4 Little Girls."  I realize that I may be the only person who
has seen it and not given it a very positive review.
However, I believe that it is wrong to raise the grade of a 
film because of its subject, no matter how important. 
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
