Title
Review for Dog Day Afternoon (1975)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** out of **** - 7.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Al Pacino (Sonny), John Cazale (Sal), Charles Durning (Moretti),
Chris Sarandon (Leon)
DIRECTOR: Sidney Lumet
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for language and violence 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1975
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Picture, Best Actor (Pacino), Best
Supporting Actor (Sarandon)
ACADEMY AWARDS: Original Screenplay (Frank Pierson)
Based on a true story, DOG DAY AFTERNOON is the story of two Brooklyn men,
Sonny Wortzik (Al Pacino) and Sal (John Cazale), who attempt to rob a bank
in a desperate attempt for funds.  The funds they hope to gain will be
used to pay for the sex-change operation of Sonny's male lover, Leon,
played by Chris Sarandon.
Sonny is a former bank employee who knows all the tricks of the trade,
which he shows by being, for the most part, well aware of the surroundings.
He's worked out his plan completely and knows how to take out all of the
bank's possible annoyances.  Everything is working out fine until the
police show up, headed up by Charles Durning (Moretti).  What transpires
from here is a multiple-day circus, including the police, media,
enthusiastic "fans" of the robbers, and a few unusual characters; namely,
a pizza boy and an angry boyfriend of one of the tellers.
DOG DAY AFTERNOON is, overall, a rather enjoyable movie.  At times it
appears it is an action movie, but at other times it leans towards a
comedy/drama.  The best performance is turned in by Al Pacino, as the
crafty leader.  John Cazale also turns in a good performance as Sal, the
dumb-witted sidekick who really isn't "all there".  For example, Sonny is
toying with the idea of taking a plane to a foreign country, and Sal
suggests they fly to the far-off country "Wyoming".  Chris Sarandon plays
a rather odd character as Sonny's gay lover; the one who needs the money
to pay for the sex-change operation.  The group of bank hostages, a number
of female tellers and the manager, also provide a few comical moments
throughout the movie.
Complete with a fairly dramatic ending, DOG DAY AFTERNOON is a good flick
that you should enjoy.  It is agreeable that it could have been better in
many ways, but it is one of the more famous bank heist films of the past
few decades.


Author
Scott A. Borton
Title: DOG DAY AFTERNOON (USA 1975)
Directed by: Sidney Lumet
Starring: Al Pacino, John Cazale, Charles Durning, Chris Sarandon
   Unfortunately, I do not begin watching a movie without some preconceived 
notion about what the movie is going to be like. I started watching DOG 
DAY AFTERNOON with the idea that I was going to get a tight farce about 
two brain-dead bank robbers. Of course, films invariably differ from my 
conception, but with DOG DAY AFTERNOON I found that not only did I not 
get what I expected, I got nothing at all.
   DOG DAY AFTERNOON jumps right into the action, which involves three
freshman bank robbers scoping out and subsequenty robbing a neighborhood
bank in Brooklyn. Things begin to go awry when one of the robbers' number
chickens out of the operation. Despite all the robber's precautions, soon
the gig is up: the bank is surrounded by police officers. Robbers Sonny
(Al Pacino) and Sal (John Cazale) decide to hold out in the bank with
eight hostages until they figure out a way to escape cleanly. The
already-bad situation degrades when the press find out certain facts about
Sonny that could prove to be somewhat embarrassing. 
   Sounds interesting? It is, from a topical point of view. The robbers 
are delightfully goofy and clueless, and there are some humorous little 
moments that demonstrate how strange some situations can get. But that's 
as far as the comedy goes: light-hearted moments that don't add up to a 
larger comedy aesthetic. There are moments of drama, inserted in a seemingly 
random fashion and without cohesion. So what do you get in the end? A 
dramatic comedy? A comedic drama? Of course, it's always dangerous to 
classify films, but it seems to me that even the creators and actors of 
the film had no idea how the film should turn out. This lack of direction 
is magnified by the larger plot of the film: the film starts out funny 
but ends dead serious.
   There is simply nothing special about this film. The dialogue is 
ho-hum, the plot is simple and uninteresting (I really didn't even care 
if the robbers made a getaway or not), and the characters are dry and 
underacted. The only thing that I found funny about the film was the 
robbers' complete cluelessness about the art of bank robbery, but that 
idea was basically thrown away in favor of unclear drama. 
   One thing that I did notice and enjoy about the film was the depiction 
of the media covering the event. During the standoff in the bank, TV 
cameras are everywhere: there seem to be more media guys than policemen. 
There isn't a TV on without some report of the event blaring on it, and 
radio talk-show hosts even try to call and negotiate with the robbers 
directly. This is a delightfully understated comment on the media, and 
certainly more effective than some contemporary films (NATURAL BORN 
KILLERS leaps to mind). 
   Thus concludes my review of DOG DAY AFTERNOON. Now I will review the
Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations that this film received. My
main question is: what were they thinking? There were six Oscar
nominations and six Golden Globe nominations for this flick. _Maybe_ Al
Pacino (AAN: Best Actor) as Sonny deserved some special recognition for
acting the part of a goofy robber so... goofily. But John Cazale (AAN:
Best Supporting) as Sal, Sonny's partner? Naw. Sal was pretty
uninteresting. Charles Durning (AAN: Best Supporting) as the cop who tries
to coax the robbers out? No! He mostly shouted into a bullhorn throughout
the whole film. And Chris Sarandon (AAN: Best Supporting) as Sonny's gay
lover?  Certainly not. A totally unbeliveable character at most. 
