Title
Review for Box of Moonlight (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Alex Fung
BOX OF MOONLIGHT (Trimark - 1997)
Starring John Turturro, Sam Rockwell, Catherine Keener
Screenplay by Tom DiCillo
Produced by Marcus Viscidi, Thomas A. Bliss
Directed by Tom DiCillo
Running time: 107 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
If screenwriter/director Tom DiCillo had his way, his new film BOX OF
MOONLIGHT would have been released years ago; he had originally
envisioned it as his follow-up to his feature film debut JOHNNY SUEDE,
but due to numerous financing problems and setbacks, the project was
postponed time after time.  In the meantime, Mr. DiCillo and a group
of friends shot a short film which was expanded to become LIVING IN
OBLIVION, the critically-lauded 1995 comedy on the perils of
low-budget filmmaking that has inspired many aspiring directors, and
which has revitalized his filmmaking career.  Based on this success,
BOX OF MOONLIGHT was finally put into production after years of
aborted starts, and the result is a delightfully charming and amusing
little comedy.
There is virtually nothing in BOX OF MOONLIGHT that one hasn't seen
before in many other films: the strength of this film about a distant,
emotionally-repressed engineer who learns to come out of his shell and
enjoy life is not in its originality, but in its execution.  Mr.
DiCillo elicits superb performances from his cast, and the film is
both well-paced and well-written, capturing an infectuous carefree
sense of whimsy.  BOX OF MOONLIGHT is a light and inconsequential
film, but a terribly amiable one.
The film's protagonist is straight-laced Al Fountain (John Turturro),
an electrical engineer whose life has reached a crisis state.  He is
despised by his employees for his priggish work ethic, emotionally
detached from his loving wife, and his chastisement of his young
son's inability to memorize the gigantic flashcard multiplication
tables Al brings home puts him at unease - Al is not a happy man.
When his offsite project is abruptly cancelled, Al decides in a
moment of spontaneity to visit a lake from his childhood rather than
return home, in the hopes that the detour might help him recapture
some of the happier moments from his past.  As Al's luck would have
it, the idyllic crystal-clear pond from his treasured memories has
become a toxic cesspool of pollution, but it is on his way away from
the lake where he comes across a strange, quirky young man dressed in
a ragged Davey Crockett suit (Sam Rockwell), who, though a series of
bizarre adventures, ultimately helps Al change the way he looks at
life.
That the uptight Al will learn from the free-spirited Kid to loosen
up is never in question; BOX OF MOONLIGHT does not surprise in that
respect, but what is interesting is that this is depicted onscreen in
such a compelling and affecting manner, which is primarily due to the
work of the two lead actors.  John Turturro, one of American film's
leading character actors, is in superb form here; this is one of his
finest performances, effectively conveying his character's
stringentness ultimately superceded by an uneasy levity within a
comic context.  (The scene in the film where Al breaks out into a
little dance is a delight.)  Mr. Turturro is terrific in BOX OF
MOONLIGHT, with his uneasy and unsettled Al a churning pot of
conflicting emotions at the outset of the film, and his winning turn
is award-calibre.  Sam Rockwell also is strong in his debut
performance as the wacky Kid; while a strange, loopy creation whose
simple wisdom far exceeds expectations, Mr. Rockwell is able to find
the humanity in the character, making him affable and ingratiating
while maintaining his harmless eccentricities.
BOX OF MOONLIGHT ultimately works because Mr. DiCillo's characters
win us over; it is amusing to watch Al's wide-eyed incredulousness at
the Kid's unorthodox lifestyle, and as Al releases the shackles which
have bound his way of life, it is equally liberating for the audience.
While not particularly a novel film, BOX OF MOONLIGHT is a sweet,
charming, and satisfying one.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"At one point when berated and bloodied by her male military superior,
 Moore screams out a guttural invitation to him to enjoy partaking in the
 absorption of a certain anatomical member." - Dan Cox, VARIETY, on G.I. JANE

Author
Ben Hoffman
This fairy tale-like film has all the elements of a "feel good"
movie with a quirky set of characters, (Al and "Kid," respectively
played by John Turturro and Sam Rockwell), a happy ending, is
funny and delightful from the opening scenes to its FIN.
Turturro is perfect as the uptight contracting engineer, Al
Fountain, a stickler for punctuality, a person so predictable he
is something of a bore.   His wife, Deb (Annie Corley), tells him
she can set her watch by him.   All that changes when an
out-of-town job, on which Al and his crew had been working, is
cancelled.   It is then that Al notices one of the hairs in his
head is grey.   In a small panic about how his life has been so
dull to date he is drawn to visit the site of his childhood.  Al
rents a car and heads to his old memories. On the way he sees a
child pedalling a bike but going backwards.   He sees a waitress
pour coffee into a cup with less and less liquid in the cup.
Very odd.
Enter Kid, standing next to his beat up and broken down old car,
dressed in a Davy Crockett outfit including the fur hat with tail.
Kid hails the  approaching car and Al stops. . . . and the movie
takes off in a state of whimsy.   Kid says he lives "just a bit up
the road" and could Al tow his car there?   Al, always Mr. Nice
Guy, agrees.    After the old car is tied by rope to the new
rental car, Kid tells Al that it would better if Kid drove as he
knows the road better.  Al reluctantly agrees.     They drive off
with Kid at the wheel of the new rental and Al in the old beat up
car.
Kid's house is somewhat further away than the "just a bit up the
road."   It begins to grow dark when the cars finally arrive at
the oddly decorated trailer and surroundings which are "home" to
Kid.    Thus begins Al's coming out of his box of predictability
as Kid, time after time, surprises Al (and us).    Kid is sooooh
reasonable and always smiling so that Al seamlessly enters some of Kid's world, becoming a better man, a better father to his child
and a more loving husband.     His earlier phone calls home to his
wife and his telephone conversations with his child are absolute
gems.
An Oscar-deserving performance is given by Sam Rockwell as a
free-spirited sprite.  Fine performances are turned in by the two
ladies to whom Sam introduces Al: Catherine Keener and Lisa
Blount.   Dermot Mulroney rounds out the excellent cast.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Tom DiCillo's offbeat BOX OF MOONLIGHT is a film that I wanted to 
like a great deal more than I actually did.  DiCillo is one of those few 
quirky directors who loves to play with both his audience and his 
subject matter.  Unfortunately, all the little twists, turns, and tweaks 
in BOX OF MOONLIGHT can't eclipse the fact that it's basically nothing 
more than a combination mid-life crisis/buddy movie.  There are number 
of enchanting scenes, but, in concert, they somehow fail to gel into a 
magical whole.
     The central problem with BOX OF MOONLIGHT may be that it loses its 
direction.  This is a malady that neither of DiCillo's previous movies 
suffered.  The film maker's first effort, JOHNNY SUEDE (starring a then-
unknown Brad Pitt) possessed the same dreamlike quality evident here, 
but it knew exactly where it was going.  LIVING IN OBLIVION, a brilliant 
satire of independent film making, was tightly written from beginning to 
end.  BOX OF MOONLIGHT, on the other hand, starts out strong, then 
starts to wander during the second half.  Rather than building to a 
satisfying conclusion, the movie sort of fizzles out, leaving behind the 
impression that, even though it was a long 110 minutes, something was 
missing.
     BOX OF MOONLIGHT opens with John Turturro playing Al Fountain, the 
kind of uptight boss whom everyone equally despises and pities.  Al, an 
electrical engineer "specializing in the field distribution of Zeus 
turbine engines," is in charge of a crew of hard-working men involved in 
the construction of a windshield wiper plant in Drip Rock, Tennessee.  
None of the guys like him -- to them, he's a machine-like clock-watcher.  
The group's foreman, Soapy (Ray Aranha), feels sorry for Al and invites 
him to a poker game, but, when the boss shows up ready to hobnob with 
the men, he overhears a barrage of disparaging comments that sends him 
scurrying back to his hotel room.
     The job in Drip Rock ends abruptly, and Al finds himself alone in 
the middle of nowhere with nothing to do.  Instead of returning home to 
his wife and son, he decides to take a journey to Lake Splatchee, an 
idyllic park where he spent a wonderful summer as a child.  Al's 
intention is to re-discover himself, but Lake Splatchee has turned into 
a chemical waste dump, and that further disheartens him.  Then he runs 
into the Kid (Sam Rockwell).  A freespirit with a Davy Crockett outfit 
(complete with coonskin cap) and a busted distributor under his hood, 
the Kid prevails on Al for a little automobile assistance.  What starts 
out as a chance encounter turns into a several day odyssey that includes 
skinnydipping, a tomato fight, a bar brawl, and a flirtatious picnic 
with a phonesex girl (Catherine Keener) and her sister (Lisa Blount).
     There are moments when BOX OF MOONLIGHT is a joy to sit through, 
but the disjointed film never generates any momentum.  It has its share 
of strange characters and odd moments, such as when Al sees things 
moving backwards in time (for example, water being sucked out of a glass 
back into the pitcher), but they don't amount to much.  The movie is 
assembled like a series of episodes, and that's is part of the problem.  
DiCillo seems to be constantly changing his mind about what he wants to 
accomplish.
     The primary goal of BOX OF MOONLIGHT is to show Al's redemption 
through his relationship with the Kid.  One is constricted by 
convention; the other has no respect for rules.  Obviously, each has 
something to teach the other.  It's an old plot, but DiCillo keeps it 
interesting.  In the final third, however, two female characters are 
introduced, and, while they add a little spice to the proceedings, they 
ultimately dilute the focus.  Suddenly, it's not just one damaged human 
being we're dealing with, but several, and DiCillo doesn't have the time 
to develop the potentially interesting sisters into more than half-
characters.
     John Turturro, who has played his share of unusual roles in 
unconventional films (take BARTON FINK, for example), is superb.  The 
temptation in a part like this is to go a little over-the-top and add 
some caricature to Al's personae.  Turturro avoids the trap, remaining 
true to his screen identity.  As a result, it requires little effort to 
sympathize with him.  Sam Rockwell, although solid in his portrayal of 
the Kid, lacks his co-star's mastery.  While Rockwell displays boundless 
energy and enthusiasm, his reading of the character isn't as deep as 
Turturro's.  Lisa Blount and DiCillo regular Catherine Keener (WALKING 
AND TALKING) are on hand in supporting roles, and Dermot Mulroney (the 
title character in MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING) has a two-scene cameo.
     It would be hard to classify BOX OF MOONLIGHT as unsuccessful, 
since it represents a pleasantly diverting two hours.  On the other 
hand, given DiCillo's impressive (albeit short) track-record, I was a 
little disappointed by what's on-screen.  In the final analysis, BOX OF 
MOONLIGHT is a relatively standard, unambitious story with a few neat 
quirks, but it isn't nearly as delightful as the title indicates.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
