Title
Review for Maboroshi no hikari (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Dalgleish
        Some movies want to explain everything.  They approach some of life's 
most profound issues--love, faith, mortality--and try to give us a 
neatly-packaged answer in a couple of hours.  Sometimes this even 
results in great movies.  But there are other, wiser films, which 
don't try to explain everything, but undertake the harder task of 
observing life, watching events unfold, standing back and illuminating 
the nuances of existence, without theorizing or philosophizing.
        Hirokazu Kore-eda's remarkable first feature, MABOROSI, is one of 
those movies which is content to watch from a distance.  It plays like 
a series of stills, one beautifully composed shot after another, 
observing the life of a woman whose first husband commits suicide, 
leaving her alone with a three-month-old son, and who remarries a few 
years later.
        There are obvious ways of dealing with this subject matter: tearful 
scenes of mourning, angry outbursts, denial.  Kore-eda isn't 
interested.  We never see the woman, Yumiko (played perfectly by 
Makiko Esumi), crying over the death of her husband.  Infinitely more 
powerful is a long-shot of Yumiko and her son (Gohki Kashiyama) 
boarding a train platform several years later, preparing to leave the 
city and join the new husband in his little Japanese fishing 
community; we watch them, dressed in black, walk slowly up the steps 
and along the platform, the sky grim and overcast.  What does it mean?  
It doesn't 'mean' anything.  What does it convey?  It conveys volumes, 
and does so in the language of pure cinema.
        That is one of the great pleasures of MABOROSI, that it says so much 
by saying so little, by merely contemplating the everyday rituals and 
routines of life.  Yumiko's changing moods are reflected in the visual 
compositions, not simply in her 'character arc.'  Later in the film, 
after she has lived with her new husband (Takashi Naitoh) for some 
time, we see the family seated in front of their house, looking at the 
sea.  The husband and son eat slices of watermelon, laughing as they 
spit the seeds out; Yumiko watches and smiles.  This scene conveys 
subtly, without fanfare, the pleasure she has found in her new life; 
everything we need to know is up there on the screen, in the little 
gestures and details, and nothing needs to be said aloud.  In this 
movie, it is not grand speeches and melodramatic confrontations that 
are important, it's things like scrubbing the steps or teaching a 
child to ride a bike. 
        Kore-eda and cinematographer Masao Nakabori use light and shadow 
masterfully, without the benefit of off-screen lighting (as far as I 
could tell).  In the first third of the film--the build-up to the 
suicide and its aftermath--most scenes are shot in darkness, or on 
cloudy, grey days.  There isn't much sunshine.  The second third, as 
Yumiko finds some measure of happiness again, is sunnily lit, 
reflecting her changing circumstances, and the final third becomes 
grey again, rainy, stormy, as the unresolved grief from her first 
husband's death preoccupies her once more, and she seeks an answer 
that doesn't exist--the dead never explain themselves.  There is also, 
in most scenes, a balance of light and dark.  Indoor scenes are either 
brightly lit inside with darkness outside, or shadowy within and light 
without.  This mix of light and dark reflects the balanced tone of the 
film--and of life, for that matter--augmented by Ming Chang Chen's 
spare score.
        Some of the shots are perfect.  Two children run beside a 
lake, their reflections in the still water, the sky looming above: the 
image is unforgettable.  And my favourite visual shows a line of 
mourners walking along the shoreline, silhouetted by a narrow ribbon 
of ocean, dwarfed by land below and sky above.  Both these images show 
human figures trapped by water, caught between the vast reaches of 
heaven and earth, and this poetic re-fashioning of images (such as the 
various shots of bicycles and trains) serves to develop and deepen the 
film's themes, and the feelings it evokes.
        The only problem, really, is that this approach demands 
considerable patience from the viewer.  This is not a movie to see 
when you're in the mood for something light and entertaining, nor is 
it a movie for impatient viewers.  But if one has the patience to 
accept Kore-eda's approach, it is deeply rewarding.  The most obvious 
point of reference is Kieslowski's BLUE, but MABOROSI is, I think, 
even better.  The final third in particular is absorbing, moving, and, 
in its finest moments, sublime, possessing a grace and wisdom few 
films strive for, much less achieve.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Makiko Esumi, Takashi Naitoh, Tadanobu Asano
Director: Hirokazu Kore-eda
Producer: Naoe Gozu
Screenplay: Yoshihisa Ogita based on the short story by Teru Miyamoto
Cinematography: Masao Nakabori
Music: Chen Ming-Chang
U.S. Distributor: Milestone Films
     In an era when MTV-inspired film making techniques have begun to 
dominate motion pictures, its refreshing to see something with the 
simple, unhurried style of Japanese director Hirokazu Kore-eda's feature 
debut, MABOROSI.  This film, which is really little more than a series 
of images connected by a bare-bones plot, explores the evolution of one 
woman's emotion as she ponders the unexplained (and seemingly 
inexplicable) death of her first husband.  
     Kore-eda, along with cinematographer Masao Nakabori, has 
meticulously constructed each shot.  There are no pans or sweeps, and 
close-ups are used judiciously.  Most scenes are photographed from a 
medium distance, with the action taking place through the lens of a 
stationary camera.  There are frequent shots of empty streets and 
alleys, and the composition of shadow and light is carefully considered.  
Kore-eda has obviously thought through the visual presentation of every 
second of MABOROSI's 110-minute running time.
     The film opens with a brief prologue during which a young Japanese 
girl watches her beloved grandmother leave home, never to return.  On 
that same day, she meets the boy who will eventually become her husband.  
When we next encounter her, Yumiko (Makiko Esumi) is twenty years older.  
She's married to Ikuo (Tadanobu Asano) and has a 3-month old son.  She 
is content, and her happiness is shown through a playfulness that 
permeates every action.  Then, one night, everything changes.  Ikuo 
commits suicide by walking in front of a train.  Yumiko is plunged into 
an extended period of mourning from which she only begins to emerge when 
she re-marries, this time to a widower named Tamio (Takashi Naitoh).  To 
be with Tamio, Yumiko leaves the city of Osaka to live in a tiny fishing 
village.  But she is a haunted woman, and her fear of intimacy keeps her 
emotionally isolated from her new husband.
     Kore-eda has chosen not to illustrate Yumiko's emotions through 
traditionally melodramatic methods.  In fact, it's rare that she sheds a 
tear, although the face of model-turned-actress Makiko Esumi is 
certainly capable of expressing a surprising range of feeling.  Instead 
of relying on the character, however, Kore-eda uses Yumiko's 
surroundings.  When she's on the way to the police station to identify 
her husband's body, the weather weeps for her, streaking the car windows 
with rain.  After Ikuo's death, the director, much like Ingmar Bergman, 
uses spatial relationships to highlight her emotional isolation.  She is 
often distanced from others, frequently appearing alone and shrouded by 
shadow.  Towards the end of MABOROSI, there is a memorable sequence when 
Yumiko, depicted in silhouette, is set far apart from everyone else.  
Kore-eda also uses certain sounds to contribute to the sense of solitude 
-- the crashing of the waves and the roar of the wind, in particular. 
     There are times when Yumiko's icy shield thaws, but such instances 
are rare.  Questions of fate and mortality overwhelm her.  The weight of 
responsibility for a death she could not have prevented paralyzes her 
spirit.  She is forever puzzling out the riddle of why Ikuo killed 
himself, not recognizing that some riddles in life have no answer.  The 
mysteries of fate are not ours to control or understand.  
     MABOROSI is a worthwhile movie experience not because it ventures 
into virgin territory, but because its presentation is so precise and 
unique.  Having seen this movie, I can't think of a more effective 
format than the one chosen by Kore-eda.  This is a haunting cinematic 
portrait, where the almost-poetic visual images and their associated 
emotional meaning hold the viewer enraptured.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
