Title
Review for She's All That (1999)
Number of Reviews
24

Author
Scott Renshaw
SHE'S ALL THAT
(Miramax)
Starring:  Freddie Prinze Jr., Rachael Leigh Cook, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe,
Matthew Lillard, Paul Walker, Kevin Pollak, Kieran Culkin.
Screenplay:  R. Lee Fleming Jr.
Producers:  Peter Abrams, Robert L. Levy and Richard N. Gladstein.
Director:  Robert Iscove.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  91 min.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Cinderella ain't what she used to be...and at the same time, she's
exactly what she's always been.  Like no other fairy tale set-up, it sets
a modern sensibility to itching -- how does one respond to the idea that a
woman must be physically transformed to be worthy of love?  This male
chauvinist Pygmalion has taken many forms over the years, from MY FAIR
LADY to PRETTY WOMAN, but SHE'S ALL THAT may have found the perfect
setting:  high school.  If there's anywhere you can sell the idea that
_everyone_ believes they must be physically transformed to be worthy of
love, this would be the place.
     So much for the sociological context -- SHE'S ALL THAT stinks like
last month's cheese left on a particularly sunny windowsill.  Freddie
Prinze Jr. stars as Zack Siler, senior class president, soccer star and
all-around golden boy at Southern California's Harrison High.  On the
first day back from spring break, Zack is dumped by long-time girlfriend
Taylor (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe) when she hooks up with a former "Real World"
cast member (Matthew Lillard).  The humiliated Zack claims he can turn any
girl in school into a prom queen, a boast that turns into a bet when
Zack's buddy Dean (Paul Walker) chooses gloomy art geek Laney Boggs
(Rachael Leigh Cook) as the subject of the experiment.  And thus the
eight-week countdown clock to personal growth and true love begins.
     I'm sure that all parties involved in SHE'S ALL THAT thought they
really were telling a Cinderella story, particularly director Robert
Iscove, who helmed the popular TV-movie version with Brandy a couple years
back.  This, of course, is one of those Cinderella stories where the poor
little girl is really a supermodel whose paint-spattered overalls hide a
slinky va-va-voom waiting to emerge.  Rachael Leigh Cook wears her
horn-rims like someone trying desperately not to appear beautiful despite
her porcelain features, somewhat dampening that willing suspension of
disbelief.  There's little if any chemistry between Prinze and Cook, no
development of what would make their mutual attraction grow...in short,
nothing that would appeal to a viewer not of the same age as the
protagonists.
     Essentially, however, SHE'S ALL THAT isn't remotely interested in
appealing to anyone outside that audience, because it's really a teen
fantasy.  For girls, it offers the prospect that, even if you're a social
pariah now, you too can turn into a popular beauty with the right haircut
and a sympathetic stud by your side; for boys, it suggests that anyone is
a hottie waiting to happen if you point her in the right direction.
There's even assurance for the academically brilliant (Zack faces the
dilemma of choosing between seven Ivy League schools) that your life is
complicated, too.  And in between, it derives belly laughs from people
eating pizza sprinkled with pubic hair.  It's humorless and derivative,
but it _understands_ you, fellow high school student.  Like John Hughes
crossed with Bill Clinton, SHE'S ALL THAT feels your adolescent pain.
     Thank heaven for Matthew Lillard, who invests his spin on "Real
World's" Puck with enough egotistical energy to rouse SHE'S ALL THAT from
its stupor periodically.  His scenes, including a manic look-at-me dance
at a party, are about the only aspect of the film not pasted together from
every other teen angst-comedy you've ever seen.  This one compounds its
tedium with a near-suffocating boredom, as Iscove can't even generate
energy to drive its familiar narrative forward.  SHE'S ALL THAT just
meanders sweetly towards its inevitable conclusion, telling its viewers
exactly what they want to hear:  that someday their prince will come, and
all it will take to get him is a sausage-casing red dress.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: January 29, 1999
Starring: Freddie Prinze Jr., Rachael Leigh Cook, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe,
Matthew Lillard, Usher Raymond, Anna Paquin, Elden Ratliff
Directed by: Robert Iscove
Distributed by: Miramax Films
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (sexual content, crude humor, brief strong language,
teen drinking)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/shesallthat.htm
For the first time since June of 1998's CAN'T HARDLY WAIT, a large
collection of Gen-X talent masses together to produce something other
than a slasher-horror flick. The change is a welcome one, if perhaps a
bit awkward for Hollywood, for their talent is half a generation ahead
of their target group. Now, formulas which have worked for the last five
years must be revised for application to a new generation of youngsters
born after 1980. SHE'S ALL THAT, the first bigscreen feature from
veteran TV director Rob Iscove, tentatively tests the waters of teenage
fanship before risking all on a muddled strategy. 
The strategy is to borrow from other sweet-hearted romances -- most
explicitly PRETTY WOMAN -- and mold them into the teenager/high school
setting. This works initially, until the movie falls into a repetitive
cycle. The end, which barely breaks from this cycle, is unsatisfying. 
The repetitive feeling comes after the novelty of our characters has
worn off. Zack Siler (Freddy Prinze Jr.) -- Harrison High soccer star,
honor roll student, and heartthrob to every girl in his class -- comes
back from Spring Break to find that his girlfriend Taylor (Jodi Lyn
O'Keefe) has just dumped him for Brock Hudson (Matthew Lillard), star of
MTV's "The Real World." The break-up is a wooden stake to the heart for
Zack, since Taylor is the most popular girl in school, but on the
rebound he bets his friends that he could make any other girl just as
popular. The guinea pig is Laney Boggs (Rachel Leigh Cook), recessive
art student extraordinaire, and Zack has six weeks to turn her into the
prom queen. 
The R. Lee Flemming Jr. script seems worthless because the character
types are so overused. Although Flemming goes to all lengths to paint
Zack as a likeable guy -- which he accomplishes to some degree -- both
Taylor and Laney become predictable. Neither of the three leads do
anything substantial with their roles, and all are there simply for
visual appeal. The supporting roles, as well as their interactions with
the main cast, manage to add some humor which helps to break the
monotony. 
For the most part, the movie has a surreal or unrealistic feeling to it.
Teenagers are likely to eat it up, though, and that's what counts. SHE'S
ALL THAT works on its level, just not anywhere else. 

Author
David Nusair
Starring Freddie Prinze Jr., Rachel Leigh Cook, Kevin Pollack
Ah, and 1999 was going along so well, too.
"She's All That" has the dubious distinction of being the worst movie I've
seen so far this year.  And quite frankly, I doubt I'll see anything
equally bad.  (At least, I *hope* I don't see anything equally bad).
"She's All That" tells the story of the most popular guy in school (played
by Freddie Prinze Jr.) who accepts a bet to transform the geekiest girl in
school (Rachel Leigh Cook) into the most popular.  That, right there, is
problem #1.  How many times have we seen this storyline?  As Cook comments
near the end of the film, "it's kind of like "Pretty Woman", except
without the prostitution".  Of course, had the filmmakers attempted to try
something new with this material, the well-worn storyline would have been
a device to propell the movie forward.  As it is, though, "She's All That"
relies *completely* on the lame and overused formula to push it ahead.
There's not one original or interesting character in the film, either, and
if that wasn't bad enough, there's not one good performance featured.  The
star of the movie, Rachel Leigh Cook, is simply horrible.  I usually don't
like to get so personal, but in this case, I think it needs to be said. 
Cook wears the same expression throughout the flick and looks to be having
as miserable a time as I was.  I was never convinced that she was a
"nerd", and her transformation was unconvincing and unnecessary.  The
movie seems to be saying it's better to be popular than to be who you are.
As for Freddie Prinze Jr., an actor I ordinarily enjoy, he too is quite
bad here.  He coasts through the film on so-called charm, and never
establishes a real character.
Kieren Culkin is here, too, as the brother of Cook.  And for some
indiscernable reason, he's got hearing aids.  No explanation is given and
they're never brought up.  Were we supposed to feel *sorry* for him just
because he wore hearing aids?  I don't think so.  That single element of
the film was one of the most offensive things I've seen in a movie in a
long time.
"She's All That" sucks.  That's what it boils down to.  It's not
entertaining, and it's not even a good time passer.  The hour and a half
running time goes by slower than a 5 minute hair-removal system
informercial.  And what's worse, it sends out a bad message to teens. 
It appears to be telling them, "hey, it doesn't matter if you're happy
the way you are.  That's unimportant.  If you want to *truly* be happy,
dress in the latest fashions and act like a bubble-headed moron."  Ugh.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
SHE'S ALL THAT by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: B-
She's All That has a story that is very common.  It has a new teenager twist
though, which will make the story line available to a larger audience.  I have
been very much anticipating this new film.  The up and coming Freddie Prinze
Jr. stars as Zack, the most popular kid at his high school.  Zack is in trouble
now.  His girlfriend Taylor, played by Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, went on MTV's Spring
Break over their school's spring break.  She met a guy from the show "The Real
World", Brock Hudson. (Matthew Lillard) She decides to break up with Zack. 
Zack is extremely angered with Taylor's decision.  Zack talks with his best
friend Dean, played by Paul Walker, (Varsity Blues) about what Taylor did.  The
two make a bet that Zack can turn any girl in the school into the prom queen in
six weeks.  Dean picks Laney Boggs, (Rachael Leigh Cook) the school dork.  The
film's first twenty minutes are quite promising.  Music accompanies the opening
almost the entire time.  She's All That was on its way to being great until
Zack made the bet.
Zack meets up with Laney and gets rejected by her.  His project is even tougher
now that she ignores him.  He follows her around, and tries to get involved in
her life.  The two of them become extremely close friends.  Laney is now
popular.  At school, Laney has even been nominated for prom queen.  Zack has
helped out Laney a lot.  The problem is that he is doing all this for the wrong
reasons.  
Freddie Prinze Jr. has reassured me that he can act after his terrible
performance in I Still Know What You Did Last Summer.  The character of Zack
was developed pretty well.  The film explained the fact very well that he is
extremely popular.  Everyone looks up to Zack, even kids in middle school. 
Taylor's characters is very annoying at many times in the movie.  She is just
the kind of character that you wish wasn't even in the movie.  The performance
by Jodi Lyn O'Keefe was well done, but the character really annoyed me.  Paul
Walker's character, Dean was also annoying.  Is these two characters were
changed a bit, this could have helped the film out a lot.   
A large cast is pretty much what saved She's All That from being terrible. 
Clea DuVall, Usher Raymond, and Sarah Michelle Gellar make extremely brief
performances.  If these characters were brought into the film more, they could
have helped the total outcome.  The main characters are developed pretty well
in the film, but we could have known a little more about Zack and Taylor's
background.
She's All That, like many teen comedies these days, makes you feel good about
yourself.  The music and characters are upbeat and nineties, and that's what I
liked the best about the film.  The dance sequence at the prom was very nicely
done.  The choreography was very nicely done.
Little suspense was put into the film at all.  It was extremely predictable
what was going to happen.  If a few more twists and turns were added to the
over-used plot, She's All That could have been a lot better.  Many sub plots
went on throughout the movie.  I think the sub plot of the prom queen race
could have been added to for some more fun in the film.  The film is also slow
moving at times.  My mind drifted away three or four times throughout the film.
The Bottom Line- It could have been "all that", but not enough effort was put
into it. 

Author
Matt Williams
The teen comedy traditionally comes in two flavors:  cynical or
saccharine. She's All That is a film of the latter variety.  It's
simple, straightforward and ultimately pleasing.
Zack Siler (Freddie Prinze, Jr.) has it made.  He's the class president,
the most popular kid in school, and a shoo-in for Prom King.  Yet, when
his girlfriend, Taylor Vaughan (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe), dumps him for the
obnoxious star of MTV's Real World, Brock Hudson (Matthew Lillard),
Zack's entire world is turned upside down.
However, Zack is confident that he can rebound.  So confident, in fact,
that he accepts a bet from his best friend, Dean (Paul Walker).  He
claims that he could date any girl in school, no matter how unpopular,
and get her crowned Prom Queen.
Enter Laney Boggs (Rachael Leigh Cook), the cold and distant artistic
student who becomes the unknowing object of Zack's bet.  She doesn't
care about proms or popularity, and it shows.  However, will the
intensity of Zack's attention be enough to change her mind?
Anyone familiar with Pygmalion, My Fair Lady, or even Pretty Woman,
knows all the relevant plot points that She's All That will hit.  It's a
simplistic story, and She's All That never strays far from its borders.
However, at least both of the leads are appealing.  Freddie Prinze, Jr.
seems  to fit the "class president" role well, but Rachael Leigh Cook
(though enjoyable onscreen) isn't quite the "unpopular" type.  Even with
severe glasses and a dour disposition, she seems more amiable than the
average teen. But, you can't ask for too much realism in a fantasy like
this one.
The supporting cast deliver mixed pleasures.  Matthew Lillard is
appropriately self-absorbed as the obnoxious MTV celebrity.  Laney's
brother Simon (Kieran Culkin), and Zack's sister Mackenzie (Anna Paquin)
are, at times, more interesting than their respective siblings.
However, the film's foils (O'Keefe and Walker) are painfully flat.
Older viewers, tired of this familiar formula, won't find She's All That
to be all that...but, for its target audience, high school teens, She's
All That hits the right notes.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Ross Anthony
She's All That is a teen version of My Fair Lady. I'm not a teen, so I
didn't expect to like it -- surprisingly, I didn't hate it. In fact, I very
much enjoyed this very rich scene in which, GQ-prep Freddie Prinze Jr., is
forced to improv at an avant-garde poetry/performance "event" (presented
tongue-in-cheek). For the first time in his life he's unprepared, slightly
intimidated, and liking it. He drops a bean bag on his foot: "Hack-e-Sack,
Don't let it drop. Hack-e-sack, Don't let it drop." As he juggles the sack
with his feet and repeats the line to dizzying background projections, his
character conflict is subtly and cleverly revealed.
After being dumped by blonde cheerleader and prom queen shoe-in, Freddie
bets his best bud that his mere presence can convert any woman into a prom
queen. The bud chooses Rachael Leigh Cook ... the dorkiest art geek he could
find. Personally, I don't think he tried too hard, even with glasses Cook is
still pretty cute. From then on, Freddie moves in on Rachael attempting to
glamorize her with his popularity.
Cook's father, a pool guy, is a warm and wonderful side character. I
particularly like a scene in which he talks back to the TV during Jeopardy,
"Which Medieval printer copied the Bible without using his name?" Alex asks.
Cook's Father replies... "Hewlett Packard." That's funny.
If you're a teen and you like MTV's The Real World, I think you might enjoy
this picture. If you're not a teen, there's probably better pictures out
there for you.
Grade..........................Teens: B+, Non-Teens: C
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Kong
I really wanted to dislike She's All That. I didn't even want to see it.
But, I was dragged kicking and screaming into the movie by my teenage
cousins. I'm glad that I saw She's All That. Contrary to my preconceptions
about the film based on the previews, this film was very entertaining.
Zak (Freddie Prinze, Jr.) is the coolest guy at his high school. He's
smart, good looking, and well respected. He's also dating the hottest girl
at the high school. He and she are about to be voted prom king and queen.
Everything seems to be going great for Zak until his girlfriend comes back
from spring break and dumps him for some TV hotshot. On a bet with his
friends, Zak tries to turn the high school loser, Laini (Rachael Leigh
Cook), into a prom queen. The story is somewhat predictable and has been
done before. But, it is done in such a way that it is quite entertaining.
She's All That is a movie aimed square at those who have recently graduated
from high school or are still in high school. I'm not in that range, but I
still found the film quite enjoyable since some of the situations will hit
home for many of us. The film is hip with its music and young actors.
The acting is nothing to write home about. But, it is good enough that it
kept me interested. The script is hilarious, with many laugh out loud
moments. And the writer, Lee Fleming, is able to write some sharp and witty
lines for the characters. This might not be Shakespeare, but it is good
writing worthy of watching.
If you have a free afternoon (and perhaps in that age range I mentioned)
you'll enjoy She's All That. Catch She's All That at a matinee showing.
[Rated PG-13 for sexual content, crude humor, brief strong language and
teen drinking. Running Time: 95 Minutes]        
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        I'll preface my comments on Robert Iscove's new
teen comedy "She's All That" with a disclaimer: I am
definitely not the film's target audience, and my review
will probably reflect that.  It's been nearly a decade since
I graduated from high school, and in the intervening years
I've been forced to learn about finances, insurance and
responsibility.  Wondering how the rent is going to be
paid and when I'll have the money to get the car fixed,
the once burning issue of "Who am I going to the prom
with?" no longer seems quite so important.  I, along with
the rest of the people in my age group, have moved on to
other things; as such, the characters in most high-school
comedies seem alien to me.  Anxiety over the prom?  I
simply can't relate.  Afraid of not getting into the college
of your choice?  Sorry, that's too far in my past for me
to empathize with you.
        With that in mind, I was pleasantly surprised to
find myself enjoying much of "She's All That."  Slick and
humorous, the film has a lot of fun with its well-worn
plot; watching it, we get the sense that everyone involved
with the movie is having a good time.  Their enthusiasm
is contagious, and it's a good thing: this agreeable tone
of goofiness is largely responsible for the film's charm.
        As is required by the plot of all teenager-themed
movies, our hero, Zack Siler (Freddie Prinze Jr.) has it
all: a handsome face, a beautiful girlfriend, the adoration
of his classmates, and so many universities banging on
his door that he can't decide which one to attend.  But
things soon begin to unravel when his girlfriend Taylor
(Jodi Lyn O'Keefe) breaks up with him to date TV star
Brock Hudson (played with pleasantly obnoxious gusto by
SCREAM's Matthew Lillard), who she met at a beach
party.  (The program that the Brock character stars on
is none other than MTV's "The Real World," a great
satirical wink to modern teen culture.  The phony clips
of Brock appearing on the show generated some of the
film's biggest laughs.)
        Zack's friends offer their condolences over the
breakup, but he shrugs it off.  His ego is such that he
believes all the girls in the school will be lining up to
go out with him; after all, being Zack's girlfriend is a
free ticket to popularity.  His friend Dean (Paul Walker)
expresses doubt about Zack's claim, which leads to a
bet: Dean will select one of the girls in the school, and
Zack will try to turn her into the next Prom Queen.
Dean eventually selects the shy, introspective Laney
Boggs (Rachael Leigh Cook), a timid artist who seems
to have little interest in anything other than painting
and spending time alone.
        Zack wastes no time in trying to get to know
Laney; although she's wary of his intentions at first ("What
is this, some kind of dork outreach program?" she accuses),
she gradually begins to warm to him.  Their relationship
begins, although Laney doesn't know that Zack is merely
trying to win a bet.  Will Zack fall in love with her by the
end of the story?  Does the Pope wear a goofy hat?
        As I said, nothing about the plot is the least bit
original; it's the spiritual descendent of "My Fair Lady,"
but without the music.  The charm of the story stems
not from the subject matter, but from the playful nature
of the performances and writing.  The film's wit is
surprisingly sharp, allowing the characters to throw
zingers at each others like refugees from a Kevin Smith
film.  (Taylor, determined to beat Laney in the race for
Prom Queen, gets the funniest quip: "I could win this
contest in fluroscent lighting, on the first day of my
period, clothed in T.J. Max.")  And another scene features
an art show, where astoundingly deep poetry is recited:
"My soul is an island.  My car is a Ford."  That's the
sort of ridiculous dialogue that we're dealing with.
Smile.  Go ahead.  You know you want to.
        The characterization isn't bad either, even for
those with limited screen time.  Laney's father, played
with warmth by Kevin Pollack, is fascinating in his
own right; I liked his clever "warm-fuzzy" speech about
living one's life to the fullest.  And Laney, as played by
Rachael Leigh Cook, has a wide range of conflicting
thoughts and emotions over the events which unfurl in her
life during the course of the film.  Only Taylor and Brock
feel like one-note characters/villains (though I'm sure it
was intended with Brock; Matthew Lillard's performance
is too much fun for me to call it "shallow.")
        One scene does much to counteract the pseudo-
intellectual tone of the film, however: a gratuitous scene
which involves a pizza topping you won't find on any
menu.  I'll say no more, except to lament the sudden shift
in both the tone and IQ of the story.  It's a shame that
a movie which is surprisingly smart for so much of its
duration felt the sudden urge to cater to the lowest
common denominator, a criticism I also leveled at "There's
Something About Mary."  Other scenes are nearly as
painful, including a gag in which an elderly man invites
Laney, who works at a fast-food restaurant, to "supersize
his balls."  (They're meatballs, see.  Har har.)
        The movie also hits one of my personal pet peeves,
as those of you who've been reading my reviews for awhile
can attest: beautiful actresses playing characters who are
supposed to be ugly.  The lovely Janeane Girafalo began
this unfortunate trend in "The Truth About Cats and Dogs";
Rachael Leigh Cook continues it here.  Are we really
supposed to believe that someone this attractive has been
oblivious to her beauty for so long?  And that the instant
she takes her glasses off, she, a social outcast, is
immediately loved by everyone?
        Never mind.  "She's All That" is pleasant enough
entertainment, if hardly a masterpiece.  I'm not sure that I
can go so far as to actually recommend it to anyone over the
age of eighteen, but I do commend director Iscove and
screenwriter Fleming for coming so close to the mark.  I
admit, I had a good time.  It seems there may still be
some life in the teen comedy, a genre I had long since
dismissed.  Semper fi, Zack and Laney.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Alex Fung
SHE'S ALL THAT (Miramax - 1999)
Cast: Freddie Prinze Jr., Rachael Leigh Cook, Matthew Lillard,
      Paul Walker, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe
Screenplay by R. Lee Fleming Jr.
Produced by Peter Abrams, Robert L. Levy and Richard N. Gladstein
Directed by Robert Iscove
Running time: 91 minutes 
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   The recent trend emerging from studio films arriving on the
   marketplace -- the repackaging of familiar, proven story material in
   a teen-friendly context -- is indicative of the degree to which this
   lucrative demographic is coveted.  Amy Heckerling's contemporary
   revision of Jane Austen's "Emma" provided one of 1995's most clever
   and buoyant pictures in the unexpected hit CLUELESS, and the recent
   Robert Rodriguez film THE FACULTY is simply a mishmash of THE
   INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS, THE THING, and teenagers, but in the
   imminent future, the trickle of teen updates to date becomes a river:
   on the horizon include such fare as CRUEL INTENTIONS ("Les Liaisons
   Dangereuses" plus Buffy), TEN THINGS I HATE ABOUT YOU ("The Taming Of
   The Shrew" in high school), and the U.S. release of STRIKE! (spunky
   teen starlets meet "Lysistrata", to woeful effect).
   Yet another example of teen-oriented revisionism run rampant is the
   relentlessly conventional SHE'S ALL THAT, re-teaming THE HOUSE OF YES
   castmates Freddie Prinze Jr. and Rachael Leigh Cook in an update of
   the Pygmalion tale squarely aimed at the teen crowd.  Put to film
   most memorably in MY FAIR LADY, this formula is hardly unpredictable
   -- man aims to transform "ugly duckling" to princess, with unexpected
   peripheral effects -- but what's disappointing here is the lack of
   any sort of effective fresh spin; after transplanting the fable into
   a trendy Southern California milieu, R. Lee Fleming Jr.'s screenplay
   slips into auto-pilot.
   That's especially crippling in this picture, far moreso than the
   scoffable inability of horn-rimmed glasses, a bad wig, a
   paint-splattered ensemble, and a tendency of tumbling to the ground
   to mask Ms. Cook's appeal while in wallflower mode -- after all,
   similar efforts to render the radiant Audrey Hepburn as gawky were
   also spectacularly unsuccessful.  It's crucial that a tale with such
   an obvious preordained conclusion should sustain interest along its
   familiar route, yet every twist and turn in the tedious plot unfolds
   like clockwork while punchlines and comic gags thud with unforgivable
   regularity.  Although the film ramps up a notch during its final
   half-hour, it's mostly due to the performances of its leads that the
   picture broaches tolerability.
   A few necessary amendments have been implemented onto the formula in
   order to make the story more palatable to contemporary attitudes.
   Today's audiences would have be challenged to find empathy for the
   passive, demure heroines which populate these tales; consequently,
   frumpy social outcast Laney (Cook) is no shrinking violet: she's much
   tougher, sharper and more self-assured -- not only does she refuse to
   swoon at the sudden attention from hotshot Zack (Prinze Jr.), she
   outright rejects his advances and freely fires acid zingers in his
   direction.  Far from being a reclamation project, the picture takes
   on the perspective that she's the film's strongest and most complete
   character from the outset.  (Of course, she's imbued with requisite
   vulnerability -- her unremitting seriousness and angry art indicate
   her loss of youthful vigor and buried grief upon her mom's death.
   And there is the matter of that wonderfully tacky falafel hat she
   gets to wear at her part-time job.)
   Otherwise, there's a numbing lack of innovation evident in this film.
   Racking up the clichis, the typical centerpiece makeover scene makes
   its inevitable appearance, with the "not improved, just different"
   Laney descending down the staircase accompanied by a sweet love song
   on the background as Zack gapes upwards agog (though I liked that the
   filmmakers undercut the moment with some humour).  It should be noted
   that Zack's moment of epiphany is a curious variant -- a
   time-honoured staple of these sorts of pictures is the magical
   reaction shot of the guy finally recognizing the beauty buried
   beneath the glasses and the bad hair; it's usually a fleeting moment
   which occurs when she removes her ungainly spectacles, but it occurs
   here when Laney slips out of her overalls to reveal her swimsuit-clad
   figure.
   While it may be futile to point out logical faults in what's
   essentially a contemporary fairytale, the film is so rife with holes
   that it would be overly charitable to neglect them altogether.  Zack
   is depicted as such a sensitive, kind-hearted soul that his initial
   pairing with such a cartoonishly one-dimensional villainess as Taylor
   (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe) defies credibility (save, that is, for her
   physical attributes).  Frankly, he's such a flat-out nice guy that it
   becomes difficult to swallow someone so thoroughly genial could
   rocket up the cutthroat high school social ladder to the point where
   he lords over the student body, enforcing law and order with nary a
   bit of intimidation and having the soccer team at his beck and call.
   These are minor quibbles relative to Laney's behavioural
   inconsistency, leaping from incredulous (and warranted) suspicion of
   Zack's advances to reluctant acceptance of his courtship with little
   cohesion bridging the two positions.  (It feels like scenes are
   missing.)  And the velocity of perennial outcast Laney's acceptance
   into the In Crowd should give hope for social misfits everywhere.
   While the picture's focus is largely upon the budding romance between
   our class-mismatched couple, it indulges in occasional comic
   diversions (most of which crash and burn) and some brief flights of
   fancy, catapulting fully into the realm of full-fledged fantasy at
   the prom, where the seniors break out into an extended choreographed
   dance sequence.  It's a moment that's both energetic and fun to
   watch.
   Although SHE'S ALL THAT's plodding consistent vision is smartly
   softened by the genuine sincerity and affection with which it treats
   its love story, the roster of caricatures which serve as supporting
   characters is a drawback.  Among the peripheral players, which
   include a reunion of THE MIGHTY's Elden Henson and Kieran Culkin (as
   part of Laney's Outcast Brigade) and Anna Paquin (who turns in a
   bizarre interpretation of a teenager), only rubber-faced Matthew
   Lillard makes much of an impression as the comically narcissistic
   Brock.  (Not only does he sport a tattoo of himself on his bicep,
   it's also labelled "Me", lest any confusion arise.)  Brock's the sort
   of character who, on stage, would carry around a mirror to gaze
   adoringly at himself; appropriately, in the film he'd rather
   approvingly ogle his televised visage than cuddle with Taylor.
   The film's strength undoubtedly lies with the screen presence of its
   charismatic leads.  Mr. Prinze Jr. gives an easygoing, affable
   performance; his wide, disarming smile suggests that the hurtful
   cruelty inherent in the plot will be dulled.  Meanwhile, Ms. Cook
   continues to demonstrate her adeptness in front of the camera,
   navigating both her character's sullen and softer sides with ease.
   (She, along with Monica Keena, were the only bright spots in STRIKE!)
   Although her tiny, delicate frame and photogenic face is obscured by
   garish clothing and unsightly accessories for half the movie (and her
   first scene calls on her to hock up a loogie, natch), she's an
   instantly charming performer.  They deserved a better movie than
   this.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Somebody asked me what I learned from Michael Bay.  And I said,
 'nothing.'"
                    - Billy Bob Thornton

Author
Jamie Peck
SHE'S ALL THAT
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
A familiar story is spun under a fast pace and little else, true, but at 
least award "All That" a bag of chips for exuding endless charm and 
enthusiasm out of a cast of hot up-and-comers. The particularly 
appealing lead performers here are Freddie Prinze Jr. ("I Know What You 
Did Last Summer") and Rachael Leigh Cook (the infamous "This is your 
brain on heroin" commercial), respectively well-cast as popular jock 
Zack and nerdish outcast Laney, senior schoolmates in sunny So Cal. 
Taking a cue from "My Fair Lady"'s Henry Higgins, a bet is suggested 
that Zack can't turn Laney into the class queen with just eight weeks 
left until the prom. He accepts and pursues. She scratches her head at 
the sudden attention. 
It's a given that this star-crossed twosome is going to fall in actual 
love, especially after she snips off her weird hairdo and trades in her 
frumpy overalls for a hot little red number. The source of suspense then 
hinges on whether or not Laney will learn of the unfortunate wager, and 
if so, whether or not there's still a happy ending waiting in the wings 
for our mismatched protagonists. Like, duh. The results of this 
eventually sticky dilemma is just as paint-by-numbers predictable as 
everything that comes before it, a shortcoming that wouldn't be as big 
if "She's All That" had supplanted the mechanics of its ho-hum narrative 
with more real imagination and wit. 
Still, there are plenty of lively elements discovered amongst the 
clutter, and chief among them are the deft actors. "Scream"'s Matthew 
Lillard is a scream as a pugnacious former star of MTV's "The Real 
World" who plays a central but secondary role in the Zack-Laney 
courtship; Paul Walker ("Varsity Blues") and Jodi Lyn O'Keefe 
("Halloween: H20") also have fun with their villain roles even as they 
fail to make much sense. And the unexpected tweaking of seemingly 
"ordinary" moments also provide welcome distraction, like a nicely 
choreographed dance sequence, numerous jabs at pop culture and the 
running commentary of a campus deejay (R&B star Usher Raymond) that 
seems to function as a Greek chorus. 
The eventual sum of honest goodies like these elevates "She's All That" 
to a standing more notable than, as teen entertainment goes, at least 
half of the WB's hit youth-oriented programming. (And speaking of the 
WB, "Buffy" fans will adore that the Slayer herself, Sarah Michelle 
Gellar, contributes an amusing, wordless cameo. Talk about a movie 
counting on its target viewers.) Even the film's broad attempts to 
satisfy all tastes end up creating an oddly amiable combo of fairy tale 
ambitions, coarse potty humor and quite a bit more. It's like planning 
to go to the prom with Mel Gibson, getting Mel Brooks for some of the 
evening, and wanting to stick around to see how things turn out.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films
 Director:  Robert Iscove
 Writer:  Lee Fleming
 Cast: Freddie Prinze Jr., Chris Owen, Rachael Leigh Cook,
Kieran Culkin, Dean Sampson, Clea Du Vall, Dule Hill, Lil'
Kim, Jarrett Lennon, Anna Paquin, Kevin Pollak
   You can bet that the consensus of critics on this one will be
that "She's All That" has its moments of hilarity and charm
but that at base it's as formulaic as a can of Gerber's baby
food.  Given the amount of money that Hollywood throws at
its writers and directors for plots that will generate lines at the
box office, why should this be so?  Could it be that the public
actually prefers the a+b=c predictability found so often in
each genre?  Absolutely, according to a new book by Neil
Gabler called "Life the Movie."  Gabler argues early on that
"entertainment is constantly searching for a combination of
elements that has predictably aroused a given response in
the past, on the assumption that the same combination will
more than likely arouse the same response again."  Maybe
this explains the often-held notion that critics are different
from normal people.  Professional reviewers tend to prefer
art, which is thought of as inventional (creative), while
entertainment is considered conventional (formulaic). 
Whether you're a authority on the movies and consider
yourself a person of uncommon taste or more the hang-loose
kind of guy who just wants to have fun, you'll find "She's All
That" mildly diverting while you'll not likely be shocked by
anything resembling a surprise or a plot twist.
   Like other movies about high-school kids (Steve Rash's
1987 "Can't Buy Me Love" about a nerdy kid who pays a
senior heartthrob $1,000 to pose as his girlfriend; Jim
Gillespie's "I Know What You Did Last Summer" about a
group of teens who accidentally run down a pedestrian and
throw his body into the sea), "She's All That" stars attractive
people who are years older than the characters they portray. 
Chief among these is Freddie Prinze, Jr., now 23 years old,
in the role of a graduating senior who--like Professor Henry
Higgins of G.B. Shaw's "Pygmalion"--makes a bet that he can
turn a dorky female into a woman of class.  It's a fascinating
theme, so much so that it has been played in various
versions since the Greeks uncovered it a couple of millennia
back.  That its conclusion is a forgone conclusion is
unimportant: after all its predictably did not hurt its appeal in
America's greatest Broadway musical, "My Fair Lady."  We
are entertained or not by how much fun we have watching its
principal head toward his goal, and for the most part we're
satisfied that director Robert Iscove brings his cast
occasionally into high gear with the material that writer R. Lee
Fleming Jr. has given him.  
   What Zack Siler (Freddie Prinze, Jr.), Laney Boggs
(Rachael Leigh Cook), Dean Sampson (Paul Walker) and
Taylor Vaughan (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe) do supply is a quartet of
good, solid bodies and clearly differentiated personalities. 
The plot, which probably bores the cast as much as it is
irrelevant to us, consists of a bet that Zack's buddy Dean
makes that Zack cannot transform a dorky girl into a prom
queen.  Zack fixes his eye on Laney, an introverted senior
who spends her free time painting in the basement of her
comfortable Southern California home and prepares to work
his wiles.  Zack's initial manipulation is to ask Laney whether
she wears her glasses all the time.  Now a true feminist
would see red through her black-framed spectacles, but
Laney--who will not wear contact lenses--promptly removes
them and never looks back, while a classmate gives her a
thorough makeover.  In a single session she is transformed
into a looker ready to turn heads.  But this is fantasy.  Like
Audrey Hepburn in "My Fair Lady," Laney looks darn good
right from the first, her makeover hardly likely to change her
wallflower personality.
    The best scene, surprisingly, revolves around Laney's dad,
who is called Dr. Pool (Kevin Pollak) because his trade is the
renovation of the Southern Cal. natatoria.  The sort of
understanding fellow that everyone would love to have as a
papa, he puts only the mildest of pressures on his daughter
to get her out of her shell and while watching Jeopardy
comes out with the best lines in the movie.  For example,
when the question deals with who printed the most famous
Bible ever, he responds, "Hewlett Packard" (the answer is
Gutenberg) and he confidently replies "Paris, France" when
the answer to a query is "New Orleans, Louisiana."
   This is quite a high school, the sort of place one hates to
leave, so that it's no wonder that the kids are more anxious
than gratified to realize that in a few weeks they'll be out in
the real world.  Everyone is attractive, each group has talents
of a professional caliber.  The campus d.j. (Usher Raymond)
supplies patter to the halls, imparting new fun to changing
classes, while he supplies a bevy of recorded songs to the
senior prom calculated to get the kids on their feet.  The title
comes from a rap song delivered with virtuoso zeal by a trio
of students.  The movie is hardly an Oscar contender but is
fast-moving with live-wire dialogue spoken by articulate kids.

Author
Christopher Null
     Well, as it turns out, she's *not* all that.  She's like half
that.  Maybe less.  I'd say 30 percent that.
     The way I ended up at SHE'S ALL THAT is because my wife refused to
go see 8MM, thus sticking us with this little flick, which she figured I
wouldn't mind seeing on account of the girls with large bazongas.  And
she is right: In point of fact, I do not mind seeing girls with large
bazongas, especially when they shake 'em on the dance floor.
     Said shaking is done on Prom Night, six weeks after Zach (Prinze)
is poised to win a bet in which he is tasked with turning uber-dork
Laney (Cook) into a teenage goddess.  And Zach does some damn fine
work.  You see, Laney's mom has died, and she's a bit of a nut job on
account of being the only woman in the family and having Kevin Pollack
as a dad.  Zach's got his own troubles, too: He can't choose between
attending Dartmouth, Yale, or Harvard... *or* he might wanna be a
hacky-sack performance artist!  (This is not a joke.)
     *Of course* Laney and Zach help each other through all this rabid
insanity!  But Laney finds out about the bet and - the horror - she gets
mad at Zach and goes to the prom with someone else!  Could their
blossoming relationship be doomed?  Well, you'll just have to get
yourself to the theater for that answer!
     Okay, there are a few chuckles, but I can count them all on one
hand.  That Prom Night shaking is also the best-choreographed prom I've
ever seen, and that includes all the ones on 90210.  But overall, this
movie's a loser.  As far as teen comedy/romances go... well, Molly
Ringwald is probably turning over in her grave.
Director: Robert Iscove
Producer: Peter Abrams, Richard N. Gladstein, Robert L. Levy
Writer: R. Lee Fleming Jr.
Starring: Freddie Prinze Jr., Rachael Leigh Cook, Matthew Lillard, Paul
Walker, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, Kevin Pollack, Anna Paquin
http://www.miramax.com:8888/ows-doc/shesallthat/index.html
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Ricardo A Lafaurie Jr.
I have a little motto in life.  If the preview for a movie shows up on
MTV, then it's a bad movie.  Unfortunately, I didn't have cable so I
ended up wasting money and time on the clunker "She's All That".  But
why is it a clunker, you ask?  Isn't it just good family fun?  Read on
and see.
The story has Zach Siler (Freddie Prinze, Jr. - a VERY disappointing
role for him) presented as the coolest guy in school.  A smart jock
who has it all, including Taylor Vaughan (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe), the
heartthrob of the school.  That is, until she dumps him for Real World
alumnus Brock Hudson (Matthew Lilard, his usual mugging self).
Knocked from heaven's skies into an all-time low, Major Tom (ahem, I
mean Zach) makes a bet with two-faced pal Dean Sampson (Paul Walker)
that he can transform arty, nerdy Laney Boggs (Rachael Leigh Cook -
whom I found attractive for some damn reason) into the prom queen.
The wager is not important (in my opinion).  Anyway, you get the idea
- it's Pygmalion time.  Boy changes girl and then falls in love with
girl, lots of roadblocks tossed in, and all that tripe.
But I think this movie should not be seen by impressionable teens.
Why?  The number one reason is that the message of this movie is
terrible, terrible, terrible!  Laney does some token resistance before
allowing Mr. Siler to make her over completely, and then everyone
stands behind her, a.k.a. "Inner beauty can only take you so far" (my
quote of the week, from a Maidenform ad).  That and the fact that
Taylor (whom is undeniably the bad girl) trashed Laney in front of the
school at a party, a.k.a. "Victimology works".
There's some other reasons.  This movie is racist!  Yes, it's set in
Beverly Hills, but there are Asians and Latinos in Beverly Hills!
There's even some black people who don't act like white people!  The
characters are shallow as hell, they can be defined by simple phrases,
and even nouns.  Zach's the jock with a heart, Taylor is the bitch,
Laney is the wallflower with a secret (her mother died when she was
young - pity her), and Brock Hudson is a freak.  And there's also what
could be the stupidest dance sequence in history.  At the prom, the
students perform what appears to be a moving Macarena to Fatboy Slim's
inescapable and irritating "Rockafeller Skank".  I think I had a
seizure in the movie.
"She's All That" is not all that.  It's a bad, bad, bad movie. Don't
watch it.  Don't recommend it for any teenage relatives you might
have.  And do NOT do that Rockafeller dance.  [ 0 ]

Author
Mr. Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
For me, the problem with a movie like She's All That is not that it's about
high school kids and revolves around events like The Prom, which in real life
most people I've come across never really cared much about. It's not even that
the plot involves a Most Popular Guy In School who makes a bet that he can turn
the Misfit Girl With Glasses into a prom queen, but then she takes off her
glasses and turns out to be beautiful and then he falls in love with her for
real and then he doesn't know what to do about the bet and can he really be
honest with her and oh what a horrible dilemma. My problem with this and many
other teen movies is that as far as I can tell it is written by someone who
never went to high school and also has had very little experience in everyday
situations with humans. 
I can accept that not all high school experiences are going to be like mine,
and maybe there are schools out there where everyone knows who's rich and who's
not and what occupation everyone else's parents have. And maybe at some schools
the class president really is the prize catch and the most popular guy in
school, instead of some guy who wears a tie and quotes Saturday Night Live
skits all the time and spends most of his time consorting with the faculty
about student government type stuff that will never have any effect on anyone
or anything, ever. There may even be a high school somewhere that has a radio
station broadcast over its intercom system with a student (in this case, Usher)
who never has to go to class because he is always spinning records and doing
gossipy shout-outs ala The Love Daddy in Do the Right Thing.
But I can't accept scenes like the one where Class President finds two bullies
(one of whom appears to be at least 32 years old) putting pubic hair on another
kid's pizza. Without even a threat of violence, he tells the bullies that they
are going to eat the pizza themselves. Apparently having no other choice, the
two swallow their pride and swallow the pubes in front of the entire cafeteria.
I don't think this was supposed to be a Jedi mind trick, or an exaggeration of
the Mighty Power of the Student Government. Perhaps it was an attempt at a
Farrellian over-the-top grossout scene. Whatever it's supposed to be, it does
not follow any laws of reality, heightened reality or satire that I'm aware. It
just makes no god damned sense. It's hard to get a kick out of Mr. President
standing up for the little guy when all you can think is that even if these two
overaged bullies couldn't beat the holy living crap out of the President, they
could definitely laugh in his face and walk away.
I also can't accept what happens when the life long best friend of the All That
Girl of the title finds out that All That Girl's date is secretly using her for
sex. He runs right past his endangered best friend and instead tries to warn
the class president, who he doesn't even know. There are many scenes like this
- one involving All That Girl abandoning a customer at her wacky theme
restaurant of employment and having a long talk with the Class President
character who she hasn't even established a relationship with yet - and for me
anyway they are painful to watch. I'm not talking about little things like in
Varsity Blues when Billy Bob the Wacky Fat Guy has a heart-to-heart with Dawson
and by the next morning at school has somehow obtained a cat scan without an
appointment - I'm talking about complete disregard for realistic human
behavior. Watching these unbelievable characters avoid the obvious behaviors of
reasonable human beings is like one of those dreams where you keep trying to
find a place but every time you turn a corner or open a door you are further
away than before.
A problem that occasionally pervades the movie that is more common for its
genre (especially the TV show Dawson's Creek) is a preposterous amount of self
awareness that, again, doesn't match up with the way we know human beings
really act and think. I don't know if I can ever take another scene like the
one in She's All That where the Most Popular Girl In School (who no one likes)
arrogantly boasts that she will be elected Prom Queen because (what the fuck!?)
her mom and cousin were Prom Queens. Not only do I not believe that people
really think of themselves as the most powerful and popular girl in school, but
I also don't believe that there is any high school anywhere where the other
students are aware of and/or care in any way that so and so's mother was a Prom
Queen in 1971. This kind of moronic shit is inexcusable. I want an apology and
an explanation. Now. 
This movie also has unusually bad characterization for its genre. I'm sure
you're supposed to like the characters and give something approaching a rat's
ass about their problems. But the All That Girl is introduced as someone who
constantly interrupts others to spout cliches about pollution and third world
countries, and who spends her free time doing Movie Style Performance Art with
two dwarves and a guy in his underwear. The performance art scene is
particularly painful. It's done in that same style you've seen a million times
where you know it's not at all like real performance art (I mentioned the
dwarves, right?). But it goes on for a good minute or two, and it's not funny,
and then when All That Girl turns out to be a part of the troupe, it's hard to
tell whether it was a really unfunny parody of bad performance art or a really
bad imitation of good performance art. Class President, for his part, calls it
"really, really good," and he seems sincere. But watching the scene feels like
watching a really bad open mic night and trying not to be rude, and then it
feels like sort of a betrayal when you realize that the scene was not supposed
to be interminable.
Sarah Michelle Gellar does a brief, uncredited sit-on, apparently continuing
her struggle to not let her work on Buffy the Vampire Slayer typecast her as
someone who only appears in really good stuff. Also slumming is Anna Paquin,
who I didn't even recognize as the little sister/makeover artist. In retrospect
I'm very impressed by her American accent, but she sure had more to work with
in that surprisingly good goose movie.
She's All That makes the atrocious Can't Hardly Wait look powerful and
emotionally resonant, but I won't try to claim that my generation had better
teen movies, or today's teens are idiots who like crap, or any such nonsense.
Filmmakers have made crap for teens for as long as there have been filmmakers
who make crap. Movies like Pump Up the Volume may have been closer to my world
view than these prom-queen-centric movies, but they were just as insane in
their depiction of reality. (Every social clique in the group rallies behind
the eccentric pirate radio misfit to overcome the pure unadulterated evil of
the grownups. Yeah, I wish.) At least these kids have Clueless, and there
haven't been any Licensed To Drive type movies lately. More importantly, it
would be a bad idea to wish today's filmmakers would try to learn from the teen
movies that I most cherish, because that may be what leads to upcoming films
like Carrie 2: The Sequel That Proves There Is No God and Jawbreaker (whose
writer-director has clearly seen Heathers as many times as I have). 
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Freddie Prinze, Jr, Rachael Leigh Cook
Synopsis:
High school heartthrob and top jock Zach Syler (Freddie Prinze, Jr.)
gets dumped by his girlfriend Taylor (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe) for a
self-absorbed MTV-type actor. On the rebound, Zach says to a buddy
something like: "Without her hair and makeup, Taylor is just a C-minus
GPA with a wonder bra. I can turn any female nerd into the high school
prom queen." Soon enough a bet is made, and an introverted girl named
Laney (Rachael Leigh Cook) is selected for the relationship with Zach
which will turn her into the prom queen. Of course, once the glasses
come off, Laney is cute. Will true romance blossom? Will unpopular Laney
turn out to be a gem? Will cute Zach fall in love with Laney and realize
he's not just conducting a cruel experiment?
These days many TV shows and movies targeted towards teenage audiences
invariably star sexually active 20-something actresses and actors
masquerading as kids. One extremely disturbing trend in Hollywood lately
is the Lolita syndrome where an adult has a sexual relationship with a
child. For example in the TV show DAWSON'S CREEK a female teacher has
sex with a male student. In SHE'S ALL THAT, Zach's high school
girlfriend Taylor is the sex object of an older, MTV-type male actor.
Similarly, there's a hint of Lolita in the scene when Zach is crowned
prom king, and an enthralled female teacher plants a slobbery kiss on
Zach's face (imagine if it were male teacher and a female kid). The
previews shown at the movie theater ten minutes before I watched SHE'S
ALL THAT advertised another "teen flick" about two teenagers plotting to
sexually manipulate a naive girl. I'm glad that many so called "teen
movies" have a PG-13 rating, because you don't want child audiences to
mistake fantasy for reality.
Hollywood is fantasy. And if I am to believe my eyes, behavior which is
statutory rape in real life is "cutting edge" in TV and movies routinely
targeted towards younger audiences. Adult supervision, and rating these
movies PG-13 might help ensure that, before being exposed to societal
standards that nonchalantly portray adults having sex with high school
children, the youngsters in the audience can tell fact from titillation.
SHE'S ALL THAT is predictable material, but done tastefully and
artistically executed. For example, as Taylor explains to Zach why she
is dumping him and reminisces about a summer beach party, instead of
just leaving it as dialogue, the scene changes to the beach party
itself. Both Taylor and Zach physically step into the party like
phantoms and examine it even though Zach was never at the party and it's
just Taylor's explanation.
SHE'S ALL THAT is a teen romance about two good kids with good behavior
who end up liking each other. I watched the movie in a theater full of
teens (mostly girls coming to ogle Freddie Prinze, Jr.), and they seemed
well satisfied with it.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Homer Yen
As Valentine Day approaches, it'll be natural for all of us to start
considering what movies we might want to see that will make us feel
good, feel happy, and of course feel a bit more romantic.  And for the
teenybopper set, this film does manage to accomplish its goals of
delivering a cute, albeit goofy, romantic comedy.
In `She's All That', we meet up with Zach (Freddie Prinze Jr.) an
admired student whom everyone else wants to emulate.   Good-looking,
loaded with charisma, and an all-around athlete, he has a good future
ahead of him.  But his popularity and perceived greatness may be in
jeopardy when his airy but sexpot of a girlfriend, Taylor (Jodi Lyn
O'Keefe), leaves him for another guy.  So, like all self-deluded, high
school seniors who believe that they are irresistible, he starts
bragging to his friends that he can have any girl in the school. 
Moreover, with a little guidance on his part, he can turn that girl
into the next prom queen.  Of course, this line of talking eventually
evolves into a wager.  And the one that has been chosen for Zach's
challenge is Laney Boggs (Rachael Leigh Cook), a bespectacled, mousy
art student whose oeuvre of work seems to represent only despair and
hatred.  `No way,' says Zach.  `She's scary and inaccessible.'  But at
the expense of suffering another setback to his ego, he begins the
process of turning the mouse into a queen.
The transformation process offers no surprises.  She's wary at first
but is curious as to why he's paying so much attention to her.  And
once she takes off those thick-rimmed Lisa Loeb-like glasses, gets a
new makeover and haircut, and develops an ounce of confidence, she is
actually very attractive.  Zach eventually sees something in her that
he's never noticed before, and she feels a never-before-felt sense of
attachment.  But whether they eventually wind up with each other or
not isn't as interesting as the peripheral elements of the movie.  
This film adds some very funny moments about high school life.  There
are the well-defined cliques such as the one whose most vital items
are lipstick and beepers.  There's the prom queen race between Laney,
who relies on the old-fashioned method of posters versus the filthy
rich Taylor, who gives away free samples of Latte.  The high school
seems located in a wealthy enclave of California.  I found it amusing
seeing how all of the students drove exotic cars and had parties in
houses that could hold 500 people.  And watching the climactic prom
scene, I couldn't help but grin as all of the students (who all look
like they're at least 23) broke out into a choreographed dance number.
 It certainly put my high school prom to shame.  Yet despite these
goofy moments, `She's All That' is a very, very lightweight movie. 
Zach was just too nice for us to doubt that there would ever be a
problem breaking into Laney's world.  And as we moved closer to the
prom queen elections, it seemed that there should have been more
showdowns between Laney and the bitchy Taylor.  But I guess as
February 14th approaches, no one really wants confrontation.


Author
Michael Dequina
_She's_All_That_ (PG-13) * 1/2 (out of ****)
While watching the teen comedy _She's_All_That_, I fondly recalled the
heyday of the _Ricki_Lake_ show a couple of years back, when just about
every episode of the gabfest dealt with self-absorbed people who thought
they were, well, all that.  What a field day Ricki's then-notoriously rowdy
audience would have with the makeover of the film's Laney Boggs, a frumpy,
long-haired high school geek who turns chic after a touch of makeup,
wardrobe overhaul, and, most importantly, a haircut.  To paraphrase the
title of one of my favorite _Ricki_ episodes, "You may have lost all that
hair, but you are _not_ all that."
The failure of the makeover in question is quite surprising, considering
the fact that the actress playing Laney, Rachael Leigh Cook, is actually
quite attractive, as briefly seen in last fall's _Living_Out_Loud_ and in
_She's_All_That_'s poster.  Be it makeup, styling, or whatever, Laney
doesn't look quite so "all that" in her first post-makeover appearance,
gussied up in a flaming red dress, matching high heels, and a shorter 'do.
This sounds like a minor quibble, but the entire film hinges upon it, for
the next day at school social outcast Laney not only finds herself to
suddenly popular, but also a nominee for prom queen.
While this comes as a surprise to Laney, it's actually a calculated move
by soccer team stud Zack Siler (Freddie Prinze Jr.), who, recently jilted
by his diva girlfriend Taylor Vaughan (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe), makes a bet with
his friends that he can turn the seemingly hopeless Laney into the prom
queen.  As one can expect, as he brings the swan out of his ugly duckling,
Zack begins to feel something genuine for Laney, and her for him.
A rather far-fetched plot that has been done in one, way, shape, or form
many a time, but what makes it especially difficult to believe in
_She's_All_That_ is that Zack never really does anything for Laney.  His
sister Mackenzie (a heavily made-up Anna Paquin) is the one who gives her
the life-altering makeover, and Zack's most dramatic "show of support" is
actually a defense of Laney's brother Simon (Kieran Culkin).  Factor in a
lack of sparks between Prinze and Cook, and one is left with a romantic
comedy with little in the way of romance.
On the other hand, neither is there much comedy on display, either, with
the only successful bits coming from the wild overacting of Matthew Lillard
as Taylor's new beau Brock Hudson, and some savvy satire of MTV's
_The_Real_World_, of which Brock is a former cast member; one big gross-out
gag is just that, and not particularly funny.  Other laughs are to be had,
but they are of the unintentional variety, stemming from the sloppiness of
director Robert Iscove and writer R. Lee Fleming Jr.  The hairpiece that
Cook wears during Lacey's long hair stage is hilariously obvious; a
choreographed set piece at the prom is apparently designed to be "good,"
but it's more bizarre than anything else, especially the moves.  Sloppiest
of all is the inclusion of R&B sensation Usher Raymond in the completely
superfluous role of the school DJ.  Watching his scenes, I suspect that he
was spliced in after principal photography had already been completed: most
of his scenes are by himself, and the one scene that shows his character
with others--the prom--intercuts solo closeup shots of him with distant
ones of the crowd.
Perhaps the saddest thing about _She's_All_That_ is that it's designed as
a breakout showcase for Cook, who is a natural and likable young actress.
I hope that this weak effort won't put a damper on her career, and she will
be given a more worthy vehicle where she can show that she could very well
be all that.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
She's All That (1999)
Freddie Prinze Jr., Rachael Leigh Cook, Matthew Lillard, Paul Walker, 
Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, Kevin Pollack, Usher Raymond, Kimberly "Lil' Kim" Jones,
 Elden Henson, Kieran Culkin, Anna Paquin, Tim Matheson. Cinematography 
by Francis Kenny. Screenplay by R. Lee Fleming Jr. Directed by Robert 
Iscove. 95 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
"Pygmalion" meets "Saved By The Bell" in the featherweight comedy "She's 
All That," a formula teen flick redeemed by a scattering of inventive 
moments, coupled with the sheer charm of lead players Freddie Prinze Jr. 
and Rachael Leigh Cook. The pre-fab romance, while far from memorable, 
works when viewed as cinematic sherbet; a pleasant diversion to while 
away the time until something more substantial comes along. Put simply, 
if it were the offering on a long airplane flight, I'd pony up a few 
bucks for the headphones.
The plot is old enough to warrant carbon-dating. On a bet, a high school 
hunk sets out to turn an ugly duckling into the prom queen. From that 
sentence, you should be able to anticipate absolutely everything that 
happens in "She's All That." If not, perhaps a "Teletubbies" marathon 
would be more to your liking.
As with all makeover stories, you spot the swan-to-be immediately. She's 
the one whose dark-rimmed glasses, messy hair and rumpled clothing 
couldn't possibly disguise the fact that she is knock-out, drop-dead 
gorgeous. What a treat it would be if, just once, the "ugly duckling" was 
actually unattractive. Or, even better, if the young woman turned to her 
"benefactor" said "No thank you, I like myself just the way I am and have 
no desire to be done up in Cosmopolitan drag. I treasure my individuality 
and, if you require a perky teen queen, why don't you ask Jennifer Love 
Hewitt to the sock hop and leave me alone?"  
But enough dreaming. This is, after all, a corporate product, and the 
filmmakers slavishly adhere to the tried and true teen movie formula. The 
de rigueur soundtrack from flavor-of-the-day pop stars throbs incessantly 
in the background, while scenes are kept short and snappy, to avoid 
challenging those audience members suffering from attention-deficit 
disorder. The young cast is a veritable Whitman's Sampler from recent 
teen movies, with two actors from the "I Know What You Did Last Summer" 
films, two from the "Scream" movies, two from "Can't Hardly Wait," two 
from "The Faculty," both leads from "The Mighty," and one cast member 
each from "Varsity Blues" and "Halloween H20." If these kids decide to 
mate, inbreeding will be of paramount concern. 
As is the norm, the supporting characters are broad caricatures. Matthew 
Lillard ("Scream") gleefully chews scenery as a thinly-veiled variant of 
Puck, the social Neanderthal from "The Real World" who gained fame by 
being thrown out of the house by his roommates. Jodi Lyn O'Keefe 
("Halloween H20") hams it up as a "Melrose Place" style villainess, and 
Paul Walker ("Varsity Blues") sneers a lot as a jock with a heart of coal.
Of the adults, only two leave any impression. "Animal House's" Tim 
Matheson looks depressingly haggard as Prinze's father, while comic and 
character actor Kevin Pollack brightens the screen as Cook's papa, a 
chronically-preoccupied pool cleaner with an acerbic wit. 
With a film as fluffy as "She's All That," everything hinges on the 
appeal of the lead actors and, thankfully, Freddie Prinze Jr. and Rachael 
Leigh Cook have plenty. Cook is a tiny thing, a sweet-faced youth who 
convincingly projects vulnerability and defensiveness, along with a 
welcome sense of underlying strength. Prinze, who gave a wonderfully 
subtle, complex performance in the delicious black comedy "The House of 
Yes," does solid work here, infusing his character with a nice blend of 
uncertainty and earnestness. Prinze is handsome in an unfinished way - - 
I suspect his face will age well. Hopefully, this film will offer both 
actors the showcase they need to snag more substantial roles in the 
future. 
In addition to Prinze and Cook's charisma, "She's All That" manages to 
sneak a few moments of originality into the formula. Early in the story, 
as Prinze's girlfriend explains why she is dumping him for Lillard, the 
film jumps to a flashback sequence on a beach, and as the scene 
progresses, Prinze strolls along the side of the action, offering pointed 
color commentary on the reminiscence. Later, Prinze visits a theater to 
witness Cook in a wickedly funny parody of performance art and, towards 
the end of the movie, an incongruous dance number livens things up. Bits 
like those, along with lead actors able to transcend their material, left 
me with a smile on my face. "She's All That" is a distinctly minor 
pleasure, but a pleasure nonetheless. 

Author
LARRY MCGILLICUDDY
***1/2 (of 4)
Directed by Robert Iscove
Starring Freddie Prinze Jr., Rachael Leigh Cook, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, 
Anna Paquin, Kieran Culkin, Elden Henson, Paul Walker, Kevin Pollak, 
Dule Hill, Usher Raymond, Matthew Lillard, Clea Duval, Lil' Kim
High school comedies have been pretty rare this decade. While the 
horror film saw itself revived back to the glory days of the early 
80s (beyond that, actually), teen comedies have been absent for most 
of the 90's. Sure, there was a Dazed and Confused here and a Clueless 
there, but after that, what are we left with? National Lampoon's 
Senior Trip? Can't Hardly Wait came along last year, and was a 
deliberate attempt to recapture the 80s spirit, when films like Say 
Anything, Sixteen Candles, and Fast Times at Ridgemont High were 
opening seemingly every weekend. The problem with Can't Hardly Wait 
was that it tried too hard. It remembered those great 80s films so 
much that the line between homage and ripoff was stretched very thin. 
There were some fine individual moments and it was certainly 
energetic, but in the end it failed. And considering it's weak box 
office performance, it seemed like the genre was dead. Well, She's 
All That is perhaps the very film that can revive this genre. The 
sold out theater I saw 
t in was very receptive towards the movie and so was I (albeit for 
different reasons).
Freddie Prinze Jr. is Zack Siler, a guy who is living on top of the 
world. He is senior class president, an honor student, pretty much 
runs the school, and has a knockout girlfriend (O'Keefe) to boot. 
Early in the film, everything falls apart. His girlfriend dumps him 
for Brock Hudson, star of MTV's The Real World. In an attempt to 
protect his legacy, he bets his friend (Paul Walker) that he can turn 
any girl in the school into the prom queen. The girl Walker picks is 
Laney Boggs, a social nothing who wears glasses, eccentric clothes 
(to say the least), and paints dark and disturbing works in art class.
One would think Laney would love the chance to get to know Zack. One 
thing I enjoyed about the film, is that she is initially reluctant to 
spend time with him. She is rightfully suspicious about his 
motivations, but he convinces her that he wants to learn about art. 
This may not have been just a line. She takes him to an art show and 
puts him on the spot. He goes up on stage, and in a wonderful moment 
of spontaneity improvises an act involving a hacky sack. Zach gets a 
real rush out of the moment. He's never experienced the thrill of a 
live performance before. Outside of the theater, he tells Laney she 
has beautiful eyes and should not wear contacts. This is a key scene, 
because this is the first time we understand that Zach's interest 
here is more than just winning a bet, and it happens before her 
transformation. That being said, the big transformation scene is 
every bit as wonderful as it should be.
At it's heart, She's All That is just a traditional romantic comedy. 
On a broader scale, it deals with themes such as responsibility, 
choices, and the high school social structure. Zach is afraid to 
decide what college to go to, and he uses his father's agressiveness 
as an excuse. Laney hides her true feelings in her bizaare paintings 
and uses her father and brother, both of whom she practically takes 
care of, as an excuse for not having a social life. John Hughes 
usually attacked parents, and presented them as one-dimensional 
subhumans who had no ability to understand what their children were 
going through. She's All That takes a different route. It says 
someone must make their own choices, and take responsibility for 
themselves, no matter what problems their parents might present. 
The social structure in high school is the most painful, inhumane, 
cruel thing for a teenager to go through. Both Zach and Laney begin 
to understand this. They also learn that it's possible to survive 
this structure without actually becoming part of it. Laney has a line 
later in the film - "I think the right person is up there" - that 
pretty much sums up this theme.
Freddie Prinze Jr.'s performance is really strong here, as opposed to 
his bland, wooden performance in I Know What You Did Last Summer. At 
the beginning of the film, he is the typical all-american egotistical 
jock, proud of his legendary existence. To Prinze's credit, Zach is 
never too obnoxious. This is because Prinze never overacts. Instead, 
he relies on his natural charisma and allows the material to speak 
for itself. It's a gamble that pays off because later in the film it 
allows him to be quite charming. As Laney, Rachael Leigh Cook is 
quite a revelation. Like Janeane Garofalo in The Truth About Cats and 
Dogs, she is beleivable as someone who could be perceived as an ugly 
duckling by the majority, eventhough the rest of us know better. She 
has one particular scene, when she learns of the bet, where she 
delivers a line of pure uninhibited rage perfectly. There is more to 
anger than just shouting and Cook understands that. Together, they 
have a fabulous chemistry, and every scene between them is absolute
y delightful.
If She's All That has a flaw, it is in the annoying portrayal of two 
supporting characters. I very much enjoyed Jodi Lyn O' Keefe's 
performance in Halloween: H20 (though I didn't enjoy the film), but 
here she seems to be on a mission to steal every single scene she is 
in. Instead of just playing her one-dimensional character as a bitchy 
snob, O'Keefe wildly overacts with a repetitive line delivery and 
bizaare facial expressions. Look at Jordanna Brewster's performance 
in The Faculty for a much better portrayal of a similar character. 
Then there is Matthew Lillard as Brock Hudson, the Real World star. 
His performance is fine on it's own I suppose, but it really belongs 
in a different movie. I think this subplot would've worked better if 
O'Keefe's character got together with one of Zach's friends.
However, other minor characters are simply wonderful. I admired how 
the film gives each of them a chance to shine. Kevin Pollak, as 
Laney's dad, is addicted to watching Jeapordy. The fact that he never 
knows the right answer doesn't prevent him from giving a hilariously 
wrong one anyways. Paul Walker's performance is interesting, because 
he is able to disguise his true intentions several times throughout 
the film. Keiran Culkin is amusing as Laney's younger brother, and 
the friendship that develops between him and Zach is actually 
touching. Elden Henson, as Laney's childhood friend, and Anna Paquin, 
as Zach's sister, also have some very nice moments.
Lee Fleming's script is witty and smart. He doesn't rely on tired 
cliche's to wrap the film up.  A key confrontation is left off screen,
 and instead just revealed through dialogue. This allows the incident 
to be funny, instead of horrifically out of place, as it would've 
seemed if shown on screen. Iscove does a fine job throughout. The 
film is never boring, and a big dance scene at the prom is quite an 
exhilarating moment, thanks to some wonderful choreography combined 
with lively music. She's All That isn't very original on it's surface.
 It's another retelling of the Pygmalion story. But it's execution 
that matters the most, and Iscove, Fleming, and the actors execute 
the material just right.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Author
Greg King
SHE'S ALL THAT (M).  
(Miramax/Village Roadshow)
Director: Robert Iscove
Stars: Freddie prinze jr, Rachael Leigh Cook, Matthew Lillard, Paul 
Walker, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, Kevin 
Pollack, Keiran Culkin, Elden Henson, Anna Paquin, Usher Raymond, 
Kimberley Jones, Debbi Morgan, 
Tim Matheson, Gabrielle Union, Dale Hull
Running time: 95 minutes. 
If John Hughes had made a version of Pygmalion, then chances
are that it would resemble She's All That.  First time feature
director Robert Iscove takes the basic plot, updates it to an American
high school setting, and gives it a contemporary soundtrack.  Iscove,
who hails from a background in television and live theatre, gives the
familiar concept a new spin, making it fresh and relevant for younger
audiences.
Zack Siler (Freddie Prinze jr, from I Know What You Did Last
Summer, etc) is the most popular guy at school - a sports star,
brilliant student, and president of the student body, he seems to have
it all.  But then his long time girl friend Taylor Vaughan (Jodi Lyn
O'Keefe, from Halloween H20) dumps him for the improbably named Brock
Hudson (Matthew Lillard, from Hackers, etc), the narcissistic and
dopey star of a tv sitcom.  Crestfallen and humiliated, Zack enters
into a bet with fellow jock Dean Sampson (Paul Walker, recently seen
in Varsity Blues) that he can transform any girl in the school into a
beauty and potential prom queen in just six weeks.
The chosen subject turns out to be Laney Boggs (newcomer
Rachael Leigh Cook), the elusive, uptight outcast.  Under Zack's
attention, Laney slowly blossoms into a beauty, and gains a new lease
on life.  Romance also blossoms, as the shallow Zack finds himself
drawn by Laney's combination of intelligence and good looks, hidden
beneath her usually dowdy exterior.  But the transformation is not
without its set backs, as jealousy and rivalry raise their ugly heads
as the prom night approaches.
The primarily youthful cast mixes fresh young faces, many of
whom have appeared in a number of recent teen slasher flicks, with a
couple of rap stars (Usher and Kimberley "Li'l Kim" Jones).  Their
performances are solid, although Prinze, Cook and a wonderfully bitchy
O'Keefe are the standouts.  Kevin Pollack (The Usual Suspects, etc)
also delivers a nicely underplayed performance as Laney's father, who
initially seems to live in a different world from his two children,
but who ultimately turns out to be sympathetic and understanding.
She's All That is a teen movie that doesn't always resort to
the usual clichés or stereotypes of the genre, nor does it
patronise its audience.  It's all the better for this.  There are a
few gross out moments along the way, but overall She's All That is
more entertaining than one would expect.  Somewhat surprisingly, this
film comes from successful independent studio Miramax.  Not content
with the room full of Oscars their films have earned, the Weinstein
brothers seem to be moving away from the strictly art house movies of
the past to embrace more shamelessly commercial, mainstream product.

Author
Steve Rhodes
SHE'S ALL THAT is an intelligent teen comedy -- bet you thought that was
an oxymoron.
A retelling of the Pygmalion story, the movie takes a low-key approach
to its comedy.  Although you're more likely to smile than laugh out loud
at the film's brand of humor, you'll appreciate its ability to appeal to
teens without relying on crude sexual innuendoes, bawdy jokes or coarse
profanity.  Even if Lee Fleming's script has more than its share of
cliches, it develops them in fresh and good-spirited ways that's likely
to please the target teen audience as well as their parents.
As the story begins, Zack (Freddie Prinze Jr.), the high school's
student body president, honor student, star athlete and handsome hunk,
is having girl trouble.  The school's radio station refers to him as "a
guy who's got dissed and dismissed" by his long time girlfriend, Taylor
(Jodi Lyn O'Keefe).  The most popular kids in the class, they've been
going together forever.
Recently, however, Taylor has ditched Zack for Brock (Matthew Lillard),
the narcissistic star of a bad television show.  In contrast to Zack's
sweetness, Taylor has the charm of a pit bull.  Described as someone
with "a C- GPA in a Wonderbra," Taylor expects to be the center of all
attention.  There will be an election in a few weeks for the king and
queen of the prom, and she has no doubts that she and Zack will win the
crowns.  As the head of the school's royalty, she doesn't need to treat
others decently.  She has always been the most popular and expects to
remain thus, in perpetuity.
On a lark, Zack bets his buddy Dean (Paul Walker) that he can turn any
girl into the prom queen.  As soon as Dean sets eyes on Laney Boggs
(Rachael Leigh Cook), he knows he has found his target.  No one could
convert such a social loser into a queen of anything.  Laney is an
artist whose friends suggest she kill herself as her only hope of
success, since posthumous artwork sells.  Laney, the type who wears
bluejean overalls to the beach, spends her evening hours engaging in
trashy, bohemian performance art.
Rachael Leigh Cook, who, along with Freddie Prinze Jr., had a small part
in the hilarious, dark comedy THE HOUSE OF YES, gives SHE'S ALL THAT its
special quality.  She brings a soft-spoken humanity to her role that
makes Laney into a wonderfully likeable and charming character.  Laney
is as crude on the outside as she is lovely on the inside, just the
opposite of Taylor.  When Zack first tries putting the moves on Laney,
she looks at him with her serious little eyes through her nerdy style
glasses and asks if he is engaging in some sort of "dork outreach
program."  (As you can guess, once she has the right makeup, hairdo and
clothes, Laney easily outshines Taylor.)
Academy Award winner Anna Paquin does a nice turn in a small role as
Mackenzie, Zack's sister.  Mackenzie does what all good sisters do; they
set their brothers straight as to how things are done.  Every guy should
have a take-charge sister like Mackenzie.
Director Robert Iscove's understated staging gives the film a remarkable
grace and subtlety.  With his serious approach to comedy, his actors
never seem in danger of laughing at their own jokes.  Adults, in the few
times they appear in the story, are sources of amusement, not derision.
Laney's father, for example, busily occupies his evening hours paying
bills, while missing all the "Jeopardy" questions from the television.
"I feel just like Julie Roberts in PRETTY WOMAN," a blissful Laney
declares in the end.  "Except for that whole hooker thing."  She ends up
contented, and so will the viewers.
SHE'S ALL THAT runs 1:37.  It is rated PG-13 for a little profanity and
some sexual situations and would be fine for kids around 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SHE'S ALL THAT  ** Directed by Robert Iscove. Written by R. Lee Fleming
Jr..Photography, Francis Kenny. Editing, Casey O. Rohrs. Production design,
Charles Breen. Music, Stewart Copeland. Cast: Freddie Prinze Jr. (Zack
Siler), Rachael Leigh
Cook (Laney Boggs), Matthew Lillard (Brock Hudson), Paul Walker (Dean
Sampson), Jodi Lyn O'Keefe (Taylor Vaughan), Usher Raymond (Campus D.J.),
Kevin Pollak (Wayne Boggs), Anna Paquin  (Mackenzie Siler), Kieran Culkin
(Simon Boggs), Elden Henson (Jesse Jackson), et al. A Miramax release.
about 90 minutes, PG-13
"She's All That" is a high school picture. roughly, vaguely a descendant of
Fast Times at Richmond High which  started a new sub-genre back in 1982.
The title is even harder to remember that most forgettable ones. It might
mean something in school parlance. Can't tell.
1) The great majority of high schools are in California. That's normal
since the Hollywood gospel tells us that the great majority of anything in
the United States of America is in California.(There was a fairly brief
time when schools of any kind, in film, could be also found in the Midwest
and the East, but those choices seem to be on the downslope.)
2) High school students are either "in" or "out" -- no exceptions.
3) They have two major factions, jocks and nerds. This is an international
phenomenon.  Ages ago, the first person in my family to attend universities
--in Belgium and France--reported that there were two groups: the athletes
and the esthetes. The difference in the USA is that, per Hollywood, the
athletes are in and the esthetes are out .
4) In all high-school movies, at least some "outies" will become "innies"
5) Romance is the main subject studied.
6) Ladies, You Too Can Be Ravishing. Wallflowers, ugly ducklings, plain or
unnoticed types can be transformed into winners, pretty butterflies.
7) Groups or gangs of pals are ethnically mixed. This means Political
Correctness.But does is mean reality?
8) A great deal of students have nice, shiny cars. In most countries on
this planet, if you tell anyone that your cleaning-person drives to your
home, they react as to a Martian story.
9) That (was this said by Dorothy Parker?) "men don't make passes at girls
who wear glasses" may still be a movie cliche though no longer true in the
real world.
At the HS in question, Zack, 18 (top student, top athlete, top everything)
is dumped without a by-our-leave, by semi-statuesque Taylor, the object of
many a desire. She takes up with the improbable, clownish Brock who is
played by an actor featured in TVs The Real World.
With the Senior Prom six weeks away,, Zack finds himself dateless. (If you
ever wondered what tragedy means, there you have it). His buddy Paul taunts
him. Zack claims that he could find the most unlikely girl and transform
her in a Prom Queen. The boys have a bet.
The girl selected is rather petite Laney, 17, who keeps her own counsel,
does not mix, except for colors with which she paints sad stuff (she's
still traumatized by the death, some years ago, of her beloved, artistic
mother ),  uses no makeup, does not dress with chic.  (The clothes thing is
pushed by having her also wear an outrageously ugly outfit at the
restaurant where she works after school).She is shy, gauche, mistrustful of
boys. But, you guessed it, she really has brains and character.
Zack makes awkward approaches, is trapped into saying that he is interested
in art. Laney invites him to a theatrical performance by youths. This is
one of the few funny parts in the film. On a stage there's Performance Art
. It is caricatured, leaves you with the feeling that the moment you call
something Art, it becomes just that. Zack is stuck with improvising a
number with a bean bag. Amusing.
To make an essentially tedious story short. A bond starts forming between
the two. Zack protects Laney's younger brother Simon who works in the HS
cafeteria  from bullies who want the kid to eat a pizza decorated with
pubic hair.
To Laney's surprise Zack mounts a campaign for her to become Prom Queen. He
also brings in a team to clean her house, presumably to free her for a
makeup plus total makeover session with his younger sister Mackenzie.
What do you bet that all that, plus a nice new dress, will transform Laney
into a pretty, cute young lady?  That she even moves gracefully now. OK.
You won. This means that you have watched at least two more HS movies in
your lifetime.
Brock (see above), in bed with Taylor, would rather watch on TV The Real
World and himself in it, than make love with the girl. Without
explanations, just before the prom date,  Taylor tells Zack she wants to go
back to him. Brock has dumped her.
Cutting to the chase. Zack's pal Paul (he who made the bet) starts pursuing
the New Laney. She will lose to Taylor for Queen, but by a small margin.
The prom has a most improbable, professionally choreographed dance.Paul has
paid $300 for a hotel room where he is certain he can seduce the New Laney.
Instead, after a misunderstanding, she and Zack get back together.
The movie is slight, uneven, patchy and crammed with deja vu. There are a
few good moments, but the dialogue among the teens, in jargon, is not among
them. It's on the same level of interest as that of kids phoning each other
by the hour.
Kieran Culkin and Anna Paquin (my, has she grown up since "The Piano"!)
have little to do but do it in likable ways.
The "plot" is all surface and does not develop its sub-sub-themes. Among
them, that of Zack's dad. who's been forever bugging his son. Papa's four
years at Darmouth were the best in his life. He has developed an obsession
for his boy to go to a major institution, and has been hammering this point
ever since the kid was five.The reaction is that while  Zack  has been
accepted at every Ivy League University, he has hidden this from his
parents. Father finds the letters and has a heart-to-heart talk with the
young man. The full situation has potential but remains skin-deep.
Among the many more barely sketched-out themes is the fact that Paul has
betrayed Zack because he (Paul) was falling in love with Laney. But, boom!,
we suddenly learn that he was after carnal knowledge first and last. Then
there's the unexplained blond male friend of Laney's. Her only
pre-transformation pal? A co-nerd?
'Nuff said. The film, apparently enjoyed by the young teens, all girls, in
"my" audience, is, for viewers over 19, not as bad as watching the hearings
in Washington, but not as good as watching the Animal Channel.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Robert Iscove
Cast: Freddie Prinze Jr., Rachel Leigh Cook, Matthew Lillard, Paul
Walker, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, Kevin Pollack, Usher Raymond, Elden Henson,
Kieran Culkin, Anna Paquin
Screenplay: Lee Fleming
Producers: Peter Abrams, Richard N. Gladstein, Robert L. Levy
Runtime: 95 min.
US Distribution: Miramax
Rated PG-13: profanity, sexual innuendo
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Okay, stop me if you've heard this one:  the Coolest Guy in School gets
dumped by his bimbo girlfriend.  His best friend -- the second-coolest
guy in school -- dares him to take the class nerd out on a few dates and
turn her into the prom queen.  The Coolest Guy has a few reservations
about this, because he's also the Nicest Guy in School.  Nontheless, he
convinces the school nerd to go out with him, and, slowly-but-surely, he
realizes that he's in love with her.  We are then treated to a grand
climax at the senior prom, where suspense is generated from wondering
who is going to be crowned queen of the prom.
If you're looking for an original plot, you won't find it in She's All
That.  The problem with the high school comedy/drama is that every
possible scenario was explored by John Hughes in the 80s.  Nowadays,
just about the only thing anyone can do to make a watchable high school
comedy is to make it extremely authentic (Can't Hardly Wait) or so
patently absurd that one simply can't deny its charm.  This is the case
with She's All That:  here is a film bored with its own story, and
manages to give us a lot of laughs and a few interesting characters by
not focusing on the plot too much.  The result is a pleasantly pointless
and satisfyingly surreal teen comedy.
The Coolest Guy to whom I referred earlier is Zach Siler, played by a
surprisingly funny Freddie Prinze Jr.  His best friend (the
second-coolest guy) is played by teen dream Paul Walker (who failed to
show us his stuff in the unwatchable Meet the Deedles).  Laney Boggs is
the school nerd, and is embodied by Rachel Leigh Cook.  Laney is not
actually a nerd by all standards -- she does get good grades, but that's
irrelevant (Zach did, after all, get into Dartmouth).  She's mostly just
a recluse; she works all the time to help out her father (Kevin Pollack)
and brother (Kieran Culkin), and when she's not working, she's painting
abstract art or acting in abstract stage productions.  
The plot and story is certainly just an amalgamation of every high
school farce ever made.  What sets She's All That above most films of
the genre is director Robert Iscove's tonal approach.  The film is
excessive and exaggerated, and paints a truly ludicrous vision of high
school.  It's not unrealistic, it's just cinematic hyperbole.  The film
takes place in Beverly Hills, so all the kids are rich (except for
Laney's father, who is a self-employed pool man).  All these wealthy
characters provide for numerous sets and locations that are huge (my
senior prom did not take place in a three-story hotel lobby) and
well-kept (my high school looked more like a giant bathroom than a
summer retreat on Maui).  
But Iscove, writer Lee Fleming, and the actors all take the perfect
tone to make She's All That a ridiculously fun film.  One of the best
scenes in the film is early on:  Laney is in art class, and a goth queen
(played by the Clea "I'm So Dark" DuVall) approach her and say, "Most
artists of your type are only appreciated posthumously."  Laney looks at
her, confused.  She continues:  "So, we think you should commit
suicide."  This scene isn't totally relevant to the story, but it's
funny and offbeat in the same way much of the film is.  The subplot
involving Zach's ex-girlfriend (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe) and her new boyfriend
(a super-self-absorbed member of MTV's The Real World, played by Matthew
Lillard) is absolutely hilarious.  Then there are the charming little
details, like the father who watches Jeopardy! only to miss every single
question.
The acting is dead-on from most of the cast; Prize Jr. stands out as a
likable leading guy, and Cook wins our sympathy early on with her
lovable dorkiness.  Walker makes a good one-dimensional villain, and
Kevin Pollack steals his scenes as Laney's father.  
No one expects depth from a movie like this.  In fact, I'd say that
She's All That is about as good as a movie like this can be.  Based on
recent entries into the teen comedy genre, it seems that coming up with
an original idea is basically out of the question.  But She's All That
proves that a few big laughs and a little bit of silliness can revive a
plot even as tired and played as this one.  

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
SCREAM (8/10) was the film that vogued teen flicks back into theatres, so
let's take Matthew Lillard from that movie. I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER
(7.5/10) was the follow-up teen-scream-popcorn-fest that brought in even
more mighty mighty bucks, so let's take Freddie Prinze Jr. from that cast.
Let's toss in Usher and Clea Duvall from last year's horror regurgitee THE
FACULTY (6.5/10), Chris Owens and Clea (again!) from the Jennifer Love
Hewitt vehicle CAN'T HARDLY WAIT (7/10), Jodi Lyn O'Keefe from the latest
HALLOWEEN: H20 (7.5/10), and even a cute cameo from the co-winner of the
"Queen of Teen flicks" award, Sarah Michelle Gellar (the other being
Jennifer Love Hewitt), and you've got yourself the makings of a perfect teen
romantic comedy, right? Well, let's see...
PLOT:
High school stud and all-around cool guy, Zach, is unceremoniously dumped by
his sexual alter-ego girlfriend, Taylor, and fished into a bet by his
friends to surreptitiously attempt to turn the school dorkiest girl, into
the high school prom queen in six weeks. While he attempts to do just that,
he soon finds himself actually beginning to like this "nerdy" girl.
CRITIQUE:
Cute movie that contains quite a few laughs off the top, an endearing couple
as its leads, but ultimately falls into the trap of utter predictability and
one too many serious moments for its own comedic good. Another small problem
with this film is the fact that the apparent "ugly duckling" girl in this
movie is actually quite cute, even before any sort of physical
transformation occurs. The touted prom queen on the other hand, could not be
any more one-dimensional, and bitchy, giving us very little reason to give a
crap about her. Don't get me wrong, I did actually enjoy most of this movie,
especially an amazingly funny and pointed "performance artist" presentation
near its inception, and the charming performances put forth by Freddie
Prinze Jr. and Rachael Leigh Cook, who kept their characters interesting
through most of this film's quick runtime.
One of my favorite movies of all-time, is actually quite similar to this
one, in that a bunch of guys bet on who is going to bring the ugliest girl
to a party. It's called DOGFIGHT (8/10) with River Phoenix and Lily Taylor,
and it is more of a dramatic representation of the repercussions that may
occur, when such a blatant lack of moral scruples strikes a couple who
really like each other. This film does not even pretend to slice that deep,
but does replace that lack of depth, with a slick soundtrack! :) And despite
this movie being as predictable as 1-2-and ?, it does come through on its
promise to fluffily entertain its target teenage audience with a hollow good
time, some laughs, some semi-tender moments and a couple of appealing leads.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Co-stars Prinze Jr. and Cook also co-starred in 1997's THE HOUSE OF YES. She
was a print model for 5 years before becoming an actress. She stands 5'2".
The hilarious "performance artist" near the first quarter of the film is
Alexis Arquette, one of the many brothers from the acting Arquette clan.
Kieran Culkin is the real-life brother of that HOME ALONE (8/10) kid,
Macauley Culkin.
Actress Sarah Michelle Gellar makes a cameo appearance in this film as one
of the girls in the cafeteria during the infamous "Simon
pizza-slice-meets-pubic-hair scene".
Another interesting actress in this film plays the character of Mackenzie,
Freddie Prinze Jr's sister. This actress actually won an Oscar for Best
Supporting Actress at the tender age of 12, for her role in the movie THE
PIANO. Her name is Anna Paquin. She was born in Winnepeg, Manitoba, Canada.
David Letterman once bet her $10,000 to get a basketball into a net. She
did, but he took the money back after the show. The media caused a fuss
about the whole deal, so he gave it back. Anna ended up giving all of the
money away to charity.
Director Robert Iscove also directed the 1997 television version of
CINDERELLA starring Brandy and Whitney Houston.
>From the "Who Hasn't?" files of trivia, it turns out that aside from
co-starring with him on episodes of TV's "Nash Bridges", Jodi Lyn O'Keefe,
once briefly dated co-star Don Johnson.
The two main stars of 1998's THE MIGHTY also star in this movie. Kieran
Culkin as Racheal Leigh Cook's younger brother, and Elden Henson as her
close friend.
