Title
Review for Five Senses, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Dennis Schwartz

FIVE SENSES, THE (director/writer: Jeremy Podeswa; cinematographer:
Gregory Middleton; editor: Wiebke Von Carolsfeld; cast: Molly Parker
(Anna Miller), Daniel MacIvor (Robert, cleaning man), Gabrielle Rose
(Ruth, masseuse), Philippe Volter (Richard Jacob, ophthalmologist),
Marco Leonardi (Roberto), Pascale Bussieres (Gail), Nadia Litz (Rachel),
Mary-Louise Parker (Rona, cake baker), Elise Francis Stolk (Amy Lee
Miller), Brendan Fletcher (Rupert); Runtime: 105; 1999-Canada)
This comedy/romance story is more about the sense of communication than
it is about the mystery story or about the five senses the structure of
its story is built around. It is done in a delicately stylized form,
filmed mostly in dark, somber shades, as the story revolves around the
characters in an office/residential building in Toronto. It involves the
intertwining of characters, each who has one of the five senses be an
important part of their personality. The film moves along at a brisk
pace, which kept me interested in their lives, but what the story failed
to do was tell me all it can about the characters. Nevertheless, I was
satisfied with the film and the very sensitive nature it tapped into, as
it touched a nerve in each one's character and left me caring about
them, despite thinking that maybe the characters were a bit shallow.
This engrossing film touches on the fears people have who are losing
their senses and how they must rely on the sense that is their strongest
to pull them through their difficulties. The main action sequence
involves the adorable three year old Amy Lee Miller (Stolk) disappearing
in the park when she was supposed to be watched by an emotionally
troubled 16-year-old Rachel (Litz), who has dropped out of school
because she doesn't fit in, and since she is home with nothing to do,
she is asked by her mother Ruth (Rose), a massage therapist, to watch
her client's daughter while she gets a massage. In the park, Rachel gets
distracted by a young couple going into the woods to make love, and when
she returns from watching them the little girl is missing. Rachel was
also approached in the park, by another voyeur, a teenager called Rupert
(Fletcher), who gives her his phone number and they form a nonconforming
romance in the 48 hours that the story takes place, where they dress up
in wigs and put on makeup, as they desperately try to get in touch with
themselves. The sullen Rachel is fearful of what she sees about herself,
as the sense she struggles to overcome is one of sight.
The recently widowed Ruth is deeply affected by the disappearance of
Anna Miller's (Molly Parker) child. She uses this experience to search
for the truth of her relationship with her daughter, realizing that she
has the ability to work magic on her clients but can't touch her own
child, as she fears that maybe she doesn't have the complete sense of
touch needed to be a healer. While Anna Miller learns how to pray again,
as the two women learn the true meaning of forgiveness by their actions
under duress.
This missing girl story crisscrosses with the lives of a decorative cake
baker whose cakes don't taste as good as they look, Rona (Mary-Louise
Parker), who invited an Italian chef she made love with while
vacationing in Italy to come to live with her in Canada. Roberto
(Leonardi) doesn't speak English and she is just starting to learn
Italian through the audio tapes, which makes verbal communication very
difficult. He is very cheerful and sensual, and their relationship is
built on sex and his love of cooking, but by trying too hard to please
her, he has made her very wary of him. She has become suspicious of him
upon his arrival, thinking he might try to scam her to stay in the
country, this suspicion increases when she sees him at the airport with
a beautiful Italian woman, who gave him her phone number. Rona struggles
to understand herself through the sense of taste that is both her strong
and weak point.
Robert (MacIvor) is a bisexual house cleaner, a former boyfriend of
Rona's, more interested in men than women. He is now close friends with
her, sharing gossip and the intimate details of their love life. They
are seen slyly talking to each other about what to avoid in a
relationship, since they have both experienced many failed ones they
have much in common. He thinks he can smell what love is and since he is
despondent that he hasn't found love so far, he makes a list of the men
and women he has seen the last couple of years, and we see those he
meets in an intimate cafe, where over a table, he smells them to see if
love is in the offering. He wants to make sure he didn't make a mistake
and let a true lover slip by. When he fastidiously works at his cleaning
job for a trendy couple, who are living in a swank apartment, he thinks
he has found in this couple the smell of love, as he is presented with a
new creation of perfume the woman designer has come out with. This comes
after he shares a bed with the couple.
Dr. Richard Jacob (Philippe Volter) is a French optometrist, who learns
that he is going deaf. He makes a list of the sounds he wants to
remember before he goes completely deaf, wishing to place them in his
head as if he can build a library of sounds there, this way he can refer
to them later on. In his loneliness and grief, this divorced man with a
child, whose family is in Europe, reaches out to a prostitute (Pascale
Bussieres), who just happens to have a heart-of-gold and a deaf child of
her own. She makes him hear his heart beat again for love. This sequence
didn't have the flow to it the others did, and even though it was
touching to see, it seemed too calculated to have much of an affect.
Jeremy Podeswa (Eclipse), the writer-director, has come up with a
captivating film despite the shallowness of the characters and the story
being a landmine full of clichés. There are things shown in the
relationships uncovered that bring out so many emotional qualities, as
this independent film takes risks on a story line that borders on being
perceived as too arty, but somehow it works because it has something to
say about relationships that are so painful to bear. That I didn't get
to know as much about the characters as I would have liked, gets
overridden by how well the story was presented. I don't think the film
would have worked if it weren't for the nuanced ways of the film and if
it tried to tidy up everyone's life by the finale. The point being made,
is that it is the small little things one does to stimulate one's senses
that counts the most, whether it is when one reaches out for another, or
when just trying to understand someone else and giving them succor, that
it is by using one's senses to connect with someone else that makes life
worth living. These revelations were too banal to make this more than an
intriguing film. But, the story did catch and hold my interest.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Not to be confused with that Bruce Willis ghost story, The Five Senses
is more along the lines of Kieslowski Lite.  The lives of five Canadians
are connected by the sensations of touch, taste, smell, sound, and
sight.  They all reside in the same apartment complex, not unlike the
lost souls wandering through The Decalogue.  Each of the protagonists
are faced with a glib moral crisis which must be resolved during the
seemingly endless hour-and-forty-five-minute running time.
Ruth, a professional massage therapist (Gabrielle Rose, The Sweet
Hereafter), uses the sensation of touch -- get it? -- to heal a wounded
relationship with her daughter's former teacher (Molly Parker, who saw,
smelled, tasted, and touched dead people in Kissed).
Sexy young socialite Rona (Mary-Louise Parker, Fried Green Tomatoes) is
able to communicate with her hot Italian lover (Marco Leonardi), who
can't speak a word of English, through the magic of delicious food and,
of course, some really great sex.  You can cross taste off of your
mental checklist, folks.
On and on we go.  There's the Crimes and Misdemeanors bit with the
sensitive young eye doctor (Philippe Volter, The Double Life of
Veronique) who is going deaf.  Not blind.  Deaf.  Cue the orchestra.  I
can already hear fifty violins crying out to God.  That covers both
sight and sound, doesn't it?
Most ridiculous is the story of a happy-go-lucky bisexual house cleaner
(Daniel MacIvor) who, undergoing a crisis of love, sets up a series of
dates where he proceeds to smell his former romantic partners. 
Ooo-la-la!
Throw in a subplot about a missing child, and you've got some serious
drama.
Writer-director Jeremy Podeswa approaches his story with solemnity which
errs on the side of pretentiousness.  The heavy-handed themes are so
broad and predictable that The Five Senses induces laughs in all the
wrong places.
The clean, austere shots are more revelatory in showing how disconnected
and empty these lives are, but that Canadian sense of detachment is
familiar from Atom Egoyan's stronger portraits of loneliness.  Exotica
comes immediately to mind, but the difference between Podeswa and Egoyan
is that The Five Senses isn't about character or even emotion, but about
ideas.  That's a mistake when you're crafting a movie about human
interaction -- no amount of egghead theory will make you care a fig
about whether or not the housecleaner will find true love.
Mary-Louise Parker brings a clever sensuality to her role, whether
flirting with Leonardi or grousing about her lousy lot to MacIvor.  She
surpasses the Generation-X "Am I after love or just sex?" dialogue by
making her character decidedly feral and bitchy.  You wouldn't want to
date this vixen past a one-night stand, but she makes for a lively
character in an otherwise ponderous piece of art house snobbery.
Director: Jeremy Podeswa
Producers: Carmelia Frieberg, Jeremy Podeswa
Writer: Jeremy Podeswa
Starring: Mary-Louise Parker, Nadia Litz, Daniel MacIvor, Molly Parker,
Gabrielle Rose, Philippe Volter
http://www.fivesensesmovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Laura Clifford
A massage therapist entrusts her teenage daughter to entertain a
client's young child, but the little girl wanders off while Rachel spies
on a lovemaking couple.  Down the hall, music-loving optometrist Richard yearns 
for his own little girl while facing declining hearing.  Upstairs, Rona makes 
speciality cakes that are tasteless while her Italian holiday fling, who 
arrives unexpectedly, cooks up a storm as he pitches woo.  Rona's ex, 
Robert is meeting with all his (mostly male) ex-lovers, looking for the scent 
of love that may still linger in "The Five Senses."
"The Five Senses" begins as Anna Miller (Molly Parker, "Kissed") emerges
from a depravation chamber.  She's under the sensitive care of Ruth (Gabrielle
Rose, "The Sweet Hereafter"), who's trying to make sense of her alien
daughter Rachel (Nadia Litz), a high school dropout.  Rona (Mary-Louise Parker)
is trying to learn Italian from cassettes even before she knows Roberto
(Marco Leonardi) is on his way.  Robert (Daniel MacIvor), who makes his
living cleaning, warns Rona about Roberto's motives while wishing himself
into the lives of a married client couple (she produces perfumes, natch).
This bleak Canadian film seems influenced by both Egoyan (star Rose and
the theme of a missing child) and Kieslowski (people interconnecting by 
chance), yet its own theme remains muddled.  Just what is writer/director
Jeremy Podeswa trying to say here?
The somber score and shadowy, mauve urban look (cinematography by Greg
Middleton) help maintain an even tone, yet the film's characters mostly
achieve no enlightenment.  Rachel meets oddball Rupert (Brendan Fletcher),
a young man who's as much an outsider as she.  Their blossoming friendship
aids Rachel's relationship with her mother and seemingly benefits
little Amy Lee Miller (Elise Francis Stolk) as well.  Yet while Rona is
inspired to attempt to make a good cake by Roberto, the distrust embedded
by Robert keeps her from seeing the truly lovely things he attempts to do
for her.  Robert finally finds the scent of love in a place he didn't even
know he wanted to find it, only to be left bereft and maybe lonelier than
he was before his quest.  Richard (Philippe Volter) plays lots of classical
music while reinitiating an old affair, but the script pretty much leaves
his character stranded, less connected than the rest.
The actors fare about as well as their characters' fates, with Rose
and Litz bringing nice emotional depth to their work.  In a subplot,
we learn via Rupert, (an interesting turn from Fletcher),  that Rachel believes 
herself a death curse ever since the death of her father when he was killed 
driving to pick her up from a school mishap.  (This is strengthened when a fly 
on a windowpane falls dead as she approaches.)  Also strong is MacIvor as 
Robert, sympathetic in his attempt to connect while remaining pragmatic about 
his less-than-movie-star looks.  No one else in the cast makes much of an 
impression.
"The Five Senses" is an interesting, moody little film, yet it doesn't linger.
In the realm of these senses, all becomes muffled.
The five senses - sight, smell, touch, taste and hearing - are the grist for
the independent filmmaking mill of director/wrter Jeremy Podeswa. His story 
takes place in the city where the lives of the film's characters will cross 
because of a single, fateful event. Massage therapist Ruth (Gabrielle Rose) is 
treating Anna Miller (Molly Parker) when Ruth's daughter Rachel (Nadia Litz) 
loses Anna's pre-school daughter Amy Lee (Elise Francis Stolk) in the park. 
Rachel meets Rupert (Brendan Fletcher), a young voyeur (sight). Robert (Daniel 
MacIvor) is a professional housecleaner who claims he can detect the scent of 
love (smell). A custom cake maker, Rona (Mary-Louise Parker) has lost her 
ability to taste.  Finally, Richard (Philippe Volter), an older man, is 
suffering from deteriorating hearing. The paths of all of these, and other, 
people, will cross in Podeswa's ensemble film, "The Five Senses."
This symbolic assigning of each of the senses to a story character is held
together with the binding dilemma of the missing little Amy Lee Miller. The
little girl's disappearance impacts all of the principles to varying degrees as
they, each, cope with the daily problems of life. For some, like Anna and Ruth,
the crisis is nearly devastating as the time drags by and the search for the
little girl spreads and hope for her recovery dims. For Rachel, who blames
herself not only for the disappearance, but also for her father's death years
before, it is another reason for her teen angst. Others, too, are impacted by
the crisis hitting so close to home.
Helmer Podeswa uses his large ensemble cast to provide a slice of
life-in-crisis look at some average Joes in New York. He mostly succeeds in 
telling each person's tale and letting us, the viewer, have a glimpse into their 
lives. We don't, though, build up any empathy for the individuals as the story 
moves, briskly, from one player to the next. There is some interesting stuff 
going on, but I never could embrace any of the characters.
"The Five Senses" is an interesting exercise in ensemble filmmaking and
storytelling, but does not involve the audience in the emotions of the events.
Though the crisis involves a missing little girl, there is no sense of danger
for the child. Some effort is given to building a minor plot line that
introduces witnesses who say she left the park with "a man," but there is
little time given to the discouragement and frustration of the searchers.
Writer/director Podeswa tells us his story in a lean, concise manner. There
isn't a lot of fat to the plot and the scripter efficiently ties up all the
story threads in a neat ending. There is talent in the work, but a more fully
realized story and fewer characters would make for a better movie. I give "The
Five Senses" a C.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Jeremy Podeswa's The Five Senses could have been a gimmicky mess, but
the writer/director's film about five people who each have one wayward
sense is a remarkable triumph of filmmaking.  Like Krzysztof
Kieslowski's Decalogue, which focused on each of the Ten Commandments,
Senses' subtle approach doesn't hit you over the head.  With five
interwoven stories that border on the ironically tragic playing out over
a three-day period, Senses plays like Magnolia directed by Atom Egoyan.
Richard (Philippe Volter, who was in Kieslowski's The Double Life of
Veronique) is an ophthalmologist who is slowly going deaf.  His neighbor
Ruth (Gabrielle Rose, who was in Egoyan's The Sweet Hereafter) is a
massage therapist who can't manage to touch her daughter Rachel (Nadia
Litz) emotionally.  Rachel, an ugly-duckling teen dropout in search of
her own identity, is a bit of a voyeur, but can't manage to keep her
eyes on a three-year-old left in her charge.  Bisexual housecleaner
Robert (Daniel MacIvor, Beefcake) thinks he can smell love and arranges
meetings with all of his former lovers to sniff out a lifemate.
Robert's best friend Rona (Mary-Louise Parker, Goodbye Lover) makes
intricately designed cakes that taste like cardboard.
The stories are pulled together by the disappearance of the
three-year-old (Elise Francis Stolk).  The most interesting of the five
stories involves Rona's relationship with Roberto (Marco Leonardi), an
Italian chef she met while vacationing in Europe.  As Senses opens,
Roberto is coming to visit the skeptical and suspicious Rona, who
believes that he may be using her to gain citizenship.  Roberto can't
speak English, and Podeswa doesn't subtitle his dialogue until the end
of the film so, like Rona, you never know his true intentions.
It's fun trying to guess which character matches each particular sense.
When you first see Richard the eye doctor, you assume he'll handle the
sense of sight tale (he doesn't).  When Ruth is shown giving massages,
you assume that her story will feature the sense of touch (she does, but
not in the conventional way).  I also enjoyed the way that Podeswa
begins the film inside of a deprivation chamber in Ruth's office.
Senses was named Best Canadian Feature Film at last year's Toronto
International Film Festival (the film was shot in and around Toronto),
and was nominated for nine Genie Awards (the Canandian equivalent of the
Oscar) where Podeswa took home the trophy for Best Director.  Senses was
elegantly lensed by cinematographer Gregory Middleton (Better Than
Chocolate) and features a handsome, haunting score from Alexina Louie
and Alex Pauk (Last Night).
1:44 - R for adult situations and adult language

Author
Steve Rhodes
In writer/director Jeremy Podeswa's mesmerizing THE FIVE SENSES, Rona
(Mary-Louise Parker from GRAND CANYON) has a small problem -- an
impaired sense of taste.  A baker who creates marvelous-looking but
incredibly-bland cakes, Rona hasn't a clue as to how to create flavor.
Her taste in boyfriends is also questionable.  While on vacation she met
an Italian hunk, Roberto (Marco Leonardi), and invited him home.  This
non-English speaker has ensconced himself in her apartment, and she
worries that she'll never get him out.  Still, the sex is good, and,
being a great cook, he feeds her well so she is perplexed about what to
do.
This is one of many overlapping stories in THE FIVE SENSES.  Each of
them involves one of the five human senses in some way.  Using this plot
gimmick, Podeswa, an extremely gifted writer and director, never lets
the limitations of the setup confine the bounds of his storytelling.
The beauty of the story is that no matter how much we learn about each
character, we are compelled to discover even more.  Most writers
introduce a dozen main characters only to the detriment of narrative
clarity, but Podeswa manages to create complex characterization within
the bounds of minimal screen time.  His movie calls to mind Lawrence
Kasdan's GRAND CANYON in the depth of its characterization.
THE FIVE SENSES in tone most reminds one of another Canadian film, THE
SWEET HEREAFTER, but THE FIVE SENSES mixes comedy and romance with its
tragedies.  The deliberate and successful slow pacing works in both
pictures, whereas slowness is usually cinematic death for a film.
The story that glues the others together concerns the disappearance of a
4-year-old girl, Amy Lee.  One day at the massage therapist, Ruth
(Gabrielle Rose), Anna (Molly Parker from KISSED) finds that Amy Lee is
bored.  Ruth asks her very reluctant teenage daughter, Rachel (Nadia
Litz), to take Amy Lee to the park across the street to play.
Rachel is a sullen, unhappy kid with a lot of repressed anger.  A
16-year-old high school dropout, she looks like a character straight
from THE ICE STORM.   She voyeurs life like a stranger from her nerdy
glasses.  While in charge of Amy Lee, Rachel wanders off to observe
lovers in the park, and when she returns, her little charge is gone.
Rachel feels terrible about it but stuffs her feelings as deep as she
can.  Only another outsider about her age, Rupert (Brendan Fletcher),
can understand something of her angst, causing them to develop a strange
bond.
In the same building as Ruth is an eye-doctor, Richard (Philippe
Volter), who is going deaf.  He becomes an audio voyeur and begins
making a list of those sounds that he wants to listen to before his
hearing goes.  His character is reminiscent of the one from LAST NIGHT
who had a long list of activities that he wanted to engage in before the
world ended.   Gail (Pascale Bussieres), a paid "escort" and sympathetic
person, helps him in his quest.
The most interesting and unusual character is that of Robert (Daniel
MacIvor), Rona's bisexual house cleaner, who has a remarkable gift of
smell.  Robert is on a quest to smell all of his previous lovers to see
if any of them still love him.  He explains that he can smell love and
that he actually would not call his acquaintances "lovers" since he
doesn't think any of them really loved him.  Robert and Rona, one of his
ex-flings, mentor each other in the ways of love.  He is especially full
of advice for her, most of which she agrees with but ignores anyway.
Robert is a funny, friendly guy, who is light-years away from the
clichés we are normally presented with as gay people.  His search has
the same bittersweet tone as the rest of the movie, but his character
works so hard to be happy that we could vote him "Most Wanting to
Succeed."  We root for him all the way even when it seems that no one
appreciates him as they should.  (He's also one of the best and happiest
house cleaners you've ever met.)
The hauntingly beautiful music by composers Alexina Louie and Alex Pauk
perfectly captures and enhances the mood of the film.  Full of strings,
wind instruments and dreamy voices, the score is striking in its
emotional impact on the film and lovely on its own.
Eventually, the stories wrap up quite satisfactorily but without any
unnatural convergences or actions.  Like GRAND CANYON, you are left
wanting to know more about what happens to your newly-made friends after
the three days covered in the narrative.  Podeswa doesn't insult your
intelligence by providing some cheap epilogue.  He leaves you free to
use your imagination to decide how the rest of their lives turn out.
THE FIVE SENSES runs 1:44.  It is rated R for sexuality and language and
would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http:/www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   One of the unfortunate contradictions of our species is that
none of us likes to feel alone, and yet given our cynical age
we often put roadblocks in the way of intimate relationships. 
This phenomenon can be milked for humorous effect as well
as tragic, as Jeremy Podeswa does so well in his finely-
crafted Canadian film "The Five Senses."  Filmed in and
about Toronto, this production has appropriately
garnered awards and accolades at film festivals in Cannes
and Toronto, and deals with the role of taste, smell, sight,
hearing and touch in the lives of a group of characters whose
narratives are skillfully interwoven.  In some cases, people
with a special acuity use their senses to establish intimate
contact; in others, folks who are at a loss in particular
perceptions learn to initiate a modicum of happiness. 
Employing the plaited narrative structure of Robert Altman
and the texture of Atom Egoyan, Jeremy Podeswa has us
leaving the theater with a smile as his characters make 
peace with what they have lost, in some instances actually
profiting from their misfortunes.
   Podeswa introduces his personalities one by one making
clear to us what is at stake for each of them.  Ruth (Gabrielle
Rose) is a massage therapist not unlike Mitchell Stephens in
Atom Egoyan's "The Sweet Hereafter," having ironically lost
her ability to touch her daughter emotionally.  Robert (Daniel
MacIvor) cleans houses professionally, has a superior sense
of smell, and believes that by smelling the men and women
with whom he associates romantically he can tell which one
would be the ideal lover.  Richard (Philippe Volter), a Belgian-
born ophthalmologist living in Toronto, is slowly losing his
hearing and seeks to make a mental archive of sounds
before he goes completely deaf.  The sixteen-year-old Rachel
(Nadia Litz) has dropped out of high school because she
could not fit in and is alienated from her mother, Ruth.  She
uses her sight to become a voyeur, to look upon her
surroundings without getting involved.  Rona (Mary-Louise
Parker) bakes wonderful-looking cakes which taste utterly
bland.
   Podeswa milks the humor principally in his portrait of
Rona, an adorable baker approaching middle age who has
become involved with a chef, Roberto (Marco Leonardi)
during a vacation in Italy.  Though Roberto has given up his
job and traveled to Toronto to re-unite with Rona, Rona is too
cynical to believe the sincere and emotional Italian wants her
for anything short of Canadian citizenship.  At the same time,
Rona continues to be friendly with a previous lover, the
bisexual cleaner Robert--who may wonder why he and Rona
ever broke up but knows from his prescient sense of smell
that somehow a genuine love was missing.
   What eventually brings these disparate persons together is
the temporary disappearance of a child who is being watched
by young Rachel but who vanishes during the moments that
Rachel follows a young couple into a remote section of the
park to observe their lovemaking.  Unable to connect with her
schoolmates, her mom, or anyone at all, she lives vicariously
through her sight and will later grasp her true self through the
patient and tender ministrations of a boy her own age.
   "The Five Senses" was screened for critics in New York on
the same evening as was "Mission to Mars."  One cannot
help observing that the two pictures are about as disparate
from each other as movies can be.  "Mission to Mars" deals
with our fascination with outer space, with exploring the great
beyond.  "The Five Senses" turns inward, exploring Oscar
Wilde's epigram, "Nothing can cure the soul but the senses,
just as nothing can cure the senses but the soul."  While
Podeswa is not as assured a director as his countryman,
Atom Egoyan (he tends at times to dwell on particular scenes
when a fast cut would have sharpened the tension), he helps
prove that when it comes to making movies, the Canadians
seem able to do no wrong.  This is a film for those who
realize that the most important unexplored territory lies not on
the Red Planet but in a place even more intimate than our
own backyards.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 107 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
