Title
Review for Fifteen and Pregnant (1998) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Fifteen and Pregnant" is a made-for-television movie,
produced by the Lifetime cable channel.  It is a
highly credible and interesting study in teenage
pregnancy, and its effect on the family.
Tina (Kirsten Durst) gets knocked up by jerk boyfriend Ray
(Daniel Kountz), who promptly dumps her.  Tina finds reluctant
family support from her embittered mother (Park Overall) and
father (David Andrews).  Andrews has been evicted by Overall,
but is attempting a reconciliation.  Tina's best friend is
unwed teen mother Laurie (Margot Demeter), who is struggling
to make something of her life.
There is nothing romantic about "Fifteen and Pregnant".
Tina has become pregnant because she feels that her
life is empty, and perhaps a baby would add meaning
to it.  Her faith in Kountz, and her desire to have a
loving relationship with him, is quickly shattered.
The poverty, hassles and struggles of becoming a young
unwed mother are effectively shown.
Tina's pregnancy isolates her from school friends.
This is actually positive, as it stops her tobacco and
alcohol abuse, and increases her interdependence with
Demeter.  But she remains selfish, and naive about what is
in store for her.  Her parents are ambivalent: they
want to punish her for becoming pregnant, but they
know that she will need support.
Julia Whelan is a bit miscast as the "younger" "fat" sister.
Her character is excellent however.  As the family focus
is on Tina's pregnancy and the parent's potential
reconciliation, she understandably feels left out.
The siblings say viciously cruel things to each other:
there is jealousy and strong disapproval, but it
fits the unblinking unromatic mood of the film.
Margot Demeter gives a superb performance as Tina's friend.
It is unfortunate that few people will ever see this
made-for-cable instant obscurity to take notice of it.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
