Title
Review for Bodies, Rest & Motion (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  5/93 (varies)
Running Length:  1:34
Rated:  R (Sexual situations, mature themes, language)
Starring:  Phoebe Cates, Bridget Fonda, Tim Roth, Eric Stoltz
Director:  Michael Steinberg
Producers:  Allan Mindel, Denise Shaw, and Eric Stoltz
Screenplay:  Roger Hedden
Music:  Michael Convertino
Released by Fine Line Features
     BODIES, REST & MOTION begins with Nick (Tim Roth) announcing to
his former girlfriend Carol (Phoebe Cates) that he and his lover Beth
(Bridget Fonda) are moving from Enfield, Arizona to Butte, Montana.
However, a day before the scheduled move, Nick takes off for an
unspecified destination without Beth, saying that he needs to be alone
to discover himself.  Beth, understandably devastated by the sudden
abandonment, finds a measure of solace in Sid (Eric Stoltz), a
joint-smoking painter who has arrived to prepare her house for the next
tenants.  What neither of them counts on is his falling in love with
her.
     For the most part, BODIES, REST & MOTION confines itself to the
often converging, occasionally diverging tales of four
twenty-something characters over a forty-eight hour span.  There is no
real beginning--we're sort of dropped in the middle of a scene and
asked to pick things up as we go along--and there's certainly no end.
It's what's often called a "slice of life" motion picture, with all of
the positives and negatives associated with that sort of movie.  The
characters are the key, with the plot of secondary importance, and what
action there is accomplishes little more than to feed us additional
information about one of the four protagonists.
     Those who like something significant to happen in their movies
will find BODIES, REST & MOTION dull and pedantic.  It's a small film
about people and how they interact.  The most momentous thing that
happens in the entire film is the theft of a television set, and
there's no tension associated with that event.  No one would ever
mistake BODIES for a source of thrills and excitement.
     It's a joy to watch the slow evolution of the relationships.
BODIES is virtually cliche-free for both dialogue and characters.  As
far as the audience is concerned, these are real people struggling with
the same kind of every-day problems and decisions that many of us
face.  This is not an escapist film, but one invested with an unusually
intelligent and incisive perspective on human motivation.  There are
several instances when the characters get too psychological in their
introspection, uttering implausibly-convoluted lines, but other than
that, much of this picture is on-target, at least as far as character
insight is concerned.
     BODIES has an unusual structure, switching back and forth between
characters with no apparent reason.  There are a few rather bizarre
sequences (such as Nick's stop at the Native American-owned gas
station, his trip to his parents' house, and the second meeting of Sid
and Beth) which contribute to the atypical tone.  The movie isn't
extreme enough to be considered weird, but "offbeat" is an accurate
description.
     Finally, Phoebe Cates gets a chance to play an adult role.  After
giving respectable performances in films like GREMLINS and DROP DEAD
FRED, Ms. Cates has at last been cast as a real, three-dimensional
person.  In a movie that boasts the names of Stoltz, Fonda, and Roth,
Cates outshines her co-stars, investing Carol with energy and life.
     I did not like the ending.  In general, while a movie doesn't have
to neatly wrap up all the loose ends, I prefer there to be some
indication of completion.  BODIES, REST & MOTION has none.  The credits
come up suddenly, with no previous warning that the movie is about to
end.  Until the first name rolled from the bottom of the screen, I was
sure there was at least ten minutes of footage left.  Admittedly, this
is a personal preference, since real life often leaves us hanging, and
undoubtedly there are some who will love the abruptness of the
picture's conclusion.
     BODIES, REST & MOTION is a movie for those who like uncomplicated
stories about real-seeming characters.  There's a lot of motion (hence,
the title), but little happens outside the ongoing self-discovery of
the four main characters.  In an era when many motion pictures are
going for "big", it's nice to see well-known actors in a "small" film
like this.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mattias Thuresson
Cast: Phoebe Cates, Bridget Fonda, Tim Roth, Eric Stoltz
The word 'rest' in the title should be stressed since this is
a movie that lacks any action scenes at all. What does takes
place is more based on character development. The film starts
right in the middle of the lives of four people: Nick, Beth,
Carol and Sid. What they have done earlier is for the most
part only hinted at. Nick and Beth have a relationship and
have decided to move from Enfield, Arizona to Butte, Montana.
(and I who thought that Butte was pronounced slightly
different...) Carol is Nick's ex-girlfriend and Beth's best
friend, Sid is a joint-smoking painter that comes to repaint
their house before the new tenants move in.
Obviously based on a stage play, the problem with the movie
is that there's a lot of things left out. It's not obvious
that Nick and Beth are in love with each other, the reason
why Nick was fired from his job isn't mentioned. And why Nick
suddenly decide to go visit his parents remain a mystery,
when he hasn't seen them for many years.
Set in a small (fictional?) town in Arizona was a good move,
since this makes the film focus on the four characters and not
on their surroundings. The name of the city is not important,
this could take place anywhere with four young people in a
house discussing life and the future. Particularly impressive
is Bridget Fonda as Beth who end up in bed with Sid when
her fiance Nick leaves her. Not an actress that I have found
interesting earlier or seen many pictures with, but I'll
keep an eye on her in the future.
Interesting trivia: this was rated R in the US but rated
'barntillĺten' in Sweden wich means that anyone at any
age can see it.
