Title
Review for Come See the Paradise (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     COME SEE THE PARADISE is a film about racism from a writer-director
who has been accused of making films with racist overtones (MIDNIGHT
EXPRESS, MISSISSIPPI BURNING).  It is also about the internment of
Japanese and Japanese-Americans during the Second World War.  And it is
a love story.
     The film was created by Alan Parker and stars Dennis Quaid and
Tamlyn Tomita as the lovers whose interracial marriage was opposed as
much by her father as by the "antimiscegenation" laws of California.
They elope to Seattle to get married, Seattle and Washington state being
known as an unusual place even in the 1930s in such matters.  They
become separated when the so-called internment camps are opened and all
persons of Japanese ancestry removed from the Pacific Coast states and
the U.S. enters the war.
     The pre-Pearl parts of the movie present a wonderful evocation of
Los Angeles' old Little Tokyo, with its mix of old and new country.  The
movie has a lush, detailed look to it.  In one of the Seattle papers
there was story about the reactions of several local ex-internees to
seeing the film.  One person was quoted to the effect that the movie
showed the camp surrounded by three barb-wire fences, just as his camp
was in real life, which detail delighted him for its authenticity.  The
camp is never identified, but I assumed it was meant to be Manzanar in
the Owens Valley of California.
     If it was Manzanar, the site of which I visited twenty years ago,
its appearance in the film points up my only real dissatisfaction with
the COME SEE THE PARADISE (aside from the title, which is an obscure
reference to the movie house where Quaid worked for Tomita's father,
played by Sab Shimono) was that to some extent it soft-pedaled the camps
and the situation.  Someday a really hard-hitting dramatic movie (as
opposed to a documentary such as one done on the camps in the late
Seventies) will be made; in the meantime, this film is better than
nothing, a first step, as it were, in realizing the dramatic potential
of this sad episode in U.S. history.
     Much is glossed over, such as dissent within the camps among the
internees about their own loyalties.  There is, in the interest of
balance, I suppose, a brief, conventional defense is offered by a minor,
white character.  However, there is no doubt that the film views the
camps as an injustice and a cruel punishment of innocent people.  From
my friends who experienced the camps directly and from my own reading, I
know that only the smallest modicum of the pain and confusion and greed
and meanness and little heroisms were depicted in this film.
     The performances by Quaid, Tomita, and the other actors are
uniformly excellent.  I've never liked Quaid better and I want to see
Tomita in lots more movies.  One of the pleasures of the movie is see
many unfamiliar faces, ethnic actors who are usually buried by the
mostly lily-white nature of main-stream film-making.  Indeed, one
especially delightful scene features one of Lily's brothers (Lily being
Tomita's character) who is trying to be a film actor but can only get 
parts as Chinese houseboys.  (Peter Lorre as Mr. Moto shows up in camp
show, too.)  
     The love story begins well, but does tend to get lost in the
hurly-burly of the war, which is probably what happened for a lot of
people, but which is not particularly good story-writing or film-making.
The two  principals play off each other well in their love scenes, but
their love scenes are more tender than passionate for some reason.
     Shall I say the film was not hard enough by half on America?  This
is not an angry film, but it is sympathetic and probably new information
for a lot of people.  America seems to have made progress since those
days, even if much distance remains to be covered.  The film is strong,
the performances are strong, the look is strong.  I am happy to
recommend COME SEE THE PARADISE.

Author
Vince Deehan
Written and Directed by Alan Parker 
Cast:  Dennis Quaid, Tamlyn Tomita, Sab Shimono, Shizuko Hoshi, Stan Egi, 
Ronald Yamamoto.
I only recently discovered the existence of this great Alan Parker film, having 
somehow missed all mention of this film when it was released six years ago in 
1990. I can't think how I haven't heard about this film before, and I can only  
guess that it must have met with little commercial and, possibly, little 
critical success.
COME SEE THE PARADISE begins with a young woman, Lily Kawamura (Tamlyn Tomita),
walking with her daughter to an imminent reunion with her newly demobbed 
husband, Jack McGurn (Dennis Quaid).  It is just after the end of World War II,
and as they walk Lily tells her daughter how she met her husband and how they 
became separated by circumstances beyond their control.
We see Jack in New York in 1936, where he is working as a sweat shop lawyer,  
an unqualified one as he explains, for a film projectionist union.  Our first 
sight of Jack is in a cinema where he and his friend Augie Farrell (Pruitt 
Taylor Vince) set light to a smoke bomb as part of a tactic to get some 
attention for their union grievances, but another pair of union men set light 
to a fire bomb which Jack wasn't warned about.  Jack expresses his anger to 
his union bosses who hadn't told him that fire bombs were going to be used.  
In the end his boss pays him off and tells him to leave as he has become too 
much of a liability to the union who have become concerned with Jack's 
superior knowledge of the law and his hot-headedness.
Jack moves out to Los Angeles and gets a job as a projectionist at a Japanese 
cinema in Little Tokyo.  There he meets and falls in love with the beautiful 
Lily, who happens to be the daughter of the cinema boss.  Lily's father (Sab
Shimono) strongly objects when Jack, a white Irish-American, starts seeing 
Lily, his Japanese daughter.  Lily and Jack eventually escape to Seattle where 
they get married on their own, and without Lily's parents blessing.  
As world War II begins and the Japanese bomb Pearl Harbour, a wave of 
anti-Japanese feeling sweeps America which results in the Presidential order 
for all Japanese people to be evacuated and sent out into a huge camp in the 
desert.  Thus, Jack and Lily and their daughter become separated.  Jack gets 
drafted but manages to visit Lily and her family, who are also imprisoned 
with her.
When we first meet Lily's brother Charlie (Stan Egi), he is working in the 
cinema with Jack, and is clearly thrilled to be an American. He loves baseball 
and is full of life and always smiling and joking.  Although he isn't by law 
allowed to become a US citizen, he seems to love America while obviously 
having great affection and pride in his Japanese roots.  He reacts bitterly 
to his imprisonment and becomes very cynical and tough, losing his friendly 
demeanour.  Stan Egi gives an outstanding performance as Charlie, who changes 
so much under the duress of his situation that he becomes almost unrecognisable
from the light-hearted man we see earlier in the film.  
In the part of Lily's husband Jack, Dennis Quaid shines in a hugely charismatic
performance. The only slight misgiving I have about the film, is the frequent 
references to Jack being Irish.  When Jack meets his brother, played by Colm 
Meaney, a reference is made to the fact that both brothers hail from Donegal, 
Ireland.  So why do neither actors play their parts with Irish accents ?  
Strange.  But this hardly detracts from the magnificence of the film.
The film is as much a love story as it is a vivid historical account of the 
appalling treatment of many innocent people, whose only crime was being 
Japanese, during World War II.  This was a part of American history that I 
knew nothing about, and the film certainly proved very educational from that 
point, as well as being a great piece of cinema. 
Review written on Mon 4 March 1996 by Vince Deehan  (vince@deehan.demon.co.uk)
