Title
Review for Bamboozled (2000)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Spike Lee, from his screenplay. Starring Damon Wayans, Savion
Glover, Jada Pinkett Smith. Running time: 135 minutes. Rated R for
offensive language throughout by the MFCB. Reviewed on February 1st, 2001.
Some of the best -- and undeniably most provocative -- movies of the past 
half-century have studied the problem of racism. In American cinema, most 
(though, certainly, not all) of these works have dealt with prejudice 
against the black community, and one of the most successful purveyors of 
these films has been Spike Lee. "Bamboozled" is Lee's newest treatise on 
the subject, and this time around he has pushed the envelope one step 
further by examining bigotry toward African Americans not just from white 
people, but from black individuals as well. And in concert with this, Lee 
looks at the way people respond to what they see on television -- how the
medium itself can help what was once controversial, and even obscene, 
become an easily-accepted part of our culture.
Lee's key character is Pierre Delacroix (Damon Wayans), a black 
programming executive for a fictitious American network. Lee clearly sets 
up Pierre to be a person who, if he is not ashamed of his race, at least 
has set himself apart from it. Not only has he changed his name to make it 
sound upper-crust and distinctly non-black, but he speaks in such a 
bizarre, affected accent that even his own father questions him about it. 
With their ratings floundering, Pierre is charged by his boss (Michael 
Rapaport) with coming up with a new show to appeal to the underserved 
black population -- something which veers away from the formula ensconced 
by "The Cosby Show" and its imitators. (One of the questions Lee poses is 
why all black-centered programmes are sitcoms. This isn't strictly true -- 
"New York Undercover", from "Law & Order" creator Dick Wolf, was a 
moderate success on FOX in the mid-Nineties and featured a mostly black 
and Hispanic cast -- but Lee's point is valid all the same.)
In response, Delacroix invents a show designed to thrust the topic of 
racism back in the public spotlight by indulging in that very thing. 
Christening it "Mantan: The New Millennium Minstrel Show", Delacroix 
envisions it as a modern update on the black exploitation vehicle of the 
mid-nineteenth century. He recruits two street performers, Manray (Savion 
Glover) and Womack (Tommy Davidson) to star in the programme: Manray will 
play the eponymous Mantan while Womack portrays his pal, Sleep 'n Eat. 
Amongst the supporting cast are such offensively named characters as 
Honeycutt and Aunt Jemima. And the racist ingredients don't end there: 
Mantan and Sleep 'n Eat live on a watermelon plantation, are lazy and out 
of work, steal chickens, and generally indulge in every stereotype 
imaginable. Even more obscenely, all the actors in "Mantan" wear blackface
(Delacroix insists Manray and Womack make their own make-up, just like 
their forebears did a century and a half earlier). And yet, despite the 
show's heinous content, "Mantan" quickly becomes a nationwide hit, a 
success which presages serious ramifications for all those involved.
"Bamboozled" starts off very well. The audacity of Delacroix's idea is 
both frightening and compelling, and the burgeoning success of "Mantan", 
flying in the face of all common sense, is at once fascinating and 
horrifying. Within weeks, the concept of actors wearing blackface changes 
from an appalling taboo to a national craze -- amongst all demographics -- 
demonstrating the effect television can have even on our deepest-held 
beliefs. The implication is that if something is on TV then it's okay, no 
matter how bigoted it might really be. And this laissez-faire attitude
toward racial injustice applies not just to white viewers but black 
viewers as well, who seem heedless of the fact that the racism is 
targetted directly at them.
At the same time, Lee draws an intriguing parallel between the minstrel 
shows and the modern-day "gangsta rap" scene. One of the instrumental 
figures in "Bamboozled", played by Mos Def, is the brother of Delacroix's 
assistant Sloan (Jada Pinkett Smith) and the leader of an aggressive band 
called the Mau Maus. Lee's assertion is that bands like the Mau Maus do 
not tout African American rights but instead simply reinforce every 
negative black stereotype prevalent today: that they're violent, thieving, 
sex-crazed, hostile to everyone who isn't African American. In this way, 
suggests Lee, gangsta rap and related musical genres are scarcely 
different from the old minstrel shows. The trappings might be different, 
but the effect on public perception is the same.
It is the collision of "Mantan" and the Mau Maus that forms the climax to 
"Bamboozled". But unfortunately, this is also where the film runs out of 
steam. Having established such a thought-provoking premise, having posed 
so many intriguing and worthwhile queries, Lee ends up tossing it all 
aside in favour of a predictable, monotonous and gratuitous finale which 
hardly matches the invention of the movie's first hour. Instead of 
approaching his themes like a master workman, Lee takes a sledgehammer to 
them. At this stage, "Bamboozled" also loses sight of its characters and 
instead resorts to tedious, melodramatic shenanigans. Particularly 
ill-served is Pinkett Smith, whose astute characterisation in the first 
reel steadily deteriorates as the film winds on.
And this is disappointing, because it wastes both a great concept and some 
fine acting. Wayans is magnetic as the maladroit Delacroix, a unique 
character who manages to be intriguing and repugnant at the same time. 
Rapaport is very funny as Delacroix's boss, Dunwitty, a man who believes 
himself to be so in touch with African American culture that he tells 
Delacroix, "I'm blacker than you are," and yet thinks nothing of spouting 
a racially-motivated slur at his underling.
Lee is clearly trying to bring some great ideas to the fore here, and is 
on the verge of making a truly memorable film about racism; that the 
picture fails so badly in the end does not diminish this potential. If 
nothing else, this movie demonstrates that Lee has by no means run out of 
steam when it comes to this subject. But "Bamboozled", sadly, will go down 
as a lesser entry in the director's filmography.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/Bamboozled.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Ross Anthony
Bamboozled is a term Malcolm X used to describe the treatment of blacks by
the whites back in the 1900's.
In the film "Bamboozled," we follow TV producer Pierre Delacroix (Wayans)
who's dropped his American accent in favor of a countryless Harvardy dialect
and his American name for a French one. The character is interesting, but
the speech much more annoying than need be.
As the "sole person of color" working for CNS, and frustrated with his
impossible-to-please boss, a desperate Pierre goes for the outrageous and
creates a TV show intended to satire black stereotypes. "Mantan the New
Millennium Minstrel show" boldly black-faces (as in Al Jolson) the black
lead actors (a tap dancer and singer) and proudly hails its anthem, "Nigger
is a beautiful thing." Set in a watermelon patch, this black "Hee-Haw" with
the balls of "South Park" leaves its studio audience (as well as
theater-goers) squinting, wincing, wondering. But the confused watchers
eventually polarize: those who think the show is a funny way to mock
stereotypes on one end; those with shaking fists, dead set on stifling this
revival of old slave-mentality TV on the other.
Every black hackneyed film and cartoon image since the turn of the century
(1800's to 1900's, that is) are replayed with the purpose of twisting
America's stabbing pain of embarrassment a quarter turn in hopes of opening
the minds of those that control the media by enraging/educating those that
watch it.
But the film twists more than this, an underground group of revolutionaries
doesn't quite find the "Amos and Andy" crap funny. "I feel like Dr.
Frankenstein," Pierre confesses as this satirical project slowly slips from
his command.
As in the film, different people within (and outside of) the black community
have their own different ideas on how to best assist the processes of
quelling 20th century racist residue. Some will no doubt find that this film
(like its fictional "Mantan Minstrel Show") heartily takes steps towards
that goal. Others will hark Pierre's own point, "That was 400 years ago, let
it go, move on!" Still others, just won't know what to think. I found myself
rotating among these three perspectives. Either way, this film provokes
thought, pressing buttons while it entertains.
The taping of the pilot sequence is break out fresh and bold. I loved it!
Impressive also, the climax sequence; while simultaneously grossly humorous
and solidly dramatic, it left me with a blinking question mark over my head.
Jade Pinkett-Smith, Savion Glover, and Tommy Davidson give very strong
performances, but Damon Wayans accent is more annoying than satirically
entertaining.
"Bamboozled" is shot on videotape, sometimes this supports the feel and
intent of the film, and at other times hinders it; but for the most part
doesn't effect the play.
Bamboozled. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Damon Wayans, Savion Glover, Jada Pinkett-Smith, Tommy Davidson,
Michael Rapaport.
Written and directed by Spike Lee.
Choreography: Savion Glover.
Produced by Jon Kilik and Spike Lee at 40 Acres/New Line.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Susan Granger
   In this satirical fable, Spike Lee tackles race, television
and how blacks are depicted in the media. Taking its title from a
Malcolm X speech about how black people have allowed themselves to be
hoodwinked and led astray, the story revolves around Pierre Delacroix
(Damon Wayans), a frustrated, black, Harvard-grad TV writer who, under
orders from his boss (Michael Rapaport), comes up with a truly
offensive concept - a postmodern minstrel show - that immediately
becomes a hit. Incorporating all the shockingly bad taste possible,
"Mantan: The New Millennium Minstrel Show" stars homeless street
performers (Savion Glover, Tommy Davidson) in blackface cavorting in a
watermelon patch on a plantation. Smearing one's face with charcoal
suddenly becomes the chic, "IN" thing to do. The theme is Lee's
assertion that today's successful black entertainers (Cuba Gooding
Jr., Whoopi Goldberg, Will Smith, Diana Ross, etc.) are no more than
participants in racist minstrel shows.  But they're not the only ones
under attack. Lee also goes after Mother Teresa, President Clinton, Al
Sharpton, Johnnie Cochran, various networks, athletes and the NAACP.
Lee's use of digital video with multiple cameras creates the quality
of a documentary expose - and popular culture is the villain. The real
hero is Junebug, Delacroix's father (Paul Mooney), a racy comic who
refused to comply with Hollywood. But Lee allows his (justifiable)
anger to run rampant over reason in the final tedious third of the
film. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bamboozled" is a
scathing 6. If you want to see the most perceptive indictment of
TV-spawned culture, rent Elia Kazan's "A Face in the Crowd" (1957),
written by Budd Schulberg, starring Andy Griffith, or Paddy
Chayefsky's chilling "Network" (1976).

Author
Jerry Saravia
Spike Lee's spectacular new film, "Bamboozled," is likely to cause heaps of 
protest from audience members, particularly blacks. The idea that minstrel 
shows can cause more laughter now than they used to, as long as blacks are 
shown to be buffoons and outright caricatures, shows that America may not 
have changed much since the days of "Amos n' Andy." And Spike Lee knows it 
all too well. 
Pierre Delacroix (Damon Wayans) is the only black executive at a New York 
cable network that needs to save itself from drastically low ratings. One 
day, Delacroix comes up with an outrageous concept - a minstrel show called 
"Mantan the New Millenium Minstrel Show." Basically, the show will focus on 
two dimwitted, nineteenth century cotton plantation workers ("Alabama porch 
monkeys") who joke and dance each week in front of a live studio audience. 
Pierre finds his two lucky actors in the form of a homeless dancer (Savion 
Glover) as the main character Mantan, and the dancer's friend (Tommy 
Davidson) as Sleep N' Eat - these two have been auditioning for Pierre in the 
past in front of his office building and now they have the shot at stardom. 
When Pierre presents his concept to his white boss, Dunwitty (Michael 
Rappaport), the boss becomes overwhelmed with glee. The only one miffed at 
the concept is Pierre's workaholic assistant, Sloan Hopkins (Jada Pinkett 
Smith). 
Naturally, Pierre expects this show to fail miserably (in the real world, it 
would not have gone further than the pitch) and, ironically, it becomes a 
huge controversial success. Think of Mel Brooks' "The Producers" meets 
"Network," with some jarring, uneven jabs at advertising, especially Tommy 
Hilfiger, its most pointed jab. The show becomes such a success that Pierre 
becomes immersed in it himself, keeping grinning, red-lipped, buffoonish 
statues of blacks from the heyday of a forgotten era in his office. But is 
such an era really far behind, or do we still, in effect, have minstrel shows 
today? Are white and black audiences more receptive to African-American 
stereotypes that we can laugh at as in "The Nutty Professor II" (the original 
one, ironically, starred Jada Pinkett) or Martin Lawrence in "Big Momma's 
House" than to films like "Beloved" or "Amistad," which focus on slavery?
When Spike Lee focuses on such issues, it becomes a lacerating, powerful film 
- how do these black actors feel about putting on blackface? Unfortunately, 
as in "Jungle Fever," Lee tends to focus on characters that are less 
remarkable and thus, distract from its intended message. The scenes of the 
rappers, who contemplate on how other rappers are not getting the recognition 
they deserve, recalls similar scenes of the Panthers in "Network" and they do 
not work very well in Lee's context of racial profiling. I was more 
interested in Pierre and Sloan, and how they felt about their guilt in the 
face of success. All this ends rather crudely and abruptly with violence and 
hysteria that, once again, recalls "Network." The difference is that 
"Network" was leading to an inevitable conclusion where violence on 
television would result in higher ratings. Here, it is too tidy a solution, I 
think, whereas a grander subplot about how audiences relate to such material 
would have been preferred, and how these actors feel abou
t their televised act to an audience that even wears blackface to honor the 
show's characters!  
The performances are quixotic, as always in a Lee film. Damon Wayans is 
perfectly restrained as Pierre, using his hands as if they were magic wands - 
his reaction to the madness he has created is clearly felt in the final 
scenes. Jada Pinkett Smith is also alluring, smart, and energetic as Sloan, 
who sees far beyond the show's concept than anyone else in the film. I also 
enjoyed the touching performances by Glover and Davidson, two actors caught 
in the haelstorm of success, the latter more cognizant of the effect it has 
on his own well-being. 
I kept thinking of one film that dealt with similar issues, and that was 
Robert Townshend's smartly satirical "Hollywood Shuffle." Townshend's film 
does it with more grace and style, whereas Lee's film is angry and bites us 
like a junkyard dog. The end of "Bamboozled" features a moving collage of 
cinematic racial stereotypes, from "High Society" to Al Jolson in "The Jazz 
Singer." If Lee inserted clips from the gangsta rappers of today or Eddie 
Murphy, his point would have been made about minstrel shows still existing 
today. "Bamboozled" is too fractured and blunt to really score (and has a 
rather muddy look due to being filmed on digital video), but it does make you 
reflect on how race is portrayed in the media in today's world.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Michael Dequina
With the NAACP once again criticizing the four major American broadcast
television networks for the lack of racial diversity--and a limited
variety roles for African-Americans--in the new television season, the
time is ripe for a film like _Bamboozled_, which satirizes the TV
industry's arguably racist practices.  And who better than Spike Lee to
direct such a confrontational film, right?  But it's one thing for a film
to wear an agenda on its sleeve, and quite another to do what Lee does
here--bludgeon the viewers with his message, preaching to them rather
than making them think while entertaining them.
For a little while, though, Lee achieves that balance.  A good example
is an early scene where Pierre Delacroix (Damon Wayans), the sole black
writer for the fictional Continental Network System, is told by the
network's white, ebonics-spouting programming head Dunwitty (Michael
Rapaport) that he's "blacker" than he is.  In addition to wringing
pointed, biting laughs, this scene also concisely pints up a real issue:
the Harvard-educated Pierre wants to create respectable series
spotlighting the oft-ignored African-American middle class (think
_The_Cosby_Show_) while Dunwitty wants to see the slang- and slapstick-
heavy sitcoms that are the predominant television showcase for blacks
(think _Homeboys_in_Outer_Space_).
So, in an act of spite, Pierre gives Dunwitty exactly what he wants--to
the nth degree: _Mantan:_The_New_Millennium_Minstrel_Show_, featuring
street performers Manray (Savion Glover) and Womack (Tommy Davidson) in a
throwback to the offensive comedy/variety stereotypes of yesteryear. 
Watermelon patch dwellers "Mantan" and "Sleep 'N Eat" wear burnt cork
blackface and get into all sorts of misadventures--always as a direct
result of their ignorance and laziness.  But every once and a while,
Mantan and Sleep 'N Eat break out into spirited song and dance numbers
while backed up by their house band, the Alabama Porch Monkeys; and their
dance troupe, the Pickaninnys.
The parallel Lee draws between TV (and entertainment in general) of
today and yesteryear is clear--blackface aside, the common portrayal of
African-Americans on the tube is disconcertingly similar, if not nearly
identical.  As the film firmly establishes this provocative point through
that plot development, it would only follow that _Bamboozled_ would then
build into even more incendiary satire.  What ignites instead, however,
is Lee's need to vent about a variety of other issues.
Much like how _Mantan_ slips out of control as it becomes an unexpected
runaway success, _Bamboozled_ soon flies off the reins.  Now a media
sensation, Manray indulges in the high life and believes his own hype;
similarly, Pierre, who could already be pegged as a sellout with his
ridiculously "refined" accent and diction, basks in the attention and
accolades for a creation that he designed to die on the vine.  Lest one
think one of the film's messages is to "keep it real," the Mau Maus, an
afrocentric rap group headed by the brother (Mos Def) of Pierre's
assistant Sloan (an impressive Jada Pinkett-Smith), is similarly raked
over the coals and then some; for all their talk of revolution and
staying true to their roots (for example, Sloan's brother changed his
name from Julian to Big Black Africa), they spend most of their time
guzzling forties and smoking weed.
Despite the muddiness caused by all the peripheral concerns, Lee never
makes one forget that _Bamboozled_ is, foremost, an attack on racial
misrepresentation in entertainment.  It's impossible to sight of that,
given how increasingly heavy handed his technique gets as the film wears
on, crossing the line between satire and sermon; sly, stinging wit makes
way for earnest and overblown preachiness--as exemplified by a lengthy
montage of racist images in entertainment through the years that comes
late in the film.
Amplifying the sense of bombast is a violent, melodramatic
wrap-up--which, in itself, reinforces another stereotype: that
African-American-themed films end with some type of bloodshed.  Is this
another point on Lee's list or an unfortunate coincidence?  With the
bungle that is _Bamboozled_, anyone's guess is as good as mine.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Jeremiah Kipp
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Jeremiah Kipp.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/9b02e0ffef6351c6882569700006b436?OpenDocument
        Welcome to a piece of American history.  In the old music hall, white
comedians and song 'n' dance men would splash their faces in charcoal,
maybe throw on a pair of white gloves, then go through the
step-n-fetchin' routine, the exotica and the buffoonery of perceived
black culture.  Jim Crow, Amos 'n' Andy, Mammy, L'il Black Sambo, Uncle
Tom, and the Ten Pickaninnies were typical characters thrown on stage
and screen for the amusement and mockery of white audiences.
        What began as white actors in blackface evolved with the 1950s Amos and
Andy Show on television, featuring black actors in blackface.  The
content remained the same, with Amos and Andy portrayed as lazy,
ignorant, chicken eatin', banjo playin', shifty clowns.  Once the show
lost favor with an outraged public, the television studios put a halt on
developing new shows about the black experience -- degrading or
otherwise -- for several decades.
        Spike Lee's Bamboozled works as angry satire, asking that we not forget
the offensive and disturbing corners of our history.
        Pierre Delacroix (Damon Wayans) is the one black writer working for the
CNS television studio. The ratings are plummeting, so an Ebonics-talking
hotshot producer named Dunwitty (Michael Rapaport) turns to his
Ivy-League educated black stooge and demands a new urban themed show
with a fresh new hook.  "You can do it, my nigga!" Dunwitty beams, "and
I can call you my nigga because my wife is black and I got two
interracial babies at home."
        Delacroix has cooked up dozens of ideas for sitcoms and dramas
involving black characters, all of which have been rejected as old hat. 
Thinking he can beat the television industry at its own game, he comes
up with the most offensive, disgusting, horrible idea he could possibly
imagine: a revival of the minstrel show featuring black actors in
blackface.  His mission is to get fired immediately, the only way to
break his contract.
        Well, surprise, surprise!  Dunwitty claims to have a boner for the
idea, so they immediately go into production.  Delacroix and his
assistant, Sloan (Jada Pinkett Smith) are suddenly in over their heads,
faced with a choice to either go with the flow and ride on the magic
carpet of their success or realize the consequences of their actions and
do something to combat the blatant racism of this program.
        The premise of Spike Lee's film is undoubtedly strong, with a promising
first act that keeps the stakes very high.  Immediately, however, some
of the warning signs start to show, such as his one-dimensional
depiction of Delacroix, the whitest black man on the planet, and the
conflicted Sloan, whose character changes in such radical leaps and
bounds that we again realize, no matter how well-performed the role is
by Pinkett Smith, Spike Lee could not write a fully developed woman
character to save his life.
        If the opening of the movie is good enough to carry us through some of
its unsubtleties, Spike Lee really hits his stride with the televised
mistrel show.  Inspired by the vaudeville routines, performers "Mantan"
(Savion Glover) and "Sleep 'n' Eat" (the superb Tommy Davidson) dress in
gaudy costumes, don the white gloves and charcoal make-up, fire engine
red lips, and googly eyes, and they follow the gawky movements of
stereotypical blackface characters.
        No punches are pulled.  We see scenes where the two goofballs sneak
into the chicken coop for some good eatin' while massah prowls outside
with his shotgun.  The scene has been set in Massah's watermelon patch,
where the darkies dance their troubles away.
        Purely offensive and disturbing, Spike Lee's accurate recreations of
these programs are heightened by montage footage of the actual minstrel
shows of America's past.  This black and white footage haunts the
present day situations of actors Manray (Glover) and Womack (Davidson),
including those painful scenes where they sit in front of a mirror,
melting cork into black paste, swabbing their skin in cocoa butter to
prevent burning and smearing red lipstick on their mouths.
        For quite a while, Bamboozled works as brilliant satire.  Even if the
offstage antics of Manray, basking in his newfound fame, and Womack,
bitter at his own exploitation, feel fairly obvious as dramatic
archetypes, Lee's situation is strong enough to carry it through.
        However, in the middle of the second act, Spike Lee hurls his entire
movie over the cliff with some obvious dramatic tactics.  We're treated
to scenes which we knew were coming, such as the inevitable lecturing of
Delacroix by his mother, who is ashamed of him.  Of course, Sloan
figures into a predictable would-be love triangle between Delacroix and
Manray. (After all, what are women characters good for?)
        As with almost every film he's made, Spike Lee clutters up his movie
with distracting subplots such as obvious, pontificating potshots at the
Wu-Tang Clan, Tommy Hilfiger's clothing line, O.J. Simpson's trial, and
violence in the media.
        His unforgivable last fifteen minutes feature a kidnapping, violence
and bloodshed which are as ridiculous and contrived as they are
out-of-character and so concerned with making a "point" that it betrays
no less than three of the major characters in his scenario (especially
the main female character, who sinks to a great low without any
foreshadowing.)
        It nearly destroys the movie, and certainly tarnishes the conclusion.
Spike Lee again comes up with seemingly five different endings while
wrapping the movie up, and is content to include each and every one of
them.
        That said, no other filmmaker is tackling this subject matter today. 
Spike Lee may be pompous and arrogant, create one-sided arguments, and
go for unsubtle choices, but he's also a master of visual allegory, he
creates vivid and colorful dialogue, and he arouses passion in his
audience.  Bamboozled, for all its numerous and frustrating flaws, is
important viewing.  It's a film which says, in no uncertain terms, that
there are some things we must not forget.
Director: Spike Lee
Producer: Jon Kilik, Spike Lee
Writer: Spike Lee
Starring: Damon Wayans, Savion Glover, Jada Pinkett Smith, Tommy
Davidson, Michael Rapaport, Paul Mooney
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Steve Rhodes
Don't be bamboozled.  BAMBOOZLED, by acclaimed writer/director/producer 
Spike Lee (MALCOLM X), is a preachy and pretentious social satire, 
featuring black-faced minstrels, that's quite embarrassing and never 
funny.  The acting, worthy of an amateur improvisational group, is 
awkward with a capital A.  And the film is extra long so that Lee can 
beat us over the head with his message.  Easily the worst film of his 
career, it is so full of bad racial stereotypes that if a white 
filmmaker had made it -- remember the flack Ted Danson got for 
attempting black-faced humor -- the movie would probably be picketed.
In a stilted, unrealistic and unconvincing performance, Damon Wayans 
stars as Pierre Delacroix, the only black writer for an upstart 
television network.  Pierre, who speaks like a tape running at half 
speed, is as painful to listen to as someone scraping their fingernails 
across a blackboard.  "I h-a-v-e a c-o-n-c-e-p-t," he says, accompanied 
with exaggerated hand gestures.  His big idea is a television series 
called "Mantan: The New Millennium Minstrel Show," set in a watermelon 
patch and featuring black-faced black actors.  His favorite word to draw 
out, which he uses profusely, is "N-e-g-r-o."  He tells his white boss 
(Michael Rapaport), for example, "I'm ready to dig d-e-e-p into my 
s-o-u-l as a N-e-g-r-o."  
The stars of the variety show, which starts a black-faced fad in America 
that outdoes the Beanie Babies craze, are two homeless tap dancers, 
Mantan (Savion Glover) and Sleep 'n Eat (Tommy Davidson).  Pierre 
introduces them to his boss as "two real coons."  Racial slurs abound in 
the script.  Both actors are uneasy about their new names (Mantan's real 
name is Manray, and Sleep 'n Eat's is Womack), but they are willing to 
stuff their pride for the opportunity of gainful employment.  Only Sloan 
Hopkins (Jada Pinkett Smith), Pierre's disapproving assistant, is 
willing to voice strong reservations about the propriety of the project.
The didactic movie insults the viewer's intelligence at every turn.  
It's hard to pinpoint the lowest and most despicable episode in a story 
filled with vile moments, but the lowest of the low may be the 
television show's commercial.  It advertises a malt liquor called Da 
Bomb that comes in the shape of a bomb.  A bunch of wasted black actors 
swear by its potency, bragging that it's 120 proof.
The film's ending, which shamelessly rips off NETWORK, transforms this 
would-be comedy into a highly manipulative tragedy.  After BAMBOOZLED, 
anything Spike Lee does will be a huge improvement.
BAMBOOZLED runs an excruciatingly long 2:15.  It is rated R for strong 
language and some violence and would be acceptable for high school 
seniors and older.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
BAMBOOZLED (2000)
Rated R; running time 136 minutes
Genre: Drama
  (forget what the genre labellers are sayin'; this ain't no comedy.)
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0215545
Official site: http://www.bamboozledmovie.com/
Written by: Spike Lee
Directed by: Spike Lee
Cast: Damon Wayans, Savion Glover, Tommy Davidson, Jada Pinkett-Smith,
Michael Rapaport, Mos Def
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsbamboozled.html
You are about to read the most schizophrenically lengthy review I have
ever written - which, ironically, marries it perfectly to the movie
being reviewed: Spike Lee's controversial BAMBOOZLED.  Here we go...
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Black TV writer Pierre DeLacroix (Damon Wayans) is charged by the White
producer of the Continental Network Systems station Mr. Dunwitty
(Michael Rapaport) to come up with an all-Black comedy show that will
boost CNS's ratings.  But when the "streetwise" Dunwitty rejects the
Harvard-educated DeLacroix's plans to create "the next Cosby show",
DeLa, along with his assistant, Sloane Hopkins (Jada Pinkett-Smith)
decides to create a show so offensive that DeLa would be fired [and thus
allowed to get out of his contract...since, after all, he has "a
mortgage to pay".  Don't ask how being fired will help pay that
mortgage, though.  Too much logic, and all].
Inspired by homeless Black street tap dancer Manray (Savion Glover) and
his partner Womack (Tommy Davidson), DeLa and Sloane come up with the
most heinous show imaginable: "Mantan the New Millennium Minstrel Show",
in which Manray would play Mantan and Womack would play "Sleep 'n Eat";
they both would be made up in blackface ("Black actors in blacker
blackface"), and called "Two Reeee-aaaal Coons".  Manray and Womack,
being in a state of poverty, agree to this (Womack more reluctantly so
than Manray, who'll do anything "longas the hoofin's real"), but DeLa is
ultimately undone when to his surprise not only does the
"nigga"-spouting Dunwitty love the concept, the American TV audience
eats it up.  Sloane and DeLa have a hard time living with this - but not
as hard a time as Sloane's brother Julius, aka Big Black Africa (Mos
Def), a member of the MauMau rap group who takes Issue with the
"comically" blackened minstrels, at the same time as he and his fellow
malt liquor-guzzling self-righteous MauMaus use the word "nigga" as much
if not more than the minstrels themselves.
The Upshot:
And the schizophrenic part?  BAMBOOZLED worked for me on so many levels
at first, that I was so utterly disappointed when it just kept going on
and on, repeating itself without saying anything New, eventually running
out of juice well before it was over.  Had I stopped watching it at a
certain point, I might've declared it a Masterpiece.  As it is, I can
neither fully praise, nor fully denigrate, this movie.  And the funny
thing is, {SOME} Black folks will try to take me to task for that very
thing ["'BAMBOOZLED' was dope!, you Oreo traitor!" ... "'BAMBOOZLED' was
wack!, you Bougie traitor!".  Can't win for losing.]
As a visionary tale, BAMBOOZLED knows few equals.  Spike Lee nailed many
of the dysfunctional Issues Black folks in America have as A People
(and, of course, as the many sub-cultures within the larger,
mostly-undefined Black Culture), and well as The Issue itself: what
exactly does it mean to be Black in America?  Is DeLa less Black than
Julius because Julius is "keepin' it real"?  Is Dunwitty - clearly a
Caucasian - *more* Black than DeLa because Dunwitty considers himself
"street"?  Is the White MauMau Blacker than *all* of them?  And when it
gets right down to it, is there even such a thing as one single "Black
Culture"?
Though Lee's targets were many, and wide (and, depending on who you ask
- for instance, Hollywood's Finest Black Comedy Stars, many of whom
loudly questioned Lee's "right" to do this movie - just plain off-base),
I found his aim fairly accurate, for the most part.  All the
"nigga"-slinging, all the malt-liquor drinking, all the empty mau-mauing
- even the mental separation of Us into "Blacks" and "Negroes" (or,
telling it like it 'tis, "Niggers") that too many of us (me included)
do...when Spike aimed, and hit, it spoke to many of the things I've long
felt were cultural ills with Us here in this so-called Melting Pot.  The
most heinous ill being that WE so gladly supply the Cork, and willingly
apply the ugly Blackface, to Ourselves.
But - and this isn't a small thing - being a Visionary is only half the
battle; to have a successful movie, one must also have successful acting
and directing, a tight storyline, and cohesive editing.  And that is
where BAMBOOZLED ultimately failed.
Granted, a Spike Lee joint doesn't always follow the typical moviemaking
blueprint of your standard motion picture.  To that end, the weird
jumpcuts, the unnatural-feeling scenes, and the strange editing, were
Lee trademarks.  But this film couldn't afford Lee's quirks *and* his
inability to cut out the repetition on the one hand and "grow" the story
on the other *and* an in-your-face storyline, all at the same time.
That, on top of the unbelievability of both Mantan's and Sleep 'n Eat's
Instant Revelations with no good cause (except, of course, the "wake
up!" caused by looking at your cork-blackfaced image in the mirror,
which should make *anybody* say "hmmm...maybe this isn't a good idea
after all"), and Damon Wayans' bizarre choice of a one-dimensional
portrayal of DeLacroix, almost killed the joy of the BAMBOOZLED
philosophy for me.
Great acting by Jada Pinkett-Smith, Michael Rappaport, and an
interesting turn by rapper Mos Def as Big Black Africa, could not
overcome Lee's lack of tight focus, the far-too-easy "instant"
acceptance of the minstrel show by the audience, the completely
incredulous "payoff" involving the MauMaus and Mantan (my eyes truly
rolled), or Wayans' just plain bad acting - and worse, the bad decision
to let him do the narrative voiceover.  The "jolly nigger"-type
collectibles, and the Black actors of the past who did what they had to
do - and having done so, *allowed* a Spike Lee, a Damon Wayans, et al,
to be where they are today - should have supplied the final narrative.
Too bad they weren't really allowed to Speak.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
"We Are Not A Monolith".  It is my daily mantra.  And it applies oh so
well to BAMBOOZLED.  But what, exactly, does it mean?
It means that somewhere out there, there's a Harvard-educated,
stick-up-the-butt, "Negro"-labelling, confused DeLa; and a
status-seeking, hard-working, bougie, confused Sloane; and a
tap-dancing, fast-talking, struggling-to-get-by Manray and Womack; and a
malt liquor-drinking, gun-slinging, pseudo-revolutionary Julius.
And like it or not, they're ALL Black.  Which, of course, lays waste to
the one huge stereotype We seem to be portrayed as on the Idiot Box that
Pierre set out to feed.  If this, more so than the viewer's experience
of the acting itself, was The Ultimate Point of BAMBOOZLED, then bad
acting/directing/editing or not, BAMBOOZLED is indeed a Masterpiece.
One that, when all is said and done, should be seen, no matter your
color.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
BAMBOOZLED, conceptually, is something that Spike Lee should be
applauded for.  Would that the finished product were as great as the
concept behind it.  It pains me to say that; after all, I drove 88 miles
to The Hood just to see a movie that a lot of theater owners in
predominantly White neighborhoods were apparently too chicken to show. I
desperately wanted to love this movie for both its message and the
talent behind it.  The message came through loud and clear; but judging
BAMBOOZLED on its creative merits alone, we have been Hoodwinked.
BAMBOOZLED (mixed rating):
A greenlight rating for what visionary Spike Lee *tried* to Say; but...
...a cautionary yellowlight for the way director Spike Lee Said it.
Spike, I gotta go with what DeLa's mama said about him: you disappoint
me.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Though creating an ambiguous central character in his
most mature work, "Bamboozled," Spike Lee harbors no
ambivalence in his overall viewpoint, which (as I see it) is
this: Each period in history finds a class that oppresses and a
group that is oppressed.  The oppressed may freely parody
the actions of the people in power.  Satire is a creative way
of deflating the powerful with ridicule.  Satire, however, is
inexcusable if used by the strong against the weak.  If white
people in general have the upper hand against black people,
they may not in good conscience use their power to poke fun
at African-Americans.  Whites may, however, mock other
whites, which makes movies like "The Three Stooges"
permissible.  Whites may not ethically have anything to do
with subjugating members of minority groups--who have
traditionally been on the raw end of the stick throughout U.S.
history.  
   To illustrate his viewpoint long and hard but with a great
deal of laughter and general entertainment value, Lee poses
a scenario in which the white vice president of a major TV
network, Dunwitty (Michael Rapaport), concerned about the
plummeting ratings of his station, encourages his one black
writer, Pierre Delacroix (Damon Wayans) to push the
envelope.  Delacroix, a successful, Harvard-educated man
with an affected upper-class accent, is sufficiently humiliated
with his role at a network that has little room for African-
Americans on its staff to want out.  Since he cannot violate
his contract by quitting, he creates a show that is politically
so outrageously incorrect that he expects the pilot to be
rejected and presumes that he will be canned without
violating his employment agreement.  Trouble ensues when
the program instead becomes a huge hit.
   What Delacroix has done is to create essentially a minstrel
show, the type of entertainment that began in the U.S. in
1840 in which blacks are stereotyped as ignorant and willing
to follow the orders of the ruling whites without question. 
(The show is so politically incorrect that in fact the New York
Times refused to accept advertising from the studio that
features African-Americans in blackface as "too demeaning.") 
Delacroix hires a couple of desperate individuals, Manray
(Savion Glover) and Womack (Tommy Davidson), a street-
peddling tap dancer and his promoter respectively, giving
them roles as Mantan and Sleep 'n' Eat, and taping a weekly
show with stage characters in blackface in historically
debasing characterizations--including a band of pickaninnies
and Alabama Porch Monkeys who eat watermelon with gusto
and dance up a storm.  As the program soars in ratings,
Delacroix becomes more conflicted, torn between his hatred
of his own father's humiliating role as a stand-up, black-
hating comic, his mother's race-conscious conscience, and
the increasing disgust of his attractive assistant, Sloan
Hopkins (Jada Pinkett-Smith.
   Regardless of our antipathy toward the long abandoned era
of blackface, Aunt Jemimas, and the slew of cartoons (which
Lee trots out with relish toward the conclusion of the film), we
in the audience cannot help being entertained by what
transpires on the stage and to be absorbed in the backstage
manipulations of the writer, his boss, and a group of so-called
Mau Maus headed by Big Black (Mos Def) who are
absolutely appalled by the degradation they witness from
Delacroix's performers on TV.  There is little doubt where
Spike Lee's sympathies lie, and while the Mau Maus
ultimately take extreme action to end the successful TV
series, Mr. Lee is obviously furious at the entire chronicle of
white exploitation of blacks and by blacks who allow
themselves to be manipulated by taking part in the designs of
the so-called ruling class.  We suspect that even a program
that many would consider fairly innocuous like The Jeffersons
would strike a sour note in Lee's consciousness but that a
production such as The Cosby Show would be more to his
liking.  As Lee ultimately demonstrates in his movie, the
blacks who take part in the designs of white TV producers
very much share in the guilt.  "There is always a choice,"
says one of the characters, and we do see indications that at
least one of the performers in the network weekly series is
perfectly willing to give up his perks and return to a life of
integrity and poverty.
   Lee's principal flaw this time around is his lack of
cohesiveness in designing a movie that plays more like a
series of fun skits than a solid narrative.  Repeating the acts
of the pickaninnies and the principal players over and over
gains no additional points for Mr. Lee and in fact the overkill
takes away from his contentions as does the contrived,
melodramatic ending.  Damon Wayans is particularly notable
in demonstrating a direction that tears him apart on the one
hand in his liking for material success and on the other by his
collaboration with the power structure in degrading his
people.  Other stand-outs are Savion Glover, who taps up a
storm as he did on Broadway recently in "Noise/Funk" and
Michael Rapaport as the white vice president who feels he
has the right to use the "N" word because his wife is black
and his kids are bi-racial.  Johnnie Cochran and Al Sharpton
make cameo appearances as themselves, rallying the troops
against the reactionary TV series.  The film could have been
better with more attention to structure and a more generous
use of the editor's shears.
Rated R.  Running time: 140 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
