Title
Review for Kĺdisbellan (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Jesper Salen, Stellan Skarsgard, Basia Frydman, Niclas Olund 
Director:  Ake Sandgren 
Producer:  Waldemar Bergendahl 
Screenplay:  Ake Sandgren based on the novel by Roland Schutt 
Cinematography:  Goran Nilsson 
Music:  Bjorn Isfalt 
Released by Sony Pictures Classics 
In Swedish with subtitles 
     "Schutt's novel THE SLINGSHOT is brimming with ideas.  The movie
is my interpretation of what I felt when I read the book.  That's
always the way it is--a direct translation isn't possible.  The world
described in the book appeals to me...There is a terrific vitality in
this story and an undertone of absurdity that really turned me on.  The
existential questions we formulate during prepubescence are important
throughout our lives."
     - Ake Sandgren, writer/director of THE SLINGSHOT
     It's interesting how almost every film out of Sweden evokes, in
one way or another, impressions of Ingmar Bergman's work.  THE
SLINGSHOT is certainly not a Bergman-derivative--it's almost too
lighthearted for that--but there are moments here and there when one
could imagine something similar from the great director.
     THE SLINGSHOT is a wonderful mix of tragedy, humor, and triumph.
Set in the 1920s, it explores some of the difficult realities of
growing up as a boy in Sweden, especially for someone like Roland
(Jesper Salen), whose mother Zipa (Basia Frydman) is a Jew and whose
father Fritiof (Stellan Skarsgard) is devout socialist.  Roland is
often the target of bullying and name-calling, but the resilient lad
always seems to bounce back from whatever problems beset him, often in
the most unexpected of ways.  On one occasion when he needs money,
Roland fashions slingshots out of scrap metal and condoms, then sells
them to his schoolmates.  Then there's the time when he has some fun
with a few lice....
     Over the past few years, there have been quite a number of coming-
of-age stories (both foreign and domestic), from the nostalgic JACQUOT
and the offbeat LEOLO to the endearing KING OF THE HILL.  THE SLINGSHOT
fits right into an open slot in this broad category, with its familiar
tone applied to unique characters and situations.
     THE SLINGSHOT successfully manages to navigate the turbulent
waters of Roland's boyhood adventures as they turn from the absurd to
the heartwrenching.  Writer/director Ake Sandgren displays a deft hand
in seamlessly melding drama and comedy.  He also creates a series of
rich screen personalities who could easily slip into comfortable
stereotypes, but don't.
     Take Fritiof, for example.  At first, this man seems to be the
typical "Swedish father figure"--someone who is stern, demanding, and
distanced from his children.  As THE SLINGSHOT progresses, however, we
learn that there's a lot more to Fritiof than is initially evident, and
his relationship with both his sons has more facets than might
initially be supposed.
     THE SLINGSHOT's lone failing comes when it skims across
philosophical issues of existence.  Perhaps because of the brevity with
which they are examined, or maybe because they are introduced from the
perspective of a ten-year-old, these themes seem out-of-place.
     With a trio of formidable performances (by Salen, Skarsgard, and
Frydman), THE SLINGSHOT offers a moving, intriguing look at the
difficulties faced by one child set adrift in a sea of bigotry where
his own resourcefulness is the key to survival.  There's more to this
film than is suggested by its apparently-simple story, and it's a
tribute to the ability of Ake Sandgren and his cast that so much is
realized.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jasper Salen, Stellan Skarsgaard, Basia Frydman, Niclas Olund.
Screenplay/Director:  Ake Sandgren.
     It may be my imagination, but the last two years seem to have been
a particularly good time to be a young actor.  Films focusing on
younger characters have been everywhere, from FREE WILLY to SEARCHING
FOR BOBBY FISCHER to KING OF THE HILL to THIS BOY'S LIFE.  Whether it's
representative of some societal yearning for a return to innocence, a
rare influx of young talent, or some happy confluence of the two,
coming-of-age dramas have become nearly as ubiquitous as Hugh Grant.
None of which makes a good one any less desirable, and THE SLINGSHOT is
a good one indeed, a sharply written Swedish import with a singular
perspective and exceptional performances.
     Based on an autobiographical novel by Roland Schutt, THE SLINGSHOT
tells the story of ten-year-old Roland (Jasper Salen) and his trials
and tribulations living in 1920's Sweden.  He is a boy with two strikes
against him, the child of a dogmatically socialist father (Stellan
Skarsgaard) and a Jewish mother (Basia Frydman).  This lineage makes
him the target of schoolyard bullies, sadistic schoolmasters and
government officials, who tend to use him as a scapegoat.  Even with
his family he is not safe, as his older brother (Niclas Olund), an
aspiring boxer, uses him as a punching bag.  But in spite of his many
obstacles, Roland navigates through his difficult world with
determination and an inventive spirit.
     As with the other recent films I mentioned, THE SLINGSHOT rests
squarely on the small shoulders of its young star, and Jasper Salen is
up to the task.  With a round, open face reminiscent of A CHRISTMAS
STORY's Peter Billingsley, Salen manages to convey both innocence and
toughness in the delicate balancing act required by Ake Sandgren's
adaptation.  While many things happen *to* Roland, he is never merely a
receptacle.  He exhibits a cockiness born of necessity, and a gift for
utilizing the tools at his disposal to get ahead.  When another boy
offers Roland a used bike he hasn't the money for, Roland offers to
repair and paint some other bikes to repay his debt.  After a fight
with his brother results in Roland owing his father money as well, he
tries to earn it by selling balloons made out of the condoms his mother
distributes illegally.  Roland is always thinking, and it is this
intelligence that comes through in Salen's performance.  He is
complemented by a wonderful supporting cast, particularly Stellan
Skarsgaard as Roland's father, a driven man who compensates for his
crippling sciatica by pushing himself and his family to their limits.
     Although THE SLINGSHOT is, as one might expect, primarily
episodic, it is still rich enough thematically that it never feels like
merely a loose collection of scenes.  Foremost among these themes is
the clash of capitalism and socialism, personified by Roland himself.
While his father lectures to him about the revolution, Roland fashions
many creations with condoms, and imagines himself credited as the
inventor of "The Underwater Sock" and "The Condom Slingshot."  When
Roland shows a cat his newly refurbished bike and says to it, "That's
mine," it is as succinct a statement of rebellion as one might
imagine.  There is also a nicely played scene in which Roland's father,
who is acting as a body double for a portrait of the King, momentarily
forgets his politics when he puts on a pair of expensive shoes.  This
is not to say that THE SLINGSHOT acts as little more than a one-sided
political tract; Sandgren is equally critical of the restrictive
government policies which turn the Schutts into criminals for
advocating birth control.  However, it is Roland's internal struggle
with his heritage that makes his external struggles even more potent.
     THE SLINGSHOT's key failing may be that it tries to do too much,
and some of the scenes begin to seem repetitive.  The obligatory moment
of sexual awakening seems just that--obligatory--and ends with a
scene surprisingly lacking in emotional punch.  A late series of events
which involves Roland's implication in a crime bogs down seriously, and
removes him from the relationships which drive his story.  Those
relationships, particularly Roland's complex interaction with his
father, are what make THE SLINGSHOT memorable.  Thanks to Jasper
Salen's splendid work, THE SLINGSHOT takes its place as a worthy
addition to the list of fine coming-of-age films.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Roland is a boy growing up in Stockholm in the 1920s (or so) with
just about everything going against him.  His father is a Socialist,
his mother is a Russian Jew fighting an illegal battle for family
planning.  Roland's father is an autocrat with little empathy for the
boy.  Roland's teachers are anti-Semitic and anti-Socialist and have
little use for the boy except as a bad example and as a target for
occasional sadistic corporal punishment.  Roland's schoolmates cheat,
exploit, and play cruel tricks on young Roland.  And in spite of all
this, Roland has an irrepressible spirit.  He sometimes does fight
back, but chooses his fights where he thinks they will do the most
good.  He also has an ingenious and a creative mind.  The story always
has the feel of an autobiography of somebody who achieved something
great later in life.  In fact, it is the adaptation of a semi-
autobiographical novel by Roland Schutt, so we know he at least became
a novelist.  The book was adapted for the screen and directed by Ake
Sandgren.
     THE SLINGSHOT takes its title from one of many applications young
Roland finds for the condoms that his mother illegally distributes.
Without understanding the actual purpose for the devices, he is able to
see in them and improvise several unexpected uses, each only getting
him into deeper trouble.  One keeps expecting somebody to notice the
genius of the ten-year-old, much as the boy comes to be appreciated in
MY LIFE AS A DOG, but this is not a film with simple answers and
obvious scenes.  Roland's rewards will be far more abstract and not so
dependent on others.
     Jesper Salen stars as Roland and manages a better performance with
more depth than many better-recognized actors in this country give.
Many actors his age just read lines and go through some motions for the
camera.  Jesper's acting is intelligent and convincing.  You always
have a feeling that there really are intelligent mental processes
behind his actions.  Stallen Skarsgard plays Fritiof, the father who
thinks himself a great liberal thinker but who runs his family like a
despot.
     While the film leaves the character of Zipa (Basia Frydman) at the
stereotypical loving mother level, we do get to know a lot more of
Roland's father.  He is harsh and demanding of his sons.  He is
determined not to let a spinal condition, which is slowly taking away
his ability to walk, undermine his control on his family.  He is a
walking (or nearly so) contradiction trying to hold on to some of the
values of the past while trying to change the social order of his
country.  He despises the government while envying the trappings of
being the king--trappings that he gets a chance to sample for himself.
     Roland is not a victim of the Holocaust and he lives in a country
not generally associated with discrimination and bigotry.  But the
prejudice he faces is clearly a major part of forming his character and
his ability to remain strong and to rebound still makes for a moving
story which I give a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
