Title
Review for Some Mother's Son (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Helen Mirren, Fionnula Flanagan, Aidan Gillen, David O'Hara, 
      John Lynch, Ciaran Hinds, Geraldine O'Rawe, Grainne Delany
Director: Terry George
Producers: Jim Sheridan, Arthur Lappin, and Edward Burke
Screenplay: Jim Sheridan and Terry George
Cinematography: Geoffrey Simpson
Music: Bill Whelan
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     In 1979, when Margaret Thatcher assumed the role of England's Prime 
Minister, one of her stated aims was to crush the IRA and its associated 
"terrorism."  Her "Northern Ireland Solution", as it became known, 
included three principles:  Isolation, Criminalization, and 
Demoralization.  Those members of the IRA captured for terrorist acts 
were to be treated as criminals, not soldiers.  Prisons were to be used 
to break morale, not create martyrs.
     On March 1, 1981, IRA prisoner Bobby Sands began a hunger strike 
which would earn him world-wide notoriety.  Sands laid out five demands 
that, if met by the British government, would end the strike.  Chief 
among these was the requirement that imprisoned IRA members would be 
recognized as "prisoners of war" (not common criminals), and, as such, 
would be allowed to wear their own clothing (instead of prison 
uniforms).  Thatcher's government refused to negotiate, even when, on 
April 9, Sands was elected as the Member of Parliament from Fermanagh 
and South Tyrone.  66 days after it began, Sands' protest ended with his 
death.  Others followed his example, and, by the time the strike ended 
on October 3, ten of the more than 300 IRA prisoners in Long Kesh 
prison's H-Blocks had perished.  
     The story of Sands' hunger strike forms the background of Terry 
George's directorial debut, SOME MOTHER'S SON.  However, while there is 
a great deal of information in the film about Sinn Fein, the IRA, and 
the political situation in Ireland during the early 1980s (some of which 
is fictionalized), this is principally a tale of sacrifice and family 
relationships.  It's about a mother being forced to confront the very 
real fear that her son may die for convictions that she does not share, 
and that it could ultimately be her responsibility to choose life or 
death for him.
     The character of Gerard Quigley (Aidan Gillen) does not, nor ever 
did, exist, but George, along with co-writer Jim Sheridan (IN THE NAME 
OF THE FATHER), uses him as a focal point for SOME MOTHER'S SON's 
narrative.  He is typical of young IRA members:  firm in his beliefs, 
staunch in his hatred of the British, and willing to die for his 
convictions.  He looks upon Bobby Sands (played by John Lynch) as a 
Messiah-like figure, and is willing to follow him to the grave.  
     The real star of the film, however, is Helen Mirren, who gives a 
stirring performance as Gerard's torn mother, Kathleen.  A widowed 
schoolteacher trying to raise a family of three, Kathleen despises the 
violent tactics employed by the IRA, and is shocked to learn that her 
oldest son is a member of the organization.  SOME MOTHER'S SON explores 
Kathleen's difficulties in coming to terms with Gerard's beliefs.  And, 
although she refuses to be "a stooge for violence", Kathleen fights for 
her son with every ounce of strength, effectively helping the IRA.  From 
her perspective, she walks a precarious moral tightrope.  Once the 
hunger strikes begin, Kathleen recognizes that an agonizing dilemma 
awaits.  If Gerard loses consciousness, it will be up to her (as his 
next-of-kin) to decide whether or not he is given food.  If she agrees 
to have him fed intravenously, she violates his convictions.  On the 
other hand, in the words of a British official, "Surely no mother would 
allow her son to die."
     Mirren is given fine support by Fionnula Flanagan, who plays Annie 
Higgins, the mother of hunger striker Frank Higgins (David O'Hara).  
Unlike Kathleen, Annie is pro-IRA, but, despite their differing 
political views, the two become close compatriots through the shared 
bond of their sons' ordeals.  Ciaran Hinds (last seen as the dashing 
Captain Wentworth in PERSUASION) plays Sinn Fein spokesman Danny Boyle 
(presumably a fictional representation of Gerry Adams).
     Production values in SOME MOTHER'S SON are top-notch.  There is a 
real sense of time and place, from the close, claustrophobic insides of 
Long Kesh prison to the streets of nearby Belfast.  Cinematographer 
Geoffrey Simpson (SHINE) manages the difficult task of capturing the 
film's personal moments as effectively as the more epic ones (such as 
the funeral procession for Bobby Sands, which drew 100,000 mourners).  
Bill Whelan's forceful, energetic score is one of the best of the year.
     Make no mistake:  while the core story of SOME MOTHER'S SON is 
universal in theme and deeply personal in scope, the narrative 
nevertheless shows evidence of a pro-Republican bias.  Although the 
movie is arguably more balanced than Sheridan's powerful and riveting IN 
THE NAME OF THE FATHER, the British still come off as faceless villains.  
Margaret Thatcher's mouthpiece is a caricature of vicious, heartless 
cliches.  For those with an interest in the ongoing conflict in Northern 
Ireland, SOME MOTHER'S SON makes an excellent companion piece to Neil 
Jordan's MICHAEL COLLINS.  But, regardless of your political leanings, 
Terry George's picture is well worth seeing because of its intelligence 
and emotional depth, not to mention Helen Mirren's Oscar-caliber 
performance.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
Using the 1981 hunger strike and subsequent election to Parliament of
IRA martyr Bobby Sands as its core story, "Some Mother's Son" stars
Helen Mirren as Kathleen Quigley, an apolitical teacher and mother in
Northern Ireland whose son, Gerry, has fervently embraced the cause of
the IRA.
Gerry's terrorist activities, and subsequent arrest, conviction and
imprisonment in the notorious prison, The Maze, thrusts him, and
Kathleen, into the thick of the things surrounding the British
government's revised policy of treating IRA inmates as criminals, not
political prisoners, in an attempt to defuse their popular influence
outside.
Irish actress, Fionulla Flannigan, appears as Annie Higgins, a pro-IRA
mother whose son, Frankie, is also embroiled in the strike. Unlike
Kathleen, Annie is dedicated to the cause, no matter what the cost -
even the life of her son.
Dealing with similar circumstances as last falls film, "Michael
Collins", "Some Mother's Son" thrusts the viewer into the political
fray of the 70's Northern Ireland conflict. "Some Mother's Son" shows
a deeply felt conviction to the real politics, then and now, in
Ireland, and does it better than the more ambitious "Michael Collins".
Helen Mirren and Fionulla Ferguson, as the mothers representing two
sides the same political coin, are outstanding. Mirren is powerful in
her role as the apolitical one whose sole concern is the safe, healthy
return of her son to his former freedom. Fionulla Ferguson is, if
anything, even more powerful in her role as the activist mother
willing to sacrifice her son for the IRA cause. I'm surprised Ferguson
has not garnered more award attention.
"Some Mother's Son" also benefits from the thing that hurt "Michael
Collins": the depth and breadth of the supporting cast is full and
rich, right down to the sneaky little English toady working behind the
scenes to screw things up for the prisoners. It's this attention to
character detail that make a film like this worth seeing.
The subject matter is selective in its appeal. For me, it appeals.
"Some Mother's Son" doesn't try on as grand a scale as Michael Collins
but it succeeds just as well. I give it a B, the same grade I gave
Collins.
"Some Mother's Son" is an effective film to make one think about the
'Irish problem.'  Are the IRA freedom fighters or terrorists, heroes
or hoodlums?
Told through the eyes of an apolitical Belfast mother (the splendid
Helen  Mirren) who is horrified to discover her son's involved with
the IRA and  was involved in the shooting of a British soldier ('he
was trying to kill ME, Ma'), "Some Mother's Son" makes a nice
companion piece to 1994's "In the Name of the Father."  The film uses
the historical context of the Bobby Sands hunger strike to present its
story.  Mirren's character is contrasted by another mother played by
Fionulla Ferguson, a heart-on-her-sleeve IRA supporter who's son was
arrested with Mirren's son.  The two become friends even though just
about everything they stand for is in conflict.  One of the strenths
of "Some Mother's Son" is how believable this friendship is.  The two
womens' acceptance of each other underscores the conflicting emotions
the view has while watching the film.
All in all, I thought "Some Mother's Son" was a much more effective
film about Irish/British politics than the earlier, more publicized
and more overrated "Michael Collins."
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SOME MOTHER'S SON is a new film about the troubles in Northern
Ireland.  It is blessed with the same producers (Jim Sheridan and
Arthur Lappin), writers (Jim Sheridan and Terry George), and much of
the same supporting cast as 1993's highly acclaimed film IN THE NAME OF
THE FATHER.  Two of the leads (Helen Mirren and John Lynch) starred in
1984's excellent film CAL.  All three of the pictures cover the same
period and all three suffer from the same bias, but, nevertheless, they
are all excellent movies -- taut dramas with high energy and important
stories to tell.
     In the press kit is the question: "Could you stand by and watch
your son starve himself to death for his beliefs?"  This correctly sets
the context for the film which looks at the Northern Ireland issues
from the point of view of the mothers of IRA members.  The story uses
two quite different mothers as the focal points.  The first, Kathleen
Quigley (Mirren), believes in non-violence, and although she supports
her son, she hates the terrorist precepts of the IRA.  The other, Annie
Higgins (Fionnula Flanagan), is a card-carrying member who is willing
to do whatever it takes to get the British out of Northern Ireland.
Both actresses are well cast and give marvelous performances.
     The story, based on a true incident, starts in 1979.  The film
opens with a vintage clip of newly elected Prime Minister Thatcher.  "I
would particularly like to remember," she says.  "some words of Saint
Francis of Assisi which are pertinent now.  'Where there is discord,
may we bring harmony.'" From there we cut to a scene in which
lower-level British bureaucrats are formulating a malevolent strategy
toward the IRA.  "We want to make the prisons an asset, not a
liability," says Farnsworth (Tom Hollander).  "It is in the prisons
that we will break the backs of the IRA."
     One of the keys to the success of the film is the editing by Craig
McKay.  He has a deft touch, knowing when to cut between the three
stories: the British government planners, the prisoners, and the two
mothers.  North Ireland home life is full of happiness and warm
Christmas images.  From this peaceful normality we switch to the
mothers' boys in terrorist attacks, killing the British.
     As in most shows about Northern Ireland, the British are portrayed
as people who are evil incarnate and who are constantly scheming on how
to oppress the Irish Catholics.  With the exception of a single scene,
SOME MOTHER'S SON makes the death of the British appear as remote and
painless as shooting targets in a video game.  In contrast we are
treated to large doses of Irish suffering.  There is a great scene in
the show where Catholic priest Father Daly (Gerard McSorley) prays not
only for the IRA member who died in a hunger strike but also the
British officials killed to avenge his death.  The IRA members view his
sermonette as heresy and walk out from the church in protest.
     The only other voice of reason in the show comes from Kathleen.
"A man was shot," she tells her friend, Bobby Sands (Lynch).  "But he
was a soldier," explains Bobby.  He views shooting them in the back as
not the same thing as killing an actual human.
     Soon her son Gerald (Aidan Gillen) and Annie's son Frank (David
O'Hara) are tried for various terrorist activities.  "I don't need a
lawyer," says defiant Gerald.  "I'm not a criminal.  I'm a prisoner of
war.  I don't recognize the court."  Once in prison they join Bobby
Sands and others there in various protests ranging from not wearing
prison clothes to the hunger strike that costs ten of them their lives.
     The prison officials try everything to get them to put their
uniforms on, including removing the can where their human wastes go.
The prisoners protest this by lining the walls of their cells with
their excrement.
     The movie manages to provide the facts without trying to gross out
the audience.  The wrenching of hunger protesters as they near death
provides the most horrific scenes in the film, but this is not a movie
that scares you; it is one that moves you to compassion for the mothers
and their plight.  Secondarily, it makes you sympathetic to the
prisoners, no matter how heinous their original crimes.  The director,
Terry George, knows how to lay the tension on thick.  This is a show
that will keep your eyes glued to the screen as the events unfold.
     When the editor cuts back to the government officials, it provides
almost comic relief as they are so inept.  One of the officials, a man
named Harrington (Tim Woodward), wants to be in charge of spin control.
He insists they must change strategies only because "we need to reclaim
the moral high ground."  Morals are relegated to the role of political
battle techniques.
     The performances by Mirren and Flanagan get better and better as
the show evolves.  As might be expected, Kathleen and Annie go from
distrust to friendship, and Kathleen becomes hardened by the conditions
she sees.  All of the mothers have it in their power with the signing
of a single document to have their sons fed intravenously and thereby
save their lives.  The sons are against this, wanting to be martyrs for
the cause.  Even if you know how it ends, I didn't, you will be swept
up into the circumstances that lead to the conclusion.
     Perhaps the mothers' entire state of mind can be summed up in one
of the interchanges close to the end of the picture.  Annie tells the
government official, "My son is not a terrorist."  The official looks
her sternly in the eye, and corrects her with, "Your son is a convicted
murderer."
     SOME MOTHER'S SON runs 1:51.  It is rated R for scenes of people
starving to death, for some violence, and for profanity.  The show
would be fine for mature teenagers.  I recommend this excellent film to
you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Walter Frith
The makers of 1993's 'In the Name of the Father'  have re-united for this
project fashioned in the same manner involving the Irish Republican Army.
 Helen Mirren and Fionnula Flanagan portray Kathleen Quigley and Annie
Higgins, two mothers whose sons went on a hunger strike to protest treatment
in prison under British rule.  Their sons Gerald Quigley and Frank Higgins
(Aidan Gillen and David O'Hara) are associates of Bobby Sands whose name was
made famous around the world when he went on a hunger strike in prison in
1981 and died.  Bobby Sands is played by John Lynch who played Paul Hill in
'In the Name of the Father' and was one of the Guilford Four sent to prison
for bombings they never committed.  'Some Mother's Son' is directed by by
Terry George who co-wrote 'In the Name of the Father' with Jim Sheridan and
the two of them collaborate on this film which is not as good as 'In the Name
of the Father' but it is compelling and well made and has historical
importance in conjunction with events still being played out to this day by
the British government and the IRA.  Helen Mirren recieved an Oscar
nomination two years ago for 'The Madness of King George' and could find
herself nominated again for this movie.  Her character is one wrestling not
only with the will of her son and the laws of Britain but with her own
conscience and her compassion for her family is uncompromising and this is a
richly textured and multi-dimensional job by Mirren for what is the best role
of her career.

Author
Cynthia A. Bussiere
[This review was first posted to CINEMA-L on January 16, 1997.]
Director:  Terry George (directorial debut)
Screenwriters:  Terry George and Jim Sheridan
Producers:  Jim Sheridan, Arthur Lappin, Edward Burke
Associate Producer:  Helen Mirren
Music:  Bill Whelan
In the late seventies, when (or shortly before) Margaret
Thatcher took office in her first term as Prime Minister, the
British government embarked upon an apparently harder line
toward the IRA and its imprisoned volunteers than had 
previously been adhered to.  In the words of the film, the
government adopted a three-pronged policy of "isolation,
criminalization, and demoralization."  "Isolation" referred
to a policy of geographical containment under which the
British set up a system of road blocks and closures to
hamper the movement of the IRA throughout Northern
Ireland.  "Criminalization" referred to a policy under which
IRA prisoners were denied previously held "special category"
status as political prisoners and, instead, were treated by the
criminal justice system as criminal terrorists.  "Demoralization"
referred to a policy of breaking the will and the morale of
imprisoned individual IRA volunteers and of the organization
as a whole.
SOME MOTHER'S SON, a docudrama, focusses on the
criminalization and demoralization prongs of that policy,
although the story is set in motion by the isolation prong.
As such, the film telescopes into the time frame of its story
various events that actually occurred in Belfast in response
to the British hard line.  These events culminated, as the film
culminates, in a prisoners' hunger strike in the Maze prison
between March 1 and October 2, 1981.
Twenty-one prisoners went on the strike, and ten of them died.
Of the ten, only one was sentenced to a life term.  (Terry George
states on the film's web site that, had they lived, all of the nine
non-lifers would have been released by 1987.)  Among the dead
was Bobby Sands, beautifully played in the film by John Lynch.
Sands was a prominent IRA member and a leader, within the
prison, of the hunger strike.  During his prison term, he was
elected to Parliament.  He was a member of Parliament when
he died.
The strike didn't end until the mothers of the remaining striking
prisoners exercised their powers as their sons' legal guardians
and authorized medical intervention to save their sons' lives.
By doing so, these women effectively took their sons off the
hunger strike.  Of course, the dilemma faced by each of these
women was horrendous:  By saving their sons' lives, they
betrayed their sons' convictions and destroyed the cause for
which their sons had fought so long and hard in the first place.
Thus, the film centers on the common dilemma of two mothers
whose imprisoned sons have joined the hunger strike.  On the
one hand, there is Annie Higgins, played by Fionnula Flanagan.
Annie is a farmer's wife and dedicated IRA supporter.  By the
time the film opens, one of her sons has already been killed by
the British and her remaining son Frank, played by David O'Hara,
is an IRA fugitive from justice.  Her third child is her fabulous
smart-mouthed, quick-tempered, red-headed daughter named 
Theresa who takes after Annie.  On the other hand, there is
Kathleen Quigley, played by Helen Mirren.  Kathleen is a teacher
in a Catholic girls' school.  She is politically uninvolved to the point
of naivete, but she hates the IRA for the violence for which it stands.
Like Annie, she has three children, two sons and a daughter.
Unbeknownst to her, her elder son Gerard, played by Aidan Gillen,
is an IRA volunteer.  Her younger son, as shown by a brief but
illuminating moment in the film, may or may not grow up to
emulate his older brother.  Her older daughter, played by
Geraldine O'Rawe, has her hands full just coping.  Both mothers
are the mainstays of their families:  Annie's husband is quite
elderly and physically unable to work.  Kathleen is a widow.
The film follows the gradual leftward politicization of Kathleen
after her son Gerard's arrest, trial, and conviction on a charge
of attempted murder.  Annie's son Frank, tried jointly with Gerard,
is also convicted.  Both young men are sent to the Maze to serve
their sentences.  The courtroom scene in which these events take
place is highly sensational and quite moving in its brutal brevity.
When Gerard immediately joins the series of small ongoing protests
conducted by all the IRA prisoners in his cell block, Mirren portrays
Kathleen as having no choice but to resort to political action to pro-
tect and ensure his welfare in prison once the authorities begin
retaliating against the prisoners.  In effect, his cause becomes
her cause, and she takes it up lovingly and ungrudgingly.  The
film realistically charts her progressive politicization in a way 
that smoothly and efficiently advances the story.  Along the way
she engages in her own small rebellion against her Catholic school
employer and its principal, the formidable and implacable Sister
Bernardina (the nightmare nun of everybody's Catholic school
education in the fifties and early sixties).
Concurrently with Kathleen's political progress, and equally real-
istically, the film charts the progress of the budding friendship
between Kathleen and Annie.  The two women begin as openly
hostile to one another.  They then gradually warm up to each
other, bond very closely, and then gradually come a bit apart
again.  This progression features, among other things, a hilarious
car ride along a beach that is meant to be funny, despite the fact
that it stands for more than it is.  Structurally, these personal
developments are woven into Kathleen's political development,
because it is Annie, whose political convictions and activism
are in place by the time the film begins, who involves Kathleen
in specific political activities.
Eventually, the series of protests at the prison lead to the hunger
strike, which both Kathleen's and Annie's sons join.  From this
moment forward, both women move into the center of a mael-
strom of the competing interests of the three major players in
these events:  The IRA, the British government, and the Catholic
Church.  The IRA is represented by Danny Boyle, the head of
Sinn Fein in Belfast.  Well and strongly played by Ciaran Hinds,
Boyle is a fictional composite character, not the least part of
which is probably Gerry Adams.  Boyle stubbornly and aggres-
sively supports the prisoners' cause and serves as their repre-
sentative in the outside world.  The British government is
represented by a ruthless counter-terrorism law enforcement
official (whose scenes are often intercut with newsclips of
Thatcher advocating her government's line), who is determined
to break the backs of the prisoners and who, to that end,
pursues a zero-tolerance policy and a stance of non-negotiation.
Steering a middle ground between these extreme factions, yet
supportive of the prisoners, is the Catholic Church.  Initially,
the Church is represented by the head of the Catholic Church
in Ireland, the cardinal who comes to the Maze to say Mass
for the prisoners.  Horrified at the conditions he witnesses there,
he immediately holds a press conference, to the extreme
embarrassment and consternation of the government.  However,
more often, more prosaically, and less dramatically, the Church
is represented by Father Daly, the local parish priest, who has
the heart-breaking tasks of giving the last sacrament to dying
hunger strikers and presiding at their funeral Masses.
Ultimately, each mother, Kathleen and Annie, holds the life
of her son in her hands and must make the decision to let
him live or watch him die.
All of the performances in the film are strong, accurate, and
(with a few exceptions) beautifully understated.  Mirren is
fabulous.  Her Kathleen has a touching diffidence, a surprising
naivete, and great quiet courage.  She also has flashes of humor
that are a tribute not only to Mirren's acting, but also to George's
direction and Sheridan's and George's writing.  Flanagan, whose
character undergoes no political changes throughout the film, has
ostensibly less to work with.  However, because the depth of her
character's personal changes is arguably greater than that of
Kathleen's, she alternates brilliantly between hardened political
ideologue and blooming, softening private person.  In a fabulous
piece of acting, her physical appearance reflects these develop-
ments by actually changing from within in front of the camera.
Hinds, whose strong, quiet presence defined the character of
Frederick Wentworth in PERSUASION, is an incredibly compelling
screen presence here.  His Danny Boyle also radiates strength,
but of a steely, threatening, potentially explosive kind.  As such,
his character is as implacable as that of his British anti-terrorist
counterpart -- and that of Sister Bernardina's, to boot.  His char-
acter is, unfortunately, rather underwritten, especially since it
appears that at least one of the real-life characters of which his
is a composite had a greater hand in the prison protests than
the film conveys.  Finally, the actors -- Aidan Gillen, John O'Hara,
and John Lynch -- who portray the prisoners display a stunning
talent that we rarely see in American actors of the same age.
Furthermore, they all have strong film credits.  Gillen was in
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, O'Hara was in BRAVEHEART, and
Lynch was in IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER.  In prison, with
their uncut hair and unshaven beards, these young men have
Christlike appearances.  This imagery is further reinforced by
background shots of anti-British posters depicting a young man
crucified on the Union Jack.
Bill Whelan's folk-based Irish music is a strong and palpable
presence in the film.  Whelan, a record producer and theatre
and television composer, is probably best known as the composer
-- in its entirety -- of RIVERDANCE THE STAGE SHOW.
The film itself is extremely well thought out and therefore very well 
made.  Like Spike Lee's DO THE RIGHT THING, the filmmakers
and the actors know what they're talking about.  Just as DO THE
RIGHT THING conveyed a deadly accurate anatomy of a race riot,
SOME MOTHER'S SON conveys a deadly accurate anatomy of a
political hunger strike in which the lives of twenty-one young men
turn on things like the interpretation of words such as "right" and 
"privilege" regarding what clothes to wear.
Almost nothing is wasted in this film.  Therefore, the smallest
occurrences and visuals, such as an apple swiped from a lunch
or a member of Parliament smoking a cigarette, take on signifi-
cance.  The film opens and closes with a view of the Irish Sea.
In between, and throughout the film, shots of feet on firm 
ground, such as marchers' feet in a candlelight vigil, are
everywhere.  The film also makes sparing but effective use
of slow motion.  Additionally, some of the editing, such as the
intercutting of a portable missile attack with a close-up of girls'
feet doing an Irish hard-shoe dance, is stunningly effective.
Finally, the two principal crowd scenes -- the candlelight vigil
for Bobby Sands and Sands' funeral -- are outstandingly well
done.  (The funeral alone comprised an entire second unit.)
These scenes were not only exceptionally well-choreographed;
they were also extraordinarily moving in a way that crowd 
scenes just usually are not.
Even though the film is essentially a work of fiction, all of the
major events it depicts actually took place.  These include the
hunger strike itself, the various prison protests -- including the
infamous "dirty protest" -- leading up to the strike, the cardinal's
visit to the prison, the election of Sands to Pariliament, the vigils,
the deaths, the funerals, and the secret deals, talks, and negotia-
tions surrounding the hunger strike.  Furthermore, while the
characters in the film, with the exception of Sands and a member
of Parliament, are fictitious, they are all composite characters
based on real people.  It appears that Belfast viewers may be
able to recognize and identify the people on whom the characters
are based.
The film was shot on location in Skerries, a small village north of
Dublin.  Skerries stood in for Belfast, where the principal events of
the film take place.  The Maze, together with its H-blocks where the
prisoners were housed, was recreated in some Dublin warehouses.
The bottom line of this film is the interplay between the personal
and the political in the lives of its characters.  Sometimes the two
are inseparable, sometimes they are in sync with each other,
and sometimes they are at odds with each other.  There is no
question that this film has an explicit republican bias.  However,
there is also no question that the issues raised in the film are
ultimately resolved on personal grounds.
