Title
Review for Meet Joe Black (1998)
Number of Reviews
27

Author
Matt Williams
Meet Joe Black is your classic boy-meets-girl, boy-likes-girl,
boy-gets-killed-in-horrible-accident,
supernatural-entity-takes-over-boy's-body,
supernatural-entity-falls-in-love-with-girl story. Based on the 1934
film Death Takes a Holiday, Meet Joe Black is a well acted romantic
drama which explores the meanings of life and love.
William Parrish (Anthony Hopkins) is a billionaire businessman on the
brink of his 65th birthday.  He has built a huge media empire, and
raised two beautiful daughters, Allison (Marcia Gay Harden) and Susan
(Claire Forlani).  William has been able to negotiate his way out of
many tough spots...but he has suddenly begun fearing his own mortality,
the one situation he won't be able to talk his way out of.
And he has good reason to fear, for Death himself is stalking him.
However, Death has a deal to make.  Death has taken possession of a man
who has recently died (Brad Pitt), and wants William to be his guide in
a holiday among the living.  In return, William gets to live a few extra
days.  Of course, he agrees.
Death, under the human name of "Joe Black", gets to experience life as a
complete innocent.  He never before has experienced the simple pleasures
of a springy matters or peanut butter.  And he's not quite compared for
the more complex pleasures when he and Susan fall in love. But, is their
affair doomed to an early demise?
At nearly three hours in length, Meet Joe Black is a little bit on the
leisurely side, though it never gets boringly lengthy.  Instead, the
film gets a chance to develop some nicely textured characters and
situations. You get to soak in and enjoy the atmosphere, rather than
being hurriedly rushed through it.
The romantic angle works well, though, surprisingly, the interactions
between Joe Black and William Parrish are more interesting than those
with his daughter.  This is most likely due to Anthony Hopkins, who once
again displays his superb acting skills.  William is a desperate man who
has had a seemingly ideal life, and doesn't want to let it go. By
contrast, Claire Forlani is merely the romantic interest.  She gets to
show Joe the ropes of love, but is hardly as interesting a character.
As Joe Black, Brad Pitt seems a bit stilted.  Granted, he's supposed to
be out-of-place, but the overly formal technique used by Pitt begins to
distract from the role.  Still, he is able to hold his own, and over the
course of the three hours, his character begins to grow on you.
The main character who seems out of place here is Drew (Jake Weber), an
ambitious executive in Williams' company who is Joe Black's main rival
for Susan's affections.  Weber plays the character with a hammy relish
reminiscent of Snidley Whiplash.  This cartoonish foil an aberration in
a film filled many more dimensional characters.
The supernatural elements of the film are handled murkily, but never
distractingly so.  We never learn what is the exact nature of Death, or
why he's never done something like this before.  It actually gets a bit
creepy when Death talks to the dying in their own voices/accents.  (His
initial conversations with Hopkins sound shockingly like Hannibal
Lecter...) And the ultimate resolution to one of the film's supernatural
problems seems, well, somewhat superficial.
Still, even with the film's length, it was a pleasant time at the
movies, something you wouldn't necessarily expect from a film about
Death...but one which Meet Joe Black delivers anyhow.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Ron Osborn, Jeff Reno, Kevin Wade and Bo Goldman
Ingredients: The grim reaper, old man, beautiful daughter
Starring: Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani
Synopsis: 
An aging, weakened, but fabulously wealthy senior news tycoon named Bill
(Anthony Hopkins) utters some words to his nubile daughter Susan (Claire
Forlani) about how only the experience of true love makes life worth
living. The Grim Reaper who is death personified (Brad Pitt) overhears
Bill's tribute to true love and becomes intrigued. He visits Bill to cut
a deal. Inhabiting the body of Joe Black, a recently deceased young man,
the Grim Reaper promises to delay Bill's death in exchange for Bill
showing him life. Unaware that Death is inhabiting the body, Susan
remembers her dad's lecture on true love and tries to start up a
relationship with Joe Black.
Opinion:
MEET JOE BLACK is three hours long and feels like it is three hours
long. Some of the parts are done well. For example, the scenes where
Bill contemplates his impending death and begins to pay more attention
to his eldest daughter are sure to bring tears. On the other hand, other
scenes feel odd. For example, Joe Black's height varies throughout the
picture. Another example is when an old man promises a woman he will
meet her for a fireworks display at the bottom of the hill. As she is
waiting for him she suddenly senses something wrong. Sure enough, the
old guy is dying on top of the hillside overlooking the fireworks.
Seeing him stumbling at the top of the hill, the woman runs up the hill
in alarm. But oddly she completely disregards the dying man when her
boyfriend arrives to woo her. 
Anthony Hopkins and Claire Forlani do a good job acting the
father/daughter bond. And for Brad Pitt fans, MEET JOE BLACK features
Brad in several nice outfits, with his trademark hairstyle. 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Cindy Bale
This review is adapted from my comments to the Internet Movie Database
(www.imdb.com) on November 13, 1998.
"Meet Joe Black" is well written, gently paced, very funny and very touching
with tremendous performances from Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani
and Brad Pitt.
Yes, I said Brad Pitt gave a tremendous performance as Death-Joe
Black/Young-Man-in-Coffee-Shop.  He plays the part of Death using Brad Pitt's
classic body as if he has never been in a human body before.   As an actor
playing this role, Brad Pitt chose to walk stiffly with virtually no mannerisms
as if he were a spirit (`Death') inhabiting an unknown organism (a human body).
I enjoyed watching him act out the consequences of this decision.  He is also
very funny throughout the movie acting in ways unlike any of the other
characters.  He especially stands out from the crowd in the boardroom scenes.
He is amazing in scenes with a hospital patient who has recognized him for what
he is.  I enjoyed his Jamaican accent.
Anthony Hopkins is marvelous as William Parish, head of Parrish
Communications.   Parrish finds out a few days before his 65th birthday that
Death will take him as soon as Death is done experiencing life on earth.  He
knows the penalty for arguing the Death-Joe Black is instant death,
and yet he stays true to himself to the end.   This is seemingly casual
performance by Hopkins is very strong.  His heart attack sequence early in
the movie is gut wrenching.  He is tender with his daughters, decisive with his
board of directors and mystified by his relationship with Death.
Claire Forlani is a find as Parrish's favorite daughter.  There is a cool,
reluctant and yet trusting chemistry between her character, Susan, and
Joe Black.  Their body language is enhanced by close camera work in tender, slow
moving, emotion-filled scenes.
The movie is long.  I looked forward to spending 174 minutes with Brad Pitt.
But I hated his last movie with Anthony Hopkins ("Legends of the Fall") so was
instantly wary when I heard about the running length.  Watching the film, I
loved the care the directory takes with each scene, each line of dialogue, each
nuanced use of the word "yes".  The script is excellent.  The ending was very
satisfying.  The film requires thought from the moviegoer.  Some folks may not
get the nuances, and may miss one of Brad Pitt and Anthony Hopkins best movies.
I hereby nominate Claire Forlani for best supporting actress.
There was one thing I didn't like about the movie.   Brad Pitt's makeup looked
heavy and dark in several scenes, especially in the hospital.   I kept wondering
what was being covered up.
Summary:  9.5 on a scale of 1 (lowest) to 10 (highest).
Comments may be sent to cbale@flash.net.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: November 13, 1998
Starring: Anthony Hopkins, Brad Pitt, Claire Forlani, Jake Weber, Marcia
Gay Harden, Jeffrey Tambor
Directed by: Martin Brest
Distributed by: Universal Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (an accident scene, some sexuality, brief strong
language)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/meetjoe.htm
There's a way of bringing romance to the screen without tipping your
hand. Successfully, a romantic picture will have finesse rather than
power, and style rather than substance. It will also have a chemistry
between lead roles that is thick and palpable -- nobody wants to watch a
pair of deadbeats fall in love. The script will be skillfully drawn out,
with devotion to both realism and fantasy, and it will have at least one
important thematic element to deliver. This definition is just as well
the description of Martin Brest's latest film, MEET JOE BLACK, an
inspiring drama about life and death and the love that falls within. 
Director Brest made the original BEVERLY HILLS COP, but hasn't directed
a feature since 1992's SCENT OF A WOMAN.  He makes a fine return here in
masterfully helming a picture that runs nearly three hours in length -
never an easy task. The script he's given to work with isn't fantastic
in terms of extensibility, for it does not spread itself out over the
three hours. There are moments when it proceeds at an interminable pace,
making sixty-second conversations into five- or ten-minute affairs.
Brest takes advantage of the script's shortcomings, however, by styling
the movie around them -- and thus MEET JOE BLACK ends up having a
thoughtful air about it. The audience definitely ponders the same
questions that the characters do. 
The cast does their best to highlight the plot, and the names involved
are certainly worthy of note. Anthony Hopkins has the main character but
in an interesting shift of dynamic, he's relegated to a supporting role
as Brad Pitt takes center stage. Pitt plays Death, in the body of Joe
Black, a young man killed in a car crash at the movie's open. And so
Death visits successful communications exec Bill Parrish (Hopkins) to
let him know that his time is up -- but before they travel to the next
world, Death wants Parrish to show him around Earth a bit. And so
Death's vacation becomes a life experience as he learns what the human
way is like; the crux of the trip, however, is the love that begins to
grow between Death and Parrish's daughter Susan (Claire Forlani). So
when Bill's time is up, it becomes a pivotal point in time for all three
characters. 
The acting corps does a fine job all around. Hopkins is the highlight,
delivering many spectacular lines in fine form (although he does wax a
bit poetic too early on). He lends a sense of robust energy to his
character that sharply contrasts the appropriate lack of emotion in
Pitt's Death. But the grounding factor in the movie is Claire Forlani,
who gives an excellent turn as the daughter of one character and the
love interest of another. She lends a passive sensuality to the movie
that strengthens the romance as well as the life story of Bill Parrish,
and the movie is certainly greater because of her. The other supports
are in fine form as well, from Jake Weber's bad guy to Jeffrey Tambor's
comic relief. All in all this becomes a very inspiring and thoughtful
movie to watch, and it's questionable only for its three-hour length.
Compared to other films of such length, like the recent BELOVED, MEET
JOE BLACK is definitely worth the price of the ticket.

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Martin Brest
Writers: Ron Osborn, Jeff Reno, Kevin Wade, and Bo Goldman
Starring: Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani, Jake Weber, Marcia
Gay Harden, Jeffrey Tambor, David S. Howard, Lois Kelly-Miller
Many of the criticisms aimed at "Meet Joe Black" have been that it's too
long, too maudlin, too uninsightful for a movie about death.  And I'm
not going to rebuke those as much as I am going to say that those aren't
exactly negative pointers.  Yes, "Meet Joe Black" is three hours when it
could have been two.  Yes, "Meet Joe Black" is melodramatic and
long-winded when it could be light and easier-to-digest.  And yes, it's
less like "The Seventh Seal" and more like a Jackie Collins book in
terms of how insightful it is.  But all I can say is no, it's not a
great film, and its mere 45 or so million dollar gross is a sign of Brad
Pitt's dwindling popularity as far as the cinema goes, but it's also
engaging and entertaining in a strange, pleasing way.  I like that this
film is drawn-out and three hours long...in fact, the three hours don't
exactly fly by as much as they pass by without pain.  Those who are
complaining about three hours being a tough sit are those who can't
stand any movie that's longer than and hour and a half and three hours
means an hour and a half they don't have to complain about how long it
was.
All I can say is "Meet Joe Black" held my interest while never involving
me too deeply that if I had never seen it, I wouldn't regret it.  It is,
though, beatiful to look at.  The cinematography is some of the best of
the year, and the production design is almost operatic in its
lavishness.  This all gives it a dour, reserved tone, with nothing but
earth colors as our entire world, and Martin Brest's direction is slow
and stately, as if he were telling his story like a great novel inspired
by D.H. Lawrence.  Combine this with a mix of pretentious and
over-handed messages about life and death, an ironic love story, and a
bizarre sense of wit, and you basically have "Meet Joe Black."
The story of death visiting a dying billionaire and falling in love with
his daughter has been done before (in fact, this is a pseudo-remake of
"Death Takes a Holiday" starring Frederic March), but Brest tells it
like it was the greatest story of all time, yet with a lack of security
apparent in its numerous almost-self-concious asides that this is all a
big joke.  Death, dubbed Joe Black, falls madly in love with the
billionaire's daughter, and she with him, much to the dismay of the
billionaire who is not only selfishly mad that the being who's taking
him away from life is also making his beloved kin feel so alive, and
Brest milks this for all the melodrama that he possibly can, but then
pulls back at the last second to make a joke about it all (one
accidental example of this is a death scene in the beginning which
starts out poignant, but ends up being hands-down this year's most
hilarious unintentional laugh).
By refusing to push the envelope all the way, and really submerge the
film in either being a completely funny film or a completely
melodramatic film (either, which would make for a great film, if handled
correctly from that point on), he sits on the fence, and never allows
the dramatic saps in the audience to ever get their full money's worth,
or the more cynical ones to either.  Since, depending on my mood, I can
be either, "Meet Joe Black" worked for me, but not exactly in spades.
Though the film is never really erratic in its mood swings, it's never
disappointing, thanks to the way it's paced, but it's not exactly
fulfilling either.  Though we're pretty sure of the daughter's love for
Joe, we're never sure of Joe's.
This is pretty much attributed to the respective performances.  The
daughter, played by Claire Forlaini, looks at Joe with her gorgeous eyes
and shows no doubt in her mind that she is completely enthralled by him,
and every time she's around him, seems to be just about to break down
into his arms, while when she's not around him, seems content in her
individuality.  Joe, played by Brad Pitt, is pretty much on the
contrary.  Obsessed with making Joe a complete fish out of water, Pitt
alienates his character from everyone else's, going as far as looking
completely relaxed in his awkwardness and speaking in a slow and
straight-forward manner.  And throughout the film, he puts on an
ignorant half-smile, as if he were a completely unaffected by everything
that happens to him, so that when he finally does bed Forlaini, he has
the exact same expression on his face that he does when he first tastes
peanut butter (which brings out the third funniest post-coital comment
I've ever heard in a movie - the first two being from "Annie Hall": "I
think I'm getting some feeling back in my jaw" and "As Balsac said,
'there goes another novel.'").
Maybe this is what the film was going for - that the usual human
emotions that take up the different realms of satisfaction aren't going
to be different for someone who doesn't know anything about our own
society.  But whatever the point was, Pitt's performance just doesn't
completely work.  He never seems to be going through any real changes,
and we soon just give up on his character and look at the others' and
how they're affected by what happens.  Forlaini is rather magnificent,
at least for a big budget romantic comedy like this, and Anthony
Hopkins, saddled with the role of the dying billionaire, brings the kind
of Shakespearean-actor depth to his role that he brought to this
summer's "The Mask of Zorro."  The two are always wonderful to watch, as
are Jeffrey Tambor (playing a business associate-cum-relative by
marriage) and Jake Weber (playing the mischevious and diabolical
boyfriend to Forlaini with delicious sarcasm - you hate him but you'd be
heartbroken if he was ever defeated, and he is).
In fact, everything in "Meet Joe Black" is beautiful to look at, even
"Sir" Hopkins (so much that afterwards I finally rented the
Mamet-scripted "The Edge" just to watch him speak Mamet's wonderful
dialogue), so much that I couldn't help but be involved in it.  It's
silly and predictable, but it has the charm of a trash novel you read
while on vacation: you pick it up, are involved in the character's
lives, and when it's done with, you place it on a bookshelf never to be
picked up or thought of deeply again, unless you're writing a review of
it.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Greg King
The Grim Reaper comes to earth in the delectable form of Brad
Pitt in Martin (Scent Of A Woman) Brest's $90 million remake of the
1934 romantic comedy Death Takes A Holiday.  Pitt plays death, who
adapts a human form to learn more about what makes us mere mortals
tick.  He has ostensibly come to claim William Parrish (Anthony
Hopkins), a self-made millionaire, but decides to spend a week in his
company learning more about the human condition.  Parrish is the only
one aware of Pitt's true identity, and he introduces the enigmatic
stranger to his family as Joe Black.
It is the week of Parrish's 65th birthday, and his oldest
daughter Allison (Marcia Gay Harden, from Flubber, etc) is planning a
lavish party.  Parrish also has to deal with a take-over bid from a
business rival who wants to strip his global communication company and
sell off its assets.  He also has to deal with treachery from within
his own board.  Parrish has plenty of time to come to terms with his
own mortality and the legacy that he will leave behind.
Meanwhile, Joe falls heavily in love with Parrish's beautiful
young daughter Susan (Claire Forlani, Sean Connery's daughter in The
Rock, etc).  As with his character in the recent Seven Years In Tibet,
Pitt's human incarnation of Death undergoes a spiritual
transformation, as he comes to learn about love, loss and the pain of
being human.  Inevitably, some hard choices will have to be made, both
by Joe and Parrish.
Meet Joe Black explores some wonderful themes and ideas, and
the climax delivers a superb emotional payoff.  Unfortunately, it
takes far too long to get there.  Brest's deliberately languid
direction perfectly suits the occasionally sombre tone of the
material, but, at nearly three hours long, the pace tends to drag and
many in the audience will tire of the film.  The 1934 version told
much the same story in half the time.  With judicious trimming of some
unnecessary padding, Meet Joe Black would be tighter and far more
enjoyable.
However, the film does have its compensations.  It looks
fabulous, thanks to the opulent production design of Dante Ferretti, a
favourite of Scorsese, and the warm cinematography of Emmanuel
Lubezki.  There is also the usual strong performance from the
dependable Hopkins.  And Pitt and Forlani make a handsome, attractive
couple - eye candy for the younger generation.  The camera loves Pitt,
and seems to caress his blue eyes, his seductive smile and his air of
boyish innocence.  If only death always looked this good then we might
be more willing to go quietly into that dark night.
Meeting Joe Black is not such a bad experience, it just could
have been so much more enjoyable and memorable!

Author
Donlee Brussel
Cast: Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani, Jeffrey Tambor
Director: Martin Brest
Screenplay: Ron Osborn & Jeff Reno and Kevin Wade and Bo Goldman
179 minutes
Rated PG-13
In case you didn't know by now, "Meet Joe Black" is a remake (rip off)
of the the 1934 film "Death Takes A Holiday." There are a couple of
differences between the two. One, which is mentioned by most critics
and people, is that "Meet Joe Black" is unduly extended at 2 hours and
59 min.  With their 3 hours of film, I got to listen and watch insipid,
prosaic dialogue and situations involving lamb sandwiches, peanut
butter, and party arrangements.  I got to hear banal one-liners come
out of the characters that seemed to be from the last Pauly Shore
movie's cutting floor.
The other thing "Black" had that wasn't used to its advantage was a $95
million budget that was wasted on... Hell, I don't think anyone knows.
Maybe it was on the 8 writers who gave this film six sub-plots.  Maybe
it was on the CGI of all the actors and actresses besides Anthony
Hopkins in the film (There's no way real people are that cardboard).
Don't interpret this as me saying this film has no saving graces.
Anthony Hopkins gives a respectable performance here, and as always,
Martin Brest directs a few good scenes in `Meet Joe Black.'  However,
the only real thing that could've saved this movie is spending more
time in the editing room.  Avoid this and go see the 1934 original
that's much better than what I saw.

Author
Susan Granger
The most audacious thing about this remake of "Death Takes a
Holiday" is its length. It's a romantic drama that takes its time with
each and every scene. Characters measure each syllable, often speaking
in hushed, conspiratorial tones, exchanging long, meaningful
glances. At three hours, it's more than twice as long as the
original. "Braveheart" and "Titanic" were that length but they had
sagas to tell. This is a rather simple, straightforward story - about
the inevitability of death and taxes. Bill Parrish (Anthony Hopkins),
a wealthy business tycoon, suffers a heart-attack just before his 65th
birthday. Around the same time, his gawky daughter Susan (Claire
Forlani) meets a charming lawyer (Brad Pitt) at a coffee shop near the
hospital where she works as a resident. But she's engaged so they
don't exchange names or phone numbers. Immediately afterwards, the
young man is abruptly hit by a car - and Death borrows his handsome
human form for a brief visit as a mysterious houseguest in the elegant
Parrish home. It's a fascinating premise which, despite a quartet of
screenwriters, never really goes anywhere beyond "if you haven't
loved, you haven't lived." There's no compelling tension or
drive. And, instead of going for Capra-esque charm, director Martin
Brest ("Scent of a Woman") approaches each scene in a visually
stunning yet dreary, reverential mode. Anthony Hopkins is magnificent,
making the most of his underwritten role. As enigmatic Death, Brad
Pitt wears a look of bemused, almost moronic bewilderment, savoring
peanut butter and sampling sexual ecstasy; his best scene is when he
speaks with a West Indian accent. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Meet Joe Black" is a mild-mannered, languid 5. Too little happens
in too long a length of time - and there's no magic.

Author
James Sanford
"Meet Joe Black" offers definitive proof that there is indeed such a thing
as too much of a good thing. Updating the venerable old chestnut "Death
Takes A Holiday" may have seemed like an inspired idea and casting Brad Pitt
as Death and Anthony Hopkins as his intended victim undoubtedly enhanced the
project's profile at Universal Pictures, badly in need of a marketable movie
after a disasterous year at the box office.
 Turning the movie over to director Martin Brest, however, was -- pardon the
pun -- the kiss of death. As he proved with his 1992 epic "Scent of a
Woman," Brest is a guy who doesn't know the meaning of the word "cut," and
while "Scent" at least offered an Oscar-winning Al Pacino performance to
hold the interest, "Joe" is so low-key it can't help but feel like a slender
little story stretched far beyond its limits. Brest lets scene after scene
ramble on and on, giving the picture a languid air that makes its three-hour
running time feel more like three weeks. For everyone except the most
fervent Pitt fans, this is Sominex Cinema.
 "Joe" gets off to a solid start, introducing Pitt as an effervescent young
lawyer who wows medical student Susan Parrish (Claire Forlani) in a
coffeeshop encounter. But when Susan meets what she thinks is the same man
later on, he seems to have had his personality stolen. Now he's reserved,
stiff and, in many ways, downright weird. That's because Death, curious
about life, is using the lawyer's body as a kind of luxurious vacation home.
 Speaking of luxury, Death has moved in with ultra-rich communications
magnate Bill Parrish (Anthony Hopkins) -- get it? Death and Parrish? --
whose upcoming 65th birthday is destined to be his last. A deal is struck
that as long as Parrish keeps Death amused and keeps his identity a secret,
Parrish can enjoy a little extra time on Earth; Death, in turn, can learn
what peanut butter tastes like and discover what love feels like.
 Most of "Joe" involves Death behaving like a child, slurping food, spinning
around in an office chair and weaving from side to side as he toddles
around. Seeing Pitt play infantilism is good for a few laughs at first, but
it's hard to believe someone as seemingly worldly as Susan finds these
traits sexy; when she begins to undress him during the big poolside love
scene you're uncertain if she's going to seduce him or check his diaper.
 Since no Pitt movie these days is complete without him doing a misguided
accent, he's allowed to tackle Jamaican patois this time out in a subplot
that could easily have been dropped. But then almost everything in "Joe" is
done to excess, including Thomas Newman's grandoise score, which vainly
tries to make this muddled drama seem important and exciting.
 If nothing else, the movie is extremely well-produced and easy to look at,
shot in a rich color scheme of ebony, amber and peach. And certainly there
are worse ways to waste 179 minutes than looking at Pitt and the sloe-eyed
Forlani, who makes Susan easily the most fascinating character in the film.
But as otherworldly romances go, "Joe" pales next to the far more compelling
"City of Angels," which actually had some points to make about the human
condition. "Joe," in contrast, has little to say and takes far too long to
say it.
James Sanford

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Meet Joe Black, and then say good-bye to him.  Like an oddity you would
meet at a friend's party, Joe Black is the sort of guy that reminds you
of the person who sits in the corner for the duration of the party and
says nothing not because he's shy but because he just isn't
interesting.  Ditto for this character study?  Notice the question
mark.  180 minutes of mumbling, meandering and dull facial expressions
are inexcusable from a director, Maritn Brest, who has been responsible
for film gems such as 'Going in Style', 'Beverly Hills Cop' and 'Scent
of a Woman'.  Talented in every sense of the word, Brest makes his films
technically flat and academically exciting as his characters always
stand out and Brest's sub text isn't always challenging but his films
are usually captivating and always entertaining.  What's more shocking
is how a pair of actors like Anthony Hopkins and Brad Pitt can read a
script and not use the chef's line...."It needs more flavouring!"  In
the dictionary under "bland", you will see a description of this movie.
The most disappointing thing about this movie is that its last half hour
is great and I don't understand why the same technique wasn't applied to
the rest of the film.
Anthony Hopkins is a media mogul whose decency as a person shines
through at every turn.  He loves his family, misses his late wife, has
not re-married for the sake of his enormous wealth and resists the idea
of making a deal with a rival to merge with his company and under mind
his life's work.  Hopkins wakes up one morning and hears a strange voice
that keeps saying "Yes."  The key to the film's story is his daughter
(Claire Forlani), a medical intern who meets an un-named man (Brad Pitt)
in a coffee shop one day.  She's pretty much an item with her father's
right hand man in business but finds that it's more of a business
arrangement and her father can sense this.  After striking up a
conversation with Pitt at the coffee shop, the two of them obviously
feel struck by the love thunderbolt.  They part strangely outside and as
she goes one way and turns the corner, he goes the other and watches her
fade from sight while standing in the middle of the street and is hit by
a car.
Hopkins experiences chest pains at the office and convulses and hears
the strange voice again and later that night before dinner, he hears it
again and is visited by what we learn is death (yes, the grim reaper)
who has assumed Pitt's body and wants a lesson in life before taking
Hopkins to the next world and the two of them know that their time left
on Earth is short.  Hopkins is able to reflect on his life and Forlani
thinks that the body she sees is the man from the coffee shop and the
film explains things clearly later, although there is no reason for this
film to be three hours in length.
When I think of films such as 'The Godfather', 'Citizen Kane' and other
movie classics that can tell a story in less time than this film, I'm
appalled.  'Meet Joe Black' has brief musical interludes here and there,
too many close-ups and much of the dialogue is barely audible giving the
impression that it could pass as a silent film if subtitles were added
which would probably get the words across more clearly than the
underachieving vocal chords of the cast.
Based loosely on the 1934 classic 'Death Takes a Holiday', 'Meet Joe
Black' is written by Ron Osborn, Jeff Reno, Kevin Wade and the brilliant
Bo Goldman who is way off the mark by allowing his name, along with
director Martin Brest to be attached to this film.
'Meet Joe Black' is not a bad movie.  It is, however, a very under
achieving and disappointing one.  It has no punch to move an emotional
nerve in the body of a movie fan and while a film like '2001: A Space
Odyssey' can be hypnotic and mistaken as boring, 'Meet Joe Black'
doesn't even have the technical supplements to warrant being what it is,
flat and unappealing.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Martin Brest.
Cast: Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani, Marcia Gay Harden, 
Jeffrey Tambor, Jake Weber.
1998 - 170 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for profanity, mild violence, and sexual situations).
Reviewed November 24, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
"Meet Joe Black," directed by Martin Brest (1992's "Scent of a Woman"), 
is a 170-minute remake of 1934's "Death Takes a Holiday," which ran 
78-minutes, and so judging from this, it might seem as if "Meet Joe 
Black," is an overly robust, needlessly long film, but it didn't seem 
that way at all. On the contrary, the film is a sleek, good-looking, and 
entertaining romance.
Set during the last week before his 65th birthday, wealthy media tycoon 
Bill Parrish (Anthony Hopkins) awakens in his New York mansion to sharp 
heart pains, and a mysterious, godly voice repeating the word, "yes." 
The next morning, after he is transported to Manhattan by helicoptor to 
go to work, with his physician daughter, Susan (Claire Forlani), she 
stops in at a coffee shop and strikes up a conversation with a handsome, 
smooth talking man (Brad Pitt). They are smitten with each other, but 
coming out of the cafe, he is hit and killed by a car, unbenownst to 
Susan. That night, Bill gets a visitor at his door in the form of the 
man at the coffee shop. The only difference is that, as he explains, he 
is Death, who stole Pitt's body and has come to take Bill away after he 
visits the world in human form for the first time to see how it feels. 
When Susan sees Pitt, now called Joe Black to hide his identity to 
everyone else, she realizes something is different about him, but begins 
to fall in love with him nonetheless. And as Joe follows Bill around and 
begins to learn things about the world, as well as care for Susan, 
everything inevitably is leading up to Bill's gala birthday party, which 
will be his last night before he dies and is lead away by Death. 
"Meet Joe Black," reminded me somewhat of "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde," not 
because of the story, but because the film is easily divided into two 
categories: scenes of schmaltzy melodrama, and moments of extraordinary 
power and honesty. Although the film could have easily been trimmed to 
two-and-a-half hours, "Meet Joe Black," really did not seem overlong to 
me. The pacing is slow and deliberate, to be sure, but it was never 
boring, and felt more true-to-life because of this. In fact, I got a 
great satisfaction out of watching the scenes unfold. Sure, they were 
drawn out a little bit, but it's better than watching the constant 
freneticism of a Jerry Bruckheimer action movie.
Going back to what I was saying before about the film being divided into 
two categories, "Meet Joe Black," sometimes would attempt to suck out as 
much sentimentality as possible just to get its audience to cry, and 
near the conclusion, the music swelled up so much that it began to feel 
too sappy for my taste. 
But then, there were scenes that were so truthful and real that I felt 
like applauding the filmmakers. Due to its length, at least one thing 
can be said for the film: all of the six central characters were written 
superbly into flesh-and-blood people. Each character was given scenes 
that really caused me to care about them, right down to the supporting 
ones. The greatest satisfaction I can get while watching a film is 
getting involved in the scenes and dialogue unto themselves, as if they 
were all separate short films. If these type of scenes are strung 
together, however, it can turn into genuine dynamite, and that is what, 
"Meet Joe Black," did.
Brad Pitt, who usually chooses more unconventional roles (not counting 
1989's slasher film, "Cutting Class"), proves here, like he has done in 
previous films, that he is more than just good-looking. Playing two 
different characters here, as the guy in the coffee shop, and Joe Black, 
he was truly endearing and likable. Anthony Hopkins, one of the best 
actors of this generation, is outstanding, as he has to juggle a 
character that seemingly has everything, but is forced to deal with his 
realization that his time on Earth is quickly coming to a close. Claire 
Forlani, in her first starring role, is a fresh new talent to look for 
in the future. She always seems to be filled with deep thoughts swarming 
around in her head, and has a lot of chemistry with Pitt. All of these 
performances are wonderful, and yet, the one performance that I thought 
surpassed all of the others was Marcia Gay Harden, who deserves a Best 
Supporting Actress Oscar nomination. Harden is given perhaps the most 
touching scenes in the film, as Bill's neglected older daughter, 
Allison. The most heartbreakingly true scene in the whole picture, in my 
opinion, involves the conversation between Allison and her father, as 
she tells him that she has always known she wasn't his favorite 
daughter, but remained happy because she still knew that she was loved 
by him. Harden flawlessly hits the right mark in every one of her 
scenes, and this is certainly her best film role since 1993's 
little-known gem, "Crush," not to be confused with the 1993 Alicia 
Silverstone thriller, "The Crush."
Judging from the many astonishing moments in the film, "Meet Joe Black," 
could have easily been one of the very best films of the year, if not 
for its occasional attempts at extreme mawkishness, and the ending, 
which felt a little bit far-fetched. Without giving anything away, the 
film might have left a more lasting, genuine impression if the last 
three minutes had been completely cut out. It was one of those frequent 
attempts at a happy ending that simply did not pay off. While not 
forgetting its faults, "Meet Joe Black" still remains a success, due to 
its intelligence and unforgettable performances, and is one of the 
better films of the 1998 Fall season, along with "Living Out Loud," and 
"Pleasantville." Unlike most big-budget Hollywood ventures, "Meet Joe 
Black," takes its time, does not hurry its story, and instead of 
condescending to its characters, refreshingly sees them as flawed, but 
sincere, three-dimensional people.

Author
Michael Redman
What would you do if you were informed that you only have a very limited time
to live? This would be the ultimate life crisis. Some would spend their
remaining days putting their affairs in order to make life easier for their
families. Others would work on getting right with their god. Certainly some
would jump into that familiar river Denial and ignore the situation.
The most common answer is that one would do all those things that he had been
putting off. Tell a loved one how much she means to you. Express to your
friends the importance they've had in you life. Explain to your children the
lessons you've learned so maybe they won't have to make the same mistakes.
Visit Bali like you've always wanted to. Of course the reality that we all do
have only a limited time rarely sinks in and we continue in our work-a-day
world oblivious to the ticking of the countdown.
Media mogul William Parrish (Anthony Hopkins) is approaching his 65th birthday
and is sure he is about to die. He has it from the ultimate authority. Death,
himself, delivered the news over dinner.
Parrish's daughter Susan (Claire Forlani) has had better luck. Involved in a
loveless relationship with Drew (Jake Weber), a business partner of her
father's, she meets a handsome stranger (Brad Pitt) in a downtown coffee shop.
There's an instant connection and they almost drown in each other's eyes.
That evening, she's shocked to find the man at her family's table. Parrish
introduces him as "Joe Black", a new associate. Unbeknownst to the rest, Death
has taken over the young man's body to spend some time on earth and try to
discover what being human is all about. He and Parrish have a deal. The Grim
Reaper will delay harvesting him as long as he acts as tour guide to our reality.
What Joe doesn't count on is falling in love with Susan. Although the two
seemingly don't have much in common -- she's a doctor from a very wealthy
family, he's an immortal force of nature -- they find themselves drawn together.
Director Martin Brest ("Scent Of A Woman") has taken a potentially 
fascinating look at coming to grips with mortality and the nature of
supernatural beings and ignored what should have been the film's strong
points. Loosely based on the 1934 "Death Takes A Holiday", there's promise in
the concept but it doesn't deliver.
The film's biggest sin is its length. At three hours, the admittedly
satisfying ending comes about 60 minutes after it should have. Virtually every
scene goes on longer than it needs to. Entire sub-plots could have been
eliminated without detracting from the movie.
Mostly what Parrish does during his last days is defend his company from a
hostile takeover. Headed by Evan, his board of directors ousts him from the
firm and he must fight to regain control of the business he's built. The
corporate takeover doesn't add much to the story except a couple brief
witticisms about death and taxes.
As part of their deal, Parrish can't explain who Joe really is to his business
cronies. In the real world if a handsome young stud suddenly showed up
constantly hanging out with a rich older man and they both refused to tell
what was going on, there would be an obvious guess as to their relationship. I
was surprised that this suspicion was never voiced.
The movie is filled with one-trick ponies. Forlani plays Susan as a nervous
hesitant woman, especially in the love scenes with Bill. She does a great job
at it, but about the fifth time it happens, you'll find yourself impatiently
tapping your fingers on the armrest.
Pitt's Death is understandably an enigma, but one that makes little sense. At
times Joe is childlike. He doesn't know what food is about. He can't figure
out how to tie his tie. He can barely walk. Think Peter Sellers in "Being
There". At other times, he delivers the insights that you'd think an entity
who has spent forever observing mankind would have.
The relationship between Susan and Joe is occasionally touching, but not very
believable. After all, she is in love with the guy she met at the coffee shop,
not this unnatural being inhabiting his body. As clueless and cold as he is
when they meet again, it's difficult to understand what she sees in him.
There are some well-done bits.The last minute of Joe and Susan's first meeting
comes out of left field and is a great cinematic moment.
The one time that the overly long scene work is when Susan seduces Joe into
discovering the garden of earthly delights. It takes forever for them to
undress each other and it's a slow heat coming to a full burn. Forlani has an
offbeat beauty that can be enticing at one moment and uninviting at others.
Not happening to be of the sexual persuasion to fully appreciate Brad Pitt's
physical attributes, I can only mention the involuntary "oohs" and "aahs" from
the women in the audience when his shirt comes off.
Hopkins is wonderful and it might be worth seeing the film just for him. He's
a grand actor, but at times he seems to be in a room by himself, reacting to
things that we can't see.
The movie misses the boat. There are interesting ideas to explore. Susan's
older sister Allison (Marcia Gay Harden) has spent her life trying to please
her father. Her husband Quince (Jeffrey Tambor) is the most human of the bunch
but gets little screen time. Surely Parrish has something better to do after
finding out he's about to die besides spend his time in the boardroom. But
these aspects get slighted in favor of far too much time spent on corporate
wheelings and dealings and Joe and Susan who get dull fast.
After what seems to be five or six hours into the film, you'll begin to wonder
whether Death is coming for Bill Parrish or this movie.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and isn't answering
the door if there's a guy with a big scythe out there. Let Death contact him
at Redman@indepen.com like everyone else.)
[This appeared in the 11/19/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Scott Renshaw
MEET JOE BLACK
(Universal)
Starring:  Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani, Marcia Gay Harden,
Jake Weber, Jeffrey Tambor.
Screenplay:  Ron Osborn & Jeff Reno and Kevin Wade and Bo Goldman.
Producer:  Martin Brest.
Director:  Martin Brest.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  179 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Death (Brad Pitt), in the nattily-attired, bleach-blond human form of 
Joe Black, is ready for a holiday.  Having spent eternity in the isolation
of his never-ending task, the Reaper has decided he wants to sample mortal
pleasures, with aging communications tycoon Bill Parrish (Anthony Hopkins)
as his somewhat reluctant guide.  You may feel that Death has made up for
plenty of lost time by the time MEET JOE BLACK finally winds its way to a
conclusion -- not because his love of Parrish's daughter Susan (Claire
Forlani) is so transforming, but because the three hours of the film begin
to feel something like eternity.  In his attempt to make an epic of the
human experience, director Martin Brest has overburdened a simple story
with an entire film's worth of pregnant pauses, portentous glances and
flabby plotting.
     The real shame is that there's two hours of solid material trying to
escape from this lengthy remake of DEATH TAKES A HOLIDAY.  The
relationship between Susan and Joe is given a neat twist at the start as
the emotionally confused Susan meets and falls for the guy whose body
Death takes (in one of the most startling screen deaths you'll see).
Hopkins, meanwhile, does nice work as the businessman taking stock of his
legacy, drawing on the understated physical acting which has always marked
his best performances.  Brest finds both comedy and creepiness in the
early stages of Joe and Parrish's interaction, with the mogul's mysterious
new confidante inspiring curiosity among his family and business
associates, as well as confusion over the gentleman's unusual affinity for
peanut butter.
     Between every shred of interesting material, however, there are
several patience-threatening minutes.  It's astonishing to note that two
editors are credited on MEET JOE BLACK, since virtually nothing seems to
have been left on the cutting room floor.  The scene in which Forlani and
Pitt make their lingering departure from one another at the coffee shop
could qualify as a short subject; it takes so long for them to undress one
another when they finally make love you suspect they're sizing each other
for wardrobe.  Superfluous sub-plots drag the film down, including one
which requires Pitt to adopt an embarrassing West Indian accent.  Even the
entire storyline involving an attempted coup by Parrish's top lieutenant
(Jake Weber, oozing yuppie sleaze) seems to exist for the sole purpose of
one big punch line at the 160 minute mark.
     That consistent lack of narrative economy ultimately dooms MEET JOE
BLACK in spite of its strengths.  Pitt brings a surprising undercurrent of
menace to the role of Joe Black, while still finding the humanity Death
discovers.  There are also some supporting moments which do work quite
well, including Marcia Gay Harden as Parrish's oldest daughter making a
heartbreaking admission of love for her father.  MEET JOE BLACK is a truly
gorgeous film, with Emmanuel Lubezki providing luminous photography of
Dante Ferretti's production design.  It's also a case of ever-diminishing
returns, with so many emotional confrontations and false endings you may
forget whom you were supposed to care about.
     1998 has already seen one film about an immortal who risks life on
earth for love, the Nicolas Cage/Meg Ryan vehicle CITY OF ANGELS.  That
film was smart enough to treat the story as grand melodrama -- a weepy
transcendental tragedy rather than an Oscar-season Message Movie.  MEET
JOE BLACK sprinkles its moments of insight so intermittently throughout
its three hours that they start to get lost.  Life on earth certainly
could have seemed more vibrant, and less like an endurance test.

Author
Jeffrey Huston
Jeffrey Huston's "Believe Me" URL: http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston
Believe Me's "Meet Joe Black" Review (complete with pictures) URL:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/meetjb.htm
Produced and Directed by Martin Brest.
Screenplay by Ron Osborn, Jeff Reno, Kevin Wade and Bo Goldman.
Distributed by Universal Pictures. Running time: 176 minutes.
Release date: November 13, 1998.
Why is it that whenever Brad Pitt and Anthony Hopkins team up in a movie,
the film ends up being a saccharine Harlequin romance novel? It sounds
weird, doesn't it? Granted, the characters that Pitt and Hopkins play are
never romantically linked (that would be too weird). But for some strange
reason, this trait has been a core aspect of their two collaborations.
"Legends of the Fall" was nothing more than a tawdry, melodramatic paperback
romance in film form. Now comes "Meet Joe Black", a completely unrealistic
romantic fantasy that tries to manipulate our emotions as opposed to
actually challenging them.
Loosely based on the Fredric March classic "Death Takes A Holiday", "Meet
Joe Black" has a unique premise. Corporate mogul William Parrish (Anthony
Hopkins) is about to celebrate his 65th birthday. But a couple of days prior
to the elegant bash being thrown by his eldest daughter, Parrish is visited
by none other than Death himself (Brad Pitt). Using the body of a recently
deceased man, Death wishes to take a break from his normal duties and be
given a tour of life on earth. After being guided by Parrish for a brief
time, Death will take him into the afterlife after his birthday celebration.
Assuming the name Joe Black, Death becomes Parrish's shadow, following him
into virtually every area of his life. But conveniently, he takes enough
breaks from this partnership to strike up a love affair with Parrish's
forlorn youngest daughter Susan (Claire Forlani). It is a romance complete
lacking in chemistry or motivation as they fall in love almost
instantaneously without even knowing anything about each other. They just
"connect". This may appeal to an idealistic teenager, but for the average
adult it may prove unsatisfying to see a woman fall in love with a guy whose
greatest passion is peanut butter. If the reasoning is "But it's Brad
Pitt!", then that is a truly shallow and meaningless reason indeed.
Running at just a hair under three hours, "Meet Joe Black" long overstays
its welcome. Scenes go on far past the point of which they should end.
Schmaltzy lingering looks and lengthy dramatic pauses are present in
virtually every scene. This is such a quiet film, one where you could hear a
pin drop about every two minutes. The pacing plods along ever so slowly,
unlike any film that I've ever seen before. You could trim about a
half-an-hour off of the film's length by simply making the dialogue and
action tighter.  But director Martin Brest wallows in pregnant pauses, ones
that suck the life out of the story, the characters, and eventually the
viewer.
I mean, how many times do we have to cut back and forth between two
characters "reacting" to one another before another word is eventually said?
Must they deeply contemplate everything that they say? This is easily Brest'
s worst film. If you want to see his best, rent the engaging and powerful
"Scent of a Woman".
The script wants so badly to be about ideas. It yearns to provoke thought
about death, life, and what we should value. But for the most part we are
bludgeoned with speech after speech that simply waxes poetic about life and
love. These diatribes are based in the ideal, but are rarely tested by
issues of reality. Because of this, much of the film comes off as preachy
instead of challenging.
Most of this enlightenment is communicated through Death of course, or at
least when it's convenient for him to do so. Joe Black is a contradictory
enigma who is all-knowing and wise in one scene, then simple and naďve the
next. In this film, Death is the most tender and sensitive entity that one
could imagine. This New Age characterization of Death as simply being
misunderstood may be appealing to some, but I had a hard time believing that
the Grim Reaper didn't have a dark side.
Most of the performances are annoying and one-dimensional. As Death, Brad
Pitt is uncharismatic and stilted. Early on there is a scene where he
discovers the unique taste of peanut butter. According to his dialogue, he
seems to be quite taken with it. But his inappropriate understated manner
simply says, "Huh, that's nice." For peanut butter being something that he
can't seem to get enough of, he emotes little (if any) excitement about it.
This example is characteristic of Pitt's entire performance. It makes sense
for him to be in this zombie-like trance at the beginning. But to see no
change in his emotional state for the entire film simply doesn't make sense.
He says that his experiences are changing him, but they seem to have no
affect on his countenance or personality. Brad Pitt has yet to live up to
the promise that was shown in 1995 when he was nominated for his supporting
turn in "12 Monkeys", as well as delivering the best performance of his
career as the naďve police detective in "Seven".
Claire Forlani is unimpressive in her debut as a leading ingenue. If she has
range as an actress, you certainly don't see it here. Like Pitt's
characterization, Forlani's performance of Susan is a one-note portrayal
that stays the same from beginning to end. This character reeks of pandering
to a female audience. Susan is shy and vulnerable, prone to cry at the drop
of a hat. She is a soft-spoken waif just waiting to be swept off of her
feet. Forlani never balances Susan's vulnerability with any sense of
strength, unintentionally creating a character that comes off as weak and
borderline co-dependent.
One look from Pitt's blue eyes (that at times hide behind his golden bangs)
and she's a goner. This may make some women swoon, but it certainly does not
equate substance or depth in the characterization of Susan Parrish.
The first scene in which she meets Pitt's character is embarrassingly
"scripted". This good-looking blonde just happens to hit on her and, in the
period of five minutes, expresses his innermost feelings about how love
should be. This is, I am led to believe, every young woman's dream. Too bad
it's something that will never happen. The best kind of fantasy has some
basis of reality because it gives the illusion that the fantasy might
actually be possible. But even though this fantasy is set in reality, it has
no basis in it.
Jake Weber is burdened with the duty of playing the bad guy. As Drew, Weber
plays the young hotshot climbing the corporate ladder. The story begins with
him having both William Parrish's ear as well as the affections of his
daughter. But as the film progresses, we see him for the cut-throat selfish
tycoon that he really is. If William Parrish is supposed to be such a shrewd
businessman, how does a jerk like Drew pull the wool over his eyes for so
long? Characters like Drew are formulaic plot devices that create
inconsistencies in the characters that choose to associate with them. There
isn't a shred of humanity in Drew; he is simply an unscrupulous evil
character who has no business being in a film that aspires to be mature.
The picture is visually lush in both its art direction and cinematography,
but at times too lush. The love scene in particular is overly beautified as
it looks like a perfume or lingerie commercial. The soft golden light shines
off of our two lovers as they strike sensual poses for the camera. These
constructed shots belong in a magazine ad or on a billboard, but are out of
place in a dramatic film.
Thomas Newman's music score is beautiful, albeit excessive. Particularly at
the films end when we are assaulted with multiple orchestral crescendos that
are supposed to really make us cry. This music bombards us as characters
either contemplate or cry. Then a short exchange occurs between two people,
immediately followed by more sweeping woodwinds and strings. Of the many
adjectives one could use to describe the use of music in "Meet Joe Black",
subtlety isn't one of them.
In a film so tediously boring, Anthony Hopkins provides the one jolt of
life. His William Parrish seems to be the only character with emotional
levels. At times he can be withdrawn and mysterious, but he also has his
moments of frustration and explosive anger.
He is also the only character that actually expresses challenging ideas.
Just when I was about to throw-up after yet another feel-good platitude,
Parrish chimed in with a statement that actually made me think. In a film
with few bright spots, Hopkins's performance stands out as the brightest.
The other actor worthy of praise is Jeffrey Tambor (TV's "The Larry Sanders
Show") who plays Quince, William's son-in-law and business partner. Quince
is gentle and loyal, but never weak. Though not a person who is prone to be
confrontational, Quince never lacks conviction. Tambor is to be credited for
giving more depth to his character than was provided him by the script.
This film fails in one key area. Until the very end, the only person who
knows of Joe Black's true identity is William Parrish. As a result, the film
sidesteps a conflict that could have been truly dramatic and intriguing.
Ponder for a moment with me, if you will. Imagine if, say, at the beginning
of the film's final hour, Susan discovers that Joe is Death. Think of the
potential complication that this would pose. The man she loves is the same
man who has come to take her father away from her. This would have created a
very challenging personal struggle for all three characters involved.
Instead, by keeping Joe's identity hidden, Susan is not challenged in any
way, leaving us to sappy expressions of love and romance that have no basis
of substance or motivation.
"Meet Joe Black" wants to have its cake and eat it to. It takes the heavy
and complicated subject of death and tells a fable where virtually every
plot line (save one crucial story element) is tied up ever so nicely with
the ribbon of audience satisfaction. The film gives us virtually everything
we "want". William Parrish and Joe Black are the only ones who know that he
is about to die. But somehow, virtually every character has a moment with
Parrish that ends up being a deathbed confessional and expression of love.
The only problem is that they have no idea he is on his deathbed. So why,
all of a sudden, do they finally feel the need to pour out their soul? I can
believe it coming from Parrish, he knows what's about to happen. But from
everyone else it seems horribly forced. These people are living on an
exhalted emotional and spiritual plain the likes of which I have never seen.
The film doesn't have the courage to challenge us with the thought that, if
we're not careful, those that we love may pass on before we have the chance
of expressing all that we really feel. Had Brest not been so concerned with
making us happy, he would have been more successful in communicating the
themes that he was hoping to address. But instead of being given something
to think about, we are appeased with the relief that everything worked out
in the end. When you choose to tackle the reality of death in a story, I
think you cheat the subject matter by having everything end so conveniently.
"Meet Joe Black" may very well be the oddest film released in 1998. It is a
film that is guilty of (what I consider to be) virtually every artistic
crime known to cinema. And yet for some truly odd reason, for as bloated and
indulgent as Martin Brest's film is, I never found myself losing interest.
Don't get me wrong; aside from Hopkins and Tambor, my interest wasn't
sustained because the film was good. I think what kept me in it was how
uniquely awful it was. I've never seen bad filmmaking quite like this
before. Dare I say that Meet Joe Black, in regards to bad filmmaking, is
revolutionary. I found a perverse entertainment in discovering brand new
ways to make a film bad. For me, this may be a singular appeasement. But for
the public at large, you're best to steer clear of this boring mess.
The thoughts and opinions of Believe Me are expressly Jeff Huston's
and not necessarily shared by Impact Productions
[Believe Me]    [Impact Productions]
[Comments -- "What do you think?"]

Author
David Nusair
Meet Joe Black (Reviewed on Nov. 27/98)
Starring Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani
In "Meet Joe Black", Brad Pitt plays Death.  
That's all that really needs to be said, but nevertheless, I will provide
the three of you that have seemingly been living in a cave with a plot
description.  Death decides to take a holiday, what with all the rigors of
soul-collecting and all, and forces Anthony Hopkins into showing him what
it's like to be human.  Death assumes the body of Brad Pitt, and from
there, much trouble ensues.
For one thing, Death-as-Pitt falls in love with Hopkins daughter, played
by Claire Forlani.  Obviously this enrages Hopkins, because really, what
can Death offer?  Besides eternal damnation, of course.  There is also a
sub-plot about Forlani's ex-boyfriend (she dumps him for Pitt) trying to
take over Hopkins company.
"Meet Joe Black" runs just under three hours.  I've always thought that
such obscene running times should be limited to historical epics.  "Meet
Joe Black" is neither historical nor is it an epic, though I get the
feeling Martin Brest (the director) desperately wants it to be.  Every
single scene in the movie goes on about 3-4 minutes too long.  And the
ending takes about 20 minutes longer than it really should.  A severe
editing job could have made this movie excellent, instead of just good,
which is what it is.
Pitt, an actor I normally loathe, is actually quite engaging as Death.  I
believed his performance, and I could see why Forlani's character would
fall in love with him.  I have to agree with Roger Ebert, though, who
found it hard to believe that an entity that's been around for all time
wouldn't know what peanut butter was.  That has nothing to do with Pitt's
performance, of course, but it is a little distracting.
Hopkins gives his usual excellent performance.  He's able to portray the
angst of a man who knows he has very little time left, without making him
an obnoxious whiner.  And in her first major studio role, Claire Forlani
is surprisingly good.  She has a sweet tenderness that allows the audience
to instantly root for her.  
So, "Meet Joe Black" is a good movie hampered by it's ridiculous running
time.  Had the film been cut by an hour or so, I have no doubt that I
would be calling it one of the best movies of the year in this review.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
>From MALLRATS (6/10) to this!?! Claire Forlani breaks into the "show"
with her first big romantic lead opposite one of the "sexiest men in
the world", Brad Pitt. Director Martin Brest follows up his greatest
critical success from 1992, SCENT OF A WOMAN (7.5/10), with a
semi-remake of the 1934 film, DEATH TAKES A HOLIDAY, a 3-hour long
fantastical romance starring Death. 
PLOT:
Death comes to Earth and injects itself into the form of a human body
(Pitt) in order to learn more about human beings and life in general.
He chooses an extremely successful and rich man, William Parrish
(Hopkins) to be his guide through this journey, up until the time he
chooses to end it, at which point, he will take the 65-year old Parrish
with him. What's the quirk in his plans? Mr. Parrish also has a
gorgeous daughter, to which Death gradually takes a liking. 
CRITIQUE:
Despite it being too long, too slow, and not all together believable,
this film still manages to whip up a kernel of cinematic magic with the
wonderful performances by its leads, the beautiful scenery and a
touching father-daughter subplot. Folks, before you read any more of
this review, please appreciate the fact that this film truly feeeeels
like three hours! Most of the scenes seem to go on for too long, the
dialogue between the actors is constantly interrupted by long spurts of
silence and ambiguous gazes, and the overall feel of the film is slow,
slow and slow. Having said that, I might recommend this film for
video-watchers, who have the prerogative to watch the film at their own
leisure, and even forward the boring parts, or rewind the whispering
parts (Most of which were too low to comprehend.)
That aside, the film's actual story line is sort of original, but not
taken full advantage of. They basically just make Death feel like a
"fish out of water" character which we've already seen done to death
(no pun intended) in many a better film. As Death, Brad Pitt is good,
but his character is really quite annoying and slow. His counterpart,
the mousy Claire Forlani is also quite decent in her role, but their
romance never really grabbed me by the throat (They might have wanted
to pursue the "coffee shop" scene's ambience further in this
script...). Her boyfriend in the film is also played well by actor Jake
Weber, but for some reason, he downshifts into a completely
one-dimensional character about halfway through this voyage. Anthony
Hopkins is also great as the patriarch of this super-rich family, while
managing to authenticate true feelings of his power and humanity.
Jeffrey Tambor is also funny in the role of the comic-relief loser.
I must say that the conclusion of this film also left me dry in the
enthusiasm department, as Death's departure from Earth was somewhat
anticlimactic. And I don't care how high you jam your bombastic musical
score, Mr. Brest, you will not make me cry solely on the basis of blood
gushing out of my eardrums!! All in all, the film does not succeed on
most fronts. It's too long, waaaaay too slow, and kind of flaky as a
romance. On the other hand, if you don't mind long or slow movies, like
staring at beautiful people and images for 3 hours, and are interested
in the father-daughter relationship angle, which is quite well done in
this film, then by all means, check this movie out...on video! And oh
yeah, I never like to reveal plot points in my reviews, but just this
once I'll tell you a little something that might juice this film up for
you..........................are you
ready?...........................Death gets laid!!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Brad Pitt's favorite snack is pizza. His favorite cereal is Frosted
Flakes. His favorite movie of all time is ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S
NEST (7.5/10) (one of his favorites). His favorite TV show of all time
is "All in the Family". He likes the music of Neil Young, Bob Marley,
Soundgarden and Eric Clapton. (The Oprah Winfrey Show, November 13,
1998)
Brad Pitt received $17,500,000 for his role in this film. He dated
fellow actresses Juliette Lewis and Gwyneth Paltrow for three and two
years respectively, and dropped out of the University of Missouri
School of Journalism when he was only two credits short of (and two
weeks prior to) graduating to move to California. He was majoring in
journalism with a focus in advertising. He told his parents and friends
that he was off to attend the Art Center College of Design in Pasadena,
because he was afraid to tell them that, in fact, he planned to
relegate himself to the status of a table-waiting, limo-driving,
chicken-suit-wearing, LA type, all in the hope that someday he would be
famous.
Pitt was the third choice for the role of J.D. in THELMA & LOUISE
(8/10). William Baldwin, the first choice, left to star in BACKDRAFT
(7.5/10).
In 1992, director Martin Brest was nominated for an Oscar as Best
Director for SCENT OF A WOMAN. He also directed the original BEVERLY
HILLS COP (7.5/10) starring Eddie Murphy.
Claire Forlani is British, and played the long-lost daughter of Sean
Connery in THE ROCK (7/10).
This film was originally titled DEATH TAKES A VACATION.
Singer Melissa Etheridge once provided this Brad Pitt testimonial: "One
night a few of us, shall we say, lesbians, were in the hot tub watching
the guys play basketball in the pool. We were staring at Brad and we
all agreed he could change a woman's mind."

Author
Michael Dequina
_Meet_Joe_Black_ (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
Most meetings last just a couple of seconds.  A hello, a handshake, and
you have officially met someone.  In the case of _Joe_Black_, the meeting
is stretched over three hours, and while it is an enjoyable and sometimes
touching entertainment, the same effect could have been achieved in half
the time.
That's exactly what director Mitchell Leisen did in 1934's
79-minute_Death_Takes_a_Holiday_, upon which Martin Brest's film is based.
Despite the presence of the Grim Reaper himself, _Joe_Black_ is a simple
and frothy fantasy that does not deserve such an epic length.  Death, who
has arrived on earth to take an aging business tycoon (Anthony Hopkins) by
the name of Bill Parrish (Get it?  _Parrish_?) into the great beyond,
decides to take a holiday in the land of the living in the body of a
recently deceased young man (Brad Pitt).  Death gets more than he bargained
for when he falls in love with Bill's unhappy youngest daughter Susan
(Claire Forlani).
An drab corporate intrigue subplot contributes to the bloated running
time, as does the tediously drawn out finale, which strings together a
number of potential endings of diminishing effectiveness; had the film
ended fifteen minutes earlier, it would have been better for it.
Nonetheless, the length does not completely dilute the involving core of
the story, whose effectiveness can be credited to the ever-impressive
Hopkins and the luminous Forlani, whose heartfelt performance is as
stunning as her appearance.  Not surprisingly, the weak link in the lead
trio of actors is Pitt, whose portrayal of Death comes off as a cleaned-up
version of his blank stoner character in _True_Romance_.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Martin Brest
WRITTEN BY: Ron Osborn, Jeff Reno, Kevin Wade and Bo Goldman 
(based on the play "Death Takes a Holiday" by Alberto Casella
CAST: Anthony Hopkins, Brad Pitt, Claire Forlani, Jeffrey Tambor
MPAA: Rated PG-13 for an accident scene, some sexuality and brief strong language.
Runtime: USA:178 
REVIEWED BY: Alex Ioshpe (C) 1998
I have never been so confused after watching a movie. "Meet Joe Black"
is probably one of the most visually satisfying films of this year,
with a cinematography, music and cast that will dazzle most of us. At
the same time it is probably the most boring and ridiculous experience
hat you will have this season.
At first you marvel at the elegant direction, graceful cinematography
and sensual musical score. Then you'll wait for something to happen
for half an hour, but when you finally understand what's going on,
you'll wonder what are actors such as Anthony Hopkins, Brad Pitt and
Claire Forlani are doing in a film like this? The script is simply a
silly and unresolved story, which is artificially stretched into a
three hour long motion picture. It feels like an eternity. Most of the
time it is a pompous soap opera, filled with empty dialogue that the
actors deliver in a high pitched voice and " meaningful" winks.
The film is based on Alberto Caesella's play "Death Takes A
Holiday". The story concentrates around Bill (Anthony Hopkins) who
lives a fulfilled life as a successful business man, but sometimes he
wakes up in the middle of the night and hears a voice that is saying
"yes". Soon he meets a young elegant gentlemen (Brad Pitt) who
introduces himself as "Death". It is Bill's time. But Death has other
plans. It has come down to us simple mortals to find out what it means
to be alive. Our Bill is chosen to be Death's guide and in exchange he
gets time. Bill introduces Death as Joe Black, who immediately becomes
the center of everyone's attention. Bill's business partners speculate
about why Joe is constantly at Bill's side, lives in his house and
resides at his office. That is not all, however. Bill's youngest
daughter Susan (Claire Forlani) falls in love with the mysterious
stranger and Joe falls in love with her. This relationship is bound to
have some serious consequences.
It wouldn't be fair to say that this film didn't have some interesting
moments, such as the scene where Joe is invited to join Bill's family
for dinner. When Joe starts enjoying peanut butter and later falls in
love, the experience is somewhat different. It is obvious that a story
like this story is very difficult to structure. It's one thing to say:
"Wouldn't it be fun to have Death take human form and come down to
earth.." To create a motion picture out of this is another. Four
screenwriters have worked on a script that lacks drive and logic. It
is overlong and too primitive to pass as a serious film. On the other
hand it demonstrates incredible performances and a very decent
direction by Martin Brest ("Scent of a Woman"). Hopkins looks great in
any role, and no matter how shallow or hollow it is, he will complete
it. His talent and charisma are needed here more than any where else,
since it actually saves the film from a complete embarrassment. But
Pitt is the one that got one of the most difficult roles of recent
time. How can you play Death in human form? To me it seems that death
and life are not something that can be associated with earthly
matters. They are not creatures, but phenomenas. Saying that death
takes human form would be the same as to suggest that eternity would
take human form. Handling such a ridiculous task is incredibly
difficult and Pitt deserves some credit for his work. Speaking in a
calm, soft voice, portraying Death as a lonely, distant and powerful
guy that is unfamiliar with practical earthly matters. He looks and
acts more like an Angel of Death, rather than a demon or a red-eyed
executioner. Claire Forlani and others are also fine, stretching their
stereotypical characters to their limits. Unfortunately their
performances are not enough to rescue this film from its self
inflicted misery.
In other words this is not what I expected from the director of "Scent
of a Woman". It could (and should) be better with such cast and
crew. In the end it seems as if they have all been intensively working
on a ravishingly looking soap opera.

Author
Steve Kong
Running at about three hours, Meet Joe Black is an hour too long. If you
can overlook that, the film is very enjoyable.
Death wants to take a vacation and he's picked the rich and well-to-do Bill
Parrish (Anthony Hopkins) as his guide to the living. Death takes a body
from a New Yorker (Brad Pitt) and comes to visit Bill just a few days
before Bill's 65th birthday. Bill finds out that he's scheduled to be taken
by Death. But, Death offers to postpone Bill's demise for a few days,
hours, and minutes if Bill shows Death, who's now known as Joe Black,
around. You see, Joe is bored with his job and he wants to see what it is
to be alive.
Bill's cherished daughter, Susan (Claire Forlani), starts to fall in love
with the mysterious Joe. This is much to the dismay of Susan's father and
her current beau Drew (Jake Weber). Drew works closely with Bill - Drew is
second in command of Bill's company.
Meet Joe Black follows three story lines. The first is the love affair
between Susan and Joe. This story works, but not as well as it could have.
Forlani and Pitt have no screen chemistry whatsoever. Of course, how could
they? Pitt is supposed to be a dead guy. The second, which takes up a lot
of the screen time, is that of Bill being overthrown as the head of his own
broadcasting company. And the third, and most interesting, is the story
that follows between Bill and Joe, showing the relationship these two build.
As far as acting goes, Hopkins, as always, is superb. His Bill Parrish
reminded me of the character he played in The Edge -- smart and likeable.
Pitt tries something new and succeeds. At first, Pitt plays a live guy --
before Death takes over his body, and this part is like all other parts
Pitt has played. Pitt plays the suave guy who picks up women with a wink of
the eye. When Death takes over the body of Pitt's character is when Pitt
really does something fun. Pitt plays Joe energetically and most of the
time he is hilarious. His movements
are toned down and stiff.
Forlani, who I last saw in The Rock, is wonderful. She has a very
expressive face and I'd love to see her in more movies. She was a delight
to watch on screen.
Worth mentioning is the score by Thomas Newton; it is one of the best I've
heard this year. Yes, it is a bit overwrought for the film, and at times
distracting, but it just sounds good. Listen to it when you see Meet Joe
Black.
Also worth mentioning is the cinematography by Emmanuel Lubezki (A Walk in
the Clouds). Meet Joe Black is the prettiest picture of the year.
Martin Brest impressed me as a director with his film Midnight Run. His
style is to concentrate on characters and I wanted to see if this carried
onto Meet Joe Black. He's done well, though he could have sat down with
editors Joe Hutshing and Michael Tronick to shave off 45 minutes from the
film and done better. Another suggestion for Brest is to have the actors
read their lines more quickly. This sounds like a ridiculous suggestion,
but it's quite relevant for Meet Joe Black. The actors often pause for long
periods between lines - which is at first jarring, and second, makes for
the long movie that Meet Joe Black is.
Overall, Meet Joe Black is an enjoyable film that is worth the three hours
it takes to unfold its story. If you could sit through Titanic, Meet Joe
Black shouldn't be a problem. See Meet Joe Black for the performances of
the three leads: Hopkins, Pitt, and Forlani. Also, see it to hear the score
by Newton and to see the cinematography by Lubezki. Don't Miss Meet Joe
Black on the big screen.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
In the interest of being generous, I want to start this review with the
scene that I liked in Meet Joe Black.  Sir Anthony Hopkins, playing a
super-rich media mogul, has gathered his family around him for dinner.  His
oldest daughter (played by Marcia Gay Harden from Millers Crossing), who
has been obsessively planning his sinfully extravagant birthday party,
presents him with three superbly decorated little cakes, which are supposed
to be scale models for his big birthday cake.
The daughter asks Hopkins to pick the one he likes.  Hopkins, frustrated by
the weight of planning for the whole elaborate affair, does what any man in
his position would do:  he punts.  Whichever one you like, dear, he says.
And the daughter does exactly what any woman in her position would do:  she
cries.
I liked that scene for two reasons.  First, the cakes looked really cool.
Second, it was, perhaps, the only scene in the movie where people acted as
you would expect people to act.  Meet Joe Black is chock-full of odd
performances, people doing things for no discernible reason at all, and
doing them in slow motion over the course of three hours to boot.  It's
easy to watch Meet Joe Black for the abundant eye candy of the palatial
homes and the beauteous Claire Forlani, but it's even easier to sleep right
through it (two people on my row managed it quite nicely).  The difficult
part of the movie is understanding the characters and their motivations and
why someone thought three hours was an appropriate length for this
overwrought mess.
I know my audience had problems with the movie, because they thought it was
a comedy.  Case in point:  Everyone should know by now that Brad Pitt plays
the Angel of Death in this movie.  However, the first we see of him is as a
young lawyer in a coffee shop hitting on the glamorous Claire Forlani.
(It's not clear from the movie whether you need a law degree to become the
Angel of Death, but it makes a certain kind of sense.)  It shouldn't take
long for the observant moviegoer to realize that Bad Things are about to
happen to Mr. Pitt.  And indeed they do (after a hideously prolonged
sequence where Pitt looks over his shoulder at the retreating Forlani and
Forlani looks over her shoulder at the retreating Pitt), because Pitt walks
into the road without looking and suddenly gets squished.  Well, when that
happened, the audience howled with laughter, and continued to laugh at
every comment that was remotely humorous.  So, if you think that sudden
violent death and sarcastic drawing-room humor are funny, I encourage you
to go see Meet Joe Black immediately.
Anyway, the deceased lawyer's body, no worse the wear from its massive
injuries, is possessed by the Angel of Death and Brad Pitt takes over that
role.  The idea is that Death (given the pen name of Joe Black, so as not
to disturb others) wants to take a holiday and experience the world.  If
this weren't Hollywood, we might get an interesting metaphysical discussion
of life and death, but since it is, we get scene after scene of
fish-out-of-water humor, just as if Death is George of the Jungle or
Crocodile Dundee or some other poor schmuck who's wandered in from the
jungle or the outback or whatever and doesn't know how to act in our
society.
It also doesn't help that the character of Death is written so
inconsistently.  He claims to be on vacation, but he never does anything
except hang around the seriously attractive Claire Forlani (just try to get
your travel agent to book that one).  He speaks very slow and halting
English but perfectly fluent Jamaican patois.  He knows everything about
some characters, nothing about others.  And as played by Brad Pitt, he's
not especially menacing or charming or glamorous or intriguing, he's just
there.  It's as if someone told Pitt, "Never mind about acting in this
picture, son, just stand there and look pretty."  It's as if Pitt is doing
his Keanu Reeves impression throughout the movie.
I've used the phrase "Angel of Death" in this review very deliberately to
contrast Pitt's performance with this year's best angel performance,
Nicolas Cage's in City of Angels.  Where Pitt is cold and unfeeling, Cage
is as warm and empathetic as the situation allows.  Where Cage is genuinely
curious about the nature of man, Pitt is aloof and arrogant.  Cage struck
instant chemical sparks with co-star Meg Ryan, where the chemistry between
Pitt and Forlani is only understandable if you accept the notion that
Forlani's character is so shallow that she can't see beyond Pitt's good
looks.
The movie's other top name is a much better actor, but that doesn't save
Meet Joe Black.  Sir Anthony Hopkins isn't given much better material to
work with, unfortunately.  He plays one of these good-hearted
multimillionaire media moguls that only exist in Hollywood.  (One wonders
what might have happened if they had made Hopkins's character more
realistically evil.)  Hopkins is marked for death due to a bad ticker, but
Death steps in and grants him some extra time in exchange for being his
guide in the world.
Of course, no one can be sure of how they will act when Death taps on their
shoulder.  But I have to wonder (and in this movie, you have a very long
time to wonder) how you or I would act in a similar situation, especially
if you or I were a multimillionaire.  Hopkins pretty much goes to the
office -- and the major subplot revolves around who will control the
corporation.  Fans of corporate intrigue will be fascinated, I'm sure.
I stayed awake all the way through Meet Joe Black, and I'm asking myself
why.  Movies about Death should encourage you to live life to the fullest,
which is what I'm going to do now.  Go spend time with your family, go
volunteer for a local charity, heck, go take a nap.  Don't go see Meet Joe
Black, because all it will do is move you three long hours closer to death.
MovieNation:  Movie Reviews in Black and White
http://members.xoom.com/movienation
movienation@xoommail.com
"No children have ever meddled with the Republican Party
and lived to tell about it."  -- Sideshow Bob

Author
Victory Marasigan
Here's how the story goes: Death decides to take a rare vacation on Earth,
using a sunny-blonde out-of-towner (Brad Pitt) as his corporeal vehicle. 
In exchange for a temporary extension on his life, wealthy tycoon William
Parrish (Anthony Hopkins) agrees to give Death, a.k.a. Joe Black, a tour
of humanity. The child-like -- and ironically angelic -- Joe eventually
finds himself head-over-heels in love with Susan Parrish (Claire Forlani),
putting the elder Parrish at odds with the daughter for whom he wants
nothing but the best (Imagine Dr. Kevorkian dating _your_ daughter). 
A pretty silly idea for a movie, isn't it?  To the contrary, the adult's
fairy tale _Meet Joe Black_ rises above the obvious pitfalls of its
premise to tell a thought-provoking and heart-warming story of deep
universal relevance.  
For once, Pitt is able to use his suave doofus persona to create a likable
character.  He and Forlani make a charged, intense on-screen couple.  More
central to the story is Hopkins' relationship with his daughters, which he
works to resolve before his impending demise.  As cliche as his
character's situation is, Hopkins great performance (one of his best since
_The Silence of the Lambs_) and writers Ron Osborne and Jeff Reno's
eloquent dialogue make all the difference in letting us forget that we've
seen this story many times before. 
At three hours, the film does carry a bit of a squirm factor, but
objectively, little could have been excised without changing the film's
impact.  If _Meet Joe Black_ moves at a glacially slow pace, it is because
there is so much to take in in every single shot (a Stanley Kubrick
influence, perhaps?). 
With its complicated lessons on family relations and the inevitability of
death, _Meet Joe Black_ resonates on a very personal level.  It is
definitely not a movie to go out and see with "the gang." Ideally, the
film should be viewed in a mostly empty theater, where the movie's
blissful quiet can invigorate you. 

Author
Luke Buckmaster
MEET JOE BLACK
Cast: Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani, Jake Weber, Marcia Gay
Harden, Jeffrey Tambor
Director: Martin Brest
Screenplay: Ron Osborn & Jeff Reno and Kevin Wade and Bo Goldman
Australian theatrical release: March 11, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
2 and a half stars
Meet Joe Black often borderlines on becoming a technical mess.  The
script fumbles, the direction is passive and the editing seems almost
non-existent.  But somehow, I find it hard to hate this film.  Meet Joe
Black has a sort of goof sincerity, a feeling that the production crew's
hearts and minds were in the right place, but they have ultimately
failed to package their product successfully.  There are many rewarding
features on show here, but every one of them is exaggerated and
sensationalized until they become faintly tiresome.  With a running time
of almost three hours, director Martin Brest (Scent of a Woman) never
knows exactly when to call it quits.  During his extravagantly long
creation, however, Brest hits upon some worthwhile lessons of life and
love.  It's just a pity that it takes patient ears to listen to them.
Media tycoon William Parrish (Anthony Hopkins) has not got long to live.
In fact, Death himself has struck a bargain with Parrish: if he shows
him the wonders of life, he will prolong his death until he is no longer
interested in human behavior.  Parrish grudgingly accepts, and
introduces death (with the newly acquired body of Brad Pitt) as "Joe
Black."  Black experiments with simplistic human treats like peanut
butter, and ponders over the meaning of the phrase "as certain as death
and taxes."  Before long, though, his experimentation becomes more than
just skin deep.  Parish's daughter Susan (the lovely Claire Forlani)
takes a shining to Black, and before long an uncertain relationship
builds between them.
In my review of 1998's The Mask of Zorro, I said that Anthony Hopkins
was "one of the true masters of American cinema," and Meet Joe Black
strengthens my belief.  On paper, his characters might seem cliché and
his scenes might seem witless, but Hopkins gives them credibility.   In
this case, the character of Bill Parrish could easily have appeared as
cold and inaccessible.  Fortunately, Hopkins gives him warmth and a
heart, whilst also providing a cutting-edge authoritarian presence.
Parrish is not unlike Disney's Scrooge McDuck; they are both smart and
shrewd, but have a lovable core that makes everything they do
intriguing.  Brad Pitt's presence is often wooden, but he is playing an
out-of-environment character so I guess it's intentional.  It is almost
as if Pitt only chooses roles that have a reason to be bad - he was a
vampire in Interview with the Vampire, a dopey stoner in True Romance, a
nut case in Twelve Monkeys, and in Seven Years in Tibet he wasan
Austrian.
Meet Joe Black is modeled in the old-fashioned style of grand cinema.
The screenplay was loosely based on 1934's Death Takes a Holiday, and
the qualities of yesteryear are on show here.  The film takes a lot of
time - in fact, way too much time - to build a climax which, naturally,
ends in an explosion of fireworks.  Whilst it is often hard to accept a
film with such a slow pace, it is also hard to resist it.  The central
romance between Pitt and Forlani is a nice bit of romantic fluff: it's
instantly forgettable but enjoyable at the time.
What is unforgivable about Meet Joe Black is that all it achieves could
have been made in half the time.  The three hours of footage were not
made because the plot is especially complex, but rather because almost
every shot is over-filmed. The dialogue is drawn out and loses much of
its interest, and there are more than a few scenes that could have been
axed all together.  Still, amongst all this cinematic mayhem, Meet Joe
Black is a film with a heart.  It takes risks, and although many of them
do not pay off, they are generally pleasing experiences.  I could
imagine that Meet Joe Black would make a good subject for a film school:
how to take a potentially excellent film and exaggerate it to the point
where it pushes the boundaries of acceptance.


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Universal Pictures
 Director:  Martin Brest
 Writer:  Ron Osborn, Jeff Reno, Kevin Wade, Bo Goldman
 Cast: Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani, Marcia Gay
Hardne, Jeffrey Tambor
   The only certain things in life are death and taxes. From
the way that politicians campaign and from the number of
pages the media devote to the issues, you'd think the latter
was the more interesting theme.  On the other hand, when
we consider how the film industry has treated the two givens
in life, you'd conclude the opposite.  Taxes are a tedious
subject for writers of fiction, but death--that's another story. 
In "Meet Joe Black," a fascinating but schmaltzy take if the
influence which death's personification has on one of its well-
heeled victims, the big surprise is not how thoughts of
impending extinction concentrate the mind.  That's obvious. 
The delicacy of this fascinating, leisurely-told, 174-minute
romantic-comedy-drama is the way that Death himself
changes from his experience with mere mortals.  Played by
the deliriously handsome Brad Pitt in the title role, Death is
both all-powerful and highly vulnerable; an angel brought to
his knees--and more--by the seductive puissance of a rich,
successful, professional woman who is herself immeasurably
changed by sharing some time with the Omnipotent.
   The plot is imaginative and intriguing. After putting in
millennia of work taking people to the Other Side, Death feels
the need for a vacation on the very planet whose denizens
share monumental fear of his might.  When a handsome,
naive and friendly individual (Brad Pitt) is run over and killed
on a city street, he immediately borrows his body and
clothing--but not his casual manner--to see what mortal life is
all about.  Insinuating himself into the daily existence of one
of the nation's richest businessmen, William Parrish (Anthony
Hopkins), he counsels the man to put his affairs in order
because as Parrish celebrates his sixty-fifty birthday, he is
going to die.  They cut a deal.  If Parrish were to act as his
tour guide, escorting Joe Black (the name taken by Brad Pitt
in the role of Death) around, Black would extend the man's
time on earth by days, even weeks. Asserting himself at
Parrish's board meetings, he attracts resentment and
fascination alike from the people he meets, all wondering who
this newcomer is and how he has gained the ear of a hitherto
headstrong corporate chairman.  While Black enjoys the
vacation of his life--digging the benefits of the earth's gifts
from peanut butter to the love of Parrish's beautiful daughter
Susan (Clair Forlani), we in the audience cannot help
meditating on the joys of our own existence, pleasures which
make us understandably fearful of losing them at the end of
our journey.
   While this is not a movie to die for, it is immeasurably
better than the year's last bid at leaping from life's quotidian
subjects to the transcendent, "What Dreams May Come." 
Unlike that artistic flop, the dialog here is not dumbed down
but frequently witty, romantic, satiric and tender.  We feel for
Parrish, who is now required to give it all up while at the peak
of his career, surrounded by his loving family and ensconced
in an estate that would be the envy of Thomas Vinterberg's
Helge in "Celebration."  At the same time we take heart in the
man's acceptance of his premature demise, a titan of industry
who, faced with the need to leave the world a better place,
reverses a major business decision and refuses to sell out his
communications empire to a conglomerate determined to
dismember it.  Forlani proves a felicitous choice as a doctor
about to settle for a marriage to a handsome but greedy man
whom she cares for but for whom she does not feel passion,
while Jeffrey Tambor is right as the acquisitive man who is
neither melodramatically nor obviously evil.  Needless to say
the giant of the profession, Anthony Hopkins, provides the
deepest development of character, a man who counsels his
daughter to feel passion but learns the lesson himself only at
the end of his life.
   The weak link is found in Martin Brest's direction of Brad
Pitt, Hollywood's best-looking young actor, who is capable of
a seductive performance to match his dashing appearance as
he proves in the opening scene.  As Death, however, he is
appropriately dignified at first but despite his warming up to
the joys of mortal being, he remains pasteboard stiff and
awkwardly repressed.  In one scene with a dying West Indian
woman who is in a great deal of pain and asks Death to take
her to the Other Side, Pitt becomes positively embarrassing
in the patronizing tone he takes to this poor old lady,
speaking to her in her own native patois.  If you can imagine
the epitome of golden-haired WASPishness talking in the
lyrical lilt of a Jamaican, you can understand why some in the
audience give in to inappropriate laughter.
   Life must be lived with fervor, is the implication throughout
this epic drama.  Live as though this week were you last on
earth. Do you really want to sell out your integrity for those
extra pieces of silver--to form a romantic bond with a person
who does not make your heart skip a single beat or your
knees buckle?

Author
Steve Rhodes
Death, using the pseudonym of Joe Black and played with maximum charm by
Brad Pitt, has come to earth to collect another soul.  This time his
pickup is supposed to be the extremely wealthy and wonderful man named
William "Bill" Parrish, played with inviting sophistication by the great
Anthony Hopkins.
In MEET JOE BLACK, director Martin Brest's remake of DEATH TAKES A
HOLIDAY from 1934, the eminently likeable Death decides to take a
holiday.  Rather than scurrying back to heaven, he decides to stay
awhile on earth and see what it's like, so he expropriates Brad Pitt's
body for the purpose -- something just about everyone would like to do.
MEET JOE BLACK is an incredible movie that doesn't fit neatly into any
genre.  Certainly it is a wonderful romance -- think date movie of the
year, but it is much more that that.  At times it can be extremely
poignant, at other times it is wise, and it is always interlaced with
intelligent and delicious comedy.
One thing is certain, the casting is superb.  Brad Pitt, showing a gift
for subtle, physical comedy, delivers the best performance of his
career.  He deserves Oscar consideration although he will probably be
ignored since the role doesn't have the maudlin seriousness that the
Academy frequently prefers.
The camera loves Pitt.  With his golden blonde, perfectly unkempt hair,
his deep blue eyes, and his bewitching smile, he mesmerizes the
audience.  The distinguished Hopkins is equally handsome, albeit a few
decades older.
Cast opposite these two celestial stars is Claire Forlani as Susan
Parrish, Bill's younger and extremely attractive daughter.  Susan is a
young medical intern who falls head over heels in love with Joe -- who
wouldn't?
The story starts a few days before Bill's 65th birthday.  Bill's older
daughter Allison (Marcia Gay Harden) is busy spending her every waking
hour obsessing over her elaborate plans for Bill's big birthday party.
She is married to a self-proclaimed perennial loser named Quince, played
likeably by Jeffrey Tambor.
When death shows up in Pitt's body, Bill christens him Joe Black for
lack of a better name.  Joe makes a bargain with Bill. He will let Bill
live for a while longer if he can tag along with him everywhere and try
out those earthly delights he's always heard about.
Pitt plays the part as a spectacular cipher.  Like an alien from outer
space, Joe doesn't know how to comport himself.  When introduced to
Bill's family at dinner, he just stares at them and smells his food.
Eventually, in an excursion to the kitchen, Joe samples peanut butter
from a jar that the butler has open.  He becomes so infatuated with
this, his first taste experience, that he keeps asking for peanut
butter.  Much later, in Susan's arms, he will finally encounter an
experience that surpasses even peanut butter.
Joe, who thoroughly enjoys his time on our planet, sees life as a
wondrously funny adventure.
The story's main subplot has Susan's would-be husband, Drew (Jake
Weber), trying to merge Bill's company with another, a move Bill comes
to oppose.  In a board meeting, Drew mentions that something is "as
certain as death and taxes."  A slightly offended and perplexed Joe
muses, "Death and taxes?  That's an odd pairing."
Joe, who is clueless about most human endeavors, is given some cash by
Bill so he can get around town on his own.  "You know about money, don't
you?" Bill asks, not quite sure.  "You can't buy happiness?" Joe replies
with his usual big, innocent smile.
When Bill worries too much, Joe gets concerned since his time among the
living is limited by Bill's health.  "Easy Bill, you'll give yourself a
heart attack and ruin my vacation," Joe warns.
In film that sets a new standard for tranquility, thanks to the
director's methodical, dreamy pacing, its few tragedies are so striking
that your heart may miss a few beats.  Still, the overall feeling that
will probably remain with you is a completely contented and romantic
one.
Exquisitely filmed by Emmanuel Lubezki, the movie almost manages to make
its three-hour length unnoticeable.  In its last 45 minutes, the movie
starts to end several times but keeps not quite finishing.  When the
ending, which does take too long in coming, arrives, it is spectacular.
Like the rest of the film, it is funny, poignant, romantic and downright
perfect.  The last scene is even set to fireworks.
MEET JOE BLACK runs 2:57.  It is rated PG-13 for sexuality, death, and a
little profanity and would be fine for kids around 12 an up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Meet Joe Black (1998)
Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani, Jake Weber, Marcia Gay Harden,
 Jeffrey Tambor, David S. Howard, Lois Kelly-Miller. Screenplay by Ron 
Osborn, Jeff Reno, Kevin Wade, Bo Goldman, suggested by the play "Death 
Takes a Holiday," written by Alberto Casella and adapted by Walter Ferris,
 and the motion picture screenplay by Maxwell Anderson and Gladys Lehman. 
Directed by Martin Brest. 174 minutes
PG-13, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Hours after viewing the sweet reflective fantasy, "Meet Joe Black," my 
thoughts drifted to the TV series "Star Trek: The Next Generation," with 
which the film shares structural and thematic similarities. Like "ST:TNG,
" the production flips back and forth between its "A" and "B" storylines. 
If "Meet Joe Black" were an episode of "ST:TNG," the plot summary would 
read like this: Following an encounter with a mysterious alien, Captain 
Picard takes a hard look at his own mortality and begins to put his life 
affairs in order. Meanwhile, the android Data makes a concentrated effort 
to learn what it's really like to be human.
In many ways, "Meet Joe Black" plays like an exceptionally opulent, and 
extremely long, episode of "Star Trek: The Next Generation." Both 
entertaining works star distinguished British actors and convey a 
positive message in imaginative fashion. Both feature an idealized 
extended family and unusually literate dialogue. And both productions, 
while charming, are sometimes overly formal and a bit full of themselves. 
Based very loosely on the stodgy chestnut, "Death Takes a Holiday," "Meet 
Joe Black" introduces William Parrish (Anthony Hopkins), a media tycoon 
days away from his 65th birthday when he begins to hear a disembodied 
voice. Death (Brad Pitt) has come to collect Parrish, but the specter has 
a proposition. Having appropriated the body of a young stud muffin, Death 
wants to learn about the human experience and would like Parrish to be 
his guide. If the elderly man cooperates, his life will be extended; by 
days, maybe even weeks -- as long as it takes for Death to accomplish the 
goals of his field trip. Parrish agrees and introduces the omnipotent 
figure to the family as Joe Black ("If I say who you are," Parrish gently 
explains, "I don't think anyone will stay for dinner").
Joe becomes a constant in Parrish's life, to the consternation of his 
ambitious second-in-command, Drew (Jake Weber), and the confusion of 
Parrish's number one daughter, Susan (Claire Forlani). The young 
physician, romantically involved with Drew, had a brief, but memorable, 
encounter with the body Joe now inhabits, and finds herself drawn to this 
beautiful, otherworldly man.  
Like "Heaven Can Wait," another romantic fantasy dealing with life beyond 
death, "Meet Joe Black" features a business magnate making pronouncements 
that baffle his board of directors, while scheming underlings work 
against him. Anthony Hopkins is wonderful as William Parrish, creating a 
rich, warm gentleman of great compassion and dignity. Joe tells him "I 
chose you [as his guide] for your verve, your excellence and your ability 
to instruct. You've led a first-rate life." Thanks to Hopkins' great 
skills, you never for a moment question the wisdom of Joe's decision.
The film's best moments are quiet ones as Parrish prepares to leave this 
world. There is a moving exchange between him and daughter Allison 
(Marcia Gay Harden), who has spent weeks arranging an incredibly lavish 
birthday party for her father. She softly tells him that she understands 
that Susan is his favorite, and that's all right, because she knows how 
much her father loves her as well. Harden is excellent, but watch Hopkins 
during the conversation. He conveys more through minute facial 
expressions than most actors could do with elaborate speeches.
Brad Pitt receives equal time, but his is the less satisfying of the two 
storylines. The learning-what-it's-like-to-be-human tale has been told 
many times before, by everyone from Jeff Bridges in "Starman" to Brent 
Spiner in "Star Trek." Like those actors, Pitt adopts stiff mannerisms to 
convey the sense of an alien being mimicking human behavior. His 
performance is sincere, if at times too mannered and precious. Thankfully,
 he gets better as the film proceeds and his character grows more 
comfortable with his form. 
Pitt is prettier than any of the women in the cast and his impossibly 
good looks are sometimes distracting. I found myself wondering how, if 
Joe needed help fixing his tie, he was able to keep his hair looking oh-
so-perfect. Apparently, mousse is much easier to manage than neckties. 
There are inconsistencies in his language skills as well. Early in the 
film, Joe doesn't understand a number of ordinary words and phrases, but 
seems nicely versed in contemporary slang. 
Claire Forlani is fine as Susan. Her mannerisms and wispy inflection 
remind me of a young Dianne Wiest. Marcia Gay Harden is even better as 
Allison and the always-reliable Jeffrey Tambor gives a good performance 
as Quince, Allison's well-intentioned, bumbling husband. As Drew, Jake 
Weber is appropriately prickly, although it's hard to fathom why Parrish 
wouldn't recognize his obvious bad intentions. And Lois Kelly-Miller is 
stirring playing a gravely-ill Jamaican woman who recognizes Joe Black 
for what he really is.
Clocking in at just under three hours, "Meet Joe Black" is a little too 
leisurely. The film would have benefited from some edits during the mid-
section of the story, which sags a bit. To its credit, the production 
recovers nicely, building to a romantic climax at the birthday party to 
end all birthday parties, with a lavish fireworks display providing the 
backdrop for the film's final scenes. 
"Meet Joe Black" is the kind of film that initially feels profound, but 
on later reflection has less substance than its sumptuous presentation 
indicates. Still, the story provides a lot of reasoned, thoughtful 
moments, with Anthony Hopkins delivering the lion's share of the rewards. 
It was nice to meet Joe Black, but much more satisfying to meet William 
Parrish.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Martin Brest
Cast:  Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Clair Forlani, Jake Weber, Marcia Gay
Harden, Jeffrey Tambor
Screenplay:  Ron Osborn, Jeff Reno, Kevin Wade, Bo Goldman
Producers:  Martin Brest
Runtime:  180 min.
US Distribution:  Universal
Rated PG-13:  some violence and sexuality, brief strong language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
The most notable element of Meet Joe Black is its length.  Director
Martin Brest (Scent of a Woman) has made a long movie.  It's a real
problem when you're trying to make a moving, emotionally sweeping love
story, and the most prominent feature of your film is its three-hour
running time.  This film will challenge the endurance of your buttox; it
will also challenge your attention (audience members with ADD are warned
to stay far away from this picture).  Meet Joe Black is so long that it
makes me wonder if anything was left out:  it just might be the first
film ever to be released without being edited first.
Of course, I'm just joking.  But it is way too long.  As we were
walking out of the theater, my friend commented that it might take
twenty minutes to read the script out loud.  In fact, the characters
don't say very much at all; when they do speak, they speak very slowly,
and employ ten seconds of silence between every sentence.  The pacing in
Meet Joe Black is almost disastrous, especially in the last forty-five
minutes, during which the film ends roughly six times and concludes with
an inexplicable event and an overblown fireworks show.  
And yet, Meet Joe Black is an exceptional picture for the first hour. 
The main character is Bill Parrish (Anthony Hopkins), and aging tycoon
and father of two daughters, Susan (Clair Forlani) and Allison (Marcia
Gay Harden).  One night, he's confronted by Death (in the form of Brad
Pitt).  It's Bill's time to die, but Death would like to see the world
first.  So, Bill takes him to dinner with his family, introducing him as
Joe Black.  Susan, who recognizes Joe as a man she had met in a coffee
shop that morning, is confused by his presence.
Well, the subplots take off from there.  Susan is engaged to a man
named Drew (Jake Weber), an executive of Bill's communications company. 
We all know that he's a cold and boring guy, and that Susan doesn't
really love him.  What isn't necessary is the subplot that involves Drew
trying to get Bill fired (his reason for doing this is that he thinks
Joe is a consultant and that Bill is running the business through him). 
The focus of the story, however, is the love affair between Joe and
Susan, and what Bill does to keep it from happening.
The best thing in Meet Joe Black is Hopkins.  He's such a fine actor,
and brings class and dignity to every role he plays.  As Bill Parrish,
he adds a dimension that might not have been present in the script:  we
care about him, and we care about the relationships he has with his
daughters.  Even when the silly corporate takeover plot swings into full
gear, we care about Bill and the way he deals with his loss.  Meet Joe
Black would have been much less of a film without Hopkins, and since
it's already pretty messy, it's a good thing he's here to help.
But the other actors aren't lost.  Pitt has been widely criticized for
this role, but I enjoyed his work.  When he first appears as death, he
shows superb comic timing -- even his wooden execution of the dialogue
is appropriate.  Clair Forlani is quiet and somber, but so what?  Susan
is a quiet and somber character -- it doesn't make her any less
interesting.  Weber is one of the better slimeballs in recent history,
and backup performances from Marcia Gay Harden and Jeffry Tambor (as
Allison's husband) are both very nice.
Brest is a good director, and makes a few effective artistic choices. 
He's a big fan of the close-up, and it works in this picture -- it makes
the characters more personable.  I always got the feeling that Brest is
passionate about his story; he cares about his characters, and he wants
his film to be moving.  I wasn't always taken with the love story, but
it's effective on some levels -- the love scene, for instance, is
touching.  The first half of the film is also very funny -- the
fish-out-of-water stuff with Death in the real world is great fun.  But,
overall, less would have been more:  there are entire subplots that
could have been taken out (such as the corporate takeover), and this
would have helped the pacing immensely.
By the final hour, you might be wondering if the film will ever end. 
It does end -- in fact, it ends several times.  There are so many
revelations, so many scenes in which people say "good bye" to one
another, so many finales that are supposed to be big and important, that
the film really just seems bloated and unrestrained.  Brest should have
sliced at least an hour off of his movie; as it is, Meet Joe Black is an
interesting movie that starts off funny and ends up self-important.  A
good editing job -- and I mean *really* good -- is all it would have
taken to make Meet Joe Black a swift and wholly effective film.

Author
Thomas Skogestad
(Re-)view January 16, 1999 at Filmteatret, Oslo, Norway
http://www.filmweb.no/oslokino/
Directed by Martin Brest (Scent of a Woman, Midnight Run, Beverly
Hills Cop)
Written by Ron Osborn & Jeff Reno and Kevin Wade and Bo Goldman
Music by Thomas Newman (nominated for an Oscar for Little Women, The
Shawshank Redemption)
Cinematography by Emmanuel Lubezki (nominated for an Oscar for A
Little Oscar)
Production designer: Dante Ferretti (nominated for an Oscar for
Kundun, Interview with the Vampire, Age of Innocence, Hamlet, The
Adventures of Baron Munchausen -- and probably for this movie)
Expectation rating: About as expected. When I first heard of the film
I thought ŤThis sounds interesting!ť. But the reviews were lukewarm
and audience reception not that hot either (but much better than you'd
think after reading all these reports about a troubled Universal), but
when I got to a chance to see it for free I thought I'd give it a
chance.
MPAA rating: PG-13 for an accident scene (Brad Pitt used in a game of
car ping-pong), some sexuality (Claire Forlani and Death bonking,
about as sexual as Ally McBeal gets) and brief strong language
(several shits and hells, one f-word used in a non sexual context).
This Christmas I saw an episode of the Twilight Zone on the Sci-Fi
channel. It was called ŤOne for the Angelsť. In this episode a man i
visited by death, is told that his time has come, but is granted one
last wish, something the man for a very long time has wanted to do: he
wants to make a fabulous sales pitch, ŤOne for the Angelsť. As long as
the wish is unfulfilled he will live; of course this means that the
poor man will make another sales pitch again in his life. But Death is
cunning, and the man has to out-cun Death.
The Twilight Zone episode makes a point out of that Death is a
character, not just a fancy name. In Meet Joe Black Death is just a
character, like any other character. Death/Joe Black could just as well
have been an imposter blackmailing Bill Parrish, or perhaps he could
have been a long lost son, now threatening to reveal a secret, like in
the Danish movie The Celebration. The movie never really makes much
use of the fact that Joe Black is Death.
One evening Joe Black calls on Bill's door while his whole family is
gathered for dinner, he'll be 65 in a few days. In a matter of a few
minutes Bill accepts the fact that Death has arrived, but that Death
wants Bill to show him some earthly delights for a while. Bill accepts
this, just like that, almost no questions asked. Will gets to live as
long as Death is interested and intrigued by what he sees. When he has
seen enough, he will take Bill away from this world.
This doesn't take long. And no wonder, besides the fact that he has a
beautiful daughter to interest Death, Bill does nothing interesting. The
movie seems stuck in all the dull moments of Will's life. Board
meeting. Board meeting. Yet another dull board meeting. There's no
sense of exploration. Did Death know this and still choose to see what
humans are like? Why not choose someone else, someone who leads a more
adventurous life?
After meeting Death, Bill presents Joe to his family. Joe does not
recognize Susan, Bill's daughter, although "they" -- the person Death
has inhabited did -- flirted earlier that day in a restaurant.
Odd. So he doesn't know anything about the people he picks up and
their surroundings? What is his purpose? Does he work for God?
Doesn't God tell him anything? Or is a free-lancer, a bit of God work
here, a bit of Satan work there? He's an angel, isn't he? In ŤDer
Himmel über Berlinť and ŤCity of Angelsť they could read people's
minds, Death doesn't seem to able to so in this movie, or only when it
suits the script. Such as when he invades Bill's mind with "the
voice".
Susan is in love with Drew, an associate of Bill, or so she says. Bill
doubts this, because of what she does not say. She does not seem
passionate about Drew. And this is perhaps the movie's greatest fault:
not what it says, but what it doesn't say. The movie presented here
has an intriguing premise, but not much is done with it. Too much time
is spent on family dinners and corporate board room meetings.
The biggest problem with the movie is its length. It goes on and on
and never seems to end, to quote Roger Ebert: ŤThere are farewells,
reflections, confessions, reassurances, reconciliations, partings and
surprisesť. (And it takes about 1 hour 50 minutes before Claire
Forlani and Death do you-know-what.) The Twilight Zone episode was
under 30 minutes long, and was never dull. Meet Joe Black is a three
hour movie, but can only sustain two hours. Maybe be a cut TV or
airline version would be to prefer. But the movie is at times oddly
fun, such as when Death proclaims ŤDeath and taxes? What an odd
pairingť.
Bill never inquires into why and how he works; is there life after
death? In one scene involving a Jamaican woman (Pitt talks to her in
her own dialect, there's even a dialect coach listed in the credits --
there are also two editors listed, and they didn't seem capable of
editing much...) where Pitt tells her to close her eyes, and she
seems content(?) with what she sees. But that is all. The tag-line for
the movie is supposedly ŤNo one can die - while he loves!ť. So how
about showing that? Some comic interludes where the local newscast
reports about people jumping from the Brooklyn Bridge or something,
but not being able to die? (I believe that the inspiring movie, Death
Takes a Holiday, which I have not seen, tackles this subject.)
Later he tells a character that he cheated on an exam. How does he
know that? Was he only kidding? So he must be able to find out things
about the people with whom he interacts, otherwise he wouldn't have
picked up on the conversations between dad and daughter. Yet, he seems
very unenlightened on the subject of sex, but when he gets a taste of
it, he proclaims that it's better than peanut butter. 
What I liked most about the movie was the more technical aspects. I
liked looking at, especially the party at the end with all the lights
and all the people. (And in particular a scene with Forlani and Pitt
where they are surrounded by a whole bunch of guests, but ultimately
surrounded by each other -- which is all we see). The score is by
Thomas Newman, which I felt was fitting, but is the kind of music I
would go out and buy, and listen to it unaccompanied by a movie.  Also
fascinating is the fact that Bill's New York penthouse apartment, with
pool and all, was filmed on a New York sound-stage. That had to cost
money! (The absolute highlight, however, is Claire Forlani, and all
the wonderful dresses she wears.)
The trailers are not quite the spoiler fests they could have been,
perhaps because there's not much to spoil. However, they do contain
scenes from the very end of the movie.
ŤA Matter of Life and Deathť aka ŤStairway to Heavenť (1946) by
Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger.
Defending Your Lifeť (1991) By Albert Brooks.
Both are movies where a man must plead before a heavenly court, for
his life and the person he loves.
