Title
Review for Rocket Man (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Sanford
         Too bad Hollywood can't just find a way to clone Jim Carrey.
That would save the rest of us from the long line of Carrey wannabes
who've tried to get their own piece of the action.
  The latest pretender to Carrey's porcelain throne is Harland
Williams, who seems to fancy himself as a cross between Pee Wee Herman
and a geekier John Cusack, and the best that can be said about his
performance in ``RocketMan'' is that it's not consistently irritating,
just frequently irritating. With a better vehicle, who knows? He might
end up being just occasionally irritating.
  ``RocketMan'' could prove to be a real side-splitter for
little boys under the age of 12 or for their bigger brothers, provided
they have a blood-alcohol level of .12.
  No doubt the screenwriters used their best crayons to
scribble down this yarn about a doofus computer programmer named Fred
Randall (Williams) who, through a remarkably flimsy and inane set of
circumstances, winds up being picked to join an expedition heading to
Mars. The rest of the crew includes skeptical veteran astronaut Bill
Overbeck (William Sadler) and a chimpanzee named Ulysses who seems to
be onboard solely to complicate Fred's life and to react to his
oh-so-zany shenanigans, which include hanging his boxer shorts in
place of the American flag on the surface of Mars and coercing
everyone on Earth to join him in singing ``He's Got The Whole World In
His Hands.''
  Actually, Fred seems to burst into song quite regularly and
never quite tunefully. When he's not warbling a tune, you can rest
assured he's making a mess of the mission, accidentally serving
hemorrhoid cream for dinner and literally bouncing off the walls when
he's locked out of his ``hypersleep chamber.'' He also passes gas into
Bill's spacesuit in a scene that climaxes - like many of Fred's
foul-ups - with the lovable nerd squealing ``It wasn't me!''
  To be fair, there are a few bright bits in ``RocketMan,''
scattered through the story like a handful of diamonds at the garbage
dump. And the movie gains a wee bit of an edge for having the audacity
to cast Sadler as something other than a psychopathic killer. More
often than not the jokes fall flat, but director Stuart Gilland at
least manages to keep the film moving along.
  With this past summer's Mars mania, this would seem an
opportune time for another movie revolving around the space
program. But in the end, the only thing ``RocketMan'' has in common
with ``Contact'' is that they're both in color.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     If you've seen the trailers for Disney's ROCKET MAN that have been
bombarding the airwaves lately, you've probably reasoned with yourself
that the film cannot possibly be as bad as it looks.  Actually, it's
worse.
     Some movies are so stupid they are good -- the most recent example
being Disney's GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE.  ROCKET MAN, on the other hand,
starring Harland Williams as Pee Herman without the charm, remains
insufferably inane.  If Harland Williams possesses any comedic talent,
it is not in evidence in this lame farce.  Only his imitations of old
movie stars demonstrate any acting ability.
     Harland plays software nerd and would-be astronaut Fred Randall.
As the movie opens, Fred appears as a youngster spinning around in his
mother's dryer.  As he looks out the door's window, he imagines himself
on a mission in space.  (That this might encourage young kids to try
this at home is one of the show's many questionable decisions.)
     As an adult but decidedly not a grown-up, the wild-haired Fred
comes in to help NASA find the problems in the software he designed for
the first manned mission to Mars.  "A glitch?" he says when confronted
with possible bugs in his code.  "That's not possible.  I programmed it
myself."
     Not long after he arrives at the astronaut training center, he is
asked to go on the flight to Mars.  During his training, he manages to
set endurance records for physical strength, all the while almost
killing others with his slapstick klutziness.
     The male astronauts invite Harland over for drinks and get him so
drunk that he does embarrassing things -- although no more so than in
the rest of the story.  The only female astronaut, Julie Ford (Jessica
Lundy), comes over to rescue him.  "I think someone drunk like this is
wrong," she tells her male coworkers.  Again, in a film whose target
audience is young kids, this whole sequence is wrong.
     To be fair, the script by Greg Erb and Craig Mazin would have been
unwatchable with just about any actor playing the lead.  The constant
sight gags include people slipping on vomit, flatulence in a space
suit, snot-encrusted space helmets, and the ubiquitous falling down
routines.
     The one joke that did hit home was Harland's training session on a
gyro-like simulator.  ("Sweet, swirling, onion rings!")  Having passed
on this simulator when my son and I went to space camp last year, I
knew just how he felt.
     "I'm 30-years-old," Harland tells us.  "I'm almost a grown man."
Almost.
     ROCKET MAN runs 1:32, but feels longer.  The show is rated PG for
some of its questionable humor.  The show is targeted at kids under 10,
but consider my warnings about the appropriateness of some of the
scenes.  My son Jeffrey, age 8, said he thought the picture was "really
good," but went on to complain that the film was "a little too stupid
at times."  I hated the movie and can barely give it a single star.  Oh
yes, there is an epilogue at the end of the credits for those of you
who cannot get enough of ROCKET MAN.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
The catch phrase for Disney's ROCKET MAN is one spoken by Fred Z. Randall
(Harland Williams), the bumbling idiot computer programmer turned astronaut
who continuously wreaks havoc everywhere he goes. "It wasn't me!" he proclaims
over and over as the aftermath of his stupidity brings about looks of disgust
from the others. Well when it comes to this movie being as horrible as it is,
Williams can't take all the blame, but he sure can't justify himself with his
own simple tag line either.
Fred has dreamed of space travel since he was a young boy, turning the clothes
dryer into a mock space shuttle and staring out wide-eyed at a poster of the
Earth. As a 30-year-old, Fred hasn't grown up much, but at least he's somewhat
closer to his goal, now designing astronaut software for NASA. When an
astronaut for an upcoming mission to Mars becomes injured, NASA calls on the
person who knows the programming inside and out to fill the void. . . Fred.
Yes, although he's an obviously klutzy moron, NASA doesn't think twice about
throwing him into a rigorous training program so he can assist one of the most
important events the space program, and time itself, has ever known.
For the first part of the film, we watch as Fred takes on the training program
much like an amusement park. He laughs, he screams, but he never once breaks a
sweat or views the preparation as anything more than child's play. His passive
approach to the program eventually leads to many record-breaking feats, much
to the dismay of cocky counterpart, Mission Commander Captain Overbeck
(William Sadler), who once held the records. Overbeck will regretfully
accompany Fred and two others to the red planet, one being astronaut Julie
Ford (THE STUPIDS' Jessica Lundy), and the other being a chimpanzee who is
much more civilized than our antagonizing protagonist. From here on out, we
are subjected to one lame gag after another, dealing with snot, laxatives, and
flatulence. You know, standard kid movie material.
Almost sounding like a poor James Stewart impressionist, Williams is awful in
his first starring role. We get the feeling that if Jerry Lewis and Pee-Wee
Herman were related and produced an inbred offspring, Williams would be it.
While he's not as annoying as other actors who cater to zany, stupid comedy,
he's just as unlikeable. To say it more understandably, Jim Carrey might annoy
you more, but this guy is even less funny. Why? Because while he possesses the
stupidness needed to pull off such a role, his performance is too understated
and boring. Classic comedic dunces were generally oblivious to their own
idiocy. Stan Laurel, for example, was so innocent in all his trouble-making
that we were immediately fond of him. Peter Sellers, as Inspector Clouseau,
was so self-assured and confident that when he did something as simple as
trip, it was humor at it's best. Williams, on the other hand, can't garner the
pity he needs to make us love him in all his anti-glory.
As for the rest of the cast, including some bigger names in smaller roles
(Beau Bridges and Shelley Duvall), nobody is worth watching whatsoever. This
is just another example of the fast-food equivalent of cinema: mass-produced,
less than mediocre, over priced, and hard to stomach. Giving it one-and-a-half
stars is *extremely* generous, but even I'll admit to laughing a few times.
The amazing thing is that even in a theater packed with little kids, laughter
was something rarely heard - even from the children! I must admit that it gave
me more respect for the kids when they didn't crack up over every little
thing. Then again, maybe they were asleep.
Some people might think critics are harsh on kid movies, claiming adults
aren't the targeted audience and therefore aren't meant to, and won't, enjoy
them. Sadly, it's also true that kids will enjoy almost anything if it's
presented right. A two-hour still shot of a dog with a cartoonish voice over
could entertain a lot of toddlers out there, but would that make it as
artistic as BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, which could easily do the same thing? And
saying that a parent's perspective isn't important is quite a poor theory to
have when they're the ones who take the kids to these films in the first
place.

Author
Chad Polenz
1997, PG, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
starring: Harland Williams (Fred Randal), William Sadler (Cpt. Overbeck),
Jessica Lundy (Julie Ford), Beau Bridges (Bud Nesbitt); written by Oren Aviv,
Craig Mazin, Greg Erb; produced by Eric L. Gold; directed by Stuart Gillard.
Seen Monday, October 27 @ 6:50 p.m. at the Glenwood Movie Plex Cinemas in
Oneida, NY by myself for free (free pass) (theather rating: **)
        As bizarre as this may sound, it takes a lot of intelligence to make
stupidity seem funny. Back in the 1980s Pee Wee Herman proved this as he
didn't just rely on gags to make jokes, he created an original, detailed
atmosphere in which the gags fit in perfectly. Unfortunately, the same is not
true of  "Rocket Man," a supposedly lighthearted, zany comedy which fails
because it's actually not stupid enough.
        The key to making a good comedy about stupidity is to first define
a setting
in which the ridiculous and the absurd is only slightly different from
everything else. This film starts off on the wrong foot by giving us a
seemingly normal reality but introduces us to a character who is both stupid
and smart at the same time.
        We meet Fred Randal (Williams), an idiot manchild who works for NASA and
programmed the computers that will be used on the first manned mission to
Mars. Fred is 30 years old, but often acts as if he's 10. Right from the
get-go it's hard to believe he could act the way he does (and work where he
does) without anyone noticing how immature he is. All the other characters
are played straight, but there's no wit or satire, so the "idiot in the real
world" shtick doesn't work. When Fred does his elaborate impersonations and
many Jim Carrey-esque slapstick routines, it's not that funny because there's
absolutely no reaction within the film.
        At least the movie doesn't waste any time in getting to the point.
When one
of the astronauts slated for the Mars mission can't make it, Fred is selected
to go in his place since he knows how the mission's computers work. Of course
all of this is explained with complete logic which only enhances the overall
lameness.
        Most of the first act depicts Fred's space training and consists of one
generic sight gag after another. The majority of them aren't funny because
they're cartoony and just plain dumb. There's Fred holding his breath for
three minutes and kicking the other guy in the groin, there's Fred throwing a
monkey around the room and making monkey noises, there's Fred's face turning
to rubber on the G-force simulators.... the list goes on.
        Eventually the mission to Mars is a go and Fred finds himself on a space
shuttle with the arrogant Captain Overpeck (Sadler), and the sweet Julie Ford
(Lundy) - the pretty woman who despises Fred at first but will eventually
come to like him. There's also Beau Bridges as Bud Nesbitt, a mission
controller who botched the Apollo 13 mission, but forms a subtle friendship
with Fred. How many times have these formulas been used before? It's not even
worth holding cliches like these  against the film because there's so many of
them. It's like trying to scrape rust off a car made up almost entirely of
rust.
        This film is a comedy, which means it's meant to make you laugh. So
does it
at least succeed in this respect? There are a few funny gags here and there,
but overall the film has a very low batting average. I'd say about one out of
every 10 or 15 jokes actually works. And what's most annoying is that all the
jokes are the same - sight gags, farting noises, moronic slapstick, and every
two minutes hearing Fred say, "It wasn't me" (which seems like a rip-off of
Bart Simpson's "I didn't do it"). In other words, the comedy is lowbrow,
repetitive, and not very taxing on the brain.
        The last act is just another generic attempt at some kind of
seriousness and
suspense, but since this is a comedy you know what will happen due to the
blatant foreshadowing at the film's beginning.
        Even if "Rocket Man" is seen as the innocent screwball comedy it
intends to
be, the fact remains it's not clever enough to use the stupidity to its
advantage.


Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Harland Williams, Jessica Lundy, William Sadler, Jeffrey DeMunn, 
      Beau Bridges, Peter Onorati
Director: Stuart Gillard
Producers: Eric L. Gold
Screenplay: Greg Erb and Craig Mazin
Cinematography: Steven Poster
Music: Michael Tavera
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     What do you get if you cross Pauly Shore, Adam Sandler, and PeeWee 
Herman?  The answer is Harland Williams, one of the most annoying 
"comic" actors to arrive on the scene since Jim Carrey.  And, since 
Williams is in almost every scene of Walt Disney's newest travesty, 
ROCKETMAN, it makes the thinly-written film that much harder to take.  
Sad to say, but the enjoyable-yet-anemic GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE remains 
the Mouse's best live action offering of the year, and this cinematic 
scrap doesn't come close.
     Williams plays astronaut Fred Randall, the most inept candidate 
ever to undergo NASA training.  And he isn't targeted for just any 
mission:  he's about to become one quarter of the four-member team 
scheduled to make the first manned flight to Mars.  His fellow space 
travelers include two shuttle veterans, Mission Commander Overbeck 
(William Sadler) and Julie Ford (Jessica Lundy), and a chimpanzee named 
Ulysses (who is actually more appealing and charismatic than any of the 
human stars).  Randall is only on the team because of his intimate 
knowledge of the landing pod guidance system (he designed the software).  
Without him, the mission would be delayed at least two years, and the 
ambitious flight director (Jeffrey DeMunn) isn't willing to wait that 
long.  So, ready or not, Randall becomes the first moron in space.
     ROCKETMAN's attempts at humor are predictably juvenile, consisting 
mainly of the usual PG-rated cartoonish slapstick and mild flatulence.  
One of the "high" points comes when Randall, wandering around on the 
surface of Mars in a space suit, has a sudden gas attack.  His suit 
balloons up until he looks like the Michelin Man, and Overbeck, who's 
using the same oxygen supply, nearly dies from the odor.  If that's your 
brand of humor, you probably won't find ROCKETMAN as unfunny as I did.
     There are a few positive things I can say about this film 
(although, admittedly, it's a stretch).  ROCKETMAN features the most 
unique exclamation found in any movie this year:  "Sweet Alaskan 
Asparagus Tips!"  There's also a surprisingly subtle bit of humor 
involving a BBC reporter who's too polite to be noticed at a press 
conference.  On the acting front, although no one really stands out, 
Jessica Lundy is pleasant enough and William Sadler avoids chewing on 
the scenery.  Beau Bridges does his best not to look embarrassed.  And, 
despite the predictability of his antics, the chimp is pretty good.
     In the end, there's not much to say about ROCKETMAN.  Distilled to 
its basic essence, it's stale, lame, and utterly predictable -- and 
those are its good qualities.  (Note: predictability can be okay if the 
movie is entertaining, which this isn't.)  When it comes to scientific 
accuracy, this film isn't going to challenge CONTACT, or even 
INDEPENDENCE DAY, for that matter.  The special effects are of the K-
Mart variety.  (The surface of Mars looked a lot more impressive in 
TOTAL RECALL.)  Essentially, the movie follows the basic plot-by-numbers 
scripting technique that forms the basis of most Disney-generated 
productions, only this time, instead of getting an appealing actor like 
Sinbad for the lead, they've chosen the irritating Williams.  Younger 
kids may actually like ROCKETMAN, but that's not a big surprise.  Disney 
knows the target audience for this sort of offering:  unsophisticated, 
undiscriminating, willing to laugh at almost anything, and fond of 
chimps.  While that's not a group profile to envy, this picture will 
probably still make a profit.  
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."
