Title
Review for Children of the Night (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:32, R, Horror, 1992
Director: Tony Randel
Cast: Karen Black, Ami Dolenz, Peter DeLuise, Evan MacKenzie,
      Maya McLaughlin, Josette DiCarlo, David Sawyer, Garrett Morris
     Ami Dolenz and her friend Maya McLaughlin go to a flooded crypt in
an abandoned church to go swimming.  Dolenz loses ha cross necklace.
The cross falls to the bottom of the flooded crypt and awakens a vampire
that hasn't been taking care of it's complexion.  The vampire takes care
of McLaughlin but Dolenz escapes.  Dolenz and Peter DeLuise, a school
teacher who was going to become a man of the cloth, are the only people
who can stop the vampire.
     CHILDREN OF THE NIGHT (1992 version, not to be confused with the
1985 television film) was just recently released on video cassette.
This film might be worth renting if you like comedies and find it for a
cheap enough rate.  On a scale of zero to five, I give CHILDREN OF THE
NIGHT a one (if viewed as a horror film) or a three (if viewed as a
comedy).  CHILDREN OF THE NIGHT is rated R for explicit language, adult
situations, and violence.
     This film reminds me very much of Stephen King's film SLEEPWALKERS,
not in subject, but in how the film turns out.  This film is supposed to
be a horror film, but anyone viewing the film with that in mind will be
sorely disappointed.  If this film is viewed as a comedy, I think that
it will be enjoyed much more.  If viewed as a spoof of vampire films,
CHILDREN OF THE NIGHT isn't bad, however, it is not as good as BUFFY THE
VAMPIRE SLAYER.
     Out of the cast, Garrett Morris (CAR WASH, EARTH ANGEL, CRITICAL
CONDITION) is definitely the best.  He has most of the comic lines that
were supposed to be comical.  Morris, the former "Saturday Night Live"
cast member, once again proves his comic greatness.  Karen Black (AUNTIE
LEE'S MEAT PIES, ZAPPED AGAIN!)  is definitely the worst.  I have never
liked Karen Black's acting and this film has done nothing to improve my
opinion of her.  Peter DeLuise (FREE RIDE) is not bad in his role, but
he could be better.  Ami Dolenz (SHE'S OUT OF CONTROL, MIRACLE BEACH)
usually does a great job in comedies.  However, in this film she looks
completely out of place.  She ends up being the "typical horror movie
bimbo".
     This film is not very well written, which is rather obvious
considering the film was supposed to be a horror film and it ended up
being a comedy.  Some of the cast has completely moronic lines,
especially Karen Black.  All Ami Dolenz character seems to be written to
do is to stand around and scream.  On the other hand, the special
effects are great.
