Title
Review for Zeros, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
A wry and independent black comedy, The Zeros turns the road trip inside
out with a funny -- yet ultimately bleak -- look at a young man facing
impending death in a not-so-distant dystopia.
Mackenzie Astin (The Last Days of Disco) stars as Joe, who is told by
his rather flippant doctor he has a matter of days or weeks to live.  A
despondent Joe throws caution to the wind and figures he'll go on a
cross-country trip of self-discovery, ostensibly in search of his
childhood friend Joyce (Jennifer Morrison).
Rest assured that the charm of The Zeros isn't ferreted away in my
pathetic attempt at a plot description.  Rather, as the saying goes, the
fun is in getting there.  Joe's trip takes him to a nursing home, a
roadside cult, a circus, a Texas millionaire's personal playground, and
most outrageously, a karaoke-strip-club-roller-disco.  Sure, there's not
much sense of direction in all of this, but it's an awfully good time.
Writer/director John Ryman fills the film was clever touches of black
and devilishly funny comedy -- from the millionaire's habit of blowing
up cows for sport to a friend he meets who wears an eye patch because it
makes "the ladies" feel sorry for him.  His sick and too-near future is
also cleverly created from modern day trappings given a sadistic twist. 
It's just too bad the narrative that holds these outrageous moments and
settings together is so wafer thin (and ultimately bogs down the last
act of the film with too many saccharine histrionics).  Still, while The
Zeros peters out in its dying breaths, it's a worthwhile picture in an
era of lackluster independent film.
Shot on Super 16 and premiering at the 2001 SXSW film festival, Ryman's
film shows great professionalism in its production, from the
cinematography to the acting, ultimately belying its low budget
reality.  The sound design is unfortunately off, but it doesn't detract
too much from the wackiness before your eyes.  And I mean that in a good
way.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
