Title
Review for 8 Heads in a Duffel Bag (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Walter Frith
Comments on this review may also be sent via email to wfrith@icom.ca
Joe Pesci won the Academy Award as Best Supporting Actor in 1990 for his no
holds barred portrayal of a mobster with a sense of humour in 'Goodfellas'.
 Pesci's other film credits such as 'Home Alone' (1990), 'Home Alone 2: Lost
in New York' (1992), 'JFK' (1991), 'Lethal Weapon 2' (1989), 'Lethal Weapon
3' (1992) and as far back as 'Raging Bull' (1980) distinguish him as a unique
and inventive actor.  '8 Heads in a Duffel Bag' is a deliciously wacked-out
and ingenious dark comedy complete with all of Pesci's trademark wiseguy
antics.  
Pesci plays a New Jersey mobster whose job requires him to deliver the heads
of eight men murdered by the organization he works for to a crime boss in San
Diego.  Pesci transports them in a duffel bag aboard a commercial airline and
encounters a medical student (Andy Comeau in a very impressive film debut) on
his spring break who has an identical bag.  Naturally, the bags get switched
at luggage pick up in San Diego and the rest you can figure out for yourself.
 Comeau meets his girlfriend (Kristy Swanson) at the airport and she
introduces him to her parents (George Hamilton and Dyan Cannon) and the four
of them leave for a vacation in Mexico.
Your enjoyment of '8 Heads in a Duffel Bag' will depend on how strong your
tolerance to black comedy is as the film leaves no stone unturned in its
pursuit of laughs and delivers on many levels.  There are plot holes in the
script by writer/director Tom Schulman (Oscar winner for Best Original
Screenplay in 1989 for 'Dead Poet's Society') but they are covered up by good
pacing and a frenzied climax.  The film borders on extreme silliness from
time to time but contains all the right tempo and build up to a satisfying
and hilarious conclusion.
Surprisingly, Pesci, as good as he is, takes a back seat in this film as
Comeau is the film's protagonist and David Spade from SNL and the two
disasters 'Tommy Boy' and 'Black Sheep' and who stars as Comeau's college
room mate who gets caught up in the insane antics of this story, provides
some great one liners.  Spade steals the show from Pesci in many scenes.  One
classic scene is worth the price of admission alone as Pesci has a nightmare
about the heads doing a little musical number.  Is '8 Heads in a Duffel Bag'
bizarre?  Of course.  Original?  Definitely.  Worth seeing?  Yes but don't
blink or this film may cause you laughing pains you won't be able to get rid
of anytime soon.  

Author
Edwin Jahiel
8 HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG  3/4  *  Written and directed by Tom Schulman.
Photography, Adam Holender. Editing, David Holden. Production design, Paul
Peters. Music, Andrew Gross.Cast: Joe Pesci (Tommy Spinelli), Andy Comeau
(Charlie), Kristy Swanson (Laurie Bennett), Todd Louiso (Steve), George
Hamilton (Dick Bennett), Dyan Cannon (Annette Bennett) and David Spade
(Ernie). released by Orion Pictures and Rank Film. 90 minutes. Rated R (for
ridiculousness, risible violence, raunchy language)
No, this is not black humor. El Mariachi is black humor. Fargo is black
humor. Grosse Pointe Blank is black humor. But 8 Heads is not black
humor.What is it then?
It's a mess. It's a cheap attempt at getting laughs. Mobster Tommy Spinelli
(Joe Pesci) carries from New Jersey to California what the title of the
film says (they all belong to hoodlums) for delivery to a Big Boss as proof
of assignment accomplished by
Tommy's middle echelon boss.
At San Diego's airport carousel,  two identical bags are accidentally
switched. The heads-duffel goes to Charlie (Comeau). He is a med student
who makes you pray that if he ever graduates you'll be better off seeing
your friendly veterinarian than Doctor Charlie.
Charlie is visiting his long time no see girl-friend Laurie (Swanson) who
has decided to dump him. He doesn't know this yet, and while he thinks he
was invited by her family, he was not. Anyway, her folks (Hamilton and
Cannon) drive everyone down to a resort hotel in Mexico.
That's where Mom, a recovering alky,is the first to peek into the bag and
go into hysterics. Charlie, then Laurie are next. Tommy in the meantime,
trying to track down Charlie, ends up with the student's roommates who seem
to be the only other living creatures on campus.
I will now spare you the details and spare myself thinking about them. Not
that some bits are not funny, but they are submerged in repetitions,
stupidities, improbabilities, plot holes, and anything else you care to
name. The performers are totally undeveloped, bad, and exaggerate badly
while accomplishing the feat of being characterless at the same time.
Pesci overdoes to death his irascibility, aggressivity, violence,
telephone-busting, sadism and other such virtues. The eight heads are
increased by more of them, courtesy of the Med School's stash of frozen
corpses.
Some mileage is gotten out of a few scenes or sequences. Like the setups
between Pesci and the roommates -- one "sensitive," the other cynical --
that might approach amusing absurdism. Sadly, the film does not know the
meaning of subtlety or wit and does not know when to stop milking the same
cow.
Annoyingly, there is a running motif of ridiculing  Mexicans and another of
including caricatures of contemporary "bandidos."  In one development,
George Hamilton's new car is stolen by local highwaymen, painted red,
rented by Charlie, re-stolen by the same gang, and...
Feeble puns are made with "head," such as losing it, go ahead, head out,
head on, etc. A wonder they didn't think that in Italian the Mafia bosses
are Capo or, in the plural, Capi.
The severed heads are extremely life-like. In  a potentially funny
nightmare of Pesci's, they come to life and sing to him "Mr. Sandman." This
comes too late to salvage things.  Incoherence, monotony and overkill, well
entrenched by now, will go on also in what's ahead.
Since many of us have had our luggage switched for a look-alike, the
movie's one positive side is a reminder to mark your bags in distinctive
ways. That's worth half-a-star.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Joe Pesci, Andy Comeau, George Hamilton, Dyan Cannon, 
      Kristy Swanson, David Spade, Todd Louiso 
Director: Tom Schulman 
Producers: Brad Krevoy, Steve Stabler, John Bertolli 
Screenplay: Tom Schulman 
Cinematography: Adam Holender 
Music: Andrew Gross 
U.S. Distributor: Orion Pictures 
     8 HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG definitely isn't for everyone.  But if you 
have a twisted sense of humor and can see the comedy in films like 
WEEKEND AT BERNIE'S, this movie is right up your alley.  For my part, 
while I wasn't overly impressed by significant chunks of the movie, 
there were times when I was nearly doubled over with laughter.  8 HEADS 
IN A DUFFEL BAG works very much like a series of skits cobbled together 
into a movie -- some of them work, some don't.  When they fail, they're 
painful to watch.  But when they succeed, they can be hilarious.   
     Not surprisingly, the most interesting performer in the film is 
lead actor Joe Pesci.  In the midst of all the madcap zaniness, Pesci 
plays his role mostly straight -- a weary hitman who just wants to 
complete one last job so he can retire.  Some of 8 HEADS' best moments 
come as a result of Pesci's even-handed approach to the material.  In 
fact, the movie's comic momentum has a tendency to flag whenever he's 
off-screen for more than a few minutes. 
     Pesci's Tommy Spinelli is charged by mob boss Big Sep (Howard 
George) to transport the heads of eight dead men from New Jersey to San 
Diego.  Tommy's trouble starts on the airplane, when he's forced to 
check his bag because it's too large to be carried on.  Then, in 
California, there's a mix-up between his luggage and that of college 
student Charlie Pritchett (Andy Comeau), who's on the West Coast to 
vacation with his girlfriend (Kristy Swanson) and her parents (George 
Hamilton and Dyan Cannon).  Charlie ends up with Tommy's eight heads and 
Tommy gets a bag full of clothes.  What follows is a series of offbeat 
misadventures as Tommy attempts to retrieve his duffel bag while Charlie 
tries to get rid of it. 
     A lot of the humor in 8 HEADS is expectedly lowbrow and grotesque, 
but there are some truly inspired moments.  In a scene that recalls the 
work of the late English director Dennis Potter (PENNIES FROM HEAVEN, 
THE SINGING DETECTIVE), the heads starting singing "Mr. Sandman" while 
their decapitated bodies dance around.  Tommy also has a solution for a 
foul-mouthed old lady (Ernestine Mercer) that may remind a few people of 
THROW MAMA FROM THE TRAIN.  Writer/first-time director Tom Schulman 
(who, curiously enough, penned DEAD POETS' SOCIETY) clearly knows how to 
use macabre circumstances to get a laugh, although by the last reel he 
has become repetitive.  
     While this is ultimately Pesci's film, there is a fairly sizable 
supporting cast.  Newcomer Andy Comeau does a nice job making Charlie 
seem both likable and inept.  George Hamilton, Dyan Cannon, and Kristy 
Swanson all have their moments, but, in general, their work here is 
largely forgettable.  Todd Louiso and the ever-irritating David Spade 
have roles as a pair of college students whom Tommy kidnaps and tortures 
to learn Charlie's whereabouts.  While Louiso's interaction with the 
heads is worth at least a chuckle, Spade is constantly more annoying 
than funny.   
     8 HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG offers humor of the most irreverent, and 
sometimes downright disgusting, sort.  As a result, it belongs in the 
same group as films like THE MONSTER and CEMETERY MAN, neither of which 
could be described as examples of sophisticated taste.  And, while this 
particular entry is not really a "good" film in the traditional sense, 
it's hard to make it all the way through without laughing your head off 
at least once. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Martyn C Winkler
        The directorial debut of screenwriter Tom Schulman can best be
described as a dark, wacky comedy; a movie reminiscent of 'nouvelle
violence' (think of PULP FICTION), filmed shamelessly in the style of a
farcical sitcom. Schulman is probably most known for his Academy Award
winning screenplay for DEAD POETS SOCIETY, but is also responsible for
writing films ranging from HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS to MEDICINE MAN. For
somebody who has been in the movie business for several years already,
Schulman is refreshingly energetic and original as a first-time director
of his own screenplay.
        The cast of 8 HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG consists of actors fitting the
nouvelle violence theme (Joe Pesci, for example, in a terrific pastiche of
his usual type-cast performances), as well as the sitcom style (David
Spade, now starring in 'Just Shoot Me'; and the
ever-so-familiar-face-but-nobody-remembers-his-name George Hamilton, from
such TV-shows as 'Dynasty'). This mix of opposite worlds is a potentially
unstable one, but Schulman manages to keep it together and delivers a
highly enjoyable and at times even hilarious film.
        The plot is as ridiculous as it is inevitable. Hit man/thug Tommy
(Joe Pesci) is assigned to deliver the heads of eight dead mobsters to the
Mafia-king who ordered their deaths. He neatly wraps up the heads in
plastic bags, places them in, yes, a duffel bag and takes the next
commercial flight to San Diego. On the plane he meets Charlie Pritchett
(Andy Comeau), a flaky student from Baltimore. Charlie is on his way to
Mexico, where he plans to spend the week with his girlfriend (Kristy
Swanson) and her parents (George Hamilton and Dyan Cannon). It is not very
surprising that Charlie turns out to have a similar duffel bag and that
the two accidentally switch luggage at the airport, but hey, we'll forgive
'm. The switch is the start of Tommy's attempts to retrieve his heads and
of Charlie's adventures in coping with the discoveries of the lost heads
throughout the Mexican hotel. Wild chases ensue, not to mention
unspeakable acts with cryogenically frozen bodies, or rather...their
heads.
        Please give the film the benefit of the doubt, though. It is much
more intelligent than it sounds, greatly due to the fact that it
acknowledges its farcical and contrived situations. It parodies those
situations as much as it shamelessly exploits them for what they are:
shallow and mostly physical humor. Take for example the scene where
Charlie is trying to take one of the lost heads out of a washing machine,
hindered by a blind (!) Mexican cleaning lady. It does not often happen
that you can feel free to laugh aloud in the cinema, without guilt, at an
obviously predictable and unbelievable scene. Again, this is greatly to
the credit of the witty screenplay, as well as the light-hearted
direction. Large portions of the film have been shot on studio sets, which
inadvertently recreate the feeling of television shows, or even the
(comic) theater. Furthermore, Schulman mainly uses wipes, from left to
right or vice versa, for the cuts between scenes. Normally this is a no-no
in modern day cinema, but the wipes give 8 HEADS... a traditional and
easy-going television-look.
        On top of this farcical foundation, the film sporadically jabs at
the viewer with darkly satirical moments. Only in a film like 8 HEADS...
can an audience burst out in uncontrollable laughter when a thug throws a
grandmother off a cliff...from a moving van. And adding to his obvious
homage to traditional television (where nobody is killed on screen),
Schulman reintroduces the grandmother at the final credits, suffering only
from a broken arm and some bruises.
        The acting is highly typecast and stereotypical. We have the flaky
good-hearted student who turns out to be smart after all, his enchanting
girlfriend who grows to love him even more, the stuck up father who still
calls his mother every day, his alcoholic wife and not to forget the
explosively violent Italian gangsters. However, the characters created and
actors cast are purposely flat and unrealistic. They are a satirical
reference to the GOODFELLAS and 'Friends' we have grown to know over the
years and help to create the surreal setting of the film. They are
essential in making the viewer accept the incredibility of it all.
        Now, I must admit the film has its weak moments. Certain built-up
scenes, screaming almost for a humorous resolution, are left dangling.
Characters are introduced, then later ignored. And the 'grand finale' has
promising potential, but is eventually disappointing. However, 8 HEADS IN
A DUFFEL BAG easily makes up for those flaws in its off-beat and highly
original concept.
        8 HEADS is essentially a tribute to the golden age of
television. It inserts stylistic elements of that medium into a twisted
version of the modern gangster genre of American cinema. Thus, Schulman
has created a surprising, intriguing and -heck, I can say it!- funny
movie. It hardly ever happens that a film makes fun of...well...itself!
---------------------------------

Author
Perry Mercer
EIGHT HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG *1/2
starring: Joe Pesci, Andy Comeau, Kristy Swanson, David Spade, George 
Hamilton, Dyan Cannon
directed by: Tom Schulman
If the filmmakers thought that the film's title "EIGHT HEADS IN A DUFFLE
BAG" was a catchy and cute one, then give them points for being
distinctive. However, if you want to reward them for the premise and
value of this same movie, give them 3-D points: distasteful, decadent, 
and dumb. Instead of calling this awful film EIGHT HEADS IN A DUFFLE
BAG, how about renaming it appropriately "EIGHT BRAINLESS HEADS WHO
WROTE A MOVIE SCRIPT THAT NEEDS TO BE BURIED IN A BARF BAG". This newest
offbeat flick tries its best to be dark and comedic but ends up daub and
corruptibly contrived.
   Just as one would expect to see sunshine when the sun rises, Joe
Pesci yet again plays his redundant role as a feisty New York mob hitman
out to deliver a bag of "cut up craniums" of former wiseguys to Los
Angeles. When the hacked-up-hitmen-heads are taken by mistake from an
unknowing medical student (newcomer Andy Comeau), Pesci's frustrated
hitman character Tommy Spinelli must follow him to Mexico and retrieve
that decomposed duffle bag. Of course we follow our peculiar
protagonists to Mexico where our poor med student Charlie must meet and
greet the parents of his 
girlfriend Laurie (Kristy Swanson).  As if the movie characters and
situations are not preposterous enough,  Kristy's mother is an alcoholic
who jumps off the wagon after inadvertently seeing the heads in
Charlie's duffle bag. And her father (George
Hamilton) is an overbearing baffoon. And how convenient that the film
ships all this farce-driven excitement to Mexico where we can see yet
another barrage of Mexican 
stereotypes amongst the zaniness of these American airheads.
   EIGHT HEADS IN A DUFFLE BAG wants to be exceedingly irreverent and
naughty with its forced taboo comedy of hitmen, high jinx, and
haplessness. Unfortunately, all this film does is to remind us how
irascible one can get watching all this moronic mayhem. Writer-director
Tom Schulman has done amusing work before with funny material such as
his previous film "WHAT ABOUT BOB?". However, in EIGHT HEADS IN A
DUFFLE BAG, he overdoes his outrageousness in this film with lame and
insipid results. "HEADS" is Schulman's directing debut I must point out.
Let's hope that Schulman has better luck in the future trying to
overcome this atrocity. If you're 
going to do a dark comedy about body parts and kooky characters, make
sure your premise is fresh and unpredictable. Having Pesci do his
"gangster" goon bit for the umteenth time in the movies not to mention
featuring that smug-looking, smartalecky David Spade with his Saturday
Night Live sarcasm routine does not instill any confidence in a film
that's supposed to be unsuspecting and viciously vibrant. All the ones
responsible for this mockery of a movie need to bury their heads in the
sand, never mind in a duffle bag!

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Orion)
Starring:  Joe Pesci, Andy Comeau, Kristy Swanson, David Spade, Todd
Louiso, Dyan Cannon, George Hamilton.
Screenplay:  Tom Schulman.
Producers:  Brad Krevoy, Steve Stabler, John Bertolli
Director:  Tom Schulman.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  93 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Clueless college students on holiday inadvertently cross paths with
mobsters, and end up having to tote around a lot of dead flesh in order to
stay alive; macabre wackiness ensues.  Is this the plot to WEEKEND AT
BERNIE'S III.  No, no, thank merciful God in heaven, no.  The film in
question is 8 HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG, and it's not nearly as awful as its
plot or direct-to-video-style title might suggest.  It's the story of a
low level mobster named Tommy Spinelli (Joe Pesci) who is given the
assignment of carrying the titular crania from New Jersey to San Diego as
proof for the Big Boss that a contract hit has been completed.
Unfortunately for Tommy, his bag is mixed up with one belonging to aimless
but affable medical student Charlie Prichett (Andy Comeau), who is
accompanying his girlfriend Laurie Bennett (Kristy Swanson) and her
parents (Dyan Cannon and George Hamilton) on a trip to Mexico.  That
leaves Tommy only 24 hours to track down his heads, with the unwilling
assistance of Charlie's two best friends (David Spade and Todd Louiso).
     It comes as quite a surprise to realize that twisted plot was created
by Tom Schulman, the screenwriter behind the decidedly not-twisted DEAD
POETS SOCIETY.  There area few moments of gruesome comic brilliance in 8
HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG, most of them involving the strange fates which
continuously befall the heads.  One ends up in the laundry, tumbling dry;
another is carried off by a coyote.  Makeup artist Greg Cannom (THE MASK)
does a delightful job of creating the heads, which keep turning up at
inconvenient moments and end up providing the film's best scene during a
sweet rendition of "Mr. Sandman."
     When Schulman is willing to push the limits of good taste, 8 HEADS IN
A DUFFEL BAG produces some big laughs, but he should have been willing to
push those limits even further, and more often.  For the first half of the
film, Charlie and the Bennett family scream and fumble around in a posh
Mexican hotel in a strained manner, with newcomer Comeau trying to carry
the farce on his thin shoulders.  He needs a lot more help than can be
provided by Dyan Cannon and George Hamilton, however; their presence only
serves to give you the feeling that you're watching a dark-humored episode
of "The Love Boat."  While he has a bizarre and original plot device at
his disposal, Schulman inexplicably resorts to unpleasant Mexican
stereotypes, Cannon's incessant shrieking and a parade of pratfalls.
     Joe Pesci, on the other hand, is wonderfully relaxed, and his
character does a lot to save 8 HEADS.  For most of the film, Tommy is busy
threatening Charlie's freaked-out buddies, and we expect Pesci to become
the amped-up sadist he made famous in GOODFELLAS and CASINO.  The great
gag in Pesci's scenes with Spade and Comeau is that he's much more simple
and creative in the tortures he devises for his wimpy captives.  With the
reserve of a veteran, Tommy gets the information he needs by whipping the
two men with wet towels, hanging them upside-down from gravity boots, and
twisting their ears.  It's a great, goofy spin on Pesci's stock character,
and it gives 8 HEADS some of its best moments.
     Too bad only Pesci seems to realize that fact.  Schulman actually
doesn't seem to know what he wants to do with the characters, resulting
sloppy and fairly pointless attempts at providing motivation.  Charlie, we
learn, is unable to decide on an academic direction, probably because he
really wants to be a writer; Laurie thinks she wants to break up with him
because of his lack of stability; Tommy is decent enough guy who just
wants to retire after this one last delivery.  None of these snippets of
personality amount to anything, however; they're stock situations which
don't even yield stock resolutions.  Schulman just lets his direction and
script wander, getting terribly conventional at the oddest moments and
pulling back when he should have been ready to go for the jugular.  8
HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG is just too uneven to be satisfying, even if some
individual gags work to perfection.  When you're throwing body parts at
the audience, you've got to offer more than half-hearted whimsy.
