Title
Review for Basic Instinct (1992)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Heather Picker
     Directed by Paul Verhoeven. Written by Joe Eszterhas. Starring Michael
Douglas and Sharon Stone, with George Dzundza and Jeanne Tripplehorn. 1992, 130
min., R (available also in an unrated director's cut), see below for details.
    When "Basic Instinct" came out in 1992, audiences either loved it or
loathed it. Critics were much the same. Actually, most praised it if only done
at face value, for Joe Eszterhas' script is as full of holes as a piece of
Swiss cheese. Eszterhas was propelled to stardom, becoming Hollywood's highest
paid screenwriter, for this lackluster effort. Yes, the same Eszterhas who will
be best remembered for "Showgirls," for which he was unofficially inducted into
the screenwriter's hall of infamy and public laughingstock-hood. (Though I
don't believe it harmed the size of his paychecks.) There has been speculation
that he only turned in a rough draft of the script, but it is so terrible that
he doesn't really have a defense. In spite of this severe flaw, the film became
a box-office success. Sleek sets and steamy sex aren't enough to make this the
seriously suspenseful film it could have been, though it's potential is evident
and we are luckily given glimpses of what a good thriller should be.
     Detective Nick Curran (Michael Douglas) and his partner Gus (George
Dzundza) are investigating the murder of a "civic" minded ex rock star that was
stabbed to death with an ice pick while in the throes of sexual passion. His
casual lover of the past year and a half, Catherine Tramell (Sharon Stone)
becomes the main suspect, and with good reason. After the boating death of her
parents, she inherited around one hundred-ten million dollars, and now, at the
age of thirty, after earning college degrees in both literature and psychology,
she is living the good life with girlfriend Roxy (Leilani Sarelle) and writing
books under the pseudonym Catherine Woolf. Her last novel is suspiciously exact
in its depiction of the ice pick stabbing of a thrill-seeking, aging rocker.
     Nick has a shady past. He had a cocaine problem, was an alcoholic, has
shot four people, two who were innocent bystanders, and it is suggested that
his behavior led to the suicide of his wife. Catherine's sob story is
elaborated, but it is still hard to think of her as anything but a brilliant
seductress. Both Nick and Catherine are desperately dysfunctional, but Nick
can't hide his tendencies the way Catherine can. Given these two main
characters, who are hard to feel anything for, it is poetic justice that the
murderous (past?) drug user, and all around despicablewait, that applies to
both. Ah, all the more perfect. This is one of the major downfalls of the
script, but it is also why it is believable on the surface. It is shoved down
our throats that these are tragic and doomed characters, and an underlying
tension is provided in the various edits of the film (material was excised for
television that places Nick in an even more unfavorable light), by Nick and
Catherine to similar degrees. Of course, either way he is constant danger of
being seduced by Catherine. (If only he had paid more attention when she told
him that her next book was going to be about a police detective who winds up
dead.)
     The US version was submitted several times to the ratings board to get an
R instead of an NC-17, the television edit was prepared by Verhoeven, and many
of the scenes were drastically altered, in turn causing the viewer's perception
of Nick to possibly be changed. The unrated director's cut was screened in
Europe, and is available on laserdisc, video, and DVD in the United States. In
addition to the problems with ratings, gay rights activists who thought that
the lesbianism and bisexuality was handled irresponsibly picketed "Basic
Instinct." I disagree with their qualms.
     Roxy was not likable, although it was easy to feel sorry for her. Most
people in the movie were unlikable. And there is no disputing that Catherine
was cold and calculating and used sex to get whatever she wanted. Does that
defame bisexuals? No more than Nick disparages heterosexual men.  Did anyone
complain about that? He wasn't nearly as smart as Catherine, and it is quite
apparent that he is sleeping with her only because he has to do something, and
he certainly can't compete with her in the intelligence/mind game departments.
The most telling scene in the film, and one illustrating that the film is not
homophobic, is the one that angered so many.
     Following one of Nick and Catherine's soft-porn, exhausting sex
diversions, Nick goes into the bathroom, where he encounters Roxy, who tells
him that if he doesn't leave Catherine alone she will kill him. Nick asks Roxy
to talk to him "man to man." But the scene is more visually representative of a
statement against Nick, or in a broader sense, men, as he is naked and Roxy is
clothed, thus putting her in the position of power. And Nick was smug, and
thought that Roxy was jealously watching him do something with Catherine that
she couldn't. Of course, the tables are turned when it is revealed that
Catherine knows about the watching and encourages it. Now it is Roxy's turn to
be smug.
     Okay, enough of that. Director Paul Verhoeven (Robocop, Total Recall) gets
to shoot a lot of nudity and sex. This will attract some, well, probably most
viewers. I found myself detached from the movie enough that I saw the sex
scenes as ploys to maintain interest. The more liberal critical viewpoint would
be that the graphic sex and violence contained in "Basic Instinct" is necessary
to understand the story, and, more importantly, character (mainly Catherine)
motivation. The famous interrogation sequence, however, is the scene best
surmising her (though it can still be considered gratuitous, either reinforcing
or downsizing the concept).
     Michael Douglas is right for the role of self-assured Nick. "Fatal
Attraction" will be compared to this picture, and the parallels are there, but
"Basic Instinct" is stylized, unabashed smut, while the former aspired to a bit
more. Douglas more than pulls off Nick, who was written in a way that would
have proved troublesome for other, less versatile actors. He manages to be
edgy, threatening, and disbelieving while at the same time being vulnerable,
naďve, and the resulting gullible; all done realistically. Douglas adds the
depth that makes one wonder if Nick knows his fate and just doesn't care.
     Sharon Stone has the most complex role, at least on paper. She has managed
to rise above the material presented and convincingly portrays this diabolical
and wounded character. Recently, I saw her interviewed on the program "Inside
the Actor's Studio." When asked by host James Lipton if, in her opinion,
Catherine ends up killing Nick, she automatically said yes and when prompted to
elaborate, said, "He had to die," going on to explain that in the mind of
Catherine, it was either or her or him, because someone had to go. And right
she is.
     The supporting cast makes the predictable story a bit easier to watch.
Jeanne Tripplehorn poses an intriguing figure as a police psychologist, past
girlfriend (of more than one character) and all around hard to decipher
onlooker and potential participant. Dorothy Malone is back in a nice, if brief
role as a friend of Catherine's with a murderous history. Wayne Knight
("Jurassic Park" and seen weekly as Officer Don on "Third Rock From the Sun")
is amusing as a lawyer, and Leilani Sarelle is a standout as Roxy, the oddly
sympathetic character, and George Dzundza seems well cast but has little to do
as Nick's ill-fated partner, Gus.  (Did any other viewers of "Law & Order" find
themselves envisioning the movie as an episode instead? That way, at least,
Dzundza would have had a partner that was better suited him, and even if Chris
Noth's Detective Mike Logan didn't triumph over Catherine, we would at least
have had someone to grieve for.)
     Overall, the film comes across as a skin flick with a good cast. Attentive
viewers may have noticed the numerous Hitchcock rip-offs (there were too many
for them to be considered references or homage), beginning with the opening
crane shot. Almost all of the San Francisco shots, most noticeably the ones of
the Golden Gate Bridge, looked like they had been lifted straight from
"Vertigo." When Catherine's hair is pulled into a bun, she bears a striking
resemblance to Kim Novak (in "Vertigo"). Another idea that was stolen is a
slight variation on the lengthy talking and lips brushing scene that Ingrid
Bergman and Cary Grant made history with in "Notorious." Sampling may be
artistic licensing in the music world, but in movies it seems more like
plagiarism. The film's score, composed by Jerry Goldsmith (LA Confidential)
sounds Bernard Hermann-ish. It is the best attempt at imitation in the movie.
     "Basic Instinct" is a typical potboiler that fails to hold up under
dissection. Verhoeven has done better, nothing extraordinary is expected from
or delivered by Eszterhas, but Douglas is dependable as usual. His similarly
unsympathetic turn in "A Perfect Murder," and his strong title role in "The
American President" have led me to believe that he is one of the most
underrated actors currently working. And Stone is nothing short of a
revelation. After a decade of admittedly weak work, she made a strong and
lasting impression, and has since established herself as a respected actress.
(Later winning a Golden Globe and an Academy Award nomination for Martin
Scorsese's hit "Casino," and garnering more critical acclaim for her role in
1998s "The Mighty.")
     Notes: Rated R for nudity, sex, violence, and profanity.  The unrated
version has more explicit scenes of sex and violence.  
     DVD Details: Widescreen, production notes, theatrical trailer(s). 
Currently, the DVD is only available as the R-rated theatrical cut.  A DVD with
the same features as the Special Edition director's cut laserdisc is reportedly
in the works.  
     The Verdict: "Basic Instinct" falls flat.  So unless you're into bad
scripts that strong performances can't salvage, skip it in favor of "Vertigo." 
If you're looking for a bravura Stone performance, check out "Casino."
mailto: Ahber16@aol.com
Review courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     Safe Sex takes on a new meaning.  Whether you call its instinct
basic or base, the movie tells you to beware.  Warning: don't get tied
to a bed while engaging into furiously panting sex, unless the other
party has supplied you with a Certificate of Sanity.  Warning: don't
get obsessively involved with carnal knowledge of murder suspects.
Warning:  The Ice Pick Cometh.  Caution: cops, do not sleuth in empty
buildings without your buddy.  Watch out: for alumni of the Berkeley
class of 1983.  Caveat to foreign car makers: your costly racing
machines may be nimble but Detroit can give them a run for their
money.
     The plot of BASIC INSTINCT has more bare flesh than bare
bones.  In a nutshell ("nut" as in "crazy", "shell" as in "shell
game"), it opens with a strokes-to-strikes scene: in his palatial
home, a retired rock star reaches a copulatory climax while his shapely
blond (but not otherwise identified) partner dispatches him with
multiple thrusts of an ice pick.
     Troubled San Francisco cop Michael Douglas suspects Sharon Stone,
an heiress (110 million dollars) who owns spectacular houses, is
bisexual and writes books about killings that later materialize in real
life.  Stone defies, mocks and taunts Douglas and the authorities.
Douglas lusts after her but will not stop investigating.  Both in
computer searches or in bed he leaves no Stone unturned.  He also lusts
after his ex-girl, police shrink Jeanne Tripplehorn.  Douglas has
frantic sex with both women, but separately.
     As a detection thriller the movie is a game of planting red
herrings and false leads and, possibly of implants.  Stone's blend of
mind-games and sex-games is not beguiling but it is intriguingly kinky,
with her provocations, her dialectics, her much-publicized and barely
visible flash of pantylessness, her fencing with Douglas, her flaunting
of live-in lover Leilani Sarelle, her disregard of traditional ways
and niceties.  Her psychological and physiological motivations are not
especially crystalline.  Tentatively, they seem to me less a result of
overcharged sexuality than of boredom and perversity caused by having
too much money.
"Basic Instinct" has several striking (in every way) scenes, top-notch
sets and photography, a menacing score, canny face and body makeup,
sexily tight clothes, nastily tight performances and direction.  Its
basic weakness however is the script structure.  It overdoes its
misanthropy (unexplained) and its trickiness (gratuitous) when it 
carries the characters' cat-and-mouse games into the audience.
     The public may be primarily paying for titillation, but that's no
a reason for neglecting the thriller elements, those that draw the line
between BASIC INSTINCT as soft porn and BASIC INSTINCT as an erotic
police cliff-hanger.  Yet the sleuthing and suspense parts are made
incoherent as the game-playing tactics reach levels of convolution
where you stop following, or caring, or both.  What you're left with is
subjecting yourself to manipulation for the doubtful bonus of shock
effects.
     As the film makes less and less sense it hides its conceptual
murkiness behind glitter.  Anything goes.  Plot and characters keep
shifting, not simply fooling expectations but actually cheating us,
notably in the concluding, arbitrary twist--a final shot that's also a
cheap shot.
     For the thousandth time since Alfred Hitchcock left us, his
lessons of holy simplicity, relative logic and clean narrative lines
that build up suspense, have been ignored.
     Thanks to its production values, BASIC INSTINCT does keep going at
an un-boring clip, but in basically unexciting ways.  Its unleashed sex
makes voyeurs of the viewers, yet its sizzle is soulless and its
studied lack of feeling, a liability.
     The police action entails much suspension of disbelief, a term
that, ironically, Stone herself explains to George Dzundza, Douglas's
partner and only friend.  The script relies heavily on very familiar
cliche's and set-pieces: the buddy who almost always gets his; car
chases (inventive but wildly improbable); political interference from
above (remember Dirty Harry's problems?); unbelievable internal police
conflicts and enmities.  The bigger-than-life syndrome extends from
performances, behavior, events and situations, down to the needless
loudness of the Douglas-Dzundza exchanges.  It's like volume replacing
melody in music.
     No real concern is created for anti-hero Douglas or anyone else.
The dialogue (in case any lookers are listening) is simplistic yet
ponderous.  A pity, because the casting is good.  Douglas's cold,
calculating persona makes him unconvincing in heroic or romantic roles,
but right for films like WALL STREET or BASIC INSTINCT.  Stone and
Tripplehorn are handsome, not too young, and--in a good match with
Douglas--like people who have been repeatedly around the block,
high-mileage but beautifully maintained.  Call them pre-owned.  Yet
while the women's faces are good to look at, the barrage of  Douglas
close-ups should please mostly his mother and father.
     In a filmic conceit, 67-year old Dorothy Malone, the vampish star
of the 1950s, makes brief and bizarre appearances.  Her lovely smile
might remind film-buffs of the young Dorothy in "Tarnished Angels, "
which is just what she represents here.
     Having started with warnings, I end with another warning.  The R
rating is a mild compromise reached after repeated modifications and
submissions, to avoid the commercially undesirable NC-17.  But it is
still a hard R, quite close to a NC-17.
     Addendum: The notorious missing seconds were reinstated at the
Cannes Film Festival.  As many people had already seen the film,
someone suggested that it might save time if the deleted naughty bits
were to have special showings by themselves.  This did not come to
pass.  The European release, however, was uncut.

Author
Michelle L. Zafron
     Okay, now maybe it's me, maybe I've just seen too many movies.
But, there were no surprises in the plot for me.  I knew right off that
the shrink was implicated somehow.  I came up with two scenarios about
fifteen minutes into the film: 1) Catherine did it or 2) the shrink did
it.  About an hour or so into the film I decided that they were both
guilty.
     What totally amazed me was the feeling of utter detachment I had
during this movie.  I was watching carefully but remained completely
uninvolved.  Occasionally, I got annoyed at blatant attempts at
manipulation, but that was about it.  But when I left the theater, these
incredible feelings of revulsion swept over me.  I am ashamed to have
paid money to see this movie.
     The supporting cast was easily the best thing about the film.  But
most of them were actors who we've all seen before--they do good solid
work and that's it.  Michael Douglas was doing the performance from
FATAL ATTRACTION.  It was essentially the same type of character, but I
would have enjoyed seeing some differentiation.  Sharon Stone--really
didn't impress me too much, but then her character was supposed to be
enigmatic so I suppose that explains the lack of depth.  The actress
playing her lover, Roxy, impressed me far more.
     One of the few posts still in the system here about the film
mentioned the music favorably.  Was it me or did the Jerry Goldsmith
score blatantly borrow from Bernard Herrmann?
     And let's talk about the Hitchcockian ripoffs...excuse
me...homages.  It was kind of cute to see Sharon Stone modelling Kim
Novak's French twist from VERTIGO, so was the San Francisco setting.  I
even liked the opening crane shots.  But the film didn't just make a
couple of inside references to Hitchcock --they borrowed shamelessly and
that bugged me.
     The film has also given homophobic movements an incredible boost by
portraying homosexuality as aberrant and dangerous, but I'm not going
to get into this now.
     The sex scenes were boring.  A lot of you are probably falling off
your seats at this, but after the first couple of minutes, I started
thinking things like "Man, she must have a great set of boxsprings on
that bed."  Somehow, I doubt that Mr. Verhoeven intended me to feel
that way.  The nudity didn't bother me, it just bored me (and by the
way, how come we never see male frontal nudity for more than a couple of
seconds?  I'm not particularly anxious to see this, but I'm curious as
to why we don't).  Then of course there was the scene in the 
interrogation room where we learn that like the late Tallulah Bankhead, 
Catherine does not wear undies.  My first thought was "doesn't San
Francisco get pretty cold?"  Less was definitely not more in this case.
     These are all pretty cosmetic criticisms, upon reflection, I think
I hated the movie because the character of Catherine was the perverted
fantasy of the ice queen who blows hot and cold and remains in control
of her emotions throughout.  The kind of woman who "deserves" to be
hurt.  That is wrong.  
     Every woman in that film came across as either perverted and
homicidal.  While the only normal, healthy character in the film was
the partner, the women came off far worse then the men.  The men were
portrayed as crude, stupid, sexist authority figures who thought with
their primary sex organs, but they were not, for the most part
portrayed as being dangerous or deadly.  The women were these terrible
creatures who looked normal (the ex-con as played by Dorothy Malone--a
devoted wife and mother who went crazy) or who occupied positions of
wealth and influence (Catherine and the shrink) and who are ultimately
deadly creatures.
Sorry for going on so long about the film...
--Michelle L. Zafron (v101pyrw@ubvmsb.cc.buffalo.edu)

Author
The Phantom
     (As we are currently suffering from a serious horror drought, the
Phantom thought he would take this opportunity to branch out into the
world of the exploitation film and make the big-budget soft-core BASIC
INSTINCT the subject of his first review.  The Phantom feels that
reviewing exploitation films is well within his artistic reach, even
though the two genres are so markedly different.  In a horror film, we
watch as first someone is murdered, then someone else disrobes, then
someone else is murdered, etc.  In an exploitation film, on the other
hand, we watch as first someone disrobes, then someone is murdered, then
someone else disrobes, etc.  The Phantom will, of course, endeavor to
keep that subtle distinction in mind as he writes his reviews, and if at
any time he feels himself not well enough qualified to critically
appraise the myriad nuances of the exploitation genre, he will return to
the familiar world of the horror film without hesitation.)
     The Phantom needed little more inducement to lay down his $7.50 for
Paul Verhoeven's latest film than that which was provided by the
high-concept plot summary: cynical, burnt-out cop becomes mysteriously
(and dangerously, if we may be so bold) attracted to beautiful, rich,
naked bisexual woman who does/does not kill people with an ice pick.
     Any six words in that sentence would be enough to part the Phantom
from his hard-earned money; but the tantalizing thought that a film
might contain all thirty was enough to transport him to exploitation
film heaven.  After all, even if only a handful of those words were
fully exploited by the film, BASIC INSTINCT would still be quite a
slam-bang, action-packed, sex- and violence-drenched exercise in
voyeurism with little or no obvious redeeming social value -- the very
definition of a successful and wildly entertaining exploitation film.
     Add to the mix Paul Verhoeven's reputation as a director for whom
the ordinary limits of taste and restraint have little or no meaning --
and Sharon Stone's reputation for being, well, rather easy on the eyes
without any clothes on -- and the Phantom's expectations were high
indeed as he ventured uptown to see BASIC INSTINCT in THX sound (the
idea being that THX sound would show off Jerry Goldsmith's score to best
advantage, or at least make it loud enough to drown out the sounds of
the Lexington Avenue line as it rumbled underneath the theater; when one
lives in New York, loudness and quality frequently go hand in hand).  
     But somewhere between the idea and the execution, something went a
little wrong.  Perhaps Joe Eszterhas delivered only a rough outline for
his $3 million story; perhaps coherent endings -- like batteries for
cheap toys -- are not included for such a paltry sum of money.  (Aside
to Tri-Star: assuming you're not yet in bankruptcy and you need an
ending for your next exploitation film, the Phantom is ready and willing
to provide one -- one that even makes sense -- for the low, low price of
only $9,999.95.  Have your people call my people and we'll do lunch.)
     Whatever the reason, though, BASIC INSTINCT's biggest problem is
its script.  Even before the film limps to its shockingly shoddy
conclusion, signs that trouble is on the way appear to us with the
passing of nearly every scene.  Eszterhas has the characters doing any
one of three things at each point in the film: getting into a car;
driving in a car; getting out of a car; walking up to a doorway;
knocking on a door; walking through a doorway; walking into a room;
walking out of a room.  And having sex, of course.  Sometimes characters
do more than one of these things in a single scene; sometimes characters
do more than one of these things at a time.  But quite a lot of BASIC
INSTINCT is given over to these nine activities, and after about a half
hour, the audience begins to realize that something is missing.  Real
life, for a start.  At no point in BASIC INSTINCT do we ever feel that
the characters exist in the real world; Eszterhas has effectively
created a very closed, claustrophobic and artificial world for a film
that can only be effective when we see the effects of the story line on
the characters' "external" lives.  One of the reasons FATAL ATTRACTION
was so successful is that we were able to see Michael Douglas' character
as a real person -- someone with whom we might possibly identify or at
least sympathize -- and not as just one more cardboard character being
stalked by a Jasonized killer.  Consider, too, Jimmy Stewart in VERTIGO,
a film that encompasses the very definition of an improbable and
artificial plot.  Yet watching it, we never get the sense that Stewart
is simply going through the motions; instead, we feel that he's a real
person who gets caught up in extraordinary events -- a hallmark of
Hitchcock's greatest work, and the bare minimum needed for successful
and effective suspense.
     After the script, BASIC INSTINCT suffers from another common
problem: that of a talented director of niche films directing something
well beyond his range as a director.  Verhoeven is one of the best when
it comes to violent, action-packed techno-thrillers like ROBOCOP and
TOTAL RECALL; however, putting aside the few killings that Eszterhas'
script calls for, the bulk of BASIC INSTINCT is given over to the
relationship between Douglas and Stone.  It is a plot tailor-made for
Brian DePalma (and in a better and more refined time, for Alfred
Hitchcock), who proved he could handle just this sort of story in BODY
DOUBLE.  Verhoeven even pulls a DePalma when he lifts the steamy kissing
sequence from NOTORIOUS; alas, it's one of the few scenes in which
Douglas and Stone generate any real heat.  Of course, they're seen naked
in and out of bed, together and apart so many times that it becomes
almost boring; yet this only proves that athletic sex is not an adequate
substitute for genuine interest, even though we as an audience have our
eyes glued to the screen all the while.  Verhoeven, whatever his
talents, has yet to learn that graphic violence is usually a poor
substitute for genuine horror; and that soft-core pornography is almost
always a poor substitute for genuine passion.  Apparently Verhoeven
operated on the principle that if it wasn't possible to show a car chase
or a murder, the story would be advanced best by having either Douglas
or Stone disrobe; while this seems like a reasonable idea at the
beginning of the film, by about mid-way through even the sight of
Douglas' naked rear-end -- featured prominently in a scene that was
apparently designed as a showcase for his derriere -- fails to lift our
spirits or hold our interest.
     It is because we never believe that Douglas is deeply and
emotionally involved with Stone that BASIC INSTINCT begins to fall
apart; without our emotional commitment, what difference does it make
whether or not Stone is the killer?  Thus all of the artificial plot
twists and turns come to naught, and by the time the credits roll we
feel that perhaps some vital part of the film had been cut.  Contrast
this with the denouement of VERTIGO: by the time Hitchcock ends his
classic film, we've strongly identified with Jimmy Stewart and thus we
can share his pain and bewilderment; in other words, we can have a
genuine emotional experience.  BASIC INSTINCT is a cheat, because all we
get to do is watch.
     Sadly, even Jerry Goldsmith doesn't come through for us in his
usual exemplary fashion.  His score attempts to place BASIC INSTINCT
squarely in Hitchcock's world, but try as it does, it never quite fits
with the action on screen.  Perhaps this is because Verhoeven is unable
to generate any sustained suspense; perhaps it is because the audience
is relegated to the role of voyeur rather than partner as the film
unfolds.  In any case, Goldsmith's score tends to pounce on us at
unlikely times and attempt to coerce us into feeling anxious.  Half the
time -- and even as Eszterhas has his characters knocking on doors or
walking around outside houses -- Goldsmith's score keeps swelling up in
the background, itself growing somewhat tiresome and repetitious as it
pounds away at inert scene after inert scene.  The other half of the
time, we're all too busy waiting for Douglas and Stone to take their
clothes off to notice whether Goldsmith is still hammering away with his
quasi-Hitchcockian score or whether he's switched to a test of the
Emergency Broadcast System.
     This said, the Phantom should hasten to add that BASIC INSTINCT is
by no means a terrible film -- it's just not a very good one.  DePalma
could get away with his incessant references to and liberal borrowings
from Hitchcock because his films stood on their own merits, and because
he was able to take plot snippets and ideas with which we were all
familiar and give them his own special gloss (that being straight-razor
murders and Melanie Griffith in her underwear).  Whatever their faults,
DRESSED TO KILL and BODY DOUBLE are stylish, entertaining and fun --
each the very definition of a successful exploitation film.  (Leonard
Maltin disdains BODY DOUBLE and calls it "another sleazy fetish film,"
which only goes to show that he wouldn't know a good exploitation film
if it stabbed him with an ice pick.  Coincidentally, the Phantom has
himself used the phrase when describing a film, but only when his
phrase-O-matic is set to "high praise"; after all, if we don't all want
to go see "another sleazy fetish film," what do we want to see?)
     And BASIC INSTINCT does have its pluses: the two biggest being
Sharon Stone and Sharon Stone without any clothes on.  Both she and
Douglas both do as well as can be expected, given the unlikely plot,
near-illiterate script and given that they're forced to spend much of
their screen time "****ing like minks", to use three charming words we
get to hear on at least a half dozen occasions.  (One of these scenes
later is described by Douglas as "the **** of the century", which gives
you a pretty fair indication of the level of Mr. Eszterhas' script.)
There is also the now-infamous "interrogation scene," which features
Ms. Stone's legs and other parts of her anatomy.  This scene is wildly
over-directed by Verhoeven, whose ever-so-subtle touch has the actors
frantically pantomiming embarrassment as Ms. Stone makes herself more
comfortable; if this were the 1920s and had not the miracle of sound
recording become part of our lives 60 years ago, the interrogation scene
would likely be more believable than it is.  (It *was* affecting,
however, in its own overwrought way.)
     The film's resolution is a disappointment to all, and in fact is so
bad that the Phantom wonders who -- other than Mr. Eszterhas -- could
possibly have liked it or thought it an appropriate way to end a
suspense thriller.  It is only a small consolation that by the time we
reach the film's final scene, we have long since ceased to care what
happens to Douglas and Stone or even who the killer really is.  In
writing BASIC INSTINCT, Eszterhas has mistaken Hitchcock's famous
"MacGuffin" for the film's central theme; instead of concentrating on
the characters and using the murders as a convenient way for them to
become further involved -- emotionally involved -- with each other,
Eszterhas' script spins its wheels as clue after pointless clue is
revealed to an audience that longs not for MURDER ON THE ORIENT EXPRESS,
but REAR WINDOW.
     Speaking of which, Hitchcock's classic films are, as always,
readily available at your local Blockbusters; phans who don't plan on
(ice) picking BASIC INSTINCT for their weekend's entertainment would be
well advised to rent any of the (much better) films from which Eszterhas
and Verhoeven have liberally borrowed.  And if the Phantom's memory
serves, three minutes of Grace Kelly or Kim Novak fully clothed are more
likely to capture our interest and attention than 30 minutes of Sharon
Stone proving that she doesn't wear any underwear.  At the very least,
you won't have to look at Jimmy Stewart's naked rear-end, which is
practically reason enough to rent one or more of these classic films and
avoid BASIC INSTINCT.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
130 min., R, Mystery, 1992
Director: Paul Verhoeven
Cast: Michael Douglas, Sharon Stone, Jeanne Tripplehorn,
      George Dzundza, Bruce A. Young, Stephen Tobolowsky
     A retired rockstar is found dead, stabbed multiple times with an
ice pick, after having sexual intercourse.  The only suspect that the
police can come up with is Sharon Stone, the rockstar's lover (not
girlfriend).  When the police bring her in for questioning her alibi is
that about six months before she had published a book that described the
killing exactly the way it happened.  Cop Michael Douglas feels that
Stone did the killing and is intent on proving it.  He finds out right
after he starts his investigation that Stone is writing another book,
about a cop that falls for the wrong woman.  As Douglas does his
investigation, Stone starts playing with him and messing with his head.
     For the most part BASIC INSTINCT is a very enjoyable film to watch.
Because of a few problems that I will describe later, I only suggest
that you go to see BASIC INSTINCT for matinee prices.  BASIC INSTINCT
keeps you guessing the entire time that you are watching the film.  It
introduces two characters that might have done the deed, and I found
myself switching my suspicion back and forth as the film went on.  On a
scale of zero to five, I give BASIC INSTINCT a four.  BASIC INSTINCT is
rated R for female nudity, graphic violence, explicit language, adult
situations, and adult humor.
     Recently, some people have been slamming this film, but I don't
think that it is really that bad.  Sure, it has its problems, but while
watching the film you don't realize most of them.  The film runs along
rather smoothly (except for the fact that the projectionist messed up
and I ended up with a ten-minute intermission in the middle of the film
while the mistake was being corrected) except for the very end.  There
the film almost falls apart and becomes muddled and confusing.  For this
reason that I suggest that you go to a matinee performance, and that way
you won't feel cheated after seeing the end.
     There are some plot problems as the film progresses, but for the
most part they are minor ones.  The problems really don't harm the
viewing of the film.  There are also a few things that I wish had been
explained more thoroughly that were hinted at during the film, but that
doesn't really hinder the film either.  For the most part, unless you
go to the theater expecting a cinematic marvel, you won't really end up
being too disappointed with the final product.
     A few of the characters introduced in the film don't really seem to
serve a purpose.  The character is introduced and then is mostly
discarded.  I feel that either these characters should have been left
out or they should have been added to so that they fit into the film
better.  Others are introduced briefly, and then used quickly, and then
discarded.  These characters should have also been better written so
that they fit into the film better.  It would have made a much cleaner
finished product.
     Another plot problem is a lot of the incidents that happen in the
film are too perfect.  Too many things happen at exactly the right time,
that in real life would have never happened that perfectly.  This really
should have been corrected to try to make the film more believable.  I
know that I have really been ragging on this film and it may sound like
I really didn't enjoy the film too much.  Actually, I did enjoy the film
a lot and am not upset that I went and saw it.  The acting in the film
is wonderful.  Michael Douglas and Sharon Stone don't have as much
charisma as they could, but they make do.  There are several unexpected
twists in the plot that catch you off guard and most of the questions I
came up with in the film were answered.  For the most part I feel that
Paul Verhoeven did a good job directing the film.  For most of the
scenes good camera angles were used to show you enough so that you know
what is happening, but don't show you enough to give away so much that
you can tell what is about to happen next.
     Joe Eszterhaz wrote the screenplay and he did a rather good job.
He could have left out a few of the liberal sex scenes that were
scattered through the film and tightened up the ending a bit so that it
made more sense.  For the slow parts in the film Joe seemed to feel that
a solution is a sex scene, which doesn't fix the problem.  It just
momentarily puts it off, but it comes back later.  I feel that if he had
smoothed out the screenplay so it wasn't quite as choppy, the film would
have been much better.  Maybe I am really being hard on the screenplay,
but I feel that it is one of the most important parts of a film, so I
feel that it should have half a decent effort put into it.
     The score by Jerry Goldsmith is very well done.  It really seemed
to capture me and pull me a bit into the film.  It isn't distracting and
overpowering so as to pull your attention away from the film, but rather
is used to focus you more intensely on some scenes and to prepare you
for something to happen.  The cinematography is well done in the film
and helps make the film more enjoyable.
     This is probably not a film that you will want to bring young
children to.  There is a considerable amount of gratuitous nudity
throughout the film, some rather graphic deaths, and some rather coarse
language.  There has been a lot of controversy over the depiction of
lesbians and bisexuals in this film, and I really don't see what all the
fuss is about.  They don't really put down lesbians or bisexuals.
Neither do they state that they all become murderers.  So I really don't
think that it is worth all the bother that has been given to it.  
     There is some Hollywood stereotyping done through the film, which
was a bit of a downfall for me.  The males seem, somehow, superior to
all the females in the film, and the females usually use their sex to
get what they wanted.  This was more of a problem for me than the
lesbian part.  In some parts of the film it almost totally puts down
women by making it look like they have to use their bodies to get what
they want.  I really don't think that this is fair to women, and some
women after seeing the film will be disgusted at the stereotyping.
     This is the part that I feel was the biggest put-down in the film.
Women have worked to get themselves above exploitation level and then
something like this comes along and just puts them down.  I really feel
that someone should have seen the stereotyping in the film before it was
released and had it written out for the most part.  The stereotyping, I
feel, is more of a degradation to women in general, not just lesbians or
bisexuals, but to the entire female population.
     So use your discretion on whether to go to a late night performance
and pay more.  I do think that the film is worth watching even though I
came down on the film so hard.  It is just that the film has flaws, like
any film.  And the flaws in this film are much more noticeable after
you have seen the film, than in some that I have seen.  Some of you
might wait until the film comes to video before seeing it.  There is
nothing that would really be lost on a small screen so there is nothing
wrong with this.  You should definitely go to see this film though.
Whether you see it on video or not is your choice, but it is definitely
a good movie and definitely worth seeing.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Dumb dud of an entry in the BODY HEAT sweepstakes, and now
something of a landmark for having spawned a jillion clones.
BASIC INSTINCT's worst crime is that it's not just a bad movie, but in many
ways, an incompetent one as well. It's stupid in itself, and stupid to
think its audience is as stupid as it is. It's supposed to be a thriller,
but the plot is dead on its feet, and ultimately arbitrary; it's only put
into the movie to jerk us around. It's also supposed to be sexy, but it's
instead got the unpleasant rawness of a teenager showing younger kids his
collections of dirty pictures. It's a ripoff.
The story opens with a rock star being murdered while in the throes of
orgasm. The biggest suspect is an authoress, Catherine Tramell (Sharon
Stone), who wrote a novel in which the murder was eerily presaged. Or maybe
it's the work of a copycat? These and other plot threads get fed to the
detective who's on the case (Michael Douglas), who has a few problems
himself. Like we wonder if his elevator goes to the top floor. We can
measure with a stopwatch the time from them setting eyes on each other to
the moment they are doing the mattress dance.
Joe Eszterhas has written the screenplay, and he uses a device that he used
before in the much better JAGGED EDGE: the killer's identity is kept a
secret until the movie's final shot. This isn't in itself a problem -- the
problem is that up until that point, we've been given nothing to work with.
Every clue in the movie -- EVERY clue -- is ambiguous. The whole thriller
aspect of the movie is a shill.
Red herrings, dead plot threads, violence, and kinky sexuality litter the
movie like potholes in Manhattan streets. They add up to zip, because
they're not happening to people we care about. Douglas's character is
foulmouthed and bitter and that's it; Stone's character has an iron-on
smile that never changes; the rest are forgettable. When we don't even have
the luxury of giving a damn about anyone in the movie, who cares what
happens in it? Especially with an ending that is not only unsatisfying, but
in many ways inexplicable? (A friend of mine once came up with a rule of
thumb about movie characters: "If no one in the movie behaves like anyone
you know, or would *care* to know, JUST LEAVE!")
One of the nastier things about the movie is the way it treats lesbianism
not as an integral part of someone's life, but as a kind of kink --
something to thrill men with. I despair whenever I encounter this kind of
stupidity in mainstream entertainment; are we still so culturally
Neanderthal that the only way to include something like that in a
big-budget Hollywood film is as a Hefnerism?

Author
Dwight Joe
(By the way, if you find that the use of the word "fuck" is offensive,
then don't read this review of BASIC INSTINCT.  I use that word
liberally, because it proves to be effective for what I to say to the
rather contemporary audience that reads this newsgroup.  I think that
"fuck" is the key word for this movie; you'll agree if you've seen it.
8^) )
     This review of BASIC INSTINCT departs from the traditional type of
review; I shall delve much more into the psyche of the movie.  The
entire movie is a ~100-minute mind game among three main characters who
are mind-fucking each other.  The sex fucks are only part of the story.
Nick
----
     He is the protagonist who's had something eating at him for years.
Earlier in his career, he had been consuming coke, which was ruining his
judgment as a police office.  His lapses in judgment caused him to shoot
4 tourists at a shopping mall.  His wife knew about his problem,
couldn't live with it, and committed suicide.
     Ever since, he has been like a man with a restless mind that cannot
pause for even a second.  The restlessness just eats him and eats him.
He wants to relax but can't.  The pressures don't destroy him or cause
him to "crack", but they eat at him and eat at him.  Whether by his
doing or by the circumstances of life, he's been fucked.
Katharine
---------
     She is the antagonist.  She enjoys playing mind games.  She enjoys
fucking people--men and women.  Her career is to get into people's
minds, manipulate people to obtain what she wants, and to spew it all
out into a novel.  The main mindgame in the movie was framing Elizabeth
with the murders.
     Yeah.  She's the antagonist, but she is just what Nick needs.
Somehow, her mindgames provide the kind of excitement that functions as
a valve to release all the pressures in Nick's mind.  In the sex scene
involving Elizabeth, Nick was trying like all "hell broke loose" to use
the sex with her to release his mental pressures, but he was not
successful.
     Don't you see?  It takes a little more than sex.  It takes
Katharine's mind games to make it work.  When Katharine fucks Nick's
mind, Nick will try to fuck her back.  Nick knows that even if he can't
fuck her back on her level, he'll get to fuck her using the old
standby--the sexual fuck.  He always has the last fuck, so he thinks
that he "wins" (the mindgame contest).  That provides the release for
all his mental pressures.
     The trouble with Elizabeth is that she just provided the "win."
Katharine provided the both the "game" (the mindgame) and the "win."
Elizabeth
---------
     Elizabeth was a tragic victim.  She was a bisexual, and so was
Katharine.  She wasn't really playing a full-blown mind game; she was
just lying to hide her background.  The obvious reason is that she would
lose her job as the resident police psychologist.
     (If I understood the movie correctly, Katharine framed Elizabeth.
Katharine planted the pictures and clippings in Elizabeth's home.  The
minor "give away" is the murder scene in the elevator, which matched
exactly the description in the final page of Katharine's latest book
about a flaky policeman.  The major "give away" is the final shot in the
movie with the ice pick at the bottom of Nick's bed, where Nick had just
done another "mental release" with Katharine.)
Final Comments
--------------
     I find it difficult to evaluate whether this movie is enjoyable in
the general sense.  The movie isn't very deep, and there is no general
theme to it.  It says nothing about society.  Some people will simply
not like this movie because of the lack of depth.  Does "mind-gaming"
demonstrate "depth"?  I'm not so sure.
     The type of person who would enjoy this movie might be (1) someone
who understands mindgames, (2) someone who resembles Nick 8^), (3)
someone who practices mindgames, etc.
(If I recollect correctly, Siskel and Ebert gave it 2 thumbs down.)
Responses?  If you have comments, then please (1) send e-mail or (2) send
e-mail and post what you e-mailed.  Thanks.

Author
Frank Maloney
     BASIC INSTINCT is a movie by Paul Verhoeven, written by Joe
Eszterhaz.  It stars Michael Douglas, Sharon Stone.  Rated R, for
nudity, sex, and violence.
     BASIC INSTINCT is a difficult movie to write about, for me.  Those
of you who have been kind enough to read my reviews in the past know
that I have often complained about the treatment of gay people in
Hollywood movies, which seldom depict us as other than victims or
maniacs.  Paul Verhoeven (ROBOCOP, TOTAL RECALL, SPETTERS, FLESH &
BLOOD, THE FOURTH MAN) and his newest movie are under a very vocal, high
profile attack by gay, bi, and women's groups.  And I'm not at all sure
where I want to come down in this dispute now that I've actually seen
the film.
     Basically, there isn't that much here to review and the importance
of the film is far outweighed by the activities of its detractors, who
unfortunately are going to sell a lot of tickets for TriStar by making
BASIC INSTINCT a news story.  The film is gripping and involving to a
degree whilst one is actually watching it, but once out of the theater
one is struck by how little there was to it, by the egregious holes and
murkiness in the plot, and by the superficiality of the film.  I don't
feel that trash is important enough to make a cause celebre out of, and
this is a very trashy divertisement.
     It has its moments, no matter how fleeting.  For the afficionado of
the aging, flattening male butt, there's a nude scene involving Michael
Douglas.  There's a delightful guest appearance by Dorothy Malone,
looking well groomed, if not a little craggy.  And most importantly,
there is Sharon Stone, who is kind of like a Madonna who can act.  She's
aggressively sexual, stylish, hip, mocking, and smart.  Ironically, her
character, one that is attracting a lot of the protest energy, is the
best defense of the movie's intentions (as non-homophobic); her
bisexuality is unapologetic, taken for granted, and celebrated as a
strength.
     Michael Douglas's character, a troubled San Francisco homicide
detective, is not particularly attractive or a very compelling apologia
for heterosexuality, by contrast.  He pretty much rapes his ex-lover
(Jeanne Tripplehorn, who makes an interesting performance herself); he
makes a really sleazy, homophobic remark to the Stone character's
lesbian lover; he's basically a loose cannon, a bad cop, and not a very
nice person.  Douglas does all this with his usual delivery.  Indeed, he
is largely repeating his role in FATAL ATTRACTION, right down to his
I'm-so-hot-I-can't-be-denied, love-making attack.
     BASIC INSTINCT is like cotton candy.  Touch it and it melts.  Try
to make sense of the plot, you cannot.  It works only as long as you're
in the dark in its compulsive clutches.  Oh, it looks very good; Jan de
Bont, Verhoeven's cinematographer, delivers a very attractive look.  And
Jerry Goldsmith's music is fine.  But it's all surfaces, a thriller that
cannot stand the light of day.
     I cannot recommend BASIC INSTINCT to you; not because its sexual
politics are held to be controversial by some of my brothers and
sisters, but because it is not a very good movie.  If you must see it,
to find out what all the hubbub is about, go to a cheap matinee.

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are many ways in which a movie could be influential.
Some are influential because they are truly landmarks of
movie history; others simply make big money and inspire
multitude of cheap imitations that could be seen as subgenre
by themselves. In 1990s such subgenre was made of "erotic
thrillers" - films that tried to compensate forgettable
plots with one or two scenes of sex, as explicit as puritan
American censors would allow. After many of those films
failed as big Hollywood projects, genre of erotic thriller
found its purpose in the domain of straight-to-video,
satisfying the needs of the audience too shy to seek porn
titles in video stores. This subgenre, one of the most
despised by mainstream critics in 1990s, owes its existence
to one of the most overhyped films in the history. This film
is BASIC INSTINCT, 1992 thriller by Paul Verhoeven, which
also happens to be one of favourite guilty pleasures for the
author of this review.
Plot of the film begins when retired rock star has torrid
sex with mysterious blonde only to get stabbed to death with
an ice pick in the heat of passion. His murder is being
investigated by Nick Curran (played by Michael Douglas), San
Francisco police detective with long and painful personal
record of alcoholism, cocaine abuse and frequent shooting
incidents that had tragic consequences. His attempts to lead
healthy life under the guidance of police counsellor and his
occasional girlfriend Doctor Elizabeth Garner (played by
Jeanne Tripplehorn) begin to crumble when he encounters the
murder suspect in the form of deceased rocker's girlfriend.
Catherine Trammel (played by Sharon Stone) is not just
stunningly attractive woman and rich heiress; her degree in
psychology enables her to play with people's minds. There
isn't any evidence pointing to her guilt, but her biography
indicates that people around here have a tendency to suffer
violent deaths; most disturbing about it is the fact that
such incidents, including the latest murder, had been
vividly described in Catherine Trammel's novels. Curran is
convinced of her guilt and wants to find the conclusive
evidence, but his determination is followed with Trammel's
willingness to engage into perverse mind games, in which she
would use her seductive abilities as well as Curran's own
animal impulses.
Two things turned BASIC INSTINCT into one of the most
overhyped films of 1992. First one was the record amount of
money paid for the screenplay by Joe Eszterhas (of later
SHOWGIRLS infamy). The other one was the unprecedented wave
of street protest by American gay activists over alleged
negative portrayal of lesbian and bisexual characters in the
film (those demonstrations, staged at the zenith of
Political Correctness, later had major impact on Hollywood;
few producers would ever dare to have a less than saintly
gay characters in their movies). For the author of this
review, both the film's producers and demonstrators were
wrong. First of all, Eszterhas' script, although not as bad
as his later reputation would indicate, was hardly worthy of
those 3 millions US$. The plot, which was supposed to be
whodunit style murder mystery is full of red herrings, major
plot holes and elements and situations that sometimes really
insult viewers' intelligence. And, before the script
culminates in corny and weak ending, it is being spiced with
all police movie cliches plus some added bonus in form of
sex, drugs, police corruption and all possible ingredients
of decadent lifestyle.
Allegedly unfavourable (at least for 1990s PC standards)
portrayal of homosexual characters actually corresponds with
the way Eszterhas treated everyone else in this movie.
Hardly any character is likeable - they are all either
incredibly stupid, bigoted, flawed or simply lack any values
associated with decent human beings. The only exception -
character we actually care for - is Curran's partner Gus,
but that has more to do with the way George Dzundza played
this character than with corny lines and stereotypical
character written by Eszterhas.
Having all that in mind, BASIC INSTINCT could be viewed as a
triumph of style over substance. Verhoeven had really
tremendous task in hiding such terrible flaws of the script
and turning this film into truly enjoyable piece of trash
cinema. He succeeded in this by staging some elaborate
scenes that would later become memorable. The best example
is, of course, famous interrogation scene which is excellent
combination of superb editing, costume design by Ellen
Mirojnick, suggestive photography by Jan de Bont, and, of
course, Sharon Stone's acting. After being exposed to such
brilliant piece of manipulative filmmaking who would bother
to think about story that doesn't make sense? Just in case,
Verhoeven uses all tricks in the books, by providing some
good action and gore and indulging himself in Hitchcockian
references - those associated with VERTIGO are most obvious,
thanks to San Francisco scenery. But the biggest attention
is given to the oldest and most effective ingredient of
successful trash - sex. Apart from usual quantities of
nudity, both male and female, this film provides scenes of
very graphic sex, as close to softcore porn as possible in
the puritanical atmosphere of Hollywood. Those scenes,
source of great hype at the time, might look rather mild or
even boring after so many years; but Verhoeven, compared
with his imitators (including himself in dreadful and
downright anti-erotic SHOWGIRLS) looks like a real
grandmaster of Hollywood style smut.
The biggest contribution to the BASIC INSTINCT was
definitely given by her female lead Sharon Stone. That
actress here played the role of a lifetime, creating one of
the most memorable characters in the history of cinema.
Catherine Trammel might be too much of a character in the
script to be believable - beautiful woman, intelligent
manipulator and psychopathic villain. Yet, Sharon Stone
manages to bring her to life; she doesn't just look
stunningly beautiful - she simply oozes sexuality, combined
with the great confidence of superior mind and the seductive
appeal of utter evil. Men (and some women) are powerless
against such unstoppable sex machine; for many of them being
ice-picked to death might even seem like a acceptable price
for brief moments of ecstasy in her bed. This great role of
Sharon Stone (that would actually begin to haunt her in the
rest of her career) shadowed everyone else. For Michael
Douglas it wasn't such a problem, since he only reprised the
role of oversexed male pig from FATAL ATRACTION. But Jeanne
Tripplehorn was not so convincing as her rival and later had
to work much harder in order to establish herself as a real
actress. Actually, in the long run, BASIC INSTINCT had hurt
careers of almost everyone involved, despite being
commercial success. The only exception, perhaps, is Jerry
Goldsmith; his great, atmospheric musical score was often
praised as the best element of the film; even those who
don't like BASIC INSTINCT are often saying that Goldsmith's
score improved the general impression.
All in all, BASIC INSTINCT is a film that should be viewed
as nothing more than a good example of Hollywood
craftsmanship. It is enjoyable little flick that didn't
deserve its popularity, as well as its infamy.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
John Newman
     Imagine SEA OF LOVE directed by Paul Verhoeven (ROBOCOP, TOTAL
RECALL).  Now replace Al Pacino with Michael Douglas, whose acting here
is limited to Meaningful Eye Contact.  Switch out Ellen Barkin for
Sharon Stone, who spends half the film naked and still can't achieve
half the heat Barkin achieves by just smiling.  Finally, mix in dozens
of unintentionally comic music stings by the uninspired Jerry Goldsmith,
plenty of gratuitous violence, and enough sex to move BASIC INSTINCT
onto the softcore porn shelf.  What remains?  BASIC INSTINCT is a huge
goose-egg of a film, a dud big enough to kill an entire film studio
(this is the last film by Carolco); it's not worth watching, even for
free.
     The plot of BASIC INSTINCT, such as it is, starts with the grisly
murder of a rock-and-roll promoter.  He is stabbed with an icepick
during a sex bondage act.  (Naturally, we get to watch.)  Suspicion
gathers around his lover Carolyn (Sharon Stone), an heiress and
paperback writer;  her last bestseller depicted just such a murder,
right down to the color of the scarf with which his hands were tied.
Did she do it, or was it some copycat murderer out to get her?
     Carolyn plays the role of femme fatale.  In the police
interrogation, her investigators frantically pantomime "hot under the
collar" as she describes how she seduced the producer as research for
her book, then used him later on occasion for casual sex.  She spends
her days befriending psychopathic murderers to get characters for her
books, and her nights hanging out at impossibly decadent San Francisco
clubs.  What is her next book?  "A cop falls for the wrong woman ...
she kills him."  Naturally, no cinematic cop can resist such a come-on.
She and Michael Douglas spend much of the rest of the film "fucking like
minks" (Michael Douglas' words) as his investigation, and her book about
him, draw toward their inevitable bloody conclusions.
     The rest of the plot is unworthy of even a summary.  Every standard
element is present:  the cop-buddy, the ex-wife and girlfriend, the
psychiatrist's report, the car chase, the sneering Internal Affairs
investigator, as if they were checked one-by-one off a checklist for Cop
Flicks.  The soundtrack telegraphs every punch; wherever there might
have been some danger of surprising the audience, the heavy-handed
musical score kicks in well in advance.  Indeed, the music seems to
start just a little too soon, as if it were meant as a parody.  "I
didn't know this was going to be a comedy," was a common response after
the screening of BASIC INSTINCT; but the film takes itself too
seriously, and is too inconsistent, to succeed even as a parody.
     The blame for this catastrophe lies squarely with Verhoeven.
Verhoeven seems to specialize in overblown sex and violence, but he's
definitely much better with violence.  ROBOCOP has a gritty, hip quality
which surpasses the special effects extravaganza and paper-thin plot.
Sexual intrigue, as opposed to mechanical violence, requires focus on
the actors rather than the stuntmen, and this is what BASIC INSTINCT
sorely lacks.  Verhoeven gets in one good car chase, as the cars weave
around oncoming traffic on a twisty two-lane mountain road.  But Michael
Douglas and Sharon Stone never get a chance to do more than rehash tired
cliches.  They never build up any chemistry, and that is the key failing
of BASIC INSTINCT.
     BASIC INSTINCT does, at least, succeed as softcore pornography, and
this may be its salvation at the box office.  It might do even better as
a video, where viewers will have more freedom to fast-forward to the
"good parts."  BASIC INSTINCT is just pornography, despite its "R"
rating.  Those looking for another SEA OF LOVE, or another BODY HEAT,
will be sorely disappointed.
