Title
Review for Arctic Blue (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Those who are prone to mistake Hollywood's products for
reality shouldn't watch NORTHERN EXPOSURE. For them, Alaska
might have look like a better place to live than Hawaii.
However, in the meantime, there were those movies who
offered alternative version of Alaska - closer to the vision
of cold, harsh place of Jack London's novels, or the
frontier of an American Wild West. In such wilderness,
adventure is still possible, but also close encounters with
the characters who many of us wouldn't like to see in our
neighbourhoods. One of such characters is Ben Corbett
(played by Rutger Hauer), hardened trapper who is prone to
violence. In one of such incidents, small row between his
friends and rival hunters ends with bloodshed. Among all of
them, Ben is caught and accused of murder. However, before
he faces trial, he must be transported from isolated town to
proper authorities. This is the job for environmentalist
Eric Desmond (Dylan Walsh), who would soon find that
murderer's friends are ready to do anything in order to save
their friend.
When they think about the plot, filmophiles among the
audience would probably find a lot resemblance to the
classic 1957 western 3:10 TO YUMA. Similarities aren't
accidental - this film really looks like western.
Unfortunately, faced with somewhat small budget, director
Peter Masterson doesn't direct ARCTIC BLUE like western.
Instead, it often baffles audience with shots more
appropriate to experimental video. Screenplay by Ross
LaManna is bellow par, with clear story diluted with poorly
written, yet morally ambiguous characters, and also with
unnecessary elements of environmentalist propaganda. Casting
is also rather bad, especially in the case of awfully inept
Rya Kihlstedt in the role of Eric's girlfriend. Luckily,
Rutger Hauer, same as in many similar instances lately,
saves this basically forgettable piece of low budget cinema
with his screen personality. Also, some of the action scenes
are impressive. But, in the end, ARCTIC BLUE is a film with
the flaws that outweigh its virtues.
