Title
Review for Major League (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
LARRY MCGILLICUDDY
***1/2 (of 4)
Directed by David S. Ward
Starring Tom Berenger, Charlie Sheen, Rene Russo, Wesley Snipes, 
Corbin Bernsen, Margaret Whitton, James Gammon, Bob Uecker
I was a fan of the Atlanta Braves in the 1980's. To put it as kind as 
I can, they sucked. They constantly finished last and lost about 100 
games a year. So imagine the great feeling I had when the Braves 
turned things around in 1991 and won a thrilling pennant race. Major 
League tells a similar story, about the perennially losing Cleveland 
Indians, and a ragtag collection of misfits that finally takes them 
to the top. There is nothing new about that plot, but what makes 
Major League one of the better films in it's genre is how effectively 
it captures the feel of a town energized by it's team's resurgence to 
the top.
The Indians owner has just passed away and his ex-showgirl widow is 
now in charge. She hates Cleveland and wants to move the team to 
Miami, but can only do that if the attendance is low. So she gets 
together the worst collection of players available, figureing there 
is no way they could win. They include Jake Taylor (Berenger), a 
former all-star catcher with a bum knee; Rick Vaughn, an ex-con 
pitcher with a great arm but no accuracy; and Roger Dorn, a 
millionaire prettyboy who refuses to risk his body to make tough 
plays. Also on hand is Willie Mays Hayes (Snipes) who wasn't invited 
to camp but earns his way on the team after displaying his blazing 
speed. Unfortunately, he's a terrible hitter. Lou Brown (Gammon), 
who's coached in the minor leagues for 50 years is selected as the 
manager.
Anyone who has seen sports comedies before knows exactly what will 
happen. The team will play terrible at first, but will band together 
and slowly rise to the top. Then there will be the big game against 
their most feared rivals at the end. So while the basic plot may be 
routine, the execution is not.
Director David S. Ward pulls out all the stops in detailing the ways 
a town gets involved during an exciting pennant race. There is a 
loyal band of fans who chant the song "Wild Thing" whenever Rick 
Vaughn pitches. By the end of the season, the entire stadium is 
taking up the chant, and Wild Thing shirts. This is reminiscent of 
the Atlanta Braves tomahawk chop, if less controversial. The "Wild 
Thing" chant was even carried over into real life and applied to 
Phillies pitcher Mitch Williams. The pure energy and buzz in the 
stadium during the games is perfectly realistic. The games, the 
strategy, the players all seam real. This is a movie that gets every 
single detail about baseball right.
There are also some nice personal moments. Jake tries to get back 
together with his ex-girlfriend (Russo),  who then was an Olympic 
swimmer and sports enthusiast. Now she runs a large library 
collection and has settled down with a snobby, upper class, 
businessman. Jake tries to prove to her that he has matured from his 
former playboy days the last time he was a ballplayer. The chemistry 
between Berenger and Russo is very strong and their many scenes 
together are adorable. Berenger's entire performance is very strong. 
He effortlessly carries the movie as the teams clubhouse leader. 
Berenger is credible wether he is romantic, tough, or funny. Sheen, 
Snipes, and Gammon are also memorable in their respective roles. And 
Bob Uecker, as the Indians announcer, gets off some of the films best 
lines.
Major League rolls along smoothly to it's conclusion, and rarely 
makes a false step. It's obvious Ward cares about this film,. He has 
injected alot of heart into it. A few years later, a sequel came 
along that managed to use the exact same formula with much of the 
same cast. What that sequel was missing was energy and heart. It's 
easy to copy the formula, but it's not easy to create excitement and 
passion. Ward and his actors were able to do that for this film, and 
that's what makes Major League one of the best sports comedies I've 
seen.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm
