Title
Review for Amateur (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Raymond Johnston
Dir: Hal Hartley
Starring Isabelle Huppert, Martin Donovan, Elina Lowensohn, Damian Young
     Hal Hartley's films are often compared to early Jean Luc Godard.
This effort is his most Godardian, down to the casting of French
actress Isabelle Huppert.  The plot is something like PIERROT LE FOU
meets NORTH BY NORTHWEST.  Hartley takes the New Wave themes of love,
money and religion and embodies them in an ex-nun who tries to write
pornography, accountants turned hitmen, an amnesiac, and a grown up
child porn star.  All of these people are mixed up in an international
plot based in Amsterdam involving a MacGuffin, some floppy disks.
    The title not only to Huppert's character being an amateur writer,
but other characters amateurish attempts at blackmail and other
crimes.  The film is also shot, quite intentionally, in an amateurish
style.  The fun story, while quite humorous, is quite contrived.  The
acting is very toned down to a dry deadpan.  All of the film, including
scenes set in upstate New York, was shot in Manhattan.  The film is
entirely in close-up and no attempt is made to develop space according
to normal Hollywood rules.  The overall effect is that of watching a
prolonged student project, but of course a very good one.
     The lack of normal spatial development creates a disjointed view
of New York.  No landmarks are seen except Grand Central Station, a
location from NORTH BY NORTHWEST.  It is not until the characters
mention it, that it is clear that the location of the film even is New
York.  Hartley presents a deconstructed New York of alleys, diners,
abandoned buildings, stairways, that could be anywhere.  They are
generic crime drama locations.
      Comedy in the film comes from the banality of the conversation.
Hitmen discuss the shortcomings of various cellular phone models, porn
publishers decry their lost dreams of making an important statement.  A
policewoman goes on and on to confused missing persons until fellow
officers tell her to get a grip.  While the film is funny, there are no
real jokes per se.
     The adult themes of pornography are dealt with in a subdued way.
The film avoids being a sleazy low budget excuse for nudity.  In fact
considering that some of the characters are obsessed with sex, the film
has very little sex and no nudity.  This helps to keep the film focused
on the characters.
     Isabelle Huppert said that her participation in the project grew
from a fan letter.  She wrote to Hal Hartley after seeing his film
TRUST.  She said that she would like to work in more American
independent films.  She pointed out a similarity in the way that
Hartley and her long time mentor Godard work.  Both allow for
spontaneity during rehearsals but want something very precise during
filming.  The film was shot over six weeks after a five week rehearsal
and is funded in part by American Playhouse, a division of public
television.
     A low-budget film like this one is certainly not for the same
audience that revels in the action scenes of SPEED or TRUE LIES.  If
you prefer the classics of the French New Wave to modern Hollywood, I
recommend THE AMATEUR very highly.  Hartley is trying to keep the
spirit of the New Wave alive.

Author
Christopher Null
     Hal Hartley's latest film, AMATEUR, is quite a departure from his
earlier work.  Gone is his traditional lead, the crimson-haired ingenue
Adrienne Shelly, and in her stead are two foreign actresses, Isabelle
Huppert (as a lapsed nun trying to make it as a porn story writer and who
believes she is a nymphomaniac) and Elena Lowensohn (as Sofia, a somewhat
psycho porn star).  Hartley's favorite male lead, Martin Donovan, remains
as Thomas, the slimeball husband of Sofia.
     The plot is this:  Sofia is fed up with Thomas, so she tries to kill
him.  He doesn't die--he just cracks his head and develops amnesia. 
Isabelle finds him and takes him under her already fragile wing.  Throw in
an extortion plot wherein the old Thomas was trying to blackmail a
nameless entity, and add the thugs trying to kill him.  Eventually,
everyone gets sucked into this scheme, and nothing works out for any of
them.
     Why AMATEUR?  Well, all the principals are new at something: 
Isabelle is new at the porn game and a virgin to boot.  Sofia is new at
trying to extort money from someone.  Thomas is new to life in general. 
Clever, right?
     Well....  The problem is that the plot is revealed so cryptically and
moves so slowly that it renders the movie stagnant.  It's difficult to
follow, and the characters drone on and on at each other, philosophizing
at length, about what, I can't even remember.  The action/comedy sequences
are superb, but there just aren't enough of them to carry the film.  The
end result is that AMATEUR is a fabulous story that's told rather badly.
     At least the acting is on target, and the story is original.  And
some of the film's scenes, especially the ones involving the two thugs,
Thomas's old partner, and his torture and revenge, are so bright as to dim
the rest of the movie.
     Hartley's characteristic oddball-ness is here, all right, but the
fresh and funny approach to the way we live our lives is absent.  AMATEUR
could have been an action-driven comedy instead of a sloppy narrative;
Hartley made a "deep" and tragic movie about big-time people.  Whereas a
movie like TRUST, a film about lower-middle class twenty-somethings, was a
comedic riot.  Hal, I hope you return to your old ways.

Author
Craig Franck
"Amateur" is filled with deadpan humor that might be missed if one isn't 
on the lookout for it. "Amateur" also shows what it is like for a man to 
see himself as others do, and not at all like what he sees.
It opens with a scene of a man laying face down on the street. He comes 
to having no idea of who he is. He is befriended by a woman (Isabella 
Huppert) at a dinner who acts as if she may have just landed on her head, 
as well. He quickly learns that she writes erotic fiction for a living. 
She invites this total stranger to stay at her apartment. (Her trustful-
ness may come from the fact that she has lived in a convent for the last
15 years, something she went ahead and did even after the Mother of Christ
herself appeared to her in a vision and told her not to become a nun.)
Thomas (Martin Donovan) did not fall from the window by accident; he was 
pushed by his wife, the lovely Sophia (Elina Lowensohn). She has had 
enough of him. He got her hooked on drugs at age 12 and used her for his 
porno films. He also tells her that he will disfigure her if she leaves 
him. 
Sophia believes he died in the fall and contacts an associate who tells
her that Thomas was trying to blackmail the person fronting the money to 
make the XXX movies. Sophia herself becomes mixed up in this when she
contacts this person about having some floppy disks with delicate 
information on them. Some men are dispatched to find her, the disks, and 
anyone else involved. 
One of the striking things is the casualness with which all these 
characters come across. The two men who are sent to get the disks strike 
up a conversation about cell phones right before they are about to torture
the accountant Sophia contacted with a live electrical cord. Sophia also 
manages to retain a childlike innocence, even in the face of such an 
abusive relationship. Isabella and her quest to lose her virginity has an
"it can wait another day" feel to it.
Thomas finds it frustrating that people are so fearful of him when he 
hasn't a clue as to why they should be. Gradually, he discovers that he 
really would rather not know the person who he was and wishes to be 
accepted for who he is now. 
The film's eccentric characters keep things interesting as the plot is 
allowed to unfold.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     AMATEUR tells the story of a porn author named Isabelle (played by
Isabelle Huppert from MADAME BOVARY, BEDROOM WINDOW, and dozens of
other films that I have not seen).  She spends her days hanging out at
a coffee shop in Manhattan.  She types her poorly written stories into
her laptop while nursing a couple of cups of coffee so that they last
the entire day.  I kept waiting for her to write "it was a dark and
stormy night ...".
     She is persona non grata at the diner since she pays next to
nothing and occupies a table all day long.  The waitresses insult her.
She retorts that just today she broke down and finally bought a muffin.
They quiz her on the type to see if she is telling the truth, and she
replies that it had mold.  Such is the dialog of the movie.
     Into the coffee shop walks a bleeding and amnesiac Thomas (Martin
Donovan II).  He turns out to have been married to a world famous porn
star called Sofia (Elina Lowensohn from SCHLINDLER'S LIST).  The rest
of the movie consist of Thomas trying to find out who he is and why two
hit men, Jan (Chuck Montgomery) and Kurt (David Simonds), are chasing
his wife and her friend, Edward (Damian Young).
     The dialog by Hal Hartley, who was also the director, is of the
David Mamet staccato style, but without Mamet's intelligent writing.
As best I could figure out, the movie appears to be an attempt at a
parody of a bad movie.  As a parody, it is neither funny nor the least
bit interesting.  Tortuous is the word that comes to mind.
     Let me give you a flavor of the quality of the writing and
directing.  One character looking disheveled and disoriented, hops the
counter at a cheap fast food pizza joint and steals a slice of pizza
with the juice dripping down his chin.  He then steals a drink by
putting his head upside down under a soda fountain.  We are not
supplied with the motivation for this bizarre behavior.  Not that I
cared.
     The acting is not much.  Only Isabelle Huppert plays a character
of any interest.  She tries to make something of it, but fails.  The
other so called actors seem not to care enough to attempt much acting.
With this script, who can blame them.  When one bad guy goes to get
take out, the other reminds him to get a receipt.
     AMATEUR runs way too long at 1:45.  I wish I had voted with my
feet and seen the picture next door.  It is rated R because I guess
they felt something this weird should not be PG-13.  There was a tiny
bit of blood, some discussions of sex, and no nudity that I can
remember.  I would not wish this show on anyone, but I should warn you
that it is so bad that many of you will love it claiming it is a cult
classic and marvelous satire.  Good for you; go twice.  I award the
show 1/2 of a star for a couple of funny lines.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Eugene R Ahn
     I think this is a fantastic movie to see in the mix of blockbuster
summer fare.  On a scale of 1-10, I rate this movie an 8.  In this review
I wanted to concentrate less on the plot and more on how this film
compares to Hartley's past works.
     To those who aren't familiar with Hal Hartley's past works
(UNBELIEVABLE TRUTH, TRUST, SIMPLE MEN), AMATEUR is the best flick to
get acquainted with this young and talented director.  It packs all of
the strengths of his past movies--great cinematography, humorous and
off-kilter dialogue, and strong central ideas--into the most
spontaneous and accessible film from Hartley yet.  In fact, after
watching this film with two Hartley-neophyte friends, they told me that
they felt it was in some ways similar to the now cultural icon, PULP
FICTION.
     And while that analogy is not entirely accurate, it does best
point at what makes AMATEUR so much more wildly enjoyable than his
previous works and more accessible.  Whereas Hartley's past movies
tended to focus in on the suburbs and the tame, this is the first film
of his where there are more fringe elements: pornography, mobs,
torture.  The result is a great mix of Hartley-esque humor with
spontaneity, sex and suspense.
     But at the same time, AMATEUR is still very much about ideas and
it is in every essence a followup to Hartley's last film, SIMPLE MEN.
One of the original endings of SIMPLE MEN was Kate (Karen Sillas)
telling the Sheriff (Damian Young), "Yes I know this man" before he
tries to arrest the protagonist (played by Robert Burke, now of Robocop
III fame).  That scene was cut from the ending since it wasn't
"essential" but it became the nucleus around which AMATEUR was built.
     Before I continue, I should mention that the extra information I
am drawing from comes from a published text of SIMPLE MEN and TRUST.
It features an interview with Hartley which I recommend all Hartley
fans to read if you have not.  It is very revealing and adds to the
enjoyment of watching his films.
     Anyhow, one of Hartley's tenets as revealed in the interview is
"... there is no escape from inequity.  One way or the other he's got to
pay ... you don't get something for nothing, ever." He's referring to the
reason why he felt Bill McCabe in SIMPLE MEN had to be arrested after
returning to Kate.  In the same vein, AMATEUR is about a once callous
man who suffers from amnesia and forgets who he was and becomes an
entirely different, albeit confused persona.  The idea behind AMATEUR
becomes a question of whether it matters to be sorry for something you
did before when you don't even remember doing it.  There are many
religious overtones, not to mention a character who is a former nun who
left the covenant after the Virgin Mary told her she wasn't fit to be
one.  The Bible has one answer, Hartley has another.
     But what I have always liked about Hartley's films is the way
Hartley makes tragedy watchable and bittersweetly so.  The characters
who become pawns in Hartley's tragedy are never victims but are
elevated by their thoughtful dilemmas and pains.  And I think AMATEUR
succeeds more because not only are the stakes higher, but also the very
essence of who Thomas, the amnesiac, decides he is is being
challenged.  Thomas also fights his tragic situation more than past
Hartley protagonists (with the guidance of the former nun, Isabelle)
which makes the result even more effective.
     There's a dialogue in SIMPLE MEN which I feel best sums up the
essential of Hal Hartley:
     "...the funny thing is, when you desire something you immediately
get in trouble.  And when you're in trouble you don't desire anything
at all."
     "I see." "It's impossible" "It's ironic." "It's a fucking
tragedy is what it is, Ned."
     Hal Hartley paints tragedy beautifully in AMATEUR and the best
scene is saved for last as Thomas opens the front door of the church, a
gift of faith from Isabelle misconstrued as something more sinister.
It's hard to believe, but Hal Hartley is just getting better.

Author
Ben Guaraldi
Directed by: Hal Hartley
Photographed by: Michael Spiller
Written by: Hal Hartley
Edited by: Steve Hamilton
Music by: Hal Hartley and Jeffrey Taylor
Starring: Isabelle Huppert, Martin Donovan, Elina Lowensohn,
          Damian Young, Chuck Montgomery, David Simonds
     AMATEUR involves you.  One becomes attached to the eccentric
characters and their confused lives right from the start.  This should
not often be considered an extraordinary feat for a movie, but with the
way this film jumps wildly about from philosophical commentary to deeply
felt emotion to murder scenes right out of Monty Python, this trait is
somewhat surprising.  Add to that acting that is nearly uniformly dry,
characters that develop with massive contradictions and scenes that have
no jokes (yet still manage to be quite funny), and one finds oneself
with the surreal aura that makes this preposterous story believable.
     But let us begin with the characters, who are something to behold:
Isabelle, the nymphomaniacal (and virginal) ex-nun (Isabelle Huppert);
Thomas, the amnesiac pornographer who wants to lead a new life (Martin
Donovan II); Sofia, the child porn star whose naivete is intriguing for
one who has lived so long on the seamy side of life (Elina Lowensohn);
Edward, the sympathetic accountant who is electrocuted and becomes
insane (Damian Young); Jan and Kurt, the well-cultured ex-accountant
hit-men (Chuck Montgomery and David Simonds); and the deeply bass
disembodied voice of the double-crossing Jacques.  To even conceive of
these wildly anti-stereotypical characters is one thing;  to integrate
them into a coherent story is quite another.  Hal Hartley, the writer
and director, manages to do both, weaving in new characters and
sub-plots with the seeming ease that life weaves such things into our
experience.
     But Hartley doesn't truly believe in the randomness of life, as
betrayed by his use of color;  these characters descend from bright
colors to black and white as they get deeper and deeper into the
underworld.  It is inevitable for the color to disturb them again, with
the bright blue of the police officers' uniforms at the end.  Even with
this idea of pre-destiny, Hartley sets up an interesting dichotomy;
Isabelle says that God has told her that it is her mission to save these
people, but Hartley has quite a different idea, ending with the
climactic slaughter at the nunnery's steps.
     And yet what is the point to this entire movie?  The key to
understanding this is within the title:  Amateur.  This word refers to
Isabelle, who struggles to be both a nymphomaniac and a pornographer;
Thomas, who is finding what it is to be a new person and Sofia, who
attempts to blackmailing for the first time.  Then one must look at the
last line, "Yes, I knew this man."  Isabelle still knew little or
anything of Thomas' past life or past wrongs, but she still asserts that
she knows who he is, clearly saying that it is different than who he
was.  Herein the author makes a significant argument for the ability to
start anew.
     And it is this argument, not any of the crowd-pleasing bawdy humor
that it is at the heart of the film.  Hartley's almost bored treatment
of the bleeding heart missing persons cop coupled with his rushed
montage of electrocuted Edward's escapades show that his heart is not
truly in these scenes but is more in the deadpan, dryly humorous
philosophizing that fills the rest of the movies.  Perchance, however,
Hartley will soon find a way to tie these two widely different brands
of humor together.  Then he will have enough practice in both to make
films that adhere them together and cohere as a whole.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Hal Hartley is something of a rogue filmmaker, producing, writing,
and scoring the films he directs.  Of late he is making them for PBS's
American Playhouse.  I have seen only his THE UNBELIEVABLE TRUTH,
though I found that an original and well-made film, perhaps better than
AMATEUR.
     In the current film Hartley brings together a mixed bag of
characters who are unfortunately less than totally believable.  One
problem with his style is that he will completely change our
understanding of a character for the sake of a funny or bizarre line.
The main character is Isabelle (played by Isabelle Huppert).  For
fifteen years Isabelle was a nun.  Then she gave it up to write
pornography and give vent to her nymphomaniacal tendencies.
Unfortunately, her pornography does not sell because she cannot resist
the temptation to turn it into literature.  She is still holding off on
her nymphomaniacal binge because she is very choosy about her choice of
partners.  So with absolutely no experience with sex, she wants to bea
pornographer.  Into Isabelle's life comes a possible sex partner, an
injured man (played by Martin Donovan) with no memory of who he is or
how he came to be injured.  Also into Isabelle's life comes Sofia
(Elina Lowensohn of SCHINDLER'S LIST), a woman who is a porno film star
who has run afoul of a powerful criminal international arms dealer.
The dealer has sent two strangely erudite thugs to murder her.  Sofia
knows who the amnesiac really is, but does not want to tell him.
Complicating matters is a former associate of the amnesiac and Sofia,
Edward (played by Damian Young).
     Hartley's dialogue is as bizarre as Quentin Tarantino's in PULP
FICTION, but with characters not quite as bright.  Hartley leaves long
pauses between spoken lines and this tends to slow the film down.
While some have classified the film as a thriller, the slow pacing
tends to sap any thrills that AMATEUR might have delivered.  In truth,
because of their bizarre behavior and motives it is difficult to
identify with or even believe any of the characters.  One character who
has gotten an electrical shock seems to mimic the childish, brutish
mannerisms of the Frankenstein monster, particularly when he comically
lays siege to a pizza shop.
     Hartley wrote, directed, and even scored this film, much as he did
with his previous film SIMPLE MEN.  That film also featured
performances by Martin Donovan, Elina Lowensohn, and Damian Young.
This is Isabelle Huppert's first performance with Hartley, though she
is a familiar actress in France, particularly from Jean-Luc Goddard's
films.  Seeing similarities in Goddard's and Hartley's styles, she
wrote to Hartley suggesting that she act in his films.  Hartley admits
contritely her letter went unread for several months due to his own
disorganization.  When he realized what the letter was, he paid its
owner more respect.
     This is a film that turns out to be more entertaining than it
might at first appear, but its style does not allow it believable
characters, nor is the humor strong enough to qualify it as a comedy,
nor does the film function as a thriller, nor is the style really
interesting.  The combination of what it contributes in these aspects
is sufficient to make the film watchable, but it is little more than
that.  I give it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
