Title
Review for War Room, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark Takacs
An October Films Release / 96 mins 
film by: DA Pennebaker & Chris Hegedus 
Featuring: James Carville & George Stephanopoulos
Tak Rating: watch it on cable
TV-Style-One-Line-Summary
-------------------------
     You-are-there documentary of Clinton's Presidential campaign,
focusing on James Carville & George Stephanopoulos as they lay out
strategy, do damage control, and cope with daily difficulties.
Tak Summary
-----------
     The film begins tracing the efforts of the War Room -- Clinton's
campaign headquarters -- in the New Hampshire primary, and leads us all
the way through the last days of the election.  We see phone
interviews, bull sessions, staff meetings (equally as boring as any
I've ever been to), pep talks, behind the scenes convention footage,
spin-doctoring, scandal shunting and attempts to leak a story.
    Instead of focusing on Clinton, like the film-makers originally
intended, the focus was shifted to THE WAR ROOM staff, specifically
James Carville and George Stephanopoulos.  Bill Clinton is rarely
shown.  It ends up as a study of THE WAR ROOM and the two people who
successfully guided it.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     I generally don't like documentaries.  They remind me of high
school social studies classes where half the class is sleeping and the
other half is doing last night's homework for math next period.  I
always managed to learn something though, I just never enjoyed the
format.  The same goes for THE WAR ROOM.
    I did get an interesting look at how a campaign runs.  Anyone who
thinks a political campaign is a model of order, organization and
efficiency will be disillusioned after this film.  Bill Clinton's
"well-oiled political machine" is chaotic, headless-chickens
running-around, seat of the pants group like any other group that needs
to respond dynamically to rapidly changing information while still
presenting a unified, organized and dignified front.  Only the efforts
of Carville and Stephanopoulos lend the mess any direction.  While
usually hellish to be involved in, such chaos is great to watch.
    Repeatedly during the campaign, THE WAR ROOM staff has to deal with
mudslinging from other candidates and questions about Clinton's past.
These include draft issues, Jennifer Flowers, and college activist
organizations.  With some of these same issues plaguing Clinton today,
it's interesting to realize that some of the same people
(Stephanopoulos at least) are still at work defusing and directing
policy.
    The human elements are THE WAR ROOM's best point.  That and the
LACK of narration.  Seeing the excitement after the debates, seeing the
tense final days when everything is topsy turvy, seeing their
depression when a news story is suppressed, seeing their reactions on
the last day as it slowly dawns on them that they've done it.  These
are the things that made the film watchable.
    There's some great lines here too.  And you know they're not
scripted... they're real lines.  After a phone interview -- "I bet I
said something you could take out of context" -- Bill Clinton.  The
sardonic Carville has several; my favorite regards Perot's expensive
campaign -- "That's gotta be the single most expensive act of
masturbation...".  And Stephanopoulos after the election results are in
-- "Now we have to actually do something..."
    One thing I can't figure out -- how do they expect to make money on
this film?  I can't see it being a big box office draw. The husband and
wife team of Pennebaker and Hegedus were dead set on making a feature
length film, but who were they making it for?  Who's the PAYING
audience?  Perhaps people who hang out in coffee shops and talk about
politics? (Admittedly, there's a glut of those here in Seattle -- maybe
they're on to something...)  But still.  Maybe they've got a sweet side
deal with video.
Technical Comments
------------------
    Of course, I knew THE WAR ROOM was a documentary and didn't expect
steady-cams and special lighting effects.  Accordingly, documentary
fans will be happy with the obligatory running-with-the-camera footage,
as well as dialogue volume swells, and rough manual pans as they flip
back and forth between speakers.  I think they actually added to the
behind-the-scenes feel.
    How did they film a 96 min movie while still maintaining a behind
the scenes feel?  According to the press packet, the film was done
without huge lights and sound booms.  No one was ever asked to "say
that again for the camera", and the cameraman often lurked in the
corner of the room, rather than crouching at people's feet.
    In fact, the war room staff often forgot the small film and sound
crew was there, often asking incredulously "You guys were filming?  We
thought you were waiting..."  But you'd never know from seeing the
movie.  The film and sound crew got some great stuff from their
unobtrusive locations.
    Additional footage was culled from unused bits of a film called
FEED, which covered the 1992 NH primary, and from network TV source
tapes.  The network excerpt were great.  It was fun to see a TV
reporter being jokingly (?) cut down by his interviewee moments before
she and he start their standard schtick -- "This is Joe Blow reporting
to you live with ..."
Tak Rating system:
------------------
    Documentaries are interesting, but I'm not sure this works well as
a feature film.  It's not really a date film, a Saturday afternoon
matinee, or even late night cable.  I wouldn't be surprised to find
something like this on your local PBS channel, or some of the better
cable educational channels.  Actually, if you're in high school or
taking a poly-sci class, this would be a GREAT excuse for a field
trip.  Maybe you can even get it paid for as an official activity.  If
not, you can at least munch some popcorn and get out of the classroom.

Author
James Berardinelli
With:  James Carville, George Stephanopoulos, Heather Backel, 
       Paul Begala, Stan Greenberg, Mickey Kantor, Mary Matalin, 
       Mitchell Schwartz, and others
Directors:  D. A. Pennebaker and Chris Hegedus
Producers:  R. J. Cutler, Wendy Ettinger, and Frazer Pennebaker
Released by October Films
     THE WAR ROOM is the story of James Carville and George
Stephanopoulos, and their efforts on behalf of Bill Clinton throughout
the 1992 Presidential campaign.  From the New Hampshire primary to
election night, THE WAR ROOM depicts Carville and Stephanopoulos'
backroom strategy sessions and public moves as they catapulted their
man from a virtual unknown to President Elect.
     This is not Bill Clinton's story, nor is it an account of how he
beat the odds to become the first Democratic President in twelve
years.  Rather, THE WAR ROOM is an examination of two of the men
instrumental in the victory:  James Carville, the "Ragin' Cajun" and,
to a lesser extent, the yuppiesque George Stephanopoulos.
     Carville, with his buoyant personality and glib one-liners,
naturally steals every scene from the soft-spoken Stephanopoulos.  THE
WAR ROOM is a pleasure to watch primarily because of Carville's
presence.  Without him, this could have been yet another dry
documentary on the behind-the- scenes political process.
Stephanopoulos is intelligent, but he's not particularly interesting to
watch.  Carville, on the other hand, is magnetic, not only because of
his own keen intellect, but because everything he does is suffused with
a sense of sincerity.
     Most of the highlights of THE WAR ROOM are quips and one-liners
from Carville.  About George Bush:  "He reeks of yesterday.  If I think
of an old calendar, I think of George Bush."  About Ross Perot's
overblown and self-aggrandizing campaign:  "...the biggest single act
of masturbation in the history of the world."  On election eve, even as
a Clinton victory seems certain, Carville ad-libs a tongue-in-cheek
concession speech that, while amusing, sounds exactly what the
candidate might have said had Bush made a miraculous comeback.
     While most of the movie focuses on Carville's professional
activities as he heads the efforts to defuse the Gennifer Flowers
situation, prepares a television commercial, and leads the attack on
the Republicans, we are given a glimpse into his personal life.  His
girlfriend, Mary Matalin, appears several times--albeit doing her job
as President Bush's campaign strategist.
     Clinton, Bush, and Perot have peripheral roles in this film that
concentrates its attention of the people behind the Democratic campaign
strategies.  While elements of the tactics used by the members of the
so- called "War Room" are revealed (including a fascinating discussion
of the relative importance of the colors of Clinton/Gore signs at the
Democratic Convention), the movie is less concerned with political
maneuvering than with the maneuverers.
     Whether your political persuasion is Democratic, Republican, or
somewhere in between, that won't matter much to your enjoyment of THE
WAR ROOM.  Necessary, however, is a fascination for elections and
politics, or a curiosity about the turbulent campaign of 1992.  The
film makers readily admit that movie-goers out for an evening of
mindless entertainment will be turned off by THE WAR ROOM.
Nevertheless, regardless of its subject matter or format, this picture
is intensely interesting and surprisingly fun in its presentation of
one of the most outrageous characters in the Clinton camp.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by D. A. Pennebaker & Chris Hegedus
Starring James Carville, George Stephanopoulos and just about everyone
else involved in 1992's Presidential campaign.
MPAA Rating     none
Running time    Approx. 100 minutes
     THE WAR ROOM is a fun, little documentary about the Bill Clinton
Presidential campaign.  But don't expect to see much of "Bubba" here--
he's as scarce as a leftover French fry in the White House.  The *real*
stars of THE WAR ROOM are communications director George Stephanopoulos
and chief strategiest James Carville.  And, as this film suggests, both
are just as powerful as the President-To-Be.
     THE WAR ROOM goes behind-the-scenes to show who *really* controls a
political campaign.  Though it's the candidates who get the attention,
it's people like Carville who spend hours thinking up the "sound bites"
and the "catch phrases." And it's a process that's both mesmerizing and
funny to watch.  One of the best bits eavesdrops on a seemingly absurd
discussion about "sign size" and how Jerry Brown has bigger letters
than they do!
     Forget real-life cartoons Dan Quayle and Ross Perot; James
Carville is the fun one to watch here.  He's an instant scene-stealer
who burns with such hatred for George Bush that his features
involuntarily crimp every time he hears "read my lips."
     Stephanopoulos is rather bland.  But his cautious tone and boyish
features make the perfect contrast to the wired and wily Carville.  The
odd couple is backed by a diverse supporting cast including Hillary,
Bill, and a dry-humored Mary Matalin.  And listen for a great Al Gore
impersonation!
     THE WAR ROOM only drags at the end.  As the film approaches
Election Day, everything seems to slow to half-speed.  The last
thirty-minutes are tough--especially with the outcome already known.
But a sincere speech from Carville helps end everything on a high
note.
