Title
Review for On Her Majesty's Secret Service (1969)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     When Sean Connery decided to take a rest from playing James Bond,
new film actor George Lazenby was chosen as his replacement.  Lazenby
won the Golden Globe in 1969 for the most promising male newcomer for
his role in ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE.
     Lazenby makes the mistake of trying to imitate Connery rather than
giving his own interpretation to the role, and as we all know,
imitations just make us yearn for the genuine article.  Lazenby, an
exceedingly plain looking actor devoid of much personality, lacks
Connery's handsome face as well as his suave demeanor.  He went on to
appear in the television soap opera "General Hospital" and in many
minor films.  But, thankfully, he never again attempted the travesty of
acting the Bond role.
     (Bond films titillate with hints of nudity and sex while showing
neither.  ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE skirts the no nudity policy
by having naked women dance during the opening credits, but they appear
only in silhouette.)
     When a beautiful women named Tracy (Diana Rigg) runs away from
James Bond in the story's opening sequence, it causes him to remark
that, "This never happened to the other fella."  The line pokes fun at
the switch but also serves to remind us that our old favorite is gone.
(Connery will be back two more times as James Bond, something we didn't
know or even suspect when this movie first played.)
     The intelligent and sexy Diana Rigg, rightfully famous for her
role as Emma Peel in the TV series "The Avengers," seems miscast as a
Bond beauty.  She's so much smarter than Lazenby than she seems out of
place.  (I once had the delight of spending time in a small room with
Diana Rigg as we waited to see a private doctor in Harley Street in
London.  I was merely a sick tourist, and she was there to escort her
ill mother.  Even without make-up or fancy clothes her natural beauty
dominated the room like a thick perfume.)
     When Lazenby, as Bond, quits in a huff early on in the film, one
feels like applauding in the vain hope that Connery will return
forthwith -- the applause being motivated as much by wanting to dispose
of Lazenby and his lackluster performance as by getting our old hero
back.
     The story's plot reeks of triviality.  SPECTRE's #1, played this
time without much energy by Telly Savalas rather than the much better
Donald Pleasence, runs an exclusive allergy institute high atop a
private, snow-covered mountain.  Richard Maibaum's script doesn't tell
us much about SPECTRE's plans until the last third of the movie.
Eventually, we learn that the dastardly deed in the works is the
unleashing of a deadly disease throughout the world.  That is, unless
SPECTRE gets a huge payoff.
     One of the secret advance technologies Bond uses is a small
photocopying machine of the size that most secretaries have in their
offices today.  One day's imaginary wonders rapidly become tomorrow's
commonplace tools.  We're still waiting, however, for THUNDERBALL-style
personal jetpacks to be available at Sharper Image.
     The show has several technical problems.  As Bond and Tracy race
one night down the mountain on skies with a band of men with guns
skiing furiously after them, the lighting is bizarre.  Scenes clearly
shot during the day are interlaced with ones shot at night.
     My son was surprised to see Bond wearing a dress.  After arguing
unsuccessfully with him that it was a actually a kilt, I gave up and
allowed as how it was a dress afterall.  A rose by any other name, etc.
     "I hope I can live up to your high standards," Bond says at one
point.  Well, Lazenby couldn't and didn't.
     ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE runs way too long at 2:20.  It is
rated PG for violence and sexual innuendo and would be fine for kids
around nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, liked this movie but still likes
THUNDERBALL the best.  He did not like Lazenby at all, and he thought
the new actor playing SPECTRE's #1 was not creepy enough.  He has seen
the first 6 Bond films now, and he likes this one least of all.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: George Lazenby, Diana Rigg, Telly Savalas, Ilse Steppat, 
      Gabriele Ferzetti, Angela Scoular, Catherina Von Schell, 
      Bernard Lee, Lois Maxwell, Desmond Llewelyn
Director: Peter Hunt
Producers: Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman
Screenplay: Richard Maibaum based on the novel by Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Michael Reed
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     With the exception of one production aspect, ON HER MAJESTY'S 
SECRET SERVICE is by far the best entry of the long-running James Bond 
series.  The film contains some of  the most exhilarating action 
sequences ever to reach the screen, a touching love story, and a nice 
subplot that has agent 007 crossing (and even threatening to resign 
from) Her Majesty's Secret Service.  The problem is with Bond himself.  
Following Sean Connery's departure after YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE, the film 
makers had to come up with a replacement.  The man they chose, a model 
named George Lazenby, is boring, and his ineffectualness lowers the 
picture's quality.
     ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE plays with Lazenby's introduction.  
At first, we don't see his face -- just the back of his head in an over-
the-shoulder shot.  The "James Bond Theme" is playing, however, so 
there's no doubt who's supposed to be on screen.  Then, after the beach 
fight where Lazenby's features are revealed, Bond makes an oblique 
reference to the actor switch:  "This never happened to the other 
fellow."  Later, Moneypenny remarks that Bond is "still the same James."
     Lazenby can handle the action sequences, but that's about all he 
masters.  For most of the film, he's stiff and uncharismatic, exhibiting 
little of the style and charm that marked Sean Connery's interpretation.  
Worse, Lazenby seems to be intentionally imitating his predecessor (a 
mistake that Roger Moore did not make in LIVE AND LET DIE), which only 
reminds us what we're missing.
     Even considering the leading man's limitations, however, ON HER 
MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE is still a fine motion picture.  It's the only 
Bond film where 007 genuinely falls in love.  The object of his 
affection, Tracy (Diana Rigg), is the troubled daughter of a European 
crime boss, Draco (Gabriele Ferzetti).  After Bond saves Tracy's life 
and pays off a 20,000-franc debt, Draco becomes interested in acquiring 
the British agent as a son-in-law.  Bond declines his offer of one 
million pounds to marry Tracy, then proceeds to fall in love with her 
anyway.
     The romance comprises most of the film's first forty-five minutes, 
as well as the final fifteen.  For a series known for its action, the 
sensitivity of the James/Tracy pairing is surprising.  Rigg does a 
marvelous job holding up her side, and, after viewing her performance, 
it's not hard to understand how Bond could fall for the headstrong 
Tracy.  Lazenby, on the other hand, manages to be merely adequate -- 
this is the only occasion when a Bond woman upstages 007.  ON HER 
MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE contains three of the most tender moments ever 
to appear in any Bond film:  James wiping away Tracy's tears at her 
father's birthday party, the marriage proposal, and the final, 
heartbreaking scene.
     The movie isn't all love-and-kisses, however.  The main storyline 
involves the return of Blofeld (Telly Savalas in this incarnation).  
This time, he plans a campaign of biological warfare to be waged from a 
"research clinic" high in the Alps.  Posing as a genealogist (Blofeld 
wants to legitimatize his claim as Count de Blochamp), Bond visits the 
place.  Despite their face-to-face meeting in YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE, 
Blofeld doesn't recognize his adversary (maybe the change to Lazenby 
confused him), but a minor mistake blows 007's cover, and he's soon 
running for his life, with Blofeld and his imposing assistant, Irma Bunt 
(Ilse Steppat), right behind him.
     The climactic half-hour of ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE is 
almost non-stop action.  There's a stunning night ski sequence, a car 
chase down icy streets and through the heart of a stock car race, an 
avalanche, a helicopter raid on Blofeld's clinic, and fisticuffs on a 
speeding bobsled.  Director Peter Hunt has a flair for these kinds of 
scenes, and he keeps viewers on the edge of their seats.
     Of the eleven Bond films scored by John Barry, the composer's work 
for ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE is his best.  Despite the absence of 
title song lyrics, the opening number is rousing (it was later used as 
incidental music during the teaser of A VIEW TO A KILL).  The love song, 
"We Have All the Time in the World", sung by Louis Armstrong, provides a 
perfect accompaniment to James and Tracy's growing attachment.  And the 
placement of the "James Bond Theme" is without flaw.
     After the relative commercial failure of ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET 
SERVICE, Lazenby thankfully retired from the role, and Connery returned 
for one more go-around.  It's sad to consider what this film could have 
been with the original lead, but encouraging that it's so good without 
him.  Even featuring an inferior 007, ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE is 
a landmark change-of-pace, and an exhilarating and affecting piece of 
entertainment.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Andrew Hicks
ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE (1969) **
        In between YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE and DIAMONDS 
ARE FOREVER was this odd little James Bond film.. I shouldn't call 
it a little film; it's 140-minute running time is the longest of the Bond 
series. It's also the only one to star George Lazenby (Never heard of 
him? Neither have I.) as 007. Being sandwiched between two Sean 
Connery movies makes this one look that much more amateurish in 
comparison.
        The epic running time is absolutely unnecessary, as the real 
story doesn't begin for an hour and a half, by which time most other 
movies would be almost over. That first 90 minutes gives us a lot of 
expository information with little action, save the traditional opening 
teaser, and that's not even up to par with the other movies in the series.
        Bond is still after Blofeld (who first popped in YOLT and 
again in DAF and is now played by Telly "Kojak" Savales) here, but 
tired enough of chasing him to take a two-week leave of absence from 
the service. That's when he meets Tracy (Diana Rigg, a.k.a. Emma 
Peel of "The Avengers"), the first woman he truly falls in love with. (I 
guess 700 really is his lucky number.) And certainly his plans for 
marriage don't have anything to do with the fact that Tracy's father, a 
crime boss, offered valuable information about Blofeld's whereabouts if 
Bond would marry his daughter.
        So Bond rushes off to Blofeld's mountain hideout, populated 
by a bevy of beauties who think he's curing them of their allergies, 
when he's really grooming them to destroy Western civilization as we 
know it. (Talk about your unconventional therapy techniques!) Bond 
meets his three-woman quota there before Blofeld discovers that he's 
not really a genealogist on research. The usual death traps and chases 
ensue, including a ski run chase that would be redone and improved 
upon in THE SPY WHO LOVED ME.
        ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE has a little merit. 
The story is decent, albeit way too overblown and long-winded, but 
adding the romance aspect to the Bond series was a good idea, even if 
they did have to add the obligatory young-couple-in-love song 
montage. And there is a truly touching moment at the end of the 
movie. But on the whole, this movie is to be viewed only by the Bond 
fan who absolutely has to see every movie in the series. Otherwise, just 
skip right over it and you won't miss a thing.
        OHMSS has far less action than the others and George 
Lazenby doesn't quite cut the mustard as James Bond. (He does cut the 
cheese a few times, to the disgust of the other characters.) Rolling 
Stone called Lazenby "a one-shot joke" and I have to agree. The 
Rolling Stones called him "Jumpin' Jack Flash" and I have to say I 
have no idea what that means.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
