Title
Review for Pretty in Pink (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Otherwise known as THE J. EDGAR HOOVER STORY... 
sorry, couldn't resist. Let's start the review over...
        PRETTY IN PINK is one of three teen comedies of the 
mid-80's from John Hughes starring Molly Ringwold. When you think 
about it, all the Hughes movies fall into two categories -- dramas about 
the pressures of conforming to the high school masses (THE 
BREAKFAST CLUB, SIXTEEN CANDLES) and fantasies about the 
individualists who don't (FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF, WEIRD 
SCIENCE). PRETTY IN PINK is a mixture of both, giving us 
non-conformist characters Andie (Ringwold), Duckie (Jon Cryer) 
and Annie Potts, along with the dilemma of a mainstream character 
(Andrew McCarthy) who wants Ringwold as a girlfriend even though 
his "richie" friends won't approve.
        Ultimately, this movie is the same typr of predictable psuedo-
drama Hughes gave us in THE BREAKFAST CLUB, only this time the 
lines between characterizations are drawn more tightly. There are only 
two types of people in PRETTY IN PINK -- the mindless masses 
(translation: popular kids) and the people who are outcasts because 
they think for themselves and have outside interests. I think you can 
tell which group I side with in this case. I've always been one of the 
people who doesn't fit in, knows he doesn't fit in and doesn't want to fit 
in. So the movie rings true, even if Andrew McCarthy has never asked 
me out.
        But the main assumption of the movie is that the two groups 
of people can never mix. McCarthy loses his popularity in pursuing 
Ringwold and Ringwold is considered a sell-out by Duckie (and if 
there's one thing you should learn in life, it's to never get someone 
named "Duckie" on your bad side) for dating McCarthy... Of course, 
Duckie has also had a public crush on Ringwold for the past ten years, 
so that may account for part of his not approving the relationship. 
Still, I know from experience that popular people and independents do 
mix. I've always been liked by mainstream society even if our main 
interests and convictions in life clash horribly, preventing the 
friendship from moving beyond the acquaintance level. Even though 
I'd never pretend to be something I'm not to get friends, if someone 
accepts me as I am and wants to be my friend, who am I to turn that 
person down no matter how popular he or she already is? And I think 
anyone outside of a John Hughes movie would agree with me on that 
point.
        PRETTY IN PINK addresses familiar issues but not in a 
relevant way. The dilemmas of the main characters don't seem 
incredibly feasible to me. If your friends ostracize you for associating 
with someone they don't like, they weren't true friends to begin with. 
No, my name isn't Oprah all of a sudden, but that's kind of an obvious 
point.
        And if you're the type who is independent of society and find 
out an attractive and popular member of the opposite sex wants to go 
out with you, for God's sake, say yes. Why would you even think twice 
about such a thing?
        And if you've had a case of openly unrequited love for almost 
three presidential administrations for a person who clearly wants the 
relationship to stay at the level of friendship, don't act like a jerk when 
that person finds a love interest.
        And if you're Molly Ringwold, you'd better get used to the 
fact that you'll never work again in Hollywood and just hope the 
residual checks from Saturday afternoon airings of movies you did ten 
years ago keep coming in.
        And if you're John Hughes, stick with the fantasy movies 
instead of the predictable teen drama movies that are no longer 
relevant.
        And if you're a bitter teenage movie reviewer who uses this 
forum to get cheap laughs insuting people with more money than 
you... keep up the good work.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
