Title
Review for Mr. Magoo (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Leslie Nielsen, Kelly Lynch, Ernie Hudson, Stephen Tobolowsky, 
      Matt Keeslar, Nick Chinlund, Malcolm McDowell, Miguel Ferrer, 
      Jennifer Garner
Director: Stanley Tong
Producer: Ben Myron 
Screenplay: Pat Proft & Tom Sherohman 
Cinematography: Jingle Ma
Music: Michael Tavera
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     When Walt Disney Pictures announced a live-action feature based on 
the '60s cartoon series of "Mr. Magoo," special interests groups 
representing the vision-impaired let out a cry of dismay.  MR. MAGOO, 
they claimed, would be an insult to the men and women they represented.  
In fact, they were wrong.  MR. MAGOO is not just an insult to the blind 
and near-blind, it's an insult to every human being who has the 
misfortune to suffer through this dreadfully unfunny, 90 minute 
atrocity.  
     It's stating the obvious to remark that Disney appears to have run 
out of original ideas.  Look at their roster of 1996 and 1997 releases, 
and you'll see a shocking list of retreads, including 101 DALMATIANS, 
GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE, JUNGLE2JUNGLE, THAT DARN CAT!, FLUBBER, and now 
MR. MAGOO.  The best of these (GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE) was mildly 
entertaining.  The worst, MR. MAGOO, exposes just how painful a bad 
movie experience can be. 
     The first problem with MR. MAGOO is the script.  Despite the 
collaboration of NAKED GUN scribe Pat Proft, MR. MAGOO is comically 
barren.  From beginning to end, there's not a laugh to be found.  Every 
attempt at humor -- and there are lots of them -- falls flat with an 
audible thud.  You'd think that out of the dozens of gags jammed into 
this film, at least a few would work, but that's not the case.  I've had 
more laughs during Ingmar Bergman pictures.  
     Then there's Leslie Nielsen, who looks, sounds, and acts absolutely 
nothing like the animated character (memorably voiced by Jim Backus).  
In the past, Nielsen has proven his comic aptitude with roles in movies 
like AIRPLANE and THE NAKED GUN.  Lately, however, he has been getting 
lazy, taking parts in the likes of DRACULA: DEAD AND LOVING IT, SPY 
HARD, and MR. MAGOO.  Even if Nielsen was in top form, it would take an 
incredible stretch of imagination to see him as Magoo (especially since 
we're reminded of the original by the short cartoon segments that open 
and close the film), but "top form" is not a phrase I would use to 
describe his performance here.  This is strictly a take-the-money-and-
run operation.
     The story, which, like many Disney stories, can be described in one 
long sentence:  Magoo is the only witness to the theft of a rare jewel 
from a museum, and, as he is trying to apprehend the thieves on his own, 
the police mistake him for the robber.  The cops are played by Ernie 
Hudson and Stephen Tobolowsky, who take their lumps early and often.  
The bad guys are Kelly Lynch (who does a lot of martial arts-type 
kicking), Nick Chinlund, and Malcolm McDowell (who has the good sense to 
look embarrassed).  Matt Keeslar portrays one of Magoo's sidekicks -- 
his nephew, Waldo.  The bumbling man's other, more interesting companion 
is a dog named Angus.
     Most of MR. MAGOO's humor comes in the form of failed slapstick.  
The cartoon violence level in this film doesn't approach that of HOME 
ALONE 3 or FLUBBER, but it's still pretty acute, with characters getting 
hit on the head with sledgehammers and knocked off snowy precipices.  
There's a non-violent bit with Magoo preparing a chicken dinner that 
could have been funny if it was handled better, but, compared to Mr. 
Bean's recent, similar misadventure, it doesn't hold up well.  Then 
there is the series of lame jokes that result from Magoo's near 
blindness, such as the occasion when he mistakes a wild animal for a 
baby.
     I'm willing to cut director Stanley Tong a little slack.  Tong, a 
Hong Kong film maker trying to break into the Hollywood market, has 
helmed several Jackie Chan movies, including FIRST STRIKE, RUMBLE IN THE 
BRONX, and SUPERCOP.  His chief talent, that of choreographing martial 
arts fights, is wasted here (despite some high kicking by Kelly Lynch).  
Like John Woo (HARD TARGET) and Ringo Lam (MAXIMUM RISK) before him, it 
appears that Tong has been consigned to the purgatory of making a bad 
movie as his entry into the American mainstream. 
     It is worth noting that, unlike many Disney films which hold a 
perverse appeal for the under-10 crowd while driving parents to 
distraction, MR. MAGOO appears to bore viewers of all ages.  The 
screening I attended was wall-to-wall kids, and, for the most part, they 
didn't seem to be enjoying themselves.  When the film was over, I asked 
one little girl what she thought of it.  Her pained expression confirmed 
the adage that a picture can indeed be worth a thousand words.  MR. 
MAGOO is the kind of movie that should be rejected by any potential 
viewer, sight unseen.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Some concepts seem patently hopeless from the beginning, a
live-action version of MR. MAGOO being a prime example.  The cartoon
figure Mr. Magoo, the bumbling blind man, can be quite funny, but only
in small doses and only within the confines of animated images.
     If you think NAKED GUN star Leslie Nielsen is a dubious choice to
play the role of the short guy who runs into walls, you are right, but
there is an even more astonishing selection.  For a director they
tapped Hong Kong's Stanley Tong, whose resume consists mainly of a
handful of movies featuring martial arts expert Jackie Chan.
     The story, such that there is one, is about a large, stolen ruby,
which looks a Woolworth reject.  Mr. Magoo gets it and, of course, does
not realize he has it.  Mayhem then ensues as the bad and the good guys
chase each other with Mr. Magoo frequently oblivious to the fact that
anyone is being chased.
     Like HOME ALONE 3 but without any class, MR. MAGOO can only be
described as painfully bad.  Fifteen minutes of it feels like an
eternity.  The movie's humor is pathetically lame, and the pacing is
way off.
     When one is stuck in a theater for an hour and a half watching
what claims to be a motion picture, one looks for some solace.  MR.
MAGOO provides only three such moments.
     The movie begins and ends with the classic cartoon version of the
character, who exudes his usual charm.  The only other saving grave in
the movie itself is Angus, the sweet little bulldog.  Angus
demonstrates more genuine emotions and a wider acting range than any of
the humans in the picture.  Finally, the ending credits contain
outtakes of the movie, which have some of the genuineness and
spontaneity that the movie badly lacked.
     Rather than attempt to adapt Mr. Magoo to a non-cartoon movie,
Nielsen makes the strategic mistake of trying to literally be a human
version of the cartoon.  He has trouble sustaining the squinting eyes
and the affected voice, and even when he does it comes off as awkwardly
unfunny.
     My wife managed to get some sleep during the movie, but I was not
so lucky.  Hopefully, this picture will force producers to think harder
about which subjects have promise and which do not.
     MR. MAGOO runs 1:37.  It is rated PG for comic violence and would
be acceptable for all ages.
     My son Jeffrey, age 8, said he thought the movie was good and
really funny, but recommends you not choose it if you want an action
movie.  He said he liked HOME ALONE 3 much more.  His friend Maxim, age
9, said that he thought it was good but very silly and parts did not
make sense.  His other friend Nickolas, age 8, said he'd give the movie
*** 1/2, but that it was really silly.
