Title
Review for Manhunter (1986)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
He's a completely different monster than the Wagnerian cannibal glimpsed
in The Silence of the Lambs.  Released five years earlier, Manhunter
(based on the book Red Dragon) views Dr. Hannibal Lecter (spelled
Lektor, here) with clinical restraint, as glimpsed in a clean,
antiseptic white cell.  Respected British actor Brian Cox (Rushmore)
would not be so gauche as to flare his nostrils while smelling you --
he'd catch you off guard, throwing away the line about your cheap after
shave with "a ship on the bottle" with a bemused note of thinly veiled
contempt.
One could discuss Cox's superb performance for the length of an entire
review yet he's only in three crucial scenes opposite his captor,
semi-retired Will Graham (William L. Petersen, To Live and Die in
L.A.).  As in Silence, Graham users Lektor as a vessel to recover the
mindset of tracking serial killers for the FBI.  Lektor's chilly,
sensual brilliance pervades the entire film, taking a psychic toll on
Graham.  Their scenes together alternate between mindfucking stabs
("Dream much, Will?") to vague, unsettling attraction.
The central conflict with Will Graham is his cursed ability to read the
mind of a psychopath, but decoding the mind of a killer is no easy
matter.  Despite the false promises from his friend and supervisor Jack
Crawford (Dennis Farina, Snatch) that he'll only be an advisor, Graham
finds himself once again slipping into old habits.  Before long, he's
empathizing with the killer, which may lead to some major breakthroughs
in the case while tearing Graham's family apart.
The presence of evil haunts Manhunter, intangibly.  The graphic
forensics reports Graham prepares, outlining the macabre crime scenes in
vivid detail, allow the imagination to fill in what happened within the
silent houses and rooms he explores.  Graham flatly describes blood on
the wall from arterial spray as the victim tried to fight, knowing that
the killer was headed for the children's room.
As serial killer Francis Dollarhyde, Tom Noonan (What Happened Was...)
is given the role of a lifetime.  Introduced at the midpoint of Graham's
search, this fiend is both demigod and terrified child trapped within a
shy, soft-spoken introvert.  Noonan brings an odd, unpredictable
stillness to the role, whether softly threatening to staple a victim's
eyelids to their forehead or making tender, awkward advances on a blind,
fiercely independent co-worker (Joan Allen, The Ice Storm).  Dollarhyde
is viewed with cool restraint, biding his time until unveiling his
twisted fantasy to transform into a God without remorse.
Michael Mann, well regarded for his minute attention to technical as
well as psychological detail, is very specific with the FBI procedures. 
There is a fascinating sequence concerning dusting a victim's eyes for
fingerprints and another in which the experts scan a handwritten note
from the killer, using infrared lasers to pick up details invisible to
the human eye.
While certain elements of Manhunter are slightly dated, such as
overdressed cops and the ever-present synthesizer score, Dante
Spinotti's crisp visuals still resonate.  His vaguely unsettling angles
often cramp actors into the corners of a shot.  The color scheme is
filled with rich, saturated hues that envelop images in a glossy,
pungent web.  Mann and Spinotti make extensive use of mirrors and
shadows, often framing Graham's reflection in glass during crucial
moments of duress.
Graham's investigation leads to a harrowing confrontation with
Dollarhyde, the troubled beast he had long envisioned on paper.  This
crucial meeting is symbolized by Graham smashing through a glass
doorway, breaking the thin mirror that kept them separate (at least in
Graham's mind).  Unsubtle, perhaps, but after two hours of slow burning
intensity the explosive moment feels earned (accompanied by Iron
Butterfly's surprisingly effective In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida).
The most perceptive scene is not the appropriately grisly finale or even
the company of Dr. Lektor.  It's a brief discussion between Graham and
his stepson (David Seaman) walking through the long aisles of a
supermarket.  The boy asks a few wary questions about Lektor's crimes
and their effect on Graham, who recovered through a long period in a
mental institution.  Graham must provide honest answers while protecting
the child from the horrific details.  Petersen finds the right balance,
investing the scene with careful tenderness.
The release of Manhunter on a limited edition DVD is meant to coincide
with Ridley Scott's Hannibal, the long anticipated sequel to Jonathan
Demme's eerie Silence of the Lambs.  Despite the appearance of Dr.
Lecter/Lektor, there's no guarantee of a crossover fan base.  Manhunter
lacks catchy one-liners about eating someone's liver with fava beans and
a nice chianti (fh-fh-fh-fh), nor does it present cold blooded
psychopaths as pop culture icons befitting a t-shirt.
Instead, Michael Mann unnerves his viewers with this psychologically
slippery, contemplative and disturbing thriller about a detective
searching under his own skin for the criminal impulse.  As Lektor
reminds Graham, "The reason you caught me is we're just alike.  You want
the scent?  Smell yourself."  As Graham ultimately discovers, once you
enter the mind of the killer, you may never return.
Director: Michael Mann
Producers: Richard A. Roth
Writer: Michael Mann
Starring: William L. Petersen, Kim Greist, Joan Allen, Brian Cox, Dennis
Farina, Stephen Lang, Tom Noonan
No web site.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Manhunter" is based on Thomas Harris's scary novel "Red Dragon," the first book
to introduce Dr. Hannibal Lecter who later resurfaced in both "Silence of the
Lambs" and "Hannibal." Though Michael Mann's film adaptation is not nearly as
good as the novel, nor as good a film as "Silence of the Lambs," it is
occasionally gripping, absorbing stuff. 
This early film does not focus on Clarice Starling, the heroine of the later
entries in the series. Instead, we have a male lead who has one or two screws
loose thanks to his unnaturally intense study of how serial killers think. He is
Will Graham (William Petersen) who has left the agency after being attacked by
Lecter (this time played by Brian Cox) and had to be committed to a mental
institution to recover. But the FBI Sector Chief Jack Crawford (Dennis Farina in
this one, Scott Glenn in "Silence") wants Graham's extraordinary ability to be
put to work on a new serial killer. Apparently, this one killer kills families
in their homes in excruciatingly brutal ways. The FBI has no suspects and no
leads but Graham might be able to find out who the killer is, branded by
policemen as "The Tooth Fairy." And there might be clues related to the killer's
dreams of being loved and an association with the poet/painter William Blake
(dealt with more specificity in the novel). 
Most of "Manhunter" is absorbing, particularly the scenes where Graham
investigates the crime scenes where he notes details of the executions and the
direction in which the blood was spilled (some of the family members were
injured or harmed postmortem). Other scenes with Graham and his wife, Molly (Kim
Greist), lack much thrust or purpose - the character of Molly is so
underdeveloped that we forget he is even married to her. Other characters like
Crawford drift in and out of focus, though Graham does have one or two finely
written scenes with Crawford where he shows his level of attention at all the
details. There is also a superb scene where Graham explains his past condition
to his son at a supermarket - except for some cutaways of his son's reaction,
the camera trains itself on Petersen and he is quite watchable. 
Still, "Manhunter" feels oddly unmoving and closed-off, much like the main
character. There is none of the richness or depth that the book provides. Its
main killer maintains some interest but is saddled with just a shotgun at the
end as the police circle his house - his creative desires and motives are
scantly mentioned here. It is a Michael Mann picture alright, complete with an
electronic score (some distracting songs by Iron Butterfly) and a shootout right
out of his superior "Thief." If nothing else, it is often enticing enough but
not at the level of the book or at the level of "Silence of the Lambs." 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 MANHUNTER (director/writer: Michael Mann; screenwriter: from a Thomas
 Harris novel "Red Dragon"; cinematographer: Dante Spinotti; editor:
 Dov Hoenig; cast: William L. Petersen (Will Graham), Kim Greist (Molly
 Graham), Joan Allen (Reba), Brian Cox (Dr. Lecktor), Dennis Farina
 (Jack Crawford), Stephen Lang (Freddie Lounds), Tom Noonan (Francis
 Dollarhyde), David Seaman (Kevin Graham), Benjamin Hendrickson (Dr.
 Chilton); Runtime: 121; De Laurentiis/Roth; 1986)
Manhunter is adapted from the Thomas Harris novel "Red Dragon." It came
five years before Harris's other novel was adapted to the screen, "The
Silence of the Lambs," and 15 years before the newly released
"Hannibal." It has become a cult favorite, and I thought it was far
superior to the other two films.
There are no over-the-top performances and no unnecessary gore shown,
yet it is a nightmarish voyeristic look at a criminal hunter going after
his prey by looking inside himself for answers. This is an intelligent
psychological portrayal of both a serial killer and the FBI investigator
who dogs him. The killer is awed by William Blake's painting Red Dragon,
while the FBI man visualizes the crime and is thankful that he's not
insane to commit such violence. What director-writer Michael Mann does
well, is build suspense through the serious characterizations. The
actors speak in muted tones, while in the background, the pulsating
soundtrack of bands such as Red 7, Shriekback, and Iron Butterfly, set
the chilling mood. Dante Spinotti's photography is beautifully effective
in making the urban and country landscapes fit so well into the
tenseness of the storytelling, while the widescreen is the perfect way
to see this original thriller.
Former FBI forensics expert Will Graham (Petersen) is personally asked
by his friend and former boss, Jack Crawford (Farina), to return from
voluntary retirement and take on the difficult assignment of catching a
gruesome killer who struck twice, killing two families, in two different
states. He reluctantly accepts, acknowledging how he got into the mind
of cannibalistic serial killer Dr. Hannibal Lecktor (Cox) and was able
to capture this most intelligent and feared psychopath. But he also paid
a heavy price, suffering from a mental disorder, as he had a tough time
getting rid of Hannibal's thoughts. He leaves sulking wife Molly
(Greist) and son Kevin in their idyllic Florida beach house and goes to
the bloody crime scenes in Birmingham, Alabama and Atlanta, Georgia,
hoping he can prevent another killing before the next full moon, three
weeks away. It is believed the killer is attracted to the moon and its
cycles, and plans his killings accordingly. He pictures what the killer,
nicknamed the Tooth Fairy, did, as he watches home videos of the family.
He concludes that the motive to the crime, is in the killer's dreams.
The case gets more complex when he visits Dr. Lecktor in the isolated
cell of the Baltimore asylum he is incarcerated in, as he believes
Lecktor can help him pick up the scent of the killer. Lecktor smells him
and frightens the agent with the knowledge that the two can think alike.
Brian Cox's performance is simply brilliant, his Hannibal is a most
intelligent and frightening one, superior to Anthony Hopkins' campy
portrayal of Hannibal in the other versions. Also, this scene was
brilliantly filmed, as it was perfectly framed, showing in frightful
details the similarity and gulf between these two antagonists, as they
converse while in different cells. The shots of them were framed to
expressly to show them reacting to each other's presence in a
super-sensitive manner, and how different they were from others because
of their rich imagination.
The film suspensefully comes down to whether they can nab the lunar
killer before he strikes again by the full moon. They come upon the
killer under the full moon, where he has a blind woman (Joan Allen)
trapped in his high-tech equipped house. The stylish photography in this
final scene, features mirrors, paintings, images, reflections, lunar
landscapes, all pointing to the killer's urge to kill because he needs
to be wanted and desired. The killer, Francis Dolarhyde (Noonan), shows
that he can be gentle and appreciative of art and nature, and of someone
who desires only him; but, he can also be so twisted that he thinks he
must kill to make himself whole again.
This is an overlooked but superior horror film, one of the best films
from the 1980s. The director's cut video has been released to coincide
with the opening of Hannibal.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
