Title
Review for Soft Toilet Seats (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Tina Valinsky.
Cast: David Alex Rosen, Alexa Jago, Sammi Davis, Jonathan Aube, Michael 
Greene, Margaret Blye, Terri Hoyos, Jim Golden.
1999 - 107 minutes.
Not Rated (equivalent of an R for nudity, sex, profanity, and mild violence).
Opens 10/99 (limited).
Reviewed July 22, 1999.
The name of the movie is "Soft Toilet Seats." Get your laughs out of the way 
right now from that silly, downright ridiculous title, because you are 
unlikely to get many, if any, laughs out of viewing this so-called 
independent romantic comedy. The romance, er, the relationship centerpiece, 
that holds the film together is just about the only thing that works in the 
movie, as the comedy is almost always obvious and poorly written, the drama 
is as ineffective as could be, and worst of all, the movie makes fun of 
death. Not like 1998's "Very Bad Things," which actually had some 
surprisingly humorous parts, but as in offensively making jokes about a very 
serious and poignant death, only to have the "comedy" make a big, loud SPLAT! 
on the floor.
Arne Steinberg (David Alex Rosen) is a hopelessly single man in his 
late-20's/early-30's whose best friend and real estate agent, Joey (Jonathan 
Aube), talks him into moving out of his pleasant Venice Beach den and into a 
suburban San Fernando Valley home, where families surround him from all 
sides. He doesn't much like the neighborhood, and dislikes it even more when 
he discovers that the previous tenant, a young woman by the name of Annie 
Ashland (Sammi Davis), allegedly committed suicide. Arne isn't in the house 
for a whole day when the beautiful Tilly Rensley (Alexa Jago), a self-assured 
English woman and best friend of Annie, shows up at his doorstep, back from a 
6-month expedition in the Brazilian Rain Forest. After Arne is forced to 
break the bad news to Tilly that Annie died, Tilly mourns (in an 
embarrassingly unfuuny scene that goes on forever as Tilly and Arne cry 
together and throw a roll of toilet paper back and forth as they wipe their 
eyes) and then sets out, with Arne in tow, to get to the bottom of her 
mysterious death, positive that Annie wasn't the type of person to kill 
herself.
"Soft Toilet Seats" is the type of movie in which the actors are so energized 
and spirited that you become convinced these poor souls didn't even realize 
that what they were filming wasn't funny in the least. Not even mildly 
amusing, where you believe something is "funny," but not "funny ha-ha." Nope, 
the screenplay gives them nothing to work with, and is so over overwrought 
and intellectually dead that the experience of watching it becomes more 
depressing than actually boring. First-time writer/director Tina Valinsky 
proves here that she certainly doesn't have a way with words nor does she 
know how to make a compelling mystery. The amateurish dialogue constantly 
cries out for another couple rewrites, and even though the film is supposed 
to make you want to know what really happened to Annie, as Tilly and Arne 
investigate, it doesn't include one intriguing sequence when dealing with 
their detective charades.
At first, Arne has no interest in finding out Annie's possible murderer, but 
initially goes along for the ride just because of his infatuation for Tilly, 
who thinks nothing of walking around in her birthday suit. Soon, however, 
their investigation swirls him in and he also becomes set on finding the 
truth, all the while forming a close bond with the kind, determined Tilly 
that doesn't go beyond friendship until the inevitable first kiss that 
appears during the last scene. We've seen this sort of relationship before in 
much better movies, but it still brings on a certain charm, thanks to the 
performances by David Alex Rosen and Alexa Jago. Obviously not the most 
skillful actors, they nonetheless work well togerher, and Jago in particular 
is someone to watch (she reminded me a lot of Kerri Green, a talented actress 
from the 80's who starred in such films as "The Goonies" and "Lucas," but 
then quit the acting business).
The flashbacks to Annie and Tilly's friendship is the real vacuous area of 
the film, as the scenes do not convince us that they are really friends, even 
though a seemingly endless sex scene between the two women is added to the 
mix. Once the climax arises and we learn how Annie really died, the 
circumstances surrounding them in this particular flashback is lightly 
touching and downbeat, but it is foolishly intercut with present-day scenes 
as the story is being told, in which jokes are made left and right. I'm 
sorry, but I simply don't think it is appropriate to be showing someone 
dramatically breathe their last breath, only for the situation to constantly 
be made light of. Worse of all in these later scenes is Jonathan Aube, as 
Arne's friend, Joey, who gives an almost maddeningly annoying performance. 
I'm convinced he couldn't act if his life depended on it.
So now we come back to the title. "Soft Toilet Seats." What does it mean, you 
ask? Well, Arne's new home, he is horrified to discovered, has soft toilet 
seats ("It feels like you're taking a dump on a trampoline!") in the 
bathrooms, causing him dire discomfort. Is there any significance to them 
though? I'm sure they are supposed to have some sort of idiotic 
double-meaning, but all possible symbolism is lost in the meandering, 
irritating particulars of the story. "Soft Toilet Seats" is billed as a "Tina 
Valinsky...kind of film." "Kind of" is right, because the film never once 
feels at all like a satisfying final product.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
