Title
Review for Turbulence (1997)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Paul Miller
The premise of TURBULENCE is I'm sure very familiar to us all.  We've
seen it before in Passenger 57, Executive Decision, and countless other
flicks that are good in there own way.  You know, terrorists take over a
plane, ask the police on the ground for what they what and so on.
TURBULENCE starts out with a "convict" Ray Liotta being accused of a
crime.  You think there is no way he could have done it, he's so open
and kind.  He is taken in and is subsequently transported on a
commerical plane to LA.  This is already a problem.  There is no way
that convicts would be transported on the same commercial flight that
normal passangers would be on.  Anyway, it is Christmas Eve and everyone
is waiting to get to LA and spend Christmas Eve there.  Well, convict
one manages to stop the flight in its proverbial "tracks" and Liotta,
still as calm as ever, takes the other convict out.  He also has eyes
for Lauren Holly, a flight attendent, and seems to grow closer to her.
I didn't like this movie because it seemed to be a rip off of every
other airplane movie I've ever seen.  At one point, Mr. Liotta looked
exactly like Jack Nicholson in THE SHINING (I'm serious!).  It was like
they stole for every other movie down to a "t".  The only reason I did
not give this 0 stars is because it had some okay stunts.  Don't even
bother!

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Ray Liotta, Lauren Holly, Hector Elizondo, Ben Cross, Catherine
Hicks, Rachel Ticotin, Brendan Gleeson Director: Robert Butler
Screenplay: Jonathan Brett
This is going to be a 'how stupid do ya take me for', 'winge review' on
an unhappy viewing of Turbulence.
1.  There must be strict government regulations about the passage of one
or more convicted felons aboard domestic flights - laws which protect
the innocent passengers. I would be very unhappy about taking my family
on board the same flight as two highly dangerous criminals.
2.  I'm also confused about the use of fire arms on air flights. In 'Con
Air', guns were strictly prohibited, even though the level of security
needed was higher on that occasion than in 'Turbulence'. On this flight
they allow four police officers to carry guns on board, yet these law
enforcers somehow manage to get killed and blow a hole in the plane at
the same time.
3.  When taking a prisoner to the toilet, one police officer goes into
the small toilet cubicle with the prisoner, and the other stands
outside. I have no problem with this except why lock the door? Why not
just leave the toilet door open, where both officers can keep an eye on
the prisoner at all times? All part of the stupidity to help create
situational tension.
4.  Gunshots are heard, and the two remaining officers investigate the
noise without cuffing the remaining prisoner to his seat. Trouble,
trouble, boil  and bubble! Soon after this, one officer struggles with
the prisoner, whilst the other just watches at a safe distance holding
his gun - excuse me, but how about lending your buddy a hand???
5.  Lauren Holly (the stewardess) has locked herself in the cockpit
(both pilots are dead) and is trying to program the auto pilot with help
from outside. She allows herself to be distracted and lured outside
(even when the plane is flying into a thunderstorm). Then wastes twenty
minutes of the viewer's time exchanging sexual innuendoes with Ray
Liotta, before finally realising he's evil. Yawn. When frightened, she
runs through the plane closing curtains behind her and putting away
fluffy toys in the luggage compartments above the seats!!!! Lauren,
aren't you meant to be saving the plane? Get back to that cockpit right
now!
6.  Ray Liotta (the serial rapist), is on death row and wants to end it
all with a 'big bang' - plummeting the plane into central district NY.
He goes the long way about trying to do this: namely trying to kill
Lauren, or sabotaging the plane's electrical systems. Wake up Ray, you
have a gun in your hands. Don't throw those bullets away! Wait till the
plane is nearer the city then blow several more holes in the plane. We
have an oversupply of guns on the plane and ya didn't think of using one
- not very smart for a serial killer.
7.  Is it aerodynamically possible for large domestic airliners to fly
upside down????
I'll also mention that Ray Liotta, who carries the same 'Ted Bundy'
charm, overacts with his fun role as the serial killer; and Lauren Holly
has given blondes a bad name. This movie made me laugh at its
incredulous plot as much as it made me want to strangle whoever wrote
the script.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Turbulence (1997) *1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Ray Liotta, Lauren Holly, Ben
Cross, Hector Elizondo, Rachel Ticotin, Catherine Hicks, J. Kenneth
Campbell. Written by: Jonathan Brett, Steven E. De Souza and John Herzfeld.
Directed by: Robert Butler. Running Time: 100 minutes.
Say, tell me if you've seen this before: a crisis on-board a commercial
airliner causes a stewardess to have to fly and land the plane herself.
Airport '97 anyone?
Ray Liotta is a psychotic serial killer being transported from New York to
California on Christmas Eve.  Amazingly, on what would seemingly be a busy
day of travel on one of the most flown routes, only about six other
passengers are on the flight.  Anyway, they take off, Liotta escapes and
kills all the police and the pilots, and stewardess Lauren Holly locks
herself in the cockpit to fly the plane.  The story is beyond routine, the
script is
embarrassing (at one point, this jumbo jet is flying completely upside
down), the characters are worthless, and the performances are annoying.
Surprisingly, co-writer Steven E. De Souza actually wrote the first two "Die
Hard" movies!
"Turbulence" takes place at Christmas time, yet the film was released a few
days AFTER the holidays.  Brilliant marketing, as no one cares about anything
having to do with Christmas after December 26th.  The studio knew they had
a bomb, and purposely dumped it out when the fewest number of people would
see it. [R]
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
In "Turbulence", it's Christmas Eve and only a handful of passengers
are on board the 747 bound for LA from New York. I t looks like an
easy flight for the crew, until four federal marshals, accompanying
psycho serial killer, Ryan Weaver, played by Ray Liotta, and psycho
bankrobber, Stubbs, played by Brandon Gleeson (Mel Gibsons sidekick,
Hamish, in "Braveheart") arrive on board, dampening any holiday cheer.
As the flight approaches a Level 6 (on a grade of 1 to 6) storm,
things get interesting in the passenger cabin as Stubbs decides to
change the order of things. The ensuing melee results in the death of
Stubbs, the four Feds and both pilots, leaving Weaver to stalk the
kind of prey he likes - the frightened, confused flight attendant,
Teri Halloran, played by Lauren Holly.
A cat and mouse suspense story follows  with Teri desperately trying
to land the plane, while Weaver, just as desperately, trying to crash
the 747 into LAX and go out in a blaze of glory.
Well, there are bad films and there are "bad" films. The former kind,
films like "Jingle All The Way", "Dear God", "High School High" or
"Mixed Nuts" are just plain bad. If you saw them, unless I warned you
first, I feel sad for you. You wasted your time and money.
Then there are "bad" films, such as "Turbulence" and last year's "The
Substitute", starring Tom Berringer. These movies stack implausibility
upon implausibility in such a god-awfully groaning way that you simply
have to laugh. Coupling the real humor the filmmakers were injecting
into the story and dialogue  with the silliness of the scripts
stupidity makes this a not bad bit of mindless entertainment.
To its credit, "Turbulence" spends a good amount of the on-screen cash
on the terrific special effects, from the computer derived external
shots of the 747 flying through a most violent storm, to the giant
gimbals used to turn a life size 747 passenger cabin a full 360
degrees - with actors on board!
With the exception of Ray Liotta, who seemed to have a hell of a good
time mugging it up for the camera, there really is not a lot of
substance to the acting here. Lauren Holly, too often, gives the image
of a deer caught in the headlights on the road - her performance will
be compared with Karen Black's from "Airport '75".
"Turbulence" is a no-brain hoot if you have absolutely nothing of
worth to do as an alternate choice. Go to a matinee to see it on the
big screen, or wait for rental.
Teri Halloran, in the end, does find her man, you'll be glad to know.
This film's been panned, but I thought it was a hoot!  "Turbulence" is
one of those so-bad-it's-almost good kind of entertainments.  In fact,
it's far funnier than most of the so-called comedies that ended the
year ("Dear God," "Jingle All the Way").
The stage of unbelievability is set when a Christmas Eve 747 flight
from New York City to L.A. has only about a half dozen passengers.
Until, that is, a convicted armed robber and a lonely-hearts serial
killer (Ray Liotta) are brought on board by four federal marshalls.
Flight attendant Lauren Holly, just dumped by her fiance, is
vulnerable and only wants to meet a nice guy - why, just the type of
woman Liotta's serial killer preys on!
The dumb-as-a-post pilot and co-pilot are killed in short order while
the plane's heading into a level 6 storm with a serial killer who
means to thumb his nose at the autorities by ensuring the plane will
crash into a heavily populated area.  This, of course, results in
officials making a decision to send out a jet fighter to shoot the
commerical airliner down.  As if she doesn't have enough problems on
her hands, Lauren Holly must attempt to land the plane safely with the
radio assistance of a noble and handsome British pilot played by Ben
Cross.
The special effects are pretty good for such a silly plot, especially
during the hilarious climax when Holly's first landing attempt is
aborted after a low swoop over a parking garage gets a Ford truck
stuck to the plane's landing gear.  
Ray Liotta chews scenery and swills Mumm Cordon Rouge throughout!
Lauren Holly looks terrified!  The ground crew is conflicted!
It may have been dumb, but it was a guilty pleasure.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Author
Walter Frith
A lot of films play in limited release late every year to qualify for Oscar
consideration and then go to wide release early in the new year.
'Turbulence' is not of those movies.  It's an early year filler that studios
have to get out of their system after the Christmas and New year holiday
seasons have passed and this is one of the worst times of the year to see a
new movie and this will go down as one of 1997's most badly made films.  A
serial killer, (Ray Liotta) and another federal prisoner are transferred on a
commercial airliner from Kennedy airport in New York City to Los Angeles on
Christmas Eve.  The bad guys naturally get loose and sanity goes out the
window as crime and mayhem break out aboard the plane.  The flight crew is
killed and the automatic pilot is activated and the long and short of it is
that Liotta and a flight attendant (Lauren Holly) are left at odds with one
another.  To put it directly, this movie is a combination of just about every
air disaster movie ever made but to make matters worse, the psychotic nature
of Liotta's character has him spinning off ridiculous and unoriginal dialogue
for cheap laughs and his character echoes that of one from almost any horror
movie you can imagine.  The movie has a dark and sadistic look from a grade B
horror film to boot and its production design, special effects and camera
work are on the amateur level at best.  The failing of Ray Liotta's career in
recent years is one of Hollywood's most puzzling mysteries.  He had such
marvelous promise in 'Something Wild' (1986), 'Field of Dreams' (1989) and of
course his most impressive film 'GoodFellas' (1990).  His last admirable
piece of cinema was 'Unlawful Entry' (1992) in which he played the
personification of evil as a corrupt police officer obsessed with another
man's wife.  I hope Liotta can resurrect his career as 'Corrina, Corrina'
(1994), 'Jade' (1996) and now 'Turbulence' have all been major
disappointments.  As for Lauren Holly (Mrs. Jim Carrey), her biggest claim to
fame was as Andrew Dice Clay's executive assistant in 'The Adventures of Ford
Fairlane' (1990) and as the wealthy socialite in 'Dumb and Dumber' (1994).
'Turbulence' is a movie that deserves to take a dive, literally, at the box
office and it's a film to be avoided at all costs as viewing it can be
hazardous to your mental health.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(MGM)
Starring:  Ray Liotta, Lauren Holly, Hector Elizondo, Rachel Ticotin.
Screenplay:  Jonathan Brett.
Producers:  Martin Ransohoff, David Valdes.
Director:  Robert Butler.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, strong profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  103 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     TURBULENCE is an interesting case of the kind of baby steps Hollywood
takes when it comes to making women equal players in the movie business.
Ten years ago, Sigourney Weaver proved in ALIENS that a woman could carry
a large-scale action film; since then, things have gone from bad to worse
for women in action films.  With TURBULENCE we finally get an entry in the
well-worn "terror in a confined space" genre which features a woman as the
central protagonist -- not just as a ready-for-kidnapping love interest --
and she can't even get first billing ahead of Ray Liotta.  Of course
Lauren Holly is hardly a familiar face or name, which begs the question of
why she received such a plum role.  That is only one of the places
TURBULENCE, a thriller with unique and sometimes compelling rhythms,
misses its chance to be something special.
     Holly stars as Teri Halloran, an airline flight attendant working a
New York-to-Los Angeles Christmas eve flight with only a handful of
passengers.  Ordinarily that would mean a quiet and uneventful flight,
except that two of the passengers are prisoners in federal custody,
including convicted serial killer Ryan Weaver (Liotta).  A charmer who
protests that he was framed by an over-zealous cop (Hector Elizondo),
Weaver begins to win Teri's trust, and appears to save the day when the
other prisoners escapes and kills the federal marshals and the flight
crew.  With no one left to fly the plane to safety, and a massive storm
ahead, Teri seems to be the only chance the surviving passengers have of
getting to Los Angeles alive.  That chance becomes a lot slimmer when
Weaver shows his true colors, and decides that going down in flaming
wreckage is more appealing that a long wait on death row.
     The opening minutes of TURBULENCE make it clear that scripter
Jonathan Brett and director Robert Butler are in full "cut to the chase"
mode.  Our knowledge of Teri as a character consists of the fact that her
fiancee just dumped her, which in turn is infinitely more than we know
about any other character on the plane.  The five civilian passengers each
get ten seconds of exposition before they are trundled off to a closet for
the rest of the film, but it is just as well they were out of the way.
TURBULENCE works best as a physical and psychological mano-a-mano between
Teri and Weaver, with the 747 turning into a careening Winchester Mystery
House of mysterious passageways.  Butler gives much of the first half of
TURBULENCE an effective tension; the atmosphere is surprisingly creepy,
with lightning and Christmas tree lights turning the central confrontation
between Teri and Weaver into something more unsettling than the pedestrian
script could muster on its own.
     Ray Liotta is an interesting villain through that scene, insisting on
his innocence as he works at getting inside Teri's head.  It is a casually
seductive portrayal by Liotta, and sets up a scenario where the hero will
have to outsmart the intelligent antagonist, since as a woman it is less
likely that she will be able to overpower him physically.  Unfortunately,
we already know from the idiotically revelatory ad campaign not only that
Weaver is in fact guilty as charged, but also that he is going to turn
into a bug-eyed, tongue-waggling loon.  Liotta tramples the mid-air
scenery swigging champagne from the bottle, swinging an axe around,
tossing off glib quips and generally doing his best audition for the role
of the Joker if the BATMAN series decides to revive him and Nicholson is
unavailable.  So much for a battle of the minds.
     It is a strange decision for many reasons, but primarily because the
film spends so much time establishing how bright Teri is.  Lauren Holly's
performance doesn't contribute all that much to that perception; she's
feisty enough, but she seems to be going through the motions when the
script gives her a shot at Weaver, and it is hard not to be reminded of
Julie Haggerty's thin-voiced flight attendant from AIRPLANE! when Holly
has to struggle with the auto-pilot.  No, Teri's smarts are revealed in a
series of scenes in which a British pilot (Ben Cross) talks her through
the landing  process.  Those scenes, far longer and more technical than
you might expect, could have anxious action fans fidgeting in their seats,
but the simple competence of Cross's tones give them a steady, gripping
tempo.  Rachel Ticotin is similarly strong in the similarly miniscule role
of an air traffic controller, radiating the kind of intelligence the role
of Teri really needs.  In fact, if TURBULENCE was going to give us a
female hero, it could have gone the extra step and given us one as strong
as Ticotin.  Go one step still further and make Cross the sly, seductive
villain, and you really could have had something.  TURBULENCE may be a
better than average adrenaline shot, but it's still basically business as
usual, even with no Arnold or Sly or Jean-Claude.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     After seeing an ad of an airplane in a thunderstorm, readers might
accidentally believe that the name of the movie TURBULENCE refers to
some atmospheric condition.  After enduring all of this NIGHTMARE ON
ELM STREET meets AIRPORT, I can correct this misconception.  The title
refers to the state of mind of writers Jonathan Brett, Steven E. De
Souza, and John Herzfeld when they composed the script.
     I would like to issue a challenge to viewers of this film by
director Robert Butler.  Why don't you take along an abacus and try to
count the number of actions that either make no sense or are just
outright ludicrous?  I lost track, but I know the number is in the high
double digits.  So that not too many more of you waste your money on
this monstrosity, I will tell you several of them, but rest assured
that I have just scratched the surface.  If you are worried about my
giving away part of the plot, I will probably not tell you much more
than the trailers, but I will use many examples to illustrate my
points.
     Detective Hines (Hector Elizondo) has tracked down serial killer
Ryan Weaver (Ray Liotta).  Although Weaver is supposed to have raped
and murdered five women and killed several cops, there is a question of
whether Hines has planted evidence, and there is a hint of a possible
Internal Affairs investigation.  After Weaver is cuffed and is lying on
the ground, Hines will unbelievably start kicking him in front of the
other officers.  (Don't forget to count.)
     Weaver and another, much slimier looking criminal named Stubbs,
played with all the finesse of a wrestling star by Brendan Gleeson, are
being extradited to LA.  They are flown across the country on a 747
commercial airplane.  Weaver says, "Stubbs may be a moron, but he's a
professional."  The script is so bad that I was laughing very loudly at
all the wrong places.
     Here is a question for you.  You are sitting in a plane seat.
Outside your window six vans labeled "Corrections" come screeching up
with their sirens blaring.  Out of them jump several marshals with
large guns, bringing two prisoners in chains to ride in the aircraft
with you.  Now, do you walk or run for the nearest exit?  Trick
question.  You stay of course.  And if you are a stewardess like Teri
Halloran (Lauren Holly) who has just been jilted by her fiance, you
start making eyes at the cute serial rapist.
     I have lots more questions for you.  Let's say you are a federal
marshal and your prisoner goes to the bathroom.  Do you think it is
necessary to keep a close eye on him?
     Soon there will be a gunfight. Holes are blown in the plane that
miraculously will later seem to self-repair, but before they do, the
plane will start losing control.  Here are two of my favorites
questions.  If you are a flight attendant, do you think you might want
to call the captain to tell him what is going on?  And if you are the
last person left flying the plane and the plane is on the verge of
free-fall, do you think you'd take off your seat belt to roam around
the plane to check on the rest of flight crew?
     When most of the people on the plane are murdered, who is looked
upon first to provide leadership?  The friendly serial killer of
course.  As you may guess, this misguided trust will soon pass and the
real hero of the tale will emerge, flight attendant Teri.  She will go
to the cockpit and fly the plane.  Well, that is when she isn't trying
to be Sigourney Weaver to Liotta's rendition of the monster.  This
shamelessly manipulative story titillates the audience with a
never-to-be sex scene as a prelude to more violence.
     The only part of the show that works has the plane heading through
the thunderstorm while crisis control in LA is helping our poor
heroine.  Rachel Ticotin plays Rachel, the leader of the crisis center.
She tries to reassure Teri by telling her, "You are flying the most
sophisticated plane ever built."  "Yes, but what if this sophisticated
plane," asks Teri, "flies into an unsophisticated storm?"
     Of all of the flaws in the show, my favorite is when Weaver is
outside the thin wooden cockpit door trying to enter.  Does he break it
down?  No, he tries to talk Teri into coming out.  The piece de
resistance is the crisis control center's attitude.  At first they tell
her to ignore him since he will kill her, but then they decide maybe it
would be okay after all.  She leaves to walk over all the dead bodies.
Surprise, he is out there lurking in wait for her.  And surprise, the
scene is lifted straight out of a schlock horror film.
     Halfway through this abysmal picture, I began to think of the
Roman emperors.  I wanted so bad to stand up, turn my thumbs down, and
yell, "kill 'em all."
     Let me leave you with the question that Weaver asks Teri: "You are
a convicted inmate on death row.  What five albums would you pick?"
     TURBULENCE runs 1:43.  It is rated R for gory violence, implied
rape, and profanity. The show would probably be okay for older
teenagers who like horror flicks.  I hated this movie and recommend
everyone avoid it.  I give it 1/2 of a star for the special effects.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
     It's an unfortunate thing to start off the 1997 movie season on 
such a low note.  As disaster films go, TURBULENCE is representative of 
the kind of mindless, lifeless nonsense that makes bloated thrillers 
like Stallone's DAYLIGHT seem brilliant by comparison.  Of course, with 
a bad movie of this sort, it's always possible to argue that it can be 
fun if approached in the right frame of mind.  And, indeed, there are 
numerous instances when watching TURBULENCE is more akin to viewing a 
parody like AIRPLANE! than any of the numerous, supposedly-straight 
AIRPORT movies. 
     Often with bottom-of-the-barrel cinema, it's possible to make the 
case that a decent premise has been ruined by poor execution.  Not here.  
TURBULENCE was a bad idea from the start, and the film makers continued 
to make mistakes all the way through -- from casting and scripting to 
editing and special effects.  Even the release was mishandled.  This is 
clearly a Christmas movie (all the decorations and tunes offer a none-
too-subtle hint of this), yet, because MGM feared it would get lost in 
the December blitz, they delayed its opening by several weeks.  All 
things considered, I doubt the box office results will be significantly 
different. 
     Most of the action in TURBULENCE takes place (no surprises here) on 
a plane.  It's a 747 Christmas Eve flight bound from New York's JFK 
Airport to LAX.  There are seventeen people on board:  the pilot and co-
pilot, four flight attendants, five "regular" passengers, four Federal 
Marshals, and two convicts.  The prisoners are an uncouth bank robber 
named Stubbs (Brendan Gleeson) and a suave, cultured serial killer, Ryan 
Weaver (Ray Liotta).  For a little while, the movie pretends that Ryan 
is an enigma, and hints that he might not be guilty, but, since he's 
being played by veteran psycho Ray Liotta, we know it's only a matter of 
time before he snaps. 
     Through a series of amazing contrivances, the pilot and co-pilot 
end up dead, and, with the 747 plunging into a dangerous storm, Ryan is 
chasing around one of the flight attendants, Teri Halloran (Lauren 
Holly), who eventually holes up in the cockpit to try to land the plane.  
Everyone else on board is either conveniently dead or locked in an out-
of-the-way-place where they won't interfere with the amazingly inept 
interaction between the two leads. 
     TURBULENCE exceeds any reasonable limit placed on suspension of 
disbelief.  The film is littered with hard-to-swallow implausibilities.  
If landing a 747 is this easy, why is it hard to find trained pilots?  
If the two prisoners are so dangerous, why send them with only four 
guards, and why on an aircraft with passengers?  And how does Ryan 
manage to survive being slugged on the head by a nearly-full fire 
extinguisher?  (I know -- all serial killers in this genre are like cats 
with nine lives.)  
     On top of all that, even if you manage to swallow the plot, you 
still have to deal with some of the worst dialogue around today, much of 
which is delivered at the most inappropriate moments.  As the plane is 
plunging into the heart of the storm, Teri and Ryan have a little chat.  
He asks her what her favorite movie is (GONE WITH THE WIND), what her 
favorite book is (GONE WITH THE WIND again), how old she was when she 
first had sex (18 1/2), and whether she enjoyed it (yes).  Any palpable 
tension drains away as these two babble incessantly in the empty cabin. 
     There are more problems with TURBULENCE, but I think I've made the 
point by now.  Considering how many solid leftovers from 1996 are still 
in theaters, I can't think of a reason why anyone would subject 
themselves to this offering.  Unless, that is, you're looking for cheesy 
special effects and a miscast Lauren Holly playing action heroine.  At 
least it's not hard to understand why they called this TURBULENCE -- it 
really is nauseating. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
