Title
Review for Wishmaster 2: Evil Never Dies (1999) (V)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brandon Herring
Wishmaster 2: Evil Never Dies
* * * out of * * * *
Rated R for strong horror violence and gore, strong language, and some
sexuality.
Wishmaster 2 is a sequel, that isnt as good as the original, but deserves all
the credit it can get. A well-written, imaginative, scary, gory, and well-acted
horror movie. With some great sequences of horor action, and humor, I have to
say this is a credible sequel.
After a robbery of an art museum, and the breaking of the statue the Wishmaster
was condemed to in the first, the burglar finds the jewel and takes it out. But
as we know, whoever releases him, gets to take him home to mommy and daddy.
Well in this one it's kinda like that, but after the burglar releases the
Djinn, she is a she named Morgana (Holly Fields) who isnt the purest girl
around. The Djinn (Andrew Divoff, once again in a great role) takes human form,
and confesses to the crime of what she did.
He goes to jail, only to learn he need 1001 souls to take over the world. Like
the first, Morgana can see if he kills anyone, and what his world when they die
looks like. A terrifying one at that. When she learns of what is happening, and
what has happened, she does her homework, and discovers what a Djinn is, and
how to destory it. With her wild look and attitude, she has to purify herself,
and team up with a priest to destroy and condemn the Djinn to his jewel for
good.
With some terrific performances, and a funny one where a man wants his lawyer
for (beep) himself, the Djinng grants this wish, and the lawyer does so but not
in the way u think. Very funny, I laughed for along time. Andrew Divoff plays
his character very well once again, and has a great time doing it. Holly Fields
(Im sure in her debut) does a credible job as the tortured woman, who has to
destroy it.
Although this film is nowhere near as good as the first, it does have a little
more plot than the first, but unlike the first, there isnt much gore till the
end, to which is a showstopping finale, and an incredible one at that. It does
however have more special effects, and gore towards the end, and stays
entertaining through out with great humor, and lots of style, to make this a
good sequel, as far as sequels go.
I must say, unlike again the first, this one went into more of the Djinn is a
demon, to which he's not, hes an evil genie, whos granting backfires, lol. But
dont let me fool you he is evil, and bad too. One big thing i noticed with this
one, was that the Djinn was more elaborately made, and had more spikes,
circles, and gadgets on him. He did however look more scary, and talked with a
scratchier voice. But watch the movie for yourself, if u didnt like the first u
wont like this, if u loved the first you will. Its not as good, but still worth
the watch.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring (HorrorMvFn@aol.com)
