Title
Review for I Confess (1953)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"I Confess" is not one of Alfred Hitchcock's most popular
films.  The mood is grim, there's not a lot of action,
there is a melodramatic love story, and the leading actor 
is the sullen Montgomery Clift.  In short, the film is
not tailored to appeal to a male audience.
Preceded by "Strangers on a Train" and followed by "Rear
Window", which are among Hitchcock's best films, "I Confess"
is not up to their level of quality.  But it is still
very good, and underrated.
The plot has Clift playing a priest.  He hears a confession
from Keller (O.E. Hasse) that he has just killed a man.  Since a 
confession is between God and man alone, Clift cannot turn Keller 
in for the murder.  Inspector Karl Malden suspects Clift of the 
murder, especially after he is seen in mysterious conversations 
with Anne Baxter, who had a romance with Clift prior to her 
marriage and his ordainment.
Baxter's acting is the weakest of the film.  Everything she
says is so breathless and melodramatic, one wonders whether
she could tell you what time it is, without it appearing to
be a major moment in her life.
However, Clift gives a fine performance.  He doesn't have
much emotional range (imagine him in a comedy!) but he is
perfectly cast as a falsely accused priest who must bear
his burdens in silence.
The supporting actors are also good, and have well-developed
characters given their small screen-time.  Clift's fellow
priests have their idiosyncracies (one likes to tease people,
the other has a fascination with his bicycle) and the
Crown Prosecutor is a good-natured politician, much as you
would expect him to be.
There is a great scene near the end of the film.  Clift is
surrounded by a hostile crowd, becoming a mob, that despises
him and believes him guilty of the murder.  It is an extremely
effective scene that demonstrates how wrong public opinion
can sometimes be.
In the ending, Clift is exonerated when Keller freaks out and shoots
his wife, who is about to tell all to the police.  It doesn't
make sense for him to murder his beloved wife, in front of a
hundred witnesses, in order to prevent her.  Perhaps the ending
should have left Clift confronting the angry mob, as it would
have conveyed the message of the movie even more strongly.
Not a happy ending, but then it isn't a happy film.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
