Title
Review for Caught Up (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     At least CAUGHT UP has a sense of humor.  That quality alone allows 
it to transcend the invisible barrier that separates nearly-unwatchable 
films from their forgettable, mediocre counterparts.  This is the kind 
of motion picture that's neither bad enough nor good enough to be 
memorable; six weeks from now, I'll probably have to refer back to this 
review to recall what it was all about.  
     CAUGHT UP starts with a fairly routine premise.  Darryl Allen 
(Bokeem Woodbine) gets out of prison after serving five years for 
participating in a bank robbery.  This is his second time in jail; he 
served an earlier term for possession of crack cocaine with the intent 
to distribute.  After spending most of his adult life behind bars, 
Darryl is interested in going straight and leading a good life, but 
forces on the streets are determined to steer him in the wrong 
direction.  For Darryl, the straight-and-narrow may be an impossible 
path to traverse.
     Writer/director Darin Scott does two things to make CAUGHT UP 
different from countless other African American-oriented films cut from 
the same cloth.  The first, which is a good idea, is to pepper the 
screenplay with instances of campy humor and satire.  The second, which 
is not a good idea, is to employ a series of preposterous plot twists 
that no one in their right mind will buy.  For example, Vanessa (Cynda 
Williams), the film's resident femme fatale, just happens to look 
exactly like Darryl's old girlfriend.  The ending also gives new meaning 
to the motion picture concept of the conservation of characters.  
(That's the rule which states that every individual, no matter how brief 
their initial appearance, will have some crucial role to play later in 
the proceedings.)
     Through it all, Scott continuously pokes fun at both the genre in 
general and this story in particular.  The voiceover narrative is used 
as much for comic effect as for advancing the plot (although, I hasten 
to add, THE BIG LEBOWSKI did this much better).  One individual launches 
into a diatribe about the economic repercussions of legalizing drugs.  
The sole purpose of one inept character, a supercilious white guy 
(Joseph Lindsey), is comic relief (although he's more annoying than 
funny).  Yet, for all of the sporadic humor, CAUGHT UP is ultimately 
intended to be taken seriously, and that's its downfall.  Made as a 
straight parody, a la I'M GONNA GIT YOU SUCKA, this could have been a 
riot.
     The level of acting is substandard.  Woodbine, who has done decent 
work in past supporting roles (JASON'S LYRIC, for one), is out of his 
depth as the main character.  He doesn't have the charisma, presence, or 
range to present Darryl as anything more than a cardboard figure.  Plus, 
he mumbles much of his cliché-riddled dialogue.  His co-star, Cynda 
Williams, isn't much better.  Sure, she's sexy and looks great with and 
without her clothes on, but that's about all she has going for her. 
     In many ways, I was reminded of PALMETTO, although CAUGHT UP is 
certainly more graphic and lurid (this film contains a lot of sex, 
nudity, and bloodshed).  Both films have hard-to-swallow narratives that 
care less about credibility than about whether they can surprise viewers 
with an out-of-left-field plot twist.  Additionally, the leads in the 
two movies are rivals for the dubious title of Mystery/Thriller 
Protagonist with the Lowest I.Q.  And, as stupid as I thought Woody 
Harrelson's character was in PALMETTO, I would have to award the prize 
to Darryl Allen, who frequently acts as if he has been lobotomized.  
Sadly, that's a term that also applies to sections of the wildly uneven 
script.  When it comes to thrillers, CAUGHT UP still has a long way to 
go.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Bokeem Woodbine, Cynda Williams, Basil Wallace, Joseph
Lindsey, Clifton Powell
Synopsis: 
CAUGHT UP is similar in plot to PALMETTO. In PALMETTO Woody Harrelson
plays an unjustly convicted man, freshly out of prison, who falls prey
to a seductress who tries to use Woody as a pawn in a lucrative
kidnapping scheme. Similarly, CAUGHT UP features an unjustly convicted
man named Darryl (Bokeem Woodbine), freshly out of prison, who falls
prey to the seductive tarot card reader Vanessa (Cynda Williams).
Vanessa wants to use Darryl as a pawn in her diamond-stealing scheme.
The movie takes place in three stages: the whole first half, the
beginning of the second half, and the finale. In the first half, Darryl
meets Vanessa. A masked person suddenly starts shooting at them, and
Vanessa tells Darryl that her jealous ex-boyfriend Ahmad is shooting at
them because Vanessa has never returned Ahmad's valuable stolen
diamonds. The story builds as if there will be a showdown between Darryl
and the psycho Ahmad.
In the second half of CAUGHT UP, Ahmad goes away empty-handed, and the
showdown is left unresolved. Vanessa is apparently dead, and Darryl
concentrates on solving the location of the missing diamonds. After the
diamonds are located, and most of the main characters die in a gun
battle, Darryl turns his attention to solving the identity of a new
gunman who may be related to Darryl's past. When Darryl solves this last
mystery, the movie ends.
Opinion:
The pace is good during each of the three stages of the movie, but at
the end of each stage, there is little or no transition, so there's dead
space where nothing interesting happens and Darryl isn't really
motivated to do anything but sit around and act confused. Because of
this the action seems to jump and rest, then jump and rest. One source
of confusion is when unrelated people from Darryl's past pop into the
picture - - for example, his old girlfriend, her estranged husband, and
a security guard from a bank make appearances in Darryl's life. Adding
to the confusion is when dead people get undead, good guys become bad
guys, and so on. 
CAUGHT UP is a good vehicle for actor Bokeem Woodbine to strut his
stuff, and he shows admirable versatility in portraying anger, fear, and
grief. Woodbine's costar Cynda Williams does good backup as a credible
seductress and con woman. 
The bottom line is that CAUGHT UP is an energetic and watchable B-grade
movie that suffers from the same weakness as PALMETTO: it tries to have
too much going on at once - - instead of having plot elements and
characters blend together in one smooth suspenseful run.
