Title
Review for Death Force (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: David Heavener, Jim Issa, Stephanie Snow 
Written and Directed by: David Heavener 
Running Time: 87 minutes 
David Heavener wrote, directed, sings on the soundtrack, and stars in
this Christian action movie about Roy, a crooked Atlanta detective
(Heavener) who has created his own scheme to rob drug dealers.  After he
is abandoned by his partner (Jim Issa) and left for dead, Roy struggles
through amnesia and decides he doesn't want to be bad anymore.  He sets
out to get revenge on those who wronged him. 
Ray recovers from his injuries at a city mission, whose owners decide
NOT to call the police when they find him bleeding to death in their
alley.  Their reason?  They fear the police will shut them down.  Um...
what?  Do the police close places down, especially shelters, because
someone near death is found outside of it?  While Ray recovers, he has a
dream about what happened earlier before he was left for dead.  Thing
is... his flashback consists of events which NEVER HAPPENED.  The
flashback has big explosions and the sequence uses a higher quality film
stock for some reason.  So basically the most expensive portion of the
film is a nonsense dream.  Also, look for the subtle details in
Heavener's character as he changes... for example, when he's bad, he
doesn't wash his hair.  But when he's good again, he gives it a good
scrub. 
Why is this film called Death Force?  Who or what is the "death force"
in this movie?  The end credits reveal that the movie's original title
was Renegade Force.  Oh, I can clearly see why they wouldn't want THAT
title... sheesh!  Death Force is SO much better.  If you're confused,
read those last two sentences again with a heavy dose of sarcasm. 
Death Force sounds like they had one day allotted for post-production,
and whatever they couldn't get done stayed unfinished.  All of the audio
in the film comes from the actual takes used... very little looping is
even attempted (and when it is attempted it is BLATANTLY obvious that
the actors are dubbing in their lines).  In a couple of instances, the
original dialogue can still be heard under the looping, which causes a
bizarre echo effect that just screams "Help us!  We don't know what
we're doing!"  Also, there's a fight scene where no contact sounds are
dubbed in... only the grunts of the person getting hit.  Amazingly, this
is Heavener's TENTH film as a director. 
The cover art for the video release of Death Force is well designed and
should get action fans to pick up the box.  However, someone renting or
buying this based on the front cover artwork will be disappointed. 
There's a girl on the cover who I don't believe is in the actual film
itself, and also some high-tech helicopters flying through city
skyscrapers, which never even comes close to happening in this film. 
Then there's the back of the box, which would immediately make someone
put the tape back on the shelf and move on.  First and foremost... the
first line of text on the box, which is the tagline of the film,
exclaims in big bold letters "It Takes A Dirty Cop To Clean-Up Yhe
City".  That's right... the word "the" is spelled with a "Y".  You can't
misspell one of the most common words in the English language and expect
to be able and play with the big boys.  Also there are three pictures on
the back of the box: one of Heavener with a gun (fine), one of Stephanie
Snow with a gun (also fine), and an old clown holding balloons and
smiling (huh?!).  Boy oh boy, nothing says action movie like some old
guy dressed up as a clown holding balloons.  I believe the original cut
of Die Hard featured a clown in place of Reginald Vel Johnson's
character (damn that studio tampering!).  Finally, the box says the
movie ends with "explosions and a shoot-out".  There's no explosions
folks.  The film does end with a homosexual guy making a bad joke and
everyone laughing at him... you know, cause he's a silly homosexual and
all.  Why not put that on the box? 
Death Force is not rated, but would be equal to an R rating for
violence, nudity, and sex... all fine Christian qualities.  If you want
to know more about uber-filmmaker David Heavener, visit his website at
www.davidheavener.com. 
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
AOL Instant Messenger: FilmJax
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
