Title
Review for Cool Hand Luke (1967)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
Of all the films that were released in 1967 few had the power and stamina of
displaying detailed characterizations in the manner of which 'Cool Hand Luke'
did.  Its strong message of individuality was a welcomed choice in the 20th
centrury's most turbulent decade which of course were the 1960's.
Based on the novel by Donn Pearce and adapted for the screen by Pearce and
Frank R. Pierson and Oscar nominated for Screenplay Adaptation (Pierson would
go on to win the Original Screenplay Oscar for 'Dog Day Afternoon' in 1975),
 'Cool Hand Luke' opens with a lazy and most effective scene showing Luke
Jackson (Paul Newman in an Oscar nominated performance many feel he should
have won for) cutting the heads off of parking meters in a drunken haze in
the confines of a small southern town.  Promptly picked up by the police and
sentenced to two years for maliciously destroying public property while under
the influence, Luke is transported to a prison camp led by a character named
Dragline (George Kennedy who won the Best Supporting Actor Oscar).  Dragline
rules with an iron fist over the gang but manages to maintain many friends
and constantly earns the respect of his fellow prisoners.  The scene in which
Luke is brought to prison sets the tone for the entire film as director
Stuart Rosenberg sternly outlines the discplinary policy of the facilitie's
captain (Strother Martin) and its guards whom the prisoners are told to refer
to as 'boss'.
Luke's mission is to immediately challenge Dragline for leadership of the
gang and a conflicting scene involving a boxing match between the two puts
Luke on good terms with the other prisoners and this is also noticed by the
guards themselves.  Dragline ends up becoming Luke's friend and protector and
the film becomes a series of rebelious acts executed by Luke.  One somber and
heartlfelt scene has Luke in contact with his mother who comes to visit him
and she is dying, presumably of lung cancer as we see her coughing and chain
smoking her way to the grave.  He refers to his mother on a first name basis
and the scene has a further impression later in the film as Luke comes to
terms with her death.  It's one of Newman's finest moments on film.
'Cool Hand Luke' is easily recognizable as social commentary but it also has
a sense of humour and knows how to be entertaining on a general level.  This
is shown in the film's most classic scene, the egg eating contest.  Luke
challenges the disbelievers in the camp into proving he can eat fifty
hardboiled eggs in one hour and every cent in camp rides on his bet.
The talented cast of 'Cool Hand Luke' includes such character actors as J.D.
Cannon, Lou Antonio, Jo Van Fleet, Wayne Rogers, Ralph Waite, Harry Dean
Stanton and a very young looking Dennis Hopper.
Director Stuart Rosenberg's heavy handed direction is appropriate for this
film which creates a clandestine environment of prison abuse and prisoner
defiance and leaves the audience with many questions of whether prison
reforms or give its convicts the impression that for every violent action,
there can be an act of equally violent reaction.
