Title
Review for Diamond Men (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Last year, Ned Beatty was given tribute by writer-director Tom Gilroy in
Spring Forward, inhabiting a beautifully written role as a weathered
park ranger.  Another true actor's actor, Robert Forster, is given his
full measure as aging diamond salesman Eddie Miller in Diamond Men. 
Forster, best known to younger audiences as laconic bail bondsman Max
Cherry in Quentin Tarantino's Jackie Brown, has quite a history behind
him.  His underappreciated body of work includes a hardcore television
journalist in Haskell Wexler's masterpiece, Medium Cool (1969), and his
debut as a quiet soldier who becomes the object of Marlon Brando's
desire in John Huston's complex Reflections in a Golden Eye (1967).
With Diamond Men, Forster effortlessly becomes one with his
surroundings.  Carrying a "live line" of diamonds (in a black briefcase)
on the road as he travels from one small-town business to another in
rural Pennsylvania, he's familiar with dingy coffee shops and cheap,
out-of-the-way motels, comfortable with the interior of his Lincoln Town
Car and his predetermined routine.  He's an older man with a heart
condition, 30 years peddling his wares, but Forster doesn't choose to
arouse pathos in this tightly wound curmudgeon.  Eddie's personality is
best described as an undisclosed poker hand: quiet, inconspicuous,
intense.  With his tough, wrinkled face and world-weary disposition,
Forster creates one of his most memorable characterizations and
writer-director Daniel M. Cohen wisely uses him to carry the movie. 
He's in almost every scene, and Diamond Men is graced by that weighty
presence.  (The other main character is Eddie's world of highways and
hotel rooms, photographed with unobtrusive sensitivity by John Huneck.)
Cohen finds an understated, assured tone of realism right from the
opening scene, where Forster collapses in a parking lot.  Eddie's a
professional who handles his work with the ease drawn from years of
experience, but after his recent heart problems he's no longer
considered "insurable" to carry a million-dollar line of jewels unless
he brings along his hotheaded young replacement, Bobby Walker (former
New Kid on the Block Donnie Wahlberg, a fine actor).  How is Eddie
supposed to train this kid?  Bobby can barely sit still for a minute,
rattles off at the mouth with a stream of obnoxious anecdotes recounting
sexual conquests, and is evidently more interested in getting laid than
studying the art of Eddie's trade.
Things don't look so good for this particular odd couple.  It's one of
those convenient pairings of opposites that defines so many movies. 
Diamond Men depends on strong performances and assured writing to pull
it off.  As a writer, Cohen brings firsthand experience of the diamond
business, emerging from three generations of roadside salesmen.  He
makes astute use of locations, particularly the seedy backwoods massage
parlor known as the Altoona Riding Club, where frumpy masseuses are
known to dole out special favors for the right price.  Bobby is able to
drag his new pal Eddie to this borderline house of ill-repute after some
tentative bonding, where the older salesman's self-imposed walls are
gradually broken down, opening him up to new experiences he'd never
dreamed of.  The scenes at this makeshift brothel feel emotionally
honest, both in Eddie's embarrassed resignation to undressing and the
women's unfocused, workaday attitude to strange men from The Road.
There's a threat of danger from some young hoods that catch wise to
Eddie's live load of diamonds.  It's a plot point that has destroyed
other independent films: L.I.E. suffers from a climax of violence after
developing an unforced, discreet relationship between the child molester
and his young prey; Ulee's Gold loses interest in developing Peter
Fonda's rich beekeeper characterization by tossing in a clumsy robbery. 
Diamond Men almost falls into the same trap, touching on this pedestrian
subplot and almost running off the rails with the threat of violence. 
Cohen thankfully doesn't stray too far from his character-driven story,
using the robbery device to unfurl his true climax, one that tests the
values Eddie Miller has stood behind for years.  Less Quentin Tarantino
than Arthur Miller, Eddie is asked to face up to his own life, something
that might never have happened if fast-talking Bobby hadn't drawn him
out of his shell.  The potential robbery doesn't figure in as the
climax; Diamond Men has larger, more personalized issues at stake.  The
finale proves as elusive as it is satisfactory.
Like Spring Forward, Daniel M. Cohen has created what might be
considered a "small" movie about everyday characters taking cautious
steps toward (or away from) wisdom.  It's lightweight, if the discovery
of friendship can be considered "lightweight," but there's a place for
movies that exist in much the same manner as the quaint corner store in
an emerging (or dying) town.  You'd rather go there than the shopping
mall, if only for the character and personality.  Diamond Men is small,
but certainly assured.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Eddie Miller (Robert Forster) is a traveling jewelry salesman whose life on
the road has spanned over 30 years until one day he has a heart attack.
Now, considered a liability by the front office, Eddie learns that he is
about to lose his longtime sales circuit to another. Adding insult to
injury, he also learns that he has to show the ropes of the road to this
new guy, Bobby Walker (Donnie Wahlberg), in "Diamond Men."
Robert Forster, who has maintained a low profile in films despite his
decades in the business, came back into the limelight with his perf in the
1997 Quentin Tarantino movie, "Jackie Brown." With "Diamond Men" the
veteran actor stars as a solitary, recently widowed jewel salesman who has
run the roads of his Pennsylvania territory for decades. After his sudden
heart attack he is informed by his younger boss that he is now a poor
insurance risk and has to give up the only work life he has really known.
With little guarantee of continued employment in the company, he is also
told that he is the one who will train his replacement. The only commitment
he can get from his condescending boss is the vague "we'll do our best" to
keep the veteran salesman employed.
Then, like an additional slap to the injury of losing his job, Eddie is
saddled with Bobby, whose total sales experience stems from two years of
servicing vending machines. Brash, flashily dressed and virtually
unschooled in sales etiquette, the young know-it-all presumes from the
start to grasp more than his mentor. He resists, at first, the wisdom of
the road dispensed by Eddie but soon learns that the older man knows what
he is doing and it behooves the rookie to pay attention. As the barriers
come down between them, during the weeks of training and traveling the
roads of Pennsylvania, the pair becomes friends and a mutual bonding
begins.
As Eddie and Bobby get to know, and like, each other they both receive an
education. Bobby learns the subtlety of the jewelry business, how to act
around a client and, most important, how to close a sale. Eddie gets
reintroduced to a joie de vie that he hasn't had since his wife went into
the years-long bout with cancer that eventually took her life, leaving
Eddie with a void that he fills with his work. He is scared and insecure
when Bobby coerces him to go to a "massage" parlor, especially when his
masseuse uncovers a giant eyeball tattooed on her chest. Bobby feels so
strongly about helping his muse enjoy life, he then fixes him up with a
mature, attractive woman, Katie (Bess Armstrong), not realizing that she
has her own working girl past.
There is a palpable chemistry between Forster and Wahlberg as the two very
different, generationally separated diamond men have to first, tolerate
each other (especially Eddie towards Bobby), then, accept each other and,
eventually and believably, become good friends. Bess Armsrong is perfect as
the love interest for Eddie and gives dimension to her perf as a woman with
a past but, nonetheless, a good woman. She is the spark that allows Eddie
to live once again. Supporting cast is scant but character actor George Coe
is convincing as one of Eddie's oldest customers and a close friend who
falls for a much younger woman, to his own detriment. Jasmine Guy is
likable as Tina, the lady who runs Bobbie's favorite "massage parlor" and
has a genuine affection for the young fellow.
Techs are solid with crisp lensing by John Huneck and a varied production
that brings you into the life, on the road, of a traveling salesman. The
small town-feel of the little motels, the family restaurants and the
mom-and-pop jewelry stores that Eddie and Bobby frequent puts you in the
heartland of America in a very real way.
One problem I have with the screenplay, by helmer Daniel M. Cohen (based,
loosely, on his father's own life as a traveling salesman), stems from the
abrupt changing of gears as the story shifts from a buddy/road movie with a
nice building of the chemistry between Eddie and Bobby to a dramatic turn
where a rushed introduction of larceny changes the mood of the film. The
drama that unfolds is set up, perfunctorily, in the beginning of the film
and makes this crime portion feel tacked on and contrived. The upbeat final
coda takes away some of the sourness of the last third of the flick and you
come out of "Diamond Men" with, fortunately, a positive outlook as our
heroes, in the end, are winners. This is as it should be.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Eddie Miller (Robert Forster, "Jackie Brown"), a man in his fifties, suddenly
finds his livelihood threatened when a mild heart attack renders
him uninsurable.  He's a fine jewelry salesman who travels throughout
Pennsylvania with a million dollars worth of inventory.  Clinging to the only
job he knows, Eddie agrees to train his replacement, the young, brash
Bobby Walker (Donnie Wahlberg, "The Sixth Sense") in writer/director 
Dan Cohen's "Diamond Men."
Bobby arrives in a flashy sports car ('I can't sit in that seat - my prostrate
will be up in my throat,' harrumphs Eddie) full of bravado.  When Eddie
worries
about 'protecting the line' by remaining inconspicuous, Bobby retorts that
it's insured and begins to score chicks in each remote hamlet.  He's late
in the morning, uses profanity in front of customers and can't handle
jeweler's equipment.  Eddie is beside himself, but one day they have a
breakthrough when Bobby appreciates Eddie explaining the difference between 
two diamonds to a shopper.  'What's the magic word?' he asks Eddie afterwards,
referring to Eddie's ability to make sale after sale while he strikes out.  
'They're not saying no, they're saying give me a reason to say yes,' replies 
Eddie.  
Now that the young man has asked for his help, Eddie softens and they open
up to each other.  Bobby scored well on a test, but he admits a friend 
actually filled it out and his only experience on the road has been filling
vending machines.  Eddie, meanwhile, has recently lost his beloved wife to
cancer and the long illness just about wiped him out financially.  Eddie 
becomes more encouraging and patient training Bobby while Bobby becomes
committed to finding a female companion for Eddie.  When none of his small
town conquests are interested in the older man, Bobby brings him to his
friend Tina (Jasmine Guy, TV's "A Different World"), who runs The Altoona
Riding Club, a backwoods brothel.  It's here that Eddie's nightmares and
unimagined dreams will both come true.
Cohen has not one, but two triumphs with his small, independent feature.
Firstly, he captures completely the world of a salesman's small town route
where routine and out of the way motels and restaurants are comfortingly
familiar and customers are treated like old friends.  Secondly, he's elicited
strong and natural performances from his two costars, with Forster's 
being one of the best male leads of the year.
Forster's Eddie is an exceedingly decent and competent man, trying to roll 
with the extremely bad hand he's been dealt.  While he's initially (and
justifiably) exasperated with Bobby's behavior, he always keeps his cool, 
like the mellow jazz he likes to listen to.  Wahlberg is hilariously obnoxious
at first, hoping his flashy loudness will be misinterpreted as confidence.
Bess Armstrong is good, if a bit too clinical as Katie, the woman Eddie
meets at Tina's and George Coe is fine as Tip, one of Eddie's oldest
customers.
The film begins to lose its momentum in its final act, but finds its
way back again by delivering a satisfying and unexpected punchline.
"Diamond Men" sparkles most, however, when examining the moments so many
would find dull.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Poor Robert Forster.  He's responsible for two of the best onscreen
performances this year, but they're both in movies most people will never
see, even if audiences are lucky enough to have the films play in a theatre
near them. Forster's turn in the film adaptation of David Mamet's Lakeboat
is strong enough to be remembered at end-of-the-year award time, and his
latest, Diamond Men, might feature an even better performance from the
leathery veteran.
Forster plays widower Eddie Miller, a traveling diamond salesman approaching
60 like a school bus with no brakes.  After a heart episode leaves him
uninsurable and undesirable to his employer, Eddie is given a choice - break
in Bobby, his young, inexperienced replacement, or hit the road.  Because
he's worried about making the mortgage payments, Eddie opts for the former,
thus launching the tale of the older, wiser man and the young, brash dude
driving around Central Pennsylvania for several weeks.  You know they'll
dislike each other at first, but eventually warm up to one another. So why
bother?  The younger guy must be played by some hot, up-and-coming actor
like Mark Ruffalo, right?
Actually, no.  Bobby is played by Donnie Wahlberg, who, despite having
screen time in one of the biggest films of all-time (The Sixth Sense) is
politely referred to, at best, as either a washed-up has-been or Marky
Mark's balding brother.  But you know what?  He ain't bad, either.
Wahlberg's Bobby, an ex-vending machine supplier who scored well on the
psych portion of his test in diamond sales school, isn't so much brash as
naďve to the ways of the world.  He thinks he can just waltz into stores
owned by Eddie's clients and sweet-talk his way into boffo sales.  Unlike
Eddie, who has to be at the top of his game to stay afloat, Bobby sees sales
as something to do when he's not chasing tail.
Sure, there are the typical clashes between the two (over everything from
music to proper attire), but when Bobby shows a genuine interest in learning
the trade after a tough week on the road, Eddie takes him under his wing.
Bobby learns selling isn't an exact science, unlike the things he was taught
in training school.  "That's not what we learned in Providence" is a line he
repeats over and over again.
If Eddie has a mantra, it's "Protect the line."  He's referring to the
extremely valuable stash of diamonds the two men peddle, and because Eddie
takes so much care in guarding the stones, you know it'll somehow factor
into the film's last act.  What you don't see coming is how it happens.  I
won't go into the whole thing, but it involves another has-been (Jasmine
Guy, A Different World) and something called the Altoona Riding Club (which,
incidentally, was the original title of the film).
Men is a lot like Spring Forward, which featured another molasses-paced,
impeccably acted May-December relationship between two guys reluctantly
forced into friendship by their employment.  While I enjoyed Forward more as
a film, Forster's acting trumped the performances of Ned Beatty and Liev
Schreiber.  You hear Men is a film about an old salesman ready to be put out
to pasture and immediately conjure images of Willy Loman, but Forster's
Eddie is far from it.  Loman despised his job, but you can tell Eddie loves
it (especially the routine), even as he trains the man who will eventually
render him obsolete.
1:42 - Not Rated but includes language and brief nudity

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 DC Films/Sidekick Entertainment/Shipwreck Productions 
 Director:  Daniel M. Cohen
 Writer:  Daniel M. Cohen
 Cast: Robert Forester, Donnie Wahlberg, Bess Armstrong,
Jasmine Guy, George Coe, Kristin Minter, Nikki Fritz, Shannah
Laumeister, Kate Rimmer, Paul Price
 Screened at: Preview 9 NYC 8/21/01
   Torn from today's headlines about corporate downsizing and
the rupture of trust between management and labor; pulled from
the sociological debates of the seventies about the gap between
the generations; "Diamond Men" is a clever, humorous, sardonic
and exquisitely acted indie about contemporary life in America. 
Written and directed by Daniel M. Cohen, the picture starring
Robert Forster as the thoroughly professional fifty-ish diamond
salesman and Donnie Wahlberg as his brash 28-year-old trainee
treats its two principal themes with the kind of skill seen in no
other film this year. Delightfully underplayed and carefully
developed, "Diamond Men" is a rejoinder to the groaners who
complain that there's just nothing out there in the movie theaters
any more: it's the first four-star picture of the year, a just-in-time,
life-saving antidote to the barrel of swill called "Bubble Boy"
which I swallowed just twenty-four hours previous to this
screening.
   Dan Cohen opens his movie on Robert Forster, who performs
in the role of diamond salesman Eddie Miller, looking dazzling in
a thousand-dollar suit as he confidently heads to his capacious
car only to suffer a heart attack, after which he is Willie-Lomaned
by his much younger boss presumably because he is no longer
insurable.  Asked to mentor Bobby Walker (Donnie Wahlberg),
the arrogant young man who is to take his place, who has
personality to burn but no special aptitude for the job, Eddie is
put off by Bobby's youth culture (rock music, egotistical attitude,
undiplomatic statements) while for his part Bobby has little use
for the older man's inflexibility.  During their long drives to clients
in the Harrisburg, PA area, they get to know each other, become
buddies, and while exchanging information about women and
sharing real experience with them in bars, restaurants and other
places, each casts a marked change on the other's life.
   Dan Cohen's writing goes far toward making "Diamond Men"
the gem that it is.  Cohen would no more force a gag or a
humorous situation on his audience than would Eddie high-
pressure a customer to buy.  At no point does the story skirt the
borders of sit-com territory.  The audience is made aware from
the start of the flaws in each person's character.  We root for
Eddie to loosen up and for Bobby to become a mensch and we
enjoy watching the clever way that the script brings the turnabout
to fruition.  The concluding scene is a twist that will knock your
socks off.   Robert Forster, almost needless to say, never
disappoints.  The stellar sixty-year-old performer first got the
attention of the film industry through his performance as Stanley
Kowalski in a 1967 production of "A Streetcar Named Desire"
and gained wide recognition for his supporting role as Max
Cherry in Quentin Tarantino's "Jackie Brown." This time it is he
who is afforded the firm support of a troupe of performers,
particularly Donnie Wahlberg as a true-to-life (if somewhat
exaggerated) replica of modern youth; and Bess Armstrong, as
Katie, a woman who is not what she seems to be but proves, like
Bobby, to be adept at turning Eddie's life around.  In one amusing
scene a bunch of old fogies, jewelers all, are playing cards with
Eddie, joking about how one of them is enjoying a sexual
relationship with his clerk, who is forty years his junior.  "First
you'll change her diapers, and then she'll be changing yours,"
jibes one of the players," but here again we see that things are
not what they seem on the surface.  The twists, the
performances, the themes, the sincerity, the  respect for the
audience. They're all here. What more can you ask for?
Not Rated.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
