Title
Review for Twin Falls Idaho (1999)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Dustin Putman
"Twin Falls Idaho," by first-time directors and real-life brothers Michael 
and Mark Polish, manages to be a film about the potentially "tabloid" topic 
of siamese twins, but does not exploit this heavy subject matter. Instead, 
they have made an indie drama that is mature and discerning, about the close 
bond between siblings, and about the struggle of these two accepting people 
who have been dealt a certain hand in life, even while struggling to break 
free as individuals. If the film sometimes is a little too obvious and the 
dialogue doesn't constantly ring true, it is clear that the Polish Brothers 
have a definite talent as rising filmmakers, and due to their own closeness, 
have concocted a picture that is satisfying, solely based on the finely-tuned 
relationships that they have created between the three pivotal characters.
Penny (Michele Hicks) is a down-on-her-luck young woman who is broke and 
without any certain idea of where her life is headed. Sometimes prostituting 
herself for the much-needed cash, Penny winds up one evening at the scummy 
hotel room of her latest client, Francis (Michael Polish). When Francis 
enters into the room, however, and she discovers that he is one-half of a 
pair of siamese twins, Penny flees. After realizing that she left her purse 
at their place and feeling rather guilty for her unsympathetic behavior 
before, Penny goes back to the hotel to discover that Francis is actually 
very ill, and it is his brother, Blake (Mark Polish), who is the much 
stronger of the two. "How come you don't get sick too?" Penny asks, to which 
Blake replies, "Because if I got sick, who would take care of Francis?" Penny 
ultimately begins a close friendship with them, mostly because she detects an 
emotional closeness due to her own alienation from the world, and a brief 
romance appears to blossom between her and Blake, only to end with the cold, 
hard realization that it would never work out. "Maybe I'll call you when I'm 
single," Blake tells her humorously, but with an unavoidably very serious 
undercurrent.
"Twin Falls Idaho" is not set, as you may first assume, in Twin Falls, Idaho, 
but rather it is just one of many symbols that end up being just a little too 
heavy-handed for their own good. Symbolism is a tricky thing to do 
successfully, as it should almost always be of the subtle persuasion in which 
you have to think long and hard about certain things before you would even 
process that it was, in fact, a symbol. A recent, efficient example of this 
would be Stanley Kubrick's "Eyes Wide Shut," whose symbols, if you aren't 
paying close attention, could potentially fly straight over your head. 
Although not a serious, damaging criticism, "Twin Falls Idaho" is not so 
refined in this respect. For example, 'Twin' stands for the two brothers 
being twins, 'Falls' is their last name, and 'Idaho' is the name of the hotel 
they are staying in. Early on, Penny is oddly given a two dollar bill as 
change from a taxi driver, and her own name, Penny, symbolizes singularity, 
which further portrays the conflict between the idea of 'one' and 'two.'
Even if "Twin Falls Idaho" also is stronger in its set-up and first half, as 
opposed to its predictable, somewhat maudlin conclusion, the film is buoyed 
over to being recommended, if marginally so, because of the impressive 
performances and the one-of-a-kind relationship between the brothers, which 
is just about as believable and heartfelt as any sibling relationship has 
ever been portrayed on film. It would be too easy to group Blake and Francis 
as one being, and both are wisely given differing, distinctive personalities, 
even when they are also presented as being just about as close to one another 
as two people could possibly be, both physically and spiritually. Blake and 
Francis believe that being siamese twins is the only way they would prefer 
life, because that's the only way that they've ever known. At one point, 
Blake tells Penny, "We came into this world together, and we're leaving it 
together, too." And yet, Blake can't help but see Penny as his sort of 
savior, an understanding, virtuous light at the end of the tunnel, whom he 
starts to love, if only he could be alone with her. In one of the film's most 
powerful scenes, Blake and Francis trudge out for a night on the town during 
Halloween, the only day of the year when they blend in with everyone else and 
are accepted as "normal" people. Ending up at a party that Penny invites them 
to, they see another two attendants that have dressed up as siamese twins, 
but sadly witness them untying the strings between one another and going off 
in their own separate directions. For Blake and Francis, it isn't that easy.
In her film debut, model Michele Hicks is remarkable as Penny, the character 
with the most noticable arc. Hicks turns Penny into an experienced, 
hard-edged lost soul who nonetheless is extremely vulnerable to the world 
around her and unsure of what she wants to do with her life. For the story 
between the brothers to work, there had to be a third party that could come 
in and add an emotional center to the film, which Hicks brilliantly does. She 
is the one we follow most in the film, as we root for her to get out of her 
job as a hooker and redirect her path, no matter where it may take her. 
"Twin Falls Idaho" is flawed in many ways (it also falls victim to a couple 
particular lines of dialogue that feel completely "written"), but its virtues 
also cannot be denied. The restrictive, unusual, but fully caring position 
that Blake and Francis are in is no better identified than between a touching 
exchange between Blake and Penny. "Do you ever get lonely?" she inquires. His 
answer: "For two minutes--just two minutes--each day, right after I wake up 
and right before I fall asleep, I'm alone. It's pretty difficult to ever be 
lonely."
   - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman.
     Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
"Do you ever feel alone?" Blake Falls's new friend Penny asks him.
Although not an unusual question for most people, Blake, being conjoined
to his brother Francis, has never been asked that question before.  Most
queries he gets are more intimate and crude.
The incredibly talented brothers, Michael and Mark Polish, in their
feature film debut in TWIN FALLS IDAHO, play Francis and Blake.  They
co-wrote the script, and Michael directed the movie.  In her film debut,
fashion model Michele Hicks gives a passable performance as Penny.
The Falls brothers, with two heads, three legs and two arms, are
visiting the big city for a reason which isn't completely clear until
the end.  The deliberately slow movie, which is told in whispers and low
voices, is a tragedy with comedic overtones.  With heavy, soulful flute
and clarinet solos and filmed in dark, somber colors, the picture has a
mesmerizing quality.
The young men move with an awkward delicacy.  Questions posed to them,
when both are awake, are answered only after the two have consulted in
whispers.  Their collective answer is spoken with one head but two
minds.
When Francis is asleep, Blake is able to speak for himself.  "Maybe I'll
call you when I'm single," Blake tells Penny once with prophetic
sadness.
Part of the movie deals with the brothers' intense and unusual mental
bonding.  Another concerns the more sensational aspects of being what
used to be called Siamese twins.
The middle section of the story happens conveniently at Halloween.  "It
is the one night of the whole entire year that they are normal," Penny
explains to her girlfriend at a Halloween party.
A gay man at the party, who has shoulder-length blond hair on one side
and short black hair on the other, tells Penny that he's like the twins.
"You don't think I can identify with them?" he asks.  "I've got a woman
inside of me screaming to get out."
The cheapest scene of all occurs when Jay (Jon Gries), "an entertainment
legal advisor," drops by Penny's apartment while she is out.  Jay badly
wants to figure out a way to exploit them for financial gain.  "A
disease isn't a disease unless it's marketable," he tells the twins.
When Penny arrives, she throws him out.  As Jay exits, he has one last
question of his would-be clients: "Have I mentioned sitcoms?"
Even if the acting by the brothers is astonishing, the story drifts
hopelessly and is ultimately just a curiosity piece.  A tender and
well-made one, but a curiosity piece nonetheless.  The Polish brothers'
skills, on the other hand, are astounding, and their next movie is worth
looking for.
TWIN FALLS IDAHO runs way too long at 1:50.  It is rated R for brief
profanity and would be fine for kids 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        At a cursory glance, "Twin Falls Idaho" looks like it might have
originated from the fractured and highly-volatile imagination of David
Lynch, director of such surreal indulgences as "Wild at Heart," "Lost
Highway," and the television series that started it all, "Twin Peaks."  But
this odd little film adds an element completely alien to Lynch's cinematic
arsenal of weirdness and weirdos: it adds empathy.
        It's an element that pushes "Twin Falls Idaho" beyond the
experience of just another freakshow.
        The feature--and starring--debut of striking-looking identical
twins Mark and Michael Polish, "Twin Falls Idaho" does not exploit its
subject matter.  Far from it: it bathes its conjoined siblings in a loving
and sympathetic light, and the result is a sad, fascinating, and profoundly
moving portrait of two individuals who have learned, not by choice, to live
together.
        There's not much of a story; it's your typical tale of "girl falls for
(Siamese) boy."  Instead, the film draws its power from the superlative
performances of its male leads, whose contributions in front of the camera
are equaled only by their skills as writers and, in Michael's case,
director behind it.  With genuine sensitivity, the film ably demonstrates
the easily imagined logistical difficulties of, say, sharing three legs, a
breast bone, and other vital organs.  There's only one "effects" shot in
the entire 110-minute film; the physicality of Blake and Francis'
relationship is expressed through the brothers' unique fraternal bond of
love and communication, rather than of skin and bone.
        Throughout the film the very separate Polish brothers stand extremely
close together, whispering softly in a beautiful didactic contrivance.
While one sleeps, the other remains awake.  When one is sick, the other
remains strong, steadfast.  When one is propositioned by a hooker (played
by Michele Hicks, a model-turned-actress whose talents, no doubt, were
previously better employed), the other reaps the benefits.
        Gorgeously photographed by M. David Mullen (and, since most of the
drama
takes place in a grungy hotel, amazingly so), the deliberately and, I
daresay, ambiguously-titled "Twin Falls Idaho" recalls Peter Greenaway's
masterly "The Falls."  Among its 99 violent, unknown biographies,
Greenaway's feature debut included identical twins played by the brothers
Quay.  Shortly after seeing "Twin Falls Idaho" I learned of conjoined twins
from Poland (Polish, don't you see) who were here in Philadelphia
undergoing the first of many surgeries in an attempt to separate them.  Of
course my mind did a double take.
        "Twin Falls Idaho" is indeed an oddity but, unlike a circus
sideshow, it's one that you should have no moral compunction in paying to
see.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Twin Falls Idaho
Rated [R], 105 minutes
Starring Mark Polish, Michael Polish, Michele Hicks; Patrick
Bauchau,       Lesley Ann Warren, Garrett Morris and William Katt
Screenplay by Mark Polish and Michael Polish
Directed by Michael Polish
website: http://www.spe.sony.com/classics/twinfallsidaho/
IN SHORT: Good indie. Well conceived and acted, but slow.
Most start up indie or post collegiate tend to look the same: minimal
casts and locations. Lots of people standing around talking in a script
that substitutes a lot of yadda yadda for character development. Twin
Falls Idaho is unique in that it's reason for being uses a story device
that Cranky has never seen in a non-horror flick, that being that the
main characters are conjoined. That means Siamese Twins to the rest of
us. So Cranky awards extra points for creativity to Mark and Michael
Polish, who split the writing chores and play brothers Blake and Francis
Falls, twins who live in a seedy hotel on Idaho Avenue in AnyCity, USA.
Blake Falls (Mark Polish) is healthy. Francis Falls (Michael Polish) is
not. Both have come to AnyCity in search of Mom (Leslie Ann Warren), who
abandoned them after their birth. On the anniversary of the day of their
birth, they share a birthday cake and hire a prostitute named Penny
(Michele Hicks) who runs for cover at first sight of her johns. But, in
the best gold hearted whore fashion, Penny brings a doctor friend back
to the hotel to have a look at Francis. From there on, a touching
friendship develops as Penny watches out for the boys, even taking them
partying on the one night of the year when their condition is invisible
to the human eye -- Halloween.
As word gets out, Penny's various friends and acquaintances all want a
piece. A gay friend Trey (Ant), wants to shoot photos and wonders out
loud "wouldn't it be tragic if one liked boys and the other liked
girls?" Her lawyer/procurer Jay (Jon Gries) is thinking of the money the
twins could generate; Her best friend Sissy (Teresa Hill) is supportive
and her doctor friend Miles (Patrick Bauchau) is as worried for Penny,
who he sees developing more than fondness for one of the twins, as he is
for the boys. Tragedy is looming, because as Francis gets sicker and
sicker, Penny falls more and more for healthy brother Blake.
The real tragedy is that this story moves with the pace of a turtle.
While teevee star cameos keep it interesting -- in addition to Bauchau
and Warren you get William Katt as the hospital surgeon who will have to
separate the twins and Garrett Morris as Jesus, who injects a well
needed dose of energy into this film.
Overall, Twin Falls Idaho presents a fascinating story of sibling
relationships and, from conception to execution, is a cut above most of
the other indie flicks I sit through. Only its languid pace stops it
from being superior.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Twin Falls Idaho, he would have
paid...
Pay per view level. As with anything independent, you have to be of a
mind to see it. Twin Falls Idaho may find its best distribution on the
Sundance Channel.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š by, Chuck
Schwartz. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
The Polish Brothers' "Twin Falls Idaho" is an example of an effective
independent film. With a cast of no-name actors, it shows us things
that we've never been shown before. In "Twin Falls Idaho" these things
are presented to us in an original and involving manner, for it is a
true independent film made with heart instead of money.
Yes, there is a real town called Twin Falls, Idaho, but it has nothing at
all to do with this film. Let me break down the title for you:
Twin- This film involves two brothers who are conjoined twins.
Falls- The brothers' last name is Falls.
Idaho- They live on Idaho Ave., in a city that closely resembles downtown
Los Angeles.
Real-life identical twins Michael and Mark Polish play, respectively,
Francis and Blake, a pair of conjoined twins living in a run-down
hotel. Penny (Michele Hicks), a hooker, shows up as a birthday
present, but Francis falls ill and she ends up staying and taking care
of them. Francis' health has been heading downwards, and the stronger
Blake is the one who keeps them alive.
Slowly, Blake and Penny become friends, and Penny begins to feel an
odd attraction for him.  Francis, however, takes an instant disliking
to her; perhaps because he is jealous. After living about 20 years
attached to each other, Blake finally starts to think about how it
would be if he could be free, and not have to worry about
Francis. "I'll call you when I'm single," Blake says to Penny.
The relationship between the conjoined twins is very, very
interesting. As a character notes later in the film, their
companionship is like a marriage where divorce is not an option. Blake
and Francis are well-rounded individuals, but a thing like this makes
you wonder how some more hostile types can survive as conjoined twins.
The Polish Brothers have crafted a dark, but touching film. The film's
tone and story are offbeat, but surprisingly, it should be accessible
to mainstream audiences. There are many directions that this film
could have travelled, and a fine path was chosen. I was expecting a
more gritty movie, but "Twin Falls Idaho" has chosen to keep the
tension subtle. In this way, the film can be moving without being too
sentimental.
The performances of the two brothers are as effective as their
behind-the-camera work. They manage to convey, quietly, the long,
drawn-out suffering of two brothers who are together without a choice.
However, it is newcomer Michele Hicks, as Penny, who makes the most
affecting debut. Instead of being the hooker with a heart of gold, she
is a heart of gold who happens to be a hooker.
The Polish Brothers' debut film, "Twin Falls Idaho", is an
interesting, character-driven movie that may decieve some with its
dark tone. Praised at Sundance, the idea of "Twin Falls Idaho" may
strike some as too odd, but those willing to see the film will find it
a pleasant surprise; like a hooker with a heart of gold.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Frankie Paiva
Twin Falls Idaho is certainly deserving of its private section at the video 
store. There has never been a movie quite like this one. It is a drama, but a 
unique one that will only settle right with a certain audience. Nothing is 
more unusual or extraordinary than the two stars who created this film. Blake 
(Mark Polish) and Francis (Michael Polish) are conjoined twins. Since 
conjoined (or Siamese) babies rarely live long, it is amazing that Blake and 
Francis have made it to their mid-twenties. They live a life where they must 
depend on each other for everything. The mere sight of them sends most people 
running and screaming into their world of normalcy and ignorance. Penny 
(Michele Hicks) is a prostitute that at first runs away when meeting Blake 
and Francis. Soon her conscience catches up with her, and she begins caring 
for the two. There is a growing attraction between Blake and Penny, and the 
two soon fall in love. Francis, however, despises Penny. The tragedy 
continues as Francis's situation worsens. One twin usually provides the life 
support for another, and Blake has always given his brother a strong heart. 
Despite this, Francis is getting weaker and weaker. This leaves Blake with a 
decision. He could die with his brother as he promised, or participate in 
separation surgery and spend the rest of his life with the woman he loves.
That is certainly a dramatic plot if I have ever seen one. One inconsiderate, 
stereotypical gay character aside, there is a drought of needed comedy. 
Nothing was there to lighten things up in the slightest. At first the 
haunting musical score and dreary plot are endurable. Michael and Mark Polish 
are dexterous as filmmakers and actors. Each has a remarkable range of 
emotions, and show true skill. I cannot wait to see what they do next. 
Newcomer Michele Hicks turns in a great performance as well. Her Penny is 
always believable and  mostly pure. The visual style of the movie fits well 
with the subject matter. The camera seems permanently tinted with dark blues, 
greens, and black. These colors also fill most of the images onscreen and set 
the somber mood. The script, written by the brothers, falters. Its first half 
is agreeable, after that point it gets increasingly gloomy. It keeps going 
downhill until it becomes what is essentially a well-acted soap opera. This 
is very bleak stuff. Add an ending that lacks closure, and you have a movie 
with an inferior second half that outweighs its superior first half. 
Before viewing this slow and disheartening movie, try taking a dose of Prozac 
mixed with caffeine. This statement should not indicate this is a bad film, 
just one that conjures up assorted feelings depending on the mood of the 
viewer. Twin Falls Idaho is unique in so many ways. It is also very 
depressing, and reminds us to be thankful for the simplest things we take for 
granted. The movie is a mixed bag. Some should move on, while it is 
recommendable for others.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Sony Film Classics
 Director:  Michael Polish
 Writer:  Mark Polish, Michael Polish
 Cast: Michael Polish, Mark Polish, Michele Hicks, Jon Gries,
Patrick Bauchau, Garrett Morris, William Katt, Lesley Ann
Warren, Teresa Hill, Ant, Holly Woodlawn
   Some of this year's teen films concentrate on outsiders--the
nerds, the geeks, the ostracized: "Election," "Jawbreakers,"
"Never Been Kissed," for example.  Imagine if you will people
who are so outside regular society that the only night of the
year that they feel normal is Halloween!  Two such folks are
the focus of the Polish brothers' quirky and decidedly offbeat
"Twin Falls Idaho," a love story with such originality that it fits
into a niche all its own.  "Twin Falls Idaho" is about romantic
love of sorts, yes, and also about fraternal and maternal
affection with all the dependency feelings such devotion
generates.  But the principal attachment is that formed
between Siamese twins, Francis Falls (Michael Polish) and
his brother Blake (Mark Polish), whose separation from birth
was either not possible because of the limited medical
technology at the time and because even if they could have
been split, not only would one die but the survivor would have
to make do with one leg, one arm, and perhaps one lung. 
Because this film is an archetype displaying sensitive,
credible performances, "Twin Falls Idaho" ranks as a must-
see for a specialized audience.  Its glacial pace and lack of
turbulent physical action limits the work commercially keeping
it suitable for the right crowd (such as the Sundance
audience that screened the Polish Brothers' drama in
January).
   Inspired by an actual case of the famous Siamese twins of
the Nineteenth Century, Chang and Eng Bunker, the 27-year-
old Polish brothers went to work on their idiosyncratic script,
with Mark Polish at the helm and in the role of the stronger of
the Siamese pair, Blake Falls, with Michael taking the guise
of the sickly sibling, Francis.  We get the impression that
despite their being joined side-by-side over the length of the
torso, sharing just two legs and two arms between them, they
valued their bond and could not envisage the trauma of being
separated.  Yet because Francis is unhealthy (his heartbeat
is weak and he is given to bouts of nausea and fatigue), he is
the one who is dependent on his brother's strength.  He
realizes that his brother could survive a surgical procedure
that could split them apart.  Apparently Blake does not even
begin to entertain such thoughts except at one dramatically
emotional point in the story--particularly strong because of the
low-key action keel that precedes the scene.
   The story opens on two hookers, Sissy (Teresa Hill) and
her friend Penny (Michele Hicks), the latter in a bad way
financially and in such need of funds that she accepts an
assignment to a seedy hotel on Idaho Street of an unnamed
town.  Horrified at first by noting that her customer is well
connected, she gradually forms a bond with Blake, the
stronger one, causing Blake's brother to become predictably
jealous.  
   The film is best when Francis, Blake and Penny are
interacting, becoming at times annoying when other
characters almost arbitrarily come upon the scene.  In one
Fellini-esque episode, a spiritual man named Jesus (Garrett
Morris) takes an interest in the pair, figuring that they
epitomize family values: they can never be divorced.  A
seedy entertainment lawyer, Jay (Jon Gries), tries to exploit
the two, coming on strong about how they can write their own
soap opera (deciding, for example, to get a divorce from each
other) to make big bucks from a public whose voracious
demand for freaky-relationship shows is insatiable.  Miles
(Patrick Bauchau), a sympathetic doctor, comes off best of
the supporting players as a man with a sincere interest in the
well-being of the brothers and of his friend, Penny--who is
inexplicably lonely and penniless.
   The story's moral is straightforward.  As Dr. Miles relates, a
two-dollar bill is now worth double its face value.  Torn in
half, however, the bill would be worthless.  The Polish
brothers turn in an enchanting performance as they simulate
Siamese twins without the use of special effects.  We never
wonder that in real life they are sibs who are so close to each
other that they finish each other's sentences, though in the
film they have an annoying habit of whispering to each other
when they have company--a rude habit at best.  Michele
Hicks does quite well in her debut role as a trampy-looking
but attractive hooker with a golden heart, though Lesley Ann
Warren as the brothers' reluctant mom is the only performer
who will be familiar to the average moviegoer.  Warren's role
is the least credible: that of the mother of the Siamese twins
who turned them out for adoption at birth but who is turned
around when the men are 27.  An eerie and entirely effective
soundtrack by Stuart Matthewman insures the movie's
position as an intensely atmospheric work while Warren Alan
Young's production design effective makes Penny's quarters
look synthetically royal while the twins pine away in a sickly
green hotel room reminiscent of the Coen Brothers' design in
"Barton Fink."  The movie about the twin Falls brothers takes
place on Idaho Street, but can occur anywhere, though you're
not likely to see such people in real life.  Siamese twins are
born only once in 50,000 to 80,000 twin births and often die a
few years after their entry into the world.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
TWIN FALLS IDAHO (director/writer:Michael Polish; screenwriter: Mark
Polish; cinematographer:M. David Mullen; cast: Penny (Michele Hicks,
former model)  Michael Polish (Francis Falls), Mark Polish (Blake
Falls), Lesley Ann Warren (Francine Falls), Patrick Bauchau (Miles,
doctor), Jon Gries (Jay, lawyer), Garrett Morris (Jesus), William Katt
(surgeon), Holly Woodlawn (Flamboyant at Party), Ant (Trey), 1999)
Michael Polish's feature debut as director, Twin Falls Idaho, tells the
story of conjoined twins, Blake (Mark Polish) and Francis Falls (Michael
Polish), whose lugubrious lives are a result of their inexplicable birth
and unique appearance. Their situation has made them bonded by the hip
and forced to exist together, with the stronger Blake keeping the dying
Francis alive by having his heart do most of the work for both. They
chose not to get surgery, saying that they came into this world together
and will leave together. Having come to an unnamed Idaho city, from
their circus home, in search of their mother (Lesley Ann Warren) who
abandoned them at birth, wanting to see her before they die, realizing
that Francis is fading fast. As a birthday gift for their 25th year,
Blake calls a prostitute for Francis, who comes up to their flea-bag
hotel room and after initially being repulsed by them as freaks, running
away from them, returns to get to know them and help the sick Francis by
getting her doctor-friend (Patrick Bauchau as Miles) to treat him.
The film is packed with tension, emanating from the choreographed looks
given off from the brothers, that is filled with their history of fear
and insulation from the world around them. It is through the eyes of
Penny (Michele Hicks, a former model), the prostitute who remains with
them because she wants to get some good karma, after viewing her life as
a failure, that we begin to know the boys. Penny, like the audience,
gets used to these freaks and begins to see them as very gentle and
touching human beings, and her heart, not her sex, goes out to them. She
falls for the more articulate Blake, which causes some jealousy for his
brother, being that this is the first time that the brothers can't share
the same experience. At this point, the story could have gone in a
number of directions, there were just so many themes it touched on, but
chooses not to sensationalize its tale, instead it becomes a very
sobering tear-jerker. Though there were some moments for levity, as when
Blake tells Penny, "Maybe I'll see you when I'm single," the film,
nevertheless,  remains too sober for its own good.
For the Siamese twins, what becomes important is not their first taste
of sex but of an intimacy shared with an attractive woman. Their
physical and emotional constraints become the storyline, and the two
minutes of loneliness experienced every day when Blake goes to sleep and
when he wakes up, is something Blake can wonder about, giving him a
sense of individuality. At a Halloween party that Penny takes them to,
which she says is their one day to be seen in public as normal, it is
their one day to not be looked upon as freaks-- becomes for them their
acid test with the real world. But all they see at this party are people
who are less normal than they are. The symbolism comes on a bit too
heavy, as we see a couple dressed as Siamese twins just untie the
strings that connect their costumes- which is something that the
brothers are unable to bring themselves to do, realizing it would be the
death of Francis and anyway, Blake would only have a fifty-fifty chance
of surviving, plus he is afraid of living alone. For the brothers, they
just prefer to be left to themselves and let their fate be as written,
though Blake's heart beats faster than his brother's, demanding a little
more than what he has so far received in life.
They have a few more contacts with worldly people, with mixed results.
Penny's sleazy entertainment lawyer friend (Jon Gries), tries to talk
them into becoming a freak show for him to promote and make a million
bucks, which causes them to temporarily turn against Penny for bringing
him around. And then there is Jesus (Garrett Morris), their next door
neighbor, who is fully into the Jesus trip and brings the two to the
hospital even though they didn't want to go. The symbolism here, is that
even if religion means well, it still does the wrong thing even when
doing the right thing. Jesus should not have been so consumed with
himself to think he was Jesus and respected the twin's wishes, just like
the worldly doctor-friend, Miles, did, when he examined them and knew
that they came to the hotel to die together and let it go at that.
The Polish twin brothers might be very close in character to the parts
they play, except for the physicality of being coupled. So it is not
surprising that they are very effective and convincing in their peculiar
roles. The female part of their menage a trois, was played energetically
by Michele Hicks, but was a somewhat less believable role than the
twins.The whore with a heart of gold is already a staple of film lore
and she brings nothing new to the table with this performance. Her
acting contrasted between being particularly touching to being strident
and, at times, she was not very accomplished in her part. The other
characters and especially the mother, had either too small a part to
have an impact; or, were not developed at all. Why the mother just
abandoned the kids (aside from being shocked by what she saw) and what
happened to the twins growing up, never came out in the telling of the
story. When they were youngsters, someone had to take care of them and
should have seen to it that they got the operation to prevent them from
becoming a freak show.
The intensity of the film and its haunting nature worked to its benefit,
as it made us see the twins as they are; the film pulled no punches and
stuck to the compelling nature of its subject matter. But these same
advantages also worked to the detriment of the film, as the story was,
at times, tiresome and rife with too much territory in which to go for
all the problems it came up with. The film couldn't free itself from all
the pain entailed in the three characters, and kept making the story
more and more muddled. An example of that, would be the film's ending,
where Penny encounters the now single Blake and possible romance is
hinted at, but the story just seems to be warming up as it ends on such
an unclear note.
This original film had too many flaws in its storytelling and never
became an inspiring drama or an entertaining work. Instead, it is an
interesting film, that touches on a mature subject of how one can be
both lonely while never being alone, how Siamese twins court a woman,
and also, how they grow up to be deprived without a mother's love. It
should be commended for its mesmerizing style and enormous strength it
showed in sticking with an unpleasant subject most films do not usually
cover. The brothers had something to say, but perhaps it was too much
for them to say in one film, even in a film with a perfectly eerie
cinematography to match its storyline. It is a film that has its heart,
seemingly, in the right place; it, nevertheless, missed the boat on
telling the sexual story it promised but never delivered. A prostitute
not having sex with a client who requested it is hard story to forget so
easily, as it seems, if done right, that could have been an innovative
and moving scene and helped the film recover from being too bleak. The
film got caught up too much in the tragedy of the twin's life and dwelt
too much on the gravity of their situation without coming up with much
more than heavy symbolism for its answers (chopsticks broken in half, a
two dollar bill as change in a cab and later on the subject of a lecture
by the good doctor telling how if the bill is torn in half it is not
worth as much as if it were whole). I found those explanations to be too
trite, and since I was never fully convinced that this wasn't a
manipulative film, playing on the freakish nature of the brothers even
if not sensationalizing it, I left the theater not fully satisfied with
all of the storyline.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Atul Akhare
Well, trying to escape the ~90 degrees heat I sneaked into a local
multiplex that showed artsy films, and was pleasantly surprised at how
much I liked the film.
The movie is set in a forlorn town in Idaho, where two conjoined twins,
Blake and Francis (played by the Polish brothers, who also co-wrote and
directed the film as well), have checked into a ramshackle motel. Well,
Blake and Francis are literally joined at the hip and share three legs
and two arms between them.
Most of the story is narrated from the viewpoint of the beautiful
hooker (played by newcomer Michele Hicks), who has been summoned to the
brothers' room in the opening shot of the movie. Apparently, the
brothers are celebrating their birthday, and they have decided to give
themselves a gift on the occasion.
Understandably, startled by the brothers, and flees the room, but
returns to retrieve her purse and gradually warms up to them. She
learns that Francis is sick (but not Blake!!!) w/ flu, and manages to
get hold of a doctor to treat him.
Well, I won't describe what transpires thereafter as I don't want to
spoil the experience of those who haven't seen the movie yet, but
suffice it to say that plot isn't this movie's forte. The movie is rich
w/ visual metaphors like the two dollar bill, and in some ways, too
rich if you ask me.
The movie loses focus during the second half when it delves too deep
into the hooker's problems, but in my opinion, the sheer originality of
the film, and the first half, which offers some rather keen insights
into the twins' lives, well make it worth the price of admission.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen

Firstly, "Twin Falls Idaho" goes for the too cute punning movie title,
sort of along the lines of "Good Will Hunting" being side-swiped by a
certain David Lynch TV series.  Once we get over this fact, groaning if
necessary, we have a neat little indie movie with a certain Lynchian
spirit of the ordinary grotesque; I don't think the title's allusion to
"Twin Peaks" is coincidental.  Ignore it's occassional obviousness,
like we see in the title: the film is worth seeing.
The basic plot of the film involves an archetypal hooker with a heart
of gold, named Penny in this case, going to a seedy hotel to meet her
next john.  This john isn't Richard Gere, come to rescue her from her
troubles; this john turns out to be the conjoined Falls twins.
Freaky.
Certainly Penny thought so, as she panics and leaves as they're in the
bathroom politely getting her a glass of water.  Realizing her purse
was left in the room, she sheepishly goes back to claim it, and finds
that the twins are busy having a quiet birthday celebration for
themselves.  With this sad scene, we begin the strange friendship that
turns into a love story between Penny and Blake, the stronger of the
twins.
Here and there, the "twins" and "pairs" images and puns are a little
strong and unnecessary.  Yes, we get the picture: the twins are a
particular entity, and separation would destroy them.  Perhaps the most
heavy-handed image is when the twins are in public, drying to reach
their hotel room during daylight: they sit down, exhausted with their
flight, and a crowd gathers around them to take pictures of this
spectacle of Siamese twins.  Yes, the bars represent how zoo-like the
scene is, and how the twins are treated by most of us as animals, not
humans.  We get it.  
Along with the love story, a love story in which the two lovers can
never be alone, the film develops the twisted family relationship of
the twins.  Their mother abandoned them; they are brothers that can
never be apart; and so on.  The notion of solitude and the unending
lack thereof is, of course, a central theme.  The movie is primarily a
series of quiet conversations between the twins and Penny -- the twins
themselves speak to each other in whispers -- exploring these ideas.
The set-piece exception is a Halloween party Penny takes them to: the
twins are simply "in costume" there, and can move around in the open
without stares.  There, of course, is another of the heavy-handed
images, where another pair of costumed Siamese "twins" get fed up with
each other and split up.
Ultimately the story moves in this direction.  In the film's last act,
Francis, the weaker twin, falls mortally ill, and it becomes clear that
the twins will have to undergo their own separation.  The split is
final: Francis won't survive the operation.  The dreamy sequence
showing this works well, far better than any of the other more obvious
symbols the film tosses at us.  I feel that it's the climax of the
film, though there is a nice, bucolic coda that follows, tying up the
lose ends.
Overall, despite my harping on the film's occasional heavy-handedness,
I liked the film.  Certainly it's different from the usual,
action-laden summer flick.  Further, the twins are each fully realized
individuals, nothing like stock evil-twin-good-twins or
angry-at-world-misfits from Central Screenwriting.  Real people.  And
the pace is slow:  it allows you to savor the characters the Polish
brothers have created here, the appreciate the strangeness of the
situation.
