Title
Review for Lucie Aubrac (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
October/USA Films
116 minutes
in French with English subtitles
starring Carole Bouquet, Daniel Auteuil, Patrice Chereau, Jean-Roger
Milo, Eric Boucher, Heino Ferch, Jean Martin, Marie Pillet, Maxime
Henry, Alain Maratarat, Franck de la Personne, Pascal Greggory
based on the novel "Ils Partiront Dans L'Ivresse" by Lucie Aubrac
written and directed by Claude Berri
At the beginning of "Lucie Aubrac", there is a disclaimer explaining
that this film is based on a true story, but certain dramatic
liberties have been taken. One of the film's problems is that not
enough dramatic liberties were taken, and we're left with a competent
historical drama-romance without much to it. Daniel Auteuil plays
Raymond, a member of the French Resistance in 1943. Recently married
to Lucie(Carole Bouquet), he gets arrested while at a secret
meeting. He is then sentenced to death, and it is up to his
headstrong, confident wife to rescue him.  Their love story is
charming, but not gripping. What is really fascinating is how strong
Lucie is; becoming a member of the Resistance and leading the troop to
save her husband's life. However, while the historical aspects of the
film are slightly interesting, there is so little character
development that you'll be bugging yourself to find out which name
belongs to which face. It doesn't help that the characters change
their names every few days. Writer/director Claude Berri has
undoubtebly used a lot of skill in putting this film together, but the
only ones who will really enjoy it are either foreign history buffs or
people who like a sentimental, slow-moving romance. Regardless of the
film's flaws, Carole Bouquet and Daniel Auteuil are excellent. With a
little more drama and emotion, "Lucie Aubrac" would be a fine film.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Chuck Schwartz
In French, with subtitles. Based on the book Outwitting the Gestapo by
Lucie Aubrac.
A fact of life of the CrankyCritic.com boards is that there is little
interest in foreign films. Long time readers know that Cranky still sees
and recommends 'em when they strike me as something above average. Well,
here we go again.
The WWII movies we've seen in the last year or so, like many of the
black and white John Wayne starrers Cranky grew up on (on teevee, I'm
not that old) tend to concentrate on battles or the bonds formed by
soldiers because of those battles. How nice then that we see a movie
about the folk who fought the battle back home, and still had the
opportunity to live "normal" lives -- to the extent that you could
assuming that the Nazis who overran your country allowed it. The country
is France. The stars of the story are members of the French Resistance
and most of what you see on the big screen actually happened.
Allow me to digress: back in my film school days the screenwriting
teacher was fond of saying that all great stories are love stories. She
was right. In this film, as you would expect, the Nazis are the bad guys
and the Resistance are the good guys. Central to the story is Lucie
Aubrac (Carole Bouquet) and her husband Raymond (Daniel Auteuil) and her
year-plus old son Jean-Pierre (Maxime Henry), nicknamed Boo-Boo. It is
1943 in the city of Lyons in what is called the Southern Zone. The
government which rules the zone is more collaborationist (they would say
realistic) than patriotic and the Nazi grip is noticeably, but not much,
looser. The Aubracs follow leader in exile Charles DeGaulle, who directs
their efforts via coded broadcasts from the BBC in London. These
"terrorists" are particularly effective, as is seen in the opening
sequence of the film and escaping from the clutches of the French police
is as much an intellectual exercise as a legal challenge.
But . . . and you knew there was a but coming, right? you can only
change your location and identity a couple of time, evade the jaws of
tyranny once or twice before they come snapping down on you. When they
do, do you choose saving your country or saving the ones you love? The
few members of the Resistance that you'll come to know all make
different choices, and you can argue them over coffee afterwards. In a
forged identity in which he is single, Raymond must deny all knowledge
of the woman he loves; to do so saves her skin and that of the few
freedom fighters still on the loose. But the Gestapo has figured out who
he really is, and have sentenced the man to death. For Lucie, saving her
husband preserves the fragile remnants of Resistance leadership in the
Southern Zone and more important, saves her husband. This desire to have
her cake and eat it too leads to some compelling and very dramatic
scenes on the big screen, as she coordinates efforts to free her man
before his date with the executioner.
This small story of Lucie Aubrac within the big story of "The Big One"
is a fine one, well acted and well told in a fairly matter of fact
style. One subplot involves the question of what happened to the Jews of
France, but rather than being an acknowledgment of the Holocaust, it
presents a most interesting twist to the main story, which I'll leave
you to discover on your own. Blink and you'll also miss the fact that
one of the Gestapo officers in the story is the notorious Klaus Barbie.
If you don't know who Barbie was or what he did, you won't miss much in
terms of the main story. It's just an extra layer of icing on the cake
of a beautifully put together script.
And, being a French film, the woman is gorgeous and her guy is not. Ah,
if only real life were really that way (said all the single male critics
on the way out of the screening room. This one included.) 
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Lucie Aubrac, he would have paid...
The subtitles don't get in the way of the story. That's important. The
story is great and the stuff I didn't tell you makes it even greater.
Lucie Aubrac is highly recommended.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 October Films
 Director: Claude Berri
 Writer:   Lucie Aubrac (book), Claude Berri
 Cast: Daniel Auteuil, Jacques Bonnaffe, Eric Boucher, Carole
Bouquet, Patrice Chereau, Heino Ferch, Pascal
Greggory, Jean Martin, Jean-Roger Milo, Jean-Louis Richard,
Hubert Saint-Macary, Bernard Verley
   If the French still have not faced up to criticism of their
wartime policies, it's no wonder.  Defeated twice by the
Germans--first in 1914 and then in 1940--France has been
reproached by many for its role in cooperating with the
enemy during World War 2.  The unoccupied southern portion
of the country was run by a collaborationist government from
the city of Vichy, while many French police and citizens
shamefully participated with the Nazis in the rounding up of
their Jewish citizens.  The one bright chapter in French
wartime history centers on the Resistance, an underground
force which ambushed and blew up ammunition-carrying
trains and trucks and shot German soldiers whenever they
felt they could get away with these actions.  Not surprisingly,
just after the war, the number of French who fought with the
Resistance miraculously "expanded," with collaborationists
and neutralists alike suddenly sharing the glory of the brave
people who risked their lives to free their country from the
hated occupiers.  One might expect Claude Berri, the noted
French director who is the son of Jewish immigrants, to come
down hard on those Frenchmen who helped round up Jews
for the Gestapo.  But in "Lucie Aubrac," based on a true 
story "Outwitting the Gestapo" by a heroic female Resistance
fighter whose real name was Lucie Bernard, Berri unfolds the
brave woman's struggle to free her husband from jail shortly
before he was to be executed.
   The film opens on its most exciting action sequence, one
that might bring to mind the blowing up of the overpass in
"The Bridge on the River Kwai."  A fictitious event in that
Aubrac's husband was not actually involved, the occurrence
adds considerable drama to a story embracing more talk than
physical action.  As a group of French Resistors work
feverishly to wire up an explosive device, Raymond Samuel,
aka Aubrac (Daniel Auteuil)--backed up by a handful of
fighters--later watches with delight as their operation succeeds in
destroying a steam train carrying ammunition to the German
forces.  Aubrac, a high-level member of the Resistance in
charge of administering a zone of operation, meets
clandestinely with his colleagues, including the leader, Jean
Moulin aka Max (Patrice Chereau).  Ultimately he is arrested
and charged with terrorism after the group are allegedly
betrayed by one of their associates, thrown into a tiny, roach-
infested cell, tortured, and sentenced to death for terrorism. 
At this point, his wife Lucie (Carole Bouquet) schemes to
save her husband by concocting a plan which would allow
him to be transported to the office of a Nazi official, thereby
allowing her colleagues in the Resistance to use violence to
free him.
   Claude Berri is quite familiar with the period of history he
describes.  His 1991 film "Uranus" starring Gerard Depardieu,
dealt with the struggle for power in a village among groups of
communists, anticommunists, collaborators and ex-resisters.
Here, he illustrates some military action in this two-hour
drama, but fixes primarily on the romantic scheme at the
story's heart.  That he is most concerned with machiavellian
designs of his countrymen is not unusual, considering that at
his height, he directed his most discussed film "Jean de
Florette"--about a proud French farmer who schemes with his
simple-minded nephew to acquire some nearby farmland by
making sure that the new owners discover an all-important
natural spring on the property.    
   A strong sentimental note attends the tale.  Lucie made
love with her husband for the first time on a May 14 and has
promised that they would be together on the anniversary of
that date for the rest of their lives.  Her insistence on keeping
to that bargain goes a way toward illuminating her strong
motivation to do everything she can to persuade German
officials to transport the man for a day from his death cell.
   While Daniel Auteuil turns in his usual reliable
performance, Carole Bouquet carries the day with a forceful
discharge of her valorous role.  Keeping a straight, almost
poker face throughout her negotiations with the enemy, she
shows the uniformed torturers and soldiers alike that she
means business.  We are made privy to her determination
even as we watch her teach history to her class of 10-year-
old girls, suggesting that they "don't laugh" whenever they get
the giggles as girls that age are wont to do.  Vincenzo
Marano's camera glides across Olivier Radot's production
design--a layout that not only transports us to village France
of the 1940s but actually makes us feel that we're watching
one of those old-time romantic war movies.  Though "Lucie
Aubrac" includes more than a modicum of violent action, the
overall ambiance is a sober one.  This is a deliberately paced
film with a powerful woman's role that may not knock your
socks off but will give you insight into the machinations within
an occupied area of Europe and how love--with just a trace of
honeyed sentiment--can serve as a literal life-saver.

Author
Steve Rhodes
May 14th.  For couples deeply in love there is frequently something
other than their wedding rings that represents their bond and their
undying love.  For the Aubracs, it is May 14th.  Long along they agreed
that for as long as they live, they will be together on that day.  May
14 is rapidly approaching, and the resistance fighter husband, Raymond
Aubrac (Daniel Auteuil from QUEEN MARGOT), is in jail.  His resourceful
and loving wife, Lucie (Carole Bouquet from FOR YOUR EYES ONLY), is
willing to try anything in an attempt to get him released.
LUCIE AUBRAC, based on a true story, weaves a fascinating tale of the
French resistance in World War II that's both an intriguing thriller and
a touching love story.  Avoiding the clichés and excessive melodrama
normally associated with such stories, writer/director Claude Berri
creates an intensely moving story full of subtlety and grace.
Focusing on the minutia of the underground collaboration rather than on
the grand plans, the movie makes palpable the fear and the intense and
unquestioning dedication of each of the freedom fighters.  The result is
a story that has a freshness and an honesty that allows the viewer to
see that era in ways that he probably hasn't before.
The first part of the story contains scenes of the troubling normalcy of
the life that many lived.  In some ways things hadn't changed even in
1943 Nazi-occupied France in which the picture is set.  People go to
work, to school, to the tailors and even to the seashore.  How hard this
must have been with friends, relatives and neighbors being routinely
rounded up and shot?
("It's a terrible thing to say, but I can't help being happy," Raymond
confesses to his wife during a blissful day with their young son,
nicknamed Booboo, at the ocean.  He and his wife frolic together in the
water while their son digs nearby in the sand.  An absolutely perfect
day if you could just forget that you might be tortured and killed at
any moment.)
As the husband, Daniel Auteuil delivers a warm, compassionate
performance as a man who is willing to die for a cause but who'd be much
happier holding his wife or playing with his son.  With a brow creased
by horrific worries, Auteuil, in a delicately nuanced performance,
displays the husband's pain and desire.  A man who seeks no glory but
shirks no obligation, he will do whatever is asked of him.
As the strong wife, Carole Bouquet gives an equally strong performance.
With intense, penetrating eyes, she's a woman who accomplishes what she
sets out to do regardless of the risks involved.  The chemistry between
them is genuine, and both avoid numerous opportunities to overact.
LUCIE AUBRAC never manipulates the viewer's emotions, but don't be
surprised if you get swept up in the tragedy and the intrigue.  Full of
tension, the story relies on the small events more than the larger ones
to create its excitement.  A rewarding movie, it is filled with
memorable, sympathetic characters for whom you'll be rooting.
LUCIE AUBRAC runs 1:56.  The film is in French with English subtitles.
It is rated R for violence and would be fine for teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 8.  In
the San Jose area it will be playing at one of the Camera Cinemas.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
