Title
Review for Hotel de Love (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     Over the past few years, American moviegoers have developed 
something of a taste for certain Australian movies.  PROOF, STRICTLY 
BALLROOM, THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, MURIEL'S WEDDING, and SHINE have 
all found fans in North America, making distributors interested in 
acquiring more products from down under.  The latest Australian import 
to enter the U.S. market is a misfired romantic comedy called HOTEL DE 
LOVE.  And, while it's not bad enough for me to suggest that it should 
have been left where it came from, this certainly isn't a shining 
example of Australian cinema.
     One good clue that a movie is in trouble is when a subplot is more 
engaging than the main story.  Unfortunately, that happens in HOTEL DE 
LOVE.  The film is about three romantic couplings, all of which undergo 
their ups and downs before the "happily ever after" ending.  The paring 
afforded the most screen time is easily the least interesting -- sour, 
dour, womanizing Rick Dunne (Aden Young) and his soul-mate, Melissa 
Morrison (Saffron Burrows, of CIRCLE OF FRIENDS).  The two became lovers 
when they were 17.  Now, ten years later, they have met again and 
discovered that the chemistry is still there.  Or, at least Rick thinks 
it's still there.  Melissa isn't as sure.
     Meanwhile, Rick's meek brother (who also happens to be our 
narrator), Stephen (Simon Bossell), has deluded himself into believing 
that he too is in love with Melissa.  But, while he's busy pursuing her, 
one of Rick's former flames, Alison (Pippa Grandison, of MURIEL'S 
WEDDING) is trying to attract his attention.  And, as if that wasn't 
enough, Rick and Stephen's parents, while preparing to renew their 
wedding vows, determine that their marriage may be over.  All of these 
things occur at the Hotel de Love, a cheesy honeymoon spot with theme 
suites for lovers (i.e., spend the night in a room that looks like it's 
in the middle of a jungle). 
     The romance between Rick and Melissa is d.o.a.  It's not 
interesting to begin with, and it only gets worse as the film 
progresses.  The two leads, Aden Young and Saffron Burrows, do credible 
jobs, but their characters never connect on any level.  The parents 
subplot, in addition to being horribly written, is even less compelling.  
On the other hand, I was intrigued enough by Stephen and Alison that I 
was willing to sit through the entire film to see how things turned out 
for them.  On some level, it was probably worth the sacrifice, but I'm 
not sure I'd recommend that anyone else do the same.
     The comedy in HOTEL DE LOVE is consistently embarrassing.  The so-
called "humor" isn't funny, and it puts the actors in awkward 
situations.  It's almost painful to watch Simon Bossell trip and twitch 
his way through the scenes where Stephen confesses his love to Melissa.  
This is the kind of material that often appears on TV sit-coms, when the 
only way we know we're supposed to find it funny is because of the laugh 
track.  Then there's the annoying pop music soundtrack (a staple of 
Australian comedies), which tries to come up with a familiar tune for 
every occasion.
     HOTEL DE LOVE is not without its share of interesting ideas -- it 
just never develops any of them.  The two brothers have the kind of 
love/hate relationship that deserves more than the handful of cursory 
lines devoted to it.  Likewise, Stephen's hobby -- sitting around at 
airports counting how many travelers are met by lovers and how many are 
alone -- could lead to something considerably more substantial that it 
does.  In short, most of the potentially fascinating elements of the 
film are snubbed because writer/director Craig Rosenberg is determined 
to tell Rick and Melissa's cliched story.  And that's unfortunate, 
because he may be the only one who's interested in watching it. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I am not sure what Australia's chief export is, but I'd like to
believe it is their films.   The Australians have a knack for making
quirky little comedies that work -- MURIEL'S WEDDING being one of their
funniest.   In HOTEL DE LOVE, they have sent to our shores an endearing
and charming comedy populated with characters worth caring about.
First time director Craig Rosenberg's HOTEL DE LOVE is not great
cinema, but it is certainly an enjoyable diversion.
     Steven and Rick Dunne are fraternal twin brothers who fall in love
at first sight with the same girl at a party in high school.   Simon
Bossell plays Steve, Aden Young (from BLACK ROBE and the soon to be
released COUSIN BETTE) plays Rick, and Saffron Burrows (from CIRCLE OF
FRIENDS and IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER) plays their would-be girlfriend
Melissa.
     Sometimes a split second makes all the difference.   It does for
Steve.   At the high school party he hesitates briefly which allows his
brother to introduce himself first to the voluptuous redhead with the
winning smile.   From her beautiful face to her long legs, she has the
beauty of a fashion model and yet the natural looks of the girl next
door.   Steve kicks himself for losing the best opportunity in his
life.
     The script, by the director, is a mixture of comedy and romance
with a touch of poignancy thrown in every now and then.   The tone of
the film reminded me of the old TV series "Love American Style," albeit
a little more explicit.
     As the show opens, ever romantic Steve is at the airport with his
notebook in hand, musing, "Do you ever look at people and wonder about
their lives?"  He is counting the number of people that are met by
someone versus the number who leave alone.   This allows him to compute
and update his romance index.   He believes in love even if he will
never be able to forget his failure with Melissa.
     After a brief liaison between Rick and Melissa, she disappears out
of their lives for ten years until she runs into them on the weekend of
her marriage to Norman.   Rick is now the desk clerk at the tacky Hotel
De Love.   Every room there is different.   My favorite is called
Subterranean Passion and looks like something out of THE FLINTSTONES,
complete with a big boulder for a door.   The set decorator clearly had
a blast with this assignment.   A great parody of bad taste.
     People either go to the Hotel De Love to get married like Melissa
and Norman or to renew their wedding vows.   Steve's and Rick's
parents, played by Ray Barrett and Julia Blake, are there to renew
theirs.   Their parents fight constantly.   Barrett plays the dad as
the classic grouch.   He wakes with the epithet, "Bloody hell; still
alive."  Rick, disgusted with their renewal farce, says, "Watching my
parents renew their wedding vows is like watching ambulance drivers
push the victims back into the wreck."
     The other woman in the show is Alison (Pippa Grandison), the
hotel's resident astrologer.   She is Rick's current girlfriend, but he
has had a long stream of other lovers before her.   He spends his
waking hours, however, pining for his first love, Melissa.
     The script is sharp and witty and most of the laughs come from the
dialog and not the wacky sets.   Movies with physical comedy too often
sink into slapstick worthy of bad TV sitcoms, but this movie rarely
goes overboard.   A typical, funny scene has Rick trying to talk to
Melissa on a bench.   He gets lodged between two passionate lovers also
on the bench, and pretty soon they are fondling him by mistake.   This
is exactly the type of scene I normally hate, but they manage to make
it seem just believable enough to be humorous.
     The film is full of delicious little subplots.   One has Steve
popping in on Melissa to express his affection.   "What are you doing?"
she warns him.   "You can't keep up your drive-by 'I Love You's."
Another has her lamenting the futility of so-called love at first
sight.   She says, "My mother believed in love at first sight with Dad,
with her second husband, and her third."
     The ending has three parts.   I thought the first was too pat, but
the others are quite sweet.   I left the theater feeling a little silly
and quite happy.   It is refreshing to see new directors with promise.
I'll keep an eye out for Rosenberg's future comedies.
     HOTEL DE LOVE runs a fast 1:36.   It is rated R for brief nudity,
some sexual groping, sexual humor, and some profanity.   The show is
tastefully done and would be fine for any teenager.   I give the film a
fun thumbs up, and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
