Title
Review for Chung fung dui ji no foh gaai tau (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
The Flying Inkpot
Action movies seem generally to have earned the epithet, "What plot?"
While one bemoans the departure from a strong story line, the action
movie continues to survive as long as kicks and punches and bombs and
bullets get more sophisticated to satiate the public's hunger. But to
what end?
EU STRIKE FORCE (better known as "BIG BULLET" in Hong Kong Cinemas)
tries to be impressive in the area of heart-stopping action as well as
plot. Sadly, both areas lose steam after 45 minutes into the movie. Once
the plot becomes clearer and motives are established, there is nothing
much to look forward to. This is forgivable if the action makes up for
it. However, spoilt by the glut of Hollywood and the Jackie Chans of
Hong Kong, one can't help but feel disappointed in this case.
Lau Ching-wan plays Sergeant Bill Zhu, a hot-tempered but dedicated
crime-fighter. He assaults a superior officer Inspector Guan for Guan's
misinformation leading to casualties of his colleagues, but suffers a
disciplinary penalty for the offence and is transferred to the Emergency
Unit (EU). Despite the blow, Bill is encouraged by superior and friend,
Yang (Ng Chun-yu) to work hard to face his new duties. In the
background, an international crime warlord, "Professor" (Yu Rong-quang)
creates havoc after a successful jailbreak. Subsequently, Yang gets
killed while pursuing the "Professor."
Heartbroken at the loss of his close friend, and fuelled by the need to
stop "Professor," Bill goes all out to investigate the case. However, he
is limited by his appointment as Team Leader in the EU. Without consent
from his superiors, Bill manages to win over his team mates and together
they attempt to stop "Professor."
The gripping scenes include power-packed shoot-outs and bomb sequences
along the streets. The car chasing scenes appear promising in the
beginning but begin to look typical by the fourth one or so. There are
also one or two borrowed ideas. One may be reminded of DEMOLITION MAN
when a severed hand is used to open a safe guarded by a palm-reading
device. And while Tom Cruise fights his nemesis on top of a speeding
train, Lau fights "Professor" on top of a plane speeding along the
runway.
Even if the action may not have been thoroughly sustained throughout the
movie, there are endearing moments. Lau's portrayal of the frustrated
cop within imposed limits is compelling. One is quickly impressed with
his keen deductive mind. Lau's character is challenged by straightlaced
team member Jeff (Jordan Chan Siu-chun). Chan's first dramatic role is
that of the potential novice uncomfortable with Lau's unorthodox
methods. Both characters complement each other, working out the tension
between them.
The sub-plots amount to trivialities except for the relationship between
Jeff and his brother, a cop turned bad. Their reunion at the end makes a
better cushioning effect than the little happy endings provided by the
other team mates who celebrate their success with their loved ones. The
resolution on the whole seems too easy, too typical of the countless of
action movies. What is more of a sell-out is perhaps Lau's character,
the lone man at the beginning and the lone man at the end. Everybody is
celebrating with someone except him. Another dimension of his character
could have been explored but an overall feel good factor was opted for
instead.
Despite unspectacular stunts and easy resolutions, the movie doesn't
sink into an abyss. In the beginning it is a vehicle for Lau's acting
but ensemble acting soon takes over in typical Hong Kong style, making
EU STRIKE FORCE rather enjoyable.
Sherrie Lee collects leather trinkets and secretly wishes that
bellbottoms will become fasionable again.

