Title
Review for Caravaggio (1986)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
Producer, Sarah Radclyffe.
Executive producer, Colin McCabe.
Camera, Gabriel Beristain.
Editing, George Akers.
Production design, Christopher Hobbs.
Music, Simon Fisher Turner.
Cast: Nigel Terry, Sean Bean, Garry Cooper, Spencer Leigh, Tilde Swinton,
      Michael Gough, Nigel Davenport, Robbie Coltrane, Jonathan Hyde,
      Dexter Fletcher, Noam Almaz, Jack Birkett.
A British Film Institute, Channel 4, Nicholas Ward-Jackson production.
Released by the B.F.I.
No rating.
     Painter-cineaste Derek Jarman, one of the "enfants terribles" of
the contemporary British scene, has come up with an avant-garde
"biography" of the great Italian painter Caravaggio (1573-1610) which
is imaginary yet factual, artful yet campy, arty yet artsy, original
but self-indulgent, and fascinating for specialized audiences.
     Kudos to the New Art Theatre for living up to its name with this
most chance-taking item.  Not that CARAVAGGIO is alienatingly
esoteric: in London it has drawn large audiences; at the Berlin Film
Festival it won the Silver Bear, the second highest prize.  But it is
neither your nice Hollywood biopic of an artist nor a feature-length
documentary, so that, in its bewildering (to some) "otherness," the
outrageous CARAVAGGIO is bound to polarize audiences.
     At the very least I'd say that this is a must for art-lovers and
students, for people interested in off-beat film and theatre and
visuals.  Shot on a limited budget in a warehouse by the Thames,
CARAVAGGIO roams around at will, flashing back from the dying painter
to his youth, and re-zig-zagging forward to the painter's death.
     It is done in broken bits, against all traditional notions of
continuity.  As it goes along, it invents, at times gratuitously, at
times on the fragile basis of history (or legend)--and it is always
perversely, often delightfully, anachronistic.  Stylized places and
years move in and out, merge, fuse, separate.  There are" nows"--the
20th century, vague, almost atemporal; 16th century "thens"; twilight,
"no time" zones; periods when the incursions of modernity in the past
vary in intensity: a corrupt Roman tinkering with a musical calculator
as he talks to a Cardinal, a Caravaggio patron; a typewriter, a
motorcycle, modern dress.  The anachronisms are not visually
intrusive.  They are reinforced by sounds of accordions, jazz bands,
jets, radio or TV, which, however, are not shown.
     The story may be confusing, but the art visuals are not, and
they're quite extraordinary.  Caravaggio used models for paintings and
Jarman goes to the paintings to reproduce the models, as living still
lifes, in minute reconstructions.
     The painter's models were people of the lower classes.  The
revolutionary, naturalistic, forceful, controversial Caravaggio--an out
and out tradition-breaking avant-gardist--used whores for Madonnas (as
in "The Death of the Virgin," scandal-making, because of its different
emphasis of figures), cutthroats for saints, novel angles and
perspectives: in "The Conversion of St.  Paul" a huge horse
dominates.
     Jarman repeats Caravaggio's magnificent use of sometimes brutal
light in what is the best demonstration of chiaroscuro, a Caravaggio
innovation and, to this day, a lesson about the immense possibilities
of one-source lighting.
     Says Jarman: "Caravaggio invented dramatic lighting ... similar to
the kind of light used in the cinema.  In a way he invented cinematic
light....  Every Italian cameraman is grounded in Caravaggio...."
     What was shock for Caravaggio's contemporaries is a different
shock, that of recognition, for us, as familiar paintings follow one
another, "coming to you live" as well as on on canvas.  It is unique,
superbly lit and photographed, and inventive with props which can be
costumes, carefully arranged fruit or painstakingly folded blankets and
rags.
     As Caravaggio paints, the canvases-in-progress are so convincingly
done that, so far as I know, they're the very best I have ever seen in
a film.  (I have no documentation on the movie and I cannot identify the
person who did those paintings).
     Jarman's whimsy goes beyond Caravaggio and into paintings by those
of a like artistic bent or those that Caravaggio influenced directly or
indirectly.  Jarman's actors and objects are in groupings, poses,
situations which do not copy other works of art, but are inspired by
them, mostly by the use of light: references, serious variants,
tongue-in-cheek homages.
     Among them Le Nain, La Tour, Zurbaran and Velasquez...  Sometimes
the trick jumps at you: an amusingly modified David, "The Death of
Danton" in his "sabot" (portable bathtub).  Sometimes the compositions
are throwaway, lightning-fast.  Between blinks you just might recognize
some of them, a Donatello sculpture for instance.
     The film's Caravaggio is bisexual, with the stress on
homoeroticism.  His major non-art passion, Ranuccio, is his equally
bisexual model, a beautiful low-life hunk that becomes the painter's
blood brother after a fight in a dive, and whom Caravaggio kills at the
end.
     Film connoisseurs might notice that CARAVAGGIO does double duty
with its unstated but clear references to the late Italian film
director Pier Paolo Pasolini.  He too came up from the slums.  He was a
revolutionary artist, a Marxist, a homosexual who was killed by one of
his young pickups.  CARAVAGGIO is even built more or less along
Pasoliniesque lines of disdain and provocation.  It also shows the
influence of Jean-Luc Godard, especially the 1982 film PASSION.
     This is a wild film where the actors, pronouncedly British, mostly
play Cockneys who play Italians.  Where a voice-off narration ranges
from poetic simplicity ("The stars are the diamonds of the poor") to
platitudes, disquisitions (e.g., on Giordano Bruno) and purple prose.
Where the painting of "Profane Love" is accompanied by lyrical flamenco
singing.  Where gold coins are stored in mouths, transmitted by kisses
and placed, Mafia-style, on the eyes of Caravaggio's black-suited
corpse, lying in state like a Sicilian Don.
     You cannot judge CARAVAGGIO by habitual standards.  It has
wretched excesses, "longueurs," claustrophobia, calculated distancing.
But it is also an original experiment, a one-of-a-kind tribute to a
ground-breaking master, and a feast of color, light and shadows.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CARAVAGGIO (director/writer: Derek Jarman; screenwriter: from an
original idea by Nicholas Ward Jackson; cinematographer: Gabriel
Beristain; editor: George Akers; cast: Nigel Terry (Caravaggio), Sean
Bean (Rannuccio Thomasoni), Tilda Swinton (Lena), Nigel Davenport
(Marchese Giustiniani), Michael Gough (Cardinal Del Monte), Robbie
Coltrane (Scipione Borghese), Jack Birkett (Pope); Runtime: 93; British
Film Institute; 1986-UK)
An iconoclastic biopic about the adventurous 17th century
late-Renaissance painter Michelangelo Merisa da Caravaggio, who was born
in 1573 and died in 1610. The Baroque artist is superbly played by Nigel
Terry and the story is brilliantly adapted to the screen by English
director Derek Jarman. It is very sensually done, emphasizing the
artist's gargantuan appetites for bisexual and, especially, homosexual
affairs with his models, the various scandals he was involved
in--including murder, his tricky dealings with the church, and the
director's playful anachronisms, purposefully including in his film the
modern street sounds as background. Successfully filmed on a very
restricted budget, which only proves, if you know how to shoot a film,
you can do it on shoestring budget and still come up with an outstanding
film.
Derek Jarman's brief film career (this was his major film debut) came to
an unfortunate end in 1994, when he died of AIDS. His original way of
shooting a biopic (highly personal but still factual), whereby
Caravaggio's most famous works are recreated with actors who are filmed
in a style true to Caravaggio's chiaroscuro paintings (the artist's gift
to the art world), makes for a one of a kind film. Jarman creates an
inspiring visual atmosphere for Nigel Terry's brooding artist portrayal,
of the artist on his death bed. We learn about him through his voiceover
and the disjointed time frame of his flashbacks, that tells of his short
life, which comes back to him in spurts of energy and in a hauntingly
disquieting manner. This art house film, a classic in gay cinema
reaching out to a mainstream audience, the director's most accessible
film, was winner of the Silver Bear at the 1986 Berlin Film Festival.
The film opens with Caravaggio bemoaning his fate on his death bed at
Porto Ercole and his mind drifting in and out with memories of the 40
years he was always on the run, by making the declarative statement that
"Man's character is his fate." My favorite quote of his, "Through doubt
comes insight," has a ring of inspiration for what egged him on to lead
an unconventional life. In the flashbacks, we see that from his very
youthful beginnings as a struggling artist, his passions were always
ripe and his lively sexual encounters were partial to the homoerotic
ones. His artistic talents were exploited by the Cardinal, which led to
their strange relationship and for him to be made the genius painter for
the church, painting their holy figures and saints...with the
prostitutes, thieves, gay men and those from the lower classes he used
as models. To add further references to his vile character, he kept a
deaf/mute child as a slave and lived in such a lavish style that he
squandered all his money.
That this film should make us concerned about this intemperate artist,
which is not an easy task to do, is accomplished despite telling us as
little about him as possible, but letting us instead examine him and his
paintings in exacting detail by using close-ups and by making his death
watch a solemn scene, befitting a giant of a man passing before mere
mortals. The bare room he lies in, the kissing scenes of his models with
gold coins in their mouth and his death scene of gold coins covering his
eyes (like a Mafia chief being buried), plus the contrasts between dark
and light shades in the film aping his art style, the depiction of the
struggles he had over money, his wanton confessions, and the wanton life
of his models and the corruption of the church, all kept the pot boiling
on his mysterious life.
His most important relationship shown, was with the muscular Ranuccio
Thomasoni who first boxed with him and then posed as the assassin in his
'martyrdom' oils. The other embroiling relationship was with Lena,
Ranuccio's mistress and the artist's exotic model for Magdalene and the
Virgin, whose pregnancy becomes a tragic moment for her. They formed a
ménage ŕ trois and that bawdy relationship becomes the heart of the
film.
The film captures the turbulent nature of the artist, accurately showing
his inventive art technique (the basis for current movie lighting
techniques), and it relates how the low birth artist still had so much
anger in him even as he grew in status and how he always painted in such
a feverish pitch, always the passionate artist. The film also lets us
see how he can so easily kill someone he loved because he believed he
was doing something that was just. As a result this is a dark but
imaginative look at the artist, one that has weight to it and works very
well, which should be more pleasing to art lovers than the general
public.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
