Title
Review for Mi nismo andjeli (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
The old saying about forbidden fruit being the sweetest can
be best illustrated with the way Croatian public greeted
Serbian films in the darkest hours of recent Balkan wars.
During those times Tudjman's regime tried to severe any
cultural link between Croatia and former federal partner and
state propaganda machinery mercilessly tried to turn Serbia
into this Earth's equivalent of Mordor and their inhabitants
into Orcs. State- sanctioned chauvinism reflected not only
in the official ban of all Serbian cultural imports, but
also with brutal censorship of media materials in Croatia
proper. For example, even 100% Croatian films made in
Communist past were forbidden from being shown on TV for the
simple reason of having distinguished Serbian actor in one
of major roles. Naturally, overzealous implementation of
such policy created almost instinctive reaction of certain
segments in Croatian movie going public; this reaction
manifested in Serbian films becoming popular ingredient of
any wilder party, and gradually many enterprising
individuals began crossing battle-lines and supplying this
newly formed market. The circle of people who enjoyed and
appreciated Serbian films steadily grew, and when the
cultural barriers between two countries collapsed few years
ago, nobody was particularly surprised to see Serbian films
in Croatia being almost as popular as films made in
Hollywood.
Among the first batch of Serbian films that turned into cult
material was MI NISMO ANDJELI, comedy directed in 1992 by
Srdjan Dragojevic. The plot of the film is rather simple and
it features Angel (played by Uros Djuric) and Devil (played
by Srdjan Todorovic). Two of them are fighting for the soul
of Nikola (played by Nikola Kojo), Belgrade playboy who is
enjoying reputation of city's top heartthrob despite the
fact that he treats women like garbage. One of his latest
victims is Marina (played by Milena Pavlovic), mousy 18-year
old high school who slept with Nikola after accidentally
getting drunk during the party. Few months later Nikola
doesn't remember the incident or the girl, but this Marina
is carrying his child. Thankfully, Marina's best friend Bubi
(played by Branka Katic) tells her not to reconcile with
this and two of them begin working very hard in order to
hook Nikola with Marina again. Before this happens, Nikola
is going to experience some rather strange events, thanks to
the manipulations of Angel and Devil.
If you want to see effects of war on filmmaker, you should
compare MI NISMO ANDJELI with other works of Srdjan
Dragojevic who would later become cinematic celebrity thanks
to his gritty war dramas PRETTY VILLAGES, PRETTY FLAMES and
WOUNDS. When the first segments of the film were being shot,
the old Yugoslavia was still in one piece, and the
protagonists are having vacation in Croatian parts of
Adriatic Coast (references to one particular island were
later creating salvos of laughter among local Croatian
public). The war actually manifested itself only in one, not
particularly inspired scene with Bubi's father in military
fatigues, a scene that would create more winces than laughs.
Apart from that, MI NISMO ANDJELI is completely set in its
own fantasy world that consists of teenagers and playboys
from well-to-do Belgrade families, who listen to rockabilly
music and live life closer to standards of 1950s America
than brutal 1990s Balkans. Dragojevic, however, sometimes
gives few glimpses of real Serbia, but those glimpses are
more in parodical nature (especially when they deal with
Serbian folk music subculture that went hand-in-hand with
extreme Serb nationalism) and not very different from scenes
in which Dragojevic gives homage to his cult classics like
TWIN PEAKS and ALIEN. Lack of perspective and solid plot is,
however, more than compensated with Dragojevic's incredible
sense of humour. Not burdened with war and atrocities,
humour in MI NISMO ANDJELI provides light but effective
entertainment.
Apart from humour, main strength of MI NISMO ANDJELI is in
characters, which are played by diverse but very talented
cast. The most recognisable face to foreign audiences is
Nikola Kojo, who had worked with Dragojevic in his two later
films. But the best impression is left by Branka Katic,
actress who turned otherwise supporting role into the most
sympathetic and memorable character. Those who are fans of
ex-YU cinema from past decades would probably enjoy seeing
faces of Eva Ras, Bogdan Diklic and Predrag `Miki'
Manojlovic in bit parts. Perhaps the only weakness of the
film is in its local nature - in order to truly appreciate
the humour and references of the film, viewer must at least
be familiar with former Yugoslavia. However, those who give
MI NISMO ANDJELI a try, are probably going to be rewarded
with film which deservedly broke through even the hardest
cultural and political barriers.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
