Title
Review for Passion of Mind (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Classics/Lakeshore Entertainment
 Director: Alain Berliner
 Writer:  Ronald Bass, David Field
 Cast: Demi Moore, Sinead Cusack, William Fichtner, Peter
Riegert, Stellan Skarsgard
   Some spokespersons for the feminist movement have
promised that women could have it all.  They could be
hard-hitting top executives with corner suites on the upper
floors of Manhattan skyscrapers and come home to loving
husbands, kids, dogs and picket fences.  Alas, in most cases,
this was not to be.  Women with MBAs who donned business
suits felt guilty leaving their kids with nannies, and those who
stayed home to take care of their loved ones felt they could
have done a lot more with their lives.  With a script by Ronald
written a decade ago with that dilemma in mind, "Passion of
Mind" gives the predicament a visual, metaphoric
presentation, contrasting the life of a low-key book reviewer
draped in casual threads living with her two daughters in the
south of France with that of a high-power literary agent going
about her fast-moving Manhattan business in smashing
designer clothes.  The kicker is that the two women are
actually one and the same: yet another case of split
personality disorder--investigated in a sluggish, cerebral story
that never springs to life but which promises a payoff that the
more prescient moviegoers could probably predict.  
   The premise designed to serve as a hook for the audience
is the nature of dreams.  As you read these words, how do
you know you that you're not dreaming?  You pinch yourself? 
This does not always work.  Here is my solution: say to
yourself, "Is this a dream?"  Your mere ability to consider that
concept will indicate to you that this is reality.  Dreams may
seem real enough when they are in progress, but that is only
because you have not been able to ask yourself this simple
question.  
   For Marty/Marie (Demi Moore), though, that technique does
not work.  When she falls asleep in France, she has visions
of a separate life in New York, where she looks about the
same and acts pretty much like her double in Provence, and
even runs into the same problems in her romantic life.  When
she beds down in New York, she is soon back in France. 
And so it goes, day after day, night after night.  In a sense
she is not the hapless situation that director Alain Berliner
might presume it to be. After all, how else can you enjoy the
delights of both worlds even faster than you could travel from
one to the other on the Concorde?  Folks in the audience
might be tempted to say, "Live with the problem.  Lighten up
and enjoy yourself--in both worlds.  And don't worry too much
about which is real."  
  In New York, Marty, the literary agent, is gradually falling for
her accountant, the shy, even nerdy Aaron (William Fichtner),
whose idea of romantic pursuit is to make dates to meet in
Central Park on Sunday mornings.  In Provence, the man
who captures Marie's interest is William (Stellan Skarsgard),
who takes an unusual interest in Marie's kids, so much so
that you wonder whether he is feigning this attention to win
his lady over.  Marie's psychotherapist in France, Dr. Langer
(Joss Ackland), is of little help, but her friend, Jessie (Sinead
Cusack), advises her to give in to her longing for love. 
Meanwhile her New York therapist, Dr. Peters (Peter
Riegert), strongly cautions Marty to keep her double life a
secret from Aaron, lest Aaron bolt from a person with an all-
consuming psychosis.
   As a romance, the story displays nothing of the passion
we'd expect from a woman who has been without a man for
years. (Her husband in France had died two years earlier
while in New York she seems to avoid dating altogether.) 
The thirty-seven year old Demi Moore just doesn't fit together
with the older Stellan Skarsgard, who comes across as
avuncular rather than appetitive.  And no woman with any
taste could fall for a guy like William Fichtner who sports an
unusually scruffy beard, the hair pouring down to his neck
without symmetry.  For every woman needing a psychiatrist
to resolve her duplicate life there's another who'd be sensible
enough to enjoy doubling her pleasure--just like the twins in
the old Doublemint gum commercials.  Whether dreaming of
New York of fantasizing Provence, Moore sleepwalks through
this lethargic role in a film whose value lies principally in
Eduardo Serra's picture-postcard shots of the Gold Triangle
area of Gordes, Bonnieux and Lacoste in the Luberon valley
of Provence.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 107 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Most people dream of having a glamorous life.  In PASSION OF MIND Demi
Moore has two.  Her predicament is that, supposedly, one is real and the
other merely an illusion, and she doesn't know which is which.
The problem with the movie, by director Alain Berliner (MY LIFE IN
PINK), is that neither of Moore's lives -- as Marie in the bucolic South
of France or as Marty in a spacious Manhattan apartment -- are the least
bit real on the screen.  With warm light constantly bathing Moore's
face, the movie appears more like the pages of a glamour magazine than a
motion picture.  Dressed always to the nines and living in picture
postcard homes, Moore appears to be a model on one long fashion shoot.
With 2 fabulous lives, 2 designer-decorated homes, 2 supportive lovers,
2 beautiful countries, 2 high-profile professions and 2 wise shrinks,
Marie/Marty would appear to have it all.  She does, of course, have the
difficulties of living these dual existences and of getting no sleep.
The movie would have us believe that she falls asleep in one place each
night and awakes in the other.  With plot holes aplenty, the biggest
might be why Marty doesn't just catch a plane to Marie's place, or vice
versa, so that she can finally put an end to the charade.  (The story
also features a remarkably French-free France.)
Her analysts aren't much help.  They each reassure her that her other
life is fake.   In France, her psychiatrist (Joss Ackland), who is
described as pure Viennese in order to give him extra credit, tells her,
"You are riding two horses, and the mind isn't built for that."  The
pretentious script is full of such mumbo-jumbo.  Her New York shrink
(Peter Riegert) uses such medical terms as "mad as a hatter" to describe
her condition.
In the plodding movie, Marie's lover (Stellan Skarsgĺrd) advises her,
"Always do what you wish you could."  And what Moore wishes to do is to
pose rather than act.  The director appears to have relinquished control
to Moore since his awkward staging makes sense only if one assumes that
the film's purpose is nothing other than to be a vanity piece for Moore.
The only reason to stay to the end and the only thing to keep the
viewers awake is pure curiosity about how the story will be resolved.
The conclusion is kind of plausible, somewhat predictable and reasonably
satisfying, but it certainly doesn't atone for making the audience
endure the rest of this silly, lackluster film.
PASSION OF MIND runs 1:45.  It is rated PG-13 for scenes of sexuality
and would be acceptable for kids 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Susan Granger
After suffering the slings and arrows of "G.I. Jane,"
"Striptease," and "The Scarlet Letter," it's understandable why Demi
Moore fled to the shelter of artsy, low-key European cinema. But this
tepid drama, the first English-language film by Belgian director Alain
Berliner ("My Vie en Rose"), is forgettable - at best. Written by Ron
Bass and David Field, it's about a woman with two lives. In one, she's
Marie, a widowed American book critic with two daughters, living
lavishly in the south of France. Marie's courted by a passionate,
older writer (Stellan Skarsgard) to whom she once gave a bad review,
although she observes, "You commit beautifully." And, as her
girl-friend notes, "He's a chance to love again."  In a less idyllic
but parallel universe, she's Marty, a high-powered, hard-working
Manhattan literary agent, courted by a shy, sensitive, erotic
accountant (William Fichtner).  In each life, she falls asleep and
awakens as the other person and, in both worlds, she visits a
psychiatrist who confirms that she's, indeed, got delusionary
problems. But at least, this time she keeps her clothes on.  Marty's
consultant (Peter Riegert) bluntly observes that she's "as mad as a
hatter," while Marie's therapist (Joss Ackland) is more tactful,
saying, "You are riding two horses, and the mind isn't built for
that." Obviously, the concept is a ludicrous, heavy-handed metaphor
about the choices facing contemporary women today, and Alain Berliner
awkwardly tries to convince us that either world could be real. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Passion of Mind" is a sumptuous but
shallow 4. With Demi Moore, more is less.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: One for the ladies. 66% interesting for the guys.
Passion of Mind, which brings Demi Moore back to the big screen, is a
fairly interesting and intriguing tale of what may be a severe case of
schizophrenia or flat out insanity or a very credible dream life on the
part of the main character. It would have been easy enough to turn this
movie into a SF fantasy of parallel worlds, which would have made this
boy happy, but that wasn't what it was meant to be. Here's the
interesting part . . .
Somewhere in the sun-drenched south of France lives the young widow
Marie (Moore) who is raising two beautiful girls. Marie is a freelance
writer whose income comes from penning book reviews for the New York
Times, though there is a stack of unpublished stories sitting in a box
in the closet. She has no man in her life, indeed, she is still in love
with the one she lost and is not seeking out new companionship. Each
night she puts her kids to bed, locks her bedroom door from the inside
and goes to sleep. Each morning she wakes up in New York City, as Marty,
owner of the MMT & Associates Literary Agency. A single woman with no
children and no love life who dreams about a family in France.
No schizophrenia here, folks. Each woman is very aware of the "life" of
the other woman. Each believes it to be a wonderful dream reality and
each is envious of aspects of the other. Marty, with a severe demeanor
and hair pinned back wishes for love and children. Marie, a veritable
earth mother, dreams of the high powered career. Each seeks out a shrink
to help deal with the dream fantasy and come to grips with reality. Each
falls in love, Marie with a writer (Stellan Skarsgaard) and Marty with a
client's accountant (William Fichtner). The big question is, of course,
which reality is "real" and what happens if Marie/Marty lets her lover
stay the night. Who will be in the bed when she wakes up?
That's a very interesting pair of parallel stories playing out on
screen. Moore does a fine job keeping the characteristics of each woman
clearly defined. We all know that, sooner or later, one life is going to
assert itself. There were several ways this story could have gone when
it reached that point, and the back of my brain was working in overdrive
as it anticipated the possibilities. The direction the film takes,
though, sets its sights at the ladies -- when Passion of Mind's big
psychological revelation hit towards the end, the screening room was
filled with sniffling like a thing alive. This poor old male sat there
thinking "huh?" as the rest of the story played out.
It wasn't that I couldn't follow which one was real. Everything that
follows was way beyond this dumb guy. Passion of Mind has all the feel
of an arthouse flick. Whether the tear factor is enough to get the
ladies to lug their gents along is a matter of word of mouth. The first
two acts of this eventual chick flick are well done and should hold male
interest. The last act is going to need explanation.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Passion of Mind, he would have
paid...
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com
