Title
Review for Maverick (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Hollywood finds a surefire recipe for success.  Take a legendary
TV show and remake it as movie with today's heartthrob (Mel Gibson) as
the lead (Maverick).  Cast the original actor (James Garner) as a
costar (playing a lawman).  For love interest, spend more big bucks and
get Jodie Foster as a competing gambler and possible lover for
Maverick.  Film it with sweeping cinematography by an Academy Award
winner (Vilmos Zsigmond).  Finally, get the Lethal Weapons director
(Richard Donner) to direct it.  The result has to be a MAVERICK that is
a monster hit.
     Ho hum.  There were laughs - mainly of modest sized proportions.
Between laughs there were long periods of boredom.
     On the good side, Jodie Foster was wonderfully counter typecast as
a sweet and comedic actress rather than the usual serious and hard
edged characters she normally plays.  Granted she was always trying to
outwit and cheat Maverick, but on the surface she had this wonderful
sweet smile.  If you are of the
I'd-be-happy-to-see-Mel-Gibson-reading-the-phone-book variety of Mel
Gibson fan, then you will like this movie.  He too has a nice smile in
it and looks great as he always does.
     If they had edited down to an hour, it would have been a passable
made for TV, Maverick returns for one more episode, sort of show.
There is a single simple problem with this movie.  In the script by
William Goldman, there is almost nothing interesting that happens and
what does happen are simple retreads of themes done countless times
before.  One more Western without much new to say and with jokes that
rarely work.
     MAVERICK overextends its welcome running way over at 2:07.  It is
a fairly wholesome show and gets a mild PG rating.  I do not recommend
it - you can always rent it later and skip to the few funny scenes.  I
give it * 1/2 for the few laughs and for Foster's smile.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Joan Ellis
     MAVERICK is an irreverent, zestful romp for three stars who team
up to poke fun at every imaginable Western cliche.  With winks in their
eyes, they play games with a runaway stagecoach, the hangman's noose,
crooked card games and bank robbers.  Their good spirits lift the
picture to inspired spoof status in the avalanche of New Age westerns.
     Bret Maverick (Mel Gibson), Annabelle Bransford (Jody Foster) and
Marshal Zane Cooper (James Garner) are charming rogues, con artists who
can barely contain the pleasure of their wicked ways.  Outdoing each
other is their delight, and they sustain the contest with good humor
for two hours.
     Maverick wears the persona of a gambler who pretends to be a
coward.  The truth of that lighthearted lie is that his gun fairly
jumps out of its holster every time someone crosses him, and he loves
every second of the confrontation.  On the prowl for entry fee money
for the poker sweepstakes in St.  Louis, Maverick sits down to a
small-town card game and meets Annabelle Bransford (Foster), whose good
looks mask her bad intentions.
     Gibson sets the tone in the first scene.  In the classic
catastrophe of the man with his head in a noose, astride a horse about
to turn skittish at approaching rattlesnakes, he begs his animal to
stay "steady, fella, don't move now." Any word or deed of substance
would be ridiculous after that, and, mercifully, none is forthcoming.
     Maverick is uncharacteristically slow to realize that Annabelle is
his match in deviltry, but when he does, their competition becomes the
funny bone of the movie.  Jodie Foster shows a new side of her talent.
Unpredictable, light and subtle, she plays equally well with each of
her leading men.  James Garner, who brought Maverick to the small TV
screen in 1957, deadpans the jokes with the same charm he used all
those years ago.  It's great fun to see him lean into a major role and
steal scenes from his young colleagues.  This is a happy band of
scoundrels.
     Filmed in the glorious country of Utah's Glen Canyon National
Recreation Area, the movie peppers the grand landscape with colorful
characters and ludicrous action.  Powered by jokes and sight gags, the
very thin plot leaves you waiting for the one-liners, and enough of
them come to keep most people happy.  But these spots of genuine fun
just aren't enough to make the whole thing a winner.
     When it starts to drag badly, the colorful finale of the St.
Louis poker game saves the day with a nice assist from James Coburn as
the man who can charge a $25,000 entry fee and still create an
extravaganza.  It is the charm of the principals that carries the
film.  Foster, Gibson and Garner have linked arms, it seems, caught the
script that was thrown them and said, "Let's have fun with this one."
--
Permission is granted free of charge to quote Joan Ellis reviews
for any promotional, editorial, or critical use provided credit
is given: Nebbadoon Syndicate -- JOAN ELLIS
Please send information regarding reuse to 'nebbadoon@telecomp.com'
or 393 Hanover Center Road, Hanover Center, Etna, NH 03750
Tel 603-643-0400, Fax 603-643-0404

Author
Mark R. Leeper

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Cast  Mel Gibson, Jodie Foster, and James Garner
"I promise I will lose for at least an hour."
     - Gibson as Maverick, to a table of reluctant poker players.
     MAVERICK, the first of two Warner westerns to hit the summer screen, 
reteams Mel Gibson and Richard Donner for an update of the 1957-62 ABC TV 
series. Despite a pair of ace co-stars and a script by SUNDANCE scribe 
William Goldman, MAVERICK is merely an OK corral of top talent.
     "Maverick" is Bret Maverick (Gibson), a sharp-witted, sharp-shooting 
card player en route to a championship poker game. He's cashing old debts 
as he rides between towns, making both friends and enemies along the way. 
His "love" is a pesky pickpocket (Foster), his foil is a former lawman 
(Garner, who originated the title role on television) and, together, they 
face everything from a runaway stage to not-so-renegade indians.
     MAVERICK proves, once again, that what works on paper doesn't always 
work on-screen. This witty western-wannabe isn't exactly D.O.A., but it 
ain't exactly F.U.N., either. Simply, MAVERICK never comes alive.
     Gibson makes a gamely gambler, but, compared to his antsy antics as 
detective Martin Riggs, the man-with-a-face seems stuck in slow motion. 
Foster is a loss with her (intentionally?) bad Southern accent and Garner 
doesn't get enough shared screen time to truly tap his talents.
     (If you commit to sit, don't miss scene-stealing Graham Greene as an 
indian who addresses Maverick as "Mav.")
     Donner's direction is hardly lethal. The man can make a movie, no 
question, but he lacks the precision to punch-up a standard set-piece 
like a runaway stage. He's backed by a posse of pros, though, and therein 
lies the irony. Far from an inspiring experience, MAVERICK is *still* 
crafted better than recent roundups TOMBSTONE and GERONIMO.
     Film fans should savor a cornucopia of cameos recruited from film, 
television, and country music. Blink and you'll miss Corey Feldman, 
Margot Kidder, Doug McClure, Dan Hedaya, Dub Taylor, Denver Pyle, Robert 
Fuller, Hal Ketchum, Waylon Jennings, and Clint Blink.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Last year's WILD WILD WEST is something unforgivable and
unjustifiable, but at least in the beginning it might have
looked like a good idea. Five years before, another 1950s
western TV series got itself revamped into rather successful
summer blockbuster. This film was MAVERICK, 1994 western
comedy directed by Richard Donner.
The protagonist of this film is Bret Maverick (played by Mel
Gibson), gambler who is both skillful with cards and guns.
He nevertheless prefers coning than shooting people, and
such abilities will be needed when he decides to join great
poker game which is held on Mississippi riverboat. But to
enter this game he must pay large entering fee, so he must
either collect all debts or find some ingenious ways to
depart people from their money. In doing so, he would cross
paths with Anabella Cranston (played by Jodie Foster),
southern belle whose beauty is not spoiled by bad Southern
accent or lack of scruples. While two of them join forces
and travel to the boat, they are pursued by lawman and
Maverick's old acquintance Zane Cooper (played by James
Garner). All that would lead to whole series of adventures
and encounters with various bizarre characters of the Old
West.
Scriptwriter William Goldman probably envisioned MAVERICK
and western version of STING - story which represents
complex set of intrigues, twist and characters who
constantly try to fool each other. However, his efforts
failed for one simple reason - plot aroused very little
interest in director Richard Donner, who instead envisioned
film as series of elaborate and mostly humorous action
scenes. Sometimes those scenes don't have much connection
with the rest of film, in some segments they are slow and
tendency to have as much cameo appearances as possible makes
this film too long. But film is nevertheless saved by
enthusiastic performances of Mel Gibson and Jodie Foster,
two actors who obviously enjoy playing light-hearted
characters for change. James Garner, who played Maverick in
the original series, is very good in the role of Cooper,
while Graham Greene is hillarious as Indian chief. All in
all, despite the lack of plot and excessive length, there is
enough humour for the audience to enjoy MAVERICK as
unpretencious entertainment. Western fans would be
additionally satisfied because MAVERICK with its light
spirit is rather refreshing addition to the rejuvenated
genre, represented with dark, depressive and revisionist
films of the early 1990s.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Mel Gibson, Jodie Foster, James Garner, Alfred Molina, Graham 
Greene, James Coburn.
Screenplay:  William Goldman.
Director:  Richard Donner.
     William Goldman may be as famous in the film industry for one
quote as he is for his screenplays (BUTCH CASSIDY & THE SUNDANCE KID, THE 
PRINCESS BRIDE, MISERY).  "Nobody in Hollywood knows anything," he wrote, 
and that pithy line became the mantra for anyone who was every frustrated 
by the movie-making machinery. However, Goldman overlooked the one thing 
Hollywood does know:  it knows how to package.  Witness the above-the-
line talent assembled for MAVERICK:  Mel Gibson, Jodie Foster, director 
Richard Donner, composer Randy Newman, and yes, even Goldman himself.  
One might expect from that list that MAVERICK is a good-looking, good-
sounding, good-natured production, and it is.  And little more. MAVERICK 
is pleasant, but it never really takes off, opting to replace a solid 
narrative with a series of sketches of widely varying quality.
     Gibson plays Bret Maverick, a roguish gambler much better at
playing cards than he is at playing hero.  He wants to get into a 
riverboat game with a $500,000 pot, but he finds himself $3,000 short of 
the required $25,000 buy-in.  Complicating his quest for cash is 
Annabelle Bransford (Foster), a faux-Southern con artist who covets 
Maverick's hefty wallet, and straight arrow lawman Zane Cooper (James 
Garner).  Maverick also must content with a gambler (Alfred Molina) with 
a particular axe to grind.  Along the way to the big game, Maverick meets 
up with a succession of "friends" who owe him money, resulting in a 
string of double- and triple-crosses through to the final scene.
     The "plot" of MAVERICK is really just a tool to get him into a
number of situations involving money and duplicity:  Maverick in a saloon 
poker game; Maverick trying to collect from a friend at a bank; Maverick, 
Annabelle and Cooper trying to recover money stolen from a group of 
missionaries.  Some of these moments are quite entertaining, particularly 
an encounter with a group of Indians with whom Maverick enjoys a special 
rapport.  Gibson and Foster are also quite good together, generating a 
lot of smiles simply from the spark of their interaction.  Gibson in 
particular is perfectly cast as Maverick, a sly but ultimately big-
hearted fellow with a gift for avoiding danger.  There is enough charm 
and energy in his performance to carry MAVERICK over many of its rough 
spots.
     It's a shame that MAVERICK misfires nearly as often as it hits.
It's a peculiar mixture of missed opportunities, overkill and necessary 
but unfortunate editing decisions (which whittled this once two and a 
half hour film to a still over-long 2:05).  Early in the film, Maverick 
shows up a young gunfighter, but the expected showdown never comes; 
instead, the gunfighter stands and politely excuses himself.  Later, 
Maverick runs into a group of tough guys to whom he owes $20.  When he 
produces a $100 bill and asks for change, you expect a slick con, but 
again MAVERICK doesn't quite follow through.  On the opposite end of the 
spectrum is a sequence where Maverick is in a bank during a robbery 
committed by a familiar actor in a cameo role.  Once the actor is 
unmasked, the joke should be over, but it's milked for more than it's 
worth in a way that made me think, "All right, I get the joke."  MAVERICK 
is full of these fits and starts, making it hard for me to like it as 
much as I wanted to.
     MAVERICK concludes with a number of plot turns reminiscent of
THE STING, and didn't necessarily find them predictable, I didn't really 
find them all that interesting, either.  By the time it hits the final 
fifteen minutes, MAVERICK finds itself in serious danger of overstaying 
its welcome, ending with far less energy than it begins.  Still, MAVERICK 
is what summer movies are generally meant to be:  big, light 
entertainment.  As frequently as it pulled its comedic punches, MAVERICK 
still had enough dopey fun to be worth a matinee look.  But if the 
inevitable sequel rolls around, I hope Gibson, Donner and company learn 
their lesson and start with a script from which they don't need to cut so 
much.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Mel Gibson, Jodie Foster, James Garner, Graham Greene, 
           James Coburn, Alfred Molina 
Director:  Richard Donner 
Producer:  Bruce Davey and Richard Donner 
Screenplay:  William Goldman based on the TV show created by 
             Roy Huggins 
Music:  Randy Newman 
Released by Warner Brothers 
     MAVERICK may be as close as anything comes to a perfect summer movie 
(as opposed to a perfect movie).  It has great action sequences, more 
than a splash of legitimately-funny humor, solid performances from 
engaging actors, and a script that doesn't demand much mental exercise.  
This is an enjoyable motion picture, and a good start to the 1994 summer 
season. 
     LETHAL WEAPON's Richard Donner and Mel Gibson have teamed up again 
in this comedy/adventure/western that recalls, but does not imitate, the 
1950s television series.  Along for the ride is James Garner, who 
millions will remember as the original Bret Maverick, and Donner makes a 
wise decision in giving him far more than a token speaking part.  
Garner's laid back persona is the perfect contrast to the high-voltage 
Gibson. 
     Two-time Oscar winner Jodie Foster is effervescent in a role that 
requires little dramatic range but a flair for comedy.  Foster's 
Annabelle Bransford is a delight to watch, especially when paired with 
Gibson.  There's a spark between them. 
     The story involves Maverick and Annabelle's attempts to get to a big 
Saint Louis riverboat poker game where the entry fee is $25,000.  Each is 
short by a few grand, and they're going from town-to-town trying to win, 
steal, or cheat others out of it.  The pair meet in Crystal River, and 
soon find themselves on the same runaway coach out of town, in the 
company of itinerant lawman Zane Cooper (Garner).   
     MAVERICK features gun fights, fist fights, an attempted hanging, and 
a tete-a-tete with rattlesnakes - but none of these sequences are graphic 
or gory.  The film is basically lighthearted, so there aren't too many 
deaths or maimings. 
     Donner has a great deal of fun incorporating parodies of past movies 
into this one.  The most inspired is a quick flash to his own LETHAL 
WEAPON.  There's also an extended DANCES WITH WOLVES sequence, featuring 
WOLVES' Graham Greene as a hip Indian who cheats the white man.  MAVERICK 
also pays tribute to screenwriter William Goldman's BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE 
SUNDANCE KID. 
     The strength of MAVERICK is the ease with which it switches from 
comedy to action, and back again.  For the most part, the pacing is 
excellent, although at more than two hours, the film goes on for a little 
too long.  No drama is needed, nor is it in evidence. 
     The well-crafted MAVERICK does everything it sets out to do.  For 
big-budget summer films, from which more and more is demanded, this is 
becoming an increasingly-difficult task - so it's refreshing to find 
something that satisfies expectations.  To paraphrase the lead character, 
MAVERICK rarely bluffs and never, ever cheats its audience.  
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
