Title
Review for Sĺsom i en spegel (1961)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Ingmar Bergman
Starring: Harriet Andersson, Gunnar Björnstrand, Max von Sydow, Lars
Passgĺrd
Bergman opens "Through a Glass Darkly" not only with a quote from Second
Corinthians, from which the title comes, but also has a dedication title,
made out to his then wife.  The two are separated from one another, but as
the film goes on, and begins to explore concepts brought on by the Bible
quote, as well as ideas about family and love, the ideas these two subtexts
bring up begin to merge into one singular idea, and instead of both trying
to work as two separate ideas in the film, they intertwine with one
another.  But of course, that's one of Bergman's fortes.
"Through a Glass Darkly" is actually a combination of many things that
normally don't fit together except here: it's a debate on God and love, and
an intense dysfunctional family drama; it concerns itself with a small
quantity of people secluded on an island, like many Bergman films, but then
makes them family members, also like many Bergman films; and it tosses in
several parallel action shots where one consists of lots of editing, and
the other features just one long take, throwing off the rhythm of the film.
 It's almost a wonder that it works at all.
But for all of this, "Through a Glass Darkly" is another very trite film
from Bergman, running about 91 minutes, and featuring only a couple very
long sequences, and features almost total dialogue and monologues, causing
it to be able to cover so much ground and so many concepts that it almost
seems overloaded.  The film deals with a family of four who take a
"vacation" on a secluded island: there's the father, David (Gunnar
Björnstrand), a writer who has distanced himself from his family; the son,
Minus (Lars Passgĺrd), a wannabe playright who resents his father,
sometimes openly; the daugher, Karin (Hariett Andersson), who has just
gotten out of a mental institution, and is on the cusp of a relapse; and
her devoted husband, Martin (Max Von Sydow...yes, the guy from "The
Exorcist"), who tries to be the buffer of the bunch.
Bergman effortlessly defines each of their characters in the first 10
minutes so that the rest of the film can take off from the exposition, and
into its rising action.  One thing that bugs me about many film is the
exposition, and how films try to blatantly give us all our information in
sometimes clumsy ways.  Bergman avoids all of that, expertly writing the
screenplay so that all of the information is given to us subtlely,
sometimes just through idle conversation.  This also gives us the right
amount of distance from the characters, as they aren't communicating with
us at all, and shows how distanced they all are from one another, whether
they like it or not.
About half way through, Bergman introduces a really bizarre plot twist:
Karin begins to hear voices from the wall in one of the upstairs rooms
telling her that it's God.  Is she having a relapse?  is it really God?  We
don't know (for awhile).  But it begins to speed up her relapse, and the
result brings out one of Bergman's favorite themes: families being brought
together by something horrible that makes them re-evaluate their
relationships.
What was Bergman trying to point out with all of this?  He brings us two
things that usually don't work together - a family drama about a lack of
communication and love, and a story of a woman who thinks she sees God -
but Bergman actually manages to pull them both together, like I said.  He
explores the existence of God as something you have to merely have faith in
but can never have any proof of by exploring the family's lack of stability
and love.  Their lack of stability is on a parallel with the lack of
stability in knowing if God exists or not.
As good as it is, it does run into a couple minor problems.  The film is
probably too short, running at a tawdry 91 minutes, resulting in a bit of a
lack of family drama that the film needs a little more of.  Luckily Bergman
is able to make up substantially for this by leaving a lot unsaid through
dialogue, and much done through action and scene set-ups, but he isn't able
to make up totally for this slight inconsistency.  The film is also very
uneven, spending a small amount of time on the exposition, but then getting
a little sloppy with the amount of time he spends on each section of the
film.  And the final scene explains a little too much - maybe some dialogue
editing would have been good in this scene.  The entire film could have
used a whole other draft, just to even out some of the little clinks in the
storyline.
However, you really have to appreciate how much this film pulls off as it
is.  Any film that can explore lack of faith in God's existence through a
tense family drama is worthy of high praise, and the film has a great
play-like feel, abandoning a lot of character action and instead focusing
on studying its characters' feelings and pains while still exploring such
an existential theme.  And it wisely never picks one character to single
out as the "protagonist," appropriately distancing us from the characters
who are distanced from one another, and allowing us to empathize more with
the situation than the characters.  Sure, it could use a rewrite, but that
would only make it slighly better than it already is.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
