Title
Review for Man Who Would Be King, The (1975)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"The Man Who Would Be King" is a good film that should have
been a great film.  It had so much potential: it was
well-cast, with Sean Connery and Michael Caine playing the
leads.  John Huston, a force behind many great films, was
the director.  The set and costumes are excellent: you
feel as if you are actually there in remote Karafistan.
It is a very good story, and with an important
moral: lust for power and greed can do you in.
Connery and Caine are 19th century British soldiers stationed
in India.  They are expelled from India due to roguish
behavior such as theft, gun-smuggling and blackmail.
They decide to visit remote Karafistan, install themselves
as rulers there, then confiscate any treasure to be found
there.  Their plan goes very well, until Connery discovers
that he would rather remain as king than flee with treasure.
What bothered me most about "The Man Who Would Be King"
is the conceit of the main characters.  Caine delivers a
line similar to "He's not a God, but an Englishman.  The
next best thing."  The soldiers truly believe that it is
their right to slaughter, mislead and plunder Karafistanis
if it serves their interests.  Early in the film, Caine
throws a subservient Indian out the window a moving train.
This is supposed to be humorous.  The Englishmen consistently
are able to fool Indians and Karafistanis, who ought to
know better.
Other minor complaints: a Karafistani woman (Shakira Caine,
Michael's real-life spouse) has the Western name 'Roxanne'.
Upon reaching Karafistani, the British soldiers immediately
encounter the only man (Billy, played by Saeed Jaffrey)
who speaks English in the entire country.  Even more
incredibly, at their first meeting Billy offers unconditional
loyalty to the Englishmen.  The first local ruler that the
Englishmen encounter (Ootah, played by Doghmi Larbi) is
conveniently an obliging fool.
Still, the cast, sets, costumes, story, script and score
are all very good.  "The Man Who Would Be King" remains
a good movie, but it would be properly titled "The Film
That Would Be Great".
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Regis M. Donovan
Review of "The Man Who Would Be King" (1975), by Regis M. Donovan
John Huston's adaptation of Rudyard Kipling's "The Man Who Would Be
King" is a classic swashbuckler about two former British soldiers who
decide, in true colonial imperialistic style, to take their guns,
march into the untouched wilds, and carve out a place among the
savages so they can live as kings.
The two errant adventurers, Danny Dravot (Sean Connery) and Peachy
Carnehan (Michael Caine), head into the unknowns of Kafiristan where
they find a kingdom untouched by the modern world and ruled long ago
by Alexander the Great.  After the help of some incredible
coincidences and a few Masonic symbols, the two manage to convince the
priestly rulers that Dravot is a god.
Of course, hubris like Dravot's must be followed by a fall, and
eventually things collapse into fighting, heroic endings, and British
stiff upper lips.
Originally conceived as a vehicle for Clark Gable and Humphrey Bogart,
Huston provides an adventure that received 4 Academy Award nominations
including one for best adapted screenplay.  Connery and Caine
admirably head a marvelous cast including Christopher Plummer (as
Rudyard Kipling) and Saeed Jaffrey.
