Title
Review for Fille sur le pont, La (1999)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Harvey S. Karten
GIRL ON THE BRIDGE (La Fille Sur Le Pont)
   Someone once said that there are only six stories in all the
world for novelists and playwrights and filmmakers to deal
with.  Without much doubt, the principal one is the ancient
tale of boy meets girl, boy loses girl, girl gets boy.  But of
course the theme is not what's important in the construction
of a film: the style with which the motif is presented is, and
lest we get into a discussion of the relative merit of style and
substance, let's say that style IS substance.  If you're looking
for a boy-girl story told with technique to spare, take a look at
Patrice Leconte's "Girl on the Bridge," which could be
dismissed by its detractors as a cute but silly story but is, on
the contrary, one which I cannot recommend highly enough
save for a single flaw.  Since "Girl on the Bridge" is a fable, a
fairy tale that features elements of both "Cinderella" and
"Pygmalion," its director, Patrice Laconte has proffered the
story in black-and-white photography to symbolize its
timelessness and perhaps to suggest a Truffaut-like
ambience.  Mistake. Big mistake.  Not only do the white
subtitles become unreadable against a white background (not
a problem for the French-speaking New York publicist but a
major one for the non-Francophones in the audience), but
more important the audience is likely to get the impression
that Leconte is being either too cheap to use color or just
plain pretentious.
  The shame of it all is that "Girl on the Bridge" is so
absorbing that maybe even Woody Allen would give his
imprimatur to have a new, colorized version made of the
parable.  Rarely do two actors convey such chemistry with
each other as do Daniel Auteuil and Vanessa Paradis, all the
more significant considering the age difference: the 28-year-
old Paradis performs in the role of a child-like beauty of 22
while the Algerian-born Auteuil, at age 50, makes a strong
presence as an unusual man who is ten years his junior.  But
the burning desire of these two people so different in ages is
just one of the unusual aspects of the movie.  For one thing,
the sensuality of this singular couple is evoked largely from
the particular that they do not consummate their mutual
desire, at least not with each other. For another, bless Mr.
Laconte for breaking with the French tradition of films that
talk talk and talk some more--all the stranger since his
remarkable costume drama "Ridicule" was, like G.B. Shaw's
"Pygmalion," all about how one's social position among the
upper orders is determined by how well, with how much wit,
you speak.
   Filmed on location in Paris, the French Riviera, Monaco,
Italy and Istanbul, "Girl on the Bridge" joins girl and boy on
an overpass above the Seine in Paris, the scene of an
impending suicide jump--but not before Leconte gets
considerable exposition out of the way by presenting Adele
(Vanessa Paradis) as the subject of a psychiatric interview
before an audience of professionals presumably studying
depression.  An unusual stranger, Gabor (Daniel Auteuil),
convinces her to curb her suicidal impulse, whereupon like a
modern Prince Charming he converts the down-and-out but 
attractive naif into Pretty Woman, making her the target of his
knife-throwing act and boosting her self-image by showing
her how the receiver of the blades and not the hurler is the
all-important person.  
   The more we watch Gabor's daring and skillful knife-
throwing act--in carnivals situated in the South of France and
Italy--the more we feel the eroticism that the enactment
evokes, one which makes the young woman even more
susceptible to the carnal intentions if the handsome men
surrounding her.  In the movie's one ham-fisted metaphor,
Gabor exhibits a magic trick in which he converts a monetary
bill which has been torn in half into a single unit.  Neither half
is worth a thing without the other.  But just as you cannot
paste up a torn dollar with half a Deutschmark if you want the
bill to have any value, you must find the right person with
whom to bond.  "Girl on the Bridge" seems to validate the
fantasy that there's only one true love for each of us, but
Leconte draws us into this most romantic of illusions so deftly
that only the most hard-hearted in the audience can leave the
auditorium snickering.
Not Rated.  Running time: 92 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

GIRL ON THE BRIDGE, THE (La Fille sur le Pont) (director: Patrice
Leconte; screenwriter: Serge Frydman; cinematographer: Jean-Marie
Dreujou; editor: Joelle Hache; cast: Vanessa Paradis (Adčle), Daniel
Auteuil (Gabor), Demetre Georgalas (Takis), Isabelle Petit-Jacques
(Takis's bride), Frédéric Pflüger (the contorsionnist), Giorgios Gatzos
(Barker), Bertie Cortez (Kusak), Luc Palun (Stage Manager), Catherine
Lascault (Irene); Runtime: 92; Paramount Classic; 1999-France)
Patrice Leconte ("Monsieur Hire" (1989)/ "The Hairdresser's Husband"
(1990)/"Ridicule" (1996)) has created an original and strangely
beautiful B&W film, one that has its roots buried somewhere in French
New Wave cinema and in Fellini's road film La Strada. It is artfully
directed by Leconte, with his choppy camera work matching the
Mediterranean's bubbly sea movements and the trembling nature of the
feature players, plus his smoothly dark photography makes it seem as if
he's filming a 1940s noir work, and his eclectic musical background
soundtracks (ranging from Benny Goodman to Marianne Faithfull and from
Italian to Turkish music) adds an excitement to a story that changes
moods from comical to tragical at the drop of a knife. It should be
noted, in the director's biggest joke he has with the audience, how the
background music plays a large part in the enjoyment of the film. This
is shown when the knife-thrower hits his human target, as Brenda Lee
croons her song "I'm Sorry" and the Italian woman target is carried off
on a stretcher to the hospital.
The gist of the story revolves around an eccentric romance between two
desperate souls, one childish and trusting, the other jaded and
mystical. When the film is playful and lighthearted, it is sublime and
masterfully done. Unfortunately, when the last reel comes, the film
shifts gears and starts to take its philosophical musings about chance
and luck seriously, and the film becomes contrived and loses much of its
punch.
The power in the film's punch comes mostly from the imaginative
performances of international pop star Vanessa Paradis, the girlfriend
of Johnny Depp, and from one of France's most popular and best actors,
Daniel Auteuil. She was nominated for a Cesar as Best Actress and he won
a Cesar as Best Actor. These two have an electricity together that is,
indeed, magical, with both featuring very expressive facial gestures and
large eyes that open wider when welcoming the viewer into their story in
a most hospitable way.
Girl on the Bridge ran as a mainstream, commercial film in France, while
in America it has only played in art-houses. Perhaps any film with
subtitles (especially subtitles that are hard to read) and one that is
shot in black-and-white, can only be relegated to a select audience. Or,
maybe, a knife-thrower act in a circus venue is art in America, while in
Paris it might be viewed as the old -- seen that, done that thing.
The film opens to the beat of exotic Algerian music in the background
and a gap-toothed cutie of almost 22-years-old, named Adele (Vanessa),
being interviewed by an official sounding woman, who could be a social
worker, court official, or shrink, as the questioner is never seen or
identified, and no reason is given for why Adele is sitting in a bare
room by a table and answering personal questions. Adele tells her
hard-luck story in a matter-of-fact way, from the start of her
nymphomania and life of wandering from one man to another, to her
current feelings of depression. She is so persuasive, that we know
everything about her that we have to from this brief opening look at
her, so much so that when she shifts her eyes, we even know what she is
thinking.
The next time we see her, she's shivering and contemplating suicide by
jumping off a bridge overlooking the Seine River. Suddenly Gabor
(Auteuil), a middle-aged, has-been, philosophical knife-thrower, reveals
himself and tries to talk her out of jumping, even offering her a job as
his assistant, which in this case means being a human target for his
act. Gabor is on a recruitment mission, figuring that he is offering
this dangerous job to someone who is prepared to die anyway and
therefore should not be frightened off by the risks involved.
Nevertheless, she jumps into the water, and he jumps in to save her. Now
that's the start of a lifetime friendship, if you ask me. The girl not
only seems grateful that he cared enough about her to come to her
rescue, but he makes it possible for her to win his expensive diving
watch by playing a gambling game with her (never mind that we soon see
that he has many other watches in storage, it is the thought that
counts). They are now ready to begin their partnership and they start by
traveling to the south of France, where he books them into a circus at
Monaco. In order to get the job there, he volunteers to do a risky blind
knife-throw. She is so naive, that she has no idea of what she is
getting into. The knife-throwing is played as a metaphor for sex, as she
erotically gasps as the knife is thrown at her while wrapped around a
sheet. There was something bizarre about the act that was movie
magic...fake magic, I grant you, but magical enough to keep me glued to
my seat in anticipation of what will happen to her, as Leconte also had
the circus sideshow entourage gasping with concern. I think he might
even have expected the theater viewer to be masturbating over this.
The catch to their relationship, is that it is a chaste one, one that
allows him to have a telepathic relationship with her, as they read each
other's thoughts; but, it is one that does not prevent her from having
sex with any man who catches her fancy and to add to her sexual prowess,
she is keen on doing it in odd places and positions. My favorite tryst,
was her and the contorsionnist making it on top of the piano (the sex
act itself is only imagined and is tastefully not seen -- but can you
imagine how they did it?). The director also makes a concerted effort to
show that Gabor is normal sexually in the biblical sense, by showing a
brief encounter he has with a former girlfriend (Lascault) in the
circus.
Gabor discovers he can change his bad luck with her as his partner,
firmly believing that she's his lucky charm he has been missing, and he
sends her off to the gambling casinos in France and then the Italian
Rivera to play roulette and baccarat and she amasses a small fortune.
They are sitting on top of the world and he also begins to show his true
feelings which indicate he's falling in love with her, but staying in
character, he can't spit it out and tell her. Besides, sex would ruin
the mystical relation they have in the act and the luck they have in her
gambling.
Their downfall, which parallels the film's, is when they are on an
Adriatic cruise ship as performers and she meets a newly-wed Greek named
Takis and decides he is her Mr. Right, and she literally jumps ship with
him and flees the cruise ship on a small boat.  She falls for his fake
kindness and believes him when he says "My wife is Italian. We don't
communicate with each other." The film then moves off the map of
credible filmmaking and becomes silly and contrived, probably imitative
of those cartoonish-like action films, where there is a daring
helicopter rescue of the couple adrift at sea. For a film that was so
sublime and had such an enchanting mystical romance going for it, it
foolishly throws that all away to make its cheap points about chance and
to show how if two souls that fit together like two halves of a money
bill, will only have value if it does not get torn apart, which is too
heavy-handed a message for this bubbly film to handle.
The film should have been a more far-reaching one and it could have been
much funnier if it didn't go on the wrong cruise toward the end. But
what we have is still a visually spellbinding film and one where Vanessa
and Danny prove to be very human creatures, who are worth caring about.
Though the part where he ends up in Istanbul selling his knives, after
his luck (Adele) ran out, didn't convince me that he so suddenly lost
his edge on life and therefore it made me rethink what I was asked to
believe about the two lost souls. What I still came up with, is that
they are both good at flirting with disaster, but what they both have in
spades, is a whimsical sense of humor and a strange sense of survival,
and just like Serge Frydman's script, which was both witty and
superfluous, the film nevertheless succeeded in sucking me into its
story, a story which probably implied more about it than it actually
delivered. But, despite this and that about it that seemed to me as if
it was drifting off into the territory of play acting, I still thought
it was a smart film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Dequina
_Girl_on_the_Bridge_(La_Fille_sur_le_Pont)_ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
Very few actors, let alone young ones, can pull off what 20something
chanteuse-turned-actrice Vanessa Paradis does in the opening minutes of
Patrice Leconte's romantic drama.  In a single take broken only by an
occasional white-on-black credit card, Paradis' Adele confides to an
unseen interrogator the reasons for her depression.  It is never
explained exactly to whom she is speaking and in what type of situation,
but that is of little consequence--in these scant minutes, the audience
instantly is given a vivid portrait of what the character is all about:
her youthful recklessness and naďveté, her sexual abandon and her
romantic soul.  While kudos go to writer Serge Frydman, it is Paradis who
brings the scene and Adele to robust life.
However, in Adele's eyes, her life isn't quite so healthy, and as such
she becomes the titular girl on the bridge, ready to jump when she meets
Gabor (Daniel Auteuil), a knife thrower in need of a new target.  Since
she clearly has no fear of danger, Adele is a perfect match--though it
comes to a surprise to both of them just how well they complement each
other, for these two historically down-on-their-luck characters find
themselves on an incredible streak of good fortune as they wow crowds
throughout Europe.  But as with all things, what comes up must come down.
_La_Fille_sur_le_Pont_ is a magical film in all senses.  On a literal
level, the surreal psychic bond that develops between Adele and Gabor
pushes the film into the realm of magical realism, and their knife
throwing scenes bear a not-so-subtle, otherworldly erotic charge.  But
the real magic comes in watching the warm sparks between Paradis and
Auteuil and following their characters' beautifully unconventional
relationship.  Jean-Marie Dreujou's stunning black-and-white
cinematography and Leconte's smart choices in music (there is no original
composed score) add to the film's whimsical, timeless spell.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Laura Clifford
Just as Adele (French pop star Vanessa Paradis) prepares to jump off a
Parisian bridge, Gabor (Daniel Auteuil, "Un Coeur en Hiver") appears
from the shadows to test her resolve and offer her a job as his assistant.
He's a knife thrower and figures Adele has nothing to lose in "The Girl
on the Bridge."
It's been a long time since I experienced what I call 'cinema rush' - that
intoxicating feeling I get whenever I see a truly great film.  Director
Patrice Leconte ("Monsieur Hire") has confected a wildy romantic, stunning
film, which won a Golden Globe nomination for Best Picture and eight
Cesar (the French Oscar) nominations (Auteuil won for Best Actor).
Adele believes she has no luck at all - she's 'a bug strip,' 'a vacuum
cleaner that picks up the dirt that was left behind.'  In the film's
opening minutes, Adele tells an interrogator, in front of an audience,
about her past, where she hopped from man to man at her convenience
in a quest for survival.  Adele is clearly somewhat amoral and promiscuous.  
The only minor quibble I have with this film is that it's unclear at what 
point in time Adele is supposed to be giving this interview - it doesn't 
quite mesh with the film's ending.  
Gabor, on the other hand, has a theory about luck and believes he can 
concoct it with Adele.  He's telepathic and together they hum.  Over and
over again he proves this by betting on the flight of a fly, with a
raffle ticket, at the roulette wheel and during their act, which he
constantly pushes to greater and greater heights.  Gabor fusses and 
frets when the much younger Adele trysts with handsome young men, making
a nuisance of himself, yet never making a move on her himself.  His
knife throwing act is clearly a metaphor for sex, however, and gradually
Adele gives up other men, until coincidence, disguised as luck of a different 
sort, arises on a cruise ship with disastrous results.
The prolific Auteuil has found a signature role with Gabor.  With barely
a change of facial expression he can be scathingly funny or intensely
serious.  The way he smokes a cigarette conveys more than words.  He'll
make you feel his pain AND his joy.  Paradis would appear to be out of her 
league against such a great actor, yet her Adele is fully formed and beguiling.
Her flightiness and enjoyment of the moment eventually give way to deeper
emotions when it finally dawns on her just what she and Gabor really had
together.  
Serge Frydman's script has a basic romantic structure and utilizes
dualilty in the name of luck (betting on the roulette wheel precedes
the 'Wheel of Death' act, for example).  Gabor's circus-related profession 
makes this film a natural for Fellini comparisons and it does briefly focus 
on a midget performer memorizing endless facts in closeup.  "La Strada" also
comes to mind, but Frydman and Leconte's circus is definitively French,
not Italian (a contortionist making love to Adele on top of a piano 
before Gabor interrupts them is a great sight gag).
Every other aspect of this film is top notch as well.  Music ranges from
Arabic numbers to Benny Goodman to Marianne Faithful, with each and
every selection perfectly matched to its visuals.  What could have been
a cliched makeover montage when Gabor outfits Adele for showbiz pops
in the hands of Leconte and his musical choice of "Sing, Sing, Sing."
The black and white photography by Jean-Marie Dreujou is rich, lush
and full of texture.  Dutch angle closeups, fly-eye-views, film noir
lighting and sun-drenched locations like Monte Carlo and Istanbul are
sumptuously presented.  Costume design by Annie Perier is imaginative,
particularly Gabor's garish floral numbers, which, while really odd, 
perfectly suit him.
"The Girl on the Bridge" is an almost perfect film.  It's funny, a
hair's breadth away from tragic. and soulfully romantic.  It's art.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/087b4b2a5a619ac58825693f0008c39c?OpenDocument
It's always rewarding to find in today's cinema a stark reminder of how
powerful the emotion of love can alter perception, reality, and reason
within a person.  Girl on the Bridge (La fille sur le pont) is one of
those stark reminders, a brutally grim and honest film of unacquainted
desire and the fearful reservations that follow two individuals looking
for that unattainable completion of one's faith and one's heart.
This disturbing and brilliant new film by renowned French filmmaker
Patrice Leconte - director of such films as Monsieur Hire, The
Hairdresser's Husband, and Ridicule - follows the tale of Adele, a
lovelorn girl who has been through too many one night stands and
promises of purposes.  She remarks in an unflinching five-minute opening
monologue, "I see my future like a waiting room in a train station, and
I sit there waiting for something to happen."  In this grim monologue,
the director Leconte portrays Adele, played with striking beauty and
prose by French singer Vanessa Paradis, as neither a slut nor a vixen
but as an emotionally confused girl who doesn't understand the
difference between love and sex.
Later, Adele ends up later that night on the edge of a bridge
overlooking the Seine, contemplating the murky waters below.  From the
darkness appears an older man named Gabor, played by the great French
actor Daniel Auteuil, a knife-throwing expert in need of an assistant
for his performances.  He tries to persuade Adele from jumping but she
ends up in the river; naturally, he saves her.  While in the hospital,
Gabor convinces Adele that her luck is changing by demonstrating his
extrasensory talents.  She joins him as his assistant, and during their
first performance, Adele develops a telepathic link with Gabor that
directs his blades.
Their journey continues to places such as Monaco and San Reno as Adele
and Gabor use their clairvoyance to win big at casinos and amaze
audiences with the knife-throwing performances.  But their relationship
sours because of the attention Adele gets, and the film gets more
disturbing from there.
Director Patrice Leconte chose the shoot the film in black and white to
add to the timelessness of the picture.  He also chose a variety of
music, such as Benny Goodman, Marianne Faithful, Brenda Lee, and the
Istanbul Oriental Ensemble, to make the movie sound quite diverse.  The
tight dialogue follows a solid pattern of delivering poignancy with the
pretensions of the subject matter as Adele and Gabor subconsciousness
move towards each other's hearts and minds.  The telepathic connection
between the characters is handled with conviction and makes you believe
that the link is solely derived from the unity of the two minds and
hearts.
The film also holds distinct elements of a dream state.  The first
moments of the film give ground for interpretation that the mysteries
and travels of Adele are in fact the fantasies of a lonely and depressed
girl looking for something, anything in this world.  The direct honesty
of Gabor and his unadulterated feelings for Adele seem to reach out to
the audience and pull them into the complexity of his love and desire
for this woman.  His words are brutal but fair and demand no sympathy
from Adele.
Admittedly, French cinema is a tough beast to understand.  The stark
dialogue is uncommon in American cinema and the development of
characters is sometimes without a roadmap and lacks the emotional
shortcuts of Hollywood.  Good French cinema is powerful and demands your
attention for full appreciation.  Give Girl on the Bridge all of your
mind.
Director: Patrice Leconte
Writer: Serge Frydman 
Producer: Hervé Truffaut, Christian Fechner
Starring: Daniel Auteuil, Vanessa Paradis, Frederic Pfluger, Demetre
Georgalas
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
John Popick
A Golden Globe nominee for Best Foreign Language Film earlier this year,
Girl on the Bridge is a terrific romantic tale about a young, suicidal
woman and a knife-thrower in the midst of a mid-life crisis.  Sure,
they're not your typical screen couple, but what would you expect from a
black-and-white French film about carnival act lovers?
Bridge opens with Adele (Vanessa Paradis) being interrogated by what
appears to be a panel of doctors.  We learn that the wide-eyed waif, who
has teeth like Alfred E. Newman, is 21 and dropped out of school early
to run off with a boy.  Since then, Adele has been unlucky in all
aspects of her life  especially love.  She even goes so far as to
compare herself to flypaper picking up filth.  This great scene is
comprised of just a few long shots of Adele, helping to establish her
character better than a typical film's opening scene.
The next scene shows Adele on a bridge over the Seine River in Paris.
She's about to jump into the cold, murky water below, when a stranger
emerges from the shadows, calmly telling Adele that she shouldn't off
herself.  The stranger even offers her a job as his assistant.
The stranger turns out to be a piss-poor knife-thrower named Gabor
(Daniel Auteuil, Lucie Aubrac).  He's just turned 40 and is starting to
worry that he's lost his touch with his precious knives.  To make
matters worse, Gabor is finding it increasingly difficult to get
bookings at big tent festivals, losing out to novelty acts like
contortionists and plate spinners.  But he sees something special in
Adele and readily takes the chance at making her a part of his act.
Gabor and Adele's first act involves knives being hurled at the shackled
beauty with a curtain separating the two.  Gabor has never thrown blind
before, but that's the only way he can talk his way past the
performance's pessimistic booker.  It goes off well, with Adele finding
some erotic pleasure from her fear of the oncoming knives.
The two hit the road, performing their sensational act around Europe.
The catch is that Gabor has to heighten the risk of each performance to
ensure a big payday.  He also has Adele visit various casinos, where the
woman who used to be so unlucky begins to rake in piles of money at the
roulette table.  The implication is that Gabor and Adele are unlucky
apart but unstoppable as a team  a point driven home by a trick
involving a dollar being torn in half and then, magically, becoming
whole again.
You can see the instant where their luck takes a dramatic turn for the
worse, at which point you hold your breath and wait for the inevitable
tragedy to occur.  But it doesn't come the way you might expect it to.
In fact, it's not even close.
While Paradis does an admirable job as Adele, Auteuil's Gabor is the
real draw here.  This has to be the coolest role in a French film since
Alain Delon played Le Samouraď.  Auteuil looks like the love child of
Midnight Run's Robert DeNiro and Charles Grodin (I understand the scene
where he is conceived is on the recently released DVD of Run).  He's
definitely not the most attractive guy (even for France), and his face
barely shows any emotion, yet his performance is alluring and
believable.
Bridge was directed by Patrice Leconte (Ridicule) and written by Serge
Frydman.  Leconte's direction, along with Jean-Marie Dreujou's lush
cinematography, make the film feel more dreamlike than any in recent
memory.  The film was nominated for eight César Awards (the French
version of the Oscars), nabbing nods for picture, director, screenplay
and both lead acting roles (only Auteuil took home a trophy at a
ceremony ironically hosted by Delon).  Although the subtitles are often
difficult to read against the black-and-white pictures, Bridge plays
like a fairy tale for grown-ups.

Author
Steve Rhodes
So you're looking for an erotic knife-throwing movie?  I thought so.  
But, had you considered one about a knife thrower who is willing to do 
it blind in order to pump up the crowd?  If so, then Patrice Leconte's 
THE GIRL ON THE BRIDGE (LA FILLE SUR LE PONT) is just the picture for 
you.
Chief among its delights are Serge Frydman's sharp and witty script and 
the sexually charged performance by Vanessa Paradis as the film's 
eponymous lead, Adele.  With pixyish good looks and large gaps between 
her teeth, Paradis appears less like a movie star than every man's wish 
for his girl next door.
Shot in an oversaturated black and white that manages to obscure the 
subtitles of some of the best sections of dialog, the movie is a fairy 
tale for adults.  The depressed damsel in distress is about to jump off 
of a bridge until she is rescued by a mysterious stranger, Gabor (Daniel 
Auteuil).
Adele explains that she is like flypaper in that she picks up all of the 
crud.  She is also a highly sexed 21-year-old, who tells about her love 
life in an extremely long opening monologue.  Watching nothing but a 
large talking head for the first 10 minutes of a story will try most 
viewers' patience.
Gabor, it turns out, spends his time hanging out on bridges and rooftops 
in order to recruit women.  No, he is not a pimp.  He is a middle-age 
knife thrower.  "Past the age of 40, knife throwing becomes sporadic," 
he explains to Adele, hence he tries to find women to work with him who 
have nothing to lose.  And being on the verge of suicide is certainly 
proof of a lack of belief in the future.
Adele admits that she has a weak right eye, which Gabor sees as an 
attribute.  "Eyes don't matter," he tells her.  "See less.  Fear less."
What she does see is men, all except Gabor that is.  "Boys attract me 
like beautiful clothes," she confesses.  "I always want to try them on."  
Since her first gig is at a circus, this presents a wonderful 
opportunity to try out sex with none other than a professional 
contortionist.
The movie is never better than when she's strapped to the board, 
withering in ecstasy and moaning with every knife strike.  As magical, 
exotic and erotic as these scenes are, they are too few and far between.  
The movie begins to end fairly predictably and then has the bad sense of 
timing not to stop but to keep going for yet another, equally 
predictable ending.  THE GIRL ON THE BRIDGE, which is already a 
reasonably short film, would be improved dramatically by being much 
shorter still.  Fairy tales work best when they don't overstay their 
welcome.
THE GIRL ON THE BRIDGE runs 1:32.  It is in French with English 
subtitles.  It is rated R for some sexuality and would be acceptable for 
most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE GIRL ON THE BRIDGE (France, 1999) (La Fille sur le Pont).***1/2 
Directed by Patrice Leconte. Written by Serge Frydman. Photography, 
Jean-Marie Dreujou. Editing, Joelle Hache. Production design, Ivan 
Maussion. Produced by Christian Fechner. Cast:  Avec Vanessa Paradis 
(Adčle), Daniel Auteuil (Gabor), Demetre Georgalas (Takis), Isabelle 
Petit-Jacques (Takis's bride), Frédéric Pflüger (the 
contorsionnist), Giorgios Gatzos (Barker), et al. A Paramount 
Classic release. In French with subtitles. 92 minutes. R 
(sexuality). At the Art. 
Soon after attending a Freaky Film Festival, by a freaky coincidence 
I saw "The Girl on the Bridge." In many ways, this superb, 
fascinating, strange, original  feature was a kind of apotheosis of 
freakishness.
Its director is the so-imaginative Patrice Leconte whose best movies 
include "Monsieur Hire," a wonderful remake of the classic "Panique" 
(1946); the very offbeat love story "The Hairdresser's Husband"; and 
the splendidly sharp and witty "Ridicule," set among aristocrats of 
the court of  Louis XVI and Marie-Antoinette.
Leconte's films are original, clever in scenarios, dialogues and 
performances, with superior cinematography and often colorful 
settings. "The Girl" is all that but now the glorious colors have 
been replaced by glorious black-and-white which aids our 
concentration and gives the film a "classic movie" feel.
It entertains in quirky, funny and sexy ways --all beyond easy 
description. It stars the great Daniel Auteuil and very popular 
singer-actress Vanessa Paradis, 
The picture is constructed like a succession of small puzzles which, 
however, impede neither comprehension nor appreciatioon. Opening on 
a soundtrack of Algerian music is the sequence of Adele, all in 
closeups. She is pretty, about 23, gap-toothed (a Gallic Lauren 
Hutton?) She talks and talks about her sad lot, her string of sexual 
and sentimental failures in male retlationships. It is an odd kind 
of self-analysis, self-criticism and confession. Whom is she 
addressing? A jury? A group of shrinks? She is very much a woman, 
but also strangely childish.
Cinephiles may be reminded of the sequence in  Truffaut's "The 400 
Blows" where the boy Antoine Doinel replies to questions by a 
reformatory's psychologist. Her declarations, paradoxical and often 
quietly funny also bring to mind Jean-Luc Godard's style.
We next meet her in night and fog, on a bridge of the river Seine in 
Paris. She intends to jump to her death. But Gabor appears, talks, 
mocks, argues, and finally fishes her out of the murky waters. He 
rescues her because he needs a new partner, meaning a target for his 
skills as a knife thrower. 
The two become a couple of performers, but not an item. Gabor takes 
her to a posh circus in Monaco where they do their number, The Wheel 
of Death.  She is tied to a rotating wheel. He throws his blades at 
her, It is terrifying yet also, after a fashion, humorous. We are 
asked (but not pressured) to believe that between Adele and  Gabor 
and the knives, there's a kind of mental tele-guidance. He does nick 
her more than once however, and his box of band-aids becomes a funny 
prop. And there's additional mind-power as Gabor -- who will not 
gamble-- has Adele do it and win stacks of money.
The film develops as a strange kind of road-movie which takes the 
duo to Italy, to a cruise ship going to Greece and Turkey, to a 
fanciful, amusing separation of the two. This grows into longing. 
Mind you, there is neither sex nor verbal love-making between the 
man and the girl. Adele is sex-obsessed -- a kind of  nymphomaniac. 
She attaches herself sexually, instantly and serially to man after 
man, consummates sex in comical or farcical scenes (including one 
with a contortionist) but does not  fall in love. Gabor reprimands 
her (when he doesn't shrug his shoulders,) yet keeps his cool --as 
she does hers.
Of course, the movie would be inhumane if Gabor were not gradually 
falling in love. But the film is humane, like those it may remind 
you of partly-- such as Fellini's "La Strada," but without its 
pessimism and grunge. Not to mention Felliniesque music. (The movie 
has an outstanding, rich musical commentary   from much Italian to 
Benny Goodman,  Mariane Faitfull, Hispanic, Turkish, and other 
sounds.)
On board the cruise ship, Adele's latest instant fling is with 
Takis, a chic Greek newlywed whose rationale to Gabor about his 
"blitz" affair with Adele is: "My wife is Italian. We don't 
understand each other.."
Such delectable absurdisms populate the movie. There is even a 
section where Takis and Adele leave the ship and their partners in 
mid-Mediterranean, by escaping in a lifeboat. The sequence seems to 
upend  James Bond who, at the conclusion of many 007 flicks finds 
himself  on a small boat--with a gorgeous female.
Non sequiturs,  frequent metaphors for sex, bits of fetishism, 
surreal sights and sites, symbolism, run rife. Yet they always fit 
the characters, the action, the sets while they are not pretentious, 
sophomoric, pleasd with themselves or irritating.  
This is a devilishly smart and smartly played movie. But I doubt 
that its direction, performances and paraphernalia could exist 
without the splendid script by Serge Frydman who had earlier twice 
collaborated with Leconte.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
GIRL ON THE BRIDGE (La Fille Sur Le Pont)
   Someone once said that there are only six stories in all the
world for novelists and playwrights and filmmakers to deal
with.  Without much doubt, the principal one is the ancient
tale of boy meets girl, boy loses girl, girl gets boy.  But of
course the theme is not what's important in the construction
of a film: the style with which the motif is presented is, and
lest we get into a discussion of the relative merit of style and
substance, let's say that style IS substance.  If you're looking
for a boy-girl story told with technique to spare, take a look at
Patrice Leconte's "Girl on the Bridge," which could be
dismissed by its detractors as a cute but silly story but is, on
the contrary, one which I cannot recommend highly enough
save for a single flaw.  Since "Girl on the Bridge" is a fable, a
fairy tale that features elements of both "Cinderella" and
"Pygmalion," its director, Patrice Laconte has proffered the
story in black-and-white photography to symbolize its
timelessness and perhaps to suggest a Truffaut-like
ambience.  Mistake. Big mistake.  Not only do the white
subtitles become unreadable against a white background (not
a problem for the French-speaking New York publicist but a
major one for the non-Francophones in the audience), but
more important the audience is likely to get the impression
that Leconte is being either too cheap to use color or just
plain pretentious.
  The shame of it all is that "Girl on the Bridge" is so
absorbing that maybe even Woody Allen would give his
imprimatur to have a new, colorized version made of the
parable.  Rarely do two actors convey such chemistry with
each other as do Daniel Auteuil and Vanessa Paradis, all the
more significant considering the age difference: the 28-year-
old Paradis performs in the role of a child-like beauty of 22
while the Algerian-born Auteuil, at age 50, makes a strong
presence as an unusual man who is ten years his junior.  But
the burning desire of these two people so different in ages is
just one of the unusual aspects of the movie.  For one thing,
the sensuality of this singular couple is evoked largely from
the particular that they do not consummate their mutual
desire, at least not with each other. For another, bless Mr.
Laconte for breaking with the French tradition of films that
talk talk and talk some more--all the stranger since his
remarkable costume drama "Ridicule" was, like G.B. Shaw's
"Pygmalion," all about how one's social position among the
upper orders is determined by how well, with how much wit,
you speak.
   Filmed on location in Paris, the French Riviera, Monaco,
Italy and Istanbul, "Girl on the Bridge" joins girl and boy on
an overpass above the Seine in Paris, the scene of an
impending suicide jump--but not before Leconte gets
considerable exposition out of the way by presenting Adele
(Vanessa Paradis) as the subject of a psychiatric interview
before an audience of professionals presumably studying
depression.  An unusual stranger, Gabor (Daniel Auteuil),
convinces her to curb her suicidal impulse, whereupon like a
modern Prince Charming he converts the down-and-out but 
attractive naif into Pretty Woman, making her the target of his
knife-throwing act and boosting her self-image by showing
her how the receiver of the blades and not the hurler is the
all-important person.  
   The more we watch Gabor's daring and skillful knife-
throwing act--in carnivals situated in the South of France and
Italy--the more we feel the eroticism that the enactment
evokes, one which makes the young woman even more
susceptible to the carnal intentions if the handsome men
surrounding her.  In the movie's one ham-fisted metaphor,
Gabor exhibits a magic trick in which he converts a monetary
bill which has been torn in half into a single unit.  Neither half
is worth a thing without the other.  But just as you cannot
paste up a torn dollar with half a Deutschmark if you want the
bill to have any value, you must find the right person with
whom to bond.  "Girl on the Bridge" seems to validate the
fantasy that there's only one true love for each of us, but
Leconte draws us into this most romantic of illusions so deftly
that only the most hard-hearted in the audience can leave the
auditorium snickering.
Not Rated.  Running time: 92 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
