Title
Review for Portrait of a Lady, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
Continuing with the 19th century literature onslought begun with 3
Jane Austen film adaptations in the past year, Australian director
Jane Campion ("The Piano") brings Henry James' "The Portrait of a
Lady" to the screen.  Nicole Kidman stars as American Isabel Archer an
independent young woman with a large inheritance who's moved to Europe
to experience more of the world.  Her curiousity allows her to be led
by a manipulative friend with a shady agenda, Barbara Hershey's Madame
Merle, into the arms of a dark dilettante, John Malkovich's Gilbert
Osmond.
"The Portrait of a Lady" is a complex story, gorgeously shot, moodily
symbolic and erotic.  Jane Campion is proving that she can stand
easily in the pantheon of world class directors, and I, for one,
would love to see her nab a second Best Director Oscar nod.
I'm a bit perplexed why this film hasn't received more accolades -
I've seem some negative response based on comparison with the source
material.  I'll state right here that I've never read the book
(although my appetite to do so has now been whetted), so I'm judging
the film simply on its own merits.
The film begins oddly, with an opening credit sequence of modern women
shot in black and white, as well as color, in sisterly groups of
staring into the camera - there's almost a hint of lesbian overtones.
Here Campion announces that her interpretation of the story will bear
her distinctive mark.
Isabel Archer, in an attempt to mark her independence, makes a
perverse choice that will bring her nothing but unhappiness.
Nicole Kidman is fine as Isabel, but I doubt this role will garner her
an Oscar nomination even though she was unjustly overlooked last year.
James Malkovich is typecast as the perversely dark charmer who revels
in emotional abuse, but he is good at these types of roles and plays
this one quietly.  
The standout in the cast is Martin Donovan as Isabel's sickly cousin
Ralph, one of her three, more upstanding admirers.  He's a Victorian
embodiment of the 'if you love them, set them free' school of thought.
He reminded me of Jeff Bridges at his most haunted best - maybe even
better!
Barbara Hershey does some fine work as the duplicitous Madame Merle,
who finally sinks into despair as she witnesses the pain brought about
by her actions. 
John Geilgud is also outstanding - he makes a strong impression in two
small scenes.  When left alone with his son Ralph, he immediately
indulges himself in a forbidden cigarette (Gielgud's pale face and
white hair framed in smoke - a beautiful, haunting image).
Another brilliant scene takes place at a ball.  While the black-clad
matron Isabel politically juggles her stepdaughter's two suitors,
plump Italian women in lavish costumes pass out to her left and right
- the coldness of an arranged marriage juxataposed against the fever
of passion.
The film wraps with triumphantly, if obliquely, in a gothically
bleak snowy England after the false sunshine of Italy.  The film's
beautiful cinematography and locations are complimented by a
hauntingly romantic score.
Normally, as a film critic, I can divorce the guy in me and just watch
a film on the critic level. Sometime, as in "Portrait of a Lady", I
watch the film as both a critic and a guy, which causes me great
confusion.
As Robin, the film critic, I watch "Portrait..." and note the detail
and attention given to costume, set design, photography, writing,
acting and direction, and see a finely crafted work with solid credits
all around.
The acting is uniformly first rate from top to bottom - especially the
performance given by Martin Donovan as Nicole Kidman's cousin and
admirer, Ralph. Very subtly, he builds on the viewer's and cousin
Isabel's (Kidman) affections so that, by the end, you're rooting for
him to get the girl. Too bad he dies. Blame the Henry James novel for
that.
The key actors, Nicole Kidman, John Malkovich (making a career as a
slimy sex symbol) and Barbara Hershey, are very good. Not great,
through no fault of their own, but still very good.
My only problem with the film, as Robin, the film critic, is that the
story is too involved for the acting. The actors are trying so hard to
do justice to the story that I never was able to get too deep into the
motivations of the characters they portray. I think its the wealth of
information being conveyed that overshadows the actors efforts.
Technically, especially the photography alluded to in the title - some
of the shots are, in fact, as visually stunning as genuine portraits -
this is a top notch affair.
Again, as Robin, the film critic, I find Portrait of a Lady to be one
of the years best and give it an A-.
Now, to Robin, the guy: its over two hours long, theres no gratuitous
violence or nudity (nudity is symbolic here, at best - guys don't do
symbolic). No guns. No good guys/bad guys. No explosions. No
shootouts. Just a lot of talking. Hey, this isn't the kind of movie
for A Guy to see, is it? Decidedly not.
Robin, the guy, gives it a C+, but that doesn't count. Robin, the
critic, still gives "Portrait of a Lady" an A-.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Author
Peter Reiher
"The Portrait of a Lady" was one of the worst films I saw this year.
While I haven't liked all her films, I generally consider Jane Campion
to be an interesting director who, at least, never did anything that
was an imitation or a predictably dull effort.  As a result, I was
extremely disappointed with "The Portrait of a Lady."
"The Portrait of a Lady" is based on a novel by Henry James, written
in the 19th century.  It concerns a young American woman who comes
to Europe to visit relatives, and becomes involved with suitors both
European and American.  In a greater sense, it's another of James'
stories about the clash of American and European cultures.
The problems with the film start, as most films' problems do, with the 
script.  It's an over-long, rather straightforward telling of the story, 
with a few ill-advised stylistic flourishes.  Not having read the novel,
I will not comment on the script's faithfulness to the book, but it
is not successful on its own terms.  However, the script is not the
greatest problem with this film.
With one major and a couple of minor exceptions, the film was very badly
cast, with the greatest problems in the most central roles.  These 
casting mistakes, combined with the poor script and a lack of
directorial inspiration, sink the film.
The title role is the core of the problem.  Isabel Archer is meant to be
a truly extraordinary young woman, someone who inspires love in 
practically every man she meets and admiration in practically every
woman.   We are told that she is capable of great things, that she could 
live a life that would amaze us.  The script goes to great lengths to 
tell us how wonderful she is - but that's all it does, tell us.  It 
never shows us anything to make the audience admire the young woman.  A 
better script would have shown us the immense potential of this young 
woman, and made us understand why people are so very interested in her.  
Given that Laura Jones' script did not make that choice, the only hope 
was to cast the part with an actress with such fierce charisma and 
internal flame that we would immediately agree that she was indeed a 
remarkable woman, even if we never see her do or say anything
remarkable.  That means someone like a young Katherine Hepburn.
Nicole Kidman is beautiful, and reasonably talented, but she doesn't 
have that kind of charisma.  As a result, the audience is left to wonder
why everyone is making such a fuss over her.
John Malkovich is equally wrong for his part, that of an American
expatriate who has lived in Florence for years, cultivating a collection
of art and antiquities, seemingly doing little else.  The story demands
that he exert a nearly irresistible attraction on Isabel, who has been 
well able to resist the attractions of younger, wealthier, more handsome 
and eligible men.  There is absolutely nothing about Malkovich in this 
role that suggests he would attract such an extraordinary young woman.  
He's not handsome, the script gives him no real opportunity to dazzle 
her with his supposedly exquisite taste, and he doesn't even seem 
terribly interested in her.  Again, the writing required a far more 
charismatic actor. Malkovich does better when the darkest side of the 
character comes out, but that's too late to do much good.
Some of the supporting roles were cast with truly annoying actors.
Both Mary Louise Parker and Shelley Duvall, in rather similar roles as
eccentric busy bodies, made one wish that Arnold Schwarzenegger had a
role in the film, so there would be some hope that he'd suddenly show up
with a machine gun and blow them away.  Shelley Winters and Christian 
Bale were merely boring, a big step up.  Richard E. Grant and Viggo 
Mortenson play Kidman's other suitors, and were apparently chosen to 
give some credibility to the attractiveness of Malkovich, by contrast.  
They are acceptable, but unextraordinary.  Martin Donovan is not 
especially good as Kidman's consumptive, infatuated British cousin.  
John Gielgud appears briefly as Donovan's father, and does what he can 
with the part.
Barbara Hershey, on the other hand, seemed to be the only actor in 
command of her role.  Only she, among the leads, seems like she has the
characteristics the script claims for her.  She practically makes the 
film worth watching, at least during her scenes.  Ms. Hershey is a fine,
underappreciated actress who deserves the best roles.  She, and the 
production design (by Janet Patterson), were the only good qualities of 
the film.
As far as the direction goes, Jane Campion has made an excellent
audition piece for the Cinematic Academy of Embalming.  She did a
fine job convincing the audience that, yes, classics on the screen
*do* have to be a tedious chore to sit through.  She uses a glacial
pace, lots of long-held shots on the central character's face (in which
Ms. Kidman's expressive abilities are stretched well beyond her current
limitations), many stately tracking shots, and plenty of long-held
images of pretty scenery and architecture .  Most of the film looks like
Merchant/Ivory, without their driving intensity.  (That's a little joke,
in case it isn't clear.)  This is one seriously dull film.
Campion dolls the film up with various little cinematic tricks, perhaps
trying to convince herself that she wasn't making such a stodgy film.
In one scene, Isabel fantasizes about abandoning herself to her 
potential lovers, and they eventually disappear in gratuitous special 
effects.  The opening sequences features a bunch of modern young 
women talking about their lives in disconnected snippets.  Isabel's 
travels after meeting Malkovich are dealt with as a fake travelog done 
in the style of an early silent film.  And once in a while Campion 
chooses a skewed camera angle, for no apparent reason.  These departures 
from the overall style of the film seemed desperate.  Each is a
separate, momentary departure from the extremely conventional style of 
the body of the film.  They are in no sense part of an integrated whole, 
unlike, say, the bridging shots in "Breaking the Waves."
It's not actually the case that Henry James has to be dull, but you'd 
never guess that from "The Portrait of a Lady."  You'd be far better off 
seeing "The Heiress" again, or getting hold of the BBC production of 
"The Golden Bowl," than wasting time on "The Portrait of a Lady."

Author
Christopher Null
     Jesus, I didn't realize when I went to the movies this morning I
was going to have to *think*!
     But seriously, that's what you're going to be doing if you see THE
PORTRAIT OF A LADY -- Jane Campion's follow-up to THE PIANO, based on
Henry James's "classic" novel that you've probably never read.  Now, I'm
wishing that I had, though, because PORTRAIT is a fantastic movie to
watch, exquisitely crafted and painstakingly detailed, gorgeously
photographed and full of style -- but it is just plain impossible to
follow.
     I mean *impossible* to follow -- I'm guessing that's why I get
copies of the production notes and why you get to read reviews like
this:  to explain the plot.  So here goes:  Isabel (Nicole Kidman) is a
woman in 1872 Europe who eschews the traditional life of the time (i.e.
marry a rich guy) and has the world's first afro (check out the
publicity stills).  She's a rare free spirit in an age of repression. 
Turning down suitors played by Viggo Mortensen, Richard E. Grant, and
AMATEUR's Martin Donovan, Isabel turns out to be pretty gullible, too,
and gets suckered into marrying the manipulative Osmond (John
Malkovich), thanks to the duplicity of Osmond's evil friend Madame Merle
(a nearly unrecognizable Barbara Hershey).  (Yes, it does sound very
DANGEROUS LIAISONS-ish.)  Isabel soon finds her life pretty miserable,
and then 124 years later they make a movie about it.  That's *way*
simplified.
     You're probably saying that PORTRAIT is probably not the best movie
material out there, and I agree, but if anyone was going to have the
ability to pull this off, it was Campion, and I've got to give her
credit for trying.  Unfortunately, unlike THE PIANO, PORTRAIT is
incredibly hard to get at, a dense and mostly inaccessible try at making
something into art.
     There's so much good about the film, though, that it's hard not to
recommend -- the performances are top-notch, especially Donovan as
Isabel's cousin, who really deserves notice for this production.  Kidman
is really coming into her own as a true talent, as well, and the
remaining cast are all great.  Again, beautiful art direction,
cinematography, direction by Campion, and interesting editing all work
to the film's advantage.  The only problem I had:  what's with the black
& white inserts, slow-motion, askew angles, and singing beans(!?) that
show up now and then?  We do *not* need another ERASERHEAD.
     Oh well... you should still see it, if for no other reason than it
will give you plenty of conversation material for a *long* time.  And
you'll get some interesting hairstyling ideas.
     [Be sure to listen for the best inside-joke line:  "I would have
given my little finger..."]
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Bryant Frazer
I should first mention that I've never read the Henry James
novel on which Jane Campion's version of THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY is
based. I should further confess that I never cared at all for
THE PIANO, Campion's 1993 study of a similarly hapless
character. And so it was that, having absorbed a handful of
rousing critical hosannahs (from Amy Taubin, Sheila Benson,
Film Comment's Kathleen Murphy, and Sight and Sound's Lizzie
Francke), I made a reluctant opening weekend pilgrimage to
the theater, propped my eyelids open with toothpicks, and
tried my best not to slouch in my seat. I found my efforts
rewarded -- paced at the bare threshold of monotony, THE
PORTRAIT OF A LADY certainly demands rapt attention, although
viewers' response to the picture seems to vary wildly. Once I
had made it through to the very end, I had decided it was at
least a moving experience if a languorous one.
That was more than three weeks ago, and I've been fighting
off a nasty virus with a New York attitude ever since. But
now that I'm finally sitting down to write, I'm surprised at
how quickly the essence of Isabel Archer comes rushing back
at me. If you do choose to give two-and-a-half hours of
scrutiny to this carefully drawn character study, you may
want to avoid thinking too much about the movie when it's
over and consider it instead a long-term investment. Weeks or
even months later, who knows if you might not flash back on
your movie-theater memories of Isabel Archer's pale blue
eyes, Gilbert Osmond's affected disdain for "dingy people,"
or the romantic notions of the giggling teenagers who open
the film, a cautionary bridge between past and present.
THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY is the story of Isabel (Nicole
Kidman), a beautiful American abroad who seems to have her
choice of eligible bachelors. As the film opens, she's
baffling friends and family by declining the marriage
proposal of the rich Lord Warburton (Richard Grant) and
rebuking the advances of Caspar Goodwood (Viggo Mortenson),
who has followed her from New York. Her sickly cousin Ralph
(Martin Donovan), himself more than a little enamored of her,
is looking forward to seeing where her willful independence
will lead her. And when her uncle (John Gielgud, briefly)
dies and wills her a sizable fortune, it looks as though the
entire world is spread out before her.
Despite her intentions, Isabel's fine life is derailed by
Osmond (John Malkovich), who schemes after her newly acquired
fortune. Isabel is introduced to Osmond by Madame Merle
(Barbara Hershey), who we come to suspect has her own reasons
for luring Isabel into his lair. Believing the rather sour
Osmond to be a man driven by his lofty tastes and refined
sensibilities, Isabel becomes engaged to him against the
warnings and protestations of Ralph, who contends that Osmond
just wants Isabel's money. As it turns out, Osmond wants more
than her money. He's a self-important sadist who wants to
control her and to own her, to add her to his expansive hoard
of arty trinkets. What ensues is a sort of psychological
horror story, as Isabel slowly comes to bear the crushing
weight of her decisions.
As the woman who gets Isabel into this mess, Hershey is fine,
but there's a striving intensity to her performance that
constantly reminds you that it's just that -- a performance.
Malkovich, meanwhile, plays to the cheap seats as Isabel's
seducer and obvious adversary (is anyone else constantly
reminded that Malkovich and Malevolence share so many letters
in common?). His casting has come under some criticism, but
there's a delicious (if inappropriate) melodrama inherent in
the scenes where he and Hershey play off one another that
adds a little vinegar to the proceedings. The supporting
players are uniformly fine, with the exception of Mary-Louise
Parker as Isabel's journalist friend. The less said the
better, perhaps, though *shrill* isn't quite the right word and
*irritating* doesn't begin to cover the bases. So poorly does
she reflect on Campion's direction that I thought I'd have to
leave the theater.
Some critics have held that Isabel is at best inscrutable and
at worst unappealing as the object of all this attention
(from her suitors as well as from the audience), but
Campion's film has to be approached as a study of interiors,
not of exteriors. A fantasy sequence near the film's
beginning where Isabel imagines making love with three
different men helps establish the film largely as Isabel's
subjective experience, not as the story told by some
omniscient narrator on whose head falls the burden of proof.
Fortunately, Kidman's performance invited me right inside the
lady's head, where I simply felt her motivations rather than
deducing them. As misguided as her decisions are, they make
emotional sense in terms of her well-meaning determination to
give her life over to only the most extraordinary of men.
When she falls for Malkovich's cruel, pseudointellectual snow
job of a courtship, it's tragic but in keeping with a
character who's trying far too hard to do the right thing at
the expense of her mortal soul.
It's worth noting that the audience -- an upscale Manhattan
crowd, supposedly the perfect demographic for a new Campion
outing -- had far less patience with all this business than I
did. The restlessness in the auditorium was palpable, and
every so often a heavy sigh -- or, worse, a giggle -- drifted
through the air. Campion's least effective when she's the
most self-conscious -- utilizing a statue with its stone
penis snapped off, posing Hershey in front of a gigantic
crucifix as she plays Judas, or tilting a street scene at an
awkward angle and then *rotating the damn camera on its axis.*
(Snickering is certainly a valid response.) Stuart Dryburgh's
cinematography, as insistently expressive as Wojciech Kilar's
score, keeps the picture interesting (he does snow very well,
which suits the chilly atmosphere) but, like Hershey's
performance, calls too much attention to itself.
Still, I can't deny that I walked out of the theater oddly
satisfied. Campion is a confident enough filmmaker that she
can entertain flashes of mad brilliance. Witness the
surrealistic black-and-white interlude that marks the film's
halfway point, during which Isabel meets both the Lumiere
brothers and Luis Bunuel -- Campion has her heroine dreaming
in the language of the movies, which of course didn't yet
exist. I was particularly fond of one breathtaking cut that
occurs in the sequence where Malkovich consummates his
careful seduction of Isabel -- the camera is suddenly
trucking around a curved wall inset with human bones before
finding Kidman and Malkovich again. Finally, see what you
make of the exquisite, enigmatic final shot, which snaps a
picture of Isabel at the moment she realizes that she's
finally and fatally trapped -- or that the world has, once
again, opened up before her.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     There are so few good novelists that it is a travesty that a
director like Jane Campion (THE PIANO) would take one of Henry James's
novels like THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY and siphon away most of its beauty.
She turns the conversations in the movie into little more than serial
monologues.  One character will deliver an emotionless short speech
followed by a pause and then the other will pontificate for a bit and
then another pause.  The speech hangs in the air like breath on a cold
winter morning.
     It is little wonder then that the people in the restroom
afterwards were making comments like, "Well, that was sure a waste of
time."  The audience sat and listened as dispassionately as the players
on the screen, and the silence was broken with periodic laughter in the
wrong places.  In fact, my reaction at the end was the same as others
in the audience.  We started laughing out loud at how ridiculous the
show had been.  Not the reaction James would have wanted.
     The film starts bizarrely with modern day young women talking
about kissing.  Soon the action moves to England in the 1870s where the
novel starts.  Actually, the word action is a carefully chosen misnomer
since the show has been sanitized by the director to be devoid of
anything approaching action.  Filmed versions of his work can be much
better, and I like several with my favorite being BBC's production of
"The Golden Bowl."
     "I've never seen an ugly man look so handsome," says Bohemian
looking Mary-Louise Parker as Henrietta Stackpole.  She is talking to
Isabel Archer, played with great sincerity by Nicole Kidman, about one
of Isabel's many suitors.  Soon Isabel will refuse the hand of one
wealthy gentlemen and then turn around and inherit a great fortune
anyway.
     Shelley Winters plays Mrs. Touchett, but she is so badly miscast
you will wish she didn't.  John Gielgud gives one of his most lifeless
performances as her husband Mr. Touchett, who is the source of Isabel's
wealth.
     Campion inserts strange montages and surreal sequences.  One has
Isabel making love fully clothed simultaneously to three of her beaus
in her boudoir.  Another has her naked in an early-1930s style black
and white film.  It has a plate full of talking coffee beans, but like
much of the film it makes such little sense that they may have been
lima beans for all I know.
     Kidman's acting is good but distant.  She throws herself into her
role, but most of the problems of the show all point back to Campion.
The actors are all top notch, but Campion insists they approach their
roles with aloofness and disdain.
     Although I put much of the blame on Campion, I must admit I have
come to think less and less of John Malkovich's great talent.  Here he
gives a vapid performance as the vile Gilbert Osmond.  Malkovich has a
proclivity for signing on to bad projects.  Two of his most recent
films, THE CONVENT and MARY REILLY, were on my worst of the year list
for 1996.
     Barbara Hershey as Madame Serena Merle is a self-proclaimed
"highly ambitious" woman who is unsuccessful because she has "neither
husband nor children nor fortune" or so she tells Isabel.  Hershey ties
Malkovich for the most wooden performance.  Some critics are proposing
her work as worthy of a best supporting actress award which I find
ludicrous.
     Although many critics whom I respect like this film, I thought the
movie, as developed by Campion, comes off as little more than
intellectual puffery.  None of her characters are worthy of attention.
     Much of the dialog works on paper, but not as delivered.  I liked
Malkovich's: "I know plenty of dingy people.  I don't want to know any
more."  My favorite of Kidman's was: "I'm rather ashamed of my plans.
I make new ones every day."
     Let me attempt to end on a positive note.  Since there is precious
little of merit other than Kidman's performance, I was able to soak in
Stuart Dryburgh's handsome cinematography.  Like his beautiful work in
AN ANGEL AT MY TABLE, he is a master at the art of lights and shadows.
His unusual choice of a pale powder blue to light Kidman's face was one
of the few experiments that worked in the film.  The costumes by Janet
Patterson (THE PIANO) are attractive, especially the tight fitting
dresses she designed for Kidman.
     Perhaps, if you've recently read the novel you will be able to
pick up and appreciate some of the nuances that other viewers missed
and be able to enjoy the film more than they did, and then, again,
maybe not.
     THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY drags on forever and finally finishes after
2:25.  It is rated PG-13 for brief nudity, but no sex, violence, or
profanity.  The show would be fine for kids who are interested in shows
this serious which I suspect is about 10 or older.  I recommend you
avoid this uninvolving film which mocks a great author.  I generously
award the picture a * 1/2 for the technical aspects plus Kidman's
performance.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Gramercy)
Starring:  Nicole Kidman, John Malkovich, Barbara Hershey, Martin Donovan,
Mary-Louise Parker, Richard E. Grant, Valentina Cervi, Viggo Mortensen.
Screenplay:  Laura Jones, based on the novel by Henry James.
Producers:  Monty Montgomery, Steve Golin.
Director:  Jane Campion.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (brief nudity, adult themes)
Running Time:  145 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Directors, both cinematic and theatrical, face their greatest
challenges when dealing with "classic" material, and not just because
audience familiarity with the text makes every step a potentially
treacherous one.  No, the real temptation is to go too far in an attempt
to make the material -- pronounce the following word dripping with sarcasm
-- "relevant."  Never mind that the text most likely achieved its lofty
status because its themes transcend the socio-political flavor of the
month; the director is determined to give it a contemporary spin.  The
irony of Jane Campion's adaptation of Henry James' THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY
is that Campion treats the narrative, a narrative with an intrinsic
emotional force, with meticulous faithfulness, while her heavy hand as a
director inspires plenty of head-shaking.
     THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY is the story of Isabel Archer (Nicole Kidman),
a young American woman living in England with her aunt and uncle, the
Touchetts (Shelley Winters and John Gielgud), and her cousin Ralph (Martin
Donovan) after the death of her own parents.  The independent and
strong-willed Isabel attracts several suitors, including Lord Warburton
(Richard E. Grant) and Caspar Goodwood (Viggo Mortensen), but she rejects
them all out of a desire to experience life before being constrained in
marriage.  Her opportunities for experience are increased when the elder
Mr. Touchett dies and leaves her a sizeable inheritance, allowing her to
interact with European society.  Among her companions is Madame Merle
(Barbara Hershey), who introduces Isabel to a gentleman named Gilbert
Osmond (John Malkovich).  Osmond intrigues Isabel, and the two eventually
marry, but when Osmond reveals his true nature Isabel must struggle to
maintain her sense of self.
     Campion opens THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY with voice-overs of modern women
discussing their thoughts on romantic love, followed by a credits sequence
featuring black-and-white images of women (we assume the same ones we just
heard) just hanging out together in nature.  The images set up a "this is
now/that was then" dichotomy which makes Isabel the object of a kind of
anachronistic pity; "The poor dear," we are told metaphorically, "if only
she had been born 100 years later."  Campion certainly sympathizes with
female characters who seem trapped by societal proscriptions (like the
heroines of AN ANGEL AT MY TABLE and THE PIANO), but nearly every
interpretation of Isabel feels misguided and simplistic.  The central
question of why Isabel marries Osmond is addressed with a pair of fantasy
sequences which make the jarring suggestion that her tragic decision was
the product of good old-fashioned lust.  That notion might have been
easier to stomach if Osmond had been played by anyone other than John
Malkovich.  Malkovich has turned the aloof Lothario into his stock
character, but the portrayal has become more chilly than chilling.  When
Osmond is supposed to be seductive, he seems bored, and Isabel's actions
make no sense.
     If the decision to marry Osmond is given a questionable treatment,
the decision to stay with him is given a merely annoying one.  After
filling THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY with images of bars, gates, slamming doors
and barriers of all kinds, Campion has Isabel stymied by a locked door as
the film ends.  It is a perfectly valid interpretation to suggest that
Isabel had no choice; it may also be the least interesting one.  After
hammering away at us with the restrictive nature of Isabel's 19th century
world for two and a half hours (and at times you can feel every minute of
it), it feels like a cheat for her to rehash the same point when
addressing the most compelling enigma the novel has to offer.
     It is all the more frustrating because there are so many other things
THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY does right.  With the exception of Malkovich, the
casting is superb, including Nicole Kidman as the wide-eyed innocent
abroad with the ERASERHEAD hairdo.  Barbara Hershey and screenwriter Laura
Jones to a particularly fine job with Madame Merle, a complex creature of
uncertain motivations.  She becomes a great tragic figure, as manipulated
as she is manipulating, even if Campion sometimes seems determined to turn
her into DANGEROUS LIAISONS' Mme. de Merteuil to Malkovich's recycled
Valmont.  Martin Donovan is also quite good as the consumptive,
kind-hearted Ralph, and Mary-Louise Parker has a delightful bluntness as
Isabel's American friend Henrietta.  The production offers a variety of
pleasures, notably Stuart Dryburgh's impressive photography, but Campion
flattens the most involving stories in THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY.  James'
clash of American and European sensibilities becomes Campion's clash of
19th century and 20th century sensibilities.  The result is essentially a
cautionary tale which only matters if you plan on doing any time travel,
or a film treatment of a hypothetical prequel:  "Smart Women Who Make
Foolish Choices: The Early Years."

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom/United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 12/24/96 (limited); 1/97 (wide)
Running Length: 2:25
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes, brief nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Nicole Kidman, John Malkovich, Barbara Hershey, Martin Donovan, 
      Mary-Louise Parker, Valentina Cervi, Shelly Winters, 
      Richard E. Grant, Shelly Duvall, Viggo Mortensen, Christian Bale, 
      John Gielgud
Director: Jane Campion
Producers: Monty Montgomery, Mark Turnbull
Screenplay: Laura Jones based on the novel by Henry James
Cinematography: Stuart Dryburgh
Music: Wojciech Kilar
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     The success of Jane Austen on the silver screen has led to a sudden 
outpouring of movies based on classic literature.  The flood, which has 
already started, will include new features from the works of William 
Shakespeare, Henry James, Charles Dickens, Thomas Hardy, and Henry 
James.  Suddenly, all the novels we were forced to read in high school 
and college English classes are being filmed.  And, if you ignore last 
year's ignoble THE SCARLET LETTER, not one (thus far) has been botched 
up.
     THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY, the first motion picture adaptation of 
James' beloved classic, presents a stark contrast to the light-and-sunny 
Austen movies.  Although it examines some of the same issues as PRIDE 
AND PREJUDICE, SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, and EMMA, the perspective is much 
darker (although not, it should be pointed out, as dark as that chosen 
by Hardy).  Those expecting a light romance from THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY 
are in for a rude awakening.  
     Even though THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY deals with characters and 
situations in late nineteenth century Europe, its relevance for today's 
audiences is undeniable.  Social standards and practices have changed 
dramatically in the last one-hundred years, but human nature remains 
immutable.  Actually, director Jane Campion (THE PIANO) is a little too 
obvious about connecting this 1881 story with the 1990s.  She opens the 
film with a brief montage featuring contemporary, young Australian women 
ruminating about kissing, love, and intimacy, then abruptly shifts to a 
close-up of Nicole Kidman's face.
     Kidman, an Australian-born actress using a passable American 
accent, plays Isabel Archer, a headstrong-but-naive young woman who, as 
the story opens in 1872, has recently arrived in England from America.  
While there, she's staying at the estate of her aunt (Shelly Winters) 
and uncle (John Gielgud).  Her closest companion and confidante is her 
cousin, Ralph Touchett (Martin Donovan), a consumptive who encourages 
his father to will a large sum of money to Isabel.  She is also pursued 
by two suitors:  the rich and unexciting Lord Warburton (Richard E. 
Grant) and the dashing Caspar Goodwood (Viggo Mortensen).  She rejects 
both, saying "I don't want to be a mere sheep in the flock.  I shall 
probably never marry."  Her desire is to explore the world and forge her 
own way in it.
     When her uncle dies, leaving her a fortune of 70,000 pounds, she 
has the financial means to do so.  She begins to travel, spending a 
great deal of time in Italy.  But her naivete enables her to be led 
astray by the sinister Madame Serena Merle (Barbara Hershey), whom she 
falsely believes to be her friend.  Madame Merle contrives a meeting 
between Isabel and the dangerous Gilbert Osmond (John Malkovich).  Soon, 
Isabel, seduced by Osmond's promises of love, agrees to marry him, 
believing that she will have the upper hand in their union.  Too late, 
she recognizes Osmond's true nature.
     Those familiar with Jane Campion's previous effort, THE PIANO, will 
not be surprised by the dismal tone of THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY, which, if 
anything, is even more grim than that of the novel.  Campion films over 
half of the scenes in dim light, making effective use of contrast to 
highlight character attributes.  Isabel is frequently shown standing in 
patches of light while Madame Merle and Osmond keep to the shadows.  
Occasionally, Campion gets a little too artsy, as in a surreal, black-
and-white dream sequence where Isabel's subconscious wrestles with 
Osmond's declaration of love. 
     There are problems with PORTRAIT's structure and pace, which could 
easily be the result of trying to condense a 600+ page book into a one-
hundred forty-five minute movie.  A great deal of background is omitted, 
which makes the beginning of the film erratic and, at times, almost 
incoherent.  The first third -- that portion which occurs before Osmond 
makes his initial appearance -- is rather dull and uninvolving.  
Isabel's character doesn't really start developing until Osmond comes on 
the scene.  Up to that point, she's just an independent 23-year old with 
insatiable curiosity but not much personality.  Later, especially as the 
movie builds to an emotionally-wrenching climax, we are drawn into 
Isabel's world.
     As has been the case in almost every period drama released in 1996, 
the acting is impeccable.  Nicole Kidman impresses as Isabel, especially 
in the late scenes.  We see the character's once-steadfast resolve 
crumble then attempt to re-assert itself as she faces her physically and 
psychologically abusive husband and learns the secret shrouding the 
identity of his lone daughter (Valentina Cervi).  Since Campion has a 
great love of close-ups, Kidman's face and eyes enhance her performance.
     John Malkovich is at his creepy best, playing Osmond as a vicious, 
malignant Svengali.  This kind of villain is far more interesting than 
the ranting psychopaths who populate films with less ambition.  Osmond 
is truly frightening, and a great deal of credit goes to Malkovich.  
Watching this performance, it's easy to understand how Isabel became 
trapped in such a relationship.
     The supporting cast is solid, and includes Martin Donovan (FLIRT) 
as Isabel's one true love, Viggo Mortensen (DAYLIGHT) and Richard E. 
Grant (TWELFTH NIGHT) as her disappointed suitors, Valentina Cervi as 
her step-daughter, Barbara Hershey as the duplicitous Madame Merle, and 
Mary-Louise Parker (BOYS ON THE SIDE) as Henrietta Stackpole, Isabel's 
female compatriot.  The settings and period detail are attended to with 
particular care.
     THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY is a difficult story to film, and Jane 
Campion and screenwriter Laura Jones have done an admirable job with 
this adaptation.  The motifs of love, betrayal, and accepting the 
consequences of one's actions are well-established.  The movie does not 
attain the emotional depth of Michael Winterbottom's recent JUDE, but 
there are definite thematic and tonal similarities.  The result is a 
fascinating portrait not only of a lady, but of the society and marriage 
that entrap, then attempt to destroy, her.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Eric Robinette
Starring Woody Allen, Alan Alda, Drew Barrymore, Lukas Haas, Goldie Hawn,
Gaby Hoffman, Julia Roberts, Natasha Lyonne, Edward Norton, Natalie
Portman, Tim Roth
Starring Nicole Kidman, John Malkovich, Tate Donovan, Barbara Hershey,
Mary-Louise Parker, Shelly Winters
Adapted by Laura Jones, based on the novel by Henry James
Directed by Jane Campion
I can hear the question already. What on earth do these two movies have in
common? To most people, not a lot, except that both are by renowned
directors.  As I saw them, however, both movies have flawed romantic
scripts wrapped in distinctive packaging of lavish visuals musical
numbers.  
But oh, how differently the packages affect their films.  While
"Everyone's" production numbers make an otherwise ordinary Woody tale
something special, Jane Campion's imaginative visuals only serve to
emphasize how pompous and uninvolving Laura Jones' script is. I left
"Everyone Says I Love You" not remembering a lot about who loved whom, but
its infectious happiness put a grin on my face.  I left "The Portrait of a
Lady" not remembering a lot about who loved whom, and I could have cared
less.
"Everyone" features  nothing Allen hasn't done before storywise. Woody is
again desperately in love with a beautiful woman (Roberts), and against
the odds they manage to click for awhile before Allen is left wondering
what went wrong--again.  Similar situations happen to his family and
friends. Some of the more outlandish comedy scenes even hark back to his
"early, funny" films. The scenes between Tim Roth and Drew Barrymore could
have come out of "Take the Money and Run," his directorial debut.
However, nothing Allen has ever done prepared me for this one-of-a-kind
display of sheer good spirits. In fact, in this movie, the feeling itself
is what's most important. Yes, the movie would have been better--among his
very best, I think--if it had a meatier story. But what it lacks in
substance it makes up for  in feeling.  And what better way to express
feeling than through music? Love is often best expressed in a song, and
the numbers the cast break into here cut straight to the heart. Some are a
tad too goofy, such as the number where a lot of ghosts prance around in a
funeral parlor, but I admired Allen for even putting them in there.
It also helps that as usual, Allen has a top-flight cast working with him.
Their singing voices range from quite good (Goldie Hawn) to not quite good
(Allen) to literally unlistenable (Barrymore, whose real voice was dubbed
by a professional).  But while their vocal abilities differ, all the
actors do a great job of putting joy up there on the screen, and making it
rub off on the audience. Granted, some people will simply never accept
characters singing in movies, but for those attuned to it, this film
should work wonders. 
Jane Campion, too, has a top-flight cast working for her in "Portrait of a
Lady," too, but even their considerable skills can do nothing to keep the
film from being a stilted, virtually lifeless mess, albeit a visually
interesting one.
Campion and her cinematographer Stuart Dryburgh come up with a great
variety of eye-filling images that linger in the mind.  Unfortunately,
what didn't linger in the mind for me was the story the visuals were
supposed to be reflecting. I remember very well shots of a train with its
light beaming and shots of men vanishing around Nicole Kidman, but I can
remember very little of what happened between all these people.  Even
worse, I don't find myself feeling bad that I've forgotten.
The problem, I think, lies not with the cast, which seemed to be trying
very hard for the material.  It was the script that couldn't convince me
to care about anyone. The characters were putting out all kinds of
emotion, but I found no reason to connect with any of them. I understood
that the story was about cold, emotionally vacant characters, but for me
to care about them, I have to identify with them somehow and want them to
inject feeling into their lives. Jones' script never simply gave me that
opportunity.
In the end, it almost seemed as if Campion was trying to inject some life
of her own into the proceedings with her visual flourishes. 
Unfortunately, as she kept painting these dazzling pictures, they only
served to push me further away from the material and remind me that there
was no connection between me and the film. In the end, the movie's one
strength ended up hurting it. 
So here we have two films with pretty uninteresting plots, and yet I was
able to truly enjoy one of them. Why? With both films, my head cared about
neither story, but only "Everyone Says I Love You"  was able to make my
heart sing.
