Title
Review for Maltese Falcon, The (1941)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: John Huston
Writer: John Huston (from the novel by Dashiell Hamet)
Starring: Humphrey Bogart, Mary Astor, Sidney Greenstreet, Peter Lorre,
Elisha Cook Jr, Jerome Cowan, Gladys George, Barton MacLane, Lee
Patrick, Ward Bond, Walter Huston
There are a few perfect films in their own respects that have been made
in cinema.  This is one of them.  "The Maltese Falcon" gets my vote for
the greatest piece of American film noir, simply because everything
about it is so flawless.  Filled with twists and turns which are
plausible and amazing, intriguing characters from all sides, and a story
which is never boring, "The Maltese Falcon" actually improves upon each
viewing.  They just don't make films like this anymore.
"The Maltese Falcon"'s labyrinthine plot revolves around the least
amoral and most intelligent character in the story: detective Sam Spade
(Humphrey Bogart), half of the detective office of "Spade and Archer." 
One day, a woman named Miss Wonderly (Mary Astor) comes in, asking them
to find her sister who has been stolen from her by a man named Floyd
Thursby.  When Archer (Jerome Cowan) tails him that night, he is shot by
point blank by someone.  Only minutes later, Thursby is also shot in the
back four times.
Not only out to clear his name since the cops think he shot one or both
of them, but also to get vengeance for his partner, Sam begins to do
some more investigating, and discovers that Thursby was thought to have
in his posession an antique "malteese falcon," which is worth millions. 
Also, Miss Wonderly is revealed to be a liar who's real name is Brigid
O'Shaughnessey, but whether she killed either of them is still
questionable.
As the plot slowly unfolds, we are introduced to a trio of more unshady
characters, all out to find the falcon: Joel Cairo (the great Peter
Lorre), an aquaintance of Thursby's who uses some witless tactics to
search Sam for the bid; Kasper Gutman (Philip Greenstreet), who's last
name describes his shape, and a rich man seeking the bird for years, and
willing to do anything to get it; and Wilmer Cook (Elisha Cook Jr.),
Gutman's dim-witted hitman who makes a name for himself inconspicuously
tailing Sam throughout the first half of the film.
The film has a brilliant plot, devoid of plot holes, implausibility, and
genuine stupidity, but is only secondary to the characters.  This is how
film noir should work: the plot is fueled by the characters within it. 
None of these characters are trapped by a gimmick, or by a plot which
needs to go only one place.  Even the romance between Sam and Brigid is
intelligently done, opening up whole new dimensions in the story.  And
the plot isn't just about who will get the bird; it's about who's smart
enough to get it.
The film also sometimes feels like a play, posessing a lot of the
intensity of watching live action occur.  On my third viewing of the
film, I timed the final scene at around 27 minutes, and in that scene,
we get a continuation of the story, as well as a wrap up.  The way this
scene is done, with very few cuts, is one of the most intense scenes in
cinema, as you're watching the end unfold mysteriously.  One of the best
things about this film is because it is character motivated, you don't
always know where the plot is going to go, and this allows every future
second to appear like a blind gaze.  In this scene, which is long, we
get tension purely because it is so superficially contained, and it's
one of the best scenes in all of Hollywood history.
The script is also amazing, as it is rumored to be word-for-word from
the novel it was adapted from (novel by Dashiell Hamet; script by
director John Huston).  The dialogue these people have are incredibly
deft, and create well-drawn characters.  There are numerous memorable
scenes consisting of just dialogue that moves the action around,
including the end, and a brilliantly done scene between Sam and Gutman,
when they first meet.  There are also some of the great lines that would
become Bogie staples, like my personal favorite, "When you're slapped,
you'll take it and like it!"
And the acting from everyone is incredible, as their characters are
written amazingly.  Elisha Cook Jr nails his role as the dim-witted
Wilmer, especially in the long final scene.  Peter Lorre gives a
memorable performance as Cairo, who has one of the coolest sounding
voices in history (which was later an influence for the cartoon
character, Ren - Lorre even gets a chance to yell at Gutman "You bloated
idiot!").  Sidney Greenstreet is incredible as Gutman, playing his
intelligent character appropriately cool, yet with undertones of
scariness.  And Astor plays her role so well that even I was as confused
to her innocence as Sam was.
And, of course, there's Bogie.  Humphrey gives one of his best if not
his best performance of his career as the anti-hero Sam Spade, a lonor
with a personal code of ethics which deems that he investigate the case
further.  Every scene he's in, he nails his character fully, embodying
him completely.  Every move he makes, and every piece of dialogue he
utters is his that of Sam Spade.  Not many people can embody a character
in a film this well, but Bogie can do it.
The direction by John Huston (in his first directing of a film) is
incredible.  He paces everything perfectly, and has written a highly
intelligent script which never loses the audience or insults their
intelligence.  Every single character is well-defined, and every twist,
turn, back-stabbing, is plausible and shocking simultaneously.  This is
a film where it is almost impossible to be bored at, and definitely
impossible to not be thrilled by.
Film noir is always a hard thing to do, but when every element is
balanced correctly, when everything comes together effortlessly, you
have a gem on your hands.  "The Maltese Falcon" is the best film noir
I've ever seen - better than "Chinatown" and the recent "L.A.
Confidential" (also better than the recent "Jackie Brown," which also
has great characterization).  By creating a world where the selfish and
cruel can abound by trying to screw eachother over, "The Maltese Falcon"
suceeds in thrilling an audience on simple pleasures, and coming off as
one of the most memorable and greatest films of all time.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Brian Koller
Perhaps "The Maltese Falcon" is not the greatest detective story
ever filmed.  But it is hard to find a better one, and much
harder to find a more enjoyable movie to watch.
One could say that "The Maltese Falcon" is full of cliches.
But since the film defines the genre, perhaps the real cliches
are from the later, derivative films.  While the characters
may never transcend their well-defined caricatures, it is
hard to complain when the cast is so strong, the dialogue so
crisp, and the characters themselves are so interesting.
"The Maltese Falcon" is a legendary jewel-encrusted statue,
priceless but long since lost.  Humphrey Bogart plays a
private eye who gradually gets caught up in the search for
the relic.  He is not alone, as Sydney Greenstreet,
Peter Lorre, Mary Astor, and Elisha Cook Jr. are also
involved.  All of the latter are ruthless, and will kill
if necessary to obtain the Falcon.
Bogart's is the central character.  He is always wise to the
situation, cynical to the core, and always on top.
He is blessed with a personal secretary who will do anything 
and everything without questioning why.
He is first hired by Astor, a femme fatale whose story
changes with every scene, and apparently is incapable of telling
the truth.  Soon, his partner is murdered and police detectives
are turning up the heat.  As Lorre, Greenstreet and Cook
enter the picture, Bogart has to play a dangerous hand,
trying to stay alive and out of jail while locating the Falcon
and (naturally) taking a share of the profits.
Peter Lorre is one of my all-time favorite character actors.
He has a terrific nasal voice and accent.  He delivers my
favorite line from the film, "You dirty filthy liar you!"
It cracks me up every time I hear it.
"The Maltese Falcon" was released in 1941, the same year
as "Citizen Kane", and one year before "Casablanca", another
Warner Brothers production that also had Bogart, Lorre and 
Greenstreet.  The 1940s had so many great films, almost
all of them filmed in black and white.  They knew how to
make 'em back then: emphasize cast, script and story, and never 
mind the stunts and special effects.
kollers@shell.mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dragan Antulov
Flood of remakes is definitely one of the most annoying
trends of contemporary Hollywood. It seems that every
outstanding film made twenty-five or thirty years ago is
about to get modern makeover. Judging by the way Hollywood
handled those remakes in past few years, it is almost
certain that many great films are about to have their
reputations forever tarnished by uninspired and usually
abysmal modern versions. Remakes, same as the sequels in
past few decades, are viewed as the manifestation of
creative crisis in modern Hollywood and its inability to
deliver anything original in their products. However,
remaking films is hardly a contemporary phenomenon in
Hollywood; movies used to be remade in previous decades same
as in our times. And in some rare occasions remakes turned
out much better than original. The best example is, of
course, one of the best known films of all time - THE
MALTESE FALCON, film noir classic directed by John Huston in
1941.
The plot of the film is based on the "hard-boiled" detective
novel by Dashiell Hammett, which has been adapted for the
screen twice before - in 1931 and 1936. Protagonist is Sam
Spade (played by Humphrey Bogart), tough and street-wise
private investigator from San Francisco who shares a firm
with his partner Miles Archer (played by Jerome Cowan). One
day their services are hired by mysterious and good-looking
Miss Wonderly (played by Mary Astor). What was supposed to
be routine surveillance job goes terribly wrong for Archer
who gets killed, while Spade becomes a prime suspect. Almost
immediately after that Spade is approached by peculiar yet
sinister world traveller Joel Cairo (played by Peter Lorre)
who wants to hire his services in order to put his hand on a
certain object. Spade is convinced that those two events are
connected and his suspicions are gradually proving correct -
not only Cairo, but also few other interested parties are
involved in the case that revolves around ancient and
priceless artefact known as "Maltese Falcon". That includes
Miss Wonderly who is not what she claims to be, yet that
doesn't prevent Spade to fall in love with her.
THE MALTESE FALCON is often seen as the Hollywood's first
film noir. The genre of hard-boiled detective stories
existed before, namely in the domain of pulp literature, but
this film was first to bring it to the silver screen in its
recognisable form. Because of that, THE MALTESE FALCON has
great historical importance - it represents something of a
milestone in development of American genre cinema. It is
also the reason why many of the characters and situations
might look like cliches, but to view them this way would be
a great injustice to the film that actually inspired such
cliches. However, when we watch the film we are hardly aware
of such cliches - the plot and character type, despite being
utilised in numerous other films through the latter decades,
are still interesting and the movie provides lot of
entertainment. This accomplishment is even greater when we
consider that THE MALTESE FALCON was actually the first film
directed by John Huston, one of the greatest American
filmmakers of 20th Century. It could be argued that his
first film (in which his father Walter appears in small
cameo role) is actually the best film in his entire career,
making this the second such instance in 1941 - the very year
when Orson Welles made his CITIZEN KANE.
One of the reasons why THE MALTESE FALCON happens to be as
great now as it was more than a half a century ago could be
found in its timeless quality. The story, characters and
situations are universal and you could sense that they might
exist in each era, including our own. This is due to the
extremely clever and tight script by John Huston, who took
each scene and each piece of dialogue from the original
novel and packed it into the coherent whole as faithful to
the dark world of Hammett's fiction as possible in early
1940s Hollywood. And because of that the movie looks
incredibly modern - its content, with hidden and some not so
well hidden layers, might very well belong to our time. The
protagonist is anti-hero with the utter lack of conventional
moral code - he is cynical, adulterous, lacks any compassion
and sometimes manifests sadistic pleasure in using violence.
There is hardly anything that separates him from the
villains in this film, except for the fact that he is more
experienced and more intelligent and therefore uses
manipulation instead of the acts that would brand him as the
villain in the classical sense. Even his final act, when he
does the Right Thing, is motivated more by the common sense
than adherence to even the most basic ethical principles. In
the world of THE MALTESE FALCON almost everyone (with the
exception of Spade's loyal secretary Effie, played by Lee
Patrick) is bad - each and every character is motivated by
greed or instant self-gratification in the form of sex (like
the character of Iva Archer, played by Gladys George). Even
the forces of law and order, which are supposed to give some
kind of moral compass, are presented as inept or violent.
Because of that, THE MALTESE FALCON, with the cast of
exclusively immoral characters, might remind contemporary
audience of the Tarantinoesque films about criminal
enterprise going bad.
Huston's flawless direction was in many ways helped by truly
stellar cast. The most recognisable of all actors, Humphrey
Bogart, used this role of morally questionable protagonist
as an excellent opportunity to make his transition from the
roles of traditional villains, which he had played in 1930s,
to the roles of noble heroes he was going to play in 1940s.
Cynical and near-psychopathic Sam Spade is, therefore, one
of his most recognisable screen incarnations, although not
as a loveable as his next greatest role in CASABLANCA. His
partner Mary Astor is also great - she might not look
enchantingly beautiful compared to the other femme fatales
of film noir, but she nevertheless manages to ooze
wickedness on the screen in a manner which is, in a sense,
more sexy than physical looks itself. Of course, the rest of
the cast is even more interesting. Peter Lorre's role of
homosexual gangster is legendary, and it is no wonder that
he became one of the greatest characters of his time. Sidney
Greenstreet as seemingly cultivated yet equally ruthless
criminal (with the large belly as a character trait, which
Huston emphasised with clever camera angles) is also great,
and his accomplishment is even greater, considering that
this was his first major on-screen role. Finally, Elisha
Cook Jr. is equally impressive as young wannabe thug. The
good acting was essential for the success of this film,
because the complicated plot would be quite uninspiring
without interesting characters and the cast capable of
presenting them to the screen. Huston again shows his great
directing skills by managing to tie every loose end and keep
the appropriate pace in the same time, making this film
slightly more than an hour and half long.
THE MALTESE FALCON, with its great direction, truly stellar
cast and interesting story and characters is a film that
managed to transcend its time and it is still able to
entertain the audience six decades after its making. To
countless new generations of viewers this is film is more
than an important piece of film history. It is a true
masterpiece.
Review written on September 17th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
