Title
Review for Black Dog (1998)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Matt Williams
It's been quite a while since there was a good trucking movie, and the
streak doesn't change with Black Dog.
Jack Crews (Patrick Swayze) is an ex-con trying to make ends meet.
Imprisoned several years earlier for involuntary manslaughter, he has
lost his livelihood: his trucking license.  Now he relies on a lowly
mechanic's job to provide for his wife (Brenda Strong) and daughter.
That is, until his boss (Graham Beckel), offers him an illegal trucking
run up the east coast which will solve all his financial problems.
Reluctantly, Jack agrees, and soon he's on the road with three
suspicious characters:  Earl (Randy Travis), Sonny (Gabriel Casseus) and
Wes (Brian Vincent).
His trucking run is far from easy.  He's dogged at every turn by a pair
of federal agents (Charles S. Dutton and Stephen Tobolowsky), and a
group of inept hijackers who are trying to seize his cargo. And with
each mile Jack gets closer to home, the stakes grow higher and higher.
The film itself is named for a trucker's superstition.  Just when
everything is going good...if you push yourself too far, a black dog
will appear and take everything away from you.  However, it also happens
to be an unfortunately apt title to place on this dog of a movie.
For the record, there are a couple of good truck stunts in the film, but
not nearly enough to make this worth watching.  Most of the film is
packed with "character defining" moments which serve little purpose
except to make the dismal characters more annoying than they previously
were.
The movie actually doesn't sink to its lowest depths until the finale.
Just when you think the movie can't get any more contrived, it continues
to surprise you.
Patrick Swayze tackles the everyman-trucker role with gusto, but this
material is beneath him.  Of the rest of the cast, only Gabriel Casseus
creates a somewhat likable character.  Dutton and Tobolowsky never fall
into the easy repartee which their comic-relief roles require.  The
additions of Randy Travis and Meat Loaf (as Jack's Atlanta connection,
Red) seem like pure stunt casting.
There may be worse films out there, but that's little consolation.  Your
time would be better spent watching The World's Deadliest Truck Chases
on television.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Michael Dequina
In 1990, the surprise success an unheralded little movie called Ghost
instantly rescued the moribund careers of its trio of above-the-title
stars, Patrick Swayze, Demi Moore, and Whoopi Goldberg.  Eight years later,
Moore and Goldberg's careers aren't exactly thriving, but they have had
their share of screen successes since; the same can't be said of Swayze,
who has just added yet another turkey to his resume with the aptly named
Black Dog.
Forget the Mortal Kombat movies--this trucksploitation flick is the
closest the movies has come to video games.  Good truck driver Jack Crews
(Swayze) must drive a cargo of illegal firearms from Atlanta to New Jersey.
Along the way, Jack and his crew of three run into a number of
obstacles--such as a highway weigh station, evil truckers, and deadly
Uzi-firing motorcyclists.  Every so often, like at the end of a video game
"level" or "stage," the main baddie pops up: Red (Meat Loaf, fresh from the
triumph of Spice World), who wants to steal the cache of guns. Just in case
you forget his name or have trouble keeping track of who's driving what,
all of Red's vehicles, be it a pickup or a big rig, are painted--you
guessed it--red.
I could go into more of the plot specifics (such as Jack's dream of having
a nice home with his family, the past trauma that sent him to prison and
cost him his trucking license, the FBI/ATF crew tracking the cargo), but
they are of little importance.  All that matters to director Kevin Hooks
and writers William Mickelberry and Dan Vining are the obstacles Jack
confronts in his drive from point A to point B.  But they fail at even this
modest goal, for none of the highway chaos, as credibly staged as it is, is
terribly interesting, let alone exciting. Once you've seen a couple of
trucks bang against each other or a big rig explode the first time, you've
seen it every time.
As dreary as Black Dog is as an entertainment, the saddest part about the
film has nothing to do with what shows up onscreen; it's that Swayze has to
reduce himself to such work.  While far from the best of actors, he is
certainly not horrible, and he is a charismatic presence. I don't know if
it's his judgment or the dearth of quality job offers that leads him to
involve himself with bombs such as Black Dog.  Regardless, if he continues
on this career track, could a TV series be far behind?
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: May 1, 1998
Starring: Patrick Swayze, Meat Loaf, Randy Travis, Gabriel Casseus,
Charles Dutton, Stephen Tobolowsky, Brian Vincent, Brenda Strong
Directed by: Kevin Hooks
Distributed by: Universal Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (intense scenes of action violence, language) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/blackdog.htm
Low-budget action films like BLACK DOG are often power trips or playing
cards for either down-and-out or up-and-coming actors. Patrick Swayze,
having not starred in a motion picture in three years, might almost be
mistaken for an up-and-comer; that is, if we weren't all too aware that
his bewrinkled face was the same one we saw eleven years ago in DIRTY
DANCING. Whatever the case, though, this beyond-his-time actor and this
film both should've been kept on the shelves and not shown in most
first-run theaters nationwide. 
Swayze is Jack Crews, an ex-trucker on parole who lost his trucking
license several years ago for vehicular manslaughter. He's now got a job
as a mechanic, struggling to make ends meet and provide a better life
for his wife Melanie (Brenda Strong) and his daughter Tracy (Erin
Broderick). When he needs nine thousand dollars to meet a past due house
payment, he takes an under-the-table offer from his boss to make one
last delivery from Atlanta to his home state of New Jersey. It will mean
breaking parole, and it will mean that he'll have to take the risk of
avoiding anyone who might want to hijack his shipment (hint, hint). 
Right after Patrick Swayze, in the credits, are singers Meat Loaf and
Randy Travis. Both of them aren't fit for the job, and instead end up
giving over-the-top performances of outrageously comedic bad guys. They,
along with almost all of the other characters in the film, are
practically parodies of themselves, and only serve to heighten the
film's hokey atmosphere. Jumbled into the mix are a lot of non-sequitous
trucker stories (e.g., the black dog, or perhaps "slipping a gear" on
the way down a hill) that are surrounded by dialogues that don't extend
beyond two or three exchanges. The film wants to cultivate the
high-tension image of SPEED, but its car chases and crashes have the
laborious feel you'd expect from a Mack truck trying to make it up a
steep incline. 
Nothing is particularly ideal for BLACK DOG, from its setup to its
characters to its plot, and even its opening weekend. Movie audiences
can usually spot the corny action movies, and while this Swayze vehicle
isn't immediately obvious as hokum, the first spoken line costs it any
chance it has to be genuine. Hollywood dollars and moviegoer dollars are
better spent elsewhere.
FINAL AWARD FOR "BLACK DOG": 1.0 star - a poor movie.

Author
Joy Wyse
Reflecting on the movie BLACK DOG I see holes that you could drive a truck
through, but that's exactly what they did.  They drove that truck anywhere
they could.  The more explosions and wrecks that there are, the better.
Swayze portrays a husband/father who has recently been paroled from prison
where he was serving a sentence for vehicular manslaughter.  His deadly
accident had occurred when he fell asleep at the wheel [and saw the black
dog!] and had killed a couple of people.  
Now, he no longer has a license to drive but he works for a trucking
company.  Of course, the owner offers him $10,000 to drive a "special"
load from   Georgia to New Jersey.  Being the good parolee that he is, he
refuses, until he learns that his wife had been unable to keep up with the
bills and their home is being foreclosed  unless they come up with $9,000
immediately.
>From there the plot gets very involved with hijackers, FBI, ATF, and who
knows who else trying to intercept the load.  Swayze has been established
in the film as a skilled truck driver, so he pulls off some very fancy
driving.
In the back of the rig there is a vicious black dog who is there to
protect the load.  It seems that the only reason that dog is really there
is to add to the title.  There is no explanation for the dog's actions. 
Although the dog is portrayed as being anxious to pounce whenever the rear
door is opened, he is mysteriously hesitant when the officer at the weigh
station inspects the truck.  Everyone in the audience was wondering if the
truckers had gone off and left the dog behind somewhere.   When he finally
snarls, it seems almost comical.  It would have been far better if the dog
had lurked in the background whenever the truck was entered.  We could
have been surprised when Patrick first encounters him, and then we would
have been anticipating the dog's appearance when the guard inspects the
load.    Also, later in the film, when a dead body is placed in the rear
with the load, what does that dog do?
As I mentioned, there are plenty of good stunts and crashes and
explosions.  How do you wreck a lot of cars at once?  Just crash a truck
that is carrying a load of cars.
Swayze is OK in the roll, not good, not bad.  Kevin Sorbo was originally
intended as the star but his shoulder problem  prevented it.  I wonder if
it would have been different with him.  As for the two singers, Randy
Travis and Meatloaf, they both turn in creditable portrayals, although it
is funny listening to Travis trying to sing poorly.  Make sure that you
listen to the lyrics of his creations.  They're very funny.  I especially
like "He drew first, but I shot faster."
I won't mind watching it again on late night TV when there's nothing
better on, but I'm not going to pay to see it again.

Author
James Sanford
Black Dog
Rated PG-13
By James Sanford
The Kalamazoo Gazette
Determined to never say die even though he's failed as a muscle-bound hero
before in "Roadhouse," "Next of Kin" and "Steel Dawn," Patrick Swayze takes
the role of stolid Jack Crews, an ex-trucker and ex-con who served two years
for vehicular manslaughter.
Since his license is now revoked, Jack wants to work as a mechanic, but his
crooked-as-a-Black Dog's-hind-leg boss Cutler (Graham Beckel) pressures him
to accept $10,000 to get behind the wheel again and haul a mysterious cargo
from Georgia back to New Jersey. Though a nightmare involving a snarling
black pit bull portends bad luck, Jack agrees to make the run when he learns
the bank is about to foreclose on his house unless he can come up with
$9,000 right away.
So Jack heads for Atlanta (which a title helpfully identifies as "Atlanta,
Georgia" so we wonšt mistake the location for Atlanta, Hawaii), commandeers
an imposing-looking Peterbilt from the nefarious Red (Meat Loaf) and rolls
north. However, a series of attacks from machine gun-toting motorcyclists,
road-hogging rigmasters and Red himself - who frequently quotes the Bible,
which in the eyes of Hollywood, must mean hešs a nut - cause Jack to realize
he's transporting more than just a cargo of toilets.
Jack would dearly love to put on the air brakes on the whole situation, but
scheming Cutler has resorted to the unorthodox employee-motivation technique
of holding Jack's wife and daughter hostage until the job is done. Oh yeah,
the FBI and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms are also involved,
just for good measure.
Although there are no stops along the way for showers or hair appointments,
Swayze manages to stay neatly coifed throughout the arduous trip, despite
being shot at and slapped around at every turn. Since Swayze's dour
performance is strictly one-note Travis' rugged but relaxed charm is most
welcome. Loaf is tiresome as the villain, and though director Kevin Hooks
went to the trouble to hire the marvelous character actors Stephen Toblowski
and Charles Dutton for his supporting cast, they have nothing to do but bark
at each other as feuding Feds.
As a second feature at a drive-in, "Black Dog" might serve as a passable
time-killer, but it's far too ludicrous and deadpan to cut it as a
legitimate action movie. The script introduces the potentially interesting
element of one of Jack's co-workers being a traitor only to throw it away
minutes later, and other opportunities for plot development are also quickly
squelched as the pile-ups just keep on a-comin'.
Those who enjoy laughing at lousy dialogue will find "Black Dog" contains
numerous howlers, such as Cutleršs claim that Jack "could drive a truck
through Hell on the Fourth of July." Also rich is Jack's impassioned speech
to his wife: "We moved out of Newark so Tracey could have a yard and go to a
school without metal detectors in the hallways. Išm not going back!"

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Kevin Hooks
Cast:  Patrick Swayze, Randy Travis, Meat Loaf, Gabriel Casseus, Brian
Vincent, Brenda Strong
Screenplay:  William Mickelberry, Dan Vining, Scott Sturgeon
Producers:  Raffaella De Laurentiis, Mark W. Koch
Runtime:  
US Distribution:  Universal
Rated PG-13:  violence, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        If you've seen the trailers for Black Dog, you probably know why I
wasn't expecting a very good film.  The picture wasn't screened for
critics, and that's never a good sign--if the studio doesn't believe in
the quality of the film, why even bother making it in the first place? 
In any event, the film has a silly title, and the hook is that it's a
loud action film with trucks and Patrick Swayze.  Need I say more?
        Well, in fact, I do, because here we have a surprising anomaly:  the
film isn't too bad.  Oh sure, it's just an action film, and it's pretty
mindless, and suffers greatly from wretched excess.  However, it's
well-crafted and exciting, thanks to director Kevin Hooks, and it has a
surprisingly clever script and some decent acting.  It's not that hard
to make a good action film, but seeing as how the formula is repeatedly
botched (Hard Rain, The Peacemaker, and Firestorm all come to mind),
it's nice to see one that has no pretensions about what it is (a
mindless action flick about trucks).
        Swayze plays Jack Crews, a man who's just been released from a prison
sentence which he served for vehicular manslaughter.  When we meet him,
he's working on the underside of a car, and he's summoned by his boss
(Graham Beckel).  His boss knows that Jack used to be a great truck
driver, and that going to prison made him lose his license; regardless,
he wants Jack to drive a truck full of merchandise from here to there,
and he offers Jack a lot of money.
        Jack takes the job because he and his wife are broke, and he doesn't
want to lose the house for which he's spent so much of his life saving. 
He finds out really quick that he's hauling a truckload of illegal
weapons, and that Meat Loaf wants to hijack the truck.  Simultaneously,
a couple of FBI agents (Charles Dutton and Stephen Tobolowski) are
trailing the weapons and know all about Jack's financial situation.
        I'm not sure who thought up this film, but it's been written by three
people.  I don't know why it needed three people to write it, but, as
action film scripts go, this is a pretty good one.  Swayze has a certain
amount of grit and realism as Jack, and there's enough character in
there that we can actually root for him and care about his family.  The
supporting performances are colorful, particularly from Randy Travis
(who just seems to be along for the ride), and Dutton and Tobolowski,
who have some pretty clever scenes as the constantly-arguing officials.
        Easily the best elements of Black Dog are the action sequences, which
are genuinely exciting and well-directed by Kevin Hooks.  One scene in
particular--which features four big rigs fighting their way down a
mountain pass--is terrific and unrelenting in its approach.  Mix in
George S. Clinton's pounding score and you have a film that will not
fail to keep you interested.
        Oh sure, it suffers from extreme excess (literally everything in this
film explodes at some point), and implausibility (the deal Jack strikes
up with the agents is very convenient) and a few cliches (the bad guy
who has to die twice).  But it's a fun movie.  It held my attention all
the way through the last unneeded action sequence (which, happily, ends
in a violent death).  Black Dog isn't the cream of the action film crop,
but it's refreshing to see a dumb movie that recognizes its own
stupidity and flaunts it as shamelessly as this.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Patrick Swayze, Meat Loaf, Randy Travis, Gabriel Casseus, Brian
Vincent, Graham Beckel, Brenda Strong, Rusty De Wees
Director: Kevin Hooks
Producers: Mace Nuefield, Robert Rehme, Gary Levinsohn, Mark Gordon
Screenplay: William Mickelberry and Dan Vining
Cinematography: Buzz Feitshans
Music: George S. Clinton
One of the reasons why last year's excellent action/thriller Breakdown
worked so well was that it genuinely yielded a scenario which was
entirely plausible and imaginable, making sense of its advertising line
"it could happen to you."  The films main star, Kurt Russel, accurately
conveyed the character of an average bloke thrust into unfair mayhem and
turmoil.  The Black Dog bears some distinct characteristics: there's a
lot of big, beefy trucks, many chase scenes and a whole lot of pressure
inserted onto one individual.  In fact, it's a wonder why it bears such
a silly title - The Big Black Truck would have been a much more fitting
name for the film.
The fact that Patrick Swayze is now in the spotlight doesn't bother me,
but his character - a macho man trucky - is so full of testosterone
packed stunts and attributes that he has lost all hope of fooling us
into believing that his adventures could happen to anyone.
Swayze is all over the place as Jack Crews - a gliding, clinging and
recklessly driving individual who we are expected to believe is an
ordinary guy.  Crews agrees to drive a truck (which he doesn't know is
full of artillery) for ten thousand big ones when him and his wife
(Brenda Strong) are unable to produce enough funds to keep their house.
The babbling and ironical bible quoting "boss" (Meatloaf) sets the
operation up, but there is more to his twisted plan than simply deliving
the weapons.  Thus, Crews enters a (yawn) web of deceit,
double-crossing, mendacity and murder.  Naturally, the head bad guys are
left to last, and Cruise's family is an obvious target for bribery.
The many action scenes - which are, no doubt, the films core and selling
point - are surprisingly dull, repetitive and boring.  They focus on
Crews and his small band of idiots, who attempt to rid the road of the
many bad guys out to kill 'em. Much to the viewers annoyance, it just
goes on and on and on, without doing anything distinctly different.
For many years I've found myself enjoying corny action flicks, but The
Black Dog pushed itself way beyond the boundaries of my passion.  It not
only failed to impress, innovate or engage me - but it actually made me
wonder why I liked these types of films in the first place.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au
