Title
Review for Score, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Christopher Null
I'll admit to having a soft spot for heist movies.  It's just too bad
that, with the exception of The Thomas Crown Affair remake, most recent
heist flicks have come off atrociously, a fact to which anyone who sat
through the ridiculous Entrapment can testify.
Hallelujah.  The Score is the heist film I've wanted to see for a long
time.  Not since James Caan burned that safe open in 1981's Thief has a
safecracking been so tense and meticulously designed.  And with the
triple threat of Ed Norton, Robert De Niro, and -- God bless him --
Marlon Brando, The Score is in some excellent hands.
The story is a familiar one.  De Niro plays the likable Nick Wells, an
expert safecracker who has clearly done well living a life of crime.  He
lives the high life, but does it quietly, in Montreal, where he runs a
swanky jazz club (presumably as a money laundering front).  Much like
Pierce Brosnan's Crown, we instantly like Nick, and when he expresses
doubts about a big job his rotund partner Max (Brando) cooks up, we want
to agree with his demurral.  But Max's inside man Jackie (Norton) will
have none of it -- he weasels his way into Nick's audience and convinces
him to do the job.  The prize: a priceless gold scepter, secreted in a
maximum-security vault in the basement of the Montreal customs office.
Jackie is key -- under the guise of a retarded janitor named David, he
has the run of the building.  With his inside knowledge and Nick's raw
talent, the job looks doable.  If there is any honor among thieves, that
is.
Like any good heist movie, The Score walks us through the minutiae of
masterminding such a grand plan, leaving enough of it secret so that
when it plays out on the screen, we're on the edges of our seats.  De
Niro is solid, but it's Norton who steals the show with his haughty and
smarmy Jackie (not to mention a spot-on retarded janitor).  Brando, of
course, is larger than life and, like any wonder of the world, a
spectacle to behold.  His screen time, sadly, is predictably brief.
The Score also has some other nice touches.  Its set designs are
impeccable, with Nick's jazz club a haunt I'd love to be a regular at. 
The film also features the most amusing computer hacker character
(played to caffeine-addled perfection by Jamie Harrold) I've seen since
WarGames.
Alas, the film is already drawing criticism, and justly so, for a
remarkably slow first act.  The film plods for at least half an hour,
repetitiously setting up what is already apparent: that Nick is plenty
well off and wants out of the racket.  Angela Bassett's girlfriend role
is a throwaway, a blatant (and unsuccessful) attempt to get a woman
somewhere in the movie.  Howard Shore's score is also undercooked, a
crummy rush job that repeats endlessly and pulls you out of the action
(visit the movie's web site and you can hear it for yourself, over and
over and over again).
But when the music is low and the game is on, The Score manages to pull
off a rare feat seen so rarely in cinema today: It makes you forget
you're watching a movie.  While recent movies like Memento have been
stellar, they're still just pictures on a screen.  The Score makes you
feel like you're handing De Niro a bolt cutter so he can get through a
steel cage.  My palms were sweating out of apprehension for the guy. 
Frank Oz is no master director, but he's managed to pull off a rare home
run with this one.
As a side note, The Score also has a bit of Hollywood gossip surrounding
it, namely involving the rumor that Brando would have none of Frank Oz's
direction to "tone it down."  Considering Brando is Brando and Oz is the
voice of Miss Piggy, it's easy to understand both sides of the
argument.  But judging from some of the shit Brando pulls in the film,
I'd say the real score is: Brando 1, Oz 0.
Director: Frank Oz
Producer: Gary Foster, Lee Rich
Writer: Kario Salem, Lem Dobbs, Scott Marshall Smith
Starring: Robert De Niro, Edward Norton, Marlon Brando, Angela Bassett,
Andrew Walker, Jamie Harrold
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
SCORE, THE (director: Frank Oz; screenwriters: Lem Dobbs/Kario Salem/Scott
Marshall Smith/original story by Daniel Taylor; cinematographer: Rob Hahn;
editor: Richard Pearson; cast: Angela Bassett (Diane), Marlon Brando (Max),
Robert De Niro (Nick Wells), Edward Norton (Jackie Teller/Brian), Gary Farmer
(Burt), Paul Soles (Danny), Jamie Harrold (Stephen); Runtime: 123; Paramount
Pictures; 2001) 
An old-fashioned, above-average heist movie. It covers familiar ground yet
manages to make its shopworn story to appear fresh, but does not break new
ground in the caper genre. This one, besides having a tight script, has three
terrific actors who cover three different generations. There's the 77-year-old
Marlon Brando as Max; the middle-aged Robert De Niro as Nick; and, the young
up-and-coming star of that magnitude, Edward Norton as Jackie. The director,
Frank Oz ("Bowfinger"), a onetime Muppeteer whose main body of work has been
comedy, deserves credit for keeping the action suspenseful and the long scenes
without dialogue interesting. There seemed to always be something intriguing
going on. 
The stylish Nick operates a jazz club in Montreal, has a beautiful stewardess
girlfriend Diane (Bassett), and for the last 25 years only cracks safes that are
not in Montreal. He promises Diane that this will be his last heist and he will
retire to live with her legally as man and wife. She kisses him tenderly,
otherwise her role is insignificant through no fault of hers. 
Nick's contact man is the rotund crime boss, Max, who has set him up with deals
for all those years. He comes to him with a big deal, something he is willing to
pay him 4 million dollars for. He's to heist an invaluable scepter from the
coronation of a French queen in 1661 and he's to work with an 'inside man' on
the job named Jackie. He works as a retarded janitor in the impenetrable
Montreal Customs House, under the name of Brian. That happens to be where the
treasure is stored. 
The three main characters are perfect in their understated performances: The
plodding, close-mouthed Nick wants the one big score to retire in style and pay
the mortgage off on his jazz club; Max has been around too long and can't do
things himself anymore, so he has to lie then beg Nick to do this job for him,
as otherwise the city's crime boss will kill him for not paying off his huge
debts; Jackie is a brash, intense and cocky loner, who gets off on the wrong
side of Nick by trying to fool him with his spastic Brian routine and for later
on carrying a gun when they buy security information from a hacker. 
Nick has his own reliable team to work with: there's a nerdy hacker named
Stephen (Jamie Harrold), who lives in his cyberspace-designed basement and
constantly has a nagging mother shouting down to the basement for him to come up
for air. Nick's security man is the burly Burt (Gary Farmer), who has a close
and trusted relationship with his boss. 
Most of the thrills come by way of the heist and the mechanics of it, and the
possibilty of double-crosses and foul-ups. It all depends on Jackie and Nick
working together as a team, and if they can get the scepter out of its secure
safe in the basement of the Customs House without being spotted by the elaborate
security system in place. Nick must also make it through a labyrinth of tunnels
to escape, while Jackie/Brian must keep his supervising janitor (Soles) away
from the scene of the crime. 
"The Score" does what it sets out to do, which makes it a diverting heist flick.
It leaves no messages and no unnecessary violence, but it holds one's attention
for the two hours it plays and afterwards you will remember this one as a pretty
good heist flick that had three notable actors in it who performed the proper
nuances called for by the script. The film proves to be a solid effort, but it
lacks the imagination and moody darkness of the human spirit to take it to a
Melville level in noir caper flicks. Everyone in on the caper could have been in
on a venture capital deal just as easily as on a heist, which makes their
characters only superficially appealing. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Score (2001)
Robert De Niro, Edward Norton, Angela Bassett, Marlon Brando, Gary
Farmer, Paul Soles. Music by Howard Shore. Screenplays by Kario Salem,
Lem Dobbs, Scott Marshall Smith. Story by Daniel E. Taylor and Salem.
Directed by Frank Oz. 123 minutes.
Rated R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
For a film like "The Score," the names Robert De Niro, Edward Norton,
Angela Bassett and Marlon Brando are both an asset and a liability. On
the plus side, such a stunning cast is a virtual guarantee that, at the
very least, the acting in the film will be as good as it gets. The
problem is that it's hard to look at that roster and not enter the
theater with unrealistically high expectations.
So is "The Score" an instant classic offering some of the most powerful
ensemble acting ever? No. The film is a sturdy production of a solid, if
unremarkable, caper story. As far as the thespians, this is De Niro and
Norton's show. Brando shares a few scenes with the boys, but his is
merely a supporting role and Angela Bassett, poor Angela Bassett, barely
appears at all. The filmmakers should be ashamed of themselves for
hiring an actor of her caliber and wasting her time with a brief, trite
part.
De Niro anchors the movie with a fine no-nonsense performance and Norton
gets the opportunity to strut his stuff, playing two dynamic characters.
De Niro and Norton make a compelling team, with Brando spicing up the
proceedings as Max, a quirky fence and financier. The story begins as
Max approaches his old friend Nick (De Niro), proposing the theft of a
scepter worth many millions of dollars. The royal staff is secured in
the Montreal Customs House, but Max has an inside man, Jack (Norton),
ready to provide the specs necessary to pull off the robbery.
Nick doesn't want to participate. The caper violates two of his rules:
never pull a heist on your home turf and never work with a partner.
Besides, his dream is to retire from crime and run his elegant jazz club
with Diane (Bassett), the love of his life, at his side, and she will
not commit to him until he goes straight. But the temptation of instant
financial security proves too strong and Nick agrees to do the
proverbial "one last job."
"The Score" looks great. Montreal is a beautiful city with a European
feel and director Frank Oz uses the setting well. He also affords Ed
Norton another attention grabbing dual role. To scope out the Customs
House and win the trust of its employees, Jack takes a janitorial job
under the persona of Brian, a mentally retarded young man. Norton is
smart enough to make Brian a distinct individual rather than a generic
intellectually handicapped person  his Brian is a captivating guy. De
Niro neatly counterbalances Norton's flash and fire. Watching him go
through the mechanics of the heist held my attention even through the
tedious parts because I felt invested in the down-to-earth character.
Brando contributes some playful Sydney Greenstreet-meets-Truman Capote
moments, and, in her very few minutes onscreen, Bassett adds smoke and
substance to the thankless fretful girlfriend role.
I only wish the plot for "The Score" was as strong as its cast. While
there's nothing overtly wrong with the story, there's also nothing fresh
about it. One has to wonder what, besides the opportunity to work with
each other, drew the four actors to such a pedestrian outing. Witnessing
De Niro, Norton, Brando and Bassett act in this film is like watching
Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa play softball. You're not sure why they're
doing it, but you wouldn't miss the game for anything.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The very thought of seeing three generations of great actors in the same
film, not to mention watching them play professional thieves, is enough to
make moviegoers salivate with anticipation.  But The Score, which stars
Marlon Brando (77), Robert DeNiro (57) and Edward Norton (32), offers little
more than a strange combination of heist-flick clichés and cop-flick
clichés. The tales of on-set feuds between director Frank Oz and Brando were
more exciting than anything that ended up in the final cut.  In other words,
this ain't no Rififi.
De Niro (15 Minutes) plays Nick Wells, an expert safecracker who owns a tiny
jazz club in Montreal.  He's a careful criminal, opting only for The Sure
Thing and never, ever dreaming of pulling off a job in his own backyard.
Nick is in a serious relationship with a flight attendant named Diane
(Angela Bassett, Supernova) and tells her he's about to hang up his tools of
the trade to be her full-time man.  But then his fence, Max Baron (Brando),
tells him about a job that could net him $2 million.   Nick's penchant for
low-risk crimes hasn't left him financially sound, and he sees this
opportunity as The Last Big Score before he rides off into the sunset with
Diane.
The trouble is that Max's job involves knocking over the Customs House in
Montreal to liberate an extremely valuable French scepter.  Nick is
immediately uninterested and becomes ever more put off when Jackie Teller
(Norton, Keeping the Faith), Max's man on the inside of the Customs House,
approaches him on the street in an attempt to lure him into the heist.  But
the power of the Almighty Dollar is too much for Nick to ignore, and he
signs on after receiving Jackie's assurances that Nick call the shots.
What follows is the same-old/same-old when it comes to films about
professional thieves.  They stake the place out.  They think of ways to
break into the safe.  But no matter how detailed their plan is, you know
something is always going to go wrong in this kind of cinematic situation.
The few things that broke the heist-film mold were easily the best parts of
The Score, like Nick's nerdy computer friend who tries to steal security
passwords with his questionable hacking skills.
I couldn't help but find The Score to be a twisted cross between Lethal
Weapon and every high-stakes theft film made in the last 25 years.  DeNiro
is the gruff Danny Glover, who is only a few days away from retirement and
doesn't want to blow his police pension, while Norton is the younger,
flashier Mel Gibson, shamelessly stealing scenes (he even plays a dual role
again, a la Aaron Stampler and Tyler Durden).  This is only his eighth film,
and he more than holds his own with Brando and DeNiro.
The film's screenwriters, Lem Dobbs (The Limey), Scott Marshall Smith (Men
of Honor) and Kario Salem (the story was concocted by Salem and Daniel E.
Taylor, TV's The Beast), try to make DeNiro's Nick unnecessarily
complicated, but he comes off as an aging sad-sack thief; the Willy Loman of
burglary.  Parts of the story work, but it's mostly a lot of unexciting
stuff they try to turn into full-on suspense.  I only approached the edge of
my seat once or twice.
You can't really blame the acting, aside from Bassett's wasted performance
and, possibly, the lack of scenes with Brando.  We're talking about four
people with 17 Oscar nominations (and four wins) between them.
Interestingly, Brando and DeNiro have played the same character (Vito
Corleone in The Godfather and The Godfather: Part II) but have never
appeared on screen together before.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Frank Oz. Screenplay by Kario Salem, Lem Dobbs, and Scott
Marshall Smith, based on a story by Daniel E Taylor and Salem. Starring
Robert De Niro, Edward Norton, Marlon Brando. Running time: 124 minutes.
Rated AA for offensive language by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 21st, 
2001.
Synopsis: Nick (De Niro) is a world-class burglar on the verge of 
retirement. At the behest of his old pal Max (Brando), Nick agrees to one 
last job, stealing a priceless sceptre from a government facility. Nick 
reluctantly teams up with a con man named Jack (Norton), who has 
insinuated himself inside the facility. But as Nick formulates a complex 
plan to acquire the sceptre, can he continue to trust the ambitious Jack?
Review: "The Score" is an entertaining, well-made film, but one that -- 
given the potency of its stars -- just isn't as good as it probably should 
have been. The mechanics of an enjoyable heist thriller are competently 
executed, but the picture lacks heart. The hook of the "criminal pulling 
one last job" is too familiar, and efforts to flesh out and lionise De 
Niro's Nick generally fall flat. Indeed, scenes such as those involving 
Angela Bassett (as Nick's love interest) just bog the film down; they feel 
superficial and obvious, and the two actors share little chemistry. Brando 
is obviously having a ball hamming it up as the effeminate Max, and "The 
Score" benefits from his all-too-rare presence. But the real star of the 
show is Norton, whose turn here as talented but conniving Jack is terrific 
to watch. The screenplay itself is fine, throwing in the requisite number 
of crosses and double crosses to maintain audience interest. Oz does a 
good job of keeping things lively even when working through the seemingly 
tedious logistics of Nick's plan; the final half hour is undeniably 
rivetting. There is a sense, though, of an opportunity missed. It's rare 
to gather three generations of Hollywood star power in one movie, and to 
waste it on what is, essentially, just another by-the-numbers action film 
(even an unusually intelligent one) seems, well, criminal.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Dustin Putman
With top-flight talent onboard that includes the likes of Robert De Niro, 
Edward Norton, Marlon Brando, and Angela Bassett, one has to wonder how Frank 
Oz's "The Score" got greenlit without one person involved--be it the cast or 
the crew--calling it on its mediocre screenplay. Unevenly written by Kario 
Salem, Lem Dobbs, and Scott Marshall Smith, what we have here is a would-be 
crime thriller involving a long-time burglar who is about to perform one last 
big score before retirement, if only he can get away with it unscathed. Stop 
me if you've heard this one before. 
The man in question is Nick Wells (Robert De Niro), and now that he owns a 
successful Montreal nightclub, he wants out of his life of crime. Inspiring 
this decision is his devoted, flight attendant girlfriend, Diane (Angela 
Bassett), who has agreed to give up her job position and move to Montreal to 
be with him, if only he fulfills his end of the bargain and stops putting his 
life on the line. But first, Nick must pull off one final job, brought to his 
attention by an old friend named Max Baron (Marlon Brando). It seems the 
Custom House has a beautiful, 17th-century scepter in storage that is, more 
or less, priceless, and if Nick is able to pull it off, he will remain 
wealthy for the rest of his crime-free life. Despite vowing always to work 
alone, Nick is persuaded by Max to be accompanied by young ingenue Jackie 
Teller (Edward Norton), who works at the Custom House and is the one man that 
can get on the inside and case the location of the scepter. 
For its opening ninety minutes, "The Score" rambles along setting up the 
premise, and then repeats this set-up again and again with variations on who 
the characters happen to be in each given scene. Heist films are a subgenre 
as old as the silent picture era, and "The Score" needlessly wallows in its 
cliches for far too long, as if director Frank Oz (1999's "Bowfinger") isn't 
quite sure that the audience will understand the complex plot. Little did Oz 
realize that the plot is actually quite simple, and maybe even too simple to 
sustain a two-hour-plus running time. 
If the first three-quarters of the film are basic filler for what is to come, 
the final thirty minutes are a suspenseful, crackerjack entertainment, 
tightly paced and drenched in nailbiting tension. As the heist gets underway, 
almost everything that could go wrong does, and Oz excels in following Nick 
and Jackie on their high-risk steal. 
Perhaps the climax seems so impressive because everything that comes before 
it is such a waste of time. The characters are handled in a clunky manner 
that paints them as giant bores with little interests outside of what the 
story requires. Robert De Niro (2001's "15 Minutes") is a consistently great 
actor who, for the first time in memory, fails to deliver an interesting 
performance. De Niro is by no means bad, but his character of Nick is dull, 
and so is he. Edward Norton (2000's "Keeping the Faith") fares decidedly 
better, only because his role of Jackie requires that he actually do a little 
something that stands out. In Jackie's case, this is acting like a mentally 
handicapped man through half of the movie, as he singlehandedly fools 
everyone he works with at the Custom House. 
In phoned-in parts that are woefully underutilized, it is downright 
depressing to see a screen icon such as Marlon Brando (1996's "The Island of 
Dr. Moreau") just sit around and attempt to make the best of the 
circumstances. Granted, Brando is not in the best of health (or shape), so 
this may explain his limited involvement in the story, but he deserves 
better. Meanwhile, Angela Bassett (2000's "Supernova") turns in a small, 
effective performance as Nick's long-suffering gal, but something tells me a 
large chunk of her role found its way to the cutting-room floor. 
In what could have been a dynamite crime movie with excellent actors 
strutting their stuff in a taut script, director Frank Oz has botched the 
results, and with no help from his lazy writers. Repetitive to the point of 
viewer impatience, only to strike back with a bravura final act that exposes 
how deeply flawed the rest of it is, "The Score" must ultimately go down as a 
missed opportunity, one that will undoubtedly hang as little more than a 
footnote in these fine performers' respective careers. 
  - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman 
    http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman 

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie posters, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
An impenetrable building houses a very expensive European scepter. A pudgy rich
guy hooks an old school thief up with a new scammer on the block and asks them
to steal it. Once taken, the item would then be sold with monetary compensation
spread to all parties. Of course, the older thief is making sure that everyone
understands that this is his "last job" (yawn) and the rich, pudgy guy is Marlon
Brando. Aaaaaaaaand action! 
CRITIQUE:
Despite its generic title and storyline, this film actually managed to entertain
me a little bit (a little bit, a little bit... ;). I liked watching it, dug the
score and the whole "shadowy" look, but mostly just went gaga over the three
generations of extremely talented and "method" actors appearing on the screen at
the same time. Not since DeNiro and Pacino went mano-a-mano in HEAT have I been
so excited. And as long as you don't go in expecting to see a fresh type of
caper movie, you might just enjoy some of it as well. In fact, the picture is
about 80% setup and 20% payoff, so most of the time you're just sitting there
watching DeNiro and Norton butt heads (which isn't an altogether bad place to
be, mind you). But the payoff paid off for me to a certain extent, and I
actually didn't see one of the twists coming (neat!). But let's not fool
ourselves here, this film would not have been made (or it might've been made but
gone straight to video), had it not been for the fact that it includes the big
three men on campus.
DeNiro, clocking in another solid performance, although not one that necessarily
stands out from his giant repertoire of films. Brando, in only a few choice
scenes, but making the most of his presence in the film by hamming it up,
splashing some French dialogue into his character and drinking water like it's
going out of style. And Norton, who surprisingly not only holds his own among
the legendary actors, but one-ups them with the strongest performance in the
whole movie. Granted, he's basically revisiting the same elements that scored
him an appearance at the Academy Awards ceremony for PRIMAL FEAR a few years
back, but it worked. Of course, I can't finish my review without mentioning the
fact that I was also a little taken with the film because it basically took
place in my backyard here in Montreal (and kudos to Oz for putting so much
French in the movie...yup, it's really like that here!).
But the bottom line with any film, especially those presented under the auspices
of the "heist" genre is that suspense, thrills and drama should be par for the
course, but unfortunately, this film lacked on all counts. Angela's Bassett's
presence was superfluous at best, and other than the film's final 15 minutes or
so, it barely had any tension whatsoever. But I'm still gonna recommend this
movie because I love all three of the main actors in it and had a blast watching
them here. Sure, the story could've used a slight tap of the originality stick,
but even though it was a little boring at times...I was never really bored!
(does that make any sense to anyone?). Anyway, see it if you dig the actors,
otherwise, just wait for video, a medium on which this film will likely be much
better appreciated. 
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Dog Day Afternoon (9/10) - Entrapment (6/10) - Reservoir Dogs (9/10) - Ronin
(8/10) - Small Time Crooks (7/10) - Snatch (7/10) - Swordfish (7/10) - Where the
Money Is (5/10)

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "THE SCORE" (Paramount Pictures)
  This high-tension crime thriller is propelled by the
three-generational star power of Robert De Niro, Marlon Brando and Ed Norton. In
the opening sequence, set during a festive party at a Boston estate, a aging
thief,  De Niro, cracks a safe, escapes with a diamond necklace and scoots
across the border to Montreal, where he's the owner of a jazz club. But Marlon
Brando, his entrepreneurial fence and partner-in-crime, needs him to do one last
heist involving an antique (1661) gem-studded scepter, a priceless French
national treasure, that's kept in the highly-guarded basement of the Montreal
Customs House. Not only does this violate De Niro's rule of never operating in
the city where you live but he'll have to coordinate with a Customs House
insider, Edward Norton, a cocky, volatile night janitor who pretends he's
simple-minded. "I run this job down to the last detail, understand?" De Niro
tells him. "It takes discipline more than talent." Not only is the relic robbery
risky but De Niro's stewardess girl-friend, Angela Bassett, has also given him
an ultimatum to quit. Working from a formulaic script by Kario Salem, Lem Dobbs,
Scott Marshall Smith and Daniel E. Taylor, director Frank Oz scrupulously
details every moment of the theft at a highly disciplined, if occasionally
excruciatingly slow, pace, particularly the final sequence. The sparking,
spontaneous chemistry of De Niro, Brando and Norton is palpable. A master
manipulator, Brando beguilingly mumbles and murmurs as De Niro embodies the
secretive pro mastermind, while Norton recklessly tries to demand their respect.
Norton's impersonation of a genial, mentally-challenged man is flawless. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Score" is suspenseful, intense 8. It's a
masterful power-play by three of our major actors.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Heist dramas are fashionable again. David Mamet has his own upcoming drama 
aptly titled "Heist." Ben Kingsley's riveting performance in the film "Sexy 
Beast" also involves a heist. Now, director Frank Oz ("Bowfinger") and three 
major stars, Robert De Niro, Edward Norton and Marlon Brando, combine their 
strengths to create their own caper flick. "The Score" is a thrilling 
character study, depending more on specifics related to the heist than with 
character. Still, it is as relaxing and comforting a film as you are likely 
to see in a mindless, mind-boggling summer. 
De Niro stars as Nick, a Montreal jazz club owner who masquerades as an 
efficient burglar. Nick is one of the best in the business, usually 
performing jobs for others in places outside of what he refers to as his own 
backyard. He has a stunning girlfriend (Angela Bassett), an airline 
stewardess, who visits him infrequently ("I'll see yah when I see yah.") 
Everything is in place for Nick but he looks like he is ready to quit too. 
That is until a shady, Sydney Greenstreet character named Max (Marlon 
Brando), an old friend of Nick's, offers Nick one big job in their own 
backyard. It turns out that the Montreal Customs House has a rare, 17th 
century French scepter in the basement, its value higher than Brando's last 
paycheck. The scepter is so valuable that it is placed under strict 
surveillance, namely video cameras and an invisible laser display. There is 
also a little snag and an inconvenience for Nick: Max has hired a cocky, 
seemingly sociopathic thief named Jackie Teller (Edward Norton) to help 
infiltrate the Customs House. It turns out Jackie works at the Customs House 
as a janitor named Brian, mimicking and fooling the employees into believing 
he is mentally challenged. He is in place already, it only takes Nick to 
perform the actual heist with Jackie's help. 
Needless to say, "The Score" fits the description of any heist thriller since 
the days of the Production Code. How many heist thrillers have had the same 
basic premise? How many have dealt with a character like Nick who sees this 
score as his last job, for good and ever? How many involve a virtually silent 
climax where the thief performs his sweat-inducing work amidst false alarms? 
The difference is in all the details, and there are enough to entertain and 
jolt audiences out of their seats. 
De Niro is one of my favorite actors, ranging from explosive portrayals of 
sinful men in "Taxi Driver" and "Raging Bull" to comedic highlights of 
minimalistic strength in "Wag the Dog" and "Meet the Parents." Lately, he has 
been saddled with mediocre fare such as "Fifteen Minutes" but what can you 
say about a man of his stature to keep himself from repeating past roles? 
Well, Nick is not unlike the ice-cold killer thief De Niro played in "Heat." 
This time, though, De Niro brings a world-weariness sense to the role and one 
can't help but feel that Nick enjoys his job as well - he is in command and 
refuses to take orders except from his boss. 
Edward Norton continues to impress me. Here he seems like an extension of the 
duality he prominently displayed in "Primal Fear" and "The Fight Club." It is 
a frightening performance in the sense that his character Jackie seems 
explosive yet reserved at the same time, willing to listen to Nick yet just 
as ready to rebel from the old-timers. His cockiness and energy are, in 
effect, part of his own undoing. How can Jackie feel superior to thieves who 
have far more experience than he ever will? 
Marlon Brando is a whole other matter. Brando seems intent on doing riffs of 
Sydney Greenstreet and the resemblance is amazing not to mention intentional. 
But there is that glee and weariness he brings that fills the screen with 
delight. His scene with De Niro is wonderful to watch, but not quite as 
potent as say the unique pairing of De Niro and Pacino in "Heat." Still, 
watching Brando mingle with De Niro and Norton is a pleasure to behold. And 
Brando's scene at an empty pool where he confesses to De Niro the truth 
behind the heist is exquisite. 
Director Frank Oz is a strange choice for this kind of material since his 
background is in the comedy genre. Still, he proves to be a master of tension 
and suspense in some notable scenes, particularly the heist itself which is 
among the most electrifying since "Topkapi." It is so good that my palms were 
sweaty while watching it. It is on par with the climactic underwater heist in 
"Sexy Beast." 
Oz's work with these acting giants also proves to be superlative (Despite 
rumors to the contrary, Brando seems effortless on screen thanks to Oz, even 
if he didn't want to be directed by Miss Piggy). One misguided exception in 
the casting is the underwritten role of Angela Bassett as Nick's girlfriend - 
a character that exists merely as a reason for Nick to quit. Only Bassett is 
too strong a presence for such a throwaway role - either eliminate the role 
or hire Halle Berry, for goodness sakes'! There is strong evidence that her 
role had been severely cut which is a shame since it would have shed some 
light on Nick's priorities in life. 
"The Score" is as pleasant and diverting a surprise as one can expect. It is 
absolutely nothing new but the acting, script and the heist climax makes it 
more than worthwile. It is not as character-driven as "Sexy Beast" or Michael 
Mann's powerful "Thief," nor as wire-tight as Kubrick's fast-paced "The 
Killing." Nevertheless, it is still watchable, tense and sweat-inducing as 
any good heist thriller should be. Unless you believe that all films should 
have digitally created characters, nothing beats a score like three diamonds 
in the rough - De Niro, Brando and Norton. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Pictures/ Mandalay Entertainment
 Director: Frank Oz
 Writer:  Kario Salem, Lem Dobbs, Scott Marshall Smith
 Cast: Robert De Niro, Edward Norton, Angela Bassett, Marlon Brando
    Hollywood movies are notorious for ignoring reality.  In almost
every thriller about greedy people who steal for a living, the crooks
get caught in the end.  What had always annoyed me at Alfred
Hitchcock's TV series was that even if the bad guys seem to have
been rewarded for their crimes, Mr. Hitchcock would show his face
during the final minute stating, "Mr. X was later apprehended by
the police and is now serving a long term in jail."  But those who
write stories about iniquity today are aware that in many cases,
the audience wants nothing more than for the cops to be shown
up as fools and for the bandits to make a clean getaway.   What
types of stories are they?  I'd say they are those in which the
brigand is charming, does not hurt anybody, and has a beautiful
woman waiting for him as he sails away with the loot.  It wouldn't
hurt if the heroic villain got dragged reluctantly into the scam. 
What if three people planned and executed a job...is it possible
that we in the audience would make distinctions and want, oh,
one or two guys to make off with the jewels while the other guy is
left stranded?  "The Score" is just that kind of caper movie, quite
an intriguing one at that because the usually obligatory car
chases, shoot-outs and explosions are shunned.  Director Frank
Oz--who must be a likable enough fellow no matter what Marlon
Brando thinks of him--lets us spend most of our time scrutinizing
the planning of a heist so that we knew just what goes on in the
minds of the truly professional swindlers--not those who rip off
people on a dare or on the spur of the moment but who carefully
scheme, weigh the odds, make demands on one another.  
   Like Jules Dassin's classic caper movie "Rififi" on which Mr. Oz
seems to borrow, the dialogue is kept to a minimum, though
unlike the predecessor there is no a long period characterized by
a complete absence of  talk.  The action centers principally on the
relationship between two pros, though the younger one is by
nature of his hormones more excitable than the calmer middle-
aged swindler.  Robert De Niro and Edward Norton star as Nick
Wells and Jack respectively, the former as the owner of a well-
appointed jazz club in Montreal's Vieux Carre, the latter as
assistant janitor on the graveyard shift in the heretofore
impenetrable Montreal Customs House.  Norton, among the finest
actors of his generation, turns rain man, acting the role of a
mentally challenged man named Brian with all the tics and
postures of a decent guy whose elevator doesn't get near the top
floor.  The two are brought together by Nick's longtime pal, Max
(Marlon Brando), a reliable guy who believes in the slogan that
there is honesty among thieves and convinces Nick to participate
in one more job.  Though Nick had sworn off dishonest labors, he
cannot resist six million bucks, his share of the undertaking,
notwithstanding the demand of his girl friend Diane (Angela
Bassett) that he walk a straight line or she's walking out.
   Because the major portion of Kario Salem, Lem Dobbs and
Scott Marshall Smith's clever script (which at times can rival David
Mamet's), rests on the blueprint for the robbery, the action that
takes place at the conclusion is all the more delightful.  This is not
to say that we're cooling our heels in our theater seats waiting for
a breakout: the details are what involve us.  We watch three top
stars, each representing a different generation of actors,
contribute their styles to the grand design: we see how the
interplay of these characters shapes the absorbing story.  Isn't this
what movies about jewel thieves should be like rather than the
same ol' formulaic tripe that has the audience a half hour ahead of
the performers?  
Rated R.  Running time: 123 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
    CAPSULE: This is a 1950s or 1960s style heist film, set in the 
    present.  Robert DeNiro stars as a risk-adverse safecracker 
    who wants to retire form crime but takes one last job at the 
    request of a personal friend (played by Marlon Brando).  Edward 
    Norton plays a hotshot young sharpster who is also in on the 
    crime.  The plot is mostly straightforward suspense with little 
    nonsense.  Rating: 7 (0 to 10), +2 (-4 to +4)
I am sure I must have seen almost the identical plot before.  This 
is a heist film made for an adult audience who probably wanted a 
crime film like they had seen in theaters when they were teens.  
There are no superhuman acrobats taking nosedives off of buildings 
like in ENTRAPMENT.  There is no rock score.  There are no ballet-
like martial arts.  This is just a basic heist film with a decent 
and distinctly credible and un-flashy script.
Nick (played by Robert DeNiro) is a safecracker who has managed to 
be successful by never taking risks.  If a job is not a safe bet 
(pun intended), he backs out.  Sometimes even the safe bets turn 
out not to be so safe.  When one job very nearly goes wrong Nick 
is unnerved enough to decide that it is Nature telling him that it 
is time to get out of the game.  He returns to his home in 
Montreal where he owns a jazz club, and decides to manage it full 
time.  He proposes to his girl friend Diane (Angela Bassett).  She 
has one condition.  He must stay retired from crime.  But before 
the deal can be cemented, Max, a Montreal kingpin and personal 
friend, has one last supposedly easy job for Nick.  Nick wants no 
part particularly because the heist will be right in his hometown 
of Montreal.  More and more details seem to complicate the job.  
Nick's partner in the crime is to be a smart, but uncontrollable 
young crook, Jack (Edward Norton).  Jack treats a locked front 
door like a welcome mat, even at his associates' homes.  The young 
crook is a know-it-all who seems good at everything he does but at 
avoiding rubbing people the wrong way.  Together they plan to 
steal a priceless historic artifact from the Montreal Customs 
House.
The script by Kario Salem, Lem Dobbs, and Scott Marshall Smith 
works like an episode of the old "Mission Impossible" television 
series.  We see pieces of the heist being put together, last 
minute changes, and things that go wrong, much like a good episode 
of "Mission Impossible."  This team might not be bad choices to 
write scripts for the Tom Cruise "Mission Impossible" films.  The 
complications are, however no more and no fewer than are needed to 
make the story believable.  The telling is cold and noirish, which 
is just what it is supposed to be.  Director Frank Oz, the voices 
of Yoda and Miss Piggy proves surprisingly good at directing a 
serious crime film.
THE SCORE has a more than adequate cast with little flashy or 
scene-stealing acting.  Edward Norton probably has the flashiest 
role and even that is low-key by today's standards.  He plays what 
is nearly a double role.  Jack pretends to be a brain damage 
victim to be hired for a job in the Customs House.  One nice (?) 
character I have not mentioned is Stephen (Jamie Harrold).  
Stephen is a master hacker who lives in his mother's basement in a 
house with a lot of screaming in both directions.  He seems like 
the last person the risk adverse Nick would want to depend upon.
The film itself remains low-key up until the time of the climactic 
heist.  Then the pace really picks up.  Before that the plot even 
stops twice for jazz interludes.  Though Oz never lets the music 
steal time from the story the way Woody Allen does in SWEET AND 
LOWDOWN.  On the subject of music, the score of THE SCORE is by 
Howard Shore.  It adds tension to the suspense scenes, but never 
seems to have much of a melody.
Angela Bassett is the one misused celebrity in a totally minor 
role that should have been played by a less famous actress who 
needed a break.  She has nothing to do in the film but demand that 
Nick give up crime and to look like an attractive reward if he 
does.  Speaking of being attractive THE SCORE seems to be 
attracting an older audience who learned to appreciate much the 
same sort of film in the 1950s and 1960s.  It does the job.  I 
rate it a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.  

Author
Michael Dequina
        Frank Oz, well-known for directing comedies such as most recent film,
_Bowfinger_; and even better known as the man pulling the strings behind Yoda
and Miss Piggy, is perhaps the last person one would expect to breathe some
renewed life into the classic heist picture.  Yet that's exactly what he and a
superb cast do in the sleek entertainment that is _The_Score_.
        "Renew" seems to have been the key idea behind _The_Score_, particularly
in its story.  The basic plot is something that has been seen many times before.
 Montreal-based career thief Nick (Robert DeNiro) wants out of the criminal life
to settle down with his flight attendant girlfriend Diane (Angela Bassett). 
First, though, Nick agrees to one last heist at the urging of longtime associate
Max (Marlon Brando)--the theft of a priceless French scepter held in a customs
house.  Two wild cards are put into play: one, said customs house is in
Montreal, thus violating Nick's rule of not doing local jobs; and two, he must
work with a young upstart named Jack (Edward Norton), who has already studied
the inner workings of the building under the guise of a mentally challenged
janitor.
        Instead of trying to add new wrinkles to the time-worn recipe, Oz strips
the genre down to its bare core.  The plot is as simple as it sounds, and the
twists in the story occur according to readily apparent schedule.  Oz doesn't
stop there, however.  The film's R rating comes exclusively through language,
for he doesn't allow himself the easy out of titillating or distracting the
audience with gratuitous violence or sex.  Hence it's that much more dependent
on the cast to engage the viewer, and everyone lives up to their stellar
reputations.  A noticeably galvanized Brando appears to have a ball sharing
scenes with DeNiro (perhaps because, if the stories are to be believed, that
DeNiro himself directed them, not Oz, with whom Brando clashed), and the
electricity emanates from the screen.  Norton not so surprisingly keeps up with
his elders with extraordinary ease.  His live wire performance plays well
against DeNiro's cool calm, making for an intriguingly volatile chemistry.  Of
the core cast, Bassett fares the least well--if only because her role is never
more than the token love interest.
        The no-frills mindset Oz brings to _The_Score_ puts the most pressure on
himself when it comes time for the heist to take place.  The pattern of
obstacles thrown in Nick and Jack's way are obviously as meticulously calculated
as the heist plans the pair map out, but Oz is able to keep the tension taut by
sticking to the minimalist approach.  There aren't any overwrought score cues or
out-of-nowhere physical confrontations to artificially manufacture suspense; Oz
is wise enough to know that a simple gesture such as having a stray leg briefly
creep into the picture of a security monitor is enough to generate the real
deal.
        Touches like those and the film's attention to pure performance, both in
front of and behind the camera, give _The_Score_ a distinctly old-fashioned
feel--and in a season of CG effects _and_ thespians, such embracing of the
basics is not only refreshing but feels downright innovative.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Steve Rhodes
Given THE SCORE's killer cast (Robert De Niro, Edward Norton, Marlon Brando and
Angela Bassett), you will probably be expecting a lot.  Start to lower your
expectations, because THE SCORE plays like a slow motion version of ENTRAPMENT
with De Niro attempting a geriatric rendition of Catherine Zeta-Jones.  Still,
De Niro gives it his all, which is a lot more than can be said about Brando, who
phones in his small part.  Even the usually outstanding Norton delivers one of
his less memorable performances.  Bassett, playing a disapproving girlfriend,
has a part that would be better cut out entirely.  In a script full of fat, hers
would be the first character that should go.
Following the standard caper formula, a seasoned pro, Nick Wells (De Niro), is
hired by his old partner, Max Baron (Brando), to pull one last job.  Max forces
Nick to take on relative newcomer Jackie Teller (Norton) as the inside man. 
Nick and Jackie are to steal a French national treasure, a scepter, from the
basement of the Customs Building in Montreal.
Working from a script created by no less than 4 writers (Daniel E. Taylor, Kario
Salem, Lem Dobbs and Scott Marshall Smith), director Frank Oz (BOWFINGER) tries
to move from comedies to thrillers.  For some reason, he forgot that thrillers,
especially thinly plotted ones like this one, need energy like comedies need
laughs.  And the writers forgot that thrillers need twists, lots of twists to
keep the suspense up.  Instead they gave the movie only two, and the studio gave
one of these away in the trailers.
Organized into the three canonical sections, planning, heist and getaway, the
movie spends almost all of the time grinding away at the preparation.  Expect to
spend most of your time slumped back in your seat rather than on the edge of it.
 Only the brief last act has any punch.   One suspects, and hopes, that this
movie will be buried at the summer box office by better movies and that the cast
will go on to be seen doing much better work in future films.
THE SCORE runs a long 2:03.  It is rated R for language and would be acceptable
for kids around 12 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave it ***.  He said that he liked the characters, the
techniques of the robbery and plot's twists.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, July 13, 2001.  In the
Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Eugene Novikov
"Don't leave me on the sidelines when it comes time to
collect, don't do it!"
Starring Robert De Niro, Edward Norton, Marlon Brando,
Angela Bassett. Directed by Frank Oz. Rated R.
Just a few weeks ago, I lamented that Swordfish didn't
have the humility to simply be a good heist movie. The
Score is like that film's twin, sans computers,
impromptu blow jobs and Travolta with a goatee. Only
this one is a good heist movie, flawed but thoroughly
competent, with an amazing cast and precise, almost
Mametian dialogue. Films like these are woefully hard
to find: though it has irony a-plenty, it doesn't have
any of the post-modern "edge" that audiences seem to
dig. The heist here seems to be just like any other.
...except that it's set in Montreal. Not just filmed
in Montreal, set in Montreal. And why not? It's such a
nice city that it's a shame to see it rampaged by
thieves, which is why the protagonist of The Score,
professional thief Nick Wells (Robert De Niro) has a
policy: never do jobs in your hometown. It never leads
to anything good. This is part of the reason for his
skepticism when his old friend Max (Marlon Brando)
approaches him with a proposition to rob the Montreal
Customs House; the other part is his girlfriend
(Angela Bassett), who has promised to move in with him
if he'll only retire.
After some prodding, of course, Nick agrees to One
Last Heist, which teams him with an intelligent and
ambitious budding criminal Jack (Edward Norton), who
has infiltrated the Customs House posing as a retarded
janitor. The target is a priceless scepter that was
once owned by a royal family and later intercepted by
customs when someone tried to hide it inside of a
piano leg. The security around it is tight but nothing
insurmountable, and Jack knows the building like the
back of his hand. But Nick, a seasoned veteran, likes
to work slowly and exclusively on his terms, making
Jack agree that what he says, goes.
Before the end credits roll, loyalties are tested, and
people are crossed, double-crossed and crossed again
(though I don't think anyone gets killed, which is
amazing for a modern actioner). The reason to watch
The Score, though, isn't the plot, which is about as
simple as it gets (thieves find target, thieves plan
heist, thieves pull heist), but the interplay between
the three actors at its forefront.
No actor radiates a fierce, dangerous intelligence as
well as Ed Norton, and this ability has landed him
some of the most enviably challenging roles Hollywood
had to offer. His Jack isn't as risque as the
"Narrator" in Fight Club, but his wavering
is-he-a-villain-or-isn't-he status gives Norton plenty
of opportunities to toy with the audience. More than
anything, it resembles his debut role in Primal Fear,
which also hid a smart, scheming criminal under the
guise of mental retardation.
The climax is a great payoff for what was a slow, if
interesting, first two acts, but I didn't much like
the ending, which is a little too pat and predictable
for my tastes. I don't want to give away too much, but
the final phone-conversation "shocker" isn't much of a
shocker at all. Still, I prefer The Score's
unpretentious conclusion to Swordfish's, which
apparently thought that if it confused us enough, we'd
praise it to pretend that we understood it. It's a
fitting end to a solid, unremarkable film. 
