Title
Review for Dresser, The (1983)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Three of director Peter Yates' most impressive films are 'Bullitt' (1968),
'Breaking Away' (1979) and 'The Dresser' (1983).  Scripted by Ronald Harwood
from his critically acclaimed play, 'The Dresser' tells the story of a group
of traveling actors in England during World War II who perform plays by
William Shakespeare.  The film focuses on two characters in particular.  One
is the head of the acting company who goes by the name of Sir (Albert
Finney), a man who is unable to grasp the very essence of friendship and a
man who is slowly being driven insane by an empty life of loneliness and
constantly repeating himself in the plays he performs.  The other is Norman
(Tom Courtenay).  He is Sir's personal valet and he performs his duty with
rigid loyalty and a deep caring for the man he serves knowing all along that
Sir's life is taking a toll on his own.
This is dramatic movie making at its finest and found a place with movie
industry peers with 5 Academy Award nominations, Best Picture, Actor (both
Courtenay and Finney), Director (Peter Yates) and Adapted Screenplay (Ronald
Harwood).  The film plays out with its roots remaining loyal to the play on
which it is based.  It takes place mostly in dressing room corridors, in
dressing rooms themselves, on the stage while the actors are performing and
has very little outdoor photography or varying scenes in general.  It is
almost exactly like watching a play with the audience confined to a stage
atmosphere.  It's ability to abandon the visuals of typical filmmaking make
it a film about the stage worth treasuring.  Truly an inspiration for anyone
considering a career in the theatre.  

Author
Brian Koller
"The Dresser" is a British production starring
Albert Finney and Tom Courtenay.  Derived from
Ronald Harwood's stage play, it has a quality
script and characters with some depth.  It
compares favorably with most Hollywood projects,
which, in their search for young audiences,
would avoid tackling such a film that appeals
to older demographics.
The story takes place during World War II.
Despite endless bombing raids by the Germans,
a group of middle-aged and elderly Shakespearean
actors is giving performances throughout England.
Finney always plays the lead role, and is the
famous actor whose drawing power sustains the
troup.  Unfortunately, he suffers a nervous
breakdown, and it is up to his loyal dresser
Norman (Courtenay) to get him through his
performance.
The film has multiple themes.  Finney's character
must confront his stage fright, and his fear of
impending death.  The courage of the British
people is demonstrated by their risking their
lives to attend sell-out performances.  The
unsung, unrewarded back-stage staff, without
whom the show cannot go on, are represented by
Norman.
Finney is a marvelous actor, and his blustery
manner and booming voice are perfect for his
character.  Indifferent to the feelings of
others, he lashes at his staff for inadequacy
after they have exhausted themselves trying
to simulate a thunderstorm for a play.
Courtenay is less effective, as he camps up
his alcoholic, blatantly homosexual role.
Both actors, however, received Academy Award
nominations for Best Actor.  The film was also
nominated for Best Picture, Best Director
(Peter Yates) and Best Adapted Screenplay
(Harwood, adapting his own play).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
