Title
Review for Bai fa mo nu zhuan (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The historic backdrop for THE BRIDE WITH WHITE HAIR by itself
would have made a better film than THE BRIDE WITH WHITE HAIR did.  What
makes this an interesting film is something that will be missed by
viewers of the film with little knowledge of Chinese history.  The
fantasy is the story of Yi-Hang who appears in the film as a friend of
Wu San-kuei.  They are two men who will react very similarly in
different but parallel struggles.  Each will betray people who depend
on him and in each case it will be for the love of a woman.  Supposedly
the story of the film is an old folktale, but to play up the thematic
similarities to actual history it is set in the 1640s with only a few
brief references to what was happening with Wu San-kuei.  Here is a
quick summary of what was happening.
     For too long the Ming Dynasty had ruled selfishly and had sown the
seeds of their own destruction.  A whole class of hangers-on--60,000
people all claiming to be part of the royal family--were supported at
public expense, impoverishing the peasants.  They did little for their
keep but collect taxes.  Whole families would go first into debt and
then into slavery in their own villages.  Public suicides were common.
In 1628 there was a famine in the Northwest and out of it rose a rebel
leader, Li Tzu-ch'eng.  The people could take no more, and a peasant
army rose up under the leadership of Li Tzu-ch'eng and captured
Northern China in 1642 and Beijing in 1644.  The Ming Emperor committed
suicide, but his army for the most part stayed loyal to the Mings.
     Both Wu San-Kuei and his father had been military commanders for
the dying Ming Dynasty.  They had been charged with repelling the
powerful Manchus, the descendents of the Mongols, wanting to sweep back
into China.  What was stopping the Manchus was the Great Wall and the
tactical difficulty of getting past its army defenses.
     But Li's rebel army had captured Wu's father to hold as a hostage.
Then adding to Wu's pain they captured his favorite concubine.  So the
peasants, the Manchus, and the Mings were each trying to take control
of China.  Li offered a Wu San-kuei a truce with the Mings and an
alliance to push back the Manchus.  But Wu's hatred was so great now he
wanted no part of an alliance the peasant army.  Li attacked Wu.  Wu
made his alliance with the Manchus.  He opened the Great Wall gates at
Shanhaikuan and allowed the Manchus to enter China on the promise they
would help defeat Li's rebellion and if they had power would allow the
elite to retain their privileges.  Perhaps Li felt he could control the
Manchus or perhaps his hatred of the peasants who captured two people
he loved was just too great.  But he let the Manchus into China, and it
was like ringing the dinner bell.  The peasants held Beijing for just a
month before they were crushed by the combined might of the Mings and
the Manchus.  Then suddenly it was just the Mings and the Manchus vying
for the country.  Soon the Ch'ing Dynasty of Manchus were China and
they remained China for 267 years until 1911.  Wu San-kuei had indeed
changed the course of history, but only to open the door for one
dynasty to defeat another.
     THE BRIDE WITH WHITE HAIR is purportedly based on an older
folktale, but is retold against the backdrop of the falling of the
Ming.  Wu San-kuei shows up briefly in both THE BRIDE WITH WHITE HAIR
and its sequel, THE BRIDE WITH WHITE HAIR II.  His story runs
simultaneously and parallel to that of Yi-Hang who would be called a
traitor to the eight good clans who form the Wu Tang.  He would be
accused of unleashing the forces of a very different evil.
     Yi-Hang was just a young boy, but already a student of martial
arts, when he was chased and nearly killed by wolves.  What saved his
life was a girl about his own age who seemed to have the ability to
command the wolves.  For years she remained just a memory.  In typical
martial arts film fashion Yi-Hang (Leslie Cheung as an adult) grows up
frequently getting into trouble usually through no fault of his own.
But his virtue and his martial arts skill get him out of any problem.
He becomes the best fighter of the eight Wu Tang clans.  But there is
trouble for the eight clans coming from an evil rival clan, the Chi Wu
Shuang, led by a somewhat unique pair of evil sorcerers.  What they are
I will not describe, but clearly magic was involved in their origins
since it is a biological impossibility.  But their secret weapon is a
third and powerful sorcerer, the beautiful woman, Lian Nichang (played
by Brigitte Lin) who uses her hair to entangle her enemies.  Yi-hang
finds Lian bathing in the woods and recognizes her as the wolf-girl of
his youth.  He falls in love with her, or realizes that he has loved
her since she was a child.  But she is of the rival clan threatening to
destroy the Wu Tang.  We have a sort of Romeo and Juliet story of the
love between these two martial artists.
     The story does not have a lot to offer that we have not seen
before.  And the martial arts fighting is augmented by special effects
and by modifying the camera speed.  So the fighting we see is about as
believable as the story.  What makes this film worth going out of ones
way to see is the photography.  In spite of the fighting and the blood,
this is something of an art film just for the stunning visuals.
Director Ronny Yu apparently wanted to give this film a unique look
that is a visual feast.  The film's rich use of colors, the beautiful
costuming, and the art direction are just terrific and make up for a
multitude of other sins.  The cinematographer is Peter Pau and he did
more to create this mythic film than anyone else involved.  THE BRIDE
WITH WHITE HAIR really deserves to be seen for the rich visual imagery.
I rate it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     THE BRIDE WITH WHITE HAIR II continues the story ten years later.
But the relationship it bears to its predecessor is a lot like SON OF
FRANKENSTEIN bore to THE BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN.  It has the same
director, it even has the same actors, but the creativity is all gone.
Instead of being about mythic characters, the film is about people who
know the mythic characters.  Lian Nichang is no longer a three-
dimensional character but has been reduced effectively to being a
monster (again parallel to the FRANKENSTEIN films).  I do not know who
the cinematographer was but I could bet that it was not Peter Pau.
Blue filters are over-used to try and recapture some of the look of the
first film, but too much of the magic has gone out of the story.  I
rate THE BRIDE WITH WHITE HAIR II a 4 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low 0
on the -4 to +4 scale.
