Title
Review for Smooth Talk (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Joyce Chopra.
Cast: Laura Dern, Mary Kay Place, Elizabeth Berridge, Treat Williams, 
Margaret Welsch, Levon Helm, Jill Inglis.
1986 - 92 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for sexual situations and profanity).
Reviewed September 1998.
"Smooth Talk," which is the best independent film I have ever seen, won 
the Grand Jury Prize at 1985's Sundance Film Festival, then known as the 
U.S. Film Festival. It is an alternately funny, touching, tragic, 
unexpected gem.
Laura Dern stars as Connie, a bored 15-year-old girl who is sometimes 
naive and selfish, like most teenagers are, and has an unhappy home 
life, especially because her mother (Mary Kay Place) completely doesn't 
understand her. Her dad (Levon Helm) is often so involved in himself and 
his own dreams that when he talks to Connie, it is as if he is speaking 
a foreign language. She also suffers because her parents obviously 
prefer her older sister, June (Elizabeth Berridge). It is summer break, 
and all Connie wants is some excitement in her life. Every day she goes 
to the mall with her two friends and they slip into the bathroom, change 
into more revealing clothes, and run around the building like little 
children. She also decides to venture across the road from the mall and 
go to the burger joint where the older people hang out, hoping to find a 
boy, but it is obvious she is still too immature for a relationship. 
Connie briefly comes in contact with a handsome, but mysterious older 
man who obviously has an ulterior motive.
To give away the last 30 minutes of "Smooth Talk" would be criminal, 
because one of the best things about the film is the element of surprise 
at what comes at the conclusion. What happens is one of the most 
unpredictable, shocking things I have ever seen, but it leads up to a 
moment in the last scene that leaves closure for what had happened, and 
is one of my all-time favorite scenes in any film.
"Smooth Talk" is the best type of film. It obviously was made for not 
much money, but was written and directed by Joyce Chopra, based on the 
short story, "Where Am I Going? Where Have I Been?" by Joyce Carol 
Oates, with a great deal of delicacy and care. The screenplay is 
especially impressive, and perfectly realized, because not only is it 
perfect at being a "coming-of-age" story, and a "slice-of-life" picture, 
but the characters are also all written to be three-dimensional, and 
each one of them is given the chance to have at least one scene in which 
we really get to know or sympathize with them. 
At the center of the story, however, is Connie, who is one of the most 
memorable and realistic teenage characters in recent memory. And what 
definately brings her to life is Dern, who is flawless in her portrayal 
of this girl who at one moment has the stature and ability to act like 
an adult, and in the next frame turn into this child. It is Dern's best 
performance to date, and was worthy of winning the 1986 Academy Award 
for Best Actress. The other cast members also couldn't be better. 
Berridge, as Connie's lonely sister, gives a truly poignant performance, 
as does Jill Inglis as one of Connie's friends whom Connie ignores once 
she starts hanging out at the burger place. The music by James Taylor is 
perfect for the movie, and fits very well, especially in the last 
sequence already mentioned, which makes the scene all the more powerful. 
I wouldn't change a thing about "Smooth Talk." It is one of the few 
motion pictures I've seen that enraptured me in its story and characters 
so well that at the end, I was left with a lot of deep emotions and 
feelings about what I had witnessed, and also about the brilliance and 
subtlety of the last touching scene.
   - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
     Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
