Title
Review for Fresa y chocolate (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE is the movie that asks the question: Do
you know the Zodiac sign of your refrigerator and is its sign and yours
compatible?  Overall, the movie is a S-L-O-W and amateurish production
yet with some quite special parts nevertheless.
     STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE is a classic romantic triangle with a few
twists.  The movie was made in Cuba, and it is set in Havana in the
year 1979.  The central figure is Diego, a gay man played by Jorge
Perrugoria.  He falls head over heals in love with David (Vladimir
Cruz), a committed albeit non-practicing heterosexual.  Diego has a
suicidal neighbor (Mirta Ibarra) who is an older woman (late 40s?) that
gets infatuated with David.  David's heart however is still with his
old, now married and strikingly beautiful girlfriend.
     The political subplot has Diego being persecuted by the government
and the left-wing students for being a homosexual.  He is a Christian
sculpture which makes him persona non grata with the Communists.
David, on the other hand, is a Communist party member so agrees to spy
on this right-wing, homosexual, religious fanatic for the party.  After
this set up, the plot moves at a snail's pace.
     Other than the need for some heavy editing, there are many other
things wrong with the show.  The sound editing is awful.  Many scenes
sound like they were made in an anechoic chamber.  The background noise
that should be there is totally missing.  The dialog is frequently
awkward and unnatural.  Finally, the second most important part in the
movie was miscast.  Cruz plays the heterosexual guy by staring blankly
into the camera for long periods of time.  I wondered sometimes if he
had fallen asleep with his eyes open.
     What is good about the show? The major joy of seeing this movie is
to watch the acting of Perrugoria.  He gave a moving and extremely
complex portrayal of the troubled gay guy.  Very convincing and
fascinating.  The acting of the more minor character of the neighbor as
well as that of David's old girlfriend was quite good.  Finally,
watching the images of Cuba were like taking a glimpse into a forbidden
land that time has forgotten.
     STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE runs (read crawls) 1:44.  It is rated R
for complete female and male nudity and for several scenes of
heterosexual sex.  It has no violence and only minor profanity.  I
agree with the R rating and do not think it is a movie for teenagers.
Overall, the bad outweighed the good for me so I gave it a thumbs down
and awarded it * 1/2.
     P.S.  The title comes from the fact that David likes chocolate
which is considered normal whereas Diego likes strawberry which is
abnormal.  It is a metaphor for their differences.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: February 10, 1995
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: 2/95 limited release 
Running Length: 1:45 
MPAA Classification: R (Nudity, sex, mature themes, language) 
Starring: Jorge Perugorria, Vladimir Cruz, Mirta Ibarra, 
          Francisco Gatorno, Marilyn Solaya 
Directors: Tomas Gutierrez Alea and Juan Carlos Tabio 
Producer: Miguel Mendoza 
Screenplay: Senel Paz based on "The Wolf, the Forest, and the New Man" 
Cinematography: Mario Garcia Joya 
Released by Miramax Films 
In Spanish with subtitles 
     On the surface, it might seem odd to compare STRAWBERRY AND 
CHOCOLATE, Cuba's official 1995 Foreign Film Academy Award entry, with 
BOYS ON THE SIDE.  Indeed, obvious similarities are few, but scratch the 
surface a little, and it becomes apparent that both movies share a common 
strength--the complex and well-developed friendship between a gay and 
straight person.  And, as was the case with Whoopi Goldberg and Mary-
Louise Parker in BOYS, the acting is the key.  Here, Jorge Perugorria (as 
the homosexual Diego) and Vladimir Cruz (as the heterosexual David) bring 
life and vitality to a pair of personalities sketched out on paper. 
     Diego and David are very different sorts of people--and perhaps 
that's what attracts them to each other.  Diego, a twenty-something 
writer with a passion for art, has an anti-Castro track record.  David, 
still in college and smarting from his girlfriend's rejection, studies 
political science and places the Communist way above all else.  The 
relationship between the two begins steeped in lies (Diego has made a bet 
that he can bed David; David is attempting to gather evidence proving 
Diego's counterrevolutionary leanings), but over time it grows into 
something genuine and substantial. 
     Several tangential characters fade in and out of STRAWBERRY AND 
CHOCOLATE, occasionally intersecting the main story, but rarely having 
much impact.  Subplots featuring David's ex-girlfriend (Marilyn Solaya) 
and a deeply religious whore named Nancy (Mirta Ibarra) are neither 
especially interesting nor invigorating.  Relying on overused story 
elements, these parts of the movie present a marked contrast to the 
thoughtful, insightful depiction of Diego and David's friendship. 
     STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE is not the first movie to examine the 
often-contradictory concepts of art and propaganda, but the balanced 
perspective presented here impregnates the issue with freshness.  One 
might not normally expect an open perspective on social and cultural 
issues to find expression in a film backed by a restrictive government, 
but STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE received not only official sanctioning, but 
financing as well. 
     STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE is ultimately a film of many layers, and
the viewer who invests more into watching the picture will get more
out.  While the movie might superficially seem to be a comedy, it is
most effective during the quietly dramatic moments.  The obvious
fulcrum--Diego and David's relationship--is as complex and
antithetical as the film's overall tone.  Mentor and pupil, with
different ideologies, the two need more from each other than either
initially guesses at.
     With a different cast or a more heavy-handed director, STRAWBERRY
AND CHOCOLATE could have been a pretentious melodrama.  Filmed with
skill and precision, however, the actual result is an
engaging--although not totally engrossing--examination of the culture
and values of 1979 Cuba--issues that are surprisingly timely and
universal.  You don't have to be a resident of Havana to understand
STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE's messages, or to appreciate the two
characters it serves alongside its ice cream.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Pedro Sena
STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE, is one of those films that is hard not to like,
and at the same time, one wonders what is it that makes it good.  It
vacillates between being a political film, and a personal film, and one
might wish that this would have been resolved some, to make the film easier
to go along with.
The personal part of the film, is a nice story about a man, who is gay, who
takes an attraction to another man.  Instead of becoming lovers, they become
good friends, even if they are on opposite side of things on a political,
and personal, scale.
And then, on the other hand, is a slight political story, that is not
vicious, but is tremendously suggestive that the war on Cuba
is mainly about how well hidden one has to keep their personal intents,
politically, so not to get over run by people who are so
eager to satisfy the state, and get paid for it.  It plays people against
people, and damages any kind of social structure.
The other story is more interesting, although hardly developed. The gay man
is a writer, possibly a subversive one by the Cuban standards, but he will
not give up his "underground" fight to get books into the country, and add
more "freedom" into their culture, specially the intellectual kind.  He is
involved in artistic circles, and his previous lover, an artist, has an art
show pending, but he has a problem which may be stopping him as well, which
is, he is also gay, in a society, where it is considered wrong, and
basically punished with being cast out.
This may be the real theme in the film. The young man, who is being pursued,
does not fall for the trickery and the games the gay man plays, but their
friendship teaches the gay man something about being honest and direct,
rather than tricky.  At the same time, it hurts to learn all this, in a
society where it isn't permissible.  And although the film resolves well for
the young man, it does not for the gay ones, which is the only solution that
pretty much would help the film get made in Cuba, and not throw these people
in jail.
It is believed that the authorities in Cuba have opened up the arts some,
but if this film is an indication, and it was partially
smuggled, and shot clandestinely in that country, thanks to the efforts of
some Mexican and Spanish people.  But the arts are still
grossly held up to a ridicule and criticism, by a hypocritical standard that
pretty much rules people into the ground.  A sign
that the communist Cuba, under Fidel, still is held together by a little
more than strings and rubber bands.
One can only hope that this is a sign that this country has an art form
which is due to break out.  The question is when, a leader
will realize the potential it has, not only to put people to work, but also
to create revenues from abroad. STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE, is not a great
film, but it has a special appeal that is hard to let go. The film is
choppy, an obvious result of its sporadic shooting style, but it manages to
get it together in a reasonable fashion, not tied up neatly because the
whole film is not tied up from the word go.  It shows much promise, it
really does, and this is important.
Worth seeing, if only to realize that Cuba is probably going to join the
world map of arts pretty soon... count on it.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This is a beautiful film from Cuba, based on a short story by
Senel Paz, "The Wolf, the Forest, and The New Man."  What makes it so
wonderful is that it is a story of tolerance.  Some people like
Strawberry and others like Chocolate.  Whatever turns you on.
     There is David, (Vladimir Cruz) a political science student,
quiet, loyal to Cuba.  Then there is Diego (Jorge Perugorria) who is
just the opposite; very outgoing, friendly and, unlike the straight
David, he is gay.
     Nevertheless, the two become very good friends but when David
confides in his friend Miguel (Francisco Gatorno), another student,
that he is friends with a gay man, Miguel wants David to find signs of
subversion so that Diego will be imprisoned.
     Lastly, there is Diego's neighbor, Nancy (Mirta Ibarra), who is
busy finding a man for herself.
     One of the funniest scenes is after David loses his virginity to
Nancy, he has a perpetual grin.  He tells Diego, "There is nothing like
doing it with a woman."  Diego's response cracked me up!
     The film, a beauty, is a collaboration between the Cuban Institute
of Art and Film Industry, the Mexican National Film Office, Tabasco
Films, Telemadrid and S.G.A.E. and was filmed in Cuba, Mexico and
Spain.  Maybe this is an indication that the Cuban government is
becoming more tolerant of homosexuals.
Directed by Tomas Gutierrez Alea and Juan Carlos Tabio.
The film has won awards at the Berlin Film Festival and the
Latin American Film Festival in Havana.

Author
Leo Bueno
     I am starting to write this review before going to see STRAWBERRY
AND CHOCOLATE, Cuba's Oscar nominee for best foreign film, directed by
Tomas Gutierrez Alea (who also directed the sometimes and in some
circles critically acclaimed MEMORIAS DEL SUBDESARROLLO--"Memories of
Underdevelopment".  I saw MEMORIAS as part of a Cuban cinema class back
in the late '70s; it merged the politics of the Cuban Revolution with
mundane elements of the human condition.  I knew then that MEMORIAS was
probably a state-sanctioned political missive, and now expect
STRAWBERRY will follow suit.
     Fellow Internetters, primarily in the newsgroup dedicated to Cuba
(soc.culture.cuba), have mentioned that STRAWBERRY is a harsh criticism
of the Revolution and its current state of affairs.  I have jumped to
the conclusion that STRAWBERRY is nothing more than a veiled attempt at
espousing the party line--it probably looks like political criticism,
but it ain't so.
     Having some first hand and extensive anecdotal knowledge of
Castro's repressiveness, I can't conceive of his tolerating honest and
adversarial criticism of the Revolution, and I can't imagine his
letting anyone even suggest his failure as a leader of a failed
movement.  As kids say these days, duh!, the Revolution's current state
needs no criticism; its physical and spiritual crumbling is self
evident.
     The proper questions to put relate to Castro's legitimacy.  I bet
the film takes Castro's power for granted, and that this or any other
movie, produced under Cuba's state control, cannot question his right
to run Cuba's political show (ongoing now for more than 36 years).
That's why I just can't believe STRAWBERRY is an honest criticism of
the regime.  Let's see what happens after the room goes dark and the
screen lights up.
     I saw the film--twice.  I was right; Castro remained intact.
     STRAWBERRY negotiates the relationship between a young "dialectic
materialist,"  as he describes himself, and a homosexual photographer
(Diego) in 1979 Cuba.  The young man (David) is the son of peasants; a
symbol of the Revolution's reason for being.  Grateful to the
Revolution for the opportunity to receive a university education, he
studies Political Science instead of Literature, his avocation, because
he perceives it is his duty.  Therein lies a likely unintended irony,
since Cuba has no need for political theoreticians.  Cuba's government
is Castro.
     Diego's lifestyle is the antithesis of Revolutionary life.  He
enjoys the finer things--tea, opera, art.  He does not do "voluntary
work" for the Revolution.  His small apartment is a sensual oasis.  The
moniker "bourgeois" figuratively hangs over his head during the early
parts of the movie.  However, he is a "Revolucionario" in his own way.
     The supporting roles are filled by: an aging busybody with a heart
of gold and a troubled psyche; David's roommate, who rally takes the
Communist Party line to its expected extreme; David's ex-girlfriend,
who dumped him for another guy, yet wants to bed him before she leaves
for Italy with her husband; German, a gay sculptor whose work Diego is
attempting to exhibit, and who strikes a Faustian pact with the
government.
     Gutierrez Alea and co-director Juan Carlos Tabio do a fine job at
almost showing that homosexuals can be revolutionaries too.  Heck,
towards the end of the film you begin to think the guy deserves a medal
for his patriotic fervor.  He really loves the Revolution (as
supposedly does everybody else in Cuba) and wants to make it better by
exposing and correcting some of its flaws.
     Real criticism is missing though.  This movie is political window
dressing.  Luis Aguilar Leon's op. ed. piece on FRESA in THE MIAMI
HERALD (10 March 1995, at 21A) did not color my judgment; it presaged
my intuition.  Aguilar Leon expressed my sentiment about this film's
political angle best:
         Like many artistic manifestations in Cuba, STRAWBERRY AND
    CHOCOLATE sprang from a totally manipulated environment.  As art
    critic Ivan De La Nuez well states in the latest issue of the
    magazine POSTMODERN NOTES, the silenced artists are those who
    refuse to accept "the charade in which artists can provoke up to a
    point, while the institutions legitimize themselves by forbidding
    them to go beyond that point."
     Although terrible propaganda, this is otherwise a fine film.

Author
Louis Proyect
Most of the action in "Strawberry and Chocolate" takes place in 
Diego's (Jorge Perugorría) living room, a gay character struggling 
with sexual and cultural repression in the Cuba of 1979. Despite 
this, it opens up a vast panorama of the human heart. In these close 
quarters overflowing with symbols of the homosexual demimonde, Diego 
attempts to seduce David (Vladimir Cruz), an earnest but dogmatic 
member of the Young Communist League attending college. However, it 
is Cuban society itself that is ultimately being seduced in this 
remarkable state-sponsored film.
Diego initially lures David to the apartment with a promise of photos 
that Diego took of him performing in a college play. After arriving 
there, Diego showers him with all the forbidden fruit that a good 
Communist would deny himself, from English tea served in fine china 
to Maria Callas arias. David is simultaneously repelled by and 
attracted to his host. Although the thought of gay sex is the last 
thing on his mind, he finds himself drawn into Diego's nonstop, 
impromptu lecture on fine literature and the need to be cultured, 
even in a revolutionary society. After Diego announces that he cannot 
find the photos, both the audience and David understand that this is 
just a ploy to get him to return.
And he does return. At first, under his room-mate's advice, he 
returns to "gather intelligence" about this sexual and political 
subversive, especially his role in organizing a sculpture exhibit by 
a gay artist and friend, whose work mixes Christian iconography and 
elements of sadism. Diego complains openly to David that art in Cuba 
is either shallow propaganda spoon-fed to the masses or clumsy 
attempts at modernism. After a few more visits, David begins to warm 
up to Diego as a human being, while Diego also begins to forget about 
seduction.
Starting out as a hard-liner, David defends the status quo by stating 
that you have to make a choice between the class struggle and its 
enemies "out there", pointing at Miami and Washington. Despite this, 
he continues to be drawn in by Diego's refined sensibilities and 
charisma. While some American critics have found fault with the 
character's campy mannerisms, there is much more to him than a limp 
wrist and a lisp. In scene after scene, he insists that unless there 
is room for him and people like him in the revolution, then it is not 
a genuine revolution. For the revolution to triumph, it needs an open 
mind toward sexuality and culture. As he puts it, "The best is not to 
be shocked by anything, and to sip from every cup.'"
Made in 1993, "Strawberry and Chocolate" was the last film directed 
by Tomás Gutiérrez Alea, who was dying of cancer. Juan Carlos Tabío, 
who, like Alea, makes films that serve as a prod to the social 
conscience of Cuba, co-directed. In his latest film "The Waiting 
List," Tabío takes aim at bureaucratic inertia in a bus station. The 
two stars of "Strawberry and Chocolate" are reunited there, with Cruz 
starring as an audacious young engineer organizing the transformation 
of the station and Perugorría as a mechanic feigning blindness just 
so he can get to the head of lines.
The willingness of such Cuban films to take aim at entrenched and 
backward political and social institutions should challenge critics 
of Cuban communism to reflect on the usefulness of such terms as 
"Stalinist" or "bureaucratic." In bourgeois society, change generally 
comes through pressure on the government, while state cinema in Cuba 
seems to exist in large part to exhort society to adapt to a changing 
world.
Even the mainstream press in the United States is waking up to new 
Cuban realities. The Atlanta Journal and Constitution (March 19, 
1995) reports:
--- 
Because he was gay, Reynaldo Garcia once was ostracized as a member 
of "La Escoria," the official Cuban government term for homosexuals, 
convicts and the mentally ill. It means "the scum." 
Now Garcia can do something he never dreamed would be possible - walk 
hand in hand down the streets of Havana with his lover of six years 
without fear of reprisal. 
"I never thought I would see this day. It's a beautiful feeling," 
Garcia said. "I feel like people are starting to see us as human 
beings, like anyone else." Cuba is backing away from years of 
discrimination against homosexuals. Once packed off to work on rural 
farms alongside dissidents and religious Cubans, or nudged into 
exile, gays have entered a period of tolerance.  
---
In 1995 Havana held its First International Transvestite Festival, a 
celebration of Cuban-style camp in which prancing female 
impersonators aped Whitney Houston, Tina Turner and Diana Ross to a 
dazzled audience sprinkled with fellow cross-dressers. 
After the appearance of "Strawberry and Chocolate," one Communist 
Party leader took Alea aside told him he was ashamed to see himself 
in the cinematic portrayal of a homophobic party hard-liner. 
In a gay-oriented email list, U.S. citizen Larry R. Oberg commented 
on his trip to Cuba:
"What I found in Cuba was a gay community with many parallels to the 
gay community in North America and a few differences as well. For one 
thing, there are no laws on the Cuban books that discriminate against 
gays. (This is to be contrasted with the United States where all too 
many states retain outdated sodomy laws and where, increasingly, 
repressive legislation is enacted at the state level.) I have talked 
with literally hundreds of gays (mostly men) in Cuba and I found none 
who believe they are being persecuted by their government. 
Discrimination by individuals is reported, however, and there is also 
a lot of resentment of the residual macho attitudes that remain 
stubbornly embedded in some levels of Cuban society, attitudes that 
perpetuate highly dichotomized sex roles and prejudice against 
homosexuals amongst the population at large. But none reported active 
or systematic repression by the state. 
"It seems to me that it is important to put Cuba's past record of 
mistreatment of gays in its proper perspective. For example, 
thirty-five or so years ago, in Boise, Idaho, hundreds of gay men 
were persecuted, driven from their homes and families and imprisoned 
in one of the more infamous anti-gay actions in our history. Florida 
itself has a dreadful record in terms of gay rights and only about 10 
years ago in Adrian, Michigan, the police staked out a public park 
for months and then arrested over 30 men at their homes, in front of 
their wives and children and, in a couple of cases, grand-children. 
(With one exception, all of these guys were married self-identified 
heterosexuals.) Cuba's past record on gay rights may be no better 
than our own, certainly nothing to be proud of, but in my experience 
gays in today's Cuba are better off than they are in any other Latin 
American society (check the murder rate in Rio) and better off than 
they are in many states in our Union (think Matthew Shepherd). 
"Cuban society, like most North American and European societies, is 
undergoing a profound review and reconceptualization of its attitudes 
towards gays and lesbians. Most of you probably know about the film 
Strawberry and Chocolate, the first Cuban film to deal openly and 
directly with homosexuality. (If you haven't seen it, I recommend 
it.) What you may not know is that the film was wildly popular in 
Cuba (indicating, no doubt, a repressed need to talk about this 
issue). Apparently it played simultaneously at 10 or 12 theatres in 
Havana for months to lines several blocks long. 
"Another seminal incident along the road to acceptance for Cuban gays 
occurred in 1996. Pablo Milanes, a Cuban nova trova singer who has 
achieved quasi-sainthood amongst the island's population, wrote a 
song about gay men entitled Original Sin (available on his CD 
entitled Origines), a song he dedicated to all Cuban homosexuals. 
Introduced at his annual holiday concert held in the vast Karl Marx 
Theater in the Miramar neighborhood of Havana, El Pecado original 
took the audience and the country by storm and did much to advance 
the cause of gay acceptance."
(Oberg's full report can be found at: 
www.mail-archive.com/marxism@lists.panix.com/msg23270.html)
I rented "Strawberry and Chocolate" on Friday night in an attempt to 
clear my mind of the World Trade Center disaster. The streets were 
flooded with American flags and overhead you could hear the roar of 
F-16's, part of the Praetorian Guard assigned to President Bush.
As the USA prepares for war and all the awful consequences flowing 
from that, I am struck by the differences between this country and 
Cuba. As the crisis of the 21st century deepens, the sclerotic mob 
running the White House looks to answers from 1898, while Cuba, a 
country that was a victim of that trumped-up war, looks into the 
future. For a way out of this impasse, it seems that the answers will 
be found in Cuba, a country whose material poverty is more than 
compensated by the grandness of spirit found in "Strawberry and 
Chocolate."
Marxism list: http://www.marxmail.org
