Title
Review for Don't Look at Me (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
David Lynch remains one of the most fascinating, illuminating directors in 
the history of cinema. One wonders how he came up with such Bizantine puzzles 
such as "Lost Highway" or "Eraserhead," or sickeningly perverse comments on 
suburbia such as "Blue Velvet." "Don't Look at Me" will not answer many 
questions, nor should it, about Mr. Lynch. Shot back in 1989 in French, it 
will give everyone an opportunity to witness the creative process behind an 
artist.
The documentary is directed by Guy Girard who stylizes the film in a Lynchian 
mode. For example, the opening scene is a conversation with Lynch and Girard 
at Bob's Big Boy in L.A., shot and framed outside the restaurant as if you 
are peering through venetian blinds. Inspired for sure, not to mention the 
various industrial sounds and abstract whistles heard on the soundtrack, most 
often associated with Lynch himself. There are also clips from his work, 
including "Eraserhead" and "Blue Velvet," which are shown on some televison 
monitor as the camera tracks Lynch dictating a script. The most stupendous 
moment is seeing Lynch thinking silently about how to continue a scene in the 
script. 
Girard's focus on Lynch is simply avante-garde in his choices for camera 
set-ups while interviewing the director. In fact, the only time we focus on 
Lynch's face is when Girard hands him polaroids of some shots from his work. 
Often, Lynch shows his back to the camera while wearing a fishing hat. 
Mostly, he refuses to divulge the meaning in his work as he correctly assumes 
that interpretations should be left to the audience (I certainly don't want 
him to tell me why the Lady from the Radiator in "Eraserhead" has puffed-up 
cheeks).  So you will not learn much about Lynch in terms of his background 
or his fixation on the dark side, but you do get glimpses ("Most people do 
not know what they are doing. They are confused."). 
Choice moments include a drive with Lynch and the late Jack Nance (who played 
Henry in "Eraserhead") to a reservoir used in one of his films, seeing Lynch 
sculpting and molding naked  figurines for some mini-environment, recording 
the beautiful voice of Julee Cruise for an unspecified project (she sang 
melodies for many of Lynch's films), and in general seeing Lynch at work, 
indulging in creative ideas ("I like the shape of an ear. An ear, in a grassy 
field, with ants crawling on it - there's hardly anything better than that.") 
Although not as enveloping or cohesive as the other Lynch documentary, 
"Pretty as a Picture," this is still enthralling and informative for anyone 
who wants to see the Dark Side of Genius revel in his own obsessions and 
dreams.  Essential for anyone who is a fan.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com 
or at Faust667@aol.com
