Title
Review for Grand bleu, Le (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Samuel Goldwyn Company/Gaumont
 Director: Luc Besson
 Writer:  Luc Besson (based on his story), Robert Garland,
Marilyn Goldin, Jacques Mayol, Marc Perrier
 Cast: Rosanna Arquette, Jean-Marc Barr, Jean Reno, Paul
Shenar, Sergio Castellitto, Jean Bouise, Marc Duret, Griffin
Dunne
   After your home team wins a basketball game, it's not
altogether uncommon to observe cheering crowds riot in the
streets, overturning police vehicles and burning ordinary cars. 
As the stands overflow into the field when the whistle ends
the final quarter of a football game, say goodbye to the
goalposts.  As for soccer?  You're lucky to get out of the
stands without being stampeded for one reason or another. 
There's one competition, however, that's unlikely to draw
such robust enthusiasm. Luc Besson takes us into that world
in "The Big Blue," a story about two friends who are rivals in
the annual diving championships and the woman who makes
a bold attempt to get one of them out of the water.
   Though the screenplay is simple and the dialogue less than
eloquent, "The Big Blue" features some exotic, if not
especially lush photography by Carlo Varini, who has
captured some of the beauty of such spots as Taormina, the
Greek islands, and Manhattan at night.  Though "The Big
Blue" highlights shots of watery depths (which feature a bland
assortment of tropical fish at best and splendid if standard-
genre dolphin shows), the real curiosity of this sports-cum-
romance travelogue is the Freudian back-to-the-womb
ambiance coupled with an astonishing mystical scene toward
the end of the new, 163-minutes' director's cut.  Nor do we
have much difficulty feasting our eyes on the ravishingly
beautiful, petite and sensuous Rosanna Arquette, just twenty-
nine years old when this film was made.
   In his first English-language movie, director Luc Besson
("La Femme Nikita," "The Messenger," "The Fifth Element"),
himself an aspiring marine biologist and only twenty-nine
years of age when he made "The Big Blue," takes us first to
a Greek island in an extended black-and-white sequence
where young Jacques Mayol and young Enzo Molinari grow
up together and challenge each other in a makeshift diving
competition.  When they meet several years later Jacques
(Jean-Marc Barr) and Enzo (Jean Reno) are again competing
for the world diving crown, with some of the most elaborate
matches taking place in the beautiful and touristic Sicilian city
of Taormina.  When insurance investigator Johanna
(Rosanna Arquette) joins the party--having met Jacques on
the snow-capped Peruvian Andes where he is taking part in
scientific research--and pursues him later to Italy, Besson
sets up the real competition: it's Johanna versus the dolphins,
the latter in the role of Jacques' lifelong true love.  Will
Johanna excuse the object of her affection after discovering
his all-night affair with the big, intelligent fish--which return his
love as eagerly as she?  Will Jacques--who is as taciturn as
his lifelong friend Enzo is swaggering--become as captivated
as the movie audience with Johanna, or will he return to the
watery depths in search of mermaids?
   Silly as the narrative may sound, "The Big Blue" is
nonetheless intriguing in its quaint originality, its photography
of Mediterranean waters, its thumping original score by Eric
Serra, and oh yes, did I mention the astonishing beauty of
Rosanna Arquette who, as the Washington Post critic quips,
is desperately seeking Scuba?
Not Rated.  Running time: 163 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
