Title
Review for Bye Bye, Love (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Matthew Modine, Randy Quaid, Paul Reiser, Janeane Garofolo.
Screenplay:  Gary David Goldberg and Brad Hall.
Director:  Sam Weisman.
     A movie about divorce and custody in 1995 seems about as timely
as a movie about mood rings.  Family breakups have been an all too
familiar part of the American landscape for nearly thirty years, and
countless dramas have told stories of acrimonious court battles in
hand-wringing detail.  Still, I can't recall a comedy about the
subject before BYE BYE LOVE.  And after it, I still can't.  BYE BYE
LOVE is rarely funny, more often a weak and melodramatic retread of
common TV-movie fare.  Only a few moments which have nothing to do
with the film's main premise offer big laughs instead of cliched
emotion.
     BYE BYE LOVE follows one weekend in the lives of three divorced
fathers who get weekend custody of their children.  Dave (Matthew
Modine), a father of two, is an inveterate womanizer having
difficulty staying faithful to his latest girlfriend; Vic (Randy
Quaid) is a foul-humored father of three about to go on a rare date;
Donny (Paul Reiser) pines for his ex-wife and has trouble relating
to his teenage daughter Emma (Eliza Dushku).  Over the course of the
weekend, the three men face various crises, including Vic's blind
date from hell (Janeane Garofolo) and Donny's growing estrangement
from Emma.
     The three lead actors form a rather unlikely combo, and the
quality of their performances is of widely varying quality.  Randy
Quaid is the best of the three, bitter without being irritating,
gleefully spiteful without being frightening.  His run-ins with is
ex-wife (Lindsey Crouse) are a bit over-played, though, and his
confrontation with a pompous radio psychologist (Rob Reiner) is
gimmicky and implausible.  He does get BYE BYE LOVE's best sub-plot,
a hilarious dinner date with a gloriously demented Janeane Garofolo,
and he does a great slow burn.  Paul Reiser really has only one
character, his slightly befuddled, uptight nice guy "Mad About You"
persona, but he does it well.  As a personality, he is appealing,
but as a character, he becomes pretty boring here.  Matthew Modine,
is, quite simply, terrible.  This isn't a performance good enough to
be called mailed-in; he even forgot to put a stamp on it.  Modine
lacks any charm in an appallingly under-written role, looks bored
most of the time, and gets stuck with a trite little speech about
how it's all his father's fault he's such a cad.  Carolco's
executives, whose entire future is resting on Modine's bankability
for the upcoming CUTTHROAT ISLAND, must be sweating buckets right
now.
     BYE BYE LOVE basically comes off as a very confused movie,
because it spends far too much of its time on the new relationships
of its main characters instead of on the relationships between the
fathers and their kids, making it just another "dating in the 90s"
movie.  When the movie does deal with the children at all, it is to
have one of them scream out an accusation and/or cry, perhaps to be
resolved later by a sensitive talk and a hug, perhaps not.  Even
more confusing is a sub-plot featuring the late Ed Flanders as a
widower who goes to work and a McDonald's and befriends a troubled
youth.  It is a sad end to Flanders' career, getting caught up in
a truly annoying over-use of McDonald's as a location, a plot device
and, apparently, a major advertiser.
     Even if BYE BYE LOVE had decided to spend its time focusing
exclusively on the parent-child relationships, it still would have
been pretty difficult to pull off, because ultimately there is very
little humor one can wring from family break-ups and their effects
on children.  Any way you slice it, it is a bad situation for kids,
and the makers of BYE BYE LOVE mostly go for the heartstrings when
dealing with the single parenting issue.  It is left to the dads'
romantic fumblings to probide what little humor there is, and it
isn't enough.  There have been comparisons between BYE BYE LOVE and
PARENTHOOD, but PARENTHOOD was both genuinely funny and genuinely
touching.  BYE BYE LOVE is a genuine shame.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release on 3/17/95 
Running Length: 1:45
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes, language)
Starring: Matthew Modine, Randy Quaid, Paul Reiser, Janeane Garofalo, 
          Amy Brenneman, Maria Pitillo, Rob Reiner
Director: Sam Weisman
Producers: Gary David Goldberg, Brad Hall, and Sam Weisman
Screenplay: Gary David Goldberg and Brad Hall
Cinematography: Kenneth Zunder
Music: J.A.C. Redford
Released by Twentieth Century Fox
     The modern-day family isn't what it used to be.  Households that 
mirror the Cleavers--or even the Huxtables or Seavers--deserve a 
place on the endangered species list.  These days, you're as likely to 
find children shuttled back and forth between divorced parents as 
spending time in a stable, single-family situation.  The fractured family 
and its ramifications lie at the core of BYE BYE LOVE, a new, lighter-
than-a-feather dramatic comedy from director Sam Weisman (D2). 
     There are times when the movie's statement about the tragic lot of 
children torn between a mother and father is almost lost amidst the 
upsurge of feel-good sentiment.  Don't expect much substance or depth 
from this film--the few questions it poses are never answered 
satisfactorily, and the story is framed in a manner designed to please 
crowds, not address issues.  There's a saying that laughter is the best 
medicine, and it's certainly true in this case.  BYE BYE LOVE's humor 
obfuscates many dramatic shortcomings.  It's hard to dislike something 
that provokes this many laughs.  Flawed though it may be, the movie does 
a good job filling the "light entertainment" niche.  
     For the most part, the story is told from the male point-of-view.  
We're introduced to a trio of divorced fathers:  Dave (Matthew Modine), 
an incurable womanizer; Vic (Randy Quaid), a fun-loving sort of guy; and 
Donny (Paul Reiser), an insecure dad who wishes that his daughter (Eliza 
Dushku, from TRUE LIES) would confide in him.  Most of BYE BYE LOVE is 
devoted to showing how these three interact with their ex-wives, their 
children, their current significant others, and each other.
     The comedy starts slowly, with occasional solid one-liners and sight 
gags (one hint that the film has promise is that most of these work).  
However, just before the half-way point, Vic embarks on one of those 
motion picture cliches, the "Blind Date from Hell."  In this case, his 
companion is the offbeat Lucille (played with deadpan gusto by Janeane 
Garofalo, the best thing to come out of REALITY BITES).  Though nothing 
that happens between these two erupts with originality, and many of the 
jokes are telegraphed, the Vic/Lucille scenes are hilarious.  Quaid and 
Garofalo create an effective rapport, each playing perfectly off the 
other.  The only downside is that they aren't on screen all the time.  An 
entire movie could have been made with just these two characters, and it 
probably would have been a far better film than BYE BYE LOVE.
     Paul Reiser essentially regurgitates his MAD ABOUT YOU personae.  
There are a few wrinkles, but this is a "safe" role that doesn't require 
much of a stretch.  Donny is blandly likable, but his story, which 
includes a relationship with Dave's ex (Amy Brenneman), seems like 
filler.  Unfortunately, Matthew Modine is barely adequate, so Dave's 
scenes are often the least enjoyable.  The script has some odd tangents, 
including a father-son relationship between a McDonald's worker (Johnny 
Whitworth) and his elderly "adopt a geezer" trainee (Ed Flanders).  Rob 
Reiner is on hand as an ubiquitous talk-show host who raises the ire of 
his listeners.
     Product placement has become a common practice for films like this, 
but BYE BYE LOVE goes way overboard in advertising for McDonald's.  This 
is the second film this year (the other being HOUSEGUEST) where the fast 
food joint attains the importance of a character.  The golden arches are 
lovingly highlighted, and there's a nice close-up of a sign advertising 
extra value meals for $2.99.  Such blatant commercialism is annoying.
     Dramatic comedies are Hollywood staples, but most fall short by 
diluting straight and amusing elements on an equal basis.  While BYE BYE 
LOVE has its share of problems, feeble jokes and unfunny humor aren't 
among them.  Despite only partially succeeding in its examination of the 
potentially-damaging effects of divorce, the end result is still a 
pleasant film that satisfies a need for cheery, unforced entertainment.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, PG-13, 107 minutes [1 hour, 47 minutes]
[comedy/lighthearted drama]
starring: Matthew Modine (Dave), Randy Quaid (Vic), Paul Reiser (Donny),
Janeane Garofalo (Lucille), produced by Sam Weisman, Gary David Goldberg,
Brad Hall, written by Gary David Goldberg, Brad Hall, directed by Sam
Weisman.
I didn't think that there could be anything worse than dating, but there is:
dating after being divorced, especially if you have children, and "Bye Bye
Love" proves that to be true.
Technically, there isn't a single plotline pushing this story along, it is
just dropping in on the lives of three divorced fathers. Dave (Modine) is
still actively dating, he tries to commit to one woman but often finds
himself flirting with other women and not thinking rationally. Donny (Reiser)
can't bring himself to date again, he worries too much about his daughter and
doesn't want to go through all the trouble again. Neither does Vic (Quaid),
although his problem isn't so much that he doesn't want to date again, he
just can't get a date in the first place. All three of these buddies have
children and we see how difficult it is to have a good relationship with a
child when you can only see them once a week.
Weisman, Goldberg, and Hall use some unique techniques to make the story
interesting by contrasting situations with other characters not directly
associated with the three guys. There is a talk radio psychologist (Rob
Reiner) who tries to help divorced people with their problems, but it's not
as easy as the simple advice he gives which always seems to be giving the
three dads headaches. We also meet Max (Johnny Whitworth), a typical teenage
stud working at the local McDonald's where the fathers always seem to be
eating. Of course he is a superficial slacker, but when he meets Walter (Ed
Flanders), a 71-year-old widower, he becomes sensitive to the reality of the
world and makes a new friend. I found this entire plotline completely
unbelievable and distracting, there's no way a 17-year-old would befriend a
71-year-old.
Donny's daughter Emma meets Max at the McDonald's, flirts with him, and is
then invited to a wild party. Max invites his new pal Walter, but this is
just too predictable and cheesy. And since Emma is a teenage girl of a
divorced couple, she is a brat. When she goes to the party she gets drunk and
then takes her father's car for a joyride. And you can tell where the story
will go from there.
There is a good scene in which Vic finally gets a blind date with a woman,
Lucille (Garofalo), who he does not get along with because she is so strange.
This was somewhat funny, but it had a sit-com feel to it, which is how I felt
about the film as a whole. 
"Bye Bye Love" is a real movie machine, but it does have one soft spot, that
is the good characterization of the three divorced fathers and their daily
anxieties they go through. It certainly was interesting to see how difficult
it can be to be a divorced man in the 90s, but at times the films strays too
far away from that point of interest and becomes rather sappy and
melodramatic. I just wish the producers would make up their minds as to what
kind of movie this is supposed to be - a comedy or a drama?
visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html
