Title
Review for Powaqqatsi (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David N. Butterworth
Culture shock can best be described as confusion and uncertainty affecting
people exposed to an alien culture without adequate preparation.  Much the
same can be said of POWAQQATSI, the new film by activist filmmaker Godfrey
Reggio, which certainly takes a different perspective in the way it
manipulates sound and images.  But if you stay with it, and become
acclimatized to its unique and personal point of view, the experience
proves ultimately rewarding.
A companion piece to Reggio's first feature KOYANNISQATSI (and reportedly
the second in a trilogy of films embracing various ways of life on our
planet), POWAQQATSI bears resemblance to that film only in its
non-narrative style.  There is no dialogue, no narration, little sound
aside from a richly textured and hypnotic Philip Glass score, which
accompanies the films visuals with a wall-to-wall intensity.  Whereas
KOYANNISQATSI  contrasted natural and man-made vistas, POWAQQATSI is a more
socially conscious piece, concentrating on human achievement in a variety
of forms--labor, craftsmanship, artistic creativity, religious
worship--each demonstrated by those in such Third World communities as
India, South America, Africa, and parts of Asia.
The film opens with a veritable army of workers hauling cloth sacks full of
dirt up the side of a mountain.  Very little in this film happens in "real
time."  The film has been slowed down to such an extent that not only do we
see the ropes cutting into the men's skin, but we can almost feel their
pain.  Eventually we see the body of a fallen miner being carried aloft,
and realize that there is a price to be paid for such industry.
But the film is less an evocation of the routine hardships these people
face than it is a celebration of the human spirit, and it soon becomes
clear that this film's major strength is its humanity.  We are confronted
by people at work, occasionally at play, dutifully going about their daily
business with conviction.  The characters here are bigger and brighter than
those you'll see in any "conventional" film.  A scene early in the film
depicts a row of Latin American children, curious, camera conscious, each
one decidedly different than the next.  Of course we are all different, but
we share the same human burdens.  We all toil, we all have to work hard in
order to make a living, irrespective of class or culture or social status.
And the film succeeds in contrasting these cultures by exposing the beauty
inherent in
the rigors of the everyday.
On a superficial level, the film could be seen as nothing more than a
travelogue for workaholics.  The images often seem arbitrary, lacking
continuity.  But it is difficult to dismiss them, however stylized or
pretty may they appear.  A young girl beating a donkey fervently with a
stick, a boy and a great white mare frolicking in the surf, another girl
transfixed as the camera focuses on a wall of graffiti behind her, ghosts
of cars passing the burned out shell of another, a goods train which goes
on for miles and miles--all are hard to forget.
One cannot, however, divorce the visual material, impressive as it is, from
the music.  It is as if they are one; inseparable.  Philip Glass's work has
matured significantly since his last collaboration with Reggio, yet it
still bears his inimitable trademark.  It is not as atonal or minimalistic
as his score for KOYANNISQATSI .  Instead, it borrows heavily from the
music and rhythms of the cultures and sub-cultures represented.  Highly
percussive in nature, Glass uses native as well as traditional instruments,
accented by an Hispanic children's choir.
But man's endurance comes through in the end, how he overcomes sometimes
major obstacles in order to further his own creations, extend life, maybe
even cheat death.  For this is the meaning of POWAQQATSI--an entity, a
spirit which consumes life in order to further its own.  Not a spirit in
the traditional sense, but a life force equal to those of nature, of light
and dark, land and sea, sound and image.
