Title
Review for Any Given Sunday (1999)
Number of Reviews
27

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Warner Bros. on March 31, 2000; certificate 15; 170 
minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Oliver Stone; produced by Lauren Shuler Donner, Dan Halsted, 
Clayton Townsend.
Written by John Logan, Daniel Pyne, Oliver Stone.
Photographed by Salvatore Totino; edited by Stuart Levy, Thomas J. Nordberg, 
Keith Salmon, Stuart Waks.
"Any Given Sunday" is a dramatic immersion in the world of American Football, 
looking further than commentators and managers, and jumping right in there 
with the guys in the huddle. The film gives us its view on the current state 
of the game, with character studies of both players and executives, but also 
reminds us of the intense physical experience of playing. For true sportsmen, 
that's the real thrill; for a lot of people in this movie, it's just 
something that they must go through in order to get big pay cheques.
At the heart of the movie's narrative are scenes showing pitch action from a 
first-hand point of view. If sometimes they seem irrelevant or confusing -- 
well, that's the point; players often look at their games in the same light. 
Some reviews have accused the moments of being unnecessary stylistic excess, 
but that's just because many journalists feel obliged to make unfounded 
attacks on the director, Oliver Stone, a man who does not avoid using bold 
techniques to tell his stories.
This time he follows a season in the life of the Miami Sharks, an American 
Football team coached by Tony D'Amato (Al Pacino). Tony has lost a few games 
in a row, and his old-school patience for things to get better is not shared 
by today's press, who savage him whenever he puts a foot wrong. The new owner 
of the Sharks, Christine Pagniacci (Cameron Diaz), is just as hasty, and 
demands an immediate solution to her squad's poor performance.
A young hotshot quarterback called Willie Beamen (Jamie Foxx) could be the 
answer, because he has made some great plays in a few successive games, and 
looks slick on magazine covers. Tony is cautious, though; he senses that 
Beamen's ego could be dangerous, and the lad would not be a wise replacement 
for 39-year old star performer Jack "Cap" Rooney (Dennis Quaid).
Egos are a big influence on all this, because professional sport is a 
business built around the talents of temperamental athletes. Disagreements 
over management strategy also play a big part, because it's a business full 
stop. And it's an atmosphere where ethical standards are hard to keep up -- 
one of the doctors in "Any Given Sunday" feels it's his duty to allow players 
to go on the field when injured, even at risk of death, because "for these 
guys football IS life!"
We're so used to thinking of everything as corrupt in this day and age that 
none of the above is particularly surprising. It's impressive, though, that 
Stone has managed to cover so many areas and get such a convincing overview 
of a sport. My only complaint is that the structure could have been tightened 
into something more urgent. Stone's best films -- "Platoon", "Talk Radio", 
"Born on the Fourth of July", "JFK" -- sweep us off our feet with angry gusto 
and big emotional payoffs. "Any Given Sunday" is content to document, observe 
and convey. While it does all these things well, a little more passion would 
not have gone amiss.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Curtis Edmonds
I am writing you, well, because I figure I owe you some money.  You see,
I went to see your new movie, Any Given Sunday, the other night.  This
particular theater shows movies that are in their second or third week
of release in this annex on the other side of the parking lot, and
there's usually just one person there who takes tickets and serves
popcorn.  Anyway, when I walked into the annex, that person wasn't
anywhere to be found.  (I confess I didn't look that hard.)  So, I
walked right into the theater without paying a dime.  I'm hoping that
you'll tell me exactly how much of a fraction you'd receive out of the
$7 dollars I didn't pay to see your movie, so I can send it to you.
I'm not all that worried about reimbursing the actors (especially Barry
Switzer), or the theater, or the crew or your investors or whoever else
it is that gets pieces of the pie.  I do, however, want to salute you,
from the bottom of my heart, for your outstanding efforts in creating
Any Given Sunday -- probably the best cinematic practical joke of the
year.
It took me a while to figure out what you were doing, of course, as
you'd expect.  Why, I walked out of Any Given Sunday convinced that it
was a horrible movie, a cliche-ridden mess with hideous, screeching
performances.  At first, the whole thing looked like it was edited by a
pack of genius high school sophomores anxious to try every bell and
whistle on their Ronco Edit-O-Matic.  And the apparent lapses of logic
and common sense were just so grating.  (Not to mention that you managed
to put he-men football heroes like Al Pacino and Dennis Quaid in
aprons.)  How was I to know what you were thinking?
I didn't figure it out until I started writing an amateur movie review
for the movie.  I started focusing on your portrayal of the head coach,
played by Al Pacino.  This baffled me no end, Mr. Stone, let me tell
you.  The media hype you orchestrated had us believe that Any Given
Sunday would blow the lid of the NFL, that it would be a searing expose
of the seamy side of pro football.
And of course, it is, partly.  We see all the things we expect to see --
drugs, women, letting players pay with potentially life-threatening
injuries.  But none of this is surprising, not really, and it would be
hard for you to outdo the really embarrassing things that have already
gone on the NFL's extensive police blotter this year anyway.  (What is
really surprising, to me anyway, is that everybody in the movie is
really, really unhappy, in a be-careful-what-you-wish-for way.)
Anyway, one part of the seamy side -- as made apparent in the firings
this week of real life coaches Chan Gailey and Ray Rhodes -- is the lack
of loyalty shown by owners to hard-working coaches whose talent base
has, through no fault of their own, eroded.  You explore this quite a
bit, but I was having problems with your take.  What had me fooled is
this:  we never see Pacino work.  Oh sure, he stands on the sidelines
and yells.  He talks to players in an avuncular tone when needed and
delivers kick-butt sideline pep talks.  But -- as you know -- this is
not really what coaches do.  Coaches work like dogs all the year 'round
-- running practices and team meetings and looking at film and working
up game strategy and designing plays and dealing with the media and God
knows what.  Pacino doesn't do any of that.  He hangs out in bars and
relaxes in his plush digs and goes to mayoral charity balls and
whatnot.  The only time he gets to talk football is with the team owner,
the whiny Cameron Diaz.  ("The running game!' Diaz complains loudly.
"You're always talking about the boooring running game.  Throw some more
touchdown passes.")
Since Any Given Sunday begins with a quote from Vince Lombardi, it might
be easy to assume that you mean for audiences to identify the Pacino
character with Lombardi, or Shula, or Paul Brown, or any of the great
coaches of the past.  (As a Cowboys fan, I appreciated your having a
Landryesque coach on one of the opposing teams.)  And then I realized:
Pacino's not supposed to represent these other coaches.
That's it, isn't it?  I mean, it's obvious if you think about it.
Football head coaches and movie directors are two peas in a pod.  You
both work too hard and have to deal with burnout.  Most of your real
work is behind the scenes on the necessary drudgery of your
professions.  You both have to deal with prima-donna
actors/quarterbacks.  You both have to deal with team owners/studio
bosses who don't really understand what you do, don't give you the
resources you need, and who scream a you every time you don't put forth
a winning effort.  And you have to deal with fans and reporters who
don't really understand what you do, either, but are the first to
criticize you about it.  (Movie directing must be even worse, what with
all the smart-alecks out there who think they're movie reviewers.)
And... ultimately, you're the ones that are responsible if things go
bad.  Just as NFL owners fire the coach instead of firing the team, it's
the director, rather than the actors, who is at fault if the movie
fails.  (And the actors/players are the ones who get the most credit for
victories, aren't they?  Ask Rob Reiner if you don't know what I'm
talking about.)
This explains why there's so much glitz and so little substance to the
Pacino character, too.  After all, you're not going to make someone who
is playing you less than glamorous, are you?  Of course not.
So -- if I'm right, and this is just a practical-jokey way of making a
biopic about yourself, then it really doesn't matter that the rest of
the movie stinks.  The horrible editing, the annoying, whiny
performances, (excepting Jim Brown as the defensive coordinator and
Jamie Foxx as the young QB) and the wretchedly cliched final game
sequence -- all of these things are extraneous.  We shouldn't worry
about them.  We should just understand the code and enjoy the movie from
there, right?  Right?
Because... well... if I'm wrong, and this is not some sort of joke
you're pulling, that means that this is a really, really bad film with
nothing to redeem it, and... well... that just isn't possible.
Anyway, thank you for taking the time to read this letter, and thank you
once again for filming part of your movie in Texas.  The film industry
is very important ot the Lone Star State, and your movies like Born on
the Fourth of July and JFK have been milestones in our state's cinematic
history.  Good luck on your next picture.
Movie Reviews:
http://www.hsbr.org/buzz/reviewer/reviews/bdreviews.html
"The question we need to ask: Is our children learning?"
    -- Governor George W. Bush

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   On any given Sunday during the football season, millions
of American men will gather with their friends around the
projection TV to watch their favorite gladiators get
pummeled while their wives (by way of revenge) conspire
to haul them to a screening of "Tumbleweeds."  Picture the
women gathering in the kitchen to play cards, asking one
another, "Just what is it that these guys see in that game?" 
Who better to answer that question than Oliver Stone, the
53-year-old helmer who has made a career of charged, male-
centered films, most being personal dramas and explorations
of violence in the United States?  If he tackled the varieties of
corruption in a nearby land in his movie "Salvador," darned if
he didn't do the same with iniquity in his own nation. 
Perhaps the Oliver Stone movie thematically closest to his
new all-star blockbuster "Any Given Sunday," is his "Wall
Street," which both lionized and condemned the 1980s
passion for greed.  With this contemporary take of pro
football, Stone both exalts the game and the people
responsible for putting together one of our national pastimes,
and castigates those who have turned it into a business--its
players more concerned about personal glory, contracts for
commercials, and the elevation of individual fulfillment over
team playing.
   This time, instead of the foxholes of "Platoon" he gives us
the furrows of the football stadium.  Where he could have
made a smashing, intelligent person's "Waterboy," giving us
the inside scoop on the game and business of this great
national sport, he goes overboard with garish camerawork,
giving credence to the statement, "If the technology exists, it
will be used."  Though he shows respect for his audience by
trusting us to sit still for two and three-quarters hours, you'd
swear that Stone has been taken in by arguments that the
American moviegoers are all part of the channel-surfing MTV
generation, unable to focus on one scene for more than a
minute at a time.  He does indeed show us what goes on
while the 80,000 spectators at a major game are munching
their hot dogs and ogling the cheerleaders by cutting to the
managers' area to eavesdrop on the conversations of the
money people--and by cutting to just about anything else that
can show off his photographic technique.  Otherwise, we
don't get to see more than two or three plays at a time. Why
not simply use some of the generous 165 minutes he has
been alloted to spend some real time on an extended series
of plays?  This could get us more involved in the chessboard
strategies of the contest so that those not so familiar with
football can gain a respect for the brainwork involved in
staging complex strategies.
   What, then, do we see and hear?  Frequently, the sound
system goes silent for a moment, then turns up to full volume
as you hear the crunch of the men which inevitably follows
the snapping of the pigskin.  The athletes look fierce enough
under their helmets, not unlike Robocop, so ferocious that
you can believe they can kill you with a look or shame you
with an obscene gesture or comment.  After a while, though,
our eyes glaze over as we get yet another close-up of these
contemporary combatants, their eye shadow boldly standing
out, their head gear rock solid and yet not invulnerable to the
crush of the predators.  Crunch, scrunch, mash, whiz, run,
pass, fumble, leap.  Stone sees the action as a rough,
macho, modern ballet.  Little feels human in the story and, in
fact, an awful lot of the characters both on and off the field
lack any semblance of compassion.  
   The principal conflict appears to be between the seasoned
coach of the Miami Sharks, Tony D'Amato (Al Pacino) and
the co-owner of the team who inherited the job from her
father, Christina Pagniacci (Cameron Diaz).  Pagniacci is
depicted as a take-no-prisoners woman, unlike her dad,
interested only in winning and in gaining the funding needed
to build a new and grander stadium for the Sharks.  In other
words, she wants to be taken seriously as a woman playing
essentially a man's game.  She does battle against the
coach's ideal that what counts is teamwork, not personal
glory.  When D'Amato's third-string quarterback, Willie
Beaman (Jamie Foxx), is called off the bench after hard hits
knock out the 39-year-old first stringer, Cap Rooney (Dennis
Quaid) and the second-stringer, the conflict is drawn. 
Beaman, unlike Rooney, is in the game for the glory, for the
perks like contracts for commercials, for the women. 
D'Amato is in the game for the game.  Can the coach
convince this man, who turns out to be his best player, to
rethink his priorities?
   Employing a script he developed with John Logan, Oliver
Stone divides his ensemble into two groups.  Dr. Harvey
Mandrake (James Woods), an orthopedist willing to send the
butchered gladiators back into the field conflicts with another
physician, Dr. Allie Powers (Matthew Modine), who opts for
keeping them alive.  Vanessa Struthers (Lela Rochon),
Beaman's girl friend who likes the man but has no love for
football, has different ideas from Cap Rooney's wife Cindy
(Lauren Holly), who, incredibly, slaps her man hard for
wanting to give up the game, caring not a whit that the 39-
year-old is pretty-much battered and washed up.
   As  Salvatore Totino's camera runs up and down the field,
into the sheltered box seats of the champagne-drinking suits,
over to the abrasive sports announcer Jack Rose (John C.
McGinley), and, still hungry for more switches to black-and-
white for shots from Coach D'Amato's past--including Vince
Lombardi--the audience cannot be blamed for wondering
whether Oliver Stone is not unlike Christina Pagniacci.  He's
in this for the business of pretentious moviemaking and not
for the love of the game.
Rated R.  Running Time: 165 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Any Given Sunday (1999) 
Rated R; running time 165 minutes
Genre: Drama
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0146838 
Official site: http://www.anygivensunday.net/  
Written by: John Logan (based on the novel by Rob Huizenga)
Directed by: Oliver Stone
Starring: Al Pacino, Jamie Foxx, Cameron Diaz, Dennis Quaid, 
James Woods, LL Cool J, Matthew Modine, Ann-Margret, Aaron Eckhart, 
John McGinley, Jim Brown, Bill Bellamy, Lawrence Taylor, Lauren Holly,
Lela Rochon, Clifton Davis, Charlton Heston
[Author's note: Just as I noted in my review/analysis of  "The Best 
Man", I offer the following disclaimer: the text below is something more 
than a "standard" review.  Purposefully, I wanted to do more than just 
say "I liked this movie" or "I didn't like this movie", as "Any Given 
Sunday" struck me on a different level than "just another movie".  To 
that end, the following is much more detailed, story-wise, than those 
who have not yet seen the movie, may want to read; it is more a film 
analysis, I suppose, than a straight review.  The reader is referred to 
read small snippets of both my and The Diva's opinion on this flick on  
"Movie Bytes", as well as reading her separate  "Any Given Sunday" 
review (and even if you don't mind my spoilage, read it anyway, on its 
own merits).
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 1999
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamssunday.html
Professional Football: a game--a game, I say!--where grown men get paid 
obscene amounts of loot and booty to chase a weirdly-shaped ball up and 
down a field.  Which is to say, I can't stand pro football (or, for that 
matter, most other pro sports).
So why am I reviewing the football flick "Any Given Sunday", hmmm?  
Hmmm...
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
"On any given Sunday, any team can win or lose".  Such is the type of 
platitude spouted by Tony D'Amato (Al Pacino), the tired, worn-out coach 
of the Miami Sharks pro football team.  A so-so team that's seen its 
glory days behind it and is fading fast, the Sharks chances of making it 
to the playoffs are threatened by the injury of aging veteran 
quarterback Jack "Cap" Rooney (Dennis Quaid)--who, along with Luther 
"Shark" Lavay (former real-life football player Lawrence Taylor) was 
already considered to be expendable by owner Christina Pagniacci 
(Cameron Diaz in a tour-de-force role), a no-nonsense hard-hitter who 
inherited the team from her late father, who was also Tony's old 
compatriot.  But Pagniacci is not the least of D'Amato's worries: he 
also has to contend with idiot sports reporter Jack Rose (John 
McGinley); hungry assistant coach Nick Crozier (Aaron Eckhart); slimy 
team doctor Harvey Mandrake (James Woods); showboat running back Julian 
Washington (LL Cool J); and third-string young gun quarterback Willie 
Beamon (the outstanding Jamie Foxx), a wild player (on and off the 
field) who has a strange projectile ritual.
The Upshot (WARNING: **more-than-usual spoilers contained below**):
This flick opens with a quote by legendary football coach Vince 
Lombardi, who compares football players to warriors--and this theme is 
advanced throughout the movie by D'Amato and others.  "Not an auspicious 
start to this flick," thought I; "these overpaid boys (and girls, as in 
the case of owner Pagniacci) owe an apology to the real warriors of the 
world for being so full of themselves to make such ridiculous 
comparisons."  But that's another rant for another time...
Fortunately, I was distracted from that rant by the opening images of 
the Sharks and their opponents; director Oliver Stone (who, casting 
himself as a football announcer, might have found a new calling) and his 
cinematographer grabs the viewer right off the bat with the MTV-like 
cuts from the field to the stands to overhead shots of the stadium and 
back; similar photography is shot throughout a great deal of the movie.  
In the hands of a lesser (younger?) cast and director, this camerawork 
might've shown the emptiness under the window dressing; but here, it 
emphasizes the storyline--to the deficit of the traditionally-shot, 
slower parts of the story.  Those bits dragged the flick down more than 
they would have in "normal" situations, and made the time more 
noticeable.
But again fortunately, the "drag" times were few and far between.  The 
story was a standard one, pitting Old School (D'Amato, Cap, and 
Julian--yes, Julian; a flashy showboater, to be sure, but still 
respectful of the old ways) versus New Jack (Pagniacci, Nick, and 
Beamon) in a "duh, we knew that" parable (Owners are greedy fat cats who 
only care about the bottom line: "Mo' Money"; older Players are grizzled 
rich men who Do It For The Gipper; younger Players are spoiled rich boys 
who Do It For The Benjamins--and the adoring fans, who keep giving them 
The Benjamins; team doctors just wanna Pump You Up).  But the story is 
told in a fresh, non-straightforward way that keeps the audience's 
attention for the most part; and though most of the characters lines are 
drawn early on, with the exception of Matthew Modine's Dr. Oliver 
Powers--a "goody two-shoes" doctor who fronts Dr. Mandrake about his 
ethics--few, if any of the characters have a surplus of redeeming 
qualities (and even Powers' "goodness" is called to question late in the 
movie).
Indeed, the best part of the telling of "Sunday" lies in the "Badness" 
of the characters: D'Amato is a frightened has-been with narrow vision; 
Pagniacci Has No Heart; Washington can't hold on to the ball in his 
anxiousness to get to the next page in the record books; Shark has more 
brawn than brains when it comes to his health; Beamon gets the big head 
and disses his teammates and his girlfriend, Vanessa Struthers (Lela 
Rochon, a long way from her Siren of "Waiting To Exhale"--but, though a 
bit more chunky, still pretty); Mayor Tyrone Smalls (Clifton Davis), a 
Black man, is shown as questionably dirty as any White politician might 
be (more on the importance of that in "The Black Factor"); assistant 
coach Montezuma Monroe (Jim Brown, in another standout role) doesn't 
pamper his players one iota, calling their manhood into question at the 
drop of a hat; in a small, but noticeable bit, Cap's wife Cindy (Lauren 
Holly) shocks us with her bitchitude; and so on.  Not many totally 
redeeming qualities in this bunch.  And up to the point where Pagniacci 
and Beamon See The Light, I grooved on their Badness.
Unfortunately, Logan almost blew the lead the story had in the first 
three quarters, in a "delay of game" snoozer of a last quarter.  Having 
told more here than I'd intended to, I won't fumble the ending except to 
say that, considering what happened in the steam room scene, I came to 
expect the ending that played itself out.  And, I find I need to qualify 
the above sentiment: though the last quarter of the flick was 
disappointing, D'Amato's action in the last scene was excellent, showing 
glimpses of the heat that Al Pacino once had oozing through his acting 
pores but now seems to have lost as he's grown older (I preface this 
with the admittance that, not having seen "The Insider" yet, I don't 
know whether Pacino's tiredness throughout in this movie was indicative 
of his acting chops as of late, or just being intentionally 
in-character).
Though the photography and direction were great, the members of this 
large cast were just as important to this flick.  As noted above, Foxx, 
Diaz, and Brown were superb; Pacino and Quaid, though solid, played as 
"old" as they looked, Quaid almost to the point of being there to just 
pass Go, collect $200 (plus a percentage of the receipts).  If I hadn't 
seen the execrable "True Crime", I might've given Woods some play here; 
but since he's playing the same one-note character here that he did in 
that movie, his just-short-of "over the top" acting gets no love from 
this reviewer; Bill Bellamy (as wide receiver Jimmy Sanderson) made me 
smile with his pep talk to himself, though he was far overshadowed by 
Foxx and LL Cool J (who, himself, I saw as being excess luggage here).  
But on a sour note, as the constantly-soused Margaret Pagniacci 
(Christina's wacky mother), Ann-Margaret was just irritating; I was too 
oft reminded of whazhername's character on "Overboard" (a wholly 
forgettable Goldie Hawn/Kurt Russell flick that I can't be arsed to look 
up on the IMDB; trust me, it ain't worth the effort).  And is it just 
me, or did the appearance of a movie clip actor Charlton Heston was 
featured in, blow any currency his Commissioner character, could've had? 
If you're like me, the players (on and off the field) in "Any Given 
Sunday" won't elicit any sympathy--and neither will their counterparts 
in real life: oh, he didn't make a kabillion dollar bonus for kicking 
the most punts in a season? boofrigginhoo; what, she was made to jump 
off a short pier after her lame team didn't clear .500? good; serves her 
right.  But the story here was told well enough to let me leave my 
cynicism about the Games grown folk play, on the sidelines for three 
hours (and by the way, it is a coincidence that this movie lasted damn 
near as long as a real pro game would?  Hmmm...)
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
I can't speak highly enough of Jamie Foxx in his role in this flick; 
though I knew he was funny and talented from his "In Living Color" days 
[nota bene, Hollywood: Jim Carrey wasn't the only one in that cast.  But 
they don' hear me doe...], and I've thus far managed to miss him in that 
show of his on the WB (aka, The Ghetto Network), the depth of his acting 
here really made me sit up and take notice.  Funny in the right spots 
("My Name Is Willie" had me rollin') but serious in others, he smoked 
Pacino in their breakfast scene together, and had some good stuff to say 
about the role of Black athletes--something that's been a long time in 
coming to be voiced on-screen.  But is anyone listening? 
Another BF moment that stood out in a movie full of them, had to do with 
the characterization of the Mayor by Clifton Davis.  It is the stigma of 
the dearth of Black roles in movies, that when a Black person is shown, 
it's generally in either a comedic role, or as the Bad Guy.  That the 
Mayor could be played as a (questionably) Bad Guy here, was a bold move 
on the movie makers parts, I think; though there might be an outcry of 
"stereotyping!" by some Blacks, the sad reality is that there are some 
slimy Black politicians out there, just like their slimy White 
counterparts.  Forget spending all this energy on getting rid of the 
movie bad guys, dump the ones in real life, eh? 
And I'm surprised that I've made it this far without mentioning that 
remarkable young man in the locker room, who didn't say much but whose 
mere presence said a mouthful.  I'll try to be good, but I don't know 
how much longer I'll be able to keep it up. 
Bammer's Bottom Line:
It appears that long movies are becoming the norm these days: in the 
past few weeks, I've watched 10 hours between only four movies ("The 
Green Mile": 3 hrs. 15 min.; "Bicentennial Man": 2 hrs. 25 min.; "Stuart 
Little": 1 hr. 34 min.; and "Any Given Sunday": 2 hrs. 45 min.), with 
mixed results (my time in "Green" felt like a picnic compared to the 
torturous "Stuart").  Which goes to show that shorter is not necessarily 
better--but longer daggone bet' have a good reason for being so long.
For the most part, "Any Given Sunday" used its time well.  It could've 
stood a more careful snip or two in the editing box (and a little less 
ham-handedness during Beaman's and Christina's Obligatory Awakenings), 
but the excellent cinematography, tight cast, good soundtrack with more 
than just the usual Urban Contemporary song stylings offered (and yet, I 
must take issue with one of the "songs" featured during the game with 
the Rhinos, a rap number that prominently featured the phrase "my 
nigga".  When, My People? When?  sigh), and the great ending scene, made 
the time watching grown folk play their Games, time well-spent.  And did 
I mention bru-man in the locker room?  woo lawd.
"Any Given Sunday": (rating: greenlight)  
We have most def entered the MTV Generation of moviemaking (though 
including Oliver Stone in that description is a tenuous connection at 
best), where quick cuts and "special effects" rule the day in the movie 
theater.  What "Any Given Sunday" has that most MTV-esque flicks lack, 
though, is a mostly compelling story line (throughout the first 3/4, 
anyway), good acting (specifically from Jamie Foxx, Cameron Diaz, and 
surprisingly, Jim Brown) and an uncredited three-legged fella who has to 
be seen to be believed.

Author
John Beachem
Imagine watching the superbowl, it's a goal line stand with four seconds left
in the game. The tension is palpable as you clench and unclench your hands into
fists, waiting for the final play. Then, just as the play commences, you're
surrounded by blaring rap music and the screen suddenly cuts to a bunch of
people in the stands beating each other up. This seems to be the way Oliver
Stone pictures football. I'm sure some will call his filming ideas here moden
and innovative, but I think obnoxious is a more fitting adjective. Stone's idea
of direction seems to involve the camera never sitting still for more than two
seconds at a time, and never allowing people to speak without pounding music
accompanying them which drowns out all that they say. 
The Miami Sharks are having a terrible season. Led by head coach Tony D'Amato
(Al Pacino) and aging quarterback Cap Rooney (Dennis Quaid), they've lost their
past four games. The team's owner has just passed away and left things in the
hands of his money grubbing daughter, Christina Pagniacci (Cameron Diaz).
Chistina wants to permanently bench Cap after he is injured, and place third
stringer Willie Beaman (Jamie Foxx) at the head of the team. The problem is,
the team doesn't much respect Beaman despite his skills. Tony tries desperately
to bring the team back together as everything he has worked to build crumbles
around him.
After watching this film, something interesting occured to me. I haven't
enjoyed a single movie which LL cool J (playing the team's star running back
here) has appeared in, yet I've found his performance in each of his films to
be rather entertaining. The man is not without talent, but he doesn't seem
capable of selecting a good film to appear in. As for the rest of the cast,
they most likely would have performed well if it weren't for some of the worst
dialogue ever written. Then again, I'm only assuming that all the dialogue was
terrible. I couldn't hear half of it because the "music" was playing so loudly.
On those rare occasions when the film actually tries to deliver a message,
we're interrupted by a cutaway to clouds moving across the sky or something
similarly pointless.
I always try to point out the good qualities in every film I see, but I'm hard
pressed to do so here. Lawrence Taylor, the hall of famer shows up playing the
team's linebacker and actually turns in one of the film's better performances.
James Woods shows up in what amounts to little more than a cameo as the team
doctor, and Charleton Heston is seen briefly playing the commisioner. The final
game of the movie is vaguely interesting, despite being incredibly predictable.
That about does it for the good points here. The remainder of the film is
composed of pointless pop culture references, music videos and inane speeches.
"Any Given Sunday" runs insanely long at 162 minutes. Don't worry though, you
won't fall asleep because the music will constantly be pounding in your ears.
I'd recommend the film only if you're a die hard fan of either Oliver Stone or
Al Pacino, although Pacino appears rather embarassed to be in this movie. The
movie contains a rather amusing little twist at the very end, but it's shown
during the credits. Good luck staying through the rest of the film to catch it.
I give "Any Given Sunday" one and a half stars and a recommendation to stay
far, far away.
Feel free to e-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
I don't follow football too closely (a recent peek at the NFL standings
made me exclaim, `Who moved the Cardinals to the NFC West, and why are
they doing so well?'), but I recognize a deep hole when I see it.  The
Miami Sharks are in a bit of a hole before Any Given Sunday even starts,
and after a few minutes have gone by, that hole is transformed into a
chasm.
In back-to-back plays at the end of the first half of the game, the
fictitious Sharks lose their three-time league MVP quarterback -
thirty-eight-year-old Jack "Cap" Rooney (Dennis Quaid, Playing By Heart)
- and his inexperienced backup.  Willie Beamen (Jamie Foxx, How to Be a
Player), the third-string passer, is inserted into the game, but he
pukes on the field before he even touches the ball and mistakenly lines
up behind his right guard for a snap.  The Sharks lose their fourth
consecutive game going into a much-needed bye week, appearing to be
extremely far removed from the team that brought home the AFFA Pantheon
Cup less than four years ago.
Coach Tony D'Amato (Al Pacino, The Insider) is understandably upset.
Not only is his team leader gone, but D'Amato also has to contend with
the bitch-on-wheels team owner, Cornell business graduate Christina
Pagniacci (Cameron Diaz, Being John Malkovich).  The spoiled-brat
daughter of the team's former owner, Pagniacci wants a winning team in
order to convince the city to give her a new stadium so that the team
will be worth more money when she puts the Sharks on the market.  When
Beamen shows promise in the quarterback position, Pagniacci orders
D'Amato to play the flashy up-and-comer, despite his lack of respect for
his coach and teammates.
Sunday concentrates more on D'Amato's discord with Pagniacci and Beamen
than it does on its football clashes, showing the game as more of a
business than a sport.  Almost every character in this film is
despicable in one way or another.  The players respect money and are
more concerned with their individual statistics, bonuses and endorsement
deals than they are with the performance of the team.  Their petty wives
and girlfriends are even worse.  D'Amato wants only to win, despite the
cost, while team doctor Harvey Mandrake (James Woods, The General's
Daughter) falsifies medical reports to keep players in and out of games,
jeopardizing lives in the process.
While you may think that Sunday's focus would be on the game of
football, there is a lot more to the film.  Almost three hours more.
Director Oliver Stone (U-Turn) spends as much time off the field as he
does on, realistically showing black players dressing like pimps (what
normal person wears suits and top hats like this?), the effect of
twenty-four-hour sports television on the game and, most importantly,
the transformation of the game from the hard-nosed, old-school, Vince
Lombardi style of play to the flamboyant personal style of today's
statistic-obsessed, drug-addled players.  Maybe it's because two NFL
stars have been arrested already this week (one after a nationwide
manhunt), but this portrayal should be particularly alarming to the NFL.
The whole old-school/new-school battle is exemplified well here between
D'Amato and Beamen, who seem to speak different languages at times.
Even though the final reel is full of every sports-movie cliché that
they could dig up, the film is still enjoyable to watch.  Errrrthat is
if you have a durable rear-end.  Toward the end of the film, D'Amato
delivers a stirring locker-room speech to his team about the importance
of inches on the field and how they needed to win the battle for those
inches.  I couldn't help thinking that if they had only trimmed about
10,000 inches of celluloid off of the final cut, it may have been a
better film.
Stone's Sunday, which he co-wrote with John Logan (Bats), is probably
his most visual film since Natural Born Killers, which is mostly a good
thing.  The game sequences are spectacular, especially during a playoff
game when the final seconds tick off of the scoreboard in a highly
stylistic fashion.  Part of making the movie look cool is shrouding the
playing field in darkness, which just seems silly, and making sideline
conversations audible despite an obvious lack of shouting.  I expected
more shots of delirious fans, but Christ, that would have just slowed
the movie down.  As it was, three major stars were cut out of the film
at the last minute  Ed Burns, Tim Sizemore and Jim Caviezel all had
roles in the film, but don't actually make in onto the screen.  Sunday
is believed to incorporate parts of former Oakland Raiders team doctor
Rob Huizenga's book `You're Okay, It's Just A Bruise: A Doctor's
Sideline Secrets About Pro Football's Most Outrageous Team.'
Most of Sunday's acting is pretty decent, with former players Jim Brown
and Lawrence Taylor surprisingly strong.  The casting is amazing, and
I'm not sure that I've ever seen a wider gamut of actors in one film.
Did you ever think that you would see Charlton Heston and Bill Bellamy
in the same movie?  I think that's one of the signs of the apocalypse.
Ditto for Ann-Margret and LL Cool J.  Another apocalyptic warning is a
football picture than takes almost as long as a real football game.  At
least in real life you get timeouts for bathroom and snack breaks.
2:50  R for adult language, violence, nudity, drug and alcohol abuse
and adult situations

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/d66da9a762ecfecb8825684b000a1a94?OpenDocument
Football is as engrained in our society's mores as deeply as war, family
values, and politics -- at least that's what Oliver Stone would like you
to believe.  To back up this statement, ANY GIVEN SUNDAY analyzes the
effects of a culture that elevates professional athletes and coaches to
a plateau, which immortalizes them as heroes of the common man.  Stone's
football fairytale is a culmination of every anecdote, highlight, or
soundbite you've ever seen associated with the pigskin, wrapped up in an
aesthetically pleasing Christmas package, and sealed with a kiss from
team owner Cameron Diaz.  Stone aims to please, and he doesn't miss a
single cliché of the revered and scrutinized American athlete.
At its core, ANY GIVEN SUNDAY is the story of Miami Sharks coach Tony
D'Amato (Al Pacino - THE GODFATHER, DOG DAY AFTERNOON) and his two
quarterbacks, Willie Beamen (Jamie Foxx - THE GREAT WHITE HYPE, BOOTY
CALL) and Cap Bowman (Dennis Quaid - THE BIG EASY, INNERSPACE).  The
quarterback is the most vital position in the game.  He is the team
spokesperson and field chief, and he serves as a crucial link between
coaches, administration, and players.  When legendary two-time Pantheon
Cup (aka: Super Bowl) champion Cap Bowman ruptures a disk after a bone
crushing hit, coach Tony is left with Willie Beamen (Foxx), an athletic,
yet untested QB.  His team has lost four straight and appears to be
plummeting in a downward spiral with the playoffs right around the
corner.   He's got delusional team owner Christina Pagniacci (Cameron
Diaz) and sports analyst Jack Rose (John McGinley, doing his best Jim
Rose impersonation) breathing down his neck because of his outdated
coaching style, and a team of players he's losing control of.
When Willie Beaman turns out to be a phenom and his team makes the
playoffs, Coach D'Amato must decide whether to stick with Cap, the
battered yet savvy veteran, or turn the reigns over to the flamboyant
prodigy, Beaman, who has been changing plays in the huddle, and is
selfishly leaving the rest of the team out of his newfound success.  In
choosing, Coach D must analyze his place in the history of the game, the
modern athlete versus the ghosts of the past, and the sacrifices he has
made of family and friends in living up to the team motto, "Whatever it
takes!"
If you're even vaguely familiar with the Oliver Stone movie formula,
you'll know in advance that there will be about eight subplots going on
at once.  Lawrence Taylor, the NFL all-time sacks leader, is an aging
linebacker faced with a nerve injury that could take his life, but he
can't collect his million dollar-signing bonus unless he continues to
play.  James Woods is Dr. Harvey Mandrake, a slimy team doctor with no
compassion for the physical well being of his players, who will
authorize or withhold the athletes from competition at the discretion of
the team owner.  Mathew Modine (THE BLACKOUT, VISION QUEST) is his
medical assistant, who attempts to act as a moral blockade for the
corrupt Mandrake.  Meanwhile, Ann-Margaret, (GRUMPY OLD MEN) the
matriarch of the Pagniacci family, maintains that the pressures of
owning a professional football team were responsible for killing her
husband and the cause of her miserable existence.  The intertwined side
stories add much-needed volume to the basic theme of the coach and his
quarterback controversy.
Oliver Stone unveils the Miami Sharks from all angles.  The film goes
inside the lives of the players: from the expensive women, to the drugs,
to the seemingly endless flow of money, and into their volatile home
lives.  He plays the race card effectively by making references to the
problem of all-white ownership in a sport that is dominated with black
athletes.  Yet his proclamation is not overly bold, because at the same
time, he casts Dallas Cowboys owner Barry Switzer as a color
commentator.  He also criticizes the media for its suffocating coverage
and idolatry of the league's players through his portrayal of
pretentious sports personality Jack Rose.
The football scenes are accompanied with music and lighting reminiscent
of a music video.  A true fan may find some of the action scenes a
little hard to swallow, but they're fun to watch, even when they're
unbelievable.  Also noteworthy is the fact that the coach would surely
notice if a QB were changing plays in the huddle.  For Pacino to have to
find out from LL Cool J, his star running back, is preposterous.  Just
ask any football coach.
On the plus side, the enormous ensemble cast is fantastic and there are
more cameos than I can count or make reference to.  See if you can pick
out some of the NFL greats yourself.  Pacino is once again stunning and
James Woods is like a chameleon putting on yet another credible
performance, but Cameron Diaz's act really takes the cake as a heartless
owner caught up in the high stakes of a winning football team that's
losing money.
Overall, it's a high-octane testosterone laden picture.  If you like
football, you'll love this film.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
James Sanford
         In the world of director Oliver Stone, a slap sounds like a
crack of thunder and a tackle like a building being imploded.
High-decibel jams by DMX, Moby and Kid Rock underscore almost
everything. The camera constantly jerks and weaves, frantically trying
to determine where the action is.
 The screen is cluttered with overlapping images and double
exposures. And, to be heard at all, dialogue must be shouted. That's
what you get -- for a full three hours -- in "Any Given Sunday," Stone's
tribute to the seamy institution we call professional football.
 It's a movie designed to bruise the eyes and ears, which it
does, thanks to Stone's sheer force of will and a team of editors that
turn even the most mundane moments into sonic and visual cacophony. When
coach Tony D'Amato (Al Pacino, making up for his restrained performance
in "The Insider" by bellowing and howling at every opportunity) tries to
reason with headstrong young quarterback Willie Beaman (Jamie Foxx), the
conversation is intercut with shots of storm clouds gathering, bits of
grainy black-and-white football films and clips of Charlton Heston in
"Ben Hur."
Take away the bravado and flashiness, however, and "Sunday" reveals
itself as a surprisingly conventional drama plagued with many of the
same problems that have burdened Stone's other work.
 Again, he teaches us there are three kinds of women: the
heartless, scheming harpy, a la Daryl Hannah in "Wall Street"
(represented here by Cameron Diaz as Miami Sharks owner Christina
Pagniacci); the worn-out nag, along the lines of Sissy Spacek in "JFK"
(in this case, it's Ann-Margret as Christina's bitter, cocktail-swilling
mom); and the eager prostitute/groupie who lurks on the sidelines,
waiting to ambush her man when his defenses are down (too many examples
to note). The only exception in the film is a cipher named Vanessa (Lela
Rochon), who steadfastly stands by Beaman until he becomes a star, then
jumps off the gravy train and disappears from the story.
 The men here don't fare much better, since Stone and co-author
John Logan have written them as concepts rather than as characters.
D'Amato is the die-hard veteran struggling to hold on to his place in a
changing world and to secure a place for his buddy Jack "Cap" Rooney
(Dennis Quaid), an aging quarterback whose body and spirit are rapidly
deteriorating. Beaman starts off as a bright-eyed kid from a religious
home, then turns almost immediately into a fatuous egotist who gives
self-adoring interviews and records an awful rap CD.
 Lightening up the high-pressure atmosphere a bit are John C.
McGinley as a desperate-to-be-hip sportscaster and James Woods as
Harvey, a devious team orthopedist who's all too happy to pump up the
players with painkillers in the name of the game. "What the hell's next?
" Harvey groans, as he adds up the various injuries incurred by the
Sharks during one tumultuous game. "Stigmata?"
 The conflicts and crises that erupt when these people are
thrown together against a background of politics, lucrative endorsement
deals, free drugs and expensive call girls are mostly what you'd expect,
and although Stone and Logan's melodrama reeks with in-your-face style
(D'Amato and Christina are always telling people to "pump up the
volume," and Stone cheerfully complies), it's definitely on the shallow
side. When pressed to say what has changed football from an all-American
game into the sleazy business it is today, Stone feebly points a finger
at television as the culprit, then wriggles away from the question. His
explanation for Christina's strident show-me-the-money attitude is even
lamer: It turns out her late daddy always wanted a son, so she's done
her best to deny her femininity.
 Despite such lazy scripting and two-dimensional characters,
"Sunday" is often engrossing nonetheless, simply because Stone is too
much of a showman to put on a second-rate circus. Much of the action on
the field is spectacularly staged and brilliantly cut together, and the
volatile match-up of Diaz and Pacino makes the fights between Christina
and D'Amato exciting to follow.
 The one thing all the flamboyance can't cover up is the story's
complete lack of any emotional impact whatsoever. In Stone's domain,
anything that's not loud, bright, fast or flashy never gets into the
game. This is an arena for gladiators, and mere human beings belong on
the bench. James Sanford

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Oliver Stone.
Cast: Al Pacino, Jamie Foxx, Cameron Diaz, Dennis Quaid, James Woods, Aaron 
Eckhart, Ann-Margret, Matthew Modine, Lela Rochon, Lawrence Taylor, Lauren 
Holly, LL Cool J, John C. McGinley, James Karen, Elizabeth Berkley, Jim 
Brown, Charlton Heston.
1999 - 170 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, nudity, and mild violence).
Reviewed December 23, 1999.  
Thus far, several reviews for "Any Given Sunday," Oliver Stone's fully 
charged ode to professional football, have stated that only those viewers who 
are fans of football will be able to enjoy it. Strange, then, that I think 
the exact opposite. Although I didn't like "Any Given Sunday" and I despise 
football, it is certainly one of the major pictures of its type that has a 
large chance to be enjoyed by several different sections of the adult 
population, whether they care for the sport or not. Stone does not dwell on 
the football-playing scenes and his rapid-fire editing is so quick that what 
is happening on the field is often nearly unintelligible. Taking a look at 
the politics that go on behind the lines, the picture is occasionally savvy 
and perceptive. But where it ultimately fails is in Stone's usual 
"everything-but-the-kitchen-sink" attitude. While this approach sometimes 
works to benefit one of his movies (1994's "Natural Born Killers"), it 
quickly grows tedious here, signaling not originality from the accomplished 
filmmaker, but clear pretentiousness.
A behind-the-scenes expose of a fictional team in the NFL, the Miami Sharks, 
Al Pacino headlines the marvelous, all-star cast as Tony D'Amato, the 
frustrated head coach of the team whose longtime career is beginning to 
crumble around him. For one, he is constantly disagreeing with the team's new 
manager, a determined young woman by the name of Christina Pagniacci (Cameron 
Diaz), who has recently acquired the team from her highly regarded father. 
Things fire up between the two when star quarterback Jack Rooney (Dennis 
Quaid) gets injured, and Christina wants him to be gotten rid of for good, 
and have talented hotshot rookie Willie Beaman (Jamie Foxx) take over. The 
Sharks are on a dismal losing streak and Christina, new to the profession, 
will stop at nothing to get positive results as the playoffs wind down, 
partially out of trying to please her deceased father, and also because she 
is quickly losing sight of the things that are most important in her life.
The no-holds-barred editing and cinematography, by Salvatore Totino, of "Any 
Given Sunday" wear out their welcome from the very first scene and the camera 
only intermittently stops long enough to capture a full scene. Striking and 
undoubtedly flashy, but also needlessly unnecessary, this style by Stone 
occasionally holds a purpose in his other films, but here, is only used to 
cover up what is basically a highly cliched and predictable sports movie. A 
170-minute epic that could have been 120 minutes, the story is very thin, and 
there are so many characters that are so pointless to the story, they could 
easily have been cut completely out. Then there are other characters that do 
hold some sort of purpose, but screenwriters John Logan and Oliver Stone 
don't even appear to be making any attempt to develop and flesh them out, and 
their subplots are entirely dropped in midstream, not to be brought up again. 
Consequently, the climactic big game is just about as conventional as they 
come, albeit with razzle-dazzle editing that makes each quarter of the game 
go by in two minutes each. If anything, those who aren't football fanatics 
can take ease in knowing Stone does not meddle on the actual game, much more 
preferring to center on what goes on after the action on the field is over. 
Entirely predictable from start to conclusion, only the final scene during 
the end credits divulges a surprising plot development.
If severely flawed on many levels (this is one of Oliver Stone's weakest 
films), the performances are the glue that keeps everything from fully 
self-destructing. Al Pacino is superior here than in the role he is currently 
getting more attention for, in Michael Mann's "The Insider," as he isn't 
playing a character quite as much like his usual persona. 
Proving why I now firmly believe she is one of the most intelligent and 
talented actresses in their twenties, Cameron Diaz more than holds her own 
with Pacino in several head-on verbal battles with each other. As Christina 
Pagniacci, she is the type of woman who knows what she wants, but is still a 
little naive in her decisions, and it is the one character with an effective 
emotional arc. Diaz could have come off as a one-dimensional witch with a 
capital "B," but unlike the other throwaway roles, her's is the one that is 
most carefully handled.
In two wasted supporting turns, Lela Rochon and Elizabeth Berkley add 
much-needed flare and a human element into the story, as Willie's neglected 
girlfriend and a high-priced hooker that spends a night with Tony, 
respectively. Rochon is so likable and her character so nicely defined (under 
the circumstances) that it is a shame nothing more is done with her. Berkley, 
who has come a long way in her acting skills since her starring role in 
1995's "Showgirls," is wonderfully charismatic and surprisingly involving, 
even in only two scenes. 
All other actors are top-notch, as well, but sadly, are not given anything 
notable to do. Aaron Eckhart, Dennis Quaid, James Woods, Matthew Modine, 
Lauren Holly, Charlton Heston, even LL Cool J--they are all fine thespians 
who perform their roles just about as well as could possibly be expected, but 
are mostly headscratchers in the writing department. 
"Any Given Sunday" is a fast-paced, entertaining drama that, 
little-by-little, grows problematic when you stop to think long enough about 
its specifics. Stone is an innovative director most of the time, but has hit 
a brick wall with his latest picture, trying to cover up its flaws with 
personal technical expertise and forgetting about the substance part of the 
equation. The problem is, the flash-cutting style of a Jerry Bruckheimer 
production (such as 1998's "Armageddon" and 1997's "Con Air") is something I 
have no patience for, and is especially distressing when you realize someone 
as intelligent in his craft as Stone has resorted to such desperate 
gimmickry. 

Author
Alex Ioshpe
CAST: Al Pacino, Cameron Diaz, Dennis Quide, James Woods, Jamie Coxx, Charlton Heston
Life is a fierce competition. You are always racing forward, but no
matter how good you are, there are always men that are younger than
you, tougher than you, stronger than you, racing along side with
you. Everyone of them is ready to push you aside, to kill, in order to
come first. This time the subject is the brutal world of fictitious
American football team the Miami Sharks. Possibly the most
"Oliver-Stoney" Oliver Stone movie to date, Pacino essentially plays a
hard-drinking football coach who must reverse the Sharks' losing
streak, while the predictably underwritten ice maiden comes in the
form of Diaz' ball-breaking club owner. But he starts questioning his
own priorities. Is winning really the most important, or is it
something else?
Comparing American Football to American life is an interesting idea
and Oliver Stone is the natural choice. Here everything is in the
open. The players stand against each other, ready to release all their
energy into one single move. Ready to sacrifice themselves for a
single moment of victory. It just takes a couple of seconds, and in
that time, you either survive or go down. If you make your way
forward, and come out alive, crawling on the bodies of your teammates,
there is no end to your glory, until a better player comes along, and
then you will be pushed to the ground, and be forgotten. They are the
gladiators of our time. This is their arena and America is
watching. But on any given Sunday, no matter how good you are, you'll
either win or loose...
This is certainly Oliver Stone's (Platoon, Born the Fourth of July,
Natural Born Killers) strangest film in some time. He has always been
known as a bold director, unafraid to make his statement, no matter
how risky or controversial it is. Nothing is subtle. Everything is in
the open. He has proven to be a "man of the truth". And "Any Given
Sunday" is drained in his most famous trademarks: the twisted
cinematography, flashy editing, multidimensional sound. Yet, there is
something about this film that somehow makes it worse than Stone's
previous. It's not that I didn't enjoy it. I certainly did, but I do
not quite know why. Maybe because I share Stone's fascination with
American Football or maybe because of the film's incredible visual
panache and solid acting. But if you ask me "what is this film about",
I couldn't tell you. In all his past films , Stone was very careful to
pose the questions in the right way and then energetically move
towards a goal, making his way through unfamiliar territories. But
here it seems as if he couldn't make up his mind. At first it seems as
it is about the American society and the clever parallels to American
Football. Then Stone starts criticizing the NFL, but in the end his
love for the game takes complete control over the story, transforming
it into a fancy filmed football game. It is a confused, but powerfully
executed film that has its golden moments. Though the script isn't
particularly well written, its holes are compensated by an amazing
cast, that is capable of transforming any cliche into originality. Al
Pacino, who looks incredible in any role, is magnificent here. It is
much more Pacino's character than the scripts, since he goes further,
deeper into the mind and heart of a coach that looses touch, faith in
himself and life. Dennis Quide is very impressive as an on-field
leader privately haunted by insecurity and Jamie Coxx is very nice,
proving to be a serious and capable actor. Otherwise the film can
boast of names such as Cameron Diaz, James Woods, LL Cool J, Charlt o
Some of it is incredible. And, in a way, Stone does the same with
American Football as Spielberg did with WW2 in "Saving Private
Ryan". The sense of "being there", not observe from above with the
popcorn in one hand and a coke in another, but actually being on the
field, look at it from the player's eyes, feel the adrenaline rushing
through your body. Unfortunately these amazing sequences, no matter
how great they are, are deluding us from the movie's actual
objective. Stone gets lost amidst mirrors and smoke, and all the
energy that is released during these two hours, is chanalized into
nothing. In the end, no matter how noble the intentions, the film
wrestles with its own shadow.

Author
Donlee Brussel
Cast: Al Pacino, Cameron Diaz, Dennis Quaid, Jamie Foxx, James Woods,
LL Cool J, Lawrence Taylor, Jim Brown, Bill Bellamy
Director: Oliver Stone
Screenplay: John Logan and Oliver Stone, based on "You're Okay, It's
Just A Bruise" by Rob Huizenga, and "Playing Hurt" by Daniel Pyne
Rated R
165 minutes
In the grand tradition of Tyler Durden and Frank T.J. Mackie, I give
you the ultimate penis power spokesperson of the new millenium, Oliver
Stone. Men's Journal calls him "the premier macho filmmaker of modern
times." He's the main man behind the football movie to end all football
movies, "Any Given Sunday."
What is it about football that intrigues America more than any other
sport? Why of all sports do more than 100 million people watch
football? Maybe because wrestling is faker than cubic zirconians,
baseball's only exciting when you're drunk, hockey is Canadian and
boxing doesn't allow ten guys to pile on top of opponents while their
face is in the ground holding a football for dear life because if they
don't keep the ball in their hands by the time the cameras or the ref
comes, that $10 million dollar contract they just signed is void. With
Oliver Stone, we know we will get one of the best sports films of the
90s as well as his name brand "cinematic masturbation" as my colleague
James Berardinelli puts it.
"Fight Club is not football on television. You aren't watching a bunch
of guys you don't know beating on each other halfway around the world
via satellite with a two minute delay, commercials pitching beer every
three minutes and applause now and then for station identification.
After Fight Club, watching football on television was like watching
pornography when you could be having great sex."
Today, Stone feels that the game is endangered: "I was talking to Jim
Brown about it, and he says TV money has had a pervasive influence.
Commercials interrupt the game's momentum. They have taken a one-hour
game that was beautiful and original and turned it into a three-hour
exercise in American style. It wrecks the concentration of the players."
Welcome to the playing field of "Any Given Sunday." Included in Stone's
all-star line-up is Tony D'Amato (Al Pacino), an over the hill
traditional coach; Christina Pagniacci (Cameron Diaz),his ball-busting
team owner; Jack "Cap" Rooney (Dennis Quaid), the fallen legend
quarterback; Willie Beaman (Jamie Foxx), his arrogant young
replacement; Julian Washington (LL Cool J), the millionaire star
running back; and Harvey Mandrake (James Woods), the mercenary team
doctor. Here for support are Montezuma Monroe (Jim Brown), the
defensive coordinator; Luther 'Shark' Lavay (Lawrence Taylor), a
blocker; and Jimmy Sanderson (Bill Bellamy), the wide receiver.
They're all a part of the Miami Sharks family, and what a happy family
they are! These guys are involved in the most family friendly things:
drugs, greed, ageism, blackmail, racism, sexism, medical malpractice
and my favorite, prostitution. Yes, we all know Stone has been
directing subtle G rated family films like this for a long time. This
one is especially noble because of a full frontal shot of a black
football player that puts Marky Mark's prosthetic to shame.
"Any Given Sunday" also has the honor of being the most stylish MTV
music video ever. Oliver uses just about every visual effect known to
man while wigger music from DMX, Mystikal and Trick Daddy plays in the
background along with "original" music composed by Casio keyboard demo
user extraordinaire, Swizz Beatz. Also on the soundtrack are headbanger
favorites from Kid Rock and Hole. Stone probably has the best team of
editors working today because there is not a single dull moment in this
film. From minute one Oliver throws us right onto the field, right into
the game and never lets us off. Sadly, this is a prime example of a
style over substance film.
Dialogue in this film sparkles with poignancy and the acting is strong.
Al Pacino is at his intense best and Jamie Foxx provides a biting
dramatic breakout performance. So where did "Sunday" go wrong? What
happened? Clichés happened. Every sports film cliché is here. There's
the torch handing between the seasoned veteran and the rookie
phenomenon. There's the Big Speech before the Big Game which ends with
the Big Play where we see the Big Clock letting us know that the player
only has fill in the blank seconds left to make the Big Score during
which, a Robin Williams-type score plays in the background. Worst of
all, "Any Given Sunday" has a scene where it completely rips off "Jerry
Maguire."
Do I recommend seeing "Any Given Sunday" despite the flaws? You betcha.
It's the most realistic football film you'll ever see because all the
hits are real, all the plays are real. "Sunday" is the closest you will
ever get to the field without really being there.

Author
Jerry Saravia
When it comes to Oliver Stone movies, they can either run hot or cold but, at
least, you are riveted by the images, the sounds, and the persuasive
performances. Oliver Stone's newest film, "Any Given Sunday," an epic parable
about football, has lots of visual razzle-dazzle to spare, plenty of
bone-crushing sound effects, and some temporarily persuasive performances. It
is also a complete comedown from the director, a relentlessly torpid mishmash
of montages within montages that will make you want to take some Valium to
relieve the massive headache you will get.
Al Pacino stars as Tony D'Amato, a veteran football coach of the fictional
Miami Sharks, who drinks too much, hollers too much, screws around with
prostitutes, and is getting too old for the game. A spoiled, bratty rich girl,
Christina Pagniacci (Cameron Diaz), the late team owner's daughter, starts
telling Tony to "hold it together, you bull-headed moron!" She wants control of
the game, but in more economic terms. Tony also has a young star quarterback,
Willie Beaman (Jamie Foxx), who is egoistic, has no team spirit, and is certain
that the game is his. He replaces the older, injured Jack "Cap" Rooney (Dennis
Quaid), who faces a wife (Lauren Holly) that demands he continue playing the
game for another couple of years. 
In fact, there are many characters in "Any Given Sunday," but so few are given
more than a few minutes onscreen at a time. The cast is eclectic (James Woods,
Ann-Margret, Matthew Modine, Jim Brown, Elizabeth Berkley) but there are only
traces of them. That leaves us with Pacino, an excellent actor, who is given
shards of a character to play, but without any depth or dimension. Cameron Diaz
does as well as she can, but like everyone else, she sort of drifts in and out
of the frame barely making an impression. This is akin to watching football on
television, the cast resembles nothing more than stick figures in Stone's
arena. 
The biggest problem lies with the editing. Stone has assembled footage in
extraordinary shifts of mood and excitement in films such as "J.F.K," "Natural
Born Killers," and "U-Turn," but here, it is the shift of one close-up shot
after another in rapid succession. This often feels like super MTV, shots and
whole sequences are so choppily edited that they leave a feeling of gradual
disorientation. The worst of it is during the actual football games. Instead of
showing us the mechanics and strategies of playing between the offense and
defense, we get close-ups of bodies flying through the air, lots of physical
poundings and flips, and twisting footballs, but no sense that any of this is
being played on the field. In other words, we never get a panoramic sense of
the field itself, and so everything is a blur, leaving us wondering as to what
exactly is happening on screen. To top it off, there are numerous montages
within montages, clouds speeding through the horizon, and the usual moonlight
shots, which Stone has shown us before. All this is draining to watch, and one
loses interest quickly. 
It is also hard to judge the actors in the film since they are cut-and-pasted
in such randomness that Stone barely lets a take run longer than three seconds.
A theme is hidden somewhere in this mess about how football players have no
education and have nothing else to offer besides great games and reaping in
lots of profits. But all is lost in Stone's grandiose style that, for the first
time in his career, has no true rhyme or reason (celebrityism and lifestyles of
the players, not to mention physical abuses of their bodies, are given minimal
exposure). The overall effect is blurry, and casts a pale shadow of the once
great Oliver Stone. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or comments at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Sean Townsend
STARRING:  Al Pacino, Jamie Foxx, Dennis Quaid, James Woods, Cameron
Diaz
DIRECTOR:  Oliver Stone
WRITTEN BY:  John Logan, Oliver Stone, Rob Huizenga (novel), Pat Toomay
(novel)
The worlds of professional sports and movies are very similar in a lot
of ways:  both involve spending vast sums of money for the sake of
entertainment; both bring adoration and fame to highly paid, instantly
recognizable stars, and both feature central figures upon whom all the
pressure rests.  When they succeed, they are respected and admired,
sometimes even immortalized.  When they fail, they shoulder the blame
and often lose their jobs.  Whether you call them 'directors' or
'coaches,' their lives are usually summed up, rightly or wrongly, in
terms of their work.  Which brings us to Tony D'Amato, the fictional
football coach and central character in nonfictional director Oliver
Stone's Any Given Sunday.  It's not hard to see why the beleaguered
Stone wanted to do a film about a guy whose passion remains firm despite
being second-guessed, criticized, and told he's washed up.  It's this
passion, both D'Amato's and Stone's, that makes the film worth watching.
D'Amato (Pacino, looking a bit like Pat Riley after a huge loss) is the
coach of the Miami Sharks, a team whose four-game losing skid is
compounded by the injury of star quarterback Jack "Cap" Rooney (Quaid)
just as the playoffs are approaching.  Luckily, third-stringer Willie
Beamen (former sitcom star Foxx) is an undiscovered talent, and he gives
the team a much-needed boost in the late season.  Not so luckily, he's
as mouthy as he is talented, and his public remarks about the team and
particularly D'Amato quickly cause friction as his fame increases.  To
make D'Amato's problems worse, he's got to deal with ice-cold Christina
Pagniacci (Diaz, attacking the role with unsmiling relish), the
win-at-any-cost owner who has inherited the Sharks from her father.  To
her, the players-- and coach-- are mere stocks to be traded away when
their value shows signs of diminishing.  Then there's team doctor Harvey
Mandrake (Woods, in fine snarky form), who uses the players' willingness
to sacrifice their bodies as justification for his lack of medical
ethics.  Worst of all is sportswriter Jack Rose (Stone film regular John
C. McGinley), who attacks D'Amato relentlessly in print and on TV.  If
there were any lingering doubts as to Stone's opinion of critics, they
can now be safely put to rest.
None of these characters are particularly original, and the football
games that drive the plot are no less predictable in their melodramatic,
down-to-the-wire outcomes than any other standard sports-movie fare.
This is not to say that the games aren't exciting to watch.  The camera
pans in blurry zigzags and quick shots of bodies in motion;  linebackers
crouch like hunting tigers, stalking their quarterback prey.  The hits
are huge, bone-crunching affairs punctuated by loud, beat-heavy music.
What really makes Any Given Sunday work, though, are the characteristic
Stone touches:  his fascinating depiction of the machinations behind the
scenes, his lengthy scenes of charged dialogue, and especially his
moralistic approach to the effect of television and big money on
athletes, coaches, and the game itself.  Football players have often
been called modern gladiators; Stone takes the metaphor one step
further, using the famous Ben-Hur chariot race to make his point.  Like
the hapless charioteers who fall and are crushed by their onrushing
rivals, today's pro football players are slaves to the spectacle, meat
for the grinder of televised entertainment.  The only thing the
highlight reels crave more than a Hail Mary pass, Stone points out, is
footage of a player puking or a blown knee.  Even more than Quaid's
aging star quarterback, the tragedy of this fate is embodied in the
character of Luther "Shark" Lavay, who is willing to literally risk his
life for his performance bonus.  Former New York Giants great Lawrence
Taylor gives the role a naturalness and depth of feeling that could only
have come from living it.
Any Given Sunday is both a nostalgic remembrance of professional
football's storied history, and an ultimately optimistic look at how
today's game relates to that tradition.  It may be bigger, richer, and
more slick than ever before, but the love of the game is still the most
important thing.  In that, the worlds of sports and movies are very
similar indeed.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
In any given year, director Oliver Stone will attempt to focus his manic
tendencies into a version of reality seen through the eyes of a man who's
been through wars, Wall Street, the White House, Jim Morrison's dirty
laundry and a long, summer heat with Sean Penn and Jennifer Lopez. Now
whether you dig the man's style, personality, odor or not (I do), there is
one thing that we can all agree on: there is no one like Olly Stone! Cheers
daddy-o and smoke 'em if you got 'em!
PLOT:
An old-school football coach is faced with the possibility of ending the
season without his number one veteran quarterback. Luckily for him, a
younger, cockier QB is ready to take his spot in the limelight, but as per
his ego, the strappin' lad cares little about the sport, his teammates or
anyone else for that matter. And as the playoffs approach and the team's
headstrong owner looms overhead, the coach must figure out how his team is
going to overcome the odds to win the big game, win each others respect and
ultimately win as men.
CRITIQUE:
Football fans rejoice, this film is tailor-made for you. Everyone else,
uhhmm....well, close your ears and get ready for an overlong, over-stylized
humpty-dumpty ride of loud banging music, loud crashing football players and
a loud, but surprisingly predictable, script. Stars galore, many wasted,
this film offers more names than any recent Woody Allen flick. Check Pacino,
as the old school coach, tough, rugged, chips on his shoulder but still
ballsy enough to get shit done. Good job. Check Diaz, going against type as
a strong-willed woman fighting to make her voice heard in a sport run wildly
by men with giant egos and wallets. Solid effort. You can even check Jamie
Foxx, last minute replacement for Puff Daddy, as the cocky, new kid on the
block, looking fine, feeling fine and acting, well, pretty damn fine. The
rest, uuuhhm, James Woods, pretty one-dimensional, Lauren Holly, even more
one-dimensional, Elizabeth Berkley, looking the mess, LL Cool J, underused,
and Matthew Modine, wow, what an insignificant career move, my friend.
The story, you ask? Well, the story is so-so interesting with much of it
predictable to anyone who has seen any other Hollywood sports movie done in
the past 50 years or so. Does Stone bring an extra stick of hot-peppered
pinnace to the proceedings? Sure, but unfortunately it materializes itself
mostly in many ridiculously overdone "symbolic" camera shots inter-spliced
between characters speaking to one another (Can anyone please explain the
whole Ben-Hur thing to me? Deeeeeep?), and some really cool scenes featuring
bang-up football at its best, but very little "insight" into the game
itself. I mean, by now anyone with a remote control knows that YES, some
sports doctors do allow their players to go on playing injured, YES, most
modern sports athletes think a lot more about the money than they do the
game itself, and YES, owners are generally cold-hearted pricks with very
little more on their mind than the bottom line. Nothing new here, folks.
Unless of course these accepted stereotypes were new to you, than oops, I
guess you might find something a little fresh in this story.
So why do I still rate this film as a "good movie"? It's simple really. It's
one great big kickass rock n' roll rappin' ride through the wonderful world
of professional football, including its rough and tumble menageries on the
green, its extra-curricular partying with the booze and the drugs and the
whores, and its ultimate high of winning the big game, teammates strapped by
your side. Basically, it's your ultimate testosterone rush, and unless you
spend your Sunday afternoons meditating over the "golf" channels, or you get
bored seeing football scene after football scene being followed by a party
scene and a "time to move the plot forward dialogue scene", this film should
blow your eardrums and eye-sockets right out of your ass! Wham-bam, thank
you man! (Bring your own condoms)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
On March 8, 1999, The New York Daily News reported that actor Jamie Foxx had
filed assault charges against rapper-actor LL Cool J after the two had a
dust-up on the set of this movie. Foxx apparently claimed that LL socked him
in the face while they were filming a scene for the movie.
Plenty of real football folks pepper this film's cast, most notably an
impressive turn by LT (Lawrence Taylor) as Shark, Jim Brown as defensive
coordinator of the Sharks, Warren Moon, Ricky Watters, as well as Dick
Butkus and Johnny Unitas featured as opposing coaches. Ex-Dallas Cowboys
coach Barry Switzer also takes a turn as a sports announcer, alongside the
writer/director of this film himself, Oliver Stone (who can be seen taking a
sip o' booze from his post high atop the proceedings early on in the film).
Sean "Puffy" Combs' official statement regarding his dropping out of this
movie from the role of Willie Beaman was that "Following numerous scheduling
changes that created conflicts with my other professional commitments, it is
clear that this is not a film in which I will be involved."
Veterans to Oliver Stone films include the always-funny John C. McGinley,
who makes his sixth appearance in a Stone pic with this one, and James
Woods, who shows up for number five.
This film is based partly on the novel written by Rob Huizenga entitled
"You're okay, it's just a bruise: A doctor's sideline secrets about pro
football's most outrageous team".
Male frontal nudity is also featured in this film, but none of the stars,
including Al Pacino, Dennis Quaid, Jamie Foxx or LL Cool J take part. Of
course, we all know that LL Cool J. stands for "Ladies Love Cool James".
Pretty corny, but hey, the man made it stick, so leave him alone! James
Smith is his real name.
Why no mention of the NFL you may ask? Considering the unyielding, honest,
and free depiction of professional football that Stone wanted to portray in
this film, he also wanted to splash an element of fiction in its physical
backdrops. Ultimately, the filmmakers and the National Football League
agreed to disagree, without interference from one party to the other, and
thus, the AFFA (Association of Football Franchises of America) was born, the
professional football league to which the Miami Sharks and all other teams
depicted in ANY GIVEN SUNDAY belong. In fact, the Shark Stadium, where the
fictitious Miami Sharks play football in this film, is actually the Orange
Bowl Stadium, in Miami, Florida.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Any_Given_Sunday_ is a guy's film.  And I say that not because it's a
football film (though that does play a major part) but because it's an
_Oliver_Stone_ football film--a fact that gives one an idea of how
testosterone-happy this gridiron saga is.
But let this be said: I enjoyed this film.  Maybe it's the testosterone
running through my own veins, but it's hard not to get adrenalized by the
bonecrunching football action Stone stages with maximum intensity.  He has
been criticized with being a bit too busy with the camera, shooting it so
close and cutting so quickly that often the exact plays are unclear.  That
complaint is understandable, but Stone's approach brings the audience into
the game like no other film, giving viewers perhaps the closest cinematic
approximation of the chaotic experience on the field.
While there is plenty of football sequences in the film, there is a reason
why this film clocks in at close to three hours, and that is the
plot--which, quite simply, there is too much of.  Stone, along with writing
collaborator John Logan, want to give an exhaustive look at just about every
aspect of professional football.  In addition to the usual win/loss
issue--which, as the film opens, is gradually falling less in favor of the
Miami Sharks' longtime coach Tony D'Amato (Al Pacino)--there's the matter of
the up-and-coming hotshot quarterback Willie Beamen (Jamie Foxx), who is
called on to replace reliable veteran Cap (Dennis Quaid) who is sidelined
with an injury.  That indirectly links to the issue of rushing injured
players' rehabiliation, which the team orthopedist (James Woods) has no
qualms about but his intern (Matthew Modine) does.  Willie's showboating and
penchant for calling his own plays puts him at odds with his teammates
(including one, played by LL Cool J, with an eye to up his own endorsement
stock) and especially Tony, who, in turn, has an even more heated battle of
wills going on with Christina Pagniacci (Cameron Diaz), the Sharks'
ballbusting owner.
There are even other, smaller concerns on Stone's mind, but those cannot
help but get lost in the shadow of the Tony-Willie and Tony-Christina
conflicts.  Granted, these threads are given the bulk of the screen time,
but even if they did not, the forceful performances would have demanded
attention.  That comment is hardly surprising in the context of acting
reliables such as Diaz--who, in five short years, has carved out quite an
impressively eclectic career for herself--and Pacino, but the real
revelation is Foxx, best known for his television comedy work. 
Surprisingly, the comic material he's called on to do doesn't work (though
that's the fault of the script, which saddles him with a silly running gag
where he vomits on the field during every game), but he impresses everywhere
else.  Not only does the convince on the athletic end of his duties, he also
holds his own against Pacino in one particularly memorable verbal
confrontation.  (One can only be glad that the role's original portrayer,
rap impresario Sean "Puffy" Combs, had to back out before filming began.)
Most of the actresses in _Any_Given_Sunday_ do nothing here that would
tarnish their reputations, but one cannot help but notice the glaring
negativity of the female characters in the film.  Christina is a strong,
independent woman; but not only is she a bitch, but she's portrayed as being
in over her head in such a male-driven business.  Christina's mother
(Ann-Margret) is in an alcoholic daze for the entire film.  In one scene,
Cap's seemingly supportive wife (Lauren Holly) is revealed to have a dark
side--only to have that trait magically disappear for the rest of the film,
making her character turn that much more arbitrary.  Tony sometimes enlists
the services of a whore, who is played, appropriately enough, by _Showgirls_
slut Elizabeth Berkley.  The one female character that appears to have some
virtue is Willie's long-suffering girlfriend (Lela Rochon), but even her
steely backbone is softened toward film's end.
But as I said, this is a "guy" picture (and how, given all the bare manhoods
on display in the locker room scenes), and the target audience won't care
once they get a taste of the stunningly staged action and Stone's trademark
way of juicing up the visuals of even the most pedestrian scenes.  Though
it's being released in the thick of awards season and bears a number of
Oscar winners on its team, _Any_Given_Sunday_ is essentially a pure
entertainment vehicle, and taken at that level, it works.
The boxing comedy _Play_It_to_the_Bone_ aims to be a pure entertainment
vehicle, and for one thirty-minute stretch, it succeeds.  The advertising
campaign touts a big match between stars Woody Harrelson and Antonio
Banderas, and in no way does the film disappoint in that area.  Theirs is
one helluva fight, expertly staged, edited, and containing more action than
perhaps all the pay-per-view boxing events held in the last five years
combined.
It is in every other area that this film disappoints--a fact that is made
especially more disheartening considering the writer-director at the helm is
none other than Ron Shelton, Hollywood's premier cinematic examiner of
sports, as seen in films such as _White_Men_Can't_Jump_ and _Bull_Durham_. 
Instead of a sharp satire of a subject ripe for parody--professional
boxing--we get a tedious, unfunny road movie.  Harrelson and Banderas
respectively play Vince Boudreau and Cesar Dominguez, best friends and
has-been middleweight pugilists who are given one final shot at glory when
they're tapped at the last minute to plug a hole in the undercard of a Mike
Tyson bout.  The promoter, sleazy Joe Domino (Tom Sizemore), doesn't throw
in L.A.-to-Vegas plane fare as part of the deal, so Vince and Cesar, along
with Cesar's current (and Vince's former) girlfriend Grace (Lolita
Davidovich), take to the open road.
This trip, which makes up most of the movie, is as long and dry as the miles
of desert the three pass through.  Along the way, Vince and Cesar recount
their past traumas in the ring, the ones that consigned them to obscurity. 
And there are a number of jokes, none of which are particularly funny (Cesar
experimented with homosexuality after his big loss--ha ha ha).  One's hopes
are perked up with the entrance of _Ally_McBeal_ siren Lucy Liu, who plays
drug- and sex-mad Lia, who joins the trio's journey midway.  Alas, not even
she can redeem a poorly-conceived part whose only apparent purpose is to
serve as an excuse to feature a gratuitous sex scene.
Upon arrival in Sin City, _Play_It_to_the_Bone_ jolts the audience awake
with its bravura centerpiece boxing match.  There is never any doubt as to
how this match will end--it's really obvious by the film's design.  That the
bout is still exciting and even nailbiting at times is further proof that
Shelton is a master at cinematic recreations of sports.  The celebrity
cameos in the audience and the presence of the HBO Sports announcing team of
Jim Lampley, Larry Merchant, and George Foreman add immeasurably to the
fight's authenticity.
Frankly, I probably wouldn't have minded _Play_It_to_the_Bone_ as much as I
did if it _hadn't_ featured such a terrific sequence.  A completely bad
movie is not a pleasure to sit through, but at least it doesn't come with
the strong sense of frustration that comes with a film that has one great
scene--especially one that shows the potential the whole project had.  But
once the fight is over, it's back down to earth and below with the
uninteresting characters and their uninteresting personal issues, which,
sadly, is the focus of the film.  What it all comes down to is that
_Play_It_to_the_Bone_ is a boxing movie that is not only _not_ about
boxing--it's about absolutely nothing of value at all.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Oliver Stone
WRITTEN BY: Oliver Stone, John Logan and Daniel Pyn
CAST: Al Pacino, Cameron Diaz, Dennis Quide, James Woods, Jamie Coxx, Charlton Heston
Life is a fierce competition. You are always racing forward, but no
matter how good you are, there are always men that are younger than
you, tougher than you, stronger than you, racing along side with
you. Everyone of them is ready to push you aside, to kill, in order to
come first. This time the subject is the brutal world of fictitious
American football team the Miami Sharks. Possibly the most
"Oliver-Stoney" Oliver Stone movie to date, Pacino essentially plays a
hard-drinking football coach who must reverse the Sharks' losing
streak, while the predictably underwritten ice maiden comes in the
form of Diaz' ball-breaking club owner. But he starts questioning his
own priorities. Is winning really the most important, or is it
something else?
Comparing American Football to American life is an interesting idea
and Oliver Stone is the natural choice. Here everything is in the
open. The players stand against each other, ready to release all their
energy into one single move. Ready to sacrifice themselves for a
single moment of victory. It just takes a couple of seconds, and in
that time, you either survive or go down. If you make your way
forward, and come out alive, crawling on the bodies of your teammates,
there is no end to your glory, until a better player comes along, and
then you will be pushed to the ground, and be forgotten. They are the
gladiators of our time. This is their arena and America is
watching. But on any given Sunday, no matter how good you are, you'll
either win or loose...
This is certainly Oliver Stone's (Platoon, Born the Fourth of July,
Natural Born Killers) strangest film in some time. He has always been
known as a bold director, unafraid to make his statement, no matter
how risky or controversial it is. Nothing is subtle. Everything is in
the open. He has proven to be a "man of the truth". And "Any Given
Sunday" is drained in his most famous trademarks: the twisted
cinematography, flashy editing, multidimensional sound. Yet, there is
something about this film that somehow makes it worse than Stone's
previous. It's not that I didn't enjoy it. I certainly did, but I do
not quite know why. Maybe because I share Stone's fascination with
American Football or maybe because of the film's incredible visual
panache and solid acting. But if you ask me "what is this film about",
I couldn't tell you. In all his past films , Stone was very careful to
pose the questions in the right way and then energetically move
towards a goal, making his way through unfamiliar territories. But
here it seems as if he couldn't make up his mind. At first it seems as
it is about the American society and the clever parallels to American
Football. Then Stone starts criticizing the NFL, but in the end his
love for the game takes complete control over the story, transforming
it into a fancy filmed football game. It is a confused, but powerfully
executed film that has its golden moments. Though the script isn't
particularly well written, its holes are compensated by an amazing
cast, that is capable of transforming any cliche into originality. Al
Pacino, who looks incredible in any role, is magnificent here. It is
much more Pacino's character than the scripts, since he goes further,
deeper into the mind and heart of a coach that looses touch, faith in
himself and life. Dennis Quide is very impressive as an on-field
leader privately haunted by insecurity and Jamie Coxx is very nice,
proving to be a serious and capable actor. Otherwise the film can
boast of names such as Cameron Diaz, James Woods, LL Cool J, Charlt o
Some of it is incredible. And, in a way, Stone does the same with
American Football as Spielberg did with WW2 in "Saving Private
Ryan". The sense of "being there", not observe from above with the
popcorn in one hand and a coke in another, but actually being on the
field, look at it from the player's eyes, feel the adrenaline rushing
through your body. Unfortunately these amazing sequences, no matter
how great they are, are deluding us from the movie's actual
objective. Stone gets lost amidst mirrors and smoke, and all the
energy that is released during these two hours, is chanalized into
nothing. In the end, no matter how noble the intentions, the film
wrestles with its own shadow.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
Any Given Sunday: all the longest yards
Any Given Sunday opens tight on the ball, pre-snap, and if it wasn't in
widescreen we might think it's really just Sunday afternoon again. But then
there's the tribal music pounding in, which, along with all the fancy
camerawork, is a giveaway that this is Oliver Stone football. Meaning lots
of stylized slow-motion and upbeat sounds, working contrapuntally to lend a
little magic to the gridiron. It's the same kind of opening Speilberg uses
with Saving Private Ryan, where we're on the beaches of Normandy for the
first twenty-five minutes or so, getting lost in the battle, (i.e.,
acclimatized to WWII) only here the battle is between men wearing regulation
pads, coaches chewing high-blood pressure meds like candy. It lasts just as
long as Spielberg's Normandy, though, if not longer, and, as that opening
game is rendered so well, so indulgently, our critical faculties are dulled
the littlest bit, just enough to where we won't necessarily question all
that comes after. It's a common trick, (Ludivico Treatment, yes) though only
the big-name directors seem to have enough pull with the studios to get away
with it. The rest have to do as The Last Boy Scout does, and try to compress
it all into one five-minute sequence. Which results in things like Billy
Cole using a pistol on the playing field, which, yes, illustrates the kinds
of pressure these guys are under quite effectively, but at the cost of other
things best not sacrificed.
Once things get started with Any Given Sunday, however--and in spite of all
the camerawork--it's all pigskins and dollar signs, (and cameos) or, better
yet, the friction between pigskins and dollar signs. As Coach D'Amato
(Pacino, still hoarse from The Insider) says, football irrevocably changed
the first time a time-out was called for a commercial. As he sees it, TV is
killing the game, but then, too, the game he's talking about is the game of
his youth, all tinted with Lombardian nostalgia, 'pure,' not at all the same
game his third-string 'star' quarterback Willie Beaman (Jamie Foxx) is
playing, which caters to the cameras. As any good hero must be, too, he's
more or less alone in his thinking: neither do his players seem to agree
with him, nor does his boss, hard-driving owner Christina Pagniacci (Cameron
Diaz). Yet he's got a season to win. And if that wasn't enough stacked
against him, he also seems to be dealing with it in all the generic
self-destructive ways (bourbon, Elizabeth Berkley).
And yes, his dilemma is the crux of the movie upon which everything else
turns, but to understand it you have to look away from him, not to Jerry
Maguire or Love of the Game or any of the other sports-type vehicles, but
deeper into Any Given Sunday itself, the minor characters whom Stone uses
very effectively, for a change. Specifically, the little dynamic going on
between Dr. Mandrake (James Woods) and Dr. Powers (Matthew Modine), a
dynamic wherein the younger slowly becomes the older, in spite of his
efforts not to. Stone just slips this in as if it's happenstance, filler,
but it's anything but: instead of just distracting us for a few moments with
good acting (Woods and Modine) or venting the tension of the previous scene
or anything like that, the Mandrake/Powers dynamic presents in its barest
terms what's fundamentally going on in the rest of Any Given Sunday: the
ritual torch-passing. This is Stone, after all; ritual does comes first,
last, and in the middle. And not just for Mandrake and Powers, but for
Pagniacci and her dead father; for Beaman and aging quarterback Cap Rooney
(Everybody's All American Dennis Quaid, still making faces like Doc
Holliday); and last, for D'Amato and his idol, the venerable Vince Lombardi.
Everybody's slowly (170 min.) turning into someone else, on-screen, and, to
Stone's credit, it works, though it might have worked better without the
redemptive coda. But so be it. At least Any Given Sunday never falls into
the pit of hero worship, never tries to deal head-on with the social issues
involved with gladiator sports. And yes, it is a seriously long movie, but
it had to be, too. Otherwise all the music wouldn't have fit.

Author
Walter Frith
A couple of years ago, my favourite director, Oliver Stone, and the world's
greatest actor, Al Pacino, were going to get together and make a movie about
Panamanian general Manuel Noriega.  The project was shelved but it's not
like Stone and Pacino don't have a past.  Stone wrote one of Pacino's best
parts, 1983's 'Scarface', directed by Brian DePalma.  So when I heard that
my favourite actor and favourite director were gearing up to make a movie
about one of my favourite sports, pro football, it filled me with great
anticipation but the final cut is a muddled and badly edited slice of pure
Americana that uses its camera like an untamed animal, and in a running time
of nearly three hours, there could easily have been an hour cut from the
final product.  'Any Given Sunday' also stereotypes the very nature of pro
athletes, based on their bad behaviour and seduction by the big time.
The best movie ever made about the gridiron is still 1979's 'North Dallas
Forty' which showed the intimacies of the business, the sport, the players
and the effects of the game in a more calculating way than anything put
forward by 'Any Given Sunday'.  Al Pacino stars as coach Tony D'Amato of the
pro football team the Miami Sharks.  The Sharks are fighting to make the
playoffs and for the sake of profit, the prospect of a new stadium and
overall prestige.  The team's unqualified owner (Cameron Diaz) makes a
mockery of something she doesn't understand...the bond between players and
coaches.  She's a Cornell University educated business woman whose father
put her in charge of the team after his death through the conditions of his
will and doesn't know how to balance the tactics of her coaches and her
board of directors.
D'Amato's loyalty to the 39-year old washed up quarterback named Jack "Cap"
Rooney (Dennis Quaid) is blind.  D'Amato refuses to accept the fact that
Rooney is washed up and can't mold the new flashy third string quarterback
Willie Beaman (Jamie Foxx) into his style of player.  Beaman likes changing
the plays sent in by the coach, often vomits in the huddle before executing
a play and makes the cover of every major magazine and is more concerned
with celebrity than with the concept of being a team player.  This
frustrates two of his most important team mates (LL Cool J and real former
NFL player Lawrence Taylor) and the team is thrown into chaos with in
fighting among the players.  This film makes a very debatable point.  Can
you hold the coach of a team responsible for the actions of his players and
the quality of his team's performance?  Yes and no.  A coach needs to
communicate with his players but it's difficult when you have a hands on
owner who also tries to run the show and the debate in pro sports in perhaps
hotter than any other form of human interaction.
Other notable characters are the team's head doctor (James Woods) and the
secondary intern waiting to take his place (Matthew Modine).  Woods'
character goes along with each player's every desire...despite the fact that
their play could kill them based on an overdose of drugs or another hit
which could be tragic or fatal.  He ignores the sacred oath doctors take for
the health of their patients while Modine's character is a by the book
physician.  Ann-Margret is the mother of Diaz and misses her late husband
and can't relate to her daughter as being the team's leader from the
business end of things.  Lauren Holly is Rooney's materialistic wife and
Charlton Heston is football's commissioner who says that Diaz's character
would "Probably eat her own young if she could".
'Any Given Sunday', a heavy handed film about male bonding looks more like a
beer commercial in many spots rather than the actual game itself.  There are
slow motion, hard hitting and musically dominated scenes of action on the
field and not enough quiet moments of reflection for the audience or any of
the film's characters.
Oliver Stone has been plagued in recent years with big budget overkill
contained within his films.  I would like to see a studio give him a total
of about 5 to 6 million dollars and force him to make a film about academics
rather than technical flashes of grainy black and white, metaphors drawn
from other films, in your face shocks of fast editing and camera spins and
the return to great film making techniques like 'Platoon' and 'Salvador'
which gave Stone his status as a household name and only 'JFK' and perhaps
'Natural Born Killers' saves Stone from being a non factor in the 90's.
Perhaps Stone can take a lesson from his past in order to know where he's
going in the next decade....and century!
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Jamey Hughton
I can see a decent sports movie struggling to break free of Oliver
Stone's `Any Given Sunday'. It's an entertaining movie that offers both
insight and excitement into the rock-em, sock-em profession of pro
football. Unfortunately, the director seems to have only one priority on
his mind: sprucing up the film with an assortment of fancy camera
maneuvers. In altering each frame with quick-flash photography and
dizzying, in-your-face editing, Stone appears to have completely ignored
the matter of plausible character development and football politics. We
see glimpses of greatness, but `Any Given Sunday' has its agenda all
tangled in technical gobbledy-gook. It grows tiresome and monotonous.
Yes, Stone has pulled a Brian DePalma.
Matters of importance are pushed aside right from the get-go. Tony
D'Amato (Al Pacino), coach of the struggling Miami Sharks, finds his
team stuck in a losing rut. Aging Quarterback Cap Rooney (Dennis Quaid)
appears to be losing his touch, and D'Amato can't seem to ignite any
passion in his squad. When Cap is injured on the field, and after a
patch of unlikely events occur, third-string QB Willie Beaman (Jamie
Foxx) is brought into the game. Once in the huddle (and this becomes an
in-game ritual), Beaman horks all over the field. Nerves, you see.
Eventually though, the ancy youngster wins the game for his teammates,
sparking his rise to fame in the football world - the endorsements, the
music videos, etc. - and Stone straps us in for the jolting ride of
behind-the-scenes stress and fury that the business is apparently like.
And I believe it. There is some intriguing insight posed, but in the big
scheme of things, Stone fumbles the ball.
The problem with the director's visual approach is this: he uses
extravagant editing devices when a more conventional approach would have
been appropriate. Football is an exciting game to watch, but Stone seems
to think dizzying the audience with an assault on the senses will only
add to the adrenaline rush. I guess he is mistaken. `Any Given Sunday'
is a visual kaleidoscope that leaves the audience in a frustrated stupor
more frequently than it excites them. Many football fans (including one
I attended with) are liable to be disappointed with the `ultra-stylish'
way Stone has decided to present the game.
In return, a three-star film becomes unfortunately degraded due to the
director's tampering. In welcome scenes when the visual pummeling comes
to a break, this actually shows decent character development and
interaction. For instance, heated returns between D'Amato and feisty
young owner Christina Pagniacci (Cameron Diaz) are enjoyable to watch.
There is also a solid performance from Jamie Foxx, who experiments with
great success in his first trek into dramatic territory. The stellar
supporting cast includes Matthew Modine, Aaron Eckhart, Lauren Holly,
Ann-Margret and Charlton Heston (in an extraordinarily brief
appearance). Unfortunately, too many big names are wasted - a typical
demise for a film with such a large and experienced cast.
Pacino makes some interesting progress with his character. You begin to
identify with coach D'Amato and the morals he is striving for.... but I
often felt he was just another play thing Stone could weave in and out
of his editing dynamics. `Any Given Sunday' is a watchable but
disappointing sports film in which plot and characters take a back seat
to excessive filmmaking technique. And a very distant back seat, at
that.

Author
Shay Casey
Year: 1999
Starring Al Pacino, Cameron Diaz, Dennis Quaid, James Woods, Jamie Foxx, LL
Cool J, Matthew Modine, Lawrence Taylor, Lela Rochon, Ann-Margret, John C.
McGinley, Lauren Holly
Screenplay by John Logan and Oliver Stone
Directed by Oliver Stone
Rated R
Oliver Stone's latest effort is officially a "sports movie." You know the
type: a misfit team or player battles through adversity and comes out on top
in the end. "Any Given Sunday" is a movie about football that does contain
some of the classic sports movie elements, but it is not a standard sports
movie, not by a long shot. Stone's film refuses to skirt the surface of its
subject matter. "Any Given Sunday" burrows under the skin of professional
football, exposing backdoor deals, negligent doctors, and all sorts of other
sordid affairs. Like much of the football action portrayed within, this film
resides not in the announcer's booth or the stands, the vantage point from
which most fans see the sport, but in the huddle, on the bottom of a
pile-up, in the football trenches. For those interested in the sport, this
football movie is a revealing experience.
Al Pacino stars as Tony D'Amato, head coach for a fictional professional
football team called the Miami Sharks. Once a proud franchise, the Sharks
are in decline. Their aging star quarterback Cap Rooney (Dennis Quaid) has
suffered a back injury that will keep him out for several weeks during the
playoff drive. Without him, the team doesn't seem to have much chance at the
postseason. After the Sharks' backup quarterback also goes down,
third-stringer Willie Beaman (Jamie Foxx) gets his chance. When he performs
well, D'Amato and the team's young owner, Christina Pagniacci (Cameron
Diaz), butt heads over what ought to be done about the team once Rooney
returns. Tony wants to stay loyal to his old friend Cap, while Christina
believes the team must travel in a new direction with the younger Beaman.
Unfortunately, Beaman's loose-cannon style is clashing with the buttoned
down D'Amato, and his propensity to change plays on the field is bothering
egotistical star running back Julian Washington (LL Cool J), along with
several other veteran players.
"Any Given Sunday" is definitely a movie for football fans only. Anyone who
doesn't follow pro football most likely will not understand it. Those who do
will recognize just how much director Oliver Stone gets right in his stab at
transferring the sport to cinema. Many sports movies use for their "action"
scenes what is essentially tricked-up television footage of a sporting
event. Stone seems to realize that most fans have seen reels and reels of
that stuff, so he moves in a much more interesting direction. In "Any Given
Sunday," we see all the action from the point of view of the characters in
the film, from the players'. Anyone who has watched a football game on TV
has seen a long pass being thrown to a receiver deep downfield, but who
knows what the receiver sees? Stone shows us: he sees a solitary ball
sailing through the air against a clear blue sky, nothing else, no
defenders, no blockers, just the ball. Most of the football action in this
film is presented in this manner. We see a play from the perspective of the
quarterback, scrambling to find an open man with defenders bearing down on
him. We see it from the coach's perspective, dashing down the sideline,
trying to get a peek at how the play is unfolding. We see what it's like for
the linemen, the men in the trenches, toiling to help others score points.
To someone unfamiliar with football, this scenes will probably be merely
disorienting, leaving them to wonder just what in the world is going on.
Veteran football watchers should have no problem filling in the details and
marveling at Stone's very original method of filming the action. "Any Given
Sunday" has some of the most pumped-up sports scenes I've ever seen. It
truly manages to capture the speed and bone-crunching intensity of the game.
Football aficionados will also notice how uncannily true-to-life this film
can be. There are several spot-on elements to this story: the injured
veteran quarterback being replaced by a hot young player whose star is
rising; the young and cocky owner, inheriting a sports franchise from her
father without much chance to learn how to run it; the players doing rap
videos; the smarmy TV journalist (John C. McGinley) who shoots off at the
mouth without really knowing what he's talking about. To anyone who has
followed pro football both on the field and in the media, much of this film
is so realistic, it can hardly be considered satire. But satire it is, and
Stone doesn't shy away from presenting all sides of this complicated sport,
no matter how ugly it might be. The vision of James Woods' corrupt doctor,
giving injured players a clean bill of health so they can be ready for the
next game, is so plausible it's downright scary. You won't find any far-out
conspiracy theories like in Stone's 1991 effort "JFK," but a clear
indictment of the world of pro sports is definitely in effect.
The casting is remarkably efficient. Pacino is dynamic as usual, turning up
the volume as Stone would want him to, and Jamie Foxx matches him
surprisingly well as a dramatic actor. Fans of his comedy work won't be
disappointed, though, when they see his hilariously ludicrous rap video.
Cameron Diaz does another unusual turn, and does it well. She's building
quite an accomplished resume as a character actress. I particularly enjoyed
John C. McGinley as a bothersome reporter. He exists as the perfect parody
of the self-satisfied TV "journalists" splashed all over cable sports
channels. Several real NFL players appear in small roles, and a substantial
one is given to former linebacker Lawrence Taylor, as a veteran close to
retirement. Taylor, to his credit, inhabits his role quite convincingly.
Stone paces his film reasonably well, though he can't avoid his familiar
indulgences, like numerous cuts to seemingly random images. These have
always annoyed me. He nearly ruins a scene between Pacino and Foxx by
continually intercutting shots of gladiators and old football heroes.
(Please, Mr. Stone, we got the football players-as-gladiators allegory some
time ago.) The director's kinetic camera work is fine for the action, but
when Stone slows it down, he really slows it down. He concentrates a little
too much on some unnecessary family subplots, such as a wife for Cap Rooney
and a family D'Amato never sees. The side stories are so badly
underdeveloped (Rooney and his wife are given one measly scene, and we never
even meet D'Amato's family) that they probably should've been removed
entirely. Certainly the film, at nearly three hours' length, didn't need any
padding.
Finally, this is a sports movie, so we still get the familiar old climax of
the big game that solves all conflicts at the end, but "Any Given Sunday" is
more than that. It's familiar story and characters are counterbalanced by
its almost unflinching look at the world of pro football. Again, please keep
in mind that those unfamiliar with the sport will most likely miss the
satirical effect Stone utilizes in this film. I am recommending "Any Given
Sunday" for football fans only. For my money, this is probably the best
football movie made in a long while, almost startling in its truthfulness.
Afterward, I almost felt as if I had been in the game myself.
For more reviews, go to
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Land/4252/movies.html

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of  "ANY GIVEN SUNDAY" (Warner Bros.)
It may be the classic story of the aging coach on a losing
streak, the meddling owner, the injured veteran quarterback, and the
rookie punk who's itching to be a stadium star - but Oliver Stone adds
a high-charged adrenaline rush and a few new twists. Al Pacino plays
Tony D'Amato, longtime coach of the Miami Sharks; he's sacrificed his
wife and kids to his job and now he realizes he's not relating to the
younger guys on the team, particularly an amazing third-string
quarterback, Jamie Foxx, who's so nervous that he barfs on the
field. "This game's about more than winning," D'Amato passionately
insists, yet he's antagonized by Cameron Diaz, as the team's ruthless
owner. Her father left her the franchise and she's determined to prove
she's tough enough to run it. While sweet-talking the league
commissioner (Charlton Heston), she even tries to blackmail Miami's
mayor (Clifton Davis) into building her a new stadium. Dennis Quaid's
the aging quarterback and LL Cool J's a wide receiver with gridiron
greats Lawrence Taylor as the top linebacker and Jim Brown as
defensive coordinator. James Woods and Matthew Modine are the team's
battling team physicians. Once again, women in Oliver Stone's movies
turn out to be boozers (Ann-Margret), bimbos (Elizabeth Berkley), or
bitches (Lauren Holly). This testosterone-laden football drama spews
visual and auditory barrages. Sometimes the split-screen holds two,
three, even four images, and there's chaotic, rapid-fire cutting
throughout. Rock and rap songs blare, almost masking the formulaic
pigskin cliches, penned by Stone and John Logan. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, Any Given Sunday is a stylish, hyperkinetic 8, a
manic, visceral cacophony of sights and sounds - and as close as
you're ever gonna get to playing pro football.

Author
Nick Lyons
  Lately Oliver Stone hasn't been cutting it. His last 2 films were garbage,
and I was hoping he would have a come back here. He partly succeeds, but again
he gets too fancy and ends up fumbling again.
  The story is simple, but messy. Head coach Tony D'mato (Al Pacino) is
struggling to win. He has a beat up quarterback named Cap Rooney (Dennis
Quaid), a severely injured defensive captain named Luther Lavay (Lawrence
Taylor) and an extremely moody owner (Cameron Diaz) breathing down his back
24:7. The Miami Sharks needed help, and they got it. When Cap and another QB
become injured, their last hope arrived. His name, Beamen (Jamie Foxx)a cocky
young player who likes breaking the rules. Even though he helps the team win
some games, he is constantly changing the plays, there by angering the team as
well as the coach. There are also a few subplots, involving the medical staff
(James Woods, Matthew Modine) and a sports writer (John C. Mcginley).
  Any Given Sunday is similar to For Love Of The Game. Both films work on one
level, which is focusing on the game. Outside that, it's one sloppy mess.
That's not to say that isn't bad, but it does indeed have many faults. One
thing I particularly liked was the message. As Pacino says in the film, he
believes there's more to football then winning, but Foxx and other young
talents believe otherwise. I couldn't help but feel this was a jab towards
Hollywood. Like I have been saying in a few of my past reviews, many directors
only make films for money. Profit is all that matters, in other words winning
is a must. Aside from those positive aspects, there are many sloppy moments. 
  Director Oliver Stone uses far too many scenes in which more than 1 objective
is going on. One moment we're watching the football game, the next a scene from
Ben-Hur. His artistic ability has gone down the tubes, and so have his movies.
He is no longer one of the top directors in the business as far as I'm
concerned. He had his moments of fame with Platoon and JFK, but those days are
gone. Another painful element of the film was the length. If it wasn't for
Stone's obsession with his artistic approach, the film could have been cut an
hour. Did they even edit this thing what so ever? I was completely bored the
second half, and even the football matches became a bore. Unlike the Green
Mile, this actually seemed like 3 hours
  Luckily the film isn't a complete waste of time during its 2 hour and 40
minute run, because there's some nice acting along the way, but not by Pacino.
In fact Pacino has never been worse. He lacked any charisma for his role here,
unlike the Insider. I don't know how an actor does the best acting to one of
the worst, it just doesn't seem right. Cameron Diaz however continues to prove
she's more than a good looking actress. It's true she overacted a bit, but so
did the rest of the cast. At least she put forth some energy towards her part.
That's more than I can say for Pacino or even James Woods. They were painfully
dull. 
  Any Given Sunday is a mediocre but dreadfully long effort by Stone. If you
can get pass the length, the many unneeded scenes, the overacting and Stone's
pitiful script, then by all means see it. But for me, it's just another fumble
for the holiday season.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Absolutely infuriating.  In ANY GIVEN SUNDAY, Oliver Stone assembles a
large, stellar cast and then undermines their performances with his
directorial grandstanding.  The camera is brought in so tight that we
usually have little clue as to what is happening.  Stone uses hyper-fast
pans and microsecond editing to dazzle us with his artistic skills, all
to the detriment of his own story.  On the field and off, the movie is
an uninviting mess.
Telling a tale of exploited millionaire football players, the movie
doesn't have many subtle moments.  In a typically didactic scene, the
high octane, but perhaps over-the-hill, coach, played with an endearing
gusto by Al Pacino, is serving dinner to his black, starting
quarterback, Willie Beaman (Jamie Foxx).  The coach just happens to have
the gladiator chariot racing episode from BEN HUR playing on his large
screen television.
Willie complains that 75% of professional football players are black,
but none of the owners are.  "In the pros the field hands are paid,"
Willie says to liken his labors with those of farm workers.  In order to
reinforce this notion of exploited (millionaire) athletes, Stone keeps
cutting back to BEN HUR's galley slaves rowing the boat as they are
whipped into submission.
The extremely simple story has two other subplots.  One involves a
ruthless team doctor, played in his usual flamboyant and volatile style
by James Woods, who is willing to send men to their deaths if it gets
him a bonus, and another, Matthew Modine, who is purer of heart and
won't play along.
In a miscast role, a glamorous Cameron Diaz plays the team's owner, who
likes to scream at the coach and try to order him around.  The owner
doesn't care anything about the game.  For her its all about power and
money.  In the movie's most unbelievable sequence, she goes into the
dressing room to talk to her naked football players, who just let their
private parts hang down in front of her with no attempt at modesty.
The unoriginal and predictable script by John Logan and Oliver Stone,
based on Rob Huizenga's novel, concerns a team that used to be great and
that now is trying to fight their way into the playoffs.  After hundreds
of blocks and tackles, choreographed to loud explosions, the movie
finally comes to the ending at -- surprise! -- the big game.  Think it
will go down to the final seconds before the victor is decided?  Think
they'll win?
The movie contains a single small twist, but you have to wait for the
closing credits to see it, so if you haven't walked out from disgust or
boredom before then, do stay through the credits.
The big surprise is why this skeletal story takes almost 2 and 3/4 hours
to tell.  If ever a film should have been brought in at an hour and a
half, it is this one.
ANY GIVEN SUNDAY runs 2:40.  It is rated R for drug usage, nudity, sex,
football violence and language and would be acceptable for older
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
ANY GIVEN SUNDAY
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Al Pacino, Cameron Diaz, Jamie Foxx, Dennis Quaid, LL Cool J,
James Woods, Matthew Modine, Lawrence Taylor, Jim Brown, Aaron Eckhart.
Screenplay:  John Logan and Oliver Stone.
Producers:  Lauren Shuler Donner, Clayton Townsend and Dan Halsted.
Director:  Oliver Stone.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, nudity, drug use, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  168 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In ANY GIVEN SUNDAY, Oliver Stone may have found the ideal subject
for his unique brand of cinematic storytelling. Following the ups and
downs of a fictional professional football team (the Miami Sharks) in a
fictional professional football league (the AFFA), Stone dives into the
trenches during the game sequences. Players taunt and strut as they try to
win the game psychologically; an inexperienced quarterback sees the field
only as a blur of colors, and hears only a blur of cacophanous sound.
Coaches send in the X's and O's, but it's the kinetic fury of what goes on
in the huddle and at the line of scrimmage that comes alive. Meet Oliver
Stone, practitioner of smash-mouth film-making.
     If ANY GIVEN SUNDAY had stayed on the field, focused on the intensity
of games, it might have been a classic sports movie. Stone, however, has
bigger issues on his mind -- as he inevitably, agonizingly always seems
to. The film follows several individuals in the Sharks organization as
they cope with the changing nature of the game. Long-time coach Tony
D'Amato (Al Pacino) is hearing the jeers that his conservative approach is
old news. New team owner Christina Pagniacci (Cameron Diaz) is trying to
be taken seriously, and not just as the daughter of the late former
owner. Veteran quarterback "Cap" Rooney (Dennis Quaid) is struggling with
whether his battered body can stand up to more punishment after a back
injury. And Cap's replacement, third-stringer Willie Beamen (Jamie
Foxx) is finding his sudden success intoxicating, as well as poisonous to
his relationships with teammates and his girlfriend (Lela Rochon).
     Stone wants to cover all of this and more, to create as comprehensive
a picture of modern professional football as he can cram into nearly three
hours. He wants to address the rise of sports media as an infotaintment
monster (personified by John C. McGinley as Jack Rose, an abrasive
broadcaster more than faintly similar to Jim Rome). He wants to expose the
yes-men and oh-yes-women who inflate athletes' egos so they can ride the
gravy train. And he wants to juxtapose the fighting spirit of the players
with the owners who use them and throw them away. He wants to do all this
despite the fact that he has too much ground to cover to give any of his
themes more than a superficial gloss. Stone stages confrontations without
context, counting on the shock value of a player's wife belting her 
husband in the fact to make up for its absence of meaning. It's not enough
in 1999 to intone breathlessly that pro sports is corrupted and 
corrupting. You must be prepared to tell a human story that feels human.
     Oliver Stone, however, is all about intoning breathlessly these days. 
He's a director who just can't help underlining everything he puts on
screen so the themes are tattooed on our foreheads. When a character
refers to Vince Lombardi and Johnny Unitas, Stone cuts away to shots of
Vince Lombardi and Johnny Unitas. When someone describes football players
as gladiators, a T.V. will be showing BEN-HUR in the background. When
characters are feuding, there are shots of gathering storm clouds. Any
time ANY GIVEN SUNDAY is focused on the lives of its characters off the
field, you keep hoping for an opportunity to discover something real about
them. Stone, unfortunately, keeps steamrolling forward with split-second
edits and changes in film stock, never offering a viewer the chance to
contemplate what the story is about. Stone's message: It's about exactly
what I'm gonna tell you it's about, and I'm gonna tell you over and over
and over again.
     All this is true, yet there are still those masterful game sequences. 
For Stone, the '90s have been all about experimentations in multimedia
assault. ANY GIVEN SUNDAY takes a game that feels almost languid in its
pacing on television and shows us the cranked-up energy of all the
participants. Coaches make frantic sideline adjustments, and players look
for an opponent's slightest giveaway of his intentions. Stone even does a
brilliant job of splicing in the events in the owner's box, where
oblivious partying and business talk shut the game out almost entirely.
>From the you-are-there field level camera work to the twists on
predictable sports movie heroics, Stone plants you inside the game. And
that's the only time he shows much interest in getting inside anything.
ANY GIVEN SUNDAY is Stone's grandiose attempt to make football a metaphor
for all of human existence, when he could have settled for a perfectly
splendid film about football as a metaphor for football.

Author
Ross Anthony
This is a hardcore football flick, not some mushy tale with football as a
backdrop. All American football all the time. So if you're not fond of the
sport, don't let your date take you. Even for those of us who like
football - it borders on the excessive.
What an incredible pace Oliver Stone delivers for 2 hours and 45 minutes,
impressive. The film is an MTV collage of sport, drama, and music. His fast
cuts, Hi-def digi-vid field shots and special effects put you into the
dangerous parts of the game; the dark side, where bones and spirits get
broken. Off the field, the action is still the same, ego's collide like
helmets.
Al Pacino plays Coach Tony Demata who can't separate life from the game -
nor can Oliver Stone. Like Tony's life, the film is all hardcore football.
Great acting, Jamie Foxx as QB Willie Beaman does a great job, but a
stereotypical play to make this 3rd-stringer turn hot shot into an
in-your-face vanity case is too fast and beneath the quality of the
production. I would have liked to have seen more complexity to that move.
Additionally, a scene that should have been the climax is cut short. Pacino
faces Diaz (owner) in the locker room closet - it's the all out fight we've
been waiting for ... and it's just starting to rock. But it gets cut short
of blossoming, leaving the climax to fall into a clich?coach's speech to the
team before the big game. That was fine, just could have been much better.
In an effort to make QB Beamen less predictable and more loveable - he
vomits in the limelight - it's a good quirk that works.
Any Given Sunday. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Al Pacino, Cameron Diaz, Jamie Foxx, James Woods, Dennis Quaid, Jim
Brown, Ann Margaret.
Directed by Oliver Stone
Screenplay by Oliver Stone based on novel by Rob Huizenga
Produced by Somebody at Some Production Company.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Bob Bloom

"Any Given Sunday" (1999) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Al Pacino, Cameron
Diaz, Randy Quaid, Jamie Foxx, James Woods, Mathew Modine, LL Cool J,
Ann-Margret, Jim Brown, Lawrence Taylor and Charlton Heston. Directed by
Oliver Stone.
So, what is Oliver Stone trying to tell us in "Any Given Sunday?"
That football is no longer a sport. That it's a microcoism of America. That
the players aren't playing for the love of the game, but for the money, the
endorsements, the women.
That the owners are now bottom-liners who don't look at their players as
human beings, but as commodities to be traded, dropped or beefed up with
drugs like cattle then sent out to the Sunday afternoon slaughter.
Gosh, I knew all of that just by reading the daily newspaper.
But you must give Stone credit. In his own overwrought, overly kinetic
manner he has driven home his point with all the force of an all-out blitz
on third-and-10.
Does he tell us anything we don't already know. Not really.
Yet Stone is so sincere, so evangelical that you can't help but admire the
man and forgive him his excesses.
"Any Given Sunday" is not a great movie, but it is a solid entertaining
vehicle, even at about two hours and 50 minutes.
And Stone doesn't leave any stone unturned. He shows the generation gap
between coaches and players; the cloaked racism that exists amongst
teammates; the owners whose loyalty is not to the fans, but to the money;
as well as the cameraderie that coalesces 11 individuals into a single unit
- a team.
The performances in the film are strong, but Stone's cinematic style
distracts from any appreciation of the actors' contributions.
Stone cannot keep his camera still for a moment. He continually jumps
around, cross-cuts, inter-cuts, changes film stock to the point where you
cannot concentrate on the story.
It is as if Stone knew his subject matter what not the strongest material,
so he decided to jazz it up, make it seem more important, more urgent than
it was meant to be.
"Any Given Sunday" is merely a routine movie wrapped in an epic's clothing.
Al Pacino as head coach Tony D'Amato gives a strong turn as a man who must
be friend, bully, father confessor, motivator and tyrant to those around
him. He is a man who has sacrificed his family for the game. He is a
mercurial man who can slide from bitterness and self-pity into evangelical
fervor to rouse his players.
Cameron Diaz is tough, spoiled and mercenary as the young team owner who
inherited the franchise from her father. To her, the Miami Sharks are
merely a commodity. If she could move them to Los Angeles to boost their
value, she would. Her loyalty is to the bottom line.
Dennis Quaid shows a quiet dignity as the veteran quarterback who realizes
his time has passed, while Jamie Foxx is vibrant, cocky and pragmatic as
the third-stringer who gets a chance to shine and make a name for himself.
But the real star of "Any Given Sunday" is Stone, and he doesn't let you
forget it. His signature style is all over the place, as he intercuts from
scene-to-scene, from locker room to the private boxes where, like in the
days of Rome, the rich watch these contemporary gladiators batter each
other for their amusement.
"Any Given Sunday" is an interesting vehicle. Stone has done better work,
most notably "Platoon," "Born on the Fourth of July," "JFK" and "Nixon."
But no one who sees "Any Given Sunday" will look at football the same way
again. And perhaps that was Stone's intention.
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom at
iquest.net

Author
Steve Kong
On any given Sunday during football season living rooms across America are 
filled with cheering men, with their beers in hand and their eyes glued to 
a TV screen.  These men sit glued to their TV sets watching warriors.  What 
happens on the field is pure; it's the game of football.  What happens 
before, during, and after the game off field, well that's business and the 
aim of Oliver Stone's Any Given Sunday is to show what this business is.
Any Given Sunday is an ensemble film, but the three lead roles go to Al 
Pacino, Jamie Foxx, and Cameron Diaz.  Pacino is the head coach of the 
football team.  Foxx is the puking new quarterback of the team.  And Diaz 
is the former-owner's daughter who has taken over the franchise.  The 
conflicts are a bound in this film.  Pacino's Coach D'Amato and Foxx's 
Beaman fight it out over how to play the game.  Beaman goes from third 
string quarterback all the way to first string after the aging star 
quarterback, Rooney (Dennis Quaid), is injured.  Beaman is not quite a team 
player and doesn't listen to the coach.  D'Amato and Pagniacci (Diaz) are 
at each other's throats also.  D'Amato is losing his touch with his old 
school style of coaching and Pagniacci wants more for the coach including 
more wins.
Any Given Sunday is more of a movie about what happens off the field than 
what happens on the field.  We can see this by the way the on field play is 
shot.  The games are shot in a MTV style, which makes each and every hit 
look like a train hitting a car.  The cuts are fast and furious and it 
makes the game look great  though even if you tried you couldn't even 
figure out what is happening on field.  Cameras are placed everywhere and 
this visceral style puts the audience right on the field with the 
players.  What is ironic is that the MTV style used for the football games 
is so well done that when Stone puts Beaman in an actual music video for 
the film it looks chintzy.
What happens off the field is engrossing and the film could have been cut 
maybe 15 to 20 minutes if the nicely shot but useless on field stuff was 
cut out.  We see the locker room speeches, the politics of how a team is 
made viable.  We see how players and coaches are just commodities.  The 
game as it is played professionally is pure only on the field and even at 
that it is played for the money, as we see in LL Cool J's 
character.  Endorsements are what drive the players; money from wins is 
what drives the owners.  It almost seems like there is no love for the game 
and Stone makes this quite clear.  Stone is out to make a point and the 
point is that professional football, or any professional sport, is more 
about corporate earnings than it is about the love of playing the game.
All the actors in the film do well, but most of the ensemble cast is not 
given much to do.  It can plainly be seen with the James Woods character 
who seems likes a fully developed character, but does not get enough time 
onscreen to develop.  Pacino spends his time chewing scenery, which is 
fine, that's his style.  Diaz is good.  But, the big surprise was Jaime 
Foxx.  He plays his role perfect.  He knows when to be cocky, he knows when 
to be repentant.  Foxx is perfect in this film.  I hope he ventures out and 
does more roles like this.  Kudos to Foxx for a perfect performance.
I'll admit now that I'm not a huge fan of Oliver Stone.  There is just 
something about the films that he makes that turns me off, perhaps it is 
the way he tries to shove a message down the audience's throats with each 
and every of his films.  I don't know.  But, with Any Given Sunday I was 
enthralled and entertained.  This film is highly entertaining and well 
deserves the Don't Miss endorsement.
