Title
Review for 24 Hour Woman, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
FilmFan16@aol.com
Directed by Nancy Savoca.
Cast: Rosie Perez, Marianne Jean-Baptiste, Diego Serrano, Wendell Pierce, 
Patti LuPone, Karen Duffy, Aida Turturro.
1999 - 92 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity and brief violence).
Capsule Review, July 27, 1999.
The exquisite characters , tightly-wound stories, and memorable writing that 
usually accompanies films directed by talented indie filmmaker Nancy Savoca 
(1989's "True Love," 1991's "Dogfight") are all but absent in her latest 
comedy-drama, "The 24 Hour Woman." Rosie Perez heads the hit-and-miss film as 
Grace, a rising television talk show producer whose life drastically changes 
when she gets pregnant with her actor husband (Diego Serrano), and ultimately 
becomes overloaded when the baby comes, questioning whether her career or job 
as a parent is more important. Rosie Perez, in one of her more quietly 
restrained and effective roles, is left stranded in a tiresome comedy-drama 
that is not very funny and is often too overwrought to be poignant. If 
anything, the film successfully shows how difficult a job parenting is; 
perhaps too successfully, since watching the non-stop chaos of children 
became overly stressful to me, even as merely a viewer.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Joy Wyse
Starring:        Rosie Perez, Marianne Jean Baptize, Patty Lupone
A cable TV show, `The 24 Hour Woman', is the focal point of this `real
life' story.  The male host of the show learns, on the air, that he is to
become a father.  The show's Producer is the mother.  That role is played
by Rosie Perez.   Rosie's voice, usually grating to the ear, is a bit less
strident here.  She's a bit easier to endure.
The event becomes a `ratings' booster as they follow Rosie through her
pregnancy, incorporating various experts on children, pregnancy, etc. as
guests on the show.  That part is delightful, but, after their daughter is
born and the couple must cope with the problems confronting working
mothers today, it gets a little heavy.
The more interesting story belongs to Marianne Jean Baptize [of Secrets
and Lies] who plays Rosie's assistant.  Marianne, the mother of three
children, has gone back to work because her husband is out of work.  They
have a lovely relationship.   It's a shame that they didn't pursue that
story further.   He feels bad that he is no longer the breadwinner so he
helps her with the chores and with the children.  Despite jeers from his
male friends he becomes a sort of Mr. Mom.     The difference is obvious
between him and Rosie's husband who is quick to take the plaudits
associated with fatherhood, but none of the work that's entailed.  His
actions cause his and Rosie's relationship and marriage to disintegrate.  
Her work suffers more and more.
There's too much reality here.  It isn't a feel-good film by any means. 
It just endorses the backbreaking work of a real 24-hour woman.  It's not
easy.  I give it a C.
