Title
Review for Beautiful (2000)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Susan Granger
Mark Twain once said, "A soiled baby with a neglected nose
cannot be conscientiously regarded as a thing of beauty." As a
corollary, this clumsy satire forces audiences to spend two hours with
Mona Hibbard, a vain, self-centered, thoroughly disagreeable
protagonist, played by Minnie Driver, in her grating quest for the
Miss America-like beauty pageant crown. Mona was born in a shack in
Naperville, Illinois, to white-trash parents who apparently tolerated
her passion for entering beauty contests while fostering her low
self-esteem. Now the mother of an illegitimate daughter, she passes
off the little girl (Hallie Kate Eisenberg, instantly recognizable
from Pepsi TV commercials) as the daughter of her best-friend/
room-mate (Joey Lauren Adams) - which becomes a problem when the
maternal care-giver implausibly winds up in jail. And we're supposed
to believe that the precocious child doesn't know who her real mother
is! Jon Bernstein's manipulative, cliche-filled screenplay sinks below
soap-opera, as Mona's secret could be exposed by an inquiring TV
reporter (Leslie Stefanson) whose own ambitions were thwarted by Mona
several years earlier in an incident involving dumping
industrial-strength adhesive on her flaming, twirling baton. Actress
Sally Field makes her directorial debut with this film; mercifully,
she can never sink lower. Nor can Kathleen Turner, inexcusably chewing
up the scenery as Mona's pageant mentor. There is one funny moment,
though, when Mona sings "The Wind Beneath My Wings" to a pregnant
woman about to give birth in a supermarket. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Beautiful" barely manages a shallow 2. If you're
intrigued by beauty contests, rent Michael Ritchie's satirical "Smile"
or the more recent "Drop Dead Gorgeous."

Author
Robert Strohmeyer
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/7bdd22b907aeefa0882569690006544d?OpenDocument
     Few things simultaneously sicken and seduce the feminist spirit in
quite as thorough a way as an American beauty pageant.  Now an
inextricable fixture on our cultural landscape, the pageant defines,
glorifies, and objectifies Woman as a prescription for all time.  An
evening spent watching the Miss America proceedings on TV is like a
psychosexual time warp, dragging us back to a kinder, simpler time when
the female of the species need not worry itself over difficult issues
like voting or wearing shoes.  So it was not without a sense of irony
that I walked down the cinema for a screening Sally Field's Beautiful.
     Irony is the central force of Field's representative pageantry, and
in the tradition of Drop Dead Gorgeous, it is no disappointment.  But
this is also a human story, about women in search of identity and
belonging.
     Mona (Minnie Driver) is a dubious beauty queen, having spent her
entire life contesting--against all reason and likelihood--for the crown
of Miss American Miss.  Though not graced with especially striking looks
from the outset, and born into a household that makes Hee Haw look
glamorous, Mona's years of determination and artificiality are finally
paying off.  She has become Miss Illinois.  Now, if she can keep her
false persona straight, she stands a chance of winning the crown.  And
if it weren't for the untimely suicide of her best friend's convalescent
patient and the disqualifying existence of her 7-year-old daughter
(played by Hallie Kate Eisenberg, that annoying little girl from the
Pepsi commercials), victory might be simple.
     Fortunately for moviegoers, life is not so simple.  But equally
unfortunately, much of this tale's delivery is bogged down by an
incongruous sense of vision.
     At the story's outset, it is compelling and funny.  Young Mona is
precocious and endearing as she struggles to grow up and prove her self
worth in the shadow of her alcoholic mother.  Her drive to win beauty
pageants is a believable compulsion, though fraught with ridiculous
overtones.  But, by the time Driver steps in to play the role, Mona has
become little more than a caricature.  She is absurd and unloving,
one-dimensional in her desire to win pageants and incapable of basic
human emotion.  This lack of humanity makes the character fundamentally
boring to watch, in spite of Driver's obvious talent.
     Eisenberg, however, is--though I so hate to admit it--quite good in
her role as the young Vanessa (except for the argument scenes, in which
her shrill screaming was more deafening than interesting).  Once we've
made it through the long, irritating period of watching how far Mona's
personality has degenerated, Eisenberg's performance as the story's
conscience-bearer is a much-needed refreshment.  Too quickly, though,
does this spiral into an uncontrollable finale of cheesy feminist
messages.
     Sally Field's direction is, for the most part, above par.  But this
film is disappointingly short on substance.  In the end, mothers and
daughters may bond over many of the movie's funnier, heartwarming
scenes, but most moviegoers will do well to wait for the DVD.
Director: Sally Field
Producer: John Bertolli, B.J. Rack
Writer: Jon Bernstein
Starring: Minnie Driver, Joey Lauren Adams, Hallie Kate Eisenberg,
Kathleen Turner, Leslie Stefanson, Bridgette Wilson, Kathleen Robertson
http://www.beautifulthemovie.com
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
It had been a while since I had seen a movie this bad. I honestly thought
that they just didn't exist anymore. Sure, this year was filled with a lot
of so-so movies, even a few films that just plain sucked, but none had
actually managed to make me physically ill as this film did. By the first 45
minutes, I wanted to all-out kill the lead character, who could not have
been a worse human being. Were we supposed to care about this woman for some
reason?! I don't know. Was it all supposed to be funny?! Not sure. All I
know is that this was one of the sappiest, stupidest, most embarrassing
films put to the screen over the past few years. And now, I will go puke and
hopefully feel a little better afterwards. PS: Skip this movie!
PLOT:
An ugly duckling girl turns into a moderately attractive woman and somehow
manages to become Miss Illinois and get a shot at the Miss America Miss
contest. Despite paying her own daughter no mind and treating everyone else
around her like they didn't exist or matter, the woman somehow manages to
make it into the finals, where she must inevitably decide what she wants out
of her own life. Yugh! (and believe you me, I've actually left out the
stupidest parts!)
CRITIQUE:
This movie is hilarious...hilariously bad! The lead character in this film,
played by Minnie Driver, is one of the most reprehensible human beings that
I have ever had the displeasure of watching at the movies. She is shallow,
self-centered, rude, vain, egotistical, a bad sport, a bad friend, a bad
mother, a bad person, bad with kids, horrible with her own kid...and just a
big ol' despicable human being. Not many qualities, I assure you. Why oh
why, the folks behind this wretched film thought that anyone in the audience
would give a rat's ass about a lady who treats everyone around her like
garbage, most especially her own kid (!), with only her idiotic dream of
winning the Miss America Miss contest as her goal in life, is beyond me! But
sadly, she is not the film's only problem. The biggest issue that this movie
has is its terribly formulated screenplay. I am honestly still not sure
whether or not this was supposed to be a drama or a comedy, but either way,
the film is just howlingly bad. The dramatic moments were humorous (one of
Minnie's friends is in jail on a murder rap and all she wants to discuss is
her upcoming beauty pageant...and yes, that was supposed to be a dramatic
moment!), and the funny moments, just plain stupid (Minnie puts crazy glue
on her competitor's baton so that she could sabotage her
performance...hahaha, look at her, she can't let go of the
baton...hahaha...ugh!).
Add that to the embarrassing plot device used to get the mother and daughter
together (I won't ruin it here, but it is one of the most nonsensical plot
twists that I have ever witnessed in a movie), the pathetic acting
performance given by Joey Lauren Adams (the thought of her prison
"confrontation" scene still makes me cringe), the extreme disservice that
this film does to all beauty pageants and the pseudo-lesbian undertones, and
God-oh-mighty, how the heck did this one get past the guards at the gate?!?
The smartest person in this whole film is a 7-year old kid, who manages to
say all the right things, while the only man in the script is a
child-molesting drunk? Yeesh! C'mon ladies, are we really that bad? Director
Sally Field also paces the film all wrong. Too much time is spent on the
childhood, the film goes on for too long, and without a proper line between
humor and drama, the film just dies all around. And what's with Minnie
looking like a transvestite in the final "talent" contest? Yikes! And that
dress! Ugh. Bad decisions all around! But when the lead character can be
described in three simple words, bee-a-tch, you know the movie isn't gonna
touch many hearts. Men, stay away, and I mean FAR AWAY from this one. And
women...stay away also. But if you do decide to go, please just do me one
favor: DO NOT BRING YOUR KIDS TO THIS FILM! The lead is an egotistical,
selfish, lying phony who will give your loved ones nothing but bad advice
and offensive moral values. Actually, you might want to take them in order
to show them what NOT to become in their lives! I gave this movie one point
because of the lovely Bridgette Wilson, who looked real pretty in the film.
Other than that, a complete and utter waste of time. I'm gonna go brush my
teeth now.
Having done a little bit of research into the screenwriter of this film, Jon
Bernstein, I found that he had only written one other movie project before
this one. Do you want to guess what it was? It's actually a perfect
companion piece to this film...Jerry Springer's RINGMASTER! Oh
my...Jon...please...for the love of God and all that is good and sacred in
this world and in screenwriting...put down the pen and concentrate your life
on something else. You're "hurting" the world by writing movies.

Author
Steve Rhodes
BEAUTIFUL isn't.  A lifeless, mean-spirited film, it arrives DOA at your 
local theater today.  Advertised as a comedy, the picture, thanks to 
Sally's Field's inept direction and Jon Bernstein's dull script, is, 
instead, a depressing drama.
With beauty pageants as its subject, BEAUTIFUL should have been an easy 
success.  Is there anything easier to satirize than beauty pageants?  
Last year's marvelously funny DROP DEAD GORGEOUS showed what is 
possible.  Even if BEAUTIFUL can't rise to that level, does it have to 
be so painful to watch?  Every performance is gratingly awful, and all 
the roles are badly miscast.  
Attractive Minnie Driver, as Mona Hibbard, the story's protagonist, 
doesn't have the body for a beauty pageant winner.  Her head and her 
bones are too large, and her movements are too awkward.  She's a 
terrific actress, but even she can't pull this one off, especially given 
how badly and unsympathetically her part is written.
To give you an idea of just how ugly BEAUTIFUL can be, one of the key 
subplots concerns Mona's disowning her own daughter, Vanessa.  It seems 
that you can't be Miss American Miss if you have children.  When Mona, 
who likes to sleep her way to victory, comes up pregnant, she keeps the 
baby but tries to claim that she is the child of her friend Ruby (Joey 
Lauren Adams).  Vanessa is played cloyingly by Hallie Kate Eisenberg 
(PAULIE).
Incidents in BEAUTIFUL will more likely have you going "yuck" than 
laughing.  When the teenaged Mona is starting off in the beauty world, 
she sleeps with a whistle.  At night, as she cuddles with her plush toy 
in bed, she has her whistle at the ready in order to ward off her 
lecherous father.  At least it works so that we don't witness child 
abuse.
Since the teenaged Mona isn't even finishing in "the top 20" of contests 
that don't seem to have more than a dozen entrants, she hires a beauty 
consultant.  This consultant is played by none other than Kathleen 
Turner (BABY GENIUSES), which again proves the rule that I've had for 
the past decade.  Any movie willing to have Kathleen Turner in it is 
bound to be a stinker.  Yes, she was once a good actress.  The operative 
word in that last sentence is "was."
BEAUTIFUL should have been released as a TV movie.  If so, it would have 
been a decidedly below average TV movie.  Actually, were it not for 
Sally Field and Minnie Driver being associated with the production, it 
would never have been released in any venue.
BEAUTIFUL runs a long 1:52.  It is rated PG-13 for language and thematic 
elements.  Although it would be acceptable for kids 11 and up, I would 
not recommend this to anyone of any age.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Jon Popick
Sally Fields' feature film directorial debut is an atrocious story of a
woman hell bent on becoming a beauty pageant winner.  The problem is
that Beautiful can't figure out whether it wants to be a coming-of-age
drama or a scathing comedy about the absurdity of pageants.  Instead of
choosing one, the film tries to be both, and the net result is an uneven
picture that runs about thirty minutes too long.
Beautiful opens in 1986, where thirteen-year-old Naperville, Illinois
resident Mona Hibbard is shown getting braces.  She's paying for the
corrective procedure with her own money (in monthly installments) and is
thrilled when the dentist tells her that they'll be off in time for the
Junior Miss Pageant.
We learn that Mona is a bitchy piece of white trash with a mother who
ignores her and a stepfather who wants to molest her.  Instead of
pouring her time and energy into a expensive and time-consuming drug
and/or alcohol habit (like most American kids in similar situations),
Mona instead devotes her life to one simple idea – becoming a beauty
queen.  Her only friendship is one made out of convenience – mousy
grammar school seamstress Ruby can help Mona create different outfits
for her run at various pageants.
Flash to 1999, where Mona (Minnie Driver, Return to Me) has just won the
Illinois state pageant, earning a trip to the prestigious Miss American
Miss competition in Long Beach, California.  The next two cinematic
months unfold over an ungodly ninety-plus minutes.  We learn that Mona
has sabotaged her rivals on several occasions, and more shockingly, had
a baby that she pawned off on Ruby (Joey Lauren Adams, Big Daddy) to
raise as her own.  Why?  Because Miss American Miss contestants can't be
mothers.
To make matters worse, Mona can't stand the sight of her own daughter,
Vanessa (Hallie Kate Eisenberg , the kid from the Pepsi commercials).
The two constantly butt heads, and, coupled with Mona's inability to
deal with real life, Ruby essentially becomes a mother to both.  But
after a oddly grim mix-up at Ruby's employer, Mona has to look after
Vanessa, bringing out the motherly instinct that she had never shown
previously.
Beautiful's script was written (and co-produced) by Jon Bernstein, whose
only previous writing credit was the appalling Jerry Springer film
Ringmaster.  It's difficult to say whether the film had a weak, choppy
script, or if Fields insisted on cramming too much into the final
product.  In addition to blowing an abnormally large chunk of time on
Mona's childhood, Beautiful spends way too much time on the final
pageant.  Do we really need to see the entire talent portion of each of
the competition's five finalists?  Tom make matters worse, the film has
an ending that will make you cringe, unless you enjoyed the last scene
of Rudy.
The best thing about Beautiful is the casting.  Driver and Eisenberg
look like they could be related, but is that really enough to keep an
entire two-hour movie afloat?  The film's moral is that it's okay to lie
and hurt other people, so long as you eventually end up on top.  And,
unlike other films about single-minded egomaniacs (like Wall Street),
Mona walks away from her experience as a winner, a hero and a role
model.  Beautiful sure isn't pretty.  In fact, it's downright ugly.
On the plus side, the film could (hopefully) be the final nail in the
coffin of Destination Films – the studio that has given us the
impressively bad lineup of Whipped, Bats, Thomas and the Magic Railroad
and Eye of the Beholder.
1:52 – PG-13 for adult language and thematic elements

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Sally Field.
Cast: Minnie Driver, Hallie Kate Eisenberg, Joey Lauren Adams, Colleen 
Rennison, Leslie Stefanson, Bridgette L. Wilson, Kathleen Robertson, Kathleen 
Turner, Linda Hart.
2000 - 113 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, September 30, 2000.
Some people, no matter what they look like or who they are, have the 
incessant urge to always succeed, whatever the cost. Such is the case with 
26-year-old Mona Hibbard (Minnie Driver), who has been practicing for the 
Miss American Miss pageant ever since she was 8. With her pretty, but 
unconventional looks, she has rarely won any of the contests she has entered, 
even going as far as sabotaging other contestants' routines simply to give 
her a better chance at winning. Growing up in a lower-class household with a 
white-trash mother and no-good stepfather, Mona hasn't exactly gotten the 
love that she has wanted, but who could blame the people around her when she 
is such a self-centered person herself?
At 19, Mona had a child out of wedlock, and instead of caring for her 
daughter, Vanessa (played at age 7 by Hallie Kate Eisenberg), her best friend 
Ruby (Joey Lauren Adams) has taken over as surrogate mother, unbeknownst to 
most people. The resemblance between Mona and Vanessa is uncanny to many, but 
they manage to brush such things off, as Mona remains to her daughter simply 
her "mother's" obnoxious best friend.
After winning Miss Illinois at the state competition, Mona finally has come 
thisclose to fulfilling her dream, being eligible for the Miss American Miss 
pageant. But then an unforeseen event strikes, and Mona, somewhat of a child 
herself, finds herself having to take care of Vanessa by herself, including 
taking her to the competition, despite mothers not being allowed to be 
runners in the contest.
"Beautiful," the feature film directorial debut of Sally Field, is, like Mona 
Hibbard, an unconventional comedy-drama that is surprisingly biting in its 
treatment of the central character, who is often distasteful and conceited. 
In an average film on the same subject, Mona would be presented as far more 
sympathetic just so she could be more likable for mainstream audiences, but 
director Field and screenwriter Jon Bernstein hold nothing back in showing 
how reprehensible someone can be simply to achieve a decidedly petty goal. 
As Mona, the talented Minnie Driver (2000's "Return to Me") perfectly creates 
this person who is unknowingly a monster on the outside, a side effect of 
never experiencing love and compassion before in her own family. Mona is not 
always likable, but there are very few actresses who could aid as a bridge 
between such a difficult character and the viewer, and Driver is luckily one 
of them. Moreover, as the film progresses and she begins to experience what 
she has missed by having her sights set on only one thing, Mona gradually 
does become more compassionate, and the catharsis she finally has is 
effectively done in the climax.
Best known as the Pepsi girl who imitates the likes of Aretha Franklin and 
Ray Charles, young Hallie Kate Eisenberg (1999's "Bicentennial Man") is very 
good and thankfully not unctuous as the strong-willed, confused Vanessa, who 
Mona discovers possesses many of the same traits she did as a child. 
Eisenberg and Driver work well together, and the familial relation between 
the two is believable. Meanwhile, Joey Lauren Adams (1997's "Chasing Amy") is 
her usual impressive self, even when her character's motivations are a little 
fuzzy and you unavoidably question why she would stay friends with someone 
like Mona for all these years.
In supporting roles, Leslie Stefanson (1999's "The General's Daughter"), 
while doing a professional job, is more of an annoyance than an interesting 
character, as a news reporter out to expose the many unwholesome things Mona 
has done over the years. Kathleen Turner is even more wasted as beauty 
pageant expert Verna Chickles, and it is unfortunate to see her return to 
such a throwaway role after her wonderful work in this year's best film (so 
far), "The Virgin Suicides." As fellow Miss American Miss contestants, both 
Bridgette L. Wilson (1999's "House on Haunted Hill," but when did she start 
getting credited with the middle initial?) and Kathleen Robertson (1999's 
"Splendor") are surprisingly memorable, as a poignant twist in the story's 
conclusion exposes both of them as being exactly like Mona, something she 
herself fears.
Along with some extremely funny moments and the occasional insightful 
character moments, "Beautiful" is an entertaining, if flawed, motion picture 
all the way up until the disastrous final five minutes, which turn up the 
self-appreciation and cheeseball meters so high that it becomes sickening. 
The sudden shift in tones in that last stretch of running time is both 
jarringly and seemingly out of another movie altogether, and it largely 
undermines the integrity of the film as a whole. "Beautiful" is the type of 
movie whose basics have been traveled many times before, but it is done well 
for the most part. Its successfulness in the first 105 minutes only makes its 
stay of execution in the finale all the more depressing.
