Title
Review for Captain Corelli's Mandolin (2001)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Universal Pictures/ StudioCanal/Miramax
 Director: John Madden
 Writer:  Shawn Slovo, novel by Louis De Bernieres
 Cast: Nicolas Cage, Penelope Cruz, John Hurt, Christian Bale,
David Morrissey, Irene Papas
 Screened at: Lincoln Sq. Thea NY 8/13/01
   As I was taking in "Captain Corelli's Mandolin," I couldn't help
thinking of two bits of advice that I got early on; one from  my
high school social studies teacher, the other from an older friend
and mentor.  The first and less important is that political alliances
are temporary.  According to Mr. Pompa back in 10th grade,
difficult as it is to believe given our great relationship with
England today, we went to war with the UK twice and were it not
for the fact that both our countries have McDonald's outlets,
there's no telling when we'd be battling it out again.  The second,
and one which served me well over and over and over is: forget
flowers and chocolate. The way to a woman's heart is with music. 
What does all this have to do with a picture about a romance that
occurs during World War 2?  Absolutely everything.
   John Madden's movie, based on Louis De Bernieres' novel and
set amid John Toll's picture-postcard photography on the
smashing Greek island of Cephallonia, opens in 1940 as the
Italians, far better suited for wine, women and song than for war,
are suffering setbacks while advancing in southeastern Europe
under Mussolini's orders.  A smaller Greek army has pushed
them back back into Albania but a force has nonetheless landed
with the help of Hitler's Germans on the island of Cephallonia,
and for a time even the Nazis under Captain Gunther Weber
(David Morrissey), are chilling out as they watch Italian Captain
Antonio Corelli (Nicolas Cage) and his men singing Puccini and
Verdi, enjoying the sun, the sand, and the Greek women.  While
Corelli sets his eyes on the daughter of Dr. Iannis (John Hurt),
Pelagia (Penelope Cruz)--who is engaged to Greek resistance
fighter Mandras (Christian Bale)--outside forces are ominous. 
Italy, which had been a reluctant ally of Germany, has
surrendered to the Allies, and Germany--none too pleased by
this while rightly convinced that the Italian troops on Cephallonia
are about to turn their weapons over to the Greek resistance--are
about to reverse their affiliation with their confederates to the
south with extreme prejudice.
   "Captain Corelli's Mandolin," then, is, like "Pearl Harbor," both a
war story and a romance, more realistic than Michael Bay and
Jerry Bruckheimer's summer blockbuster in the courtship
department but quite a bit less flashy in scenes of combat. 
Shawn Slovo's screenplay gives the best lines to John Hurt in the
role of Pelagia's astute ol' dad, a veritable fortune cookie of
wisdom about love, life and medicine.  His learning must come
strictly from experience since he couldn't possibly raise the
money to acquire books--in one scene he's shown getting paid
for medical treatment with a live chicken.  (Sounds like more than
most of our HMO docs deserve, doesn't it?)  Iannis tells his little
girl not to marry Mandras not because he's an American psycho-
-he's not, he's Greek and he was born on Cephallonia--but
because he doesn't know how to read and he's of a lower social
class than the ambitious young woman.  Iannis also knows from
experience that there's a difference between love and being in
love--the latter being what happens in the beginning when the
earth movies while the former occurs during the next forty years
when you're shopping for Pampers and washing the dishes.  
   I haven't the foggiest idea how these different groups
communicated with one another in real life, because Mr. Pompa,
my 10th grade social studies teacher, never told us about
Cephallonia, but all the folks in John Madden's picture have a
dandy time speaking in English while maintaining their special
European accents throughout.  Nic Cage has no problem with his
Italian inflection and really looks as though he's playing that
mandolin that he carries around on his back.  Remember what I
said in the beginning about how serenading women is better than
giving them chocolate and flowers?  In the movie's best scene,
Pelagia is about to stomp away from Corelli--after all, he's the
enemy--when the Italian whips out his instrument and strums
away.  She's transfixed.
   "Captain Corelli's Mandolin" is not a great romance and not a
great war movie, though it tries to combine to two genres in the
way that major combat fare ("The Bridge on the River Kwai,"
"The Longest Day," "Saving Private Ryan") wouldn't think of
doing.  As summer entertainment, though, it provides some
spectacular photography which you can take in from your air-
conditioned location without suffering Cephallonia's August heat.
Rated R.  Running time: 127 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "CAPTAIN CORELLI'S MANDOLIN" (Universal)
  Based on Louis de Bernieres' epic novel, this romantic drama begins in
1940 on the idyllic Greek island of Cephallonia, where Pelagia (Penelope Cruz),
the serious, proud daughter of Dr. Iannis (scene-stealing John Hurt), the
village physician, is engaged to Mandras (Christian Bale), a fisherman who
leaves to fight Mussolini's forces in Albania. Soon the island is occupied by
hedonistic Italian troops and Captain Antonio Corelli (Nicolas Cage) is billeted
in the Iannis's house. Believing that Mandras has died in battle, Pelagia falls
for the charming, fun-loving Corelli, who's a translator between the Germans and
the Greeks. He trains his men to sing, not fight, and says, "I've never aimed a
gun in my life." But Mandras has - and he is very much alive, hiding out with
the partisan guerrillas. Eventually, Pelagia must choose between the two men. As
Dr. Iannis puts it: "When you fall in love, it is a temporary madness. It erupts
like an earthquake, and then it subsides. And when it subsides, you have to work
out whether your roots have been so entwined together that it is inconceivable
that you should ever part, because that is what love is."
    Shackled by Shawn Slovo's shallow, under-developed,
overly-simplified screenplay, director John Madden concentrates on the formulaic
romance amidst W.W.II conflicts, utilizing John Toll's sweeping cinematography
and Stephen Warbeck's luscious score. But there's little on-screen sexual
chemistry between Nicolas Cage and Penelope Cruz, even when he woos her with
music by seductively strumming his mandolin, and the conclusion seems
anti-climactic. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Captain Corelli's
Mandolin" is a picturesque, escapist 5. Rent Gabriele Salvatore's "Mediterraneo"
(1991), a similar story that's far more emotionally effective.

Author
Jonathan F. Richards
     It is said that in preparation for his role as a music-loving WWII Italian
officer in the John Madden movie Captain Corelli's Mandolin, Nicolas Cage
communed with the spirit of his departed grandfather, Carmine Coppola.  Whatever
the old man gave him, it wasn't a credible Italian accent.  Cage made a good
Italian-American in the 1987 comedy Moonstruck, but as an Italian-Italian he
does not cut the pasta.  This is too bad, because when the central character of
a movie leaves a hole the size of Naples, the rest of the movie is hard-pressed
not to sink right through it.  
     Another disadvantage for a movie that is primarily a love story is a lack
of chemistry between its lovers.  Cage has become an action star, and has lost
the knack of connecting romantically to anyone other than himself.  His love
interest here is Penelope Cruz (rumored soon to be Penelope Cruz-Cruise), a
Spanish actress impersonating a Greek maiden named Pelagia.  Cruz is an
appealing sort, and very good in Spanish movies like All About My Mother, but
her appeal so far has resisted English translation.  The third corner of the
movie's romantic triangle is the talented young British actor Christian Bale
(American Psycho) who's been chopped and channeled into the illiterate Greek
partisan Mandras, a job of tailoring on a par with Natalie Wood playing a Native
American.
     The best acting comes from the always reliable John Hurt as Pelegia's
father, the local doctor, who narrates part of the movie.  Hurt may not seem
very Greek either, but he commands the screen with his hooded eyes and his
slow-moving, rumpled dignity.  Also good is David Morrissey as a German soldier
who would like to be a good guy and join in the Italians' carousing,
opera-singing good fellowship, but doesn't quite have it in him.  And worth
mentioning is the great Greek actress Irene Pappas, who plays Mandras's mother;
unfortunately, being really Greek, she sticks out like a sore thumb in this
company.
     The movie was shot on the island of Cephalonia, where the bestselling novel
by Louis de Bernieres was set, and Cephalonia at least does not disappoint. 
John Toll's camera lingers lovingly on the sparkling sapphire water, and moves
through the dappled hillsides and the dusty little town with the lazy
timelessness of an Aegean afternoon.  But Madden, who combined history, romance,
literature, and humor so effortlessly in Shakespeare In Love, seems at a loss
here without a Tom Stoppard screenplay to set him up.  
     The screenplay in hand is by Shawn Slovo, who last wrote a movie a dozen
years ago and probably should have quit while he was ahead.  Here he has the
thankless task of filleting out the cinematic spine of a well-loved novel,
figuring out what to keep, what to jettison, and what to invent.  He tries a bit
of all three. Those who loved the book will find some passages brought to life,
major themes and plotlines and character traits abandoned, and a few surprises,
including a Hollywood ending that even the studio wanted to reshoot. 
    Captain Corelli's Mandolin is by no means hopeless.  It looks good, and it
sometimes comes to life with real tension, particularly when the bad guys show
up in the form of vicious Nazi occupiers come to supplant the hedonistic Fascist
occupiers who have fraternized to excess with the natives and have abandoned the
Fuhrer's cause.  The movie surprises itself with flashes of drama and moments of
heroism.  But at its soft center, where Cage grapples romantically with Cruz,
and vainly with his Inner Italian, the movie is yet another of the high-profile
disappointments of 2001.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
If you've been thinking about vacationing on one of Greece's Ionian Islands
and you have a lot of time to kill, head down to your local megaplex and
check out Captain Corelli's Mandolin.  Pretty much everybody else should
just stay away.  With its crystal-clear blue water and bone-white sandy
beaches, Mandolin is essentially a really (really) long commercial for the
Greek Tourism Commission.
As if we haven't already had our fill of wartime romances this summer,
Mandolin tries awfully hard to be The English Patient but instead is only
slightly less ridiculously annoying than Pearl Harbor (with fewer
explosions, to boot).  It's about a Greek woman who falls in love with one
of the Italian soldiers occupying her picturesque island during World War
II, which would be kind of like Anne Frank hooking up with Colonel Klink.
Like Patient, it's based on a hip novel (Louis de Berničres' 1994 novel had
a different ending and oodles of homosexual overtones) that you've probably
never heard of before, but Patient it is definitely not.
Mandolin was doomed from the get-go, with original director Roger Michell
(Notting Hill) dropping out after suffering a heart attack just months
before shooting was supposed to start (personally, I think he was faking).
He was replaced by John Madden (Shakespeare in Love), but then one of the
worst casting blunders of all-time occurred when Nicolas Cage was tapped to
play the Italian soldier and Penélope Cruz accepted the role of his Greek
beauty (because all olive-skinned people look alike, right?).
Why can't more filmmakers do like Abbas Kiarostami and Jafar Panahi and cast
films with actual people native to the region in which the film is set?
With Mandolin, we get Cage (The Family Man), whose Captain Antonio Corelli
is the only member of his battalion to speak Greek.  When he translates,
he's an American guy who is playing an Italian speaking Greek, but it's
really English.  Makes about as much sense as my long-distance phone bill.
About a half-hour before I saw this film, some entertainment show was
crowing about Cage spending months to master an Italian accent, as well as
learning how to both play the mandolin and conduct an opera.  They made it
seem like he was working on a cure for cancer, and the fact is, his accent
is horrible.  Cage, who has very little experience in period romances,
sounds like Dracula (he always looks like him anyway, to me), and if it
weren't for Shannon Elizabeth in American Pie 2, he'd win the Worst Accent
of the Month Award.
Cruz (Blow) is no better, as her Pelagia is performed by a Spaniard
stumbling over the English language while not even bothering to try to sound
the slightest bit Greek (but all Mediterranean people sound the same,
right?).  Pelagia has spent her whole life on the island of Cephallonia
(which, I think, is the name of the brain tumor you get from using a cell
phone), learning how to practice medicine from her father, Iannis (John
Hurt, Lost Souls).  She gets engaged to a simple fisherman named Mandras
(played by a simple actor named Christian Bale, Shaft), but before you know
it, those damn Italians are amassing at the Greek border on Mussolini's
orders.
Shortly after Mandras heads off to join the Greek partisans, Cephallonia
surrenders to the Italians (after a funny initial response) and the island
becomes "occupied" by a dozen soldiers, led by the mandolin-toting Corelli.
Iannis, who looks an awful lot like Stalin, is forced to put Corelli up in
his house, much to the dismay of Pelagia.  But we learn Corelli is more into
dancing, singing, drinking and swimming than any type of war activity.  He'd
sooner shout "Heil Puccini" than "Heil Hitler," and he tries to acclimate
himself with all of Cephallonia's locals (called Cellephants, perhaps).
Even the blind can see where this story is going.  Pelagia hates Corelli at
first, but she starts to fall for him at the one-hour mark, and they're
playing tonsil hockey about 15 minutes later.  Then, the all-important
unveiling of the Penélopes occurs.  But what will happen when the tides turn
in the War?  How will Italy's surrender affect the island?  Will the
soulless Germans try to occupy Cephallonia?  And, more importantly, will we
get to see the Penélopes again?
If you can stay awake, you'll learn the answers to these important questions
and more at Captain Corelli's Mandolin, playing at a theatre near you.  Just
don't say I didn't warn you.
2:09 - R for some violence, sexuality and language

Author
Robin Clifford
The beautiful Greek Island of Cephallonia was a peaceful jewel in the
Ionian Sea until 1941 when the war ravaging Europe landed on its shores.
Italian troops are sent to garrison the island and Captain Antonio Corelli
(Nicolas Cage), a conscript sent to the foreign land, falls in love with a
lovely local girl, Pelagia (Penelope Cruz), in "Captain Corelli's
Mandolin."
Months ago, we received the first of the video press material for "Captain
Corelli's Mandolin." Watching the trailer tape way back then, I was
reluctant about the movie. It looked like a smarmy romance, the kind that
really doesn't hold a lot of appeal for me. The press stuff kept trickling
in and a sense of mild dread took over as the film's release date drew
near. Finally, word came announcing the advanced screening, so I bit the
bullet (after all, it does have Penelope Cruz) and went to see what I
expected to be nothing more than a chick flick. Boy, was I wrong.
John Madden ("Shakespeare in Love") brings the popular Louis de Bernieres
novel, Captain Corelli's Mandolin, to the big screen in a lush, beautifully
crafted movie that turns out to be more than just a love story. Captain
Corelli, an unwilling draftee into Mussolini's invading army, loves life
and the music he plays on his mandolin. When he is stationed, with his
artillery battery, on Cephallonia, he sees beautiful Pelagia amidst the
island's citizens and is immediately smitten. When Antonio is billeted in
the house owned by her father, Dr. Iannis (John Hurt), her resentment of
the invaders is softened and the Italian officer works his way into the
young woman's heart. A deep, mutual love is born.
The horrors of the war have left the small Greek island unmolested and
Italy's powerful ally, Nazi Germany, has left the Balkan country to the
Italians to rule. But, in 1943, when Mussolini falls from power, his German
masters take a hand in the occupation of Greece. When Italy surrenders to
the Allies, the Nazis demand the surrender of arms by all of the Italian
forces. Rumors fly about Italian troops being imprisoned by the Germans and
the soldiers occupying Cephallonia decide to resist their now-former
allies. Battalions of crack German mountain troops are sent to quell the
mutineers and the out-numbered and out-gunned Italians pay the deadly
consequences.
The focus, as you would expect in a romance-based story, is on the two lead
characters. Antonio and Pelagia make a handsome couple and some sparks fly
in their romantic scenes, but, overall, Cage and Cruz don't quite have the
chemistry to make this an epic love story. The pair is nice but the screen
doesn't burn up when they're together. This could have been a disaster for
the movie, but the quality of the production, a strong supporting cast, the
gorgeous locale, the outstanding tech values and exciting battle scenes,
plus the depiction of a little know slice of history all contribute in
making this a solid all-around film.
John Hurt, a truly great actor, gives depth to his character, Dr. Iannis,
the island's physician. The doctor is an enlightened individual, shunning
the Greek Orthodox religion of the islanders, but dedicated to the people
of Cephallonia and, in particular, his daughter, Pelagia. Film icon Irene
Papas appears as the mother of Mandras (Christian Bale), an illiterate
Greek fisherman who had the heart of Pelagia until Antonio Corelli's
arrival. With just a look the veteran actress tells volumes of the hopes
and fears for her son. The actors making up Corelli's artillery battery,
called La Scalas for their propensity to break into the songs of Puccini
and other great Italian composers, provide a musical cameo perf that gives
a human face to the occupiers.
John Toll's cinematography is, in a word, stunning. The pallet of colors
that his cameras pick up give a lushness that complements the island
locales. The look of the film is so inviting it makes you want to spend
your days drinking in the beauty of Cephallonia. Other techs are on a par
with Toll's exquisite lensing. Jim Clay and his production design team had
the daunting task of creating the film's Greek island village virtually
from scratch. An earthquake devastated the island in 1953, leaving little
of the old-fashioned structures needed for the film. The recreation of the
capital city of Argostoli is nothing less than remarkable. Costume designer
Alexandra Byrne expertly fits the period, clothing the Italian and German
troops in real looking uniforms and the islanders in homespun attire. The
battle sequences between the Italians and Germans are deftly staged and
wrenchingly realistic looking.
The history depicted in "Captain Corelli's Mandolin" covers territory
virtually unknown. The only other film that deals with the Italian
occupation of Greece and its islands was the charming Best Foreign Film
winner several years ago, "Mediterraneo," but that comedic viewpoint did
not get down to the nitty gritty of the war itself. If only the romantic
center of "Corelli" had equaled the exquisite production. I give it a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Eighty minutes.  That's how long it takes before CAPTAIN CORELLI'S MANDOLIN ever
comes alive.  Still, that is ten minutes sooner than PEARL HARBOR.  Both
pictures suffer from making their audiences wait and then giving them very
little reward for their patience.  Based on Louis de Berničres's novel -- which
I am told is quite good, the movie is directed by SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE's John
Madden.  With Madden's languid pacing and Shawn Slovo's sappy script, the movie
begs for a one word review: Yuck.
Nicolas Cage, as Captain Antonio Corelli, and Penélope Cruz (ALL THE PRETTY
HORSES), as Pelagia, deliver two of the least interesting performances of their
careers.  Corelli is a happy-go-lucky Italian soldier, part of a force that is
occupying a Greek island during World War II.  Most of the movie exists in a
fairy tale world in which the occupying forces sing and dance while the Greeks
treat them rudely.  Corelli, although he is a captain, has never in his entire
life even aimed a gun at anyone.  He is the founder of his regiment's opera club
so he leads his troops in songfests.  
Pelagia, the island beauty, is betrothed to Mandras (Christian Bale, AMERICAN
PSYCHO), who leaves to fight with the Greek partisans.  Madras likes to beat his
chest while saying corny things like, "I don't know how to tell you what's
inside here."
Pelagia, of course, will eventually fall in love with the Captain Corelli.  When
she complains that in a war there is nothing to sing about, he explains, "I've
always found something in life worth singing about, and for that I do not
apologize."  Keep your eyes open because, if you blink, you'll miss their love
scene.
"The war we thought would never end is over," Pelagia's relieved father (John
Hurt) tells us in voice-over near the end.  I felt the same way about the movie.
CAPTAIN CORELLI'S MANDOLIN runs a long 2:09.  It is rated R for "some violence,
sexuality and language" and would be acceptable for teenagers.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave the film **.  Although he was able to identify a
few scenes that he liked, over all he felt that the movie was at best "okay."
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 17, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Annette Cardwell
Captain Corelli's Mandolin is one of those films that most people can't
in good conscience say they hate.  In the tradition of films like Waking
Ned Devine and Cinema Paradiso, it's a sweet but flawed wartime romance
with enough gorgeous scenery and quaint villagers to choke a horse.  It
innocuously celebrates the triumph of true love, exalts the rise of an
everyman hero, toasts art's ability to eclipse the horrors of life, and
at times is even a visual feast (Miramax should charge the Greek tourist
board royalties).
Adapted from the best-selling novel by Louis de Bernieres, the story
begins in 1941.  Dr. Iannis (John Hurt) and his lovely daughter Pelagia
(Penélope Cruz) live on the idyllic Greek isle of Cephallonia, where
Pelagia is betrothed to fisherman Mandras (Christian Bale) who's eager
to prove his mettle in the growing war in Europe.  He goes off to fight
for Greece against the Italians; in the meantime, the Italians invade
his home island.  But these Italians aren't scary, Mussolini types;
they're jolly, good-natured and even kind.  According to them, Italians
are best at "eating, singing, and making love," which the filmmakers set
out to prove to no end in this movie.  Let's put it this way: Puccini
gets some serious screen time.
When the opera-crooning Captain Corelli (Nicholas Cage) -- beloved
mandolin in hand -- is placed in Dr. Iannis' home as a boarder, he and
Pelagia fall in love.  All seems wonderful, especially when word arrives
that Mussolini has surrendered to the Allies.  The Italians are ready to
go home, but in handing over their arms to the still-fighting Germans,
some of the fun-loving Italians get shot.  Soon, Corelli and his men are
working with the resistance to help liberate the island and avenge their
brothers' deaths.  But, can these few men defeat a huge Nazi onslaught? 
Can true love prevail?
Don't be so certain of the answer, but don't expect miracles either. 
Films about love and war should have pathos and grit, and Corelli's
gives us smatterings of each.  Unfortunately, those glimmers are
smothered by incredulously bad, syrupy dialogue ("I feel I could've
watched you forever.") and ludicrous -- almost comic -- accents.  The
performances are all passable, but Americans and Brits posing as
Italians and Greeks can be too much to bear at times.  Cage seems to
channeling a toned-down Roberto Benigni, exclaiming "Bella bambina!"
every time he catches sight of Cruz.  And Christian Bale as a swarthy
Greek revolutionary?  That casting decision is pure comedy.
While it's not remotely as bad as Pearl Harbor, the war here is
basically a nice device to teach us the important lesson of acceptance. 
We're all not so different (well, except maybe the Nazis, but everyone
hates them, right?).  Greeks, Italians, and Germans can remarkably
understand each other... in their accented English, of course, and these
cultural exchanges are where the film's painless platitudes come to
light.
Oddly, Corelli's does provide quite a bit of gruesome battle footage and
its fair share of brutal death, which gives you quite a jolt after
watching an hour of bucolic harmony, Italians singing happily, lovers
cooing at one another, and "Bella bambina!"  It's a welcome shock back
to reality.
But with the billing of "From the director of Shakespeare in Love," one
would hope John Madden's follow-up would have touted the same witty,
incisive and radiant dialogue as its predecessor, but this script is
made of lead.  Instead of clever, we're treated to cliché with a thick
artsy varnish, and there's certainly a big audience for that.  Too bad
he couldn't get Tom Stoppard to bail him out this time.
Director: John Madden
Producer: Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Kevin  Loader, Mark Huffam
Writer: Sean Slovo
Starring: Nicholas Cage, Penelope Cruz, John Hurt, Christian Bale, David
Morrissey, Irene Papas
http://www.captain-corellis-mandolin.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
