Title
Review for After Hours (1985)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Martin Scorsese
Writer: Joseph Minion
Starring: Griffin Dunne, Rosanna Arquette, Teri Garr, John Heard, 
Catherine O'Hara, Linda Fiorentino, Verna Bloom, Tommy Chong, Cheech 
Marin, Will Patton, Bronson Pinchot
"After Hours" is the most bizarre black comedy anyone will ever see.  
Simply stated.  This film is so bizarre that not only is it absolutely 
hysterical to watch, but it's also tense and frightening and one could 
probably benefit from a small break halfway through the film just to 
collect yourself.  I mean, one can only take so much of Kafka and Freud 
being presented at the same time.
Written by a film student and directed with darkly comic flair by Martin 
Scorsese (A True God Among Men), "After Hours" is a kafkaesque nightmare 
of a movie, starting out as a little unusual date movie and turning into 
a wild multi-leveled nightmare.  Our hero, Paul Hackett (Griffin Dunne, 
at his best), is a typical computer programmer in New York who hates his 
job, flicks channels all night, and goes to coffee shops to read George 
Miller's "Tropic of Cancer" with hopes of meeting a female.  This 
particular night it happens with Marcy (Rosanna Arquette) who sees him 
reading Miller and makes some wild, sexually fierocious comments on the 
book.  Paul is immeadiately turned on and gets her number.
He calls her that night and discovers she's living with some artist 
named Kiki Dees (a young Linda Fiorentino, working on her "Last 
Seduction" role early) in Soho (Let me just say that after watching this 
movie I will NEVER step foot in Soho).  He goes there, experiences some 
very bizarre situations, gets to know her better and then ditches her 
because: a) she's weird and more importantly: b) she might just have 
some burn scars all over her body.  
The film, which has started off as a date film, has slowly become 
bizarre and, well, kafkaesque (a counter, please, for the number of 
times I say that word in this review alone).  But even though it has 
been weird so far, it's nothing as for what will happen next.  Paul's 
life is turned into a nightmare by associating with other people in an 
attempt of trying to get back to his apartment (see, the subway tolls 
have gone up and he only has about 90-some cents on him).  Among the 
people he meets are: a bartender (John Heard), who's seen so much that 
he doesn't even stare a bit when two men come into his bar and make out; 
a waitress (Teri Gaar), who's such a loser that it's unexplainable; and 
a pair of burglars who just happen to be played by none other than 
Cheech and Chong (great casting, if I might say).
This might just be a stupid everything-bad-happens film but it's so well 
written and so brilliantly directed by Scorsese that it seems to have 
several dimensions: on the surface, it's a wicked comedy; beneath, it 
has Freudian undertones (most of the problems he gets into are 
sex-related in some way...and the end is, well, incestuous, but I won't 
divulge) and, well, Kafka undertones as well (no need to explain this). 
 It all projects Scorsese's view of New York as a kind of Dante's 
Inferno, with everybody seeming to be losers just waiting around for 
whatever and actually being so bored that it might be fun to form a mob 
and chase an innocent man through the streets of Soho.  
Besides, this has Scorsese written all over it: the music playing slowly 
and drearily; the amazing slow takes; the dry wit and black humor; etc, 
etc, etc.  But, unlike many of his other films, I believe "After Hours" 
to stand on the same level as his other masterpieces (Which are?  Glad 
you asked: "Mean Streets," "Taxi Driver," "Raging Bull" and 
"Goodfellas"), presenting Scorsese's talent with comedy; his 
non-traditional way of presenting a story with flair and style and 
making a full dimensional work of art out of it.  But if you really 
don't care about these things, you'll still have a great time with this 
brilliantly funny film.

Author
Brian Koller
"After Hours" is a quirky black comedy.  It is an
endless series of events that don't completely make
sense, but the director (Martin Scorsese) plays it
straight, creating an ironic rather than surreal effect.
Griffin Dunne stars as an average guy who is trapped
late at night in the Soho section of New York.  Without
any friends or cash, he is dependent upon the generosity
of strangers.  Unfortunately for Griffin, everybody
he meets in Soho is eccentric, and his attempts to
go home place him in increasingly bizarre situations.
The film begins conventionally enough: Boy (Dunne)
meets Girl (Rosanna Arquette).  The first clue that
things are amiss is that Arquette's room-mate
(Linda Fiorentino) is a punk sculptress.  Arquette
apparently has burns on her body, and has curious
domestic troubles.  Dunne soon encounters burglers
Cheech and Chong, "beehive 1965" (Teri Garr), and
numerous homosexual characters.
The Academy Awards passed on "After Hours", but
Scorsese won Best Screenplay at the Cannes film festival.
I guess that it is a credit to the screenplay that
the film never loses its focus, considering that a half
hour story has become a 96 minute movie.  But Cannes may
have honored the film more for its feel than its quality.
Dunne's character becomes increasingly whiny, and
the actions of the characters often make little sense.
In particular, every female character that Dunne encounters
takes a strong interest in him.  If you are wondering
how Dunne came to be cast for the plum role, it probably
helped that he co-produced the film.
For Scorsese, best known for dramas starring Robert De Niro,
this was his second black comedy in a row, following
"The King of Comedy".
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
