Title
Review for Femme de chambre du Titanic, La (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CHAMBERMAID ON THE TITANIC, THE (FEMME DE CHAMBRE DU TITANIC, LA)
(director/writer: Bigas Luna; screenwriters: based on the novel by
Didier Decoin/ Cuca Canals/Jean-Louis Benoit; cinematographer: Patrick
Blossier; cast: Romane Bohringer (Zoe), Oliver Martinez (Horty), Aitana
Sanchez Gijon (Marie), Didier Bezace (Simeon), Aldo Maccione (Zeppe),
Jean-Marie Juan (Pascal), Aldo Maccione (Zeppe), 1997-France)
The story is set in a grimy town in the Lorraine region of northern
France in the spring of 1912. A group of tired workers in the foundry
are seen finishing their shift, walking through puddles, and coming home
to their wives. There is a buzz among the workers about an advertised
athletic contest sponsored by the foundry, an obstacle race, with an
unannounced prize going to the winner. When Horty (Martinez) wins for
the third year in a row, the president of the foundry, Simeon (Didier),
tells him he won an all-expenses paid trip for one to Southampton,
England to watch the maiden launching of the Titanic. The only catch, is
that he will have to leave his loving wife Zoe (Romane) behind.
While staying in the best hotel in Southampton, on the night before the
ship leaves, he meets a chambermaid, Marie (Aitana Sanchez Gijon), when
she knocks on his door and tells him she needs a room to stay, because
there are no hotel rooms available. Since she is a gorgeous brunette, he
invites her to stay the night with him. Instead of questioning her
motives for coming to his room, he falls in love with her, offering her
his bed - he'll sleep in a chair. What doesn't happen that night, is
that he doesn't make love to her, putting her too much on a pedestal as
an ideal woman. He will, instead, obtain a photograph of her to keep as
a momento of the trip when he returns home.
At home, he becomes upset with his job promotion to maintenance work,
where he will now have a softer job than working the furnaces. He is
upset because he wonders why he got this promotion. He is susceptible to
the rumors circulating that his wife slept with Simeon while he was
away. So he heads for the bar for some consolation, and when all his
cohorts there see the photo of the chambermaid, they want to hear how he
had sex with her. The soft spoken, almost inarticulate, Adonis-like
Horty, soon can't stand telling the men nothing happened and starts
embellishing the story, where it comes out that he made love to her 12
times that night and he did it to her in very exciting ways. Lies become
the theme of the film, as it is examined how harmless or necessary they
are for people, especially since most people live hum-drum lives and
could use a little imagination to liven things up. People also lie
because they feel hurt about things and think that by lying they can
make themselves feel better.
Horty has become a local attraction at the bar, drawing crowds nightly
to hear his stories. This upsets Zoe, as she is as convinced by his
stories as everyone else is, as she believes that Horty is madly in love
with the memory of a woman who probably perished when the Titanic went
down. This lie has changed his life; it torments him when he starts
thinking of Marie's beauty and of his wife sleeping with the boss. When
he gets fired, he soon finds that a promoter of traveling theater acts,
Zeppe (Maccione), hires him on as a storyteller, even as he tells both
the promoter and his wife, that he made these stories up. She agrees to
go along with the storytelling act, when she sees how much money there
is in it.
The Spanish director, Bigas Luna (Jamon, Jamon/Golden Balls/The Tit and
the Moon), known to make very unconventional and sexually implicit
films, has apparently toned down his act here, shooting for satire as
his only proverbial fish in the barrel to shoot at.
Not only did I find this film a bore, the acting uninspiring, and the
motif unconvincing, but what annoyed me most, was that there was scene
after scene of Horty telling his inane story of his dying love for
Marie, to an audience that pays to hear this so they can have a good cry
over it. It seemed to be pushing in the audience face what the director
was supposedly satirizing.
The film is a parody of a need people have to hear great stories,
whether they are true or not, which might be a good idea on which to
anchor a film, but this one had no heart-beat to it. The melodramatic
soapy romantic story, just never sailed gracefully across the ocean. The
film was never able to be poetic or articulate about the point it was
trying to make, instead it just settled for looking good, but couldn't
rejuvenate through this feeble storytelling ploy, the art of good
storytelling. There was just no passion to be found in all these
handsome stars; the idea of the film, that one can't live without
imagination in one's life, was a worthy idea that never fully
materialized. It has the look of one of those arty-farty films, the ones
that only play in art houses and pretend to be something more arty than
what they are.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Goldwyn Films
 Director: Bigas Luna
 Writer: Bigas Luna, Cuca Canals, Jean-Louis Benoit from
     the novel by Didier Decoin
 Cast: Romane Bohringer, Olivier Martinez, Aitana Sanchez
     Gijon, Didier Bezace, Aldo Maccione
   Our elementary school teachers tell us that we should
never lie.  They point to George Washington, who, admitting
that he chopped down the cherry tree, was not punished
because he told the truth.  What's more, criminals who
confess are let off with lighter sentences, as are those who
snitch on their associates.  We must never lie.
   Nonsense, of course.  Look at all the trouble Fletcher
Reede (Jim Carrey) got into in "Liar, Liar," in one case
securing a punch in the nose by an endowed woman in an
elevator for telling her the truth about her anatomy, and about
to lose every client he defends in court by being the only
honest lawyer in town!  Someone once said that if everyone
told the truth, there would not be two friends left in the whole
world.
   Which brings us to "The Chambermaid on the Titanic." 
This French-Italian-Spanish coproduction is not about to
compete with the blockbuster movie starring Leo DiCaprio,
nor is it primarily a bedroom farce, sentimental comedy, or
gritty, neo-realist view of the lives of working-class men in a
French foundry.  It is, more accurately, an ode to lying. 
Without the ability to lie at great length, we would have no
theater, no novels, no movies; in short, not a heck of a lot to
live for.  Or so believes Bigas Luna, who directed and co-
wrote this clever work which he divides skillfully into four
parts, using a different photographic look for each segment. 
Even in our own age of mass media and the all-
encompassing power of television, we still love to hear a
story, and sometimes we gather round a very good
prevaricator who will weave a tale of adventure or romance,
riveting us simply with the power of his voice and the energy
of his narrative.  
   Such a man is Horty (Olivier Martinez), a handsome,
popular, somewhat shy worker who wins an annual contest
sponsored by his company's president Simeon (Didier
Bezace).  By beating the competition in a race, he is given
just one ticket that will transport him by rail to Southampton
where he will stay in a luxury hotel and then watch the sailing
of the Titanic.  But he must leave his wife Zoe (Romane
Bohringer) behind--which is part of the boss's plan to seduce
her while her man is away.  In the posh hotel, he is visited
late at night by a beautiful woman, Marie (Aitana Sanchez
Gijon), who claims to be a chambermaid on the Titanic, but
one who is somehow left without a place to stay that night. 
Offering to share his own quarters with the lovely creature,
Horty sleeps with her--literally!--and, loyal to his wife back
home, gets to touch the fair roommate only in his dreams. 
When he returns, he is told that his wife had a brief affair with
the company president and, resentful and furious at the
thought, he weaves a long, almost totally false story of his
sexual escapades, riveting his friends in the local bar.  Hired
by the majordomo of a traveling theater, Zeppe (Aldo
Maccione), he eventually captivates increasingly large
audiences with variations on the theme, even affording his
wife a part in the daily drama.
   We learn in theater history class that at first there was the
story; then a single actor to relate the tale; then a second
actor to dialogue with the storyteller; eventually a third, an
increasingly elaborate set and costume design and
instrumental music.  "The Chambermaid on the Titanic" is a
well-realized microcosm of this three-thousand year chronicle,
told economically in just ninety-six minutes, putting the
principal performers to fine use.  Aitana Sanchez Gijon, whom
we all know from her role opposite Keanu Reeves in "A Walk
in the Clouds," is radiant as a woman who turns out to be
other than she represents; Olivier Martinez an engaging
storyteller who is so proficient at what he does that his final
episode fools everyone in the movie audience; and Romane
Bohringer a competent model of a typical wife of a hard-
working industrial laborer in the France of 1915.
   Walter Caprara and Bruno Cesari's production design looks
authentic down to the iron maiden used to transport Horty to
England, and France Squarciapino's costume design was
vigorous enough to win an award in that category.  In an
interview with the director, Bigas Luna expressed his fear that
the mass media are drowning the tradition of storytelling, and
acknowledges his use of the Titanic to symbolize the gradual
sinking of the ancient tradition.  Perhaps the great irony of the
story is that it took a well-designed movie to project this
anxiety and to rejuvenate the teller of lies on his appropriate
pedestal. Not Rated.  Running time: 96 minutes.  (C) Harvey
Karten 1998

Author
Joy Wyse
        The popularity of the TITANIC may help attract audiences to this film,
the full title of which is The Chambermaid on the Titanic.  But this is a
totally different type of love story than that shared between Leonardo and
Kate.  This French-Spanish-Italian joint effort is in French, with English
subtitles.  It is the story of a young married couple, living strenuous
lives, working in a foundry.  
        The owner, lusting after the wife, Zoe, arranges for the young husband,
Horty, to win a trip to England where he will witness the initial sailing
of the ill-fated Titanic.  He hopes that while the husband is away, he can
have his way with her.
        In England, Horty befriends a beautiful French girl who calls herself
Marie.  She cannot find a room in the overfilled city.  He offers to let
her share his room.
        The next morning, she is gone.  He goes to the pier and sees her on
board.  A photographer has taken a tintype of the beauty.  After the ship
sails, Horty prevails upon the photographer to let him have the photo.
        Upon returning home, he hears rumors that, during his absence, the owner
did have a clandestine affair with the wife.  When the owner suddenly
gives Horty a large promotion, he realizes that it must be true.
        Later, at the local bar, Horty tells his friends about Marie and their
time together, adding to the reality with highly imaginative additions. 
His audience grows and he becomes a local hero_.a highly esteemed
storyteller, so much so that he becomes an actor, touring the country with
his ever-growing story.  There is a very surprising ending.  The script is
quite contrived and even ridiculous in spots, but there are many
fascinating scenes.   I found the acting to be very good.
        I give it a C+.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As in a wonderful dream, Horty, a dirt-poor foundry worker, finds
himself in a luxury hotel room in a foreign city.  Answering a knock on
the bedroom door, he finds himself face to face with a beautiful woman.
Since there is no room in town, what with the maiden voyage tomorrow of
the Titanic on which she will be a chambermaid, he ends up sharing his
room with her.
     And it gets better.  Pulling back the sheets to reveal her skimpy
gown and her lithe body, she invites him to get out of the chair where
he is trying to sleep and spend the night with her in his bed.  It is
what happens or doesn't happen next that forms the basis of the plot.
     Director J.J. Bigas Luna's THE CHAMBERMAID ON THE TITANIC (LA
FEMME DE CHAMBRE DU TITANIC), based on the novel by Didier Decoin,
isn't some cheap exploitation picture trying to ride on the coattails
of TITANIC's success.  Instead, it is a delightful and whimsical tale,
full of the magic of the storytelling.  Beautifully and delicately
constructed, the film captivates and surprises the audience.  The
superlative acting adds to the enjoyment, and unlike many French films,
the three leads will probably be familiar to American viewers.
     It all starts when the strikingly handsome Horty, played with
quiet intensity and precision by Olivier Martinez from THE HORSEMAN ON
THE ROOF, wins a contest.  Every year his foundry in France runs a
brutal decathlon-style event, and this year there is to be a special
prize.
     The prize turns out to be two tickets to London to witness the
launching of the Titanic.  The foundry company's president lies, saying
there is only a single ticket because he wants time with Horty's wife
Zoe, while Horty is out of the country.  Romane Bohringer from Colonel
Chabert plays the innocent-looking Zoe.
     It is in London that Horty is smitten by the lovely chambermaid
named Marie.  Played with devilish good looks by Aitana Sanchez-Gijon
from A WALK IN THE CLOUDS, Maria soon has captured Horty's heart.  When
she sails away and dies on the Titanic, he has only her picture to
remember her by.  He dotes on her photograph as if it is the Star of
India.
     And that is only the setup for the plot.  The body of the movie
occurs after his return when Horty and Zoe confront each other with
their alleged infidelities.
     Soon he is spending his time at the bar telling the story about
Marie.  He comes to realize that his gift in life is not manual labor
but telling mesmerizing stories.  The question is what is true, and
what isn't?
     The audience's reaction may be similar to those of his friends in
the bar.  They are not entirely sure if they care about his veracity
since these ribald, adult fairy tales keep getting better and better.
The men and women of the town hang breathlessly on his every word.
Every night becomes Super Bowl Sunday, in which no one would miss going
to the bar to listen to him.
     The touching movie takes many unpredictable twists before coming
to a surprising and completely satisfying conclusion.  Like Horty's
stories, the movie is smart enough to serve up delicious little morsels
of ambiguity for us to savor and ponder long after the house lights
have gone up.
     THE CHAMBERMAID ON THE TITANIC runs a fast 1:41.  It is in French
with English subtitles.  The film is not rated but would be an R for
profanity and sex and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     If I were to look for a film to double-feature with THE
CHAMBERMAID ON THE TITANIC, it would probably be last year's
misunderstood and under-appreciated THE POSTMAN.  Both films are about
unpleasant societies and the transforming and inspiring power of just
the right lie.  In each film the public is more than anxious to be
fooled by the lie that fills a need.
     THE CHAMBERMAID ON THE TITANIC opens in a steel mill town
somewhere in France.  One gets a feel for how harsh life is in the
credit sequence where the pouring of molten steel looks like the core
of a volcano.  Fun in this town is the annual race in which the
runners, sopping wet, carry large sandbags on their backs through
puddles of standing water.  Each then has to climb a hill of cinders to
retrieve a baton only to return to the run.  The winner this time, as
it has been the previous two, is young and handsome Horty (Olivier
Martinez).  This year there is to be a special prize.  The winner gets
a trip to Southampton, England to see the embarkation of the steamship
Titanic.  Actually the prize was to have been two tickets, but the
manager of the mill wants to use the opportunity to attempt to seduce
Horty's wife Zoe (Romane Bohringer).  Unaware of what is happening at
home, Horty goes to Southampton.
     In his hotel Horty meets a beautiful damsel in distress.  Marie
(Aitana Sanchez-Gijon) is to be a chambermaid on the departing ship in
the morning, but she cannot find a room for the night and asks Horty if
she may have his room.  He reluctantly agrees and spends a frustrating
but chaste night in the same bed with the comely woman.  Marie is gone
before he arises and as he watches the Titanic set sail, he notices
that a local photographer captured her picture.  He purchases the
picture and fantasizes about what might have been.
     On his return, Horty's friends hint to him that his wife may have
been seeing the manager.  Jealous of his wife, he retreats to the bar
to enjoy his memories and his photograph of Marie.  When his friends
start pressing him for details, he brags of his romantic adventures,
telling his fantasies as if they were true.  What begins as the
locker-room sort of boasting evolves into a sort of romantic soft-core
pornography.  Ever-increasing crowds of both genders gather each night
to escape their problems and hear the story of the romantic interlude.
     The deceptively simple story touches on not just the mystique of
womanhood, but the will to believe and to a certain extent
commercialization of the arts.  We have a story of the duality of
legend and reality and the will to believe.  THE CHAMBERMAID ON THE
TITANIC, which takes place in Northern France and England, is actually
a Spanish film.  Jose Juan Bigas Luna wrote and directed.  In keeping
with Spanish film, his visuals are not impressive exercises in effects.
His film is more about people than visual images. Luna's special
effects are sufficient to let the viewer know that it is supposed to be
the Titanic in the background of a scene, but he does not let the
spectacle run away with what is actually a simple story. Bigas Luna, a
filmmaker and a painter, has a string of interesting films to his name,
few of which are seen in the US.  Perhaps the best known here is the
sly comedy JAMON, JAMON.  Following his 1996 BAMBOLA, this is the
second of three films he intends to make on the mystique of women.
Olivier Martinez is probably most familiar to American audiences for
the 1994 THE HORSEMAN ON THE ROOF.  The enigmatic beauty of the
chambermaid Marie is provided by Aitana Sanchez-Gijon who is popular in
Spain but best known in this country for A WALK IN THE CLOUDS.
     The middle film in a trilogy is frequently the least of the three
films, but because of the current popularity of romantic stories
involving the Titanic, this one is getting much wider play here.  And
certainly the film deserves to be seen.  I would rate it a 7 on the 0
to 10 scale and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
