Title
Review for America's Sweethearts (2001)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Laura Clifford
Eddie Thomas (John Cusack) and Gwen Harrison (Catherine Zeta-Jones) were 
America's favorite Hollywood couple, appearing in one blockbuster after 
another together.  But when they teamed up with genius filmmaker 
Hal Weidmann (Christopher Walken), Gwen began an affair with her Spanish 
supporting costar Hector (Hank Azaria, "The Birdcage") that drove Eddie 
into an asylum and Gwen off the box office charts.  It's now up to Lee
Phillips (Billy Crystal) to get the two together for the press junket of
Weidmann's film in "America's Sweethearts."
Lee's not only dealing with warring costars - Weidmann is holding his film
hostage and Lee has to keep the press preoccupied so they don't notice they're
not seeing the movie. Lee puts the focus on the separated couple, leaking
videotape of an apparently masturbating Eddie outside of Gwen's cottage
followed by a picture of them canoodling in a car.  This brings the jealous
Hector out to the desert resort to beat Eddie senseless and provide more
publicity.  Meanwhile, Gwen's sister/assistant Kiki (Julia Roberts), who's
shed sixty pounds since Gwen and Eddie's breakup, has consummated her long 
time crush on Eddie by falling into bed with him.
Writers Billy Crystal and Peter Tolan ("Analyze This") had a brilliant idea 
to anchor a screwball comedy, but while they sprinkle the script with several 
brilliant bits, their story begins to deflate just when it should be reaching 
its comic climax.  They neglect to develop some characters, most notably 
Eddie, and their big moment, when Weidmann finally unspools his film, is 
painfully unfunny.
"America's Sweethearts'" all star cast, therefore, have varying degrees of 
success bringing this thing to life.  Firstly, Julia Roberts must be given
credit for creating the most human, audience empathetic, character in
Kiki.  Long subjected to the petty demands of her spoiled sister, Kiki 
soldiers on, coordinating hundreds of details lest Gwen encounter reality
('Is that the water with the electrolytes?  I only drink water with the
electrolytes.')  Julia nails the film's best scene, where Kiki finally has
her meltdown over a hungry man's breakfast, like the superstar pro she's
become.  Unfortunately, the flashback scenes which feature her in a fat suit
merely make her look stiff.
Most comical of the film's cast is Catherine Zeta-Jones as the high maintenance
movie diva.  She wheedles and pouts until her supreme unalienable right to
be the center of the universe is granted.  In a hilarious bit, as Lee is
convincing her to attend the junket, we see her Doberman attack a window
washer outside, bringing the man to the ground, mauling him.  When Lee informs
her of this as the huge beast bounds into the room, she coos 'puppy!' 
obliviously.  
The always dependable John Cusack tries to inject his 
considerable charm into Eddie Thomas.  While he's marginally appealing, 
the character has been so neglected by the writers that he comes across 
shallowly.  Hank Azaria starts off well, doing what appears to be a parody 
of Antonio Banderas, but his lisping, heavy accent gets wearisome quickly.  
Crystal's given himself many of his movie's best lines, but he barely breaks 
a sweat creating his PR guy.  Christopher Walken's miscast as the Hal 
Ashby-like director who edits his films in the Unabomber's shack, which he's 
had transported to the grounds of his estate.  Stanley Tucci is fine as the
hand-wringing studio head beholden to Phillips after having fired him, while
Seth Green disappears into the background as Lee's protege who was to have
replaced him.  Alan Arkin amusingly plays the 'Richard Libertini role' of 
Eddie's self help guru.
The Hyatt Regency Lake Las Vegas Resort is a good location choice for this
glossy production, luxurious yet remote.  Unfortunately, the cast
careening around its grounds keep the audience remote more often than 
they allow them to luxuriate in classic comedy.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Is the world ready for a plump Julie Roberts, who appears in flashback with an
extra 60 pounds? ("That's a Backstreet Boy," Billy Crystal says of her weight
loss.  Along with Peter Tolan, Crystal is responsible for AMERICA'S SWEETHEARTS'
hilarious script.)  Roberts, as Kiki, wearing the nerdish glasses that you're
still ashamed to have worn in high school, is her sister Gwen's obsequious,
personal slave.
An even bigger surprise than the briefly pudgy Roberts is that Catherine
Zeta-Jones, as Gwen, turns out to be wonderful at comedy, playing a pampered
bitch with great panache and perfect timing.  Gwen plays the crowd with great
swagger and confidence, but she's hell on wheels when out of the public's view. 
She sees herself as the center of the known world.  "Did we brush our teeth
today?" she asks, meaning only herself.
Gwen and Eddie (John Cusack) have the "most celebrated marriage in Hollywood,"
with nine movies together, six of which have earned more than a hundred million
dollars.  AMERICA'S SWEETHEARTS opens with a hilarious montage of clips from
some of their sappy box office hits, including SASHA AND THE OPTOMETRIST, in
which Eddie wins Gwen's heart by having her read "I-L-O-V-E-Y-O-U" from an eye
chart.  
But the sad truth is that Gwen and Eddie have broken up after she ran off with a
Spanish actor, Hector (Hank Azaria), from their last movie.  Hector, the film's
silliest character, has a heavy accent.  He calls a press junket, a "press
hunket," and his favorite expletive is "bull chit!"
Eddie, who has been holed up in a wellness clinic run by a barely recognizable
Alan Arkin as a New Age guru, is almost as obsessed with Gwen as she is with
herself.  "It's so hard being someone people don't get over," Gwen tells Kiki. 
The truth, even if Gwen won't face it, is that she needs Eddie.  Without him,
her last two movies bombed.
The story's challenge is a press junket without a movie since Hal (Christopher
Walken), the iconoclastic director of Gwen and Eddie's last movie together,
won't show anyone the picture until the press junket.  The studio exec (Stanley
Tucci), who would be happy to have a star commit suicide if it would increase
revenue, is livid.  He unfires his publicist, Lee (Billy Crystal), so that Lee
can wine and dine the press at the most remote site possible while waiting for
the film, hopefully, to show up.  After ensconcing the press in the Nevada
desert, Lee creates quite a commotion among the stars in order to keep the press
from realizing that the movie hasn't arrived.
This classic screwball comedy features four actors (Roberts, Zeta-Jones, Cusack
and Crystal) performing superbly.  Just like the press, all you have to do is
sit back and enjoy the action in this wonderful blend of physical and written
comedy.
The real mystery is whether the film will ever show up, and, if it does, what it
will be like.  Trust me.  You will not be disappointed.  
This weekend, it will be America's real sweetheart, Julia Roberts, going up
against the dinosaurs.  It's hard to see how she won't get trampled in the
JURASSIC PARK III juggernaut.  Still, one thing is certain, this film is a real
crowd pleaser with laughs so big and often that you're going to miss some of the
lines.  If you're more in the mood for laughs than action, go for AMERICA'S
SWEETHEARTS.  You'll be glad you did.
AMERICA'S SWEETHEARTS runs a brisk 1:40.  It is rated PG-13 for language, some
crude and sexual humor and would be fine for kids around 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, who laughed long and hard, gave it ****. He said that it
is one of the best films that he's seen lately.  He said that it had two really
good female comedians, but everyone was great.  He commented too on how
surprised he was that Zeta-Jones could do comedy so well.
The film opens in nationwide release today, Friday, July 20, 2001.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
America's Sweethearts could have been the summer's best romantic comedy but
will instead be remembered as one of the season's biggest disappointments.
Don't get me wrong - the film isn't awful, and, at times, it's quite
entertaining.  Given the A-list cast, however, things should have clicked a
little louder and a lot more often.
Sweethearts points its magnifying glass at the seedy world of Hollywood
promotion - specifically, the press junket for a film called Time Over Time,
which re-teams America's two favorite actors, husband and wife Gwen Harrison
and Eddie Thomas (Catherine Zeta-Jones and John Cusack from High Fidelity).
Time is the 10th film the lovebirds have made together, but there are two
major problems giving the film's producer (Stanley Tucci, Joe Gould's
Secret) fits of anxiety.  For starters, Gwen and Eddie split up over a year
ago, and to make matters worse, the director (scene-stealing Christopher
Walken) has hijacked the final cut of the $87 million picture, leaving a
beleaguered publicist named Lee (Billy Crystal, Analyze This) to do some
creative spin control.
Lee's plan is to make the junket media believe Gwen and Eddie are back
together, because "When (they're) together, the press forgets there's no
film."  Easier said than done, considering Eddie has spent the last 18
months at The Wellness Center with a Bowfinger-like Svengali (a hilarious
Alan Arkin).  Gwen won't be any easier to sway as she is convinced Eddie is
a homicidal maniac out to get her and is currently involved with a Latin
lover type named Hector (Hank Azaria, Tuesdays With Morrie).
Julia Roberts (The Mexican) plays Kiki, the careworn assistant (and sister)
of Gwen, who, as we learn in a flashback, used to be 60 pounds heavier and
has always carried a torch for Eddie.  Kiki is the calm, kindly, intelligent
Ying to Gwen's bitchy, self-centered and dumb Yang, and thusly, we must root
not for Eddie and Gwen to reconcile, but for Eddie to realize he really
loves Kiki.  He's Lloyd Dobler, for Christ's sake - he should be with a real
girl.
In addition to failing to go far enough in its attempt to satirize the star
mentality, Sweethearts also delivers the moral that you can't win the guy
unless you lose a bunch of weight.  Aside from Roberts, the leads are all
way too annoying and bland, and are easily outshined by each supporting
role. And if it seems to you like Crystal gets all of the script's good
jokes, it's because he wrote it (with Bedazzled's Peter Tolan).  This is the
first film directed by Joe Roth since 1990's Coupe de Ville (he's the guy
who left Disney to create the studio that made Sweethearts).
The Hector role, which was supposed to go to crackhead Robert Downey, Jr, is
completely overused and becomes an increasing aggravation in Sweethearts
final reel.  The more Hector talks, the more he sounds like a gay Apu from
The Simpsons.  What's with the white guy playing a Latino, anyway?  Why not
get Antonio Banderas or Luis Guzman?  And, Jesus H. Christ - is anybody else
tired of seeing celebrities in fat suits?  Hope not, because after Julia
(and the talentless Martins Short and Lawrence), we'll see Gwyneth don one
in a few months for the Farrelly brothers' Shallow Hal.
The more clueless critics who are familiar with junkets will love the inside
jokes (a la Roberts' Notting Hill) without realizing the film is making fun
of how incredibly stupid they are.  The audience gets the same treatment,
learning that the quality of a film doesn't matter one bit compared to what
the tabloids are writing about its stars.  But the ultimate irony is that a
film that preaches about the promotion of a dud is itself a dud.
1:40 - PG-13 for language, some crude and sexual humor

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Columbia Pictures
 Director: Joe Roth
 Writer:  Billy Crystal
 Cast: Julia Roberts, Billy crystal, Catherine Zeta-Jones, John
Cusack, Hank Azaria, Stanley Tucci, Christopher Walken, Seth
Green, Alan Arkin, Keri Lynn Pratt, Michael A. Tessiero, Rainn
Wilson
   Interesting, isn't it, how life follows art and art follows life? 
When Tim Blake Nelson was putting the movie "O" together--
loosely based on Shakespeare's "Othello" including a high-school
shootout--he could not have envisioned the tragedy at Columbine
High School in Colorado.  When Alejandro Amenabar was going
through the steps of directing "The Others"--in which two children
must be kept indoors at all times, away from sunlight lest they die
of an incurable disease--he could not have known that several
months later the wife of Helmut Kohl would commit suicide
because she had a similar ailment.  
   Along comes Joe Roth with "America's Sweethearts," Columbia
Pictures' self-deprecatory look at press junkets, opening just
days after attorney Anthony Sonnet, representing Citizens for
Truth in Movie Advertising, filed a lawsuit against the major
studios for using the quotes of junketeers as though they were
wholly unbiased opinions.  "America's Sweethearts" takes satiric
aim as well at supercilious actors, megalomaniac studio heads,
movie publicists, Eastern therapy, and most of all at Cupid's
demented aim, placing arrows now here, now there, mixing up
we fallible human beings so much that we can't be blamed for our
relationship with nervous breakdowns, heartbreak, and other
drawbacks most piercing to our species.
   "America's Sweethearts" is Joe Roth's first time at the helm in a
decade, his last movie, the forgettable "Coupe de Ville," not
nearly a mark of his identity as his almost six-year leadership of
Walt Disney Studios beginning in mid-1994.  If anyone knows the
movie industry it's Roth, so we can excuse some inaccuracies in
his take on press junkets as deliberate, designed so better to
entertain us, and chuckle at the ways of the American film
industry which has captivated most of the civilized world.
   The movie's very title "America's Sweethearts," indicates that
this is not the story of any one person, is not told from an
individual's point of view, but one which is driven by sharp
ensemble work by a crack team of comic actors.  The concept
that propels the story is the desire of Lee Phillips (Billy Crystal), a
major publicist for a big Hollywood studio, to carry out a
successful press junket in the Nevada desert (actually filmed at
the Hyatt Regency in the Vegas area).  He faces two problems.
One is that the bizarre director, Hal Weidmann (Christopher
Walken), is holding his picture hostage, refusing to release it until
it shows at the junket itself, so that not even the studio head,
Dave Kingman (Stanley Tucci), is privy to its contents.  The other
is that the two stars of Weidmann's picture, Gwen Harrison
(Catherine Zeta-Jones) and Eddie Thomas (John Cusack), have
split up and are about to divorced.  The studio believes that their
reconciliation would be wonderful press to influence the
junketeers and the public alike, bringing in the big bucks at the
box office.  Increasing the obstacles faced by Eddie is the fact
that Gwen's sister and gofer, Kiki Harrison (Julia Roberts), is
carrying the torch for Eddie while Gwen is enjoying the company
of the fiery Spaniard, Hector (Hank Azaria).
   While no one person steals the show, there is ample
opportunity for all of these fine performers to strut their stuff,
which they get to do in what is at once a series of Saturday-
Night-Live style of sketches and a film that gels with a
sentimental, if predictable ending. 
   Alan Arkin virtually winks at the audience bearing an
inappropriate smile as the East Indian guide at a so called
Wellness Center, where heartbroken Eddie has gone for a two-
week cure that has kept him there for six months.  Sporting a
great run and a penchant for inhabiting the role of an Indian guru,
Arkin agrees to a premature release of the not-yet-cured patient
to the studio publicist in return for the promise of a convertible. 
Christopher Walken, looking every bit the image that the general
public has of creative film directors, shows in the film's whimsical
conclusion why he would not release his latest work before the
press meeting.
    I've never been to one of these out-of-town junkets in part
because I review films but do not do interviews, but after seeing
the scene at the Hyatt Regency displayed satirically by Joe Roth,
I have to laugh at a defense that one blurbmeister gave of the
practice.  Said he, "You can't spend what [the studios] give you.
"A hotel room? What is that? Is that real income? No. A meal?
You have to eat. You  can't turn around and convert that meal
into money."  Obviously, these are the luxuries on which people
would love their spend their hard-earned cash, and as for food, I
would hardly call the champagne being offered by waiters in
white coats, the lavish outdoor spread, and the unlimited evening
bar "a meal."  What's more the press are getting all these
amenities completely free of Uncle Sam's long reach.
   While some critics have charged that the barbs are not
sufficiently pointed and the comedy insufficiently off-the-wall, I'd
have to dissent.  Hank Azaria in the role of an off-the-wall
Castilian, is the least effective person in the cast principally
because his behavior is the of the least believable kind, and
gentle satire frequently makes its points better than the harsher
variety because the audience is in the good spirits needed to
accept the message.  "America's Sweethearts" is paced well,
photographed sharply by Phedon Papamichael, and a welcome
summer comedy well acted right down to its crotch-sniffing
Doberman.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 120 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Christopher Null
Would you believe -- in real life, I mean -- that if you were Julia
Roberts, that you'd be the ugly underdog to your sister, the creepy
Catherine Zeta-Jones?
Let me tell you what reality is.  Reality is that you are megastar Julia
Fricking Roberts and your brother is Eric Roberts, and he picks up
whatever crumbs of stardom fall off your coattails as you blaze across
the sky in a golden chariot.
That's reality.  America's Sweethearts is the opposite of reality, a
train wreck that tries to sell Julia as a scruffy also-ran, presumably
because she wears horn-rimmed glasses and used to be overweight
(uh-huh).
The plot follows two married, mega-movie stars, Gwen and Eddie
(Zeta-Jones and poor, poor John Cusack, whose material gets worse every
year), on the eve of their new star vehicle's release, a film called
Time Over Time.  The only problem: Gwen and Eddie have gone through a
nasty separation, and the press and public have not been forgiving
(think Meg and Dennis).  Gosh, and the director has vanished with the
film, holding the only print hostage.  Veteran PR agent Lee (Billy
Crystal) is called upon to clean up the mess, throwing a press junket in
the Nevada desert to woo them with the story of a possible
reconciliation between the Gwen and Eddie, presumably distracting the
stupid, stupid film critics into forgetting they haven't seen the movie
at all.  (Note to Sony: Any studio executive that thinks this plot is
going to win points with the reviewing press needs to check into rehab.)
And did I mention Gwen's sister Kiki (Roberts) is along for the ride? 
And that she and Eddie just might fall in love along the way?
Oh Billy, you're a scamp!  The script you've co-written with Peter Tolan
(What Planet Are You From? and Bedazzled -- need I say more?) is a roast
of Hollywood and celebrity, sure, but it's not a funny one.  Yes,
Crystal tells us, Hollywood is lying to our faces!  If you are surprised
by this, you might want to check on your subscription to People
magazine.  It's about to expire.
Aside from a scant few zingers (Yeah, Seńor Winces rules!), America's
Sweethearts' jokes aren't funny, its pace is choppy, and the whole
affair comes off as a vanity project -- not for headlining star Julia
Roberts -- but for Billy Crystal to deliver a bunch of lame punch lines
that he wrote himself.  I didn't time it (the movie's not that bad), but
it's Crystal who really has the most screen time and is the unequivocal
focus of the film.  Bad move, Billy -- your jokes suck.  The crotch
humor is outpaced only by the meanness of the movie's gags -- and with
unsubtle sexual innuendo dripping from every scene, how this movie
earned a PG-13 rating is a mystery to me.
Julia overcame a lot of spiteful writing and acting to make My Best
Friend's Wedding into a winning film, but not even that 90-tooth smile
can save her here.  Obviously aware of the ugliness before him, director
Joe Roth turns to goofy supporting characters like Hank Azaria (as a
lisping Spaniard), Christopher Walken (the insane Time Over Time
director), and Alan Arkin (a New Age guru in a fright wig) to crack
wise.  None of the stereotypes is successful except for Walken; Azaria
comes off as a preening queen when he's supposed to be macho.  As for
Roth, in case you don't know, went from direcing Revenge of the Nerds II
to launching his own movie studio, Revolution, which produced this
work.  He's back behind the camera for the first time in 11 years. 
It'll probably be another 11 before he's back again.
I could drone on about how America's Sweethearts will only appeal to the
mouth-breathing morons who talk on their cell phones during the movies,
but that would get old.  Instead, I'll settle for discussing the movie's
worst sin: that Sweethearts is painfully contrived and wholly
unbelievable, not just in its plot but in its sentiment.  Every single
character in this film (with the arguable exception of Kiki) is simply
hateful, and putting them in a romantic comedy is a waste of a bunch of
villains.  When you leave the theater, you'll ask yourself, too: Why
would I want any of these jerks to be happy?
Director: Joe Roth
Producer: Susan Arnold, Billy Crystal, Donna Roth
Writer: Billy Crystal, Peter Tolan
Starring: Julia Roberts, Billy Crystal, Catherine Zeta-Jones, John
Cusack, Hank Azaria, Stanley Tucci, Christopher Walken, Seth Green, Alan
Arkin
http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/americassweethearts/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "AMERICA'S SWEETHEARTS" (Columbia/Sony)
What a waste of a talented cast! Billy Crystal and co-writer Peter Tolan have
concocted a sly, provocative premise and, as the opening credits roll, it's
obvious that they're attempting an old-fashioned romantic comedy. The story
involves a veteran publicist (Billy Crystal) who is summoned to orchestrate a
press junket in Las Vegas when an arrogant director (Christopher Walken) holds a
megabuck movie hostage in his editing room, refusing to show it to anyone. He
figures that by giving the journalists juicy hints of a possible reconciliation
between the film's once-married-but-now-estranged stars, Gwen and Eddie
(Catherine Zeta-Jones, John Cusack), they'll be so distracted that they won't
remember they didn't see the movie or it wasn't what they expected. (And Crystal
thought of this long before a Sony exec concocted the phony critic/David Manning
quote scandal!) For help, he turns to Gwen's personal assistant/sister (Julia
Roberts).
But the laughs are few and far-between. Crystal's glib, cynical flack isn't
wickedly funny enough with a few amusing one-liners. After six months under the
care of a Depak Chopra-like guru (Alan Arkin), Cusack's character's too
emotionally fragile, lacking the necessary charisma. Zeta-Jones's vain,
narcissistic diva is undeveloped and one-dimensional. Only Hank Azaria, as
Zeta-Jones's much-macho Spanish lover, and Stanley Tucci, as a studio exec, and
Roberts manage to whip up any farcical froth. Basically, we don't like these
ego-driven, stereotypical characters, let alone root for them to unwind their
romantic entanglements, and Joe Roth's direction is predictable, formulaic and
telegraphic. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "America's Sweethearts" is a
contrived, shallow 4. As a screwball satire, it's strictly superficial.

Author
Homer Yen
There are three problems that suck all the fun out of
"America's Sweethearts," a romantic comedy with enough
star power that should light up a city.  First, Larry
King, who provides a two-minute cameo, gives the most
zestful performance among the reputable ensemble cast.
 On his show, he lustfully berates his guest, film
actress Gwen Harriston (Catherine Zeta-Jones).  She's
a beautiful and an accomplished celebrity, but her
stardom has faded over the past two years.  Why?  As
call-in listeners will tell her, they lament and
complain about her previous decision to separate from
her popular husband, film actor Eddie Thomas (John
Cusack) in favor of a Castilian boy toy (Hank Azaria).
 Eddie, shattered by that incident, has become a
permanent fixture at a secluded Serenity Institute
where he is taught peace, gratitude, and unfathomable
words of wisdom ("life is like a cookie," says its
wizened leader).
Second, the most intriguing character, Lee Phillips
(played by Billy Crystal), is swept aside into
obscurity by the end of the film.  Lee is a lubricious
press agent who is tasked with assembling a blowout
press junket for the estranged couple's last film.  At
first, he seems to provide a welcome dimension of
edginess to a somewhat uninspired film.  Watch him
scheme and put his plan into motion as he coddles,
appeases, maneuvers, and exercises damage control. 
This formidable task requires wit and energy. 
Unfortunately, he is eventually relegated to flippant
one-liners and crude sight gags with a Doberman
pinscher.
Third, the center of this film (the real reason we're
going to see it) never generates any real momentum. 
This involves a budding love triangle between the
narcissistic Gwen; her frumpy but sweet sister, Kiki
(Julia Roberts); and the neurotic Eddie.  But the
tension is only lukewarm.  In fact, the best scene of
the film is given away if you've seen any of the
trailers.  It's really no contest between the two
siblings.  Kiki's character is the only one grounded
in reality, and becomes the only person that you begin
to care about. 
All of this overwrought melodrama makes much of the
film uncomfortably ham-fisted. The first 30 minutes
(when we meet the major characters in their individual
environments) are especially corny rather than funny
and sadly laughable rather than amusing.  It strains
for laughter and the interplay between the characters
feels laborious.  
All of these actors are much better than this material
would suggest.  Zeta-Jones was delicious in "Traffic";
Roberts charm was played to perfection in "Notting
Hill", and you'll miss Cusack's unique brand of
quirkiness, offbeat humor, and wry behaviorism from
films past.  Perhaps, this role was a bit too
mainstream for him.
"America's Sweethearts" failed to evoke that
indescribable feeling of joy, weirdness, and goodness
that are the necessary ingredients in a love story. 
Partly, Roberts could not particularly shine as she
was obscured behind the star power of the other
actors.  Partly, the film spends too much time as a
lampoon about the junket scene (where multitudes of
critics ask the same questions, eat for free, and
think up quotes like "America's Sweethearts Lacking
Chemistry").  Thus, the film lacked conviction and its
tone becomes fuzzy.  Sometimes it's cute.  Sometimes
it's clever satire about Inside Hollywood.   But more
often, it's just unremarkable.  Ultimately, it's
inability to generate more than just some fleeting joy
will leave you heartbroken.

Author
Jerry Saravia
I consider it sinful to cast Julia Roberts in a movie nowadays. She is such a
watchable presence and has such a stunning smile that it is easy to see why
she's a movie star. Star first, actor second. The truth is that she has always
impressed me as an actress first, movie star second. Even in mediocre films like
"Sleeping With the Enemy" or "Dying Young," she has proven her worth and her
talent is undeniable, particularly her finest Oscar-nominated role in "Erin
Brockovich." Amazingly, she is given a tertiary role in producer Joe Roth's
directorial debut, "America's Sweethearts." Wise move since it gives us the
chance to see Roberts participate in an ensemble for once rather than center
stage. 
"America's Sweethearts" are Gwen Harrison (Catherine Zeta-Jones) and Eddie
Thomas (John Cusack), a formerly married movie star couple who have not spoken
to each other in a year. Gwen has moved on and carried on an affair with a
Spanish hunk (a hilarious Hank Azaria). Eddie has taken leave of absence at a
clinic with the help of a long silvery-haired guru (Alan Arkin) to try and
recuperate. Gwen has gone solo at the movies sans Eddie and has remained a
box-office flop ever since. Now rumors abound that a new film called "Time After
Time" (the last time the pair had appeared together onscreen)  has finally been
completed by a revered, Oscar-nominated director Hal Weidmann (Christopher
Walken). The trick is that Weidmann refuses to show the film until the day of
the press junket. This drives irate studio chief, Dave Kingman (Stanley Tucci),
insane. He decides to enlist the help of sly press agent, Lee Philips (Billy
Crystal), to concoct a supposed reconciliation between Gwen and!
 Eddie so that their new film ca
n become a hit. Lee seeks the help of Gwen's personal assistant and sister, Kiki
(Julia Roberts), to make this work. But will Gwen and Eddie be able to stand
each other? And is Kiki interested in Eddie since he once kissed her when he was
drunk? 
"America's Sweethearts" is an old-fashioned Hollywood romance masquerading as a
smart satire on Hollywood, as well as mixing a dash of the screwball comedy
genre. It is not an even mix considering that the screwball portion is left on
the sidelines (except for one slightly tired bit about a dog) and hardly coaxes
much out of a romantic triangle that feels a tinge forced, lacking the punch
that leads to an expected  payoff. The satire on Hollywood is by now a cliche
but it leads to the zingiest scenes in the film (the screenplay was co-written
by Billy Crystal). In other words, the film is often a mess but an enjoyable
mess nonetheless. 
I was surprised by how good the performances were and how well-timed in terms of
comic pacing. Catherine Zeta-Jones ends up stealing the movie from everyone and
deservedly so. She plays the bitchiest diva on screen in quite some time, and
about as needy and cumbersome as one can expect. She has no conscience and
demands too much from her overworked sister, Kiki. Zeta-Jones' scenes with
Roberts lacks some insight but they are still believable as siblings. 
John Cusack may have the toughest role as Eddie since we know he is still in
love with Gwen after their break-up - he also develops feelings rather quickly
for Kiki. Only we wonder what was so wonderful about a bitchy goddess like Gwen?
What exactly did Eddie see in her? Cusack has played a sad sack before but here,
he does it with more restraint than usual. His dinner scene with Roberts is
breathlessly good, exuding more romantic charisma than in most teen romance
comedies.
I am a big, supportive fan of Julia Roberts and always look forward to seeing
her onscreen. In this film, Roberts, like Cusack, is a bit more laid-back than
usual and it serves the purpose of the character Kiki. She is at her winsome
best and has a terrific scene where she erupts with rage at Cusack and
Zeta-Jones by dumping scrambled eggs on them! Also, it is a rarity to see
Roberts in a flashback appearing forty pounds heavier!
There is also a great supporting cast at hand, including Crystal who is simply
marvelous as always as the anything-goes press agent who is willing to create
drama in the actors' lives to promote a film. Seth Green is astoundingly funny
as Crystal's naive trainee who has no concept of film history. Also worth
mentioning is the amazing Christopher Walken, playing an eccentric director who
claims to have made the most honest film of his career ("Even Kubrick was
misunderstood."). 
"America's Sweethearts" is largely and consistently funny enough to get a
passing grade. A riotous last half-hour gives it the necessary lift it so
desperately needs. The whole cast is sweetly engaging but Roberts is still my
favorite sweetheart. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Joe Roth. 
Cast: Julia Roberts, John Cusack, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Billy Crystal, Hank 
Azaria, Stanley Tucci, Seth Green, Christopher Walken, Keri Lynn Pratt. 
2001 - 102 minutes 
Rated PG-13 (for sexual situations involving a dog and an adult male, and 
profanity). 
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, July 20, 2001. 
With a high-powered, A-list cast that features no less than Julia Roberts, 
John Cusack, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Billy Crystal, and Christopher Walken, the 
chance that "America's Sweethearts," a satirical view of Hollywood with a 
little romance thrown in for good measure, would be a failure seemed slim to 
none. Thanks to director Joe Roth's aimless direction, and Billy Crystal and 
Peter Tolan's unimpressive, personality-deprived screenplay, the unthinkable 
has happened. "America's Sweethearts" is a dull-witted, utterly slight comedy 
that, dare I say, is boring from one end to the other. 
Set over one weekend at a Las Vegas desert-set press junket, big-screen 
actors and married couple Eddie Thomas (John Cusack) and Gwen Harrison 
(Catherine Zeta-Jones) have come to promote their eighth picture together, 
entitled "Time Over Time." With Gwen's last two Eddie-less films bombing in 
the states, a lot is riding on the success of "Time Over Time" to boost both 
of their careers. Only one problem stands in the way of a peaceful weekend of 
joint promotion; Eddie and Gwen have split up and are currently not even 
speaking to each other. 
Enter Lee (Billy Crystal), a studio publicist who has been hired to reconcile 
Eddie and Gwen's relationship, or, at the very least, make it seem to the 
press that they are still getting along. This task won't be an easy one; 
Eddie is in a state of depression, and still believes he is in love, while 
Gwen has taken up with a Spanish lothario named Hector (Hank Azaria). Further 
complicating matters, Gwen's sister and personal assistant, Kiki (Julia 
Roberts), has secret longings of her own for Eddie. 
If "America's Sweethearts" wants to take a ruthless, sharp jab at the 
Hollywood industry, it is far too soft around the edges and lacks the wit 
needed to accomplish such a task. If it wants to make a statement about 
famous marriages and the press surrounding celebrities, the same idea was put 
to far better use, and was infinitely more telling, in 1999's "Notting Hill," 
also starring Roberts. If it wants to be a screwball comedy in the tradition 
of Preston Sturges, it hasn't the energy to even get off the ground running. 
And, finally, if it wants to be a romance between Eddie and Kiki, I've seen 
more sparks fly between ostriches. 
Watching "America's Sweethearts" is a disheartening experience. It starts off 
slowly, has a middle that creeps along at the speed of an asthmatic 
octogenarian, and finishes up with a conclusion that is neither gratifying 
nor inspiring. While a few winning moments sneak in throughout (Roberts' 
distressed Kiki, formerly sixty pounds heavier, falls off the wagon and digs 
into a breakfast big enough for the entire salvation army), they are only 
fleeting glimpses of what might have been had the screenplay gone through 
some major rewrites. Not helping matters are a collection of characters 
(excluding the mousy Kiki) who are self-involved, uninteresting, and not 
nice. Who wants to watch a film--one that attempts to be a romantic comedy, 
no less--when you can't even stand to be around the participants? 
Julia Roberts (2000's Oscar winner for "Erin Brockovich") isn't the world's 
most popular actress for nothing. She injects life into the slimmest of 
parts, and "America's Sweethearts" offers her her most thankless role since 
1991's "Hook." While Roberts' Kiki is the sole likable presence, as she 
gradually learns to stand up for herself, she is underwritten and not 
terribly engaging. Almost every scene that does work includes Roberts, 
however, whether she be stuffing her face with breakfast, blowing up at the 
vacant idiocy of Gwen and Eddie, or sharing a tender moment with Eddie in a 
flashback that finds her equipped with a pudgy face and a fat suit (read: a 
normal, American body). 
John Cusack (2000's "High Fidelity") and Catherine Zeta-Jones (2000's 
"Traffic"),as title couple Eddie Thomas and Gwen Harrison, are far above 
their roles. Cusack, good in just about everything, must resort to jokes 
about falling on the spines of a cactus to get laughs. Zeta-Jones plays the 
pampered actress to a hilt, but the sheer phoniness of her character does 
nothing in the way of making her an attractive presence. Billy Crystal 
(1999's "Analyze This"), as the determined, smarmy Lee, has one good gag 
involving a Doberman attracted to his crotch, but might as well not have even 
been present for the rest of the picture. In minor roles, Christopher Walken 
(2001's "Joe Dirt"), as the maniacal director of "Time Over Time;" Hank 
Azaria (1999's "Cradle Will Rock"), as Gwen's flamboyant new flame; Stanley 
Tucci (2000's "Joe Gould's Secret"), as the head of the production studio; 
and Seth Green (2001's "Josie and the Pussycats"), as Lee's eager, but 
clueless, assistant, have little to do. 
"America's Sweethearts" squanders so badly because it fails to uphold the 
courage of its convictions. Something is definitely off about the whole 
enterprise. Where it should be a lethally funny attack at the cliches of the 
Hollywood system, it holds no true insight or daring. And where it should be 
a cute romance, it is--for lack of a better word--sterile. Director Joe Roth 
may be the head of the promising new studio, Revolution Films, but as the one 
in charge of "America's Sweethearts," he has wasted the talents of a large 
bevy of people who probably should have known better in the first place. 

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
America's Sweethearts (2001)
Julia Roberts, Billy Crystal, Catherine Zeta-Jones, John Cusack, Hank
Azaria, Stanley Tucci, Christopher Walken, Seth Green. Screenplay by
Billy Crystal & Peter Tolan. Directed by Joe Roth. 100 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"America's Sweethearts" has an intriguing premise and a great cast, but
it isn't nearly as edgy or funny as it should be. Almost all the
problems with the project can be traced back to co-script writer Billy
Crystal, who shows the same lack of discipline with the screenplay that
he typically displays while co-hosting "Comic Relief" charity shows with
Robin Williams and Whoopi Goldberg (two other paragons of
self-indulgence).
Crystal ignores a simple, but crucial, rule: For a screwball comedy to
work, the characters must be placed into a rigid social setting, because
only in that context will their unorthodox antics be humorous.
"America's Sweethearts" takes place at a press junket, where decorum
must be maintained in front of the reporters. It's a promising set-up,
but the screenplay quickly blows off the rules, thus dissipating the
tension of the situation. By the end of the film, all the lead
performers participate in a huge fight with a room full of journalists
looking on, but their outbursts are only mildly amusing because the
structure has been destroyed.
John Cusack and Catherine Zeta-Jones play Eddie Thomas and Gwen
Harrison, a beloved acting duo whose marriage hit the skids when Gwen
began seeing Hector (Hank Azaria), a Spanish actor with an ego almost as
pronounced as his lisp. Of the last nine films Eddie and Gwen made
together, six crossed the $100 million mark, but the prospects for their
final effort, a space opus titled "Time Over Time," are far from rosy.
While Eddie has spent many months in a New Age rest clinic fretting over
the breakup, Gwen's solo films have tanked. To make matter worse, the
director of the movie (Christopher Walken), a "visionary" who purchased
the Unabomber's cabin and had it moved to his backyard, is withholding
the film from the studio, insisting that the first screening be held at
the junket.
Desperate to win over the press, the studio elects to hire Lee (Billy
Crystal), a recently fired publicist, to salvage the situation. Lee
hopes to turn lemons into lemonade by convincing Eddie and Gwen to
pretend to be on the road to reconciliation. He enlists the help of Kiki
(Julia Roberts), Gwen's sister, personal assistant and whipping girl.
What Lee doesn't know is that Kiki is in love with Eddie, a fact that
could temper her effectiveness.
Press junkets are a haven for control freaks. Studios fly journalists in
from around the world and put them up in a plush hotel, with food and
drink always at hand. Generally, on the evening of their arrival,
writers are bussed to see the featured film, then ferreted straight back
to the hotel. The next day, writers go to the studio suites and assemble
in groups of five or six for roundtable interviews. Every 30 minutes or
so, a producer, director, writer or actor is brought into the room for a
few minutes of questions, with a publicist hovering in the corner to
keep an eye on things. The atmosphere is one of cordial oppression 
writers are free to ask what they want, but understand that if the
studio dislikes a question, they may not be invited to future junkets.
Representatives from TV stations face even more restrictions. They get
roughly five minutes to interview each member of the cast and crew, with
the studio filming the exchanges. The "reporters" are notorious for
tossing softball questions as they suck up to the stars, but to play it
safe, the studios stand ready to erase the tapes if anything unpleasant
occurs.
Placing two spoiled actors in a setting where image is everything is
inspired, but the screenplay undermines the conceit. The junket is moved
from the handsome, but highly confining, Four Seasons Hotel to a plush
resort near Las Vegas. For most of the film, the movie stars run around
the sprawling grounds, completely safe from the eyes of the press. When
they do deal with journalists, the "it is imperative that you be on your
best behavior in front of the reporters" premise is de-clawed. Gwen and
Eddie insult each other while the TV cameras roll, they scream at each
other in a restaurant filled with the media and, at the screening of the
movie, everyone connected with the film goes nuts, all without any
repercussions.
Lee certainly isn't bothered by any of the infantile outbursts; in fact,
he makes arrangements for footage of even more inappropriate behavior to
be delivered to the tabloids. Is the studio angry about his handling of
the combative actors? Hell no  they feel Lee is a genius for garnering
so much publicity for the movie.
All of which underscores how Billy Crystal and co-writer Peter Tolan
screwed up their own premise: The comedy in "America's Sweethearts" is
based on barely-in-control people trying to contain themselves in the
presence of reporters, except that it doesn't matter because any
publicity is good publicity. And thus the very set-up for the film
implodes, leaving smoke and dust in place of laughter.
So what about the cast? Julia Roberts, at her best playing the underdog,
is utterly charming here, although I could have lived without flashbacks
that exist solely as an excuse to show her in a fat suit (and not a very
convincing one, by the way). Catherine Zeta-Jones makes a believable
brat and John Cusack fleshes out his obsessed character enough to make
him vaguely sympathetic. By casting himself as the publicist, Billy
Crystal allows himself to do roughly the same thing he does on "Comic
Relief"- stay on the sidelines of the action while tossing off cornball
jokes and snarky remarks.
In supporting roles, Hank Azaria wears out his welcome fast with broad
gestures and a Spanish accent that Speedy Gonzales would have deemed
"too broad." Seth Green is amusing as a toadie, Stanley Tucci is very
good as a ruthless studio head and Christopher Walken plays the
eccentric director with suitable flair, though he has little to work
with.
Come to think of it, "little to work with" is the operative phrase for
this movie. As a Hollywood satire, "America's Sweethearts" is toothless.
As a romance, it is at best a minor pleasure. Such a good cast, such a
waste of their efforts. Had it not been taken long ago, a better title
for the film would have been "Much Ado about Nothing."

Author
Robin Clifford
Gwen Harrison (Catherine Zeta-Jones) and Eddie Thomas (John Cusack) have
been romantic idols to the American public for nine films. When their
marriage broke up a year and a half ago, her career went down the tubes and
he ended up as a patient at a California wellness clinic. Now, with their
last film about to hit the street, PR maven Lee Phillips (Billy Crystal) is
given the task of bringing the estranged couple together, with the help of
Gwen's sister, Kiki (Julia Roberts), to save their careers and their film
(and his job) in "America's Sweethearts."
Screenwriters Crystal and Peter Tolan provide a modern romantic comedy that
is set in the world of the Hollywood "press junket." The last film Gwen and
Eddie did together is scheduled for its debut, but there are problems. The
divorced couple, both of whose careers are currently in the toilet, need to
make a show of reconciliation or lose their audience and a lot of money for
the studio. Complicating matters, the director, Hal Weidmann (Christopher
Walken doing a riff on real director, the late Hal Ashby), has taken the
unfinished movie, named "Time Over Time," hostage and won't let anyone see
it until the junket, not even studio head Dave Kingman (Stanley Tucci). Lee
has to do the most difficult juggling of his public relations career to
keep the press at bay and the stars conciliatory until Hal and his film
arrive.
Meanwhile, Gwen's sister and assistant, Kiki, has quietly undergone a
change since her sister's divorce. Since Eddie last saw her, right after
the breakup, she has lost 60 pounds and is not just a nice person (unlike
Gwen) she has turned from an ugly duckling into a beautiful swan. Eddie and
Kiki have always been close and, now that he has been separated from Gwen
for a while, he begins to see which sister really is the one for him. The
conflicted romantic comedy continues until the big day when Hal finally
delivers his film and shows it to the studio heads and the press. Then, all
hell breaks loose.
I had high hopes for "America's Sweethearts" what with its stellar ensemble
cast and all. Julia Roberts is actually developing into an actor and does a
good job as the self-deprecating, loyal sister to the star. She maintains
the nice-girl persona of the character throughout the film and, when the
now-svelte Kiki binges out on a huge breakfast from frustration with the
whole situation, she does it with vigor. Catherine Zeta-Jones, as Gwen, is
dead on as the shallow, selfish prima donna - "People have no idea what it
is like being me!" she whines - and is as unlikable as she is beautiful.
Cusak does the bedraggled, obsessive actor with his usual goofy charm.
Billy Crystal moves things along (and gives himself some of the funniest
lines, especially when acting opposite a large Doberman), both as writer
and performer and he does good PR shtick.
The problem that holds "America's Sweethearts" back is the completely
telegraphed story. There is little doubt, for the viewer, as to who ends up
with whom and how they get to where they are going. The actors play their
parts well, but the two-dimensional machinations of the script prevent
anything more than the obvious from happening so, by the end, you have the
whole thing figured out. There is slapstick galore and one-liners abound -
the Doberman gets to do the best visual gags in the film - but there isn't
nothing' new here. A bright distraction, near the end, is Hal's
presentation of his visionary film, changed from feature to documentary,
much to the consternation of soon-to-be ex-studio boss Kingman. Alan Arkin
gives a subtle, yet riotous, cameo as Eddie's wellness guide. He's supposed
to be an Indian wise man, but he plays it so sharp he keeps you guessing if
he's Eastern Indian or Native American.
Direction, by Joe Roth, is perfunctory and straightforward. He does it by
the numbers as he walks his cast down the line to the films inevitable
conclusion. Costuming, by Ellen Mirojnick (with Jeffrey Kurland responsible
for wardrobing Miss Julia), meets the superstar criteria of elegance and,
for Cusack, despondent seediness. Production design by Garreth Stover,
especially the selection of the remote location of the Hyatt Regency Lake
Las Vegas Resort, suits the Hollywood star mentality of "America's
Sweethearts." The prods show the money is there and the tech staff uses it
well.
A good cast and expensive production attributes can help a film but,
without a solid screenplay to hang it all on, you can never attain
greatness, whether it be comedy or drama. "America's Sweetheart" falls
smack in the middle of this dilemma and suffers for it. It will draw a good
size audience and will appeal to many with its good-natured pokes at the
Hollywood star machine. But, it never rises beyond the level set by the
routine, predictable screenplay and I give it a B-.

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A separated, glamorous, Hollywood couple must pretend to reunite for a press
junket of the last movie that they ever shot together. Kewl...now I only wish
that I could pretend never to have seen this movie...
CRITIQUE:
Trite, unfunny, boring and a waste of everyone's talent. How a premise with such
zest and bite can turn into a movie that doesn't feature any chemistry, any real
laughs, any surprises or any spice is beyond me. How Julia Roberts is used
solely as a "puppy dog" character, puttering around in the background while we
endure the complete bitchiness of Zeta-Jones' character, who is not one bit
funny or romantic (two ideal ingredients in a "romantic comedy"), is also beyond
me. And why they chose John Cusack, a great, quirky actor in his own right, to
play the most bland, uninteresting and unfetching character (with zero chemistry
with either of his leads) is further more, beyond me. And to anybody who decided
that this project was "funny" enough to greenlight featuring the talents
mentioned above, along with Billy Crystal, Christopher Walker, Seth Green and
Stanley Tucci...well, what can I say...I just don't have the words. So is this
the worst movie that I've seen all year? No. But it definitely sucks and it's
basically because...well, it's just not funny. And for the record, allow me to
state a few more problems with it. It starts off slow, it's got no energy, it
doesn't engage you with any of its characters (Julia barely gets somewhat
interesting in the film, everyone else...lame!), it utilizes way too many
flashbacks to move the story forward, it's utterly predictable, standard,
routine, see-through and uninteresting as a plot and it just sits there on the
screen, big and ugly, waiting...waiting for you to laugh or find something in it
that is amusing.
And then Hank Azaria shows up...aaaaaah, the film's savior (mind you, some might
be offended by his exaggeration of a stereotype, but that's another story
altogether). But when an experienced "voice" actor upstages all of the main
stars in a summer "blockbuster" romantic comedy with an over-the-top Antonio
Banderas accent, damn dude...your film's in trouble!! Rent this movie on video
just to see what went wrong yourself. The references to Ricky Ricardo and Senor
Wences (huh!?), the idio-plot points like when one of the characters goes on the
roof to stretch his arms out and relax, but everyone believes that he's going to
kill himself (hardy-har-har) and the cheap way of getting the audience to leave
the theater laughing by bringing back a ball-sniffing dog that has no place
being in the location at the end of the movie, well...I could go on. But I won't
because I do still respect all of the actors in this film and actually did laugh
at Azaria, Green and Tucci's antics from time to time (ironic, eh...what about
the leads, dammit!) and liked the premise behind the film (before I saw the
finished product, of course). A dud all the way around.
BTW, all the talk about this film was that Julia Roberts was to be in a fat suit
for one scene (her character is supposed to have lost 60 pounds), so when the
scene finally came, I did get a little excited about what it might look like and
then...well, it basically just looked like Julia Roberts in a fat suit! Ugh. I
think I'm gonna start drinking again after this lame-ass movie. C'mon Hollywood,
enough with the crud!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Beautiful (1/10) - My Best Friend's Wedding (7/10) - Notting Hill (5/10) -
Pretty Woman (7/10) -Runaway Bride (5/10) - Someone Like You (4/10) - Wedding
Planner (3/10) - When Harry Met Sally (10/10) - You've Got Mail (4/10)

Author
Eugene Novikov
"Word of advice: when you hit formica, stop."
Starring Billy Crystal, John Cusack, Catherine
Zeta-Jones, Julia Roberts, Stanley Tucci, Alan Arkin,
Christopher Walken. Directed by Joe Roth. Rated PG-13.
America's Sweethearts is what happens when satire gets
lazy. We've seen this before, and recently; Scream 3
was plagued by the same demon. It's a twist worthy of
O'Henry when a satire becomes exactly what it's
satirizing. It can also be interesting, as in Mel
Brooks's better films, but in this case it's messy and
dull. The film exhibits not a delicious sense of
irony, but obtuseness.
Pity, because Joe Roth's romantic comedy/would-be
Hollywood spoof hits the exact right note with its
opening sequence, a montage of scenes from films
starring Eddie Thomas (John Cusack) and Gwen Harrison
(Catherine Zeta-Jones), "America's Sweethearts." It's
perfect because, though exagerrated, it bears an
uncanny resemblance to actual movies, tripe like Sweet
November, The Bachelor, etc, etc. The films in the
montage were hits, but now the real-life couple has
undergone a bitter break-up and the fans are
despondent.
Unfortunately, they also have a held-over movie coming
out, a time travel drama cleverly entitled "Time Over
Time." The director (Christopher Walken), an
Oscar-winner, but so eccentric that he purchased the
unabomber's shack and uses it as his editing room, is
holding his work hostage until the press junket, when
he will show it for the first time. It's up to big
shot publicist Lee Phillips (Billy Crystal) to get
both Eddie and Gwen to the junket and, when there,
make the press forget about the fact that they haven't
seen the actual movie.
Eddie is now at a phoney-baloney self-help resort
somewhere in the mountains, with mystic guru Alan
Arkin raising his self-esteem by spouting lines like
"life is a cookie." Gwen, who initiated the break-up,
is sulking at home with her sister/slave Kiki (Julia
Roberts), who has lost a lot of weight. What does her
losing weight have to do with the plot? Well, she has
to be thin so that Eddie can fall in love with her.
Duh.
There's good stuff in the first half of America's
Sweethearts, including some good Billy Crystal lines
and unexpectedly sharp jabs at the inner workings of
Hollywood. Then, it becomes some of the sloppiest
big-budget filmmaking I have ever seen. The script is
just all over the map, with a tonal shift
approximately every other scene. The payoff, which
comes when we finally get to see the mystery movie, is
a complete failure, a decent idea that the filmmakers
ruined, making it far less incisive than they
apparently think it is.
At that point, though, the movie isn't terribly
concerned about being incisive. It had long
degenerated into one of the lame romances it was
parodying just 40 minutes earlier, with movie-star
Eddie falling in love with regular-gal Kiki. Think
Notting Hill, only reversed and much less interesting.
I hate movies that gather an amazing cast and then
waste it, intent on giving the audience what they
think it wants to see those A-list actors do. I don't
particularly care whether John and Julia fall for each
other, especially not if the film itself doesn't care.
I was hoping for sharp satire and biting wit, but
America's Sweethearts starts out well and then wimps
out. 
"Everyone is entitled to his own opinion but not his own facts."
(Daniel Patrick Moynihan)

Author
Bob Bloom
AMERICA'S SWEETHEARTS (2001). 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Julia Roberts,
Catherine Zeta-Jones, John Cusack, Billy Crystal, Stanley Tucci, Hank Azaria,
Christopher Walken, Alan Arkin and Seth Green. Written by Crystal and Peter
Tolan. Music by James Newton Howard. Directed by Joe Roth. Approx. 110 minutes.
Rated PG-13. 
With an all-star cast and a script that keeps the laughs coming almost
continuously, Americaí's Sweethearts is a delight. 
This Joe Roth-directed comedy mixes farce, satire, physical humor and romance to
create a winning feature that will keep you chuckling. 
The story is simple: An estranged movie-star couple must come together for a
press junket weekend to promote their 10th and final film pairing. Along the
way, they bring their emotional baggage, resentments and hostilities. 
America's Sweethearts has an old-fashioned quality despite some raunchy humor.
It's a distant cousin to the screwball comedies of the 1930s and '40s. Some of
the more outrageous moments are reminiscent of those zany Preston Sturges movies
from the early '40s such as Sullivan's Travels. 
Sweethearts has a sweetheart of a cast, headed by Julia Roberts and featuring
Catherine Zeta-Jones, John Cusack, Billy Crystal (who also co-wrote the script
and produced the film), Hank Azaria, Stanley Tucci, Alan Arkin and Christopher
Walken. 
The movie is filled with little gems, from Tucci's maniacally frustrated studio
head describing to veteran press agent Lee Phillips (Crystal) why Senor Wences
was the only true show biz genius, to Cusack's Eddie Thomas and Phillips taking
a bow above the junketís press corps after Eddie nearly falls from the hotel
roof in what the press perceives as a suicide attempt. 
Some nice one-liners also abound. When Eddie shows up alone at the hotel, he is
asked about the whereabouts of his entourage. I'm a paranoid schizophrenic. "I'm
my own entourage," he responds. 
Performances sparkle throughout America's Sweethearts. Zeta-Jones is cruelly
funny as the pampered, spoiled, self-centered movie star who treats every minor
inconvenience as a cataclysmic disaster. 
Cusack's Eddie, while more grounded in reality, practices some New Age
mumbo-jumbo to help remain centered. But he also flashes his movie star ego at
times, worrying about grosses and the trajectory of his career. 
Roberts is the comedy's heart. She plays Kiki, Gwen's sister and assistant. Her
movie-star sibling treats her more like a go-fer than a sister. She uses love
and sisterly devotion to wheedle Kiki into catering to her every whim. 
And it seems she has been doing this her entire life. Kiki reminds her that in
high school when Gwen wanted to break up with a boyfriend, she'd send Kiki to
break the bad news. "I wound up being the most hated girl in school," Kiki tells
her oblivious sibling. 
To make matters more complicated, Kiki is in love with Eddie and believes Gwen
treated him badly. 
Crystal is connivingly convincing as the always-thinking press agent who sees
every misstep or accident as an opportunity as a movie promotion. 
Walken, looking like a Woodstock burn-out case, is hilariously weird as the
director who brings his singular vision to the movie he was supposed to have
shot. 
Veteran Arkin turns in a sly appearance as Eddie's therapist who spouts Eastern
bromides that sound sage, but really make no sense at all. 
The movie's only major misstep is in Azaria's portrayal of Hector, Gwen's
Spanish lover. His characterization comes close to being an offensive stereotype
of Latino machismo as he seems only to be concerned about his 
reputation as a lover and the size of his penis. 
America's Sweethearts is a honey or a comedy, a movie you'd want to cuddle up
with. It's warm and cute as well as satirical and sharp. 
Plus, you get to see Julia Roberts in a fat suit. Who could ask for anything
more! 
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He can
be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Bloom's reviews also can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette
Bloom's reviews also appear on the Web at the Internet Movie Database site:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Michael Dequina
_America's_Sweethearts_ (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
        Two types of comedies struggle for control in _America's_Sweethearts_:
one, a catty satire of the Hollywood hype machine; the other, a frothy star
vehicle for America's apparent real-life sweetheart, Julia Roberts.  Coming out
the loser in the ensuing mess is Joe Roth, who shows that spending the last ten
or so years heading movie studios hasn't done any favors for whatever
directorial ability he may have once had.
        From the looks of it, _America's_Sweethearts_ started out as an edgier
ensemble picture, and shades of that appear in the film's more effective
portion, the first half.  The sweethearts of the title are beloved off- and
on-screen pair Gwen Harrison (Catherine Zeta-Jones) and Eddie Thomas (John
Cusack), who fell in love on the set and then proceeded to make a string of
popular co-starring vehicles after getting married.  Alas, the fairy tale came
to an ugly end after Gwen fell in love with another co-star (Hank Azaria) on the
set of their latest movie, the sci-fi romance _Time_Over_Time_, which is now
being readied for release.  It's up to seasoned publicist Lee Phillips (Billy
Crystal) to make sure the two put on their best faces--and not kill each
other--during the multi-day, hotel-set publicity ritual known as the press
junket.
        The basic premise of _America's_Sweethearts_ paints the film as being
almost too 
inside.  After all, the story of a press junket being in danger is one that
could only be understood, much less appreciated, by journalists and others with
a keen knowledge of the workings of Tinseltown's PR process.  That said, some
effective zingers (by Crystal and Peter Tolan) directed at big studio glitz
provide some amusement for less showbiz-savvy audiences, as do some inspired
performances by Stanley Tucci, who plays a nervous studio chief; Christopher
Walken, who plays the eccentric, reclusive director of _Time_Over_Time_; and
Zeta-Jones, who obviously has a ball playing the stereotypical self-absorbed
screen diva.
        But somewhere along the line Julia Roberts decided to get involved in
the picture--not as the ostensible female lead, Gwen, but in the more secondary
role of Gwen's put-upon sister/personal assistant Kiki.  Roth then beefed up the
Kiki role in fair proportion to the "JULIA!" stature as any self-respecting
studio head/businessman would.  However, this turns out to be a ruinous
miscalculation not only in terms of storytelling but  in simple casting.  Kiki
is supposed to be frumpy and a bit of a loser, and regardless of whether or not
you think Roberts is the "pretty woman" she's celebrated as being, her charisma
and natural star wattage is undeniable and just about impossible to quash.  Not
even a fat suit, which she wears in some flashback scenes, is able to obscure
the fact that it's "JULIA!".  So when Kiki and Eddie start to develop feelings
for each other (which isn't giving away a thing that isn't already revealed in
the trailers or that could be easily predicted), what should have been a mere
plot complication becomes the focus, and suddenly "America's Sweethearts"
transforms into a "JULIA!" star vehicle about how she gets the guy--and an
especially weak one at that, given the glacial non-chemistry between her and
Cusack.
        Not that _America's_Sweethearts_ is too successful in general comedic
terms.  Apparently having little faith in the sometimes-spicy ideas and dialogue
as well as the talented actors delivering them, Roth throws in the broadest
lowest-common-denominator slapstick gags whenever he can.  A feisty, ferocious
dog takes an unnatural liking to Lee's crotch.  While jogging through a golf
course, Lee's underling Danny (Seth Green) gets hit in the head with a ball. 
And the point is...?  Certainly not laughs, for those goofy goings-on land with
a thud.
        Then again, the whole of _America's_Sweethearts_ doesn't seem to have a
point, either, given its split personality.  Roth would have been wiser to
choose between making a movie publicity send-up or a "JULIA!" showcase, for in
trying to achieve the best of both worlds, he ended up shortchanging the
audiences for either.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23
