Title
Review for Great Flamarion, The (1945)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Erich von Stroheim, Austrian-born actor, writer and director
is one of the most recognisable Hollywood icons. His image
is usually associated with silent era spectacles or his own
directorial megalomania and clashes with producers, which
made him one of the most tragic personalities of Old
Hollywood. At the end of his career, von Stroheim employed
his instantly recognisable image in various character roles.
But few of us would dare to turn von Stroheim into film
noire protagonist. In 1945, Anthony Mann did just that in
THE GREAT FLAMARION.
The plot of this film is relatively simple. Flamarion
(played by Von Stroheim) is expert marksman, who lives
ascetic life and works as performer in variety shows. His
latest act features him as an jealous husband, with two of
his assistants - beautiful Connie Wallace (played by Mary
Beth Hughes) and Al (played by Dan Duryea) playing
adulterous lovers. In real life Connie and Al are unhappy
couple; Connie can't stand living with alcoholic, abusive
and not very bright Al, but she can't divorce him either
because he knows some sinister secrets of her past. So,
Connie decides to get rid of the husband by seducing
Flamarion. Since his tragic experience with opposite sex
twenty years ago, Flamarion is resisting Connie's seduction,
but not enough. Soon he would fall in love with her and take
part in her scheme to get rid of the husband by arranging
Al's "accidental" death on the stage.
THE GREAT FLAMARION in 78 minutes of its length shows us
craftsmanship of Old Hollywood, but nothing more. All
familiar elements of film noire are here - crimes of
passion, fatal brunette, comeuppance and explanatory
flashbacks. Idea to make contrast between stage and real
life relationship between the characters seems interesting.
Actors are OK - Duryea gives very convincing and almost
sympathetic alcoholic, and Mary Beth Hughes is more than
believable as femme fatale. Unfortunately, von Stroheim
seems somewhat unconvincing in his role - his character
transforms too quickly and his character isn't explored
properly. All in all, THE GREAT FLAMARION is good film that
could be recommended for the lovers of classic cinema, but
those who want to truly appreciate von Stroheim and Mann
should try to watch other films.
