Title
Review for Kurt & Courtney (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Matt Prigge
Starring: Nick Broomfield, Hank Harrison, Tom Grant, El Duce, Rozz 
Rezabak, Kurt Cobain, Courtney Love
Nick Broomfield seems to be in a minority when it comes to the amount of 
general interest in the subject of his newest documentary. I don't, of 
course, mean to imply that no one gives a shit about Kurt Cobain and/or 
Courtney Love and their subsequent relationship that ended in his 
suicide. I've always wondered exactly why Kurt killed himself, not being 
satisfied with the mere explanation that he hated fame. No one kills 
themself for one main reason; there are many many reasons why such 
things occur, and when this film unearths some of the possibilities of 
the reasons he killed himself, it's nothing short of interesting. For 
instance, I was fascinated when I heard from his aunt about her 
speculations on his death: that Courtney and him each wanted something 
else, that she was too controlling over him, and that she may have used 
him. It all sounds eerily like "A Star is Born" to me, and I know I'm 
not the first to point that out (thank you, Roger Ebert). And I'm not 
exactly ruling out a possible conspiracy - it's just that by now, any 
speculation about a possible murder sound goofy and too late in the 
forming. Once I too was obsessed with conspiracy theories, most notably 
revolving around one particular case inspired by the viewing of one 
particular movie many years ago that ended up shaping my initial descent 
into paranoia of all kinds (and thank you, Oliver Stone). But it's when 
this film decides at the crossroads, whether it should go to be about 
the two of them and their relationship or about possible murder theories 
implicating Courtney heavily to go for the latter that I soon tuned out.
And I grew more distated as the film plowed on from theory to theory, 
and trying to prove them. Broomfield, who not only made the Spalding 
Gray film "Monster in a Box" (great flick, mostly due to Gray, of 
course), but also a little documentary I watched in film class called 
"Soldier Girls" which is unbelivably interesting, abandons some of the 
wit and the observation with which he showed in those two films, and it 
becomes not really about Kurt and Courtney but about Nick Broomfield 
trying desperately to find anything smutty and/or controversial about 
Kurt and Courtney. Like a Michael Moore without screen presence or 
actual real wit, Broomfield travels the country meeting with people who 
knew them or were associated with them (and in one case, is one of 
them), in hopes of finding anything at all about them. He shoots 
interviews so that he's there in the frame, or at least in reaction 
shots during interviews. He shoots inside the car as he's traveling from 
place to place. And he comments continuously on the soundtrack about 
what's going on, what he thinks about his discoveries, and what he would 
have done with the film if Courtney Love hadn't found out he was making 
the film and pressured those who funded him (but I really wish he didn't 
have to explain that every ten minutes).
It's perhaps wrong that Love prevented him from exploring all the 
possibilities the subject allows, not only for ethical reasons, but 
really because the film hurts from it. Without a whole lot of funding, 
Broomfield is only allowed to explore certain things, and it turns out 
he only has the budget to talk to the cesspool of witnesses, those who 
no one would touch because they're implausible in any key testimony. 
Love's father, who wrote two books about Kurt's death and how it may 
have been a murder maybe by Courtney herself, voices his horrible 
dislike for Courtney, and in one interview shows that much of his 
ranting stems from deep emotional and psychological pain aimed at his 
daughter. Tom Grant, the detective hired by Love to find the missing 
Cobain in the last days of his life, voices how he thinks he may have 
been a coverup device, and whose sole proof of this is that Kurt was so 
high on heroin that he couldn't have held a gun (this is disproven 
shortly after, shockingly enough by Broomfield himself). An ex-lover of 
Courtney displays many of her quirks and mannerisms when it comes to 
fame, broadening our picture of her, then yells into the camera a long, 
priceless string of insults aimed at her. Weirdest of all, we see an 
underground punk rocker named El Duce, a man who looks like my 
perception of Satan, who says that he was hired by Love to kill Cobain 
but didn't do it (though he has since started haunting my dreams, it's 
nice to hear that he was later on killed when he stumbled into the path 
of a train). We meet groupies who knew them, journalists who were 
threatened by them, and best of all, Kurt's aunt who's the sanest and 
most plausible witness the film can offer.
Not only does "Kurt and Courtney" get nowhere on the murder rap, it too 
harshly aims scrutiny in the direction of Courtney, making a vicious but 
one-dimensional attack at her character. The bad thing about this is: 
Nick Broomfield fucking hates Courtney Love. Bad thing for a documentary 
director, since the one surefire thing that should encompass every 
documentary is that the director has an open mind. Broomfield is willing 
to explore his subject and opens the evidence he unearths to scrutiny 
(the detective thing, once again), but underneath the entire film is the 
subtext that Courtney Love is a bitch, and the entire film doesn't play 
like an unearthing of their relationship but as a way to demonstrate in 
what ways she is a horrible individual. The problem with taking a stance 
like this is that it makes it easier for audiences to take sides with 
the filmmaker, and while people may buy into Broomfield's vision of Love 
as a coldhearted, manipulative bitch, we can also see how 
one-dimensional his argument is. On one hand, Love has threatened 
journalists and made them scared for their lives...but on the other 
hand, the journalists were trying to unearth painful secrets to her, and 
to make her look horrible. When Broomfield himself gets up at a free 
speech ceremony, where Love has received an award, and makes a speech 
showing what a hypocrite she is, it's either easy to sympathize with him 
for not being able to tell his story completely, or with Love for being 
trashed so much by Broomfield. In fact, we could either symapthize with 
Broomfield for having his funds cut off (and thus buy into his beliefs), 
or we could sympathize with Love for trying to thwart the making of this 
film because if we put ourselves in her position, we wouldn't want some 
jerk journalist trying to spread bad shit about us either, would we? I 
always think a documentary should engage us and make us question an 
issue, but it should never make us question its own belief system.
That said, "Kurt and Courtney" is at the very least intriguing. Some of 
the issues it digs up, mostly on the relationship between the eponomys 
couple, are when the film is truly great. Other moments, when it's 
foolishly trying to prove a part of a conspiracy theory or when it's 
trying to destroy Courtney Love, or when it's lack of a budget kicks in 
(there's something about that bit where he tries to sneak into a Hole 
rehearsal with a video camera only to have the battery die when the door 
is opened that's eerily reminiscent of "This is Spinal Tap"), are when 
it's at the very least a "uh huh, whatever" experience. But when it's 
uncovering interesting aspects of the respective personalities of Kurt 
and/or Courtney and their fascinating relationship, I could almost 
ignore the frustrating usage of yellow journalism and annoying presence 
by pompous ass Nick Broomfield. Well, at least temporarily.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Scott Renshaw
KURT & COURTNEY
(Roxie)
Featuring:  Nick Broomfield, Courtney Love, Hank Harrison, Tom Grant.
Written, Produced and Directed by Nick Broomfield.
MPAA Rating:  Unrated (could be R for profanity, nudity and adult themes)
Running Time:  97 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     By the end of Nick Broomfield's controversy-plagued documentary KURT
& COURTNEY, I think I knew as much about Broomfield himself as I knew
about Kurt Cobain or Courtney Love.  The film might have begun as a
biographical study, exploring the tempestuous tives of Nirvana lead singer
Cobain and riot grrrl-cum-actress Love both before and after their 1992
marriage, but that's not the story it ends up telling.  Instead, it
becomes the tale of Broomfield's ongoing battle with Love over the making
of the film -- her successful efforts to persuade MTV to withdraw funding,
her objection to the use of several songs, her attempts to intimidate
anyone involved in the production.
     No one can blame Broomfield for being infuriated at Love,
particularly when her 11th-hour legal stunt forced KURT & COURTNEY out of
the Sundance Film Festival lineup.  It might have been easier to
sympathize with him, however, if his presence in the film weren't so
consistently intrusive.  Like Michael Moore, Broomfield has no qualms
about filming himself in the process of making his documentary film;
unlike Moore, Broomfield isn't entertaining enough to warrant all the
screen time.  In fact, he's just plain annoying at times, interjecting
commentary over virtually every musical selection (or lack thereof) and
casually referring to Cobain's hometown of Aberdeen, Washington as a
"redneck logging town."  Even his habit of shooting from inside the car as
it pulls up to various locations feels pretentious, an attempt at
you-are-there urgency which conveniently ignores that automotive jaunts
hardly make for compelling cinema.
     Lucky for Broomfield that his subject is such a wild and provocative
one.  KURT & COURTNEY features as wonderfully twisted a cast of characters
as any recent film has compiled:  Love's estranged father Hank Harrison,
whose casual aggression towards his daughter provides a frightening
insight into her childhood; Love's ex-boyfriend and former Portland-area
singer Rozz Rezabek, seething bitterness at the career he might have had
if Courtney hadn't driven him to hate it; a one-time friend of Love and
Cobain named Amy who may or may not have photos of them doing heroin
together, but certainly is trying way too hard to look like Courtney.
Broomfield also spends time examining rumors that Cobain's 1994 death,
ruled a shotgun suicide, was actually a murder engineered by Love.  This
angle introduces us to El Duce, a demented, drunken punk band frontman who
claims Love once offered him "50 grant to whack Kurt Cobain."  Watching
the kind of people with whom Kurt and Courtney surrounded themselves makes
you wonder why both of them didn't end up dead long before.
     Ultimately, KURT & COURTNEY doesn't seem out to convict Courtney Love
of soliciting murder, debunking many of the contentions of conspiracy
theorists like private detective Tom Grant.  It's far more damning in its
contention that Love's drive for fame and success tends to crush
everything in its path, and that her history of verbal and physical
assaults is just a hair's breadth removed from her obsessive need to
control her public image.  It would have been chilling to watch that
personality connected more directly to Cobain's psychological
disintegration, but the troubled soul has little more than a cameo role in
the film.  Instead, Courtney is primarily connected to Nick Broomfield,
who finally follows Love on-stage at an ACLU benefit to chastise her
hypocrisy.  KURT & COURTNEY tends to drift away from its potentially
fascinating subject; it's a record of celebrity turned caustic, intercut
with a record of a film-maker's pique.  You almost wonder why he didn't
call the film KURT & COURTNEY & NICK.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Music hath charms to sooth the savage breast, but not all
bosoms want to be placated.  A recent survey about the
influence of music on the nervous system showed that New
Age spiritual harmonies assuage the spirit best, classical
second, and not surprisingly at the bottom of the list after acid
rock is grunge.  Grunge musicians do not sit primly on stage
in formal attire but stand and gyrate and even sometimes
resort to violence against patrons and one another as they
strum their electric guitars and swat their drums, committed to
driving themselves and their constituents into a frenzy.  Also
not surprisingly, folks who are "into" this sort of discord are
more likely than most to be part of the drug scene as well. 
It's no wonder, then, that Nick Broomfield's documentary
about famed punk rocker Kurt Cobain and his less talented
wife Courtney Love is chock full of interviews with people that
are off-the-wall and, in fact, if you count the principal
characters who appear on Broomfield's camera, you'll come
up with just two down-to-earth people.  One is the unaffected
aunt of Mr. Cobain, the other the filmmaker himself.  And not
every viewer will be convinced of Broomfield's wits.  The
subjects are more likely than not to make frequent use of
expressions like "you know," "like," and "totally" which they
utter between brief periods of nodding out.  The musicians
tend to be awfully thin (Cobain weighed only 120 pounds) and
their followers are apt to wear rings on their pierced skin.
   Kurt and Courtney is not a musicography: in fact,
unfortunately, Broomfield displays painfully little of the music,
in one case cutting away just as the musicians at one concert
were getting started kicking audience butt.  Had he spent
more time on the rhythms, we may have acquired more
insight into the nature of the beast.  But controversial rocker
Courtney Love, whom even straight audiences may have
seen for her vivid role in a movie about pornography king
Larry Flynt, threatened to sue if Broomfield made
unauthorized use of copyrighted music.  Ms. Love was merely
trying to stall the movie's opening, no doubt aware that all the
documentarian needed to do was expunge the melodies and
go on with his real agenda.  Why was Love so intent on
stopping the film?  With good reason.  Often playing like a
living supermarket tabloid, "Kurt and Courtney" toys with the
theory that Ms. Love ordered the murder of her husband, Kurt
Cobain, who was found dead in April 1994 amid a plethora of
drug equipment, ostensibly a suicide at the age of 27.
   The film unfolds primarily in Seattle and Portland where
Broomfield--a handsome, articulate interviewer takes us to
some of the title characters' relatives, friends, and
professional people who got caught up in the tawdry tale. 
The least sensational and yet most effective segments of the
ninety-nine minute drama show Cobain in the days before he
became a household word, a little kid who showed an
aptitude for music early on to become later a young adult who
mixed with the heroin and cocaine crowd.  Interviewed after
he became the leading figure of the grunge movement, he
insists that the gobs of money he made from his concerts had
little to do with happiness; that in fact he misses browsing in
second-hand shops, anxiety-ridden about whether he can
afford to buy the things he really liked but once indulging, he
treated his goods like special treasures.  Others confirmed
later that many of the arguments he had with the woman he
married, Courtney Love, were over money; Courtney favored
fancy cars like the Lexus while Cobain was positively
embarrassed to be seen traveling in anything but a van.  Nor
would Cobain be happy to be seen in the sort of mansion
favored by the Mrs.
   The most unusual interview is with Love's father Hank who
insists that he loves his daughter (with "tough love,") has
written two books about her and Cobain, and astonishingly
enough suggests that his daughter indeed had her husband
murdered.  Tom Grant, a private detective who had been
hired by Love to find Cobain when the rock singer was
missing for days likewise speaks against type by suggesting
even more strongly that Cobain was murdered in that there
were no fingerprints on the gun, the police botched the
evidence, and that a man with 1.52 mg of heroin in his
system would not be able to stand up and pull the trigger of a
rifle.  A character who is far-out even by West Coast
standards, El Duce, has a drunken talk with the interviewer
insisting that Love offered him $50,000 to whack her husband
but that he flat-out refused the bid.  (It came out later that this
Duce was paid $100 by Broomfield for the interview.  Duce,
who led a weird band called the Sex Slaves, was later killed
by a train while he was drunk.)
   Some reviewers have already criticized Broomfield for being
biased, contending that he takes for granted the theory that
Love ordered the murder.  The movie, however, shows the
charming interrogator to be fair-minded, to challenge those
like the private detective and the father when they accuse
Love of criminal activity.  But Broomfield is no fan of the
woman, whom he portrays as unstable, consumed by an
insatiable desire for attention, and given to violent threats
such as the one she made on the answering machine of a
hostile biographer, who moved suddenly from Seattle to L.A.
fearing for her life.
   Strange, isn't it, that a druggie like Courtney Love is
honored by the prestigious American Civil Liberties Union for
her stand on free speech in the movie "The People vs. Larry
Flynt" when, in fact, she was merely acting a role with no part
in the writing and when many people question the use of
Larry Flynt as a role model for the First Amendment.
   Though "Kurt & Courtney" cries out for a deeper look at the
demons in Cobain's life--the reasons for his psychosomatic
stomach pains and his suicidal depression--its tabloid-like
albeit fair assessment of Cobain and Love are vastly
entertaining.  Pulled from the Sundance Festival at the 11th
hour, the movie will ironically draw fair-sized audiences are
commercial screening if the crowd attending the opening in
L.A. are an indication. Not Rated.  Running time: 99 minutes. 
(C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Murali Krishnan
Everyone who follows the popular music scene knows the musical group
"Nirvana", who had a large world-wide following and, as the prototypical
Seattle band, defined the genre of "grunge rock". The creative leader of the
group was writer and guitarist Kurt Cobain. Cobain ended his life with a
shotgun blast to the head in April 1994. For many people, the story ends
there, but as veteran documentary filmmaker Nick Broomfield finds out, there
may be more to the story. He finds many people who feel that Cobain's death
was not a suicide, but was rather a homicide that was covered up.
All of the conspiracy theories have a common thread. They all connect
Cobain's wife, Courtney Love, to his death. No one appears to claim she
pulled the trigger, but some claim that she hired someone else to do the
job, or else she drove Cobain to do it himself. In all, no one has much to
say that is very positive about Love. She is generally portrayed, as a
shallow, manipulative, opportunistic, gold-digger, which is in stark
contrast to the caring, introverted, Cobain. As might be expected when
researching a typical conspiracy theory, many of the sources are vague and
many of the people are shady. Amazingly, one of the people suggesting Cobain
was murdered is Love's own father.
This is an interesting film, but there are two glaring weaknesses. First,
most people believe that Cobain's death was simply a suicide. Second, and
more annoying, Broomfield has chosen to make himself too much of a
participant in the story. Besides the usual amount behind-the-camera
narration expected in a documentary, Broomfield spends too much time in
front of the camera. At one point he even voices a position against Love at
an awards ceremony. Also annoying is Broomfield's continuous complaints of
how Love is continuously trying to sabotage the film by denying the use of
any "Nirvana" music, and by persuading the producers to pull funding.
Perhaps it is because she has something to hide, but one also understands
that she knows this will be an unflattering portrayal of her and her actions
is well within her rights.
Recommended. It may not be of interest to viewers who do no care for
documentaries, since it is not a very good entry for that genre. However,
the enjoyable aspect of the film in not in any revelations, but rather in
seeing part of the cast of sordid and quirky group of people that have been,
and still are, associated with Kurt and Courtney.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
