Title
Review for Where the Heart Is (2000)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Attention, Wal-Mart Shoppers! Princess Amidala's been sleeping
in your store. Well, not exactly, but in this chick's flick Natalie
Portman plays a poor, pregnant 17 year-old named Novalee Nation who
moves into an Oklahoma Wal-Mart when her wannabe musician/boyfriend,
Willie Jack Pickens (Dylan Bruno), abandons her. In the discount
chain-store, she finds everything she needs. She sleeps in a sleeping
bag on a fake lawn, bathes in the bathroom, and keeps careful record
of everything she's used so she can pay it back some day. And when her
daughter, Americus, is born she's celebrated in the media as "the
Wall-Mart Baby."  Intrigued by her celebrity, Novalee's dysfunctional
mother (Sally Field) appears and makes off with some cash. So what's
the girl gonna do? Like the Beatles' song - she gets a little help
from her friends. Like a perpetually pregnant maternity nurse (Ashley
Judd), who become her best-friend, and a nurturing surrogate-mother
(Stockard Channing). Novalee even finds a fella, a shy, gentle
librarian (James Frain), and an empowering career as a
photographer. But then Willie Jack resurfaces as country singer Billy
Shadow, now the protege of a Nashville agent (Joan Cusack). Based on
Billie Letts' 1996 best-seller, adapted for the screen by Lowell Ganz
& Babaloo Mandel, and directed by Matt Williams (TV's "Roseanne,"
"Home Improvement"), this episodic story of love and the meaning of
family unfolds in a relentlessly likable, sudsy soap opera
style. While Natalie Portman is obviously a sophisticated, refined and
talented actress, she's woefully miscast as raw Southern trash, which
is the way her role is described. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Where the Heart Is" is a sweetly banal, schmaltzy 5, just the
number that Novalee considers ominous.

Author
James Sanford
         Some actresses are capable of giving wonderful performances
even without the benefit of a solid script or a strong director. With
"Where the Heart Is," Natalie Portman and Ashley Judd join that select
group.
 The movie itself is a shapeless, often downright baffling
confection, made up of equal parts syrup, salt and good old-fashioned
hogwash. It's drawn from a novel by Billie Letts that became a hot
seller after it earned the Oprah Winfrey seal of approval. Often, as the
film skips from corny comedy to unconvincing drama, it appears as if
screenwriters Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel completely missed whatever
it was that made the book so special.
 "Heart" was directed by Matt Williams, the man who helped
develop "Roseanne" and whenever the picture reaches for some serious
emotions, Williams tends to serve them up in the overearnest style of
one of those dreaded "very special episodes" that turn up on sitcoms
during sweeps week. Were it not for the presence of Portman and Judd,
"Heart" could easily have turned into a pilot for a lame TV series. Call
it "Wal-Mart Mama."
 The story merrily skips through the five years following the
day penniless, heavy-with-child Novalee Nation (Portman) was abandoned
at a Wal-Mart in Sequoyah, Oklahoma. That's where Novalee gave birth to
her daughter Americus -- cute is the name of the game here --  and where
she found shelter with a good-natured recovering alcoholic named Sister
Husband (Stockard Channing). What was Sister's brother named, you ask?
Why, Brother Husband, of course.
 It doesn't stop there. Lexi (Judd), Novalee's confidante, has
five kids, all of whom have been named after snack foods. The two women
become close friends, perhaps because they're the only ones in Sequoyah
who seem able to laugh away the problems of being barefoot and pregnant.
         As "Heart" unfolds, the pair will weather kidnappings, natural
disasters, abusive boyfriends, scheming relatives and much, much more.
Whatever slight credibility the plot builds up is quickly erased after
one character inherits $41,000 and proceeds to use it to build and
furnish a house that must have cost at least five times that much.
 Yet Judd and Portman seem to believe in this bunk and, to some
extent, they convince us the movie is worth watching. Since her
breakthrough role in "Ruby in Paradise," Judd has too often allowed
herself to be straitjacketed in parts unworthy of her talent: "Double
Jeopardy" and "Eye of the Beholder" were shining recent examples. Lexi
isn't fully developed, but Judd's warmth and natural charm come through
anyway. So does her sly way with a line, as when she asks Novalee if she
can drive home slowly "so I can pretend it's a vacation."
 Portman is the real engine of "Heart" though, and she delivers
a marvelous, deeply moving snapshot of a woman who has to grow up
quickly in a very short amount of time. As someone who claims she's
"never lived any place that didn't have wheels underneath it," Novalee
would seem ripe for parody, and plenty of actresses would have had a
difficult time refraining from being condescending.
 Not Portman. She seems completely sympathetic to Novalee's
situation and never once does she drift into caricature or make a cheap
joke about her. As she did in last year's much better "Anywhere But
Here," Portman slips gently into her character and embodies her with
spirit, grace and verve.
 At one point, Novalee tells Lexi, "We've all got meanness in
us, but we've got goodness, too, and the only thing worth living for is
the good." That doesn't sound like anything a teen would tell her older
friend, but Portman delivers it as if she believes every syllable. She
does it so well in fact that maybe for just a moment we can believe it
too. James Sanford

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Matt Williams.
Cast: Natalie Portman, Ashley Judd, Dylan Bruno, James Frain, Stockard 
Channing, Richard Jones, Joan Cusack, Sally Field, Keith David.
2000 - 118 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, April 27, 2000.
Director Matt Williams' "Where the Heart Is" is such a well-meaning, 
brightly-acted slice-of-life that it's too bad more care wasn't given to the 
episodic, uneven screenplay, by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel. Moving with 
hasty rapidity through a five-year time period, with almost every following 
scene set a few weeks, or months, or even a whole year, later, the film never 
garners enough emotional interest in its characters because they always seem 
to be getting vigorously wrung through the motions. If anything, "Where the 
Heart Is" does have a big heart, but everything feels closely scripted, with 
only a few fleeting scenes boosting a human naturalism that desperately was 
needed throughout.
Based on the 1996 novel by Billie Letts that gained popularity when it was 
chosen as Oprah Winfrey's Book of the Month, "Where the Heart Is" begins as 
we meet pregnant 17-year-old Novalee Nation (Natalie Portman), who is fleeing 
her trailer park existence in Tennessee with her boyfriend, Willy Jack 
Pickens (Dylan Bruno). Stopping off at an Oklahoma-based WalMart to go to the 
bathroom and buy a pair of new shoes (her old ones fell through the hole in 
the floor of Willy's busted-up jalopy), Novalee is devastated to discover 
that he has left her stranded there when she gets back to the parking lot, 
with no trace of him or the car in sight. With literally no money or a home 
to go to, Novalee takes up shelter in WalMart, hiding in the bathroom each 
night as it closes down. Then she gives birth to the baby one late night in 
the store, and briefly becomes a highly publicized celebrity, with her 
daughter, whom she has given the sturdy name of Americus, being called the 
"WalMart Baby." 
Novalee is quickly given a home by the kindly Sister Husband (Stockard 
Channing), and WalMart hands her a job working for them. She also makes 
friends with unlucky-in-love Lexie Coop (Ashley Judd), who has four kids, 
each with a different father. All of this takes place within the opening 
half-hour, with the remaining 90 minutes light on plot, but heavy on tragedy 
and bad things happening, as Novalee may now have a roof over her head, but 
still has a life that isn't endlessly filled with wine and roses.
Surprisingly, some of the most entertaining scenes are in the subplot 
involving Willy Jack Pickens, who the film occasionally alternates back to 
after he abandons Novalee at the WalMart. Following a brief jail term for 
picking up a minor in his car, Willy, who turns out to be a talented country 
singer, heads to Nashville, where he is hired as a client by disgruntled 
agent Ruth Meyers (Joan Cusack), and quickly is given the more alluring name 
of Billy Shadow.
As Willy, Dylan Bruno (1999's "The Rage: Carrie 2") is superbly cast and a 
real find, easily holding his own in a minor storyline that otherwise goes 
nowhere and is pointless to the picture as a whole. In yet another memorable 
and funny performance, her best since her Oscar-nominated turn in 1997's "In 
and Out," Joan Cusack has loads of fun as the matter-of-fact Ruth Meyers, who 
is clearly fed up with her profession as a country music agent, but keeps 
right on chugging. Unfortunately, very little comes of the notable amount of 
time spent on this side story, save for a climactic reunion between Novalee 
and Willy, and Ruth abruptly disappears completely.
The majority of "Where the Heart Is" focuses on Novalee Nation, and the 
trials and tribulations she must go through to seek full happiness. Seemingly 
destined to never break out of her trailer trash upbringing, Novalee 
nonetheless has aspirations to become a professional photographer, as well as 
being the kind of caring parent that her own money-grubbing mother (Sally 
Field) never was. Natalie Portman has proven time and time again what a 
sparkling talent she is as an actress, and in her first adult role, this 
performance is no exception. Her character of Novalee, however, is not nearly 
as complex as her roles in 1999's "Anywhere But Here" or 1996's "Beautiful 
Girls," so it isn't quite as showy, despite equipping herself remarkably.
Best of all is Ashley Judd, whose character of Lexie Coop, a woman who 
strives for joy and a happy marriage and everything in between, but can't 
seem to find a truly compassionate and loving man to share her life with, may 
be underdeveloped, but is given most of the only genuinely honest scenes. A 
particularly heartbreaking one comes near the end that is less the work of a 
Hollywood performer, and more the work of a true-born actor, something that 
is rarely seen nowadays. Rounding out the cast are Stockard Channing, as the 
infinitely generous Sister Husband, and James Frain, as the shy, gentle 
Forney, a librarian caring for his alcoholic sister, who grows to fall deeply 
in love with Novalee, despite her only ever viewing him as a good friend.
Where "Where the Heart Is" makes its fatal mistake is in not allowing the 
characters to naturally progress throughout the film without major calamities 
popping up in nearly every scene. From tornadoes, to kidnappings, to abuse, 
to pedophilia, few subjects are left unturned by screenwriters Lowell and 
Ganz, and because of this, the proceedings come off as disjointed at almost 
every turn. While not exactly melodramatic, the emotions within are surely 
manipulative, not helped much by Mason Daring's needlessly syrupy music 
score. "Where the Heart Is" has its eclectic and talented cast in place, but 
the screenplay they are given to work with is clunky and below their 
intelligence level. They deserve better.

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
 http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/e012f170e965e9ae882568cf000106ca?OpenDocument
Long ago, films were constructed of strong dialogue, original
characters, memorable plot points, and solid acting.  One of the best
examples that Hollywood now completely ignore these qualities is found
in the new film Where the Heart Is.
This opus about the power of love and the redemption of family follows
the tragic, and I mean tragic, life of Novalee Nation (Natalie
Portman).  Hitting the road with her hick, guitar-playing boyfriend in a
rusted-out GM, Novalee dreams of the blue skies of Bakersfield and
sipping chocolate milk beneath a plastic umbrella with her unborn baby,
due in a month.
Stopping off at a nearby Wal-Mart for a quick rest, Novalee's boyfriend
decides to take off and leaves her there.  Novalee then decides to
secretly hole up in the Wal-Mart (because she's not the brightest bulb
in the stagelights).  A wacky librarian (Keith David) comes to her
rescue when she goes into labor one night while she is camped in the
outdoors section of the store.  Then the she moves in with a family,
befriends everyone in town -- including Ashley Judd's character (who has
FIVE kids and still can work part-time as a nurse) -- fights off
religious freaks, survives a tornado, breaks the heart of the wacky
librarian that saved her, receives an inheritance, builds a Martha
Stewart-esque house, becomes an award-winning photographer, and manages
to always look like she stepped out of a Cosmo shoot, all while not once
doing anything with her kid.
This film is terrible.  The directing is awful: It seems director Matt
Williams had an index card with six angles written on it and used every
one of them, over and over and over again.  We get pathetic and ugly
acting by Natalie Portman, who can do good work.  A disjointed pacing of
key scenes and a time structure so confusing that it would throw Steve
Prefontaine off.  A subplot that actually validates the actions of the
boyfriend who abandoned Novalee in the Wal-Mart parking lot.  An
embarrassing display of emotions by the characters, making the audience
ill.  Taking two great comedic screenwriters, Babaloo Mandel and Lowell
Ganz, and forcing them to write drama on par with Oprah's Book Club.
Altogether, it has the feeling of being trapped at home, watching a very
bad television mini-series and wishing it to end, only the remote is
broken.
However, the main problem with the film is that it never answers the
most poignant question brought up:  Where is the heart?  No one ever
seems to find it in this piece of junk.
Director: Matt Williams
Producers: Matt Williams, David McFadzean, Susan Cartsonis, Patricia
Whitcher
Writers: Babaloo Mandel, Lowell Ganz
Starring: Natalie Portman, Keith David, Stockard Channing, Ashley Judd,
Sally Field, Dylan Bruno
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Natalie Portman, an eminently likable actress who will always be famous
as Queen Amidala in THE PHANTOM MENACE, plays a sweetly tragic character
named Novalee Nation (funny names are prominently featured) in Matt
William's WHERE THE HEART IS.  Novalee is the mother of the famous
"Wal-Mart baby," but more on that later.
A mixture of humor and pathos, the film has some memorable moments but
overall comes across surprisingly flat.  Based on Billie Letts's book,
the uneven script is by the writing team of Lowell Ganz and Babaloo
Mandel, who have produced some wonderfully funny comedies (CITY
SLICKERS) as well as some gratingly awful ones (FATHER'S DAY).
Novalee grew up with a family of losers.  When her mother (Sally Field
in a cameo) comes to visit her, it's only to steal her money before
vanishing again.
When we first meet Novalee, she is a very pregnant teen and soon to be a
barefoot one as well.  Her boyfriend, Willy Jack Pickens (Dylan Bruno),
is taking her to California -- she hopes to get a room with an ocean
view in Bakersfield, no less -- in his junker, which has a large hole in
front of the passenger's seat.  This makes it convenience for him to
toss out his garbage as he drives, but it's also a hole that swallows up
shoes while the passenger dozes.
Willy Jack stops to let Novalee off at a Wal-Mart to go to the bathroom
and then abandons her there.  (He repeatedly gets his comeuppance for
this indiscretion in a subplot that follows his pitiful life.)  A broke
Novalee discovers that she can live at the store by hiding in the
restroom when it closes.  Like a kid in a candy store, she finds
everything that she needs at night: exercise gear, boom boxes, reading
material, clocks, camping equipment, cookies, you name it.  After 6
weeks, her life at the Wal-Mart Motel comes to a crashing end when one
night her water breaks.  In an improbable scene, in a movie filled with
them, her white knight, Forney Hull (James Frain), smashes through a
plate glass window to save her and rush her to the hospital.
After having her baby (Americus Nation -- get it?), Novalee becomes a
celebrity.  Wal-Mart, which has been unknowingly providing for her well
being, offers her a job at any of their stores anywhere in the country.
At the hospital, she meets Lexie Coop (Ashley Judd), a woman in a
permanent state of pregnancy, who attracts abusive men.  Lexie says that
she likes to name her ever-expanding brood after junk food, including
Brownie, Praline, Cherry and Baby Ruth.
If the story sounds funny, it is sometimes, but you're more likely to
grin than laugh.  Much of the movie tests the film's PG-13 rating.  It
includes, among other shocking scenes, a baby kidnapping, a killer
tornado, a train that chops off a character's legs, a badly battered
girlfriend and pedophilia.  In the latter case, we hear the abused young
child screaming after the fact, but the child rape itself isn't shown.
Maybe this doesn't make the film R by the MPAA rating standards, but
it's a lot more shocking than many R films, which get the rating because
some character says the F-word a couple of times.
A sad story, WHERE THE HEART IS never quite finds its rhythm, which
leaves its audience fidgeting in their seats not quite knowing whether
to laugh or cry.  The story does have a lot of potential.  One suspects
that with a script doctor and a seasoned director, the film could have
soared.  As released, it's a film with an almost equal balance of hits
and misses, but with a precious performance by Portman at its core.
WHERE THE HEART IS runs 2:00.  It is rated PG-13 for intense thematic
material, language and sexual content and would be acceptable for those
over 13.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom

 Where the Heart Is (2000) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Natalie Portman,
Ashley Judd, Stockard Channing, Sally Field, Joan Cusack and James
Frain. Written by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel from the novel by
Billie Lett. Directed by Matt Williams
 "Where the Heart Is" is a movie overflowing with heart.
 Based on the novel by Billie Letts, and popularized as one of Oprah's
Book Club selections, the story is the odyssey of Novalee Nation, from a
17-year-old girl pregnant and abandoned at a Wal-Mart in the middle of
nowhere Oklahoma, to a self-sufficient single mother who discovers her
self-worth and true love.
 Yes, I know, it sounds hokey, cliched. And to a small extent it is.
 But the warm-hearted screenplay by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel, who
have co-authored "Parenthood", "City Slickers," "A League of Their Own"
and "EdTV," among others, transcends the familiar.
The characters in "Where the Heart Is" are compassionate, loving and
caring. You root for them, you like them.
 Director Matt Williams makes an auspicious debut behind the camera. He
took what could have been an overly schmaltzy pot-boiler and gives it
respectability by not being condescending to his protagonists. He has
genuine affection for these characters and it is evidenced throughout.
 Call me a sentimental softy, but I enjoyed "Where the Heart Is." And
the reason is the cast.
 Natalie Portman, in her first real adult role, brings a childlike
understanding to Novalee. George Lucas' Queen Amidala grows from a
plucky, but frightened teen-ager to a wise young woman who overcomes her
self-doubts about her status on the social structure. She is a woman who
grows to realize that she has earned the right to accept love.
 A wonderful supporting cast of women surround Portman, most notably
Ashley Judd as Lexie who finely blends comedy and pathos as the single
mom of five who always is finding the wrong man.
 The always-grand Stockard Channing plays the loving Sister Husband who
takes in Novalee and treats her and her baby like family. Channing is
such a sharp actress that she can take what is a Shirley MacLaine-"Steel
Magnolias"-type of small-town eccentric and elevate the character into a
full-bodied individual filled with kindness and charity.
 In a smaller role Joan Cusack delivers some comic moments as a
Nashville music promoter, while Sally Field is flinty in a brief cameo
as Novalee's wandering mother.
 James Frain is touching and warm as Forney, who runs the town library
and falls in love with Novalee and her daughter. Frain, best known for
playing pianist Daniel Barenboim opposite Emily Watson in "Hilary and
Jackie," at first is a bit caustic and snobbish. But he softens and
becomes more sympathetic as the movie progresses.
 "Where the Heart Is" will delightfully surprise you. It's a film that
elicits smiles. And if you own shares of Wal-Mart stock, get ready to
earn some dividends. After Where the Heart Is, every woman is going to
want to deliver her baby in Aisle 4.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Bloom, an associate member of the Online Film Critics Society, has his
reviews posted at http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 WHERE THE HEART IS (director: Matt Williams; screenwriters: Lowell
 Ganz/Babaloo Mandel/from the novel by Billie Letts; cinematographer:
 Richard Greatrex; editor: Ian Crafford; cast: Natalie Portman (Novalee
 Nation), Stockard Channing (Sister Husband), Joan Cusack (agent),
 Sally Field (Novalee's dysfunctional mother), Ashley Judd (maternity
 nurse, Lexie Coop), Dylan Bruno (Willie Jack Pickens), James Frain
 (Forney Hull), Keith David (Moses Whitecotton), Richard Jones (Mr.
 Sprock); Runtime: 115; 20th Century Fox; 2000)
There's slim pickings in this shamelessly contrived melodrama built
around a Wal-Mart setting. All the contrived sitcom scenes just never
click. It's a film about a vulnerable, low-class, and stupid woman, but
a woman who is good-hearted. She fights against all the obstacles placed
in her way and against her own stupidity in decision making. The result
is a predictably boring film which neatly ties up all the loose ends by
its conclusion, whose heart lies where the schmaltz is. The film appears
to be one big advertisement for the giant department store and its
generosity to its trailer park clientele.
Natalie Portman is miscast, as shw was never convincing in her role. She
plays the poor, uneducated, Southern accented, superstitious, pregnant
17-year-old, Novalee Nation, who moves into an Oklahoma Wal-Mart when
abandoned by her wannabe musician, handsome but repulsive boyfriend,
Willie Jack Pickens (Dylan Bruno). After leaving their trailer park home
in Tennessee, he abandons her in the Wal-Mart parking lot before they
reach their California destination. After sleeping in Wal-Mart's for a
few weeks in the sporting section with a sleeping bag on the artificial
garden lawn, she has her baby daughter Americus in the store. Her baby
is delivered by the eccentric, nice guy Forney (Frain), who hears her
screams and breaks a store window to reach her. The man from the
civilized state of Maine unselfishly stopped his college education and
pursuit of a career to be a history teacher in order to take care of his
alcoholic sister, who is the small-town librarian in this cultural
Oklahoma wasteland. He does her job since she's always incapacitated,
and he saves her from going to a sanitarium.
After the baby's birth is celebrated in the media as "the Wal-Mart
Baby," and the mother receives mostly encouraging mail from across the
country, Novalee's sleazy mother (Sally Field) surprisingly appears
after abandoning her 5 years ago (5 is Novalee's unlucky number), but
she soon absconds with the $500 Wal-Mart gave her.
Stuck in this dire situation, good-hearted strangers give her comfort.
There's maternity nurse Lexie (Judd), also an uneducated, loose-living,
single parent, with a number of children (she names them after junk
foods: Baby Ruth, Praline, and Brownie), who becomes her best
girlfriend. There's a recovering alcoholic and born-again Christian,
named Sister Husband (Channing), who takes her and the baby into her
humble mobile home. She will become her surrogate-mother.
After 5 years Novalee becomes a photographer for Wal-Mart, and she soon
fulfills her dream of living in a house without wheels under it. Willie
Jack resurfaces in her life as a legless man, after he tried to become a
country singer under the name Billy Shadow with his career being guided
by a tough Nashville agent (Joan Cusack); but, Willie turns out to be a
hard-luck loser, who because of his stupidity and bad nature continues
to make the same mistakes he always had.
Novalee will almost blow her chance of real love, by thinking she's not
smart enough for Forney. She tells Lexie, "Forney's different than us --
he went to college." But, wouldn't you know it, there's a happy ending,
as Novalee finally makes a smart decision and marries Forney.
This is a film that got itself stuck inside Wal-Mart and could never get
out of aisle 5. Director Williams, he once directed the Roseanne TV
show, uses the material adapted from Billie Letts' best-selling novel to
keep everything as dumb as he can.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Dequina
For all the surface eccentricities of the story, which derives from
Billie Letts' novel of the same name, Matt Williams' film follows a
simple course where a good-hearted woman is placed in adverse
circumstances and then slowly but surely triumphs over them.  Along the
way, she even helps others triumph over their own adversities.  Sound
familiar?  It should--this is the rubric for the genre that I've come to
call the "Oprah movie": slick, well-meaning, female-empowering, and just
about as exciting and suspenseful as the middle label implies.  (Not
surprisingly, Letts' novel was an Oprah book club selection.)  Such films
are hard to hate--and, indeed, _Where_the_Heart_Is_ is likable--but
they're just as difficult to get worked up over in the positive sense. 
The individual elements are put together with care, but they are also
assembled with an obvious calculation--lending the film a
less-than-authentic gloss.
Portman, on the other hand, remains natural and genuine throughout.  But
her "realness" is constricted by the conventions, much like in
_Anywhere_but_Here_, her last film--and another entry in the Oprah genre.
 She's too young and vibrant a performer to pigeonhole herself in films
like _Where_the_Heart_Is_, which are precious and nice but hardly the
most interesting and effective uses of her talent--not to mention not the
most interesting and rewarding films to sit through.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Matt Williams. Screenplay by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel,
based on the novel by Billie Letts. Starring Natalie Portman, Ashley
Judd, Stockard Channing. Running time: 122 minutes. Rated AA by the MFCB.
Reviewed on May 11th, 2000.
There are some movies which, on a purely aesthetic level, you know you 
shouldn't really enjoy, but which are blessed with such charm that you do 
anyway. "Where The Heart Is" is this kind of movie. Its storyline lacks 
creativity and is sometimes hard to swallow, its dialogue is for the most 
part only serviceable, its direction is fair but undistinguished. But its 
characterisation is fun and unusual, and the performances of its cast -- 
especially stars Natalie Portman and Ashley Judd -- are so endearing that 
it's hard not to leave the theatre with a grin on your face.
Novalee Nation (Portman) is a pregnant teenager who leaves her Oklahoma 
home to head to California with boyfriend and would-be country music star 
Willy Jack (Dylan Bruno). On the way, they stop at a Wal-Mart so that 
Novalee can use the washroom. She returns to the parking lot only to find 
that Willy Jack has abandoned her. Alone, penniless, and well into her 
third trimester, Novalee hides out in the Wal-Mart until her baby is 
born. In the meantime, she meets some of the locals, including a 
recovering alcoholic named Sister Husband (Stockard Channing) and Forney, 
the eccentric librarian (James Frain).
Finally, in an unexpectedly stark scene, Novalee gives birth. In the 
hospital, she befriends nurse Lexie Coop (Judd) who is also an unmarried 
mother, though in her case her brood numbers four (all named after candy 
bars). Acting on a suggestion to give her daughter a strong, meaningful 
name, Novalee calls her Americus. (You'll notice the movie's penchant for 
bizarre phenomenology; and I haven't mentioned other characters like 
Moses Whitecotten or Mr Sprock!)
The rest of "Where The Heart Is" tells the story of Novalee and her new 
friends as she comes to find her place in the world. Covering five years, 
the film alternates between good, solid character development and an 
unfortunate tendency to substitute incident for real characterisation. 
Some sequences are genuine and amusing, like the formative stages of 
Novalee's burgeoning career as a photographer, or her keeping accounting 
of every little thing she has borrowed from the Wal-Mart she makes her 
temporary home. But others are obvious and clumsy plot devices. One 
unlikely scene, for example, sees Novalee nearly being swept into a 
tornado, clinging to a slowly disintegrating staircase and trying to save 
Americus at the same time. (I kept expecting Helen Hunt or Bill Paxton to 
show up, myself.)
As a result, "Where The Heart Is" has a somewhat disjointed, episodic 
feel to it. To be fair, I do wonder if this may be partly a consequence 
of trying to condense Billie Letts' novel down to a two-hour screenplay. 
But in the end, I wished the movie had spent less time on glaring set 
pieces and played more often to its strength, which is the often unusual, 
sometimes unexpected, but always very human incidents which color our 
days. "Your life can change in a breath," Novalee tells Lexie at one 
point. But those changes are rarely major show pieces, and sometimes 
"Where The Heart Is" seems to forget that.
It is somewhat astonishing to realise that "Where The Heart Is" is 
Natalie Portman's first leading role. Less surprising, however, is that 
she handles the extra duties with typical aplomb, despite the fact that 
Novalee may be one of her more difficult assignments. Many of Portman's 
characters in the past have been preternaturally intelligent or mature: 
Queen Amidala in "The Phantom Menace", Ann August in "Anywhere But Here" 
and Marty in "Beautiful Girls" all spring to mind. Novalee, on the other 
hand, is a character who has not had the opportunity to cultivate her 
intelligence, nor who innately possesses considerable maturity. 
Consequently, she represents a different sort of challenge for Portman, 
who has to let Novalee slowly develop these characteristics over the 
course of the movie. In successfully doing so, Portman demonstrates once
again why she is one of Hollywood's most talented actresses. (Portman has 
reportedly decided against doing any more movies other than the next two 
"Star Wars" instalments until her undergraduate education is complete. 
With doubt, Hollywood's loss is academia's gain.)
Also superb is Ashley Judd as Lexie. It would have been easy to make  
Lexie just a slightly older version of Novalee, but Judd carves her own 
niche, bringing to the proceedings an infectious enthusiasm which belies 
her deeply troubled character. Lexie is the unlucky sort of woman who is 
always looking for Mr Right but only manages to find Mr Wrong. The end 
result is four kids (and more as the movie proceeds). Judd conveys the 
difficulty of her life while still maintaining a believable, indeed 
admirable, positive outlook. This makes Lexie particularly endearing, and 
the rollercoaster she endures as the film unfolds truly involving.
The supporting cast is also very good. Frain finds just the right note as 
Novalee's friend and would-be lover, neither under- nor over-indulging in 
his character's idiosyncrasies. Despite limited screen time, Bruno brings 
Willy Jack to life, wisely portraying him as immature and misguided 
rather than out-and-out rotten. Indeed, I found myself at times wishing 
Willy Jack's story had earned a little more of the spotlight; it would 
make a fascinating movie in its own right. Similarly underutilised is 
Joan Cusack as Willy Jack's tough-as-nails agent Ruth Meyers. Indeed, the 
only disappointing performance is from Channing, whose Sister Husband is
surprisingly bland and uninteresting.
Although it is certainly a flawed movie, I nonetheless find myself 
recommending "Where The Heart Is". It's not often a movie can succeed so 
totally on the basis of its characters, but that is the case here. Many 
will find the film's unlikely elements off-putting, and I am 
hard-pressed to disagree. But this is the kind of movie that is best 
watched with your brain in the "off" position. Its target is the 
audience's heart, and in this respect it hits a bulls-eye.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/WhereTheHeartIs.html
--
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, http://www.joblo.com/
This is the third Saturday night "sneak preview" that I've seen in the past
month, and the third "audience-friendly" flick of the bunch. Of course, it
only makes sense to preview movies which will most likely have the Jones'
recommending it to their co-workers come Monday morning water cooler time,
and such tactics certainly didn't hurt either KEEPING THE FAITH or RETURN TO
ME, which both received great word of mouth (also known as "free
advertising" in the marketing world). So will the masses enjoy this one?
Read on...
PLOT:
An uneducated Southern teen, abandoned by her mom, gets dumped once again,
this time by her dumbass boyfriend, at a local Wal-Mart, barefoot and
pregnant. The resourceful girl manages to live inside the market for about
six weeks, ends up delivering the baby at the store and must ultimately
learn to survive despite the cavalcade of obstacles which continue to be
thrown her way.
CRITIQUE:
The white-trash feel good hit of the year! Harumph...okay seriously,
although many will ultimately dismiss this film as the grand-daddy TV movie
of the week, I enjoyed much of it based solely on the excellent performances
put forth by five great actresses. Natalie Portman, leaving Queen Amidala in
the dust, with a subdued performance, just begging people to love her even
more than they do now. Ashley Judd, looking sexy without even trying, with a
great supporting role as the surrogate big sister to Portman, a woman who
probably needs more help than anyone in this film. Stockard Channing, Rizzo
to me always, with not a whole lot of time on the screen, but certainly a
lot of punch in her few moments. Joan Cusack, a woman who can't help but
deliver great performances one after the other, with another cool and funny
character, not as goofy as usual, but entertaining just the same. And Sally
Field, a woman who spends no more than five minutes in this film, with a
dead-on manifestation of the ultimate white-trash mommy dearest. And the men
you may ask?
Well, it's probably better if you didn't ask, since the world in which these
women live apparently doesn't provide for many decent men. That is, if you
don't count the old man who boinks Ms. Channing on the kitchen table every
now and again. Granted, the film certainly does play out like the ultimate
soap opera, but in the end, nothing really bored me. I had a few laughs here
and there, shed a couple of internal "guy-tears", yessiree-bobee, and golly
gee, who the heck wouldn't want to watch these two beautiful leading ladies
prance around the big screen all day long. I know I sure wouldn't mind. And
is it just me, or did Natalie Portman actually start looking like Ashley
Judd in a few choice scenes? But enough about that. In the end, most anyone
should be appreciative as to the sentiments which carry Portman's character
through the tough times, learning as she goes along and ultimately making
the best out of what she's been handed. It certainly is a triumph of the
spirit (am I quoting Oprah now?).
So piss on me all you want if you think I am recommending this film solely
on the extreme appeal of the actresses, but there are many reasons why some
movies work and others don't, and a lot of it has to do with the
performances. This one nails that door down shut, whilst also providing us
with a touch of humor, a touch of drama, and a touch of love. Of course, I
also thought Natalie Portman looked kinda sexy while she was preggers, but
that's a subject which only my psychiatrist can explain. Either way, I'm a
sick man but the film is still charming. You go, girl!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Unsure about whether or not she wants to continue her career as an actress,
Natalie Portman is currently attending Harvard University full-time,
studying in psychology. According to her, she will not act in any other
films, besides the two Star Wars prequels, over the next four years, so that
she could concentrate on her studies. She once said that when she "got
older", she would like to be a doctor just like her father. Natalie was born
in Jerusalem, Israel, moved to the States at the age of 3, and uses her
grandmother's maiden name (Portman), to protect her privacy. She's also
fluent in French, Hebrew and Japanese. Boy-oh-boy...is there anything this
great girl can't do?! Wow.
In case you're like me and wondered where you'd seen the "nice guy" in this
movie before, the character of Forney played by James Frain, he recently
played Ben Affleck's good friend in REINDEER GAMES. Natalie Portman's
character is superstitious about the number 5 in this movie. In the novel on
which this movie is based, written by Billie Letts, the lead character is
actually superstitious of the number 7.
This is the directorial debut of Matt Williams. He is best known as the
co-creator of TV's "Roseanne" show and "Home Improvement".
This film was originally titled HOME IS WHERE THE HEART IS, which might've
been a better idea considering that Paul Newman's WHERE THE MONEY IS was
released just last week.

Author
David N. Butterworth
If home is where the heart is, then Novalee Nation's home is the rambling,
timber-framed ranch house she builds in Sequoyah, Oklahoma.  Yet Novalee
did not spring from such lavish roots.
Pregnant and penniless in her tender teenage years, Novalee and her
fly-by-night boyfriend Willy Jack Pickens do what many pregnant and
penniless Tennessee teenagers do--head out to California with its promise
of a new life and new opportunities.  Instead, Novalee's dream is shattered
when Willy Jack abandons her at a wayside Wal-Mart, and it's at that
Wal-Mart, during the last of many illegal sleepovers, that Novalee's baby
is born.
Her "Wal-Mart baby" becomes the toast of Sequoyah and, upon the advice of
the store's resident photographer, Novalee gives her daughter a strong
name: Americus.
This is just the beginning for Novalee, and just the beginning of "Where
the Heart Is," one of those "dramadies" that follows many years--here it's
about five--in the life of its protagonist, watching her grow, be
challenged, fail, fall, love and learn, and all that Big Stuff that
confronts us on our journey through the backroads--and the Wal-Mart parking
lots--of life.  And "Where the Heart Is" is indeed a journey full of ups
and down.  So many ups and downs, in fact, that the movie soon settles into
a predictable pattern--good stuff happens, bad stuff happens, good stuff
happens, etc.  A little variety from the screenwriters would have helped.
That screenplay, by the team of Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel ("Father's
Day," "A League of Their Own," "Splash"), is based on the best-selling
novel by Billie Letts, and is often times guilty of succumbing to forced
humor, predictable outcomes, and unnecessary contrivances (Novalee's
illogical fear of the number five, for example).
But the film is saved time and time again by some deft direction by
newcomer Matt Williams and many exemplary performances, none the least of
which is Natalie Portman as Novalee.
Portman carries the weight of the film on her young shoulders and its a
lot to ask of the 18-year old, who until now has mainly played supporting
roles (in such films as "Beautiful Girls," "Star Wars: Episode I - The
Phantom Menace," and the recent "Anywhere But Here").  "Where the Heart Is"
is her film through and through, and even though the writing is a little
schizophrenic at times, she couldn't ask for a finer supporting cast.
Complementing Portman is a wonderful ensemble of actresses who take
potentially clichéd roles and turn them into characters brimming with life
and vitality.
There's Stockard Channing as Sister Husband who takes Novalee
in--weather-beaten, maternal, alcoholic; Ashley Judd as Novalee's
ever-pregnant friend and confidante, Lexie--Judd grows into her character
well; Joan Cusack as a hard-boiled talent agent who hooks up with Willy
Jack--it's a small part but a good one; and Sally Field as Novalee's
worthless, state-fleeing mother.  All four are excellent, and Field is
probably better in her one scene here than in her last ten movies put
together!  Yes, there are men in this movie, but they simply cannot compete.
Is "Where the Heart Is" a chick flick?  Sure.  But it's also a better than
average film that should appeal to just about anyone with a heart beating
in their breast.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb
