Title
Review for Manon des sources (1986)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Pedro Sena
And this is where the story really starts.  Manon, now a grown teenager
decides
to take her revenge in her own hands, on the people who destroyed her
father.
With the help of an outsider boyfriend they begin planning their attack,
until
the old farmer's accomplice is found out and kills himself.  At that point
the
old farmer is lost, and has little strength to keep up the chore of plugging
the well every time it swells up.  The problems mount until 2/3 of the way
the film drops a brick on your head.
An elder woman, who lives elsewhere, comes to visit.  She was one of the old
farmer's flames, and dearly loved him.  She loved him so much that when she
got pregnant she kept the child.  And she tells the story of the child
growing
up away from dad.  And in the meantime Yves Montand's face begins to turn
sad, that the woman he loved the most, never told him the story before, and
they never married,  which they both wanted.
He absolves himself, apologizes to Manon, and clears himself before he dies,
a disappointed man, sad in love, and sadder in life.
The beauty of this film is the turnaround between what is really a set of
criminal actions, and the kharma which begets him.  What he did to others,
he
now pays in full unto himself.  The suffering he applied to others, he now
has to face in full.  And he does, thus showing his strength and ability.
Manon and her husband unplug the well, the town is happy, and the prosperity
will now start.
It isn't often that a story is told, and keeps you in, only to find out that
all that matters is not gold.  And when it does, the story has to deal with
it without throwing it away.  This film does, and delivers with as much
beauty
as there is.
If you have the patience to see this film, do so.  You will be stunned, but
you will like it.  It delivers, like most films don't.
A MUST SEE.  But it only makes good sense if you see both films, since the
first film explains the outcome and actions of the second film.  SUBTITLES,
you say, so what. A film is a film, and to take care of the action like this
novel does is an accomplishment not often done in film.  This is LITERATURE
at
its best on film.  This is not ENTERTAINMENT.  And as literature, it teaches
and helps us along.
ENJOY IT.  The Acting is superb, and this was Yves Montand best role ever.
He
won several international awards for it.  It's a tour the force, and a real
shame that he gets ignored for the Oscars.  There isn't much better work
around that can stand up to this kind of material.  Brilliantly written and
taken care of with just as much care.  Wonderful music and visuals through
out, as it has 'poetic' moments every now and then, giving us the seers a
chance to catch our breath, and evaluate what went on.
If you like good work, this is as good as it gets, or are likely to find.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     As anyone who has read my Seattle Film Festival reviews knows, I am a
prejudiced fellow.  And one of my biggest prejudices is French films.  I point
to their comedies and groan; I point to their dramas and grouse about
characters who I couldn't give a damn about philosophizing for hours on end
about their own petty problems (at least MY DINNER WITH ANDRE had Wally Shawn).
Sure, it's an ignorant generality to make, and I generally go to a film
regardless of national origin, but if I'm at the Festival and there's two films
of interest and one of them's French...
     What I *will* say for French films is that when they make an exception to
my bigotry, they *really* make an exception.  DIVA was an addiction for me -- I
think I saw it more times than STAR WARS.  I played LA WALLY to all hours of
the night.  I looked around for those silly blue liquid slo-mo wave machines.
The guy in the white Rolls updated The Lone Ranger to a form I could actually
enjoy again.  It was one of those films that marks a year, rather than
visa-versa.
     Well, I just completed the two-part adaptation of Pagnol's WATER OF THE
HILLS, and while I'm not infatuated with it, I am enamored of it, not to
mention being blown away and in a state of utmost admiration -- this is an
amazing film, and you should not miss it.  As many of you know, MANON OF THE
SPRING is the second part of a two-film story begun in JEAN DE FLORETTE.  I saw
the first film a year and a half ago at the Seattle Film Festival, and was
impressed and moderately entertained with its lush photography and its
demonstration of how the smallest evils could be the worst.  MANON takes the
basis of the plot in JEAN DE FLORETTE and amplifies the events of the first
film into one of the finest films I have seen this year.  PASCALI'S ISLAND was
classic tragedy being played basically on one instrument (Ben Kingsley); in
MANON, the tragedy is a symphony of photography, music, direction by Claude
Berri, and the featured performer being Yves Montand.  It is romantic, it is
heart-rending, it gives you characters whom you feel the full spectrum of
emotions for during the film's length: hatred, contempt, pity, and sympathy.
The layers of irony in this film are laid one atop another until the entire
story of JEAN DE FLORETTE has been rotated 180 degrees, and the phrase "what
goes around, comes around" is etched in your memory alongside the characters.
     The acting is good on almost all fronts: Emanuelle Beart as the grown
daughter of the hunchback Jean de Florette, who has her revenge on those
responsible for her father's death in ways both ironic and innocent, and Daniel
Auteuill as the nephew of Cesar whose adherence to his uncle's policies comes
back to haunt him in a multitude of ways.  But the performance that I will
always associate with this film, with both films, is Yves Montand as Cesar, a
casually cruel man cursed with seeing his great sin turned against him in every
manner possible.  Impersonally, one would say that he gets what he deserves in
the end, but this film and Montand delineate his character so well that I was
left thinking that *no* one deserved this kind of fate.
     But the quality of this film is not limited to the actors.  The
photography uses the wide screen to its full effect, and it lingers on people
and events and the gorgeous scenery with genius and often with perfection.
Berri directs a wedding scene towards the end which is amazing; its impact to
the plot had me holding my breath, but the way it was shot -- the wedding party
having their picture taken, their attention arrested by Cesar's approach -- is
one of those bits of cinematography that will be associated with the very best,
like the Amish rising from the wheat in the opening of WITNESS or James Dean on
the windmill in GIANT.  It has all the beauty of a painting, but is
strengthened by the fluid nature of film -- something which is uncommon in the
cinema today, where motion seems to be a reason to film in and of itself.  The
music score is as beautiful as the camera work; DOES ANYONE KNOW IF IT'S
AVAILABLE IN THE U.S.  YET?!!
     I came away from MANON OF THE SPRING feeling as if I had seen a parable
about the wages of sin precisely and beautifully illustrated, using characters
both real and larger-than-life.  Pride, greed, insensitivity to your
neighbor ... all run through MANON as much more than concepts or morality.  The
portrayal of Hell that I have always found most appropriate is a state that men
and women build for themselves with their own actions; these two films reflect
the type of common cruelty that is no less mean because it is widespread, and
then pen the originators in with their own crimes, caging them with the bones
of their victim.  It is tragedy, and entertainment, and (yes) art, and I had a
damn fine time watching it.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
[There are two back issues that reviewed JEAN DE FLORETTE, the film that
preceded MANON: 00089 and 00149.  In addition, Mark did a review that was not
posted here but is also available.  Send mail to movies-request@mtgzy.att.com
to request them.  -ecl]
     A few months ago I reviewed JEAN DE FLORETTE, the film that makes up
the first half of the film adaptation of the novel of the same name by
Marcel Pagnol.  I refused to rate JEAN DE FLORETTE by itself because, unlike
some reviewers, I did not feel it stood by itself as a story.  The story
proceeds to a natural breaking point, but a point unsatisfying as an end of
a story.  MANON OF THE SPRING continues the story years later.  It works
only slightly better as a self-contained story and probably should not be
rated by itself either.  We have essentially a single film and the parts
should be separated by at most an intermission of an hour or so.  I cannot
help feeling that even more of the story would fit together for me had I not
allowed so long a time to elapse between seeing the two films.
     As MANON OF THE SPRING begins, Manon has grown into a beauty, but has
grown up a little wild in the hills where her father tried to build his
farm.  There is some question as to how much she knows of the events that
happened when she was a young girl.  Knowledge that the audience assumed she
already knew comes to her as a revelation that brings her to tears.  It is
only then that she starts plotting a revenge that I had earlier assumed she
had years to think about.  the story is engrossing and credible through most
of the film.  Then suddenly the plot twists again under the all-too-obvious
hand of the storyteller.  Rather than a solid drama, the film swerves into
melodrama trying too hard for too contrived an ending.
     But while the ending damages the credibility and dramatic power of the
story, it cannot damage the beautiful portrait of French village life.  This
is a film in which the background is as compelling as the foreground.  In
the final analysis, how people live is of more interest than what the people
do.  And the characters become more interesting as well.  Ugolin, who is
little more than a sidekick in the earlier, comes into his own as a
character.  His love for Manon, the woman he had wronged years earlier, is
pitiful and yet compelling.  The viewer almost hopes that he can be forgiven
the past and win Manon.
     JEAN DE FLORETTE and MANON OF THE SPRING together make up a very good
story that continues for nearly four hours without dragging.  Rate the pair
+2 on the -4 to +4 scale.  If you can manage it, see the two together.

Author
Wayne Citrin
     Just caught a local sneak preview yesterday of MANON OF THE SPRING, the 
second part of JEAN DE FLORETTE.  I gave JEAN DE FLORETTE a favorable (3 stars
out 4) review about a month ago, and reported that it seemed to stand on its
own even though it was the first part of a two-part work.  In this it differs
from MANON OF THE SPRING, which I believe cannot be properly appreciated
without having seen the first part.  I don't want to give away too much of the
plot, since it may spoil it for those who haven't seen JEAN DE FLORETTE, but it
is safe to report that MANON OF THE SPRING is the story of the revenge taken by
the daughter of Jean on Papet and Ugolin, which is to be expected by those who
saw the first film.  The way in which this revenge unfolded was somewhat of a
surprise (at least to me), although what was not a surprise was the way in
which the second film clarifies the personal relationships that were only
hinted at in the first film.
     MANON OF THE SPRING moves more quickly than JEAN DE FLORETTE, due to the
larger number of locations and characters and the broader sweep of the plot,
which takes in the whole town, unlike the first film which concentrated on the
struggle over a single farm.  The acting and production are up to the high
standards of the first film and, if anything, the portrayal of the dynamics of
provincial village life in southern France between the wars is even better.
Again, the characters are well-rounded and well-motivated, even the nominal
villains.  
     Ideally, the best way to see this film is as a double feature with an 
intermission, as I did last night.  Seeing MANON OF THE SPRING alone is less
satisfying, particularly if one has not seen JEAN DE FLORETTE.  For those who
have seen JEAN DE FLORETTE, however, I give MANON OF THE SPRING the same three
stars out of four.
