Title
Review for Volere volare (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Alan Jay
Shown at the 35th London Film Festival.
Directors: Maurizo Nichetti, Guido Manuli
Leading Players: Maurizo Nichetti, Angela Finocchiare, Patrizio Roversi.
Italy 1991
Capsule: After THE ICICLE THIEF Nichetti continues his exploration of
mixing reality and fantasy with VOLERE, VOLARE a film in which the
main character (Nichetti) evolves with the animated films he dubs.  +1.5
     VOLERE, VOLARE has Nichetti's look and feel all over it.  He is
star, writer, director and producer of this film and here he plays a
wimpish sound technician fascinated by real sounds and their use for the
cartoon films he adds effects to.  Nichetti's character is obsessively
devoted to that perfect sound and the first half hour or so of the film
is devoted to slapstick style views as he gets the perfect sounds, which
we later see him use while dubbing a cartoon.
     The story revolves around this reclusive character his brother
with whom he shares a sound studio and who dubs porno movies (or as he
describes them, "artistic") and the love interest of a young girl who
provides pleasure for others in some perverse and hilarious ways.
     The film drags slightly towards the latter half of the movie as it
runs out of steam on one track before taking up the final idea brought
to first view in WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT the mixing of live action and
cartoons (with shadows).  The film was originally conceived nine years
ago but Nichetti was unable to raise finance for this film due to the
feeling that cartoons are for children.  When ROGER RABBIT was
successful he was able to raise the $4 million it took to bring this to
the screen.
     Overall this is an enjoyable film with some great visual gags --
especially in the first half of the film -- so if it gets distribution
go see it.
     The London Film Festival Continues until 21 November at the
National Film Theatre and around London.  For further information call
071-928 3232.
