Title
Review for Dead Ringers (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Craig Good
     David Cronenberg doesn't make "easy" films.  He made the best ever Stephen
King movie, THE DEAD ZONE, and THE FLY was one of the best films of 1986.  The
latter was, in many circles, maligned or simply ignored just because it was a
"horror" film.  Hmph.  Beneath the goo, glop and prosthetics was a
psychological thriller.  Now Cronenberg brings us DEAD RINGERS, a pure
psycho-thriller.  He proves that what *really* frightens you is in your mind,
not your eye.
     Steve Upstill observed that this film shows a whole new level of maturity
for Cronenberg.  His direction is deft, sure and polished.  There isn't a note
out of place.  His sense of visual style, so striking in THE FLY, has evolved
into a subtle, strong support for the story.  While giving Jeff Goldblum and
Jeremy Irons the tremendous credit that is their due, I cannot help but wonder
if it's entirely a coincidence that they each turned in such amazing
performances under the same director.
     Irons is simply drop-dead stunning in his dual role as the Mantle twins.
Beverly and Eliot are brilliant gynecologists with a successful fertility
clinic.  They are identical twins; so identical that they can share everything:
patients, business appointments, and women.  Irons, who you may remember from
THE MISSION, has such a firm grasp of these complex characters that you can
often tell within the first few seconds of a scene which twin is which.  Aided
by a seamless, perfectly-executed motion control split-screen system -- and by
Cronenberg -- Irons does work worthy of the *two* Academy Awards for which he
should be nominated.  By the end of the film it's difficult to think of him as
just one man.  He is supported by the always fabulous Genevieve Bujold, in her
role as the infertile, promiscuous actress.
     You've noticed by now that I haven't talked about the story.  That's
because I hate spoilers in reviews.  Let me just encourage you to go to what is
a strong contender for my top ten list this year.  But let me do it with a
warning:  DEAD RINGERS is an intense psychological experience.  It is
disturbing and tragic.  Nobody can give you the creeps like Cronenberg.  There
are images and feelings which will stay with you for quite a while.  If you
insist on leaving the theatre singing a merry song you should steer clear.  If
you like being engrossed, awed, repulsed, frightened and skillfully manipulated
then make tracks to the movie house.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  David Cronenberg's latest is an
     adaptation of the novel TWINS by Wood and Geasland with
     Jeremy Irons playing twin brothers.  The acting and the
     technical work are good but the storyline is slow, muddled,
     confusing, and self-contradictory.  Rating: 0.
     Every two or three films David Cronenberg takes another few steps up
the ladder of recognition.  His STEREO and CRIMES OF THE FUTURE are
experiments that went wrong.  I did not find them worth watching.  Then came
SHIVERS (a.k.a. THE PARASITE MURDERS, a.k.a. THEY CAME FROM WITHIN), RABID,
AND THE BROOD.  These are diverting for horror film buffs, but not actually
good films.  SCANNERS and VIDEODROME were actually good and earned him a
respectable following in his own genre.  With THE DEAD ZONE, THE FLY, and
DEAD RINGERS, he is building respect from general audiences.  In fact, until
very near the end DEAD RINGERS is not really a horror film at all.  It is
something else; perhaps "surreal" comes the closest to describing it.  In
other ways it is unlike other Cronenberg.  Of all Cronenberg's major films
only THE DEAD ZONE has less blood and less observable deformity.  Note that
the deformity does not fit into the plot, but seems sort of plastered on
and, unlike in most Cronenberg films, is limited solely to dialogue and some
absurd renderings of medical instruments.  One wonders if the mutation plot
was even in the source of the story (TWINS by Bari Wood and Jack Geasland).
     The story is about identical twin gynecologists (Beverly Mantle (played
by Jeremy Irons) and his brother Elliot (played by Jeremy Irons).  These
twins are so identical that even people who know them well cannot tell them
apart (partially due to the fact they they even have facial marks in the
same places).  (Of the two actors, Irons is probably the more charismatic
and often shamelessly steals scenes from Irons.  From childhood Beverly and
Elliot have shared interests, classes, experiences, even lovers.  They
imitate each other so well that they can hand lovers back and forth without
the lovers suspecting.  Then a new lover comes along, Film star Clare Niveau
(played by Genevieve Bujold) who discovers she has been handed off.  She
chooses one of the twins over the other and that asymmetry opens a Pandora's
box in the brothers' relationship.
     DEAD RINGERS is a spotty affair that sometimes makes sense and
sometimes does not.  Irons does as good a job of split-screen acting as has
ever been done.  And makes no mistake, that is difficult acting.  Nobody
nominated for an acting Oscar this year will have worked harder than Irons,
yet the chances are virtually non-existent that Irons will get industry
recognition for his part in DEAD RINGERS.  But the plot of the film is
plodding and ponderous.  Some things that happen are never very well
explained.  In some scenes it is unclear which brother we are seeing.  The
final scene of the film is flatly impossible given what has led up to it.
Because of the flaws, this gets a low 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
