Title
Review for Cleopatra's Second Husband (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Christopher Null
     Ever had a houseguest that wouldn't leave?  You don't know the half
of it.  A striking departure from films like Pacific Heights,
Cleopatra's Second Husband cuts deep and pours salt in the wound -- a
harrowing story that goes from semi-romantic comedy to gruesome thriller
without looking back.
     Jon Reiss's debut feature tells the story of Robert Marrs (Paul
Hipp), an independently wealthy and prissy photographer unable to
impregnate his wife Hallie (Bitty Schram).  When they leave for a short
trip, Zack (Boyd Kestner) and Sophie (Pitch Black's Radha Mitchell) are
enlisted to care for the house.  But upon their return, the place is a
mess, the fish are dead, and Zack & Sophie don't look to leave.
     Things get spicy when Robert has a tryst with Sophie, his wife
leaves, Sophie follows suit, and Zack becomes a devil in the flesh, soon
turning Robert into a zombified slave.  What happens next I won't spoil,
but suffice it to say the best is yet to come.
     Cleopatra is startling in its originality, and while it's only 93
minutes long, the movie feels epic in its scope, thanks to all the
twists and turns.  In other words, it's destined to become a cult
classic.
     The film's few failings -- atrocious sound design that leaves
numerous lines inaudible, too many scenes that chat about rather that
show the action, and a draggy first act -- are largely forgivable.  In a
nutshell, if you're a fan of independent film, seek out Cleopatra's
Second Husband and see if your jaw doesn't hit the floor like mine.
Director: Jon Reiss
Producer: Jacqui De La Fontaine, Jill Goldman, David Rubin
Writer: Jon Reiss
Starring: Paul Hipp, Boyd Kestner, Bitty Schram, Radha Mitchell, Alexis
Arquette, Jonathan Penner, Nancye Ferguson
http://www.indicanpictures.com/Cleo.htm
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Murali Krishnan
Retrospective: Cleopatra's Second Husband (1998)
In any abusive relationship, the two involved parties usually fall
into the clearly defined roles of abuser and victim. These are most
commonly associated with the abusive husband/abused wife scenario, but
aspects of these archetypes can be found in any human relationship
where one person exerts control over the other. This film is a study
of the dynamics of such a relationship.
The story begins with Robert Marrs (Paul Hipp) and his wife, Hallie
(Bitty Schram), leaving for a vacation. Needing someone to look after
their house while they are away, they decide to let friend-of-a-friend
Zack (Boyd Kestner) housesit, along with his girlfriend, Sophie (Radha
Mitchell). The Marrs' relationship is not outwardly fragile, but it
has grown strained, exacerbated by the couple's inability to conceive
a child.
Upon returning early from the vacation, Robert and Hallie discover
that although the house has been adequately taken care of, their
guests have not been completely conscientious. For example, the
tropical fish have died from lack of care. Although Robert wants to
get rid of Zack and Sophie, Hallie is more forgiving, and she is
sympathetic to their inability to find a place to live (they have just
moved to the area), so she invites them to stay with them temporarily.
She quickly regrets the decision as their intrusions provide the
catalyst that deteriorates her relationship with Robert. When Hallie
leaves, Robert allows Zack and Sophie to remain. Eventually, the
relationship between Robert and Zack slowly evolves into victim and
abuser, respectively. The decay is slow, and by the time that Zack
realizes what has happened, he has no power to change the
relationship.
The story is necessarily disturbing, as the viewer helplessly watches
Robert slowly sink into the morass of Zach's manipulative personality.
By intentionally adopting a pace that is slow and a mood that is dark,
the film incarcerates the viewer in Robert's shrinking world. Robert
would not have chosen to enter the psychological prison that his
relationship with Zach becomes, but he is oblivious to the slow
progression.
The acting performances must be noted for their skillful execution.
The role of Zach required Kestner to expose the personality of the
character over time, and he adeptly executes this without allowing
Zach to balloon into a caricature. The role of Robert entails very
subtle challenges. Hipp needed to communicate the laconic Robert's
reasons for entering the relationship with Zach. With the exception of
the garrulous Hallie, the characters are expressed in an atmosphere of
minimal dialog. Without the benefit of having the characters verbally
express their inner thoughts, the actors need to have them
communicated through physical expression. This also indicates that
writer and director Jon Reiss was willing to work hard to express the
story without taking convenient shortcuts. Add in the fact that Reiss
needed to have the audience relate to characters that are not
particularly likeable, and it is clear that the film was carefully
constructed and proficiently executed.
The meaning of the title is not apparent in the film's story, and one
must credit the director for not spoonfeeding it to the viewers. It is
a reference to the relationship between Cleopatra and Marc Anthony in
the 1963 Hollywood film production Cleopatra.
Recommended. The film is a noir psychological thriller. It is engaging
enough to keep viewers involved in the slow progression of the story.
The depiction of degradation in the abusive relationship is
disturbing, but because of director Jon Reiss' focus, they do not feel
licentious.
--0-1189641421-966401586=:27754--

Author
Steve Rhodes
Robert Marrs (Paul Hipp) finds his life a little complicated lately.  
His wife, Hallie (Bitty Schram) is about to drive him crazy with her 
obsession about finally getting pregnant.  And they are having trouble 
getting their friends of friends, who have been housesitting for them, 
to leave.
CLEOPATRA'S SECOND HUSBAND, a mixture of IN THE COMPANY OF MEN, 
BABYFEVER, and PACIFIC HEIGHTS, is a sharply written and partially 
autobiographical black comedy by writer and director Jon Reiss.  Reiss 
was at our screening and said that the first, and sunniest of the three 
acts, is based on his life while the second two acts are fictional.  
A photographer with a nice house, thanks to a little money and some good 
investments, Robert Marrs is a wimp who's easy to push around.  His wife 
knows this and commands him like a lap dog.  "I'm ovulating!  Come on!  
Come on!" she barks frantically at her husband from across the house.  
Now is the one time a month that they do it, so she needs him to get in 
the bedroom fast.  Having sex with Hallie is about as much fun as doing 
the laundry and is only allowed once a month because she wants him at 
maximum potency when her ovulation test stick turns blue.
Besides being tyrannical, "middle-aged" Hallie is quite cynical, since 
she says she "is about 35" -- 32 to be exact.  Pregnancy is her one 
goal, and she's going about it with a vengeance.  "Your chances go down 
ten percent every year until you reach 40, when your chances are better 
of getting hit by a bus," she explains.
The dynamics of Robert and Hallie's relationship gets further 
complicated when their housesitting couple does not leave after the 
Marrs return from vacation.  Boyd Kestner plays an IN THE COMPANY OF 
MEN-like character named Zack Taylor, who sits in the Marrs's house 
while letting their fish die.  HIGH ART's Radha Mitchell plays Zack's 
girlfriend, Sophie, who lives with him.  You can immediately tell the 
other couple is bad since Zack smokes like a chimney and they don't 
recycle.  All four of the actors in the purposely-claustrophobic tale 
are well cast.
Radha Mitchell is terrific as the alluring female guest.  While Robert 
lies bored and sleepless in bed with his DOA wife, he is forced to 
listen to Zack and Sophie's enthusiastic and erotic grunting in the next 
room.  
Sophie makes no secret of her sexual desires for Robert.  The two female 
characters are nicely contrasted.  Both are attractive, but the wife is 
dominating and bitchy toward Robert whereas Sophie is supportive and 
seductive.  Robert's conundrum then is choosing between his safe, 
good-looking and boring wife and his no better looking but much sexier 
and exciting houseguest.  What happens next is obvious even if the 
reactions aren't.
When Hallie catches her husband in an extramarital act, she doesn't say 
quite what you might expect.  "I can't believe you can do this to me, 
Robert," she yells quite naturally, but then throws in a zinger, which 
reveals her true feelings.  "I'll be ovulating in a few days now."  
Hallie always knows what is most important to her, and it isn't Robert.
>From this long setup, the body of the movie takes several twists, some 
surprising and some predictable, but all quite satisfying.  The 
sophistication of the production belies its modest budget.  Shot in a 
house in an 18-day shoot, it still backs the wallop of a movie with much 
bigger stars and budget.
Most reviews end with the critic telling you what the movie is about.  
This time let me quote from the writer and director who summarizes it 
well.  "The movie is about personal responsibility," Reiss said.  Robert 
lets himself be drawn into a hellish web, and it is his responsibility 
and no one else's.  (Reiss also explained the film's goofy title, which 
makes little sense and still doesn't after you've heard his rationale.  
The good news is that he is willing to change it before the movie is 
released later this year if someone can come up with a better one.)
CLEOPATRA'S SECOND HUSBAND runs a fast 1:32.  It is not rated but would 
be an R for sex, profanity, and violence and would be fine for older 
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Laura Clifford
When Robert (Paul Hipp, "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil") and
his overbearing wife Hallie (Bitty Schram, "Kissing a Fool") plan a 
babymaking trip to the country, friends of friends Zack (Boyd Kestner,
G.I. Jane") and Sophie (Radha Mitchell, "Pitch Black") move in to take
care of their dog and exotic tropical fish.  When they get home, they
encounter disarray, dead fish, seduction and psychological game playing
in feature debut writer/director Jon Reiss' "Cleopatra's Second Husband."
Reiss claims to have based his tale on a true life housesitting incident
combined with Marc Anthony's decline in the wake of his passion for
Cleopatra.  He makes no mention of the Dutch film (and its American remake)
"The Vanishing," although clearly it inspired his third act.
After Zack and Sophie declare they're unable to find their own place in LA,
Robert quickly becomes enthralled by sexy Sophie and Hallie departs after 
catching the two together.  Zack seems perfectly willing to share Sophie,
but when he forces himself on Robert, Sophie leaves in disgust.  Zack
continues to dominate Robert, even buying him an apron, while clouding
his true intentions with a show of friendship and camaraderie.  Eventually
Robert wises up and plots an elaborate revenge.
While the script contains some good (albeit unoriginal) ideas, the story
is so oddly executed that it frequently seems weird for weirdness' sake.
Robert, a photographer existing on inheritted money, stops to photograph
maggots on roadkill during his country idyll.  'Maggots and dead things -
I like it.' says Sophie later as she watches him develop the picture.
This is strange and offputting, but leads absolutely nowhere, nor does
it provide any character illumination.
The only character who's the least bit likeable is the promiscuous Sophie,
yet we wonder how she ended up with evil Zack and what their history was.
Robert is a henpecked schlmemiel who's introduced hosting a dinner party
of annoying yuppies impressed with pretense.  Hallie is unbearable and 
joyless, demanding sex once a month only in order to get pregnant, because
that's the way it's done.  Zack is a slovenly satyr and a leech.  The cast
can't be faulted as they all do a good job playing their characters.
"Cleopatra's Second Husband" would make an OK diversion for late night cable,
but as a theatrical feature it's appeal will be extremely limitted.  The
film completely loses its stream in its final act which is unsatisfying
and unappealing.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
