Title
Review for Opportunity Knocks (1990/I)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
        In OPPORTUNITY KNOCKS, Dana Carvey takes a stale story line and
turns it into an entertaining vehicle for his comic charm.  The movie
relies on the oldest comedy gimmick in the book: the case of mistaken
identity.  Carvey plays a low-life con man who is mistaken for a wealthy,
Harvard-educated business wizard.  It's the perfect opportunity for a major
con.  He suckers manufacturing tycoon Robert Loggia into giving him a job.
He suckers gorgeous Julia Campbell into falling in love with him.  His con
is so good he even suckers himself.  Carvey forgets that he's really a
no-good bum only PRETENDING to be a suave, sophisticated yuppie.
        OPPORTUNITY KNOCKS is altogether cliched and implausible.  But that
doesn't stop the appealing cast from pulling the movie out of the gutter by
its bootstraps.  The film is a showcase for Carvey's comic genius.  It
allows him to be wild and goofy and to do impressions, everyone from George
Bush to a gas company inspector.  Carvey is so endearing and has so much
boyish charm that it's impossible not to root for him during his charades.
        Loggia is as charismatic as ever as the CEO of a company which
markets blow-dryers for public rest rooms.  He hopes that Carvey can revive
the company's sagging sales.  Campbell makes an impressive film debut as
Carvey's love-interest, Loggia's fiercely independent and intellectual
daughter.  Milo O'Shea is in fine form as Carvey's uncle and mentor, a
retired con man.
        In fact, all of the characters and actors in the film are
captivating, with only two notable exceptions.  Todd Graff has the
thankless task of playing Carvey's dumb sidekick, an annoying character who
is totally irrelevant to the story.  James Tolkan, playing a generic
gangster, is part of a distracting subplot involving the mafia.
        OPPORTUNITY KNOCKS falls far short of director Donald Petrie's
previous film, the wonderful sleeper MYSTIC PIZZA.  The difference, not
surprisingly, lies in the writing.  Alfred Uhry's screenplay for PIZZA was
subtle and profound.  Mitchel Katlin and Nat Bernstein lack Uhry's grace;
their screenplay for OPPORTUNITY KNOCKS is sloppy and forced, almost
haphazard.  Thankfully, Carvey is around to turn straw into gold.
