Title
Review for Abbaleh, Bo L'Luna Park (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Evelyn C. Leeper
THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT, directed by Stephan
Elliott, Australia, 1:42:
     This is a "road picture," but what a road!  Through the wide open
spaces of the center of Australia travels "Priscilla, Queen of the
Desert," an old and not very luxurious bus, along with Priscilla's
passengers, three drag queens on their way to a gig in Alice Springs.
They meet various people (including the obligatory meeting with native
Australians), have adventures, and reveal their personalities and
problems to each other along the way.
     This is a movie with a lot of style--not surprising, given the
occupation of the main characters.  In fact, one of the film's messages
seems to be that when it comes to style, drag queens have it all over
the rest of us.  (The scene as the bus pulls out of Sydney is hardly
subtle in this regard.)
     THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT has some things
to say, but its value lies in the interesting characters, especially
Terence Stamp as a transsexual drag queen past her prime, and the sheer
pleasure of watching flamboyance on a grand scale.  It may not be a
great film, but it certainly is a fun one.  Rating: +2 (-4 to +4).
THE SECRET ADVENTURES OF TOM THUMB, directed by Dave Borthwick, Great
Britain, 1:01:
     This is a very difficult film to describe.  It uses an animation
technique I can't recall seeing before in which the "live action"
actors are filmed in stop motion as well as the clay figures.  (Or
maybe they film the actors in the regular way, then remove some frames
and duplicate others.)  In any case this is fascinating from a visual
standpoint, but definitely not for children (in spite of what the title
might lead you to believe).  Tom lives in a very dark world, full of
disturbing images, swarms of strange insects, and unspeakable
scientific experiments.  It seems at times more like something out of
Franz Kafka than a children's fairy tale book.
     This is not for everyone's taste (though it played to an almost
full house here), and given its length (or lack thereof), is unlikely
to play in "normal" theaters anyway.  Look for this at theaters which
shown experimental film, film festivals, or perhaps science fiction
conventions (which seem a perfect venue for it).  Rating: +2 (-4 to
+4).
MESMER, directed by Roger Spottiswoode, Great Britain/Canada/Germany,
1:42:
     Franz Anton Mesmer has been considered both a charlatan and a
visionary. This film makes no definitive judgment, but seems to fall
into the visionary camp, albeit perhaps a misguided visionary.
     Played by Alan Rickman, Mesmer is a man who sees the practice of
medicine in his day (the 18th Century) as barbaric, which of course it
was.  The cure for almost every ill was to bleed the patient.  Mesmer
takes a different approach.  Calling on "animal magnetism," he attempts
to use magnetic currents and forces to cure his patients.  He achieves
some notable successes, but many of the cures seem to be temporary and
the patients relapse.
     Unfortunately, much of Mesmer's philosophy regarding his
treatments (the term "mesmerism" is never used) seems as bizarre today
as it did to the established medical professionals then.  It is left
for the audience to see the seeds of hypnotism, the power of
suggestion, holistic medicine, and the nature of psychosomatic
illnesses in Mesmer's explanations of the pull of the moon and magnetic
forces.  Although Rickman is very good (I refuse to call his portrayal
mesmerizing, though Lord knows someone will), and Amanda Ooms excellent
as his patient Maria Theresa Paradies, some of the supporting
characters are rather sketchily drawn.  In the end it is perhaps the
strangeness of Mesmer's philosophy which makes it difficult for
screen-writer Dennis Potter to give us a character we can understand.
Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
THE ADVOCATE, directed by Leslie Megahey, Great Britain, 1:35:
     The year is 1452.  The place is Abbeville, France. To this small
village comes Robert Courtois to serve as the advocate (the public
defender).  His first case is defending a man accused of killing his
wife's lover.  That goes pretty well.  Then he defends a woman accused
of witchcraft; that case does not go so well.  His third case is even
more peculiar by own standards, and we begin to see that what at first
seemed like isolated aberrations in the law are actually part of a
larger insanity.  Or as the priest says, "In a world where nothing is
reasonable, nothing can be said to be truly mad."
     Colin Firth as the advocate in this film (which I might describe
as "THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE Meets TWELVE ANGRY MEN") seems a bit
out of his depth in a cast containing Nicol Williamson as the local
seigneur, Ian Holm as the priest, Donald Pleasence as the local
prosecutor, and Michael Gough as the magistrate.  But then the
character of the advocate finds himself a bit out of his depth as well.
     It may seem odd to say that a mystery set in a period of
superstition, prejudice, and the Inquisition in France has some very
funny moments, but Megahey's script takes advantage of the weirdness
going on all around, and the actors carry the humor off quite well.
The supporting cast looks authentic to the era (perhaps more so than
most of the principals), although not quite to the level of the casting
in THE NAME OF THE ROSE.  If THE ADVOCATE occasionally has the look of
a made-for-television film, that may be in part due to the fact that
the BBC was one of its financiers, and also to the fact that Megahey's
background is in television and this is his first feature film.
     This is a very entertaining film that is (so far as I can tell)
historically accurate to its time period.  (For example, all the court
cases are based on actual court cases of the time.)  I recommend it
highly.  Rating: +3 (-4 to +4).
CYBERTEENS IN LOVE, directed by Brett Dowler, Canada, 1:33:
     Shot on video, this definitely has the look of a student film,
though technically the filmmakers were not students, but were working
under the auspices of British Columbia Film and the National Film Board
of Canada (Pacific Center).  The acting of some of the supporting cast
is mediocre to bad (although Carole Henshall is perfect as Kid Cutter).
The computer animation is fairly basic for today.  The staging of some
of the action sequences is pretty lame.  Even the basic plot is
unimaginative: girl escapes from state-run orphanage, finds love with
street-smart computer wiz, and gets involved in adventures and danger
in cyberspace.  But the script by John Dowler shows great imagination
and creativity in its use of "futurespeak."  For example, a rhetorical
question becomes an "answer-free question" and Su doesn't try to find
her family, she tries to "family-find."
     The film does have a lot of rough edges, but the dialogue helps
you past a lot of that, with its poetry and flow.  Rating: +1 (-4 to
+4).
TOTAL BALALAIKA SHOW, directed by Aki Kaurismaki, Finland, 0:56:
     One newspaper complained about the choice of this as one of the
free outdoor shows of the festival because they felt it was nothing but
an extended music video, and not even Canadian.  Of course, the same
could be said of WOODSTOCK, but wasn't--at least not by that writer.
In any case, we actually paid to be this indoors because 1) the free
showing was opposite THE ADVOCATE, and 2) rain was predicted for the
day of the free showing.  While the theater wasn't full, it still had
quite a respectable crowd for something that had just been shown for
free.
     On June 12, 1993, the largest stage ever erected in Finland was
set up in Senate Square (hey, we were just there!) for a joint concert
of the Leningrad Cowboys and the Alexandrov Red Army Chorus and Dance
Ensemble.  THE TOTAL BALALAIKA SHOW is the concert film made there by
noted Finnish director Aki Kaurismaki (who first introduced the
Leningrad Cowboys to the world in LENINGRAD COWOYS GO AMERICA).
     Songs included "Finlandia," "Together We Stand," "Volga Boatmen,"
"Happy Together," an absolutely wonderful rendition of "Delilah,"
"Knockin' on Heaven's Door," "Oh, Field," "Kalinka," "Gimme All Your
Lovin'" (with strains of the "Internationale" and the "Hallelujah
Chorus" added as background), "Sweet Home Alabama," "Dark Eyes," and
"Those Were the Days."
     I have to say that during "Happy Together" I found myself
comparing and contrasting this concert with "The Three Tenors."  It was
an even stronger feeling when the Russian soloist held the note in
"Kalinka" for what seemed like at least a minute.  I also got a real
feeling for the fact that the Cold War is over if the Red Army Chorus
is singing Western rock music, especially when they sang the lines from
Bob Dylan's "Knockin' on Heaven's Door": "Put my guns in the cold black
ground; I can't shoot them any more."
DADDY, COME TO THE FAIR, directed by Nitza Gonen, Israel, 1:16:
     One of the problems of reviewing a film about the Shoah
(Holocaust) is that the subject gives the film some element of
"untouchability"--it is very difficult to say anything negative about
it unless it is almost intentionally offensive.  But there are some
many mis-steps and misjudgments in the making of this made-for-
television documentary that I simply cannot recommend it.
     From the very beginning, or even before it in some sense, I think
there were problems.  This is a documentary of a man returning to
Poland, where his parents were murdered in the Holocaust.  With him
travel his son and his daughter, and the film (it's actually videotape,
but "film" has become generic) concentrates more on the son than on the
father.  It is true that during the trip, the relationship between the
son and the father undergoes a transformation, but how could they know
this would happen at the beginning of the shooting?  At time the camera
angles and other effects seem too studied, more suitable for a
narrative film than a documentary.  One almost gets the impression that
the entire project was the idea of the son, who just happens to be in
show business, and is more designed to promote his career than to focus
on his father.  Rating: 0 (-4 to +4).
(See general article for comments on KABLOONAK.)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Our fourth day is starting a bit rainy.  The nice thing about a
film festival is that if we get tired of all this cinema we can,
without guilt, just say "the heck with it" and go to the movies.  In
line for MESMER I am holding an umbrella over my head and Evelyn's.
There is room for a third so I edge over to include the woman ahead of
us in line.  We start a conversation and she is a Peruvian.  Her
husband who went off to get a pass to the film works for the National
Film Board of Canada and we get to talk with him about the board.  We
are particularly fond of Canadian animation like "Hot Stuff" and "The
Big Snit."  One of the things I ask to know a little more about is a
character who seems to run through a lot of Canadian animation.  It is
a cat who has shown up in many different National Film Board animations
and of late I have seen even on bags of potato chips.  That strikes me
as odd since the different filmmakers rarely use the same invented
character.  Apparently the cat was introduced in "The Cat Came Back,"
which I assume is based on the song about the unwanted cat who keeps
returning to his owner after the owner tries more and more desperate
measures to be rid of the thing.  The cat was used in other animations
and now seems to be a trademark of films in a given style from the Film
Board.  The Board is a non-profit government agency and which ran into
some controversy when private companies wanted to start using the cat
figure, like the potato chip company.  I imagine the controversy was
not what to do with the profits, though that entered into it, but would
this appear to be a government endorsement.
     Present for the premiere of MESMER were director Roger
Spottiswoode and Alan Rickman.  Rickman was very popular with the
audience.  He is a major film actor after playing in a particularly
good villain in DIE HARD, as well as appearing in CELLO (a.k.a. TRULY,
MADLY, DEEPLY), and the somewhat over-the-top sheriff in ROBIN HOOD,
PRINCE OF THIEVES.  (Though in that film Rickman had Costner to act as
a lightning rod.  Most audiences found it jarring to have Costner talk
with an American accent.  He certainly should have known what the
English accent sounds like.  It is what Nazis or ancient Greeks and
Romans sound like in so many films.  In any case it is probably
Rickman's worst performance, though the fault is more in that wretched
script.)
     Of course, having the director or even an actor on hand to discuss
the film could be very interesting, but that is what the press
conferences are for.  I guess that the audience likes to just see the
people involved with a film.  Ironically, actors are more popular than
directors.  Audiences get a real thrill seeing actors in their three-
dimensional form, particularly someone like Rickman who has been good
in some popular roles.  The directors come and say a few words and
usually disappear.  I suppose some can be looking at audience reaction
and some may go off for coffee.  Only a couple that I have seen so far
have been answering questions about the film afterward and I think that
the theaters discourage that behavior, since they have to follow a
schedule.  Generally the introductions are short.  Rickman welcomed the
audience in French and then translated into English saying "I THINK I
just said..."
     [A note on the following.  This review is being written at the
Montreal Film Festival.  I do not have materials to research Franz
Anton Mesmer so what dubious historical knowledge I have of Mesmer, I
have to take from the film.]  Roger Spottiswoode has directed films as
good as UNDER FIRE and last year's AND THE BAND PLAYED ON.  His lesser
films include TURNER AND HOOCH and STOP OR MY MOM WILL SHOOT.  His
latest is an odd film about one of history's more enigmatic
personalities, Franz Anton Mesmer, whose name has passed into common
usage for "mesmerism," a word used synonymously with "hypnotism."  It
is not clear, however, that the force Mesmer called "animal magnetism"
is hypnotism.  In Dennis Potter's screenplay what Mesmer uses does not
appear to be hypnotism or really any other technique as applied today.
Just how he cures pain is something mystical that would probably today
be ascribed to "power of suggestion."  But this had to have been a real
revelation in a time when the recommended treatment for hysteria-
related ailment was slicing the patient's arm and bleeding the patient
until he was no longer strong enough to be hysterical.
     The film opens with a tribunal of Paris doctors examining the
heretical techniques of Mesmer.  Unfortunately, the unfriendly medical
tribunal of hide-bound doctors is an all-too-familiar film stereotype
going back to the Frederic March DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE.  It starts
the film on a false note.  Mesmer is apparently reviewing in his memory
his own career and most of the story is told in flashback--also a bit
cliched.
     We find ourselves in Vienna sometime in the 1770s.  Mesmer is
already a controversial character: he cures the poor, or at least tries
to, in mystical ceremonies that often seem to work.  His approach is so
radically different from those of his contemporaries that he is
considered to be a charlatan.  Yet surprisingly often his methods are
effective.  Since Mesmer offers his services to the poor free and
rarely has a paying patient he must operate on funds provided by his
wealthy wife.  His wife and his dim-witted son or stepson are losing
their respect for the unsuccessful Mesmer.
     At a recital, famous blind pianist Marie Therese Paradis has a
hysterical fit.  The physicians want to bleed her right there in front
of the recital audience, but Mesmer finds he can calm her with his
mystical "animal magnetism" techniques.  Paradis becomes Mesmer's
patient and develops an emotional need for his attention and
treatments.  Parallels could be drawn to religious cults and indeed the
script sees Mesmer not so much as a hypnotist as perhaps a faith
healer.  The plot centers on Mesmer's treatment of Paradis and later
his career in a decadent Paris where he specializes in helping the rich
with complex mystical ceremonies.  Finally the French medical
establishment, no more receptive than the Austrians, calls upon Mesmer
to prove he is not a charlatan.  Through much of the film I found
myself wondering where Mesmer's theories had originated.
     There are several problems with the script, but absolutely nothing
wrong with Rickman's performance.  Mesmer should be charismatic and
hypnotic--in a word, "mesmerizing"--and pulls off his performance with
aplomb.  With the proper handling of the film, this could be Rickman's
best remembered performance.  Amanda Ooms as Maria Therese Paradis
brings to her role a sort of otherworldly quality.  Michael Nyman's
score is not memorable but it does create a proper mood.
     Spottiswoode occasionally seems to exaggerate on the side of the
melodramatic, though when dealing with a figure like Mesmer, can one be
sure?  Scenes of his cure techniques have a wild madhouse feel.  There
are sensationalist and bloody scenes of opening veins and bleeding
patients of a style one might find from Hammer Films of Britain.
     This is a spotty film with moments of real intelligence as well as
moment of pure sensationalism.  Initially I gave it a lower rating, but
on consideration I would rate it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
Dennis Potter, considered an influential force in British drama,
unfortunately did not live to see the film based on his script
completed.  He died last May.
     A word or two about the ideas of this film that might constitutea
spoiler.  For me the techniques used by Mesmer are so bizarre a major
attraction of the film would have been to find out the origin of
Mesmer's ideas.  Dennis Potter's script apparently was written
intending to tantalize the viewer with just that specific question.  He
structures the film to save that revelation for the final lines of the
film and then answers the question with a fascinating paradox.  It is
almost as if power of suggestion invented itself.  Mesmer is so
convinced that pain could not exist without a means to alleviate it
that he has used power of suggestion on himself to convince himself
there must be something like power of suggestion.  The other
interesting question the script plays with is, if you do not cure a
patient, but only make the patient imagine that he is cured, have you
not in fact cured the patient?  As a personal example I suffer badly
from the common cold unless I take Vitamin C.  If I do take the vitamin
the cold is usually very light by comparison.  I am told that VitaminC
does not help a cold, to which I respond it may be true, but I really
value the illusion that it is helping.
     MESMER played with "Intact," a short film by Turkish director
Seyhan Cecilya Derin.  It is about a Turkish woman whose family has
arranged a marriage for her falsely convincing her intended that she is
still a virgin.  Now they are arranging a medical operation to give him
the illusion that she was.  The main character is not happy being
treated as a commodity but meets another Turkish woman at the clinic
who has a different outlook on the operation.  The film touches on
themes of personal freedom and self-worth.
     I probably would have like to go for the press conference at 2PM
but we had tickets for MEN LIE opposite it.
     The title pretty much tells it all in this hypocritical anti-male
diatribe packaged as a light comedy.  John Andrew Gallagher has turned
from making the kinds of films cable services run at midnight to a
feature-length diatribe which brings less and not more understanding to
his issue.
     There are basically three kinds of scenes in MEN LIE.  There are
interview scenes with women claiming that men are shitheels.  There are
scenes of men weakly defending their behaving like shitheels.  And
there is the wafer-thin story of Scott (played by Doug DeLuca) who acts
like a shitheel after getting advice from other shitheels on how it is
done.  The joke that keeps repeating itself is to have a woman say
Scott will act like a jerk and then, sure enough, the script has him do
just that.  If the same film were made with women as the target or
blacks or just about any ethnic group it would be obvious that this
film is hate propaganda, but by targeting men it can be considered a
blow for women's liberation and will find a ready and even anxious, if
not very discerning, audience.
     (What little story there is the following paragraph may spoil.)
Scott has a perfect girlfriend, Jill (played by Ellia Thompson), but
like a jerk he cheats on her every chance he gets.  His uncle, who is
an unsavory lawyer, gives him a lot of advice on how to be a more
competent jerk.  Jill's friends warn her that Scott is a jerk and a
louse, but Jill foolishly loves Scott.  She catches him once, but he
apologizes then continues to cheat.  When she catches him a second
time, she ends their relationship.  Scott says he has learned a lesson
but is a jerk with his next girlfriend as well.  That's not a very
exciting plot, but it really is all there is to this film.  Repeatedly
the laughs come from Scott doing exactly what one of his detractors
predicted.  Supposed laughs also come from men using supposedly
standard male tactics like Scott blaming Jill's anger on PMS.
     Being fair, there are two male characters in the film who seem to
be presented in a positive light.  There are no women who are portrayed
as being anything worse than gullible or angry.  Also in fairness, the
stereotypical male jerk as presented does have some basis in reality,
but men do not have a monopoly on being jerks, and the stereotypes here
have no more validity than other ethnic hate-stereotypes.
     Generally the acting is sufficient, but there are at least two
scenes in which it was jarringly bad.  This is a bad film that is
riding a political wave that is just about the only thing that would
make it acceptable to anyone.  By far this is the worst film I have
seen at this festival.
     Some of the few on-target jokes in the film concern a character
who insists on seeing female nudity in the films he rents from
videostores.  Gallagher may not be happy about this form of
exploitation, but, hey, business is business so he includes exploitive
sex scenes in this film.  I wonder if he also felt bad about
exploitation of women when he made BEACH HOUSE and POSED FOR MURDER.
     MEN LIE has crude production values, a very flat plot, and perhaps
a chuckle or two.  For the sake of a couple of decent chuckles I rate
this one a low -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     That answers my question about whether or not being shown at the
festival guarantees that a film will be good.  Somebody must have liked
it--it got a good review from Joe Leydon of "The Houston Post."  I
don't know who that is.
     The evening film was THE ADVOCATE and it was introduced by Leslie
Megahey, the writer director and by Lysette Anthony.  She had a
smallish comic role in the film.  I know the name, but don't remember
where I have seen her before.  Oh, to have Internet access here!
     The year is 1452 and Paris lawyer Richard Courtois is tired of the
legal entanglements and corruption of city law.  He wants to use his
talents to help common people, so he and his clerk Mathieu travel to
the small town of Abbeville.  There he indeed finds that law is
different, though no better and in some ways a lot weirder.  Rural law
cases involve accusations of witchcraft, devil pacts, and sodomy with
animals.  And the law extends to human and animal alike.  If a farmer
is shown to have had sex with his donkey, both might be hung on the
same gibbet.  Animals may also be called to court to be sworn as
witnesses.  One of Courtois's first cases is a very bizarre "murder
trial," at least by modern standards.  Today such an incident would not
fall under the category of murder, but we are looking at a very
different culture.  Incidentally, the case really did get tried as it
is portrayed in the film according to historical records.  It seems at
first like a ludicrous and trivial court action until Courtois starts
sensing that the state's case is invented and may be a part of a larger
conspiracy.
     THE ADVOCATE is a film with a lot going for it.  First and
foremost is the setting.  Years go by between good films set in so
remote a historical period.  Even without a good plot the historical
detail by itself would keep this film intriguing.  The historic detail
that gives the film its texture and gives a feel of being very well
researched.  The viewer is consistently astonished by the differing
attitudes and life-style of the 1400s.  Unfortunately too often the
attitudes we see are a mix of that century's and our own.  Similarly to
THE NAME OF THE ROSE, the photography often appears inspired by the
master artists of the time like Breugel and Bosch.  The peasants look
grizzled and a bit grotesque.
     But beyond the historical detail the plot is also enjoyable by
itself.  The mystery is not one of the best or most unpredictable, but
it is likely to keep the audience guessing.  THE ADVOCATE is at once an
intriguing mystery film and a well-written drama with comedic
overtones.  One historical detail that the film makes clear is that in
the Middle Ages people were a good deal less sensitive about being seen
without clothing.  That, however, tends to make me suspect it would get
some editing before American public television would show it.  But
clearly it seems intended for some wide audience because of a major
budget and a cast of familiar actors including Colin Firth in the title
role, Ian Holm as a likable but corrupt local priest, Donald Pleasance
as Abbeville's other attorney, Michael Gough as town judge, and Nicol
Williamson thoroughly enjoying his role as a local lord.
     THE ADVOCATE was written and directed by Leslie Megahy, a director
nearly unknown in the United States but who has made several TV movies
for the BBC.  This is his first feature film and deserves attention.
My rating would be a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     That was probably the best film so far.  Certainly it was the most
enjoyable, though MESMER left me with more to think about.  It is a
pity that there are not more Medieval mystery films like THE NAME OF
THE ROSE and THE ADVOCATE.  I guess it is surprising there aren't more
considering how often you hear about Medieval mystery plays; it is
surprising more have not been made into films.  [On the Internet that
last line is e-mail bait.  I expect a megabyte or two of e-mail from
well-meaning but humorless people explaining to me what a Medieval
mystery play is and about eight items explaining to me what an idiot I
am for not knowing!]
     The fourth day started with THE STORY OF YUNNAN.  From this point
on we did not learn anything especially novel about the fest, so the
balance of reviews follow.
     Mainland Chinese films are generally a fairly bleak lot.  On the
whole life in China is fairly harsh.  Between the living conditions and
the politics, the people in their own films do not seem to lead very
happy lives.  It is unusual to find a Chinese film that is uplifting or
inspiring, but THE STORY OF YUNNAN, directed by Zhang Nuanxing, is a
sort of Chinese KEYS TO THE KINGDOM.  Shizu, a Japanese woman, was
living with her family in Manchuria when the Japanese lost the war.  In
the ensuing chaos she finds herself alone in a hostile country.  She
attempts cutting her wrists, but is stopped by a sympathetic Chinese
soldier who sends her to a hospital.  Two years later she is a hospital
nurse and again meets the soldier.   They marry, but the soldier is
forced to leave the army for marrying a Japanese.  He takes her to his
home in Yunnan province, only to sicken on the way and die upon
reaching his home.  Shizu is now all alone in a village where the
superstitious people blame her for the death and want to punish her to
placate ghosts.  [Bad subtitling make it appear they actually wanted to
throw her in the fire, but I am assured by the director that was not
her intent with the scene.]  Things could not seem more bleak.
     From this inauspicious beginning, Shuzi will build herself into
the one most important person, a matriarch, in the community.  She will
help to banish superstition and bring enlightened ways to the mountain
village.  In a story told all too fast she remains in spite of
suspicion of her background, government attempts to send her back to
Japan, and the Cultural Revolution.  Finally she is reunited with her
family in Japan and must make some final difficult choices.
     Nuanxing in 97 minutes takes the viewer from a village with
centuries-old rituals and customs to a Japan with cellular phones and
huge department stores.  Through the eyes of one woman we see the
modernization of Asia.  Her film is curiously positive on the former
enemy Japanese.  It is a Japanese, not the government, woman who brings
modern knowledge to the village. The government is portrayed as being
well-meaning if occasionally officious.  Shizu's Japanese family are
shown positively in spite of their participation in the Chinese
occupation.  Part of the intention of the film seems to be to mend
fences with the Japanese.
     The worst fault of Nuanxing's film is its sketchiness.  To cover
so many years in 97 minutes the film has to let one or two scenes cover
three or four years.  There is often a feel that scenes are rushed.
Perhaps to save time or perhaps to make this film more acceptable with
the government, after the first few days Shuzi is accepted a little too
easily in her new village.  The script is determined not to assign any
fault and not to have villains.  This film could easily used another 30
minutes of screen time.  The film is at its best when it is showing
village life.  It shows customs like fertility dances that one rarely
sees in Chinese films but which add texture to the picture of village
life.
     THE STORY OF YUNNAN is the director's statement of women's values.
It is unique for a film from China.  I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.
     The film was accompanied by a short "Schrei der Erde" ("Cry of the
Earth") by Arvo Blechstein.  Blechstein created last year's Oscar-
winning "Black Rider."  This film is a tribute to French painter Jean-
Francois Millet.  It also has an ecological comment.  It is, however,
less involving and more serious than "Black Rider."
     In a near-future world recreational drugs have become passe.
Those who want drug-like kicks have electrodes surgically attached to
their brains and tap directly into cyberspace.  This is a very
dangerous form of entertainment, worse than drugs, but with a greater
and more exciting variety experiences that the mind can tap into.  Of
course a lot of this is only rumor in Child Support, the prison-like
orphanage run by the state.  Teenager Su decides to escape Child
Support and her escape is aided by Kon, a stranger whose truck she
uses.  Before long she is getting to know Kon better and discovers he
is up to his frontal lobes in the illegal "trode trade."  But Kon's
partners are up to something incomprehensibly big concerning something
called the "eternatrode" that offers a kind of immortality in
cyberspace.  The head of the team, the mysterious and aptly-named
Olderman is particularly intrigued by Su and her ability to see in her
dreams visions of the mysterious "Shadowfaces," beings that seem to
have a life of their own, but until Su came along only in cyberspace.
     That is the basis for a visionary but curiously unengaging
cyberpunk science fiction film.  One of the features of the cyberpunk
writing style is an interesting use of language and here the dialog is
all written in a style given the cliched name of "futurespeak."  In
futurespeak the language is permuted in odd ways that take the viewera
few minutes to get used to.  Show up late to a meeting and you might
say "Sorry for my late self-delivery."  Instead of "Kon, can I ask you
something?"  "I'm trying to sleep." the dialog comes out "Kon, question
and answer phase."  "No, I have my sleep lids on."  As someone once
said, prediction is difficult, particularly about the future, but I
would hazard a guess that technology will get to the point shown in the
film long before language would evolve as much as it appears to have
done in this film.
     CYBERTEENS IN LOVE is a low-budget quickie made on grant money.
The film makes use of computer graphics where possible to create visual
effects cheaply, though even now many of those effects are passe.
Beyond that it is a weak melodrama with a plot that could have come
from a 50's exploitation drive-in movie but given a new lease on life
by the addition of science fiction concepts.  Those concepts all too
often come out in the dialog rather than showing them to us on the
screen.  Because of the obvious budget constraints we have a film that
shows more promise than quality.  That also goes for the acting talents
of Justine Priestly as Su and Martin Cummins as Kon.  Occasionally
their acting rings hollow; more often they just fail to be interesting.
     This is the first feature film in high definition Sony Digital
Betacam format with a 9x16 aspect ratio.  Generally the format is
fairly good, but it still looks like video, particularly when there are
near-horizontal lines in the image being filmed.  The scan lines are
still all too evident to give this image the quality of a celluloid
one.
     There are some concepts in the film, but the viewer has to meet
them more than halfway.  Stretches of the film are talky and dull.
There are lots of ideas in the film but few are intriguing.  I give
CYBERTEENS IN LOVE a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     This is a random collection of five short films that have been
submitted to the festival.  As far as I can tell they will be shown
together no place else.  And they are very different from each other,
but the mind does tend to look for patterns even in random data and
various pairings make for interesting contrasts.  [Short films I
generally rate as poor, fair, good, very good, or excellent.]
     "Tall Stories": This is a light animated film with a little boy
talking about his house and family while an older man talks about his
home as a child and keeps playing "one-ups-manship" talking about how
everything he had was better.  The punchline is in finding out what
exactly is going on.  Rating: fair
     "Ignotus": This is a nice, ironic little horror film from Spain.
Two obnoxious punk rockers, lost on the Spanish countryside find an old
village.  They are taken for saints by the locals because their punk
spikes look so much like the golden spikes of light on the heads of
statues of saints.  The locals worship them as they would saints and
the rockers think they have lucked into something pretty good.  But
being taken for a saint is not necessarily such a good thing.  This is
a story with a Rod Serling feel.  Rating: good
     "Death in Venice, CA": The title says it all.  This is a retelling
of the Thomas Mann story with the site relocated in Venice, California.
The effect is much the same as doing Shakespeare in modern dress.
Something is lost in the atmosphere, something is gained in supposed
identification value and relevance.  This is a long and introspective
half hour.  An author visits his sister-in-law and finds himself
fixated on his nephew Sebastian.  As a curious touch the main character
is familiar with the writing of Mann, but does not recognize that he is
living out one of Mann's most famous stories.  Rating: good.
     "The Train": Perhaps this one just caught me in the right mood.
For a twenty-five-minute film Mike Mathis's film is one impressive
piece of cinema.  It is introspective like "Death in Venice, CA" but
realistically rather than in a literary sense.  It is a horror story,
but far more believable than "Ignotus" and apparently could well be
based on a true incident.  "The Train" is told mostly in flashback two
years after the events of the story.  The main character, Eddie, was
working with his brother Jim in a trainyard.  Eddie should be doing his
job, but untrained Jim is filling in for him and involved in a
horrifying accident of a type that was common in 50s trainyards.  Jim
who feels fine, is told he has just minutes to live.  He can die
instantly and painlessly, or painfully over a fifteen-minute interval.
Jim has just minutes to say goodbye to his life.  Eddie has years to
make peace with himself or not.  This is a very powerful story and a
deeply affecting film. Rating: excellent.
     "Tick... Tick... Tick...":  This is quite a nice little thriller.
A man, a woman, and a bomb are tied up together in an abandoned shack.
Obviously somebody is not happy with them.  But can they figure out
what is going on and can they escape before the bomb goes off?  The
film combines suspense and a puzzle for the viewer.  Rating: very good.
     I had gone to this in the hopes that it would be similar to ARIA,
a single cohesive film in which different respected directors would see
what they could do given a single theme in this case working on a
sensual story rather than showing what they see when they hear opera
music.  Well, I was half right.  It certainly was major directors, but
with each piece just a minute or two short of a half hour, this had the
feel of a series of episodes made for cable.  My major complaint is
that of these three half-hour erotic tales, the first two are not
erotic and the third is not a tale.
     "The Insatiable Mrs. Kirsch" (co-written and directed by Ken
Russell): This film is surprisingly tame given that it was directed by
the uninhibited Mr. Russell.  The story might almost be out of Somerset
Maugham.  Simon Shepherd plays a writer escaping from the world to
write at an exclusive hotel.  There he finds himself completely fixated
on the beautiful Mrs. Kirsch who seems like the most oversexed woman he
has ever seen.  She seems to eat only long and narrow food, like corn-
on-the-cob and sausages, she frequents sex-shops, and much more.  The
author decides to take advantage of the situation leading to the
obvious plot twist.  The story is quite predictable.  Rating: fair
     "Vrooom! Vroom! Vroooom!" (written and directed by Melvin Van
Peebles):  This one has a sort of "Twilight Zone" feel.  Leroy is the
lonely kid who never gets the girls.  The other kids are all singing
and dancing and waving body parts at each other, but Leroy is alone.
Then Leroy saves an old witch-woman from being hit by a car.  For this
she grants him a wish.  He would like a motorcycle and a girl, but he
gets only one wish.  The witch-woman, however, finds a way to grant
both wishes with a single wish, but with bad results.  Rating: fair
     "Touch Me" (co-written and directed by Paul Cox):  Sarah is an
artist.  Christine is a nude model.  Sarah gives art classes.
Christine models nude in Sarah's classes.  Sarah has a student who
thinks he is Toulouse-Lautrec.  He faxes her poems with obscene
artwork.  Christine has a boyfriend who does not understand her.  Sarah
and Christine spend a weekend together in the country.  They chase
horses.  They take showers and sit in front of a fire.  Christine gets
muddy and Sara cleans her off.  Sarah gets another fax from her
student.  It isn't a great story, but it is the only one they have.
There is a lot of very sensual photography but little dramatic
resolution at the end.  There also seems to be little theme except take
love where you find it.  Rating: fair
     Itzik Finkelstein would like to be a big time wheeler-dealer.
Unfortunately his big-time deals all fall through and the wheel has a
flat.  Itzik is a total failure and has a chip on his shoulder against
everyone who has ever wronged him, which he thinks is pretty much
everybody in his life.  Itzik would like to take his vengeance on the
world, but what are the chances for a poor slob who couldn't hit the
floor with his hat in three tries?
     Then, as luck would have it, a mystical cult from the bowels of
the Earth decides that the world must be destroyed to be saved.  They
send an all-powerful invisible monk to give Itzik the power to kill
with impunity.  The time has come for Itzik to wreak his terrible
revenge.
     THE REVENGE OF ITZIK FINKELSTEIN is a slyly written comedy from
Israel with more than a little similarity to Peter Cook's's BEDAZZLED.
Not too surprisingly Itzik's hate-tour of the villains of his past is
less than the killing spree that he at first envisioned.  Instead Itzik
has an opportunity to reevaluate the values he has been given by others
that he thinks have led to his sorry state.  As his attitudes change,
his self-image and others' images of him change.
     Argentina-born director Enrique Rottenberg emigrated to Israel in
1963 and has produced films previously but is directing for the first
time.  He co-authored the screenplay with Estaban Gottfried, basing it
on the story "La Venganza de Beta Sanchez" and moving the setting to
Israel.  Gottfried appeared in the film in the role of the invisible
monk.  The film won seven Israeli Oscars including Best Picture, Best
Director, and Best Screenplay.
     Moshe Ivgi's Itzik Finkelstein can be very funny, but some of the
more verbal humor seems to be lost in the subtitling.  He does however
show considerable personality.  Gottfried's monk is well-written but
flatly played.
     Not all of the screenplay's humor is in the best of taste, and
often humor is more vulgar than funny.  Then again, perhaps more humor
would come across to people more fluent in Hebrew.  I would rate this
one a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Aki Kaurismaki is a Finnish director generally known for very
downbeat films like ARIEL.  He did try his hand at comedy, however,
with somewhat spotty results with THE LENINGRAD COWBOYS GO AMERICA.
That film told the story of a hapless rock band either from Finland or
someplace very cold in the Soviet Union touring the United States on
the cheap.  The band is actually played by a Finnish comic rock group
called the Sleepy Sleepers, but the film seems to imply the characters
might be Russian.  Their trademark is pompadours that stick out a foot
in front of their heads like unicorn horns and pointed shoes that stick
out just as far.
     A sequel was made (word of mouth is that it is not very good) and
the third film featuring the Cowboys is a concert film.  This one
magnifies the incongruity of the first film by matching the rock band
with the Red Army Chorus and Dance Ensemble.  The Chorus and Dance
Ensemble was always a bit of an incongruity itself.  As a branch of the
Soviet Army, they were responsible to preserve beautiful Russian folk
singing and dancing and to bring them to the world.  Even people who
hated the Soviets would buy records of their Army Chorus and Band
because the music was good.  The whole existence of the chorus was a
bit of an anomaly, sort of smoothing over the conjoining of Slavic
traditions to Soviet militarism.
     This film opens with a solemn diplomatic scene.  It is apparently
the signing, under a watchful poster of Lenin, of a contract for the
Red Army Ensemble to have a concert with the Leningrad Cowboys.  We
then flash to the concert itself, which took place on in front of an
audience of 50,000 on June 12, 1993.  The resulting film is full of
ironic humor with more than a little touch of sadness.  There is a
little hint of lost traditional values in seeing Russian women in
traditional folk finery doing traditional Russian dancing to the sound
of "My... my... my... Delilah."  A buffoonish Cowboy and a squat folk
singer in full Soviet military uniform arm-in-arm sing "So Happy
Together."  This is more than a concert, it is a comment on the closing
of the cold war and the coming of new values, with little respect for
the old.
     The Red Army seems more able to enhance the popular music than
vice versa.  For traditional songs like "The Volga Boat Man" and
"Kalinka" the Cowboys are able only to clown around a little awkwardly
on stage.  The Russians lend far more to the popular lyrics
contributing the sound of a full orchestra and chorus to music usually
carried by five or six performers.  Their clowning is more like adding
snatches to the old Soviet National Anthem to "Gimme All Your Lovin'"
Some how they also add poignancy to "Those Were the Days."
     This is a short film, only 55 minutes, with a good sense of humor
and a lot of perhaps overly familiar music.  Perhaps the music is just
not as important as the subtext.  On the scale of short films, I would
rate it a very good.
     Carl Nielsen is considered the greatest Danish musical composer.
The famous post-Romantic composer wrote the story of his youth in his
autobiographical MY CHILDHOOD (1927).  Erik Clausen has now adapted
Nielson's memoir of his youth into the film CARL, MY CHILDHOOD
SYMPHONY.   As the title implies, we see a set of reminiscences from a
poor but not particularly sad childhood.  As a set of remembrances we
get an episodic montage that is more than the sum of its parts.
     The film covers Nielsen, who was born in 1865, at three periods of
his youth.  The 1871 segment has Dog of Flanders feel.  We are
introduced to young Carl as a boy of only six, but we see the seeds of
a budding genius in him.  The son of a very poor artist and musician,
the boy herds geese.  In one sequence the six-year-old leaves his
geese, spellbound by the sound of a young piano student playing.  When
the girl gives up in frustration, he sneaks into the strange house just
to see the piano.  His father is angry when he hears of his son's
trespass, but he appeases his son's curiosity about music by giving him
a violin to play with.  The boy takes to the violin as a favorite toy
and soon is able to make real music with it, preferring to compose his
own tunes over playing other people's music.
     The young Carl makes friends through his music with people of his
village including a blind musician and a cobbler.  Carl meets a sister
whom he never knew he had when she returns home to die of consumption.
Carl builds a relationship with an older brother who Carl thinks is
even more musically gifted only to have Carl accidentally injure the
brother and end what he thinks might have been a brilliant career.
Though his family and friends suffer from poverty and disease, the film
seen from Carl's eyes never gives in to self-pity.  The film does not
have the structure of a single directed story, but more that of a lot
of little reminiscences that go to form a single piece, much as many
themes go to form a symphony.
     The film develops Carl's character through two more chapters.  In
1879 Carl joins the army as a bugle boy.  He hides his violin skill and
learns the cornet, plays in a military band with near clashes, meets
more colorful characters.  But in his youthful enthusiasm for his music
he remains oblivious to much that goes on around him.  By the third
chapter in 1883 he has a more mature outlook on life.  This section is
more introspective with Nielsen falling in love and finally coming toa
better understanding of himself and his friends.
     CARL could easily have made a social or political point like so
many other films about people who grew in poverty.  CARL seems almost
aimless in not sending some similar message.  But that was not
Clausen's point in making the film.  This is a story of a man with a
destiny, and it is that destiny that binds the film together, seeing
how the mind of Nielsen came together.  This is a film of awe, not
anger.  And as such, it is the best musical biography to come along in
years, rating a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     This documentary by Nitza Gonan is an uneasy mix.  One documentary
combines a tearful visit to the Auschwitz death camp and scenes from
the main character's stand-up comedy act.  That is as uneasy a mix asI
can imagine.
     Mordechai Vilozny lost both parents of his parents in the
Holocaust and a large part of himself, though he managed to survive and
emigrate to Israel.  He has walled off that part of his life and never
discussed it with his children Schmuel and Shoshanna.  In 1993 he is
returning to Poland to visit the sites of his childhood and to see
where his parents were murdered.  Schmuel, now an actor and a stand-up
comic has resented his father's unwillingness to share Holocaust
experiences.  The film is about the effect of the journey on the three
people and in a broader sense the effect of the Holocaust on the second
generation of survivors.
     Schmuel is really the main focus, rather than his father, which
somewhat detracts from the film since he seems a rather unpleasant
character.  One tends to agree with him when he dismisses skinheads as
"idiots" but it seems a tactless comment.  However his jibes at the
expense of a Polish soldier who will be taking part in a memorial to
victims of the Holocaust seems less than fair.  Some of his style is
reminiscent of Michael Moore, but not as funny.  He also expresses some
anger at auditioning but not being chosen to act in SCHINDLER'S LIST.
He says that he is actually a piece of the Holocaust and many of the
actors chosen were not.  It would be more accurate to say his father
was a piece of the Holocaust.  In a later visit to Auschwitz he pockets
a standoff insulator from the electronic fence as a souvenir.
     Some of his shots seem unreasonable.  He shows us some skinhead
graffiti ("same hatreds, same graffiti") and then shows us a peasant
woman who claims there is no anti-Semitism in Poland.  Clearly denying
the anti-Semitism is factually incorrect, but it seems a very human
thing for a peasant woman to try to deny it.  She is hardly going to
start giving case histories for the camera.
     The film's best sequence is the visit to Auschwitz, where
Mordechai finds records of his father.  Even here the camera is more
interested in Schmuel than in his father.  By this point the viewer is
far more interested in the father's experience than the son's.  The
sequence is certainly touching, but could have been a lot better.
     The documentary was apparently made for Israeli TV and then poorly
subtitled into English.  Some subtitles are flashed on the screen for
as little as three-quarters of a second.  There are long and pointless
sequences like Schmuel's "walk to beach like Fellini," which seems like
nothing more than showing Schmuel strut and hum a Fellini-esque tune.
It seems like three minutes of screentime are wasted on this eminently
cuttable sequence.
     This documentary showed potential, but it could have been handled
in a much better way.  I would give it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Mick (played by Tony LaPaglia) is at the top of his profession.
His profession is eliminating people his employers think are
inconvenient.  He has just finished a big and important job that at
first went wrong.  An old friend Archie (played by Matt Craven) had
been part of the hit and had nearly wrecked everything, but Mick had
salvaged things, finishing the job, and for now he deserves a rest.
But his boss George (Peter Boyle) comes to him with an emergency.  A
woman has to be killed that very night and Mick is the only person who
can be depended on.  But, George mysteriously assures Mick, she knows
about the hit and will cooperate.  All Mick has to do is pull the
trigger.  And the odd thing is, he seems to be right.  Fiona (Mimi
Rogers) is an extremely intelligent and attractive woman who is
entirely blase about the fact that she is about to be murdered.  And
thus begins a very odd few hours in the lives of Mick, Fiona, and
Archie.
     Gordon Melbourne has written the kind of script that keeps the
viewer guessing what exactly is happening and where the film is going.
While in premise there are similarities to DIARY OF A HITMAN, which may
well have been part of the inspiration for KILLER, Melbourne has his
own ideas on what to do with the premise.  One is never sure what plot
details will be important.  Fiona gets Mick and Archie talking about
the business of murder.  Is she looking for something specific or is it
natural curiosity?  She also seems extremely friendly to Mick, all the
while seeming to be walking into her own murder with both eyes open.
Why does she do what she is doing?  Mick has been successful to this
point as a hit man and he even explain to Archie his philosophy of
exactly what it takes to do his job right, but in one night he has
fallen in love and has developed a conscience about killing.  And that
puts a whole new twist on the game that it has never had before.
     While Tony LaPaglia is a generally good actor, his is the most
straightforward of the three main characters.  Mimi Rogers carries much
more of the load of making the film work.  She has to be the most
desirable woman on the screen since Kathleen Turner in BODY HEAT.
Under Mark Malone's direction she manages quite nicely.  Matt Craven,
as the incompetent hitman wanting so much to succeed does an excellent
job of projecting both comic and tragic dimensions of his character.
     Mark Malone is directing for the first time, though previously he
co-wrote DEAD OF WINTER and SIGNS OF LIFE.  His KILLER is slickly
produced and it works reasonably well.  My rating is high +1 on the -4
to +4 scale.
     Pablo Torre's film THE SILENT MOVIE LOVER is an atmospheric
melodrama from Argentina that is reminiscent of Billy Wilder's SUNSET
BOULEVARD, but is even stranger.  It is the story of a boy coming of
age and of a silent film star near the end of his days.
     Paulito is a fatherless boy living in an apartment with his
beautiful mother.  Money is always a problem and he has to turn to
stealing from neighbors and giving the proceeds to his mother who does
not question the "miracle" of money appearing in her drawers.  A local
girl teases Pailito and abuses him with dark sexual games.  Finally
Paulito's mother gets work living and working in a mortuary and playing
the piano.  The mortician is an intense and aging silent film star who
cannot let go of the past.  He looks and moves as if he were constantly
in front of the silent film camera.  Even the architecture of his
funeral parlor is that of movie palaces of the 1920s and his funeral
send-offs, performed in silence except for Schubert on the piano, are
spectacular silent film scenes.
     The old film star, Ralph, who went to Hollywood back in the days
when there was demand for Latins following the death of Valentino.  By
blackmailing Keaton he is able to break into the movies and become a
great film star, only to lose everything with the coming of sound.  We
are told Ralph's story with classic Hollywood documentary and film
footage supplemented with antiqued new film footage of Ralph as a young
man.  In a marvelous way, like the characters, once we are pulled into
the claustrophobic film palace mortuary, we get out only through the
movies.  When suddenly we find ourselves out on a big river reminiscent
of CREATURE FROM THE BLACK LAGOON, we are momentarily shocked and it
feels very out of place.  The characters must feel the same and that
too is part of the story.  The pacing of THE SILENT MOVIE LOVER is
slow, deliberate, and very atmospheric, like a silent film.  The style
of telling is probably better than the value of the story itself.
     Pablo Torre, who wrote and directed THE SILENT MOVIE LOVER, is the
son of film director Leopaldo Torre Nielson.  Until this point Pablo
has been a novelist and this is his first film as director.
     THE SILENT FILM LOVER is heavy with atmosphere, and is enjoyable
as a reminder of the early days of cinema, but the plot is
dissatisfying.  I rate it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
