Title
Review for Flawless (1999)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Steve Rhodes
More aptly titled DOA, were that name not already taken, FLAWLESS is an
unappealing mess of a movie.  Written and directed by Joel Schumacher,
whose last film was the sleazy 8MM, the movie has tonal problems from
its gangster beginning to its madcap mayhem ending.  Sometimes it wants
to be a gay comedy, other times it wants to pull your heart strings and
still other times it wants to shock you with Schumacher's signature
violence.
No matter what it tries, it rarely succeeds.  Best described as a
comedic tragedy, the movie ladles on lots of attempted humor.  It is the
sort of movie that has one person -- in our audience it was the same one
person -- laughing loudly and frequently, as the rest of the viewers
watch stoically.
The story concerns the awkward friendship between a depressed,
homophobic, stroke-victim, Walt Koontz (Robert De Niro), and an unhappy
transvestite, Rusty Zimmerman (Philip Seymour Hoffman), who wants to be
a woman as soon as he can get the money.  Besides the tens of thousands
of dollars for the sex change operation itself, he also requires $28,000
for "extensive psychological testing" before the operation.
"I'm lonely; I'm ugly; I'm a drag queen," Rusty concisely summarizes his
view of his life.  Although he tries to act tough ("I left sensitivity
back in the sand pile"), he lets himself get pushed around.  Walt
begrudgingly comes to Rusty to get singing lessons as a form of speech
therapy.  De Niro, turning in one of his most uninteresting performances
ever, accurately portrays the speech patterns of his character but
forgets to give him any life.  The entire movie features labored acting
whose presentation has the dullness of an old knife.
Although Daniel Orlandi's costumes are colorful, Declan Quinn destroys
their effect with his grim and ugly cinematography -- more of the film's
tonal problems.  Schumacher, who also gave us the abysmal BATMAN &
ROBIN, can't seem to make up his mind whether he wants to make LA CAGE
AUX FOLLES or SEVEN.   Whenever he throws in something fun, like the
contrast between the conservatively-suited gay Republicans and the
flamboyant cross-dressers, Schumacher feels compelled to destroy the
moment.  Rather that just enjoy the visual delights of the situation, he
writes Rusty a diatribe against all Republicans, even gay ones.
There are also subplots about the search for a mobster's missing money
and about Walt's search for unpaid female companionship.  None of this
makes any difference because Schumacher's narrative, or lack thereof,
can't sustain the viewer's interest.  There is no genuine chemistry
between the two leads, and the movie never comes close to jelling.
FLAWLESS runs 1:50.  It is rated R for pervasive language and strong
violence and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
James Sanford
         Somewhere in the messy, laughably titled "Flawless" is a
potentially fine character study about prejudice and the price we pay
for sex. But Joel Schumacher's script (which he also directed) is a
rhinestone in the rough, a piece of junk jewelry even Robert DeNiro and
Philip Seymour Hoffman can't make sparkle.
 Heaven knows they try, though. As Rusty, a drag queen who badly
wants to be surgically transformed into "a real woman," Hoffman huffs
and puffs and sometimes blows everyone else off the screen, as if he's
certain he can somehow turn this shabby stick figure of a character into
Mama Cass. DeNiro can't even hope to compete. He's playing Walter, a
stroke victim with partially paralyzed vocal cords who seeks out
loud-mouth Rusty for therapeutic singing lessons. Since Walter is a
hard-boiled homophobe, of course the match-up is a disaster waiting to
happen.
 To further complicate matters, Schumacher has tossed in some of
Walter's macho cop buddies, a cold-hearted "dancer" with eyes for
Walter's wallet, a beautiful love-starved mouse (Daphne Rubin-Vega) and
a passel of aggressively outrageous friends of Rusty's, most of whom
spend their days shrieking out old Sylvester anthems and smacking their
heavily glossed lips over the sight of the stud who works in the
neighborhood pizza parlor.
 All these mini-dramas prove to be irritating distractions, like
gnats buzzing around your ears. But even that's not enough -- as a
screenwriter, Schumacher can't say 'no' -- so every 15 minutes or so
"Flawless" cuts away from the stormy Rusty/Walter relationship to a
completely incongruous subplot about stolen drug money and murdered
hookers.
 But don't put your feet up yet: You've still got to sort
through episodes showing masochistic Rusty being battered by a cruel
boyfriend, scattered jabs at gay Republicans and running jokes involving
elderly ladies who can't comprehend why some men like to wear thigh-high
boots and boas. No wonder the story's message ultimately gets twisted
along the way and inadvertently links being gay with having a physical
disability. Good luck selling that theory to the local chapter of
ACT-UP, Mr. Schumacher.
 The movie would be a thorough waste of time were it not for a
handful of DeNiro and Hoffman's scenes together in which the actors cut
through Schumacher's silly yarn and try to simply let Walter and Rusty
communicate as human beings, rather than as archetypes. Those moments
far outclass everything else in the film, and it's conceivable
"Flawless" could make an intriguing one-act play if Schumacher bothered
to strip away all the ridiculous frills covering up his central theme.
In the world of drag, fussiness can be an asset; in screenwriting, it's
a major liability. James Sanford

Author
Michael Dequina
With a title like _Flawless_, writer-director Joel Schumacher has set
himself up for the easy critical jab, so allow me to get it out of the
way right here, right now: _Flawless_ is anything but.  However, this
small-scale character drama from the poster child for studio-manufactured
bombast is not without its flashes of perfection even if the whole is the
opposite of its title.
_Flawless_ may take its title from a drag queen beauty pageant that
figures not-at-all-prominently in the plot, but it best serves as a
description of the terrific performances featured in the film.  First and
foremost there is Robert DeNiro, who initially does not break any new
ground as retired New York security guard Walt Koontz, a homophobic macho
man who is constantly annoyed by the drag queens who practice singing in
the apartment across the way.  But after Walt suffers a paralyzing
stroke, DeNiro turns in some of his most impressive work.  His physical
mannerisms are entirely convincing largely because he doesn't overdo
them; he shows remarkable control as Walt's condition slowly improves
through the course of the film.
That improvement is in no small part due to the drag queen who is Walt's
main target, Rusty (Philip Seymour Hoffman), who reluctantly gives Walt
singing lessons as speech therapy.  Hoffman's performance is the direct
opposite of DeNiro's, all flamboyance as opposed to subtlety.  It's a
showy part, no doubt, and Hoffman far from downplays Rusty's theatrical
nature, creating more than a few funny moments.  But his work also
conveys genuine heart; one easily feels the pain behind Rusty's heavily
made-up exterior.
Even the more peripheral supporting players are noteworthy, in
particular Daphne Rubin-Vega, who is touching as Tia, a young tango dance
hall patron who carries a torch for Walt.  But performances do not
entirely a movie make; there has to be an interesting story to tell. 
Unfortunately, Schumacher doesn't come up with one.  As can be gleaned,
the focus of _Flawless_ is the unlikely friendship that develops between
Walt and Rusty, and while the relationship is not without its
charms--DeNiro and Hoffman play, pardon the term, flawlessly off of each
other--there's nothing terribly distinctive with how it develops.  Adding
another layer of contrivance is a tired thriller element Schumacher
places on top of it, involving some shady characters looking for stolen
money.
Schumacher obviously intended _Flawless_ to prove that he can pull off a
small-scale film, but he's only half-succeeded.  The strong performances
show that he can coax winning work from his cast within more modest
settings.  While that proves his ability at a director, his dull script
shows his writing ability lags far behind.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Frankie Paiva
There is one man in Hollywood that I have always feared. Joel Schumacher,
director of such films as Batman Forever, A Time To Kill, Batman and Robin, and
8MM. I have yet to see a recent (like in the past twenty years) good movie
coming from the man. That's why I was extremely surprised when I viewed
Flawless, the adult Thanksgiving alternative to Toy Story 2. After watching the
film, I noticed the director of the picture, Joel Schumacher. If you see this
and any of the four movies I've mentioned above, you can easily see why I was
surprised that this film contained a marginal amount of quality. I'll spare you
from saying that Flawless is anything but (as so many other critics have) but I
will say that the film's performances lift it up much higher than expected.
Walt Koontz (De Niro) is an ex-cop who lives in the bad side (Is there a good
one?) of Brooklyn. One night in his apartment building, he hears a shot from
another room and immediately goes up to investigate. Walt gets caught up in a
fight, gets shot and has a stroke. He stutters a lot and is barely able to
speak. He finds his past life that was already slipping away falling away from
him even more as he realizes that he's getting older and isn't what he used to
be.
But there may be help. Rusty (Hoffman) is a transvestite who lives one floor
up. Before the accident, homophobic Walt would usually engage in a battle of
insults with his neighbor, but now he/she may be the source of his recovery.
Rusty offers to give him singing lessons so that his embarrassing stutter might
go away. The two begin to form an unlikely bond as another plot emerges.
Apparently there has been some stolen drug money (at least Joel is keeping
parts of his roots) and a big crime boss thinks that someone in the apartment
next to Rusty has it. This part of the plot certainly isn't very interesting,
and is kind of a cheap way to add to the running time.
De Niro was obviously picked for his ability to play characters with
disabilities with amazing ease. Walt is much like his character who awoke from
a coma in Awakenings. Hoffman, known for playing a variety of characters, (his
film credits include Magnolia, Happiness, and Boogie Nights) is great. He fully
embodies his drag queen character without putting in too many of the
traditional clichés. Besides these two factors though, the film doesn't have
much going for it. Much of the film is shot without attention to visual detail
and the plot has a tendency to be gritty and depressing. The drug money subplot
is what really destroys the film, making for a wild ending that doesn't belong
with the rest of the film. Perhaps if they would have used the footage during
the credits (stay for them, it's pretty funny) for the ending everyone would
have gone out of the theater smiling. The performances in Flawless are great,
but the script (written by, who else? Joel Schumacher) and the plot aren't.
Acting is enough to lift Flawless up, and it gets my *** stars.
The Young-Uns: Besides one character being a drag queen, we see several scenes
featuring him and his other homosexual friends, for those concerned about such
things. There is also some not very graphic violence and lots of f-words. Good
Age: 15 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://www.homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Too many Hollywood films are based on opposites.  You've got your
Runaway Bride-type romantic swill where hunky guys and pretty girls hate
each other, but then fall in love.  And then there's your 48 Hours-type
action picture where hard-edged cops and fast-talking criminals team up
to catch bad guys.  What we rarely see are effective, more realistic
portrayals of real odd couples.
Flawless is a decent attempt to fill that niche.  It's the story of a
conservative ex-cop that makes an unlikely friend in his transsexual
neighbor.  Their relationship is predictable - they hate each other at
first, but then slowly open up to one another.  Despite the
predictability, their screen interaction is magical, thanks to fantastic
performances by two top acting talents.
The ex-cop is Walt Koontz (Robert De Niro, Analyze This), a decorated
officer living in the same Bed-Stuy neighborhood that served as his beat
when he was on the job.  He's a well-known figurehead in the area and is
on a first-name basis with people he passes on the street each day.  A
very friendly man, except when it comes to his drag queen neighbor.
The queen in question is Rusty Zimmerman (Philip Seymour Hoffman,
Happiness), a beefy female impersonator that lives on the floor above
Walt.  Rusty (which I find to be a damn hysterical name for a
cross-dresser) and his flamboyant friends often rehearse song and dance
numbers in the building, which enrages Walt, who can hear the racket
from his apartment.  The two exchange a barrage of "f" words through
their windows within the film's first five minutes.  To further
accentuate their differences, we see each standing in front of their
bathroom mirrors, Walt applying Brylcreem to his graying temples and
Rusty applying lipstick.
Their situation changes as a result of a late-night robbery in their
building.  Walt hears a gunshot, grabs his piece and tries to stop the
situation, but has a stroke in the process.  Partially paralyzed on his
right side, Walt is too proud and embarrassed to leave his apartment,
missing appointments for physical therapy, which only worsens his
condition.  He struggles to walk and talks like he's got a mouth full of
cole slaw.  Through an odd turn of events, Walt ends up taking singing
lessons from Rusty in an attempt to rehabilitate his speech.
Each scene with De Niro and Hoffman is truly entertaining to watch, even
though Hoffman obviously has the meatier of the two parts.  He's a real
scene-stealer, taking all of the good lines while De Niro is left to
incoherently (literally) mumble like a member of Howard Stern's Wack
Pack.  De Niro's role is overshadowed and thankless and, as a result,
his scenes without Hoffman seem to suck the life out of the film.  To
make matters worse, writer/director Joel Schumacher (8mm) continues to
use the building's robbery as a continuing subplot throughout the film.
It isn't needed.  Flawless would have been much better if it were filmed
as a two-person stage production.  Its biggest flaw is to not increase
the focus on its two stars.
1:50 - R for adult language and violence

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A feelgood, comic drama with melodramatic overtones,
"Flawless" is the sort of film you might expect to come
around at this time for a shot at the Best Actor Oscar. Having
watched Dustin Hoffman get the big O for "Rain Man" (which
was cited as well for Best Picture in 1988), Joel Schumacher
("Batman Forever," "A Time To Kill") may have figured that
the story of a physically disabled person played by superstar
Robert De Niro could bring in the gold. In "Flawless," two
performers play lonely human beings outside the mainstream
of society who initially despise each other and through the
ups and down of almost forced contact learn to develop a
modicum of warm and fuzzy feelings.
   Schumacher was inspired to write and direct the story after
observing the destruction that a series of small strokes
delivered to a friend, a person whose speech underwent
dramatic improvement after he took singing lessons.  (This
makes sense since therapists have long observed that
stutterers lose their stumbling when engaged in song.)  But
where Wes Craven spent considerable time exhibiting the
process by which a gifted violin teacher inspires her pupils in
"Music the Heart," Schumacher focuses on the melodramatic
change of heart which the handicapped person undergoes
when he actually gets to know the object of his loathing and
the man's circle of friends.
   At times "Flawless" looks like a photographed play,
particularly when Patrick Capone's camera hones in on the
visits which Rusty (Philip Seymour Hoffman) makes to the
dilapidated hotel apartment of stroke victim Walt Koontz
(Robert De Niro).  Even when we move outside to the dreary
tenement streets of Brooklyn, the film has a closed-in feel
that denies us a substantial impression of the neighborhood
with its hookers, dealers, and criminals with their hangers-on. 
The sporadic violence somehow feels like part of a different
movie offering a jarring contrast to the drag-queen world on
display and, in fact, by artificially throwing Walt and Rusty
together, the chaos of the streets prevents us from witnessing
a true connection between the two principals.
   After a quick introduction to the daily lifestyle of Walt
Koontz (Robert De Niro), a one-time hero security guard
responsible for freeing 14 hostages, the mood becomes
melodramatic.  A trio of criminals chase after and track down
a man who has stolen $25,000 of their money, but not before
he had given the bag of loot away to a confidant.  When Walt
hears a commotion in an adjoining apartment, he throws
himself into the fray, gets shot, and suffers a stroke that
leaves him partially paralyzed and speech-impaired. 
Reluctant to leave his apartment for physical therapy, he
allows himself to receive singing lessons from the drag queen
against whom he had regularly exchanged loud insults. 
Slowly learning about the life of the wannabe transsexual 
Rusty (Philip Seymour Hoffman) together with the fun-loving
attitudes of his pals, he discerns the man's humanity and
vulnerability, becoming his friend.  In a final melodramatic
flourish, the camaraderie is put to the test.
   While De Niro does a credible job of performing in the role
of a man with a deep speech impediment (not very much
unlike his guise in the 1990 film "Awakenings" as a man who
awakens from a coma after 30 years), Hoffman is the real
star of this story.  Philip Seymour Hoffman, so adept in his
role as the sexually inhibited Allen in Todd Solondz's
"Happiness," is often so convincing that a viewer entering this
movie late could swear he was a woman.  We learn that his
character feels so trapped in his male body that he is willing
to spend upwards of $40,000 simply to change to the gender
that half the world is born into.  We also learn that drag
queens fight with one another about as much as they struggle
against homophobics who cannot abide their way of life.  The
most satiric scene satirizes a group of patronizing, suited, gay
Republicans, who seem to hold their noses while suggesting
that they march together with the queens in a show of
solidarity.  But on the whole, the movie, for all the quality of
its leads, does not resolve the differences between the two
men who appear to live with each other's company only
because of the temporary threats of the outside world.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
You have to pity poor Joel Schumacher. Not only is he accused of
single-handedly destroying the Batman franchise, but his last film,
the bleak 8mm, was ridiculed by the majority of critics in America. I
can visualize Schumacher's conversation with himself: "Hmm... I've
just made several critical duds in a row. What am I doing wrong? Let's
see. The Batman films and 8mm all share dark, creepy atmospheres, and
that genre's obviously not working for me. Let's go the opposite route
on the follow-up." 
It's almost cute the way Schumacher rolls with the punches, and it's
no surprise that in Flawless, a title that almost dares critics not to
like the movie, the writer/director tries to play it safe... or at
least as safe as any film which centers around a flamboyant
transvestite can be considered to be. Everything here seems
specifically constructed to avoid offensiveness or friction, and it's
the movie's single biggest problem: everything has been so homogenized
that what could have been a fascinating film comes out as a cinematic
vanilla pudding, lacking any sort of flavor whatsoever. 
Walter Koonz (Robert De Niro) is a cranky ex-cop and raging homophobe
who finds himself partially paralyzed and unable to speak properly
after suffering a stroke. Embarrassed by his condition, Koonz begins
taking voice lessons from Rusty Zimmerman (Philip Seymour Hoffman), a
local transvestite who adheres to every gay stereotype and cliche'
imaginable. You'll no doubt be shocked to learn that as they grow
closer, they form a deep bond. Just consider this the low-calorie
version of As Good as it Gets. 
Flawless desperately wants to be The Odd Couple, and there are moments
in which it comes close, drawing us into the lives of the characters
as they come to terms with each other and their differences. Both De
Niro and Hoffman are engaging actors, with Hoffman's bubbling screen
persona serving as a brilliant counterpoint to Hoffman's gruff
demeanor. They each have a firm handle on two very challenging
characters (De Niro actually wore weights in his clothes to help him
prepare for his role as a stroke victim), and they work well together.
But sadly, the performances are all Flawless has going for it. The few
sparks of fire De Niro and Hoffman are able to inject into the story
are quickly extinguished by Schumacher's adherence to the lowest
common denominator, such as the laughable finale, which is so deeply
mired in cliches that it's hard to resist the temptation to hurl
popcorn at the screen. Nor is the drama helped by the unimaginative
shooting methods employed by Schumacher. We may as well be watching a
TV sitcom--or a play. 
I'll give Schumacher an 'A' for effort: with Flawless he's
demonstrated a willingness to deviate from his previous work, and he's
created a film with the potential for power and drama. Unfortunately,
the director does not yet appear to have either the confidence or
ability to helm a project which requires such depth; hence, we're
treated to countless gay stereotypes and unimaginative plot twists
(Stolen drug money? Yawn). Oh well. It was a nice try, Joel, and I
mean that. Maybe next time. 

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film: http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write to:
joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com. 

Author
Bob Bloom
 Flawless (1999) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Robert De Niro, Philip Seymour
Hoffman and Barry Miller. Directed by Joel Shumacher.
 "Flawless" is one of those flawed movies about opposite worlds colliding,
but ultimately coming to understand and like each other.
 Robert De Niro plays Walter Koontz, a macho, homophobic
ex-cop-turned-security guard who suffers a stroke.
 Philip Seymour Hoffman plays Rusty, a flamboyant drag queen and Koontz's
neighbor. They despise each other, hurling invectives back and force
through their respective apartment windows.
 But after Koontz's stroke, he turns to Rusty for help. Koontz asks Rusty
to give him singing lessons in an effort to regain the use of his vocal
cords.
 Director Joel Shumacher - who ruined the Batman franchise with his "Batman
Forever" and "Batman and Robin" - does not spare us one cliché here.
 Rusty, to put it kindly, is an over-the-top flaming drag queen, whose only
wish is to save enough money to have an operation that will transform him
into a woman.
 He and his fellow drag queen friends are loud, colorful and witty.
Koontz on the other hand, is dull, plodding and bigoted.
 The movie is not helped by a nasty subplot concerning a low-life drug
dealer and his stolen money.
 The movie's main asset is Hoffman's performance. Hoffman, best remembered
as the young crew member with a crush on Mark Wahlberg's Dirk in "Boogie
Nights," takes what could have been a caricature and transforms him into a
fully-developed human being.
 Despite how you may feel about the kind of life Rusty leads, you come to
respect him.
 De Niro on the other hand seems to be reprising some of his moves from
"Awakenings" as the stroke-impaired Koontz.
 He does a fine job at showing the frustrations of a man who can no longer
function at 100 percent. But he adds nothing more.
 And some of the other characters feel cliched, especially the actresses
who play the women in Koontz's life. Both are prostitutes, but one ditches
him after his stroke, while the other, with the proverbial "heart of gold,"
loves only him and doesn't care whether or not he has a nickel.
 The entire enterprise feels contrived.
 "Flawless" will not do much to advance the cause of gay rights. It does
have some funny moment though, especially a scene in which some three-piece
suit, gay Republicans try to reconcile with their more flamboyant brothers.
 The difference between them, Rusty explains, is that the Republicans are
ashamed of being gay, while Rusty and her friends feel nothing but pride.
 "Flawless" is a bit too violent for the subject at hand, and that adds a
disquieting note to the proceedings.
 Overall, though, "Flawless" is carried on the shoulders of Hoffman. And it
is his performance, worthy of an Oscar nomination, alone that makes this a
movie you may want to see.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Double personality. Joel Schumacher. Think FLATLINERS. Think ST-ELMO'S FIRE.
Think FALLING DOWN. Now think BATMAN FOREVER, BATMAN & ROBIN & THE CLIENT.
He likes to make the smaller, more meaningful pictures, but then he also
enjoys making the bigger, commercial movies as well. And this one? Well,
with DeNiro in tow, you'd think it was a big film. You'd be wrong. This a
small, character-driven niche film, which Mr.Hyde likes to pop up and do
once in a while. Just do us comic book fans a major favor, Joel. DO NOT
TOUCH the fifth installment of Batman! You've done enough damage.
PLOT:
A macho ex-security guard doesn't like his neighbor who is gay and a drag
queen. The neighbor doesn't like him back, cause he's an obvious homophobe.
One day, the macho man has a stroke, gets paralyzed to his right side, and
needs speech therapy lessons, which can be administered by someone very
close to him. Guess, guess! That's right, irony upon irony, the same exact
drag queen that he hates, now has to give him lessons. Let the odd couple
therapy begin.
CRITIQUE:
Do not go to see this movie if you're looking for a good story. An eventful
story it is not. Do go see this movie if you enjoy character-driven films
which allow you to relate, care and understand the people in whom you are
investing your time, as opposed to seeing them simply as movie actors. And
this is why I kind of liked this movie. I liked its characters, especially
the flawless (sorry but I had to) rendition of the over-the-top drag queen
as delivered by Philip Seymour Hoffman, who covered all the basics a la THE
BIRDCAGE, but also powered through the scenes featuring his own emotional
battles versus the outside world. Give this man an Oscar nod, for God's
sakes. He's good. He's very good! DeNiro is also good, but for some reason I
felt like I'd seen him do this whole schtick before. AWAKENINGS maybe?
Anyway, you still have to admire a man who need not continue to play roles
of physically challenged people, but does so in order to challenge his own
acting chops to a higher degree.
Knowing DeNiro though, I was laughing to myself at the beginning of the film
as I thought about how many months of handball lessons he must've taken for
that one-minute scene featured in this movie. You gotta love those method
actors! Solid performances aside, there wasn't much more of consequence in
this film. And whatever else they did have in there wasn't all that good and
seemed out of place. It's unfortunate because whenever I felt as though I
was just getting to know these two characters better, the film took me out
of my element and through some cockamamie plot-line featuring an evil local
drug lord who was chasing the money that some punkass kid had stolen from
him. Of course, all this also lead to a thriller-type ending, which seemed
completely out of place in this film, when a deeper emphasis on the
characters, especially the drag queen's personal life, which was barely
touched upon, would have been much better appreciated. As you can see, this
was quite a split decision on my part. I dug the performances, especially
Hoffman's standout role as the woman caught in a man's body, but didn't much
care for the side-tracked story a la RANDOM HEARTS. So see it if you want to
see a couple of solid actors doing their "thang", but skip it if you're
looking for a good story.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Many of you will also have seen another aspect of Joel Schumacher's filming
career, which includes music videos that he's recorded for many artists.
This list includes the music video "Kiss From A Rose" by Seal, "The End is
the Beginning is the End" by The Smashing Pumpkins and "Devil Inside" from
INXS. His film  directorial debut began on 1981's THE INCREDIBLE SHRINKING
WOMAN, which he followed up two years later with the Mr.T film vehicle D.C.
CAB. He's also written a few screenplays including the famous 1976 film CAR
WASH, and even garnered credits as a costume designer in the 70s on such
pictures as Woody Allen's INTERIORS and SLEEPER.
One of actor Philip Seymour Hoffman's first movie roles was in 1992's SCENT
OF A WOMAN, in which he played a snotty, prep kid. Some may also remember
him as the fat, sexually frustrated man from the overrated HAPPINESS.
Robert DeNiro has been married twice in his lifetime and both times his
better halves were African-American. The first was actress Diahnne Abbott
and the second was Grace Hightower. He also had twin sons with Toukie Smith,
conceived by in-vitro fecundation.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Robert De Niro never bores me as an actor, and is always trying to make a fresh
cut out of every character he plays. In "Flawless," De Niro plays a paralyzed
cop, and this echoes memories of the mental patient he played in "Awakenings,"
yet surprisingly his role here is overcome by the dazzling Philip Seymour
Hoffman. 
Hoffman plays a drag queen named Rusty, who considers "herself" to be an artist
- a showgirl with dreams of having a sex operation. Rusty is a show-off -
always entertaining any and everyone including a group of drag queens who sing
together loudly at his, or, um, her apartment. This infuriates a cop named Walt
(De Niro) who lives across the courtyard. Walt is an aching homophobe who also
has a low opinion of certain women. When one asks to tango with him, he
replies, "You are a whore. She is a lady." One night, Walt gets a stroke when
he hears a shooting, and is paralyzed on the right side of his body. It does
not take a rocket scientist to know that these two opposites will come together
in some way - how and why is the reason of most of these movies with generic
buddy-buddy formulas exist in the first place. When we think of this formula,
Eddie Murphy and Nick Nolte come to mind in "48 HRS." or De Niro and Charles
Grodin in the fabulous "Midnight Run." I almost want to pair "Flawless" in the
same company, but it is a near-miss. 
In a matter of speaking, the thrust of "Flawless" is the developing
relationship between Rusty and Walt, as Walt reluctantly takes singing lessons
from Rusty to correct his speech impediment. This relationship is often
threatened by a subplot involving a secret stash of money and some gangsters -
somehow, this feels out-of-place and seems to come from another movie entirely.
There are not enough scenes of Walt's inner life, or his relationship with a
tango dancer or with his cop buddies. Director Joel Schumacher obviously has an
affection for Rusty and the circle of drag queens - this may be very personal
terrain for Joel but he never takes it as far as one would hope. Instead, we
get more gangster threats involving stolen money and drug deals that make one
squirm at the screenwriting level. Does a dead parrot and a kidnapped mother
merit any attention in a character study like this one?
What is particularly invigorating about "Flawless" is Philip Seymour Hoffman -
his performance is on par with Terence Stamp's subtle drag queen character in
"Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert." Hoffman makes the smart choice
of not infusing any of the stereotypical cliches often associated with such a
character - he makes her human and compassionate and appropriately effeminate.
There are some scenes between De Niro and Hoffman, particularly when playing
the piano and singing, that will take your breath away. Hoffman can easily add
this character to his memorable turns in "Boogie Nights" and "Happiness" - this
is an actor I will keep an active watch for the in the future.
De Niro lends another fine character role to his oeuvre - it is a difficult
part to play because he has to play it with a speech impediment (sometimes it
is difficult to comprehend what he is saying). De Niro is essentially second
fiddle to Hoffman, who has the showier part, but his character is too
underdeveloped. The transition from homophobe to a compassionate human being is
less credible than Nicholson's transition in "As Good As It Gets," but at least
De Niro makes Walt touching in his frailness and inexpression.
"Flawless" has its share of flaws - the deletion of the gangster subplot would
have improved things greatly - but it has a certain poignance and there are
delightful zingers along the way, courtesy of Hoffman. And it is Hoffman's
performance that is really flawless - he makes his affinity for Hollywood
starlets very inviting. You feel like singing and dancing along with him.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Ross Anthony
These days, De Niro seems to be seeking out scripts with challenging twists
to his tough guy persona. "Analyze This" (earlier in the year) portrayed him
as a Mafia boss, who in search of meaning to his criminal life, enlists the
reluctant help of the comical psychologist Billy Crystal. In "Flawless," De
Niro plays retired hero cop Walt Koontz: strong, suave, and staunchly
homophobic. Walt soon suffers a stroke, prompting him ever-so-reluctantly to
take singing lessons (therapy) from his cross-dressing neighbor down the
hall. The relationship between these two (ahem) men, is the nugget of gold
that gives "Flawless" its appeal.
But there's plenty of less glittering film around this golden center. A
"Starsky and Hutch"-like drug/money drama weaves in and out lasting for
weeks and months without resolution -- until the end. Surprisingly, this,
essentially warm buddy film, wraps up with an action sequence. Farcical, out
of place, but not terribly destructive, the climax plays more off the good
humor of the writer/director than the vicious potential of the bad guys.
Though quiet brashly amusing, the drag-queen entourage overdoes the costume
parade at times. It's a rough, yet playful film with endearing moments,
where both hetero's and gays are cherished and ribbed.
Flawless. Copyright Š 1999.
Starring Robert De Niro, Philip Symour Hoffman. Rated R.
Written and Directed by Joel Schumacher.
Produced by Joel Schumacher and Jane Rosenthal at MGM/Tribeca.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
