Title
Review for Apartment Complex, The (1999) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 On Sunday, October 31, at 8 PM on Showtime TV, horror maestro
Tobe Hooper presents a quirky, psychological mystery, "The Apartment
Complex," starring Chad Lowe as a young grad student who has just
moved from the Midwest to study psychology at UCLA. Broke and living
out of his car, he's hired by Jon Polito, as the malevolent
Dr. Caligari, to manage the Wonder View Apartments in Hollywood in
exchange for rent, despite warnings from Obba Babatunde, playing a
homeless philosopher who lurks on the front curb. Inspired more by
Stephen King than Frank Lloyd Wright, there's something very strange
about the Wonder View Apartments. Certainly the tenants are an oddball
assortment of neurotics and psychotics, ideal specimens for a master
thesis on abnormal psychology. There's Faye Masterson, a
haunted-looking beauty with her hot-tempered, insanely jealous
boyfriend, Patrick Warburton; Amanda Plummer, an over-sexed psychic;
Tyra Banks and Gina Mari, stunt actresses who dabble in martial arts;
R. Lee Ermey, a paranoid, reclusive ex-government agent; creepy twins
Jimmy and David Schuelke; and Charles Martin Smith as the agoraphobic
with a dark, terrible secret. The horror starts when Lowe discovers a
dead body in the murky swimming pool. Detectives Ron Canada and Miguel
Sandoval figure he's their only suspect, tormenting and bullying him
as other strange events plague the tenants. All the psycho-babble he's
been learning in grad school comes in handy as the
wise-beyond-his-years student begins doling out free therapy as he
zeros in on the real killer. On the Granger Made-for-Television Gauge,
"The Apartment Complex" is a sinister 6.  It's Halloween hell in
exchange for free rent.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

APARTMENT COMPLEX, THE (director: Tobe Hooper; screenwriter: Karl
Schaefer; cinematographer: Jacques Haitkin; editor: Andrew Horvitch;
cast: Chad Lowe (Stan Warden), Fay Masterson (Alice), Amanda Plummer
(Miss Chenille), R. Lee Ermey (Frank Stanton), Obba Babatunde (Chett),
Jon Polito (Dr. Caligari), Ron Canada (Detective Culver), Miguel
Sandoval (Detective Duarte), Tyra Banks (Shana), Gina Mari (Kiki),
Patrick Warburton (Morgan), Charles Martin Smith (Gary Glumley);
Runtime: 99; 1999)
A Showtime Original movie that results in a very strained comedy/mystery
story, one that is more stupid than offbeat and less noir than in the
mode of a sophomoric film school work. It tries so hard to waver between
reality and being completely off-the-wall, until it succumbs to being
mostly annoying and far too cute looking for it to be appealing, yet not
funny enough to be worth the effort of setting up such an inane story. I
can only recommend it for those who want to see Amanda Plummer perform
her magical acting ability as a psychic. She can do no wrong, no matter
how rotten this made-for-TV film is or how ridiculous her part is, as
she sticks out like a rose in a weed garden, plying her talents as a
sex-craved psychic for the police.
Rob Lowe's brother Chad, stars as the naive Stan Warden, who leaves his
family house in the Midwest to live in his car in California, while
taking graduate courses in psychology. Desperate to earn some money, he
takes a job as a manager of a creepy apartment complex in Hollywood,
where he gets a rent-free apartment. The apartment he gets is filled
with crates and plastic bags marked the property of Glumley and looks
like the dark apartment a demented person would inhabit.
The Wonder View Apartments has a swimming pool that is polluted with
slime and filled with debris and it has an assortment of odd and
annoying tenants, from wise guy roller skaters to corny lovebirds. Stan
meets the eccentric tenants as he goes for the job interview. He
mistakes the slum landlord Dr. Caligari for someone who is a homeless
philosopher (Obba), and has the distinction of getting hired by both the
false and the real landlord (Polito). The tenants get a chance to try
out their revue comedy schtick for him and he gets to see this weird
place, designed by Frank Lloyd Wright's cousin Iggy, as he is introduced
to the tenants by the homeless one. There is one apartment, No. 19, that
is missing, which he can't find when he goes there to deliver a strange
package he receives addressed to it; and, in apartment No. 9, the one
next door to Amanda, there is someone who has lived there for 10 years
but who has never been seen. She says she wouldn't be able to pick him
out of a lineup. In apartment No. 4 lives an attractive but troubled
girl (Fay) he swoons over, she is going out with a psychopathic
muscleman (Warburton), who has fits of jealousy, threatening to beat up
anyone who even looks at her. Then there are two body double/stunt
actresses (Tyra Banks and Gina Mari), they provide some martial arts
scene routines, as they are scantily dressed in a bikini top and shorts
while trying out their choke hold act. All the while, the story revolves
around Stan's study of psychology in the sterile college atmosphere,
where rats are experimented in a maze to study human behavior, which is
compared to how invigorating it is to study people's behavior in a real
setting, as he finds people in this setting act the same way the rats
behave in a maze. To further mock the study of psychology, the hero uses
the bust of Freud to knock out the bullying boyfriend of apartment No.
4, implying that is about all Freud is good for nowadays.
The ambitious Stan cleans out the pool with an ex-CIA tenant (Ermey)
helping him lift a heavy object out of the pool, which is supposedly the
dead body of the last manager, Glumley. The two detectives (Canada and
Sandoval), for no reason at all, make Stan the only suspect in their
homicide case. This might have been funny, if there was some credulity
to their picking on the dumbfounded Stan, who has an airtight alibi. But
the film defeated itself by trying to be both real and absurd, thereby
nothing caught fire, it all seemed like every man and woman was out for
themselves to see if they can get a laugh
somehow from a story that was going nowhere.
Tobe Hooper (Poltergeist/Texas Chain Massacre) directed this shallow
movie with irreverence, allowing that shallowness to run rampant through
the film. The film failed doubly, both as a comedy and as a mystery.
There were so many gaps in the story, that one can easily make a case
that nothing made sense and what was funny, was merely only silly. This
is a low point in storytelling, as the director has failed to keep this
shallow film above even the low water mark it set for itself.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
