Title
Review for Sneakers (1992)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Donn B. Parker
*SPOILERS* *SPOILERS* *SPOILERS* *SPOILERS* *SPOILERS*
    [The following review was prepared by Donn Parker for distribution to the
    members of the International Information Integrity Institute (known as
    I-4), an organization consisting of something like 60 companies with 
    significant interest in improved computer security and integrity, which 
    is managed by SRI -- with Donn as one of its key players.  This review is 
    reproduced here with his permission, and is authorized for further 
    distribution, with appropriate attribution.  PGN]
    -Moderator]
     SNEAKERS (released September 11, 1992 by Universal Studios, owned
by Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd., and promoted in association
with CompuServe, owned by H&R Block) starring Robert Redford, Dan
Aykroyd, Ben Kingsley, Mary McDonnell, River Phoenix, Sidney Poitier,
and David Strathairn; directed by Phil Alden Robinson (Field of Dreams
director); and produced and written by Walter F. Parkes and Lawrence
Lasker (writers and producers of WARGAMES in 1981).
     The new computer crime movie, SNEAKERS (as in hackers who wear
sneakers and sneak into computers) was previewed in a San Francisco
showing sponsored by Universal Studios and Mondo 2000 Magazine (a
slick-cover psychedelic publication of the Timothy Leary genre appealing
to hackers) and attended by a large segment of the Bay Area hacker
community including Cap'n Crunch.  I had assisted the writers, Messrs.
Lasker and Parkes, with their first movie, WARGAMES--much to my chagrin
because the technology was so distorted.  This time they had the
technical assistance of Len Adelman (the A in RSA Crypto) from UCLA and
Robert Abbott, an information security consultant of long standing.
This "Mission Impossible," PG-rated (only three "God damn"s and almost no
sex) film is mostly technologically believable, unlike WARGAMES.  We can
forgive them for showing a Cray computer with a terminal displaying
Windows 3.1.
     All information security professionals should see this film and use
it to promote security awareness.  Some critics may pan it, but it has
all the ingredients for financial success.  It has:
     Universal has uniquely teamed up with CompuServe and CompUSA
computer stores to promote the movie.  A chat board has been set up to
fire questions about the movie at Mr. Robinson, the director, who has
been using CompuServe for 8 years.  Anagram and secret password games
can be played, with prizes including trips to Hollywood and Robert
Redford's jacket worn in the film.  The film is sure to be a big hit in
Europe and Japan as well as in the United States and should appeal to
the juvenile hacker culture throughout the world.
     One unbelievable item is the skimpy $175,000 accepted by Redford's
security penetration (read "tiger team") consulting company for a
record-breaking information security project.  Redford's team plus all
the high-priced technical equipment were worth much more than that.
They had to steal the universal decryption black box-the Maltese Falcon
of the movie-and then steal it again from the bad guys posing as NSA
types who steal it from Redford.  There is a neat shoulder-surfing
password pickup by video recording.  There are hacker antics such as a
transfer of President Nixon's net worth to the National Organization for
the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), credit record and license plate
registration privacy invasions, trashing of the NSA, CIA, and FBI, and
liberal-politics slams at President Bush and the Republican Party
well-timed for the upcoming national elections.  However, this is all
tolerable since it is done by Redford's character and his team who all
have serious criminal and other highly unethical practices in their
backgrounds.
     A tiger team attack on a client bank that has relatively good
security is excessively elaborate and would have left the bank guard in
a good position to sue his employer for aggravated assault and mental
anguish.  We will probably have to assure our company management people
that we don't do things like that-but the time to justify your budget
and staff is soon after they see this movie.
     The film ends with the rather patronizing and simplistic advice
that whoever controls the information, controls the world.  Just the
straightforward action and technology without all the liberal politics
and moralizing would have made it even better.
     You and your teenage children and your computer users and
management should all see and enjoy this much-to-be-talked-about film.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
126 min., PG-13, Action/Comedy, 1992
Director: Phil Alden Robinson
Cast: Robert Redford, Dan Aykroyd, Ben Kingsley, Mary McDonnell,
      River Phoenix, Sidney Poitier, David Strathairn, Timothy Busfield,
      George Hearn, Eddie Jones, Stephen Tobolowski, James Earl Jones
     Robert Redford is the head of a small business that breaks into
businesses to check their security.  The members are Redford, Dan
Aykroyd, River Phoenix, Sidney Poitier, and David Strathairn.  Each of
the members have an interesting past.  The National Security Agency
(NSA) requests Redford to find and bring them a black box, which is
being made by a mathematician.  The team finds the box and turns it over
to the NSA.  Redford finds out that the men from the NSA aren't really
from the NSA.  The fake NSA people try to kill Redford's team and the
team has to get back the box.
     SNEAKERS is an excellent film, which in some ways is like the
earlier film WARGAMES.  I highly recommend this film for everybody.
This film won't be in theaters for much longer, so I suggest seeing it
soon.  On a scale of zero to five, I give SNEAKERS a five.  SNEAKERS is
rated PG-13 for explicit language and violence.
     The cast for this film is excellent.  Robert Redford, who, believe
it or not, I have never seen in a film before, is superb.  He makes his
character believable without overacting.  Dan Aykroyd is great and not
in a slapstick role, as he usually is.  His character is magnificent,
and provides most of the comedy.  Nothing is ever made of River
Phoenix's character.  He isn't on the screen for all that long and he
doesn't have much of a speaking role.  His character also doesn't do
much.  Sidney Poitier is outstanding.  I have seen a few of Poitier's
past films and haven't been that impressed by Poitier (then again most
were old films and I am not generally impressed by old films).  In this
film though I really got into his character and enjoyed his acting.
David Strathairn was exceptional as the blind man.  His character was
also basically there for comic relief.  Ben Kingsley, however, I feel
was a miscast.  He tried his best, but I don't think that he fit the
role.  James Earl Jones was completely wasted in a cameo appearance.  He
has good acting talent, but hasn't been using it recently, having only
cameo appearances instead.  I hope that he will take a real role in the
near future.  Mary McDonnell was also not on for much time.  When she
was, though, she did a great job.
     The script and story were perfectly written.  The story moved along
smoothly and was interesting.  The characters, for the most part, were
well developed.  Nobody in the film had moronic lines that no real
person would ever have said.  The direction was excellent.
     This film is a great family film because there is no blood with the
violence and there is minimal profanity.  The story is one that will
entertain the young as well as the old.  All the stars work well
together and appear as if they are enjoying the whole film.  This is one
of the best films I have seen in a long time.

Author
Steve Kong
Sneakers is a light-hearted techno-thriller that entertains.
Sneakers is about a rag-tag team of industrial espionage experts. By
themselves, they would be individual nobodies. As a team, they are a group
that big corporations hire to break into their facilities to find faults in
the security systems. Leading the team is a 60's activist, Bishop (Robert
Redford). Also on the team are Mother (Dan Aykroyd), a paranoid man who has
more conspiracy theories than Fox Mulder (of The X-Files); former CIA man
Crease (Sidney Poitier); a young hacker Carl (River Phoenix); and a blind
guy, Whistler (David Strathairn).
Two NSA (National Security Agency) agents approach the team to recover a
black box. It seems that the black box contains circuitry that is the
ultimate code-breaker. This black box could for instance take a scrambled
data transfer from the Air Traffic Control system and decode it for anyone
to see or manipulate. Want to crash a plane? Quite a dangerous weapon if it
fell into the wrong hands.
As big as a computer geek as I am, watching movies that use computers in
them is more often than not a painful experience. Hollywood never gets
computer stuff correct on the screen and Hollywood is the worst when it
pushes the computer technology as the basis for a movie I can't remember
how hard I laughed when I watched Sandra Bullock in The Net. Things are
different with Sneakers, though. Computer technology is the basis for the
movie, but director Phil Alden Robinson (Field of Dreams), surprisingly,
keeps the computer stuff to a minimum. This works very well for Sneakers.
Computers, though the basis for the story, aren't really put to the
forefront when it comes to screen time. Most of the computers used in
Sneakers are just boxes with big glowing screens.
The script for Sneakers, written by Lawrence Lasker and Phil Alden
Robinson, is smart and tries to be smarter than it really is. The "bad guy"
in the movie can be easily guessed after the first few minutes of the film.
But, because the film doesn't take itself too seriously, the script works
out well.
Robert Redford is fits perfectly into the role of Bishop, the guy who gets
in over his head. The rest of the team doesn't get enough to do to be
memorable. Though Aykroyd is memorable in any film, his appearance in
Sneakers feels odd. Aykroyd's Mother is hilarious when he starts to talk to
Poitier's Crease. There is another performer in the film that is oily and
slimy and fits into the role very well. If I give away the identity of the
character or the name of the actor that portrays him I'd spoil the film.
Let's just say the character has a room filled with body heat and motion
detectors.
The only big complaint I have with Sneakers is that it runs just a tad too
long, clocking in at six minutes over two hours. Other small things felt
out of place with the film. For instance, the homeless guy outside of the
NSA office just didn't feel right. The overly nerdy "my voice is my
passport" guy from the toy company felt way out of place. Some of the
computer stuff looked strange, though this is just a matter of the
equipment being outdated.
You can find Sneakers on video and DVD and I'd recommend the film. Sneakers
has the 'fun factor' that most other films based on computers are lacking.
Sneakers also doesn't take the computer stuff too seriously. If you want a
film that will thrill, check out Sneakers.

Author
Frank Maloney
     SNEAKERS is a film directed by Phil Alden Robinson and written by
Robinson and Lawrence Lasker & Walter Parkes.  It stars Robert Redford,
Ben Kingsley, Mary McDonnell, Sydney Poitier, Dan Aykroyd, River
Phoenix, and David Strathairn.  Rated PG, for minor violence.
     SNEAKERS is an old-fashioned caper movie, despite its overlay of
computers and high-techery.  It is funny, likable, and very smooth.  It
is also, in all likelihood, nonsense and pointless at the end.  It has a
taut story and some wonderful actors who seem to be enjoying themselves.
Director Phil Alden Robinson (FIELD OF DREAMS) along with Walter Parkes
and Lawrence Lasker (WAR GAMES) put together a smooth, workable package
with only a few deficiencies.  It is perhaps a little too smooth to the
point where the tension level is not high enough to call it a thriller,
where the paranoia level is confined mostly to the very funny and very
wigged out character played by Dan Aykroyd, and where politics is
reduced a single evil genius (Ben Kingsley).  The ostensible topic is
cryptography, but the real subject is star vehicle.  Also, it would have
been nice if they had figured something for River Phoenix to do.
     Indeed, Robert Redford turns in his best performance in years.
After such bombs as HAVANA, his on-screen career could the kind of boost
SNEAKERS is probably capable of giving it.  Redford is not the smooth
man-of-the-world, but a member of the over-the-hill gang, who stumbles,
who bumbles.  In its way, it is a courageous performance.
     And it is a genuine pleasure to find Sidney Poitier on the screen
again.  I find him much more interesting and less on his dignity here
than he's been since the end of the 50s.  He is the sure anchor for the
rest of the cast.
     Mary McDonnell continues to impress me; I loved her as Kevin
Kline's wife in the Lawrence Kasdan film of last year, and my enthusiasm
then is more than justified by her performance now; the sexual tension
between her and Redford's characters is very erotic without any overt
bedroom hijinks.
     As mentioned, Aykroyd does a near perfect turn on his character, a
man who calmly believes the CIA is holding John Kennedy prisoner, inter
alia.  
     Kingsley's performance is more problematical.  Usually, it's the
heavy who has the most fun in these movies; Kingsley's performance is
more complex than mere scene-chewing, yet somehow it does not quite
satisfy, which may more the writing than the acting.  Does Redford's
Martin Bishop really have to tell Kingsley's character that he's crazy;
shouldn't that been made clear by the character himself?
     The editing is intelligent and add much to all forms of tension in
the film.  The cast is first rate.  The production values are high
overall.  There are lots of well-earned laughs.  I just can't believe
the story any more than I could believe the story of WAR GAMES.  An
plausible movie about the inherent threats to human liberty in the
Information Age would be an important film.  SNEAKERS is merely good
entertainment.  SNEAKERS is an entertaining film, not one to be taken
too seriously, but certainly worth a matinee ticket.

Author
Chad Polenz
Sneakers
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1992, PG-13, 126 minutes [2 hours, 6 minutes]
[thriller]
starring: Robert Redford (Martin Bishop/Brice), Sidney Poitier (Donald
Crease), Dan Aykroyd ("Mother"), Mary McDonnell (Liz), Ben Kingsley (Cosmo),
produced by Walter F. Parkes, Lawrence Lasker, written by Phil Alden
Robinson, Lawrence Lasker, Walter F. Parkes, directed by Phil Alden Robinson.
Most high-tech thrillers make the mistake of taking themselves too
seriously, so when the movie machine kicks in and the cliches pile up, no one
can enjoy the ride because the flaws are distracting. "Sneakers" is another
one of those flicks in premise, with lots of cool gadgets, computer hacking,
and amazing break-ins. However, it's lighthearted with a good distribution of
comedy and important themes to make for the adventure the other films try
for, but usually don't achieve.
Like most stories about government-level crime, this film uses some cliches
to establish its complicated story, but it's interesting and suspenseful and
you have to respect that. Two college buddies break into the government (both
physically and via computer) to electronically transfer funds to "more worthy
causes." When one (Martin) goes out for pizza, the other (Cosmo) is arrested.
The story then jumps to the present day as an older Martin (Redford) leads a
team of thieves who break into a bank.  We later learn they are actually
super security sneaks (if they can break into your place then it's definitely
not safe). 
Martin's team is made up of five guys including: himself; Donald Crease
(Poitier), the stern ex-CIA guy; "Mother" (Aykroyd), a paranoid conspiracy
theorist; "Whistler" (David Strathairn), a blind man in tune to the sound of
electricity; and Carl (River Phoenix), a 19-year-old hacker who fits in
somewhere. These guys make for the generic spy team, but they have great
camaraderie, which is due to the clever, witty dialogue. Even when they argue
it's funny, which shows the film's humbleness - it knows it's a typical
thriller, but it doesn't knock you over the head trying to prove itself.
Although the mood is initially nice and light, the story becomes a bit more
complex than it needs to. National Security agents show up and tell Martin
they know about his past. They cut a deal, if he and his team perform a
slightly illegal operation for them (stealing a microchip which is supposedly
the ultimate code-breaker), his record will be erased and he can get his true
name back.
The second act is full of detail and typical thriller stuff with many
characters introduced and clues dropped about the story, as we eventually
realize there's something much bigger going on. Suddenly, we are just as
confused as the characters when everything we thought to be true turns out to
be wrong. 
You probably wouldn't expect a film like this to make such great use of
mood, but it does through James Horner's cubist/jazz score, which makes the
atmosphere so dark you can feel it. Not to mention many key scenes which
become horrifically frightening because of their basis in reality. 
Through a series of strange events Martin finds himself face to face with
his old friend Cosmo (Kingsley). Cosmo had orchestrated a massive conspiracy
in order to get the microchip (which explains the film's complexity), and
when he tells Martin the power it contains it is another example of the
film's ability to be moving even though it shouldn't be. 
The final act involves a fantastic effort on behalf of the gang to pull off
a conspiracy of their own and steal back the microchip from Cosmo's highly
secured headquarters (a modern "fortress" if you will). Accomplishing their
mission is a difficult and delicate task, and although few errors crop up,
the suspense is so exciting, it more than makes up any distractions. The
ending is pretty much what you'd except, but because of the charm the film
had throughout, I didn't doubt it for a minute.
"Sneakers" is a great adventure that could have been even better. It
incorporates computers in a realistic, believable manner and poses many
relevant theories regarding their use and importance. It's not often we get
commercial movies as well crafted and moving as this one. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
SNEAKERS: Action/"sting" movie, up-to-date with cryptology, hacking,
and the NSA; high-tech thefts and double-crosses, the good guys against
"the gummint," or is it really?  Or *is* it really?
Plot/kick-off: Marty, the head of a security consulting firm with a 60's
rebel/hacker past, is threatened with jail unless he helps the National
Security Agency (an actual US government agency, which does seem to have
been overstepping its bounds lately, initially charged with monitoring
and decoding any signal transmission relevant to the security of the
United States) steal a cryptologist mathematician's  "black box"
invention.  He enlists his firm's help to get it and more action results
from this.
Characters/acting: Robert Redford is believable as Marty.  Mary
McDonnell was good as Liz, Marty's ex-girlfriend who got tired of
Marty's "boys club" but gets dragged back into Marty's life when he
needs her help.  Dan Ackroyd was hilarious as "Mother," the phone phreak
who lives the Illuminati trilogy, perhaps a little too deeply
(conspiracy theories abound).  Sidney Poitier was a pleasure to see as
the ex-CIA man.  These players all seemed well into their parts, not
"look I'm Robert Redford" etc.  Unfortunately, Ben Kingsley and James
Earl Jones seemed a little bit over-the-top as the characters they
played.  Ben!  Stop playing these power-hungry smoothies and get back to
Pascali's Island!  James!  Stop these cameos and get a real role!  Oh.
Please excuse me for my outburst.  :-)
Score/Sound: good varied soundtrack, also good sound FX.
Violence/Gore: some bullets flying, a couple of dead bodies (no gore),
a few fights and slugs.
Skin/situations: innuendos, some kissing and foreplay.
Analysis: Great throwaway lines, good twists and turns,
edge-of-your-seat at times, but a little self-indulgent, especially at
the end (think TERMINATOR 2).  I feel like one final draft could have
ironed out some of the movie's flaws (a couple of inconsistencies, a
couple of doubtful scenarios, and the overplaying mentioned above), but
on the other hand I didn't think about most of them until the day after.
It was nice to see a movie take a crack at the NSA (anyone interested in
our right to privacy in communications should read "Decrypting the
Puzzle Palace," John Perry Barlow's analysis of the recent
behind-the-scenes actions and initiatives of the NSA, printed in
COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM, June 1992 and reprinted in EFFECTOR ONLINE,
Issue 3.1, July 29, 1992).  Minor flaws and serious considerations of
our eroding rights aside, however, SNEAKERS was a fun movie with some
cool scenes/tricks to cheer at, certainly an enjoyable ride.

Author
2fatguys@tdis.icpsr.umich.edu (Too Fat Guys)
Roger:  SNEAKERS, a techno-thriller, engages in some of the least subtle
        government bashing in recent memory.  Martin Bishop (Robert
        Redford) runs a computer security company with "Mother" (Dan
        Aykroyd), "Whistler" (David Strathairn), Crease (Sidney Poitier),
        and Carl (River Phoenix).  They are hired by NSA agents to steal a
        black box.  After retrieving the device, they soon discover what
        it is: the ultimate code breaker.
Roger:        And this is really the only portion of the movie whose technical
        accuracy can be questioned. Using the black box, they break into
        several services, such as the "National Power Grid".  Aside from
        the improbability of such a service existing, the NPG seems to
        trust encryption enough to do away with authentication.
Roger:  There were also several other technical inaccuracies, but I was
        willing to excuse them.  Accuracy is an admirable goal, but it
        doesn't always make great cinema.  At least they bothered to hire
        a technical advisor.
Roger:  Information plays so great a role, that the villain seems almost
        incidental.  The real target of abuse is the government.
        Certainly, the film seems to be saying that the government is the
        greatest abuser of information.  And who could fault anyone for
        criticizing the government?
Roger:        So, that's two thumbs up for SNEAKERS.  That's all for now --
        the tty is closed.
-- 
For the latest review by the Too FAT Guys, finger roger@icpsr.umich.edu.

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
Starring Robert Redford, Sidney Poitier, Dan Aykroyd, Mary McDonnell,
         River Phoenix, and David Strathairn
Directed by Phil Alden Robinson
     This movie was a pure treat.  It reminded me a lot of WARGAMES with
Matthew Broderick.  It's got a lot of humor and a lot of government
bashing.  Everything a movie-goer could want.  And its also got a lot of
gadgets.
     SNEAKERS is the story of two computer hackers who in the late 60's
set out to take on the world from behind their CRT's.  The only problem
is that one of them gets arrested, and through a stroke of luck, the
other gets away.  This other, played by Robert Redford, later gets
involved with a group of very talented people, all from different
vocations and all possessing some sort of secret.  Their job is to break
into people's places so that the people who had their place broken into
know how to prevent others from breaking in.  They are "hired" by the
National Security Agency to obtain an ultimate code-breaker, only to
find that the people that hired them are not from the NSA, and the rest
is secret.
     This movie is a very good execution of the now popular "ensemble
movie."  All the actors are believable in their roles, and there is
plenty of humor going around.  There is also plenty of talent (as far as
the characters are concerned), which is always a big draw at the box
office.  You can have humor, but you must also have professionalism and
realism.  The American audience demands it, and SNEAKERS delivers.  I
thought it was a wonderful movie because I love gadgets, especially ones
that can tell your stress level or ones that can decode any encryption.
But never fear to the average movie-goer; this movie is *not* loaded
down with a lot of techno-mumbo-jumbo.  It's basically a high-stakes
romp, and it is a good crowd pleaser.  After all, it scored very high in
test screenings!
     So if gadgetry, conspiracy, and humor are your game, check out
SNEAKERS.  If you don't, you may never know what the government is up
to....
