Title
Review for Imaginary Crimes (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Eric Mankin
     Here's an unusual cinema event: a chance to watch Harvey Keitel
portray a seedy loser.  The latest one's named Ray Weiler, a low rent
deadbeat/con man and widower father of two in Kennedy administration
Portland, Oregon. "An opportunity like this comes once in a blue moon,"
we see him telling a mark, as his daughter Sonya (Fairuza Balk) cringes
in shame and embarrassment.  Haven't we seen this movie before?
     The details are different.  It's anchored in 1962, Sonya's senior
year in the private school that Ray has managed to talk her into.  She
is writing reminiscences of her earlier life, giving the film an
opportunity to dip into the past and follow Ray through the shipwreck
of a hundred inventions that don't quite work and mining claims that
don't quite pan out, through the death of Sonya's mother (Kelly Lynch)
and the illness of her sister Greta.  Sonya's writing talent brings her
to the attention of a kindly English teacher, and a chance at college,
as Ray's lies build to critical mass.
     Anthony Drazen (Zebrahead) directed the adaptation (by Kristine
Johns and Davia Nelson) of Sheila Ballantyne's coming of age memoir.
The acting is faultless.  Keitel could play this character in his sleep
from inside an iron lung; but he gets effective help from Lynch, Chris
Penn (as a disgruntled investor); and Balk, last seen in GAS, FOOD,
LODGING.  The scene and costume design is predictably perfect, down to
the pastel Melmac dinnerware and the harlequin revival eyeglass frames;
the music (by Stephen Endelman) is effective.  All that's missing is
any raising of the stakes beyond the most familiar strong-child-takes-
on-bad-parent interaction--in short, any surprise at all.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Harvey Keitel, Fairuza Balk, Kelly Lynch, Vincent D'Onofrio,
           Elisabeth Moss, Diane Baker, Chris Penn, Seymour Cassel 
Director: Anthony Drazan 
Producer:  James G. Robinson 
Screenplay:  Kristine Johnson & Davia Nelson based on the novel by 
             Sheila Ballantyne 
Cinematography:  John J. Campbell 
Music: Stephen Endelman 
Released by Warner Brothers 
     In 1993's THIS BOY'S LIFE, the memoirs of author/professor Tobias
Wolff were committed to film.  Wolff's affecting story, a coming-of-age
tale set in the Pacific Northwest, concentrates on the difficulties
experienced by a boy growing up in a single-parent household.  Also
based on an autobiography (that of Sheila Ballantyne), director Anthony
Drazan's IMAGINARY CRIMES explores similar terrain (both literally and
figuratively--this movie takes place in Oregon).  In this case, the
central figures are Sonya (Fairuza Balk) and her widowed father Ray
(Harvey Keitel).
     IMAGINARY CRIMES opens in 1961 with Ray operating a series of
sophisticated cons designed to keep his family fed and sheltered.  His
wife Valery (Kelly Lynch) is eight years dead from cancer, leaving him
two daughters:  high school senior Sonya and her younger sister Greta
(Elisabeth Moss).  Ray has never held a solid job, instead opting to
run get-rich-quick scams.  Although these have never paid off, Ray
refuses to face reality, convinced instead that one day his ship will
come in.  Sonya, a veteran of broken hopes, has come to accept the
bleakness of her life, much like Valery had done before her death.
     The story is told in two phases:  the "current" struggles of the
Weiler family during late 1961 and early 1962, and a series of
flashbacks framed as short stories written by Sonya.  These chronicle
certain events from the previous decade, both before and after Valery's
death.
     As an account of growing up in a family constantly on the verge of
blowing apart, IMAGINARY CRIMES is often touching, and occasionally
poignant.  This is Sonya's story, not Ray's or Greta's, so ultimately
the viewer's emotional response is determined by the effectiveness of
Drazan's dramatization of the young woman's turmoil.  For the most
part, he is successful in toning down the melodramatic elements in
favor of a more honest approach.
     Oddly, some of the earlier sequences might have been enhanced by
the use of a little *more* skillfully-applied melodrama.  Until the
flashback of Valery's death thirty minutes into the film, it's
difficult to connect emotionally with any of the characters.  That's a
rather long time for an audience to be held aloof, regardless of the
eventual payoff's impact.
     The similarities with THIS BOY'S LIFE don't end with common
themes.  Harvey Keitel's performance echoes that of Robert De Niro in
the earlier film.  Keitel occasionally seems trapped by the restraint
demanded by this role, which makes for a few awkward moments.  In
general, however, the actor acquits himself as the father about whom
his eldest daughter says:  "Never has a man less equipped for
parenthood tried so hard."
     With an unforced portrayal that makes use of her expressive eyes,
Fairuza Balk (of GAS FOOD LODGING) is the real star of IMAGINARY
CRIMES.  The central question for Sonya throughout the movie is whether
her father, a con man, really loves her and her sister--indeed,
whether he's capable of love at all.  Balk accurately and believably
conveys the turmoil caused by this uncertainty.
     Those finding the recent wave of coming-of-age stories to their
taste will probably appreciate what this movie has to offer.  IMAGINARY
CRIMES is a difficult film to connect with, but once the connection is
made, it rewards with an unexpectedly rich emotional texture.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
