Title
Review for Grand Canyon (1991)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Brian L. Johnson
135 min., R, Drama, 1992
Director: Lawrence Kasdan
Cast: Steve Martin, Danny Glover, Kevin Kline, Mary McDonnell,
      Mary-Louise Parker, Alfre Woodard, Tina Lifford, Marlee Shelton
     This film is about several people who have problems in their lives,
how they cope with their problems, and how they help out others.
     I think that GRAND CANYON is a wonderful film.  If you haven't yet
had the chance to see it, that you rush out to do so immediately.  I was
able to see the film on the big screen (at a second run theater) and
thought that it was definitely worth it.   GRAND CANYON is also
available on video cassette, although it won't be quite as spectacular
this way, it may be the only way that you will be able to see it.  On a
scale of zero to five, I give GRAND CANYON a five.  GRAND CANYON is
rated R for explicit language and female nudity.
     The performances in this film are great.  Steve Martin gives the
best performance that I have seen, and shows that he can do a wonderful
job with dramatic material.  Danny Glover also gives a spectacular
performance.  Kevin Kline is great.  He deftly handles his material and
creates a wonderful character.  Alfre Woodard is also very notable in
the cast, and does nothing but add to the film.  Mary McDonnell and
Mary-Louise Parker also seem to give their best.
     The director Lawrence Kasdan, who did THE ACCIDENTAL TOURIST and
BODY HEAT, does a wonderful job.  The film comes out looking perfect.
The script is expertly written and kept me fully entranced for the full
two hours and fifteen minutes.  When the film was over, I wished that it
had gone on for a longer time.  I wanted to know what happened to all
people in the film after it was over.  The locations used for the film
are excellent.  They set the film perfectly and added greatly to the
finished product.
     The score for the film was perfect.  The volume wasn't so high that
it drowned out words or became annoying and it fit the film.  Although I
am not much for classical music, I thought that it came out great.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I have no doubt that GRAND CANYON will be my best movie of 1991.
This was a movie about how the chance happenings in your life can
fundamentally alter your life forever.  It especially dealt with the
chance meeting of people who might become inseparable to you.
     What is the plot of GRAND CANYON?  Hard to say.  It is about a lot
of things.  There is a mugging, a rescue, a lost baby, a found baby,
getting involved with gangs, getting away from gangs, falling out of
love with your wife, falling into love with your wife, being scared of
someone of other race, becoming bosom buddies with someone of another
race, and so and so forth.  In short it is about life.  GRAND CANYON is
set in LA, but it could have been set anywhere.  The movie's title
comes from a wish of one of the characters played by Danny Glover.
     It was most of all a film full of wonderful characters that you
would like personally to meet.  The dialog (Lawrence Kasdan and Meg
Kasdan) was always incredible.  I hope the writers get the Oscar for
it.  The directing is super.  It was done by Lawrence Kasdan who did
THE BIG CHILL, and you can think of it as a much more serious and heavy
BIG CHILL.  Alternatively, you can view it as updated BIG CHILL for the
90s.
     GRAND CANYON is full of characters and full of events that make
you think of real life and not movies.  Where else could you have a
long scene about the absolute fear of teaching a young boy to drive.
Imagine a left turn against heavy traffic that is really scary and
realistic and not the laugh track version you have come to expect.
     This is also a quite scary movie with a fair amount of fear and
blood.  A subtheme is the violence in society in general and in LA in
particular.  As parents who are trying without much luck to have  a
second child, the episode of finding the baby and keeping it was really
touching.  Yet this was a life affirming and fundamentally happy movie
that made you want to immediately give your spouse (and children and
friends) a big hug.
     The actors (Danny Glover as Simon, Kevin Kline as Mack, Steve
Martin as Davis, Mary McDonnell as Claire, Mary-Louise Parker as Dee,
and Alfre Woodard as Jane) are in top form.  I had no idea Steve Martin
could be an articulate and serious character.  There is one very bad
side to the show: It ends! The ending is fine and not abrupt yet I
wanted to go on for hours.  I love these people.
     GRAND CANYON runs 2:15 which might be too long in a lessor
picture, but here I wish the editor Carol Littleton had included even
more footage.  Moreover, I hope that someday the producers (Michael
Grillo, Lawrence Kasdan, Charles Okun) will do a GRAND CANYON II
because I need to know how these new friends of mine from this movie
are doing.  GRAND CANYON is rated R for some reason and I guess it is
the fear and the bad language.  Certainly it would be fine for any
teenager.  I recommend this film strongly to everyone over the age of
12 and award it my top rating of ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Richard John Rauser
     Before I saw GRAND CANYON someone told me that "it's just like THE
FISHER KING."  Which, in my opinion, was a strong recommendation.
     Well, I just saw GRAND CANYON.  And it was nothing like THE FISHER
KING.  THE FISHER KING was a brilliant movie.  GRAND CANYON, on the
other hand, was bland, yuppie trash.
     I won't bore you with a detailed summary of the events in this
stupid film, but to put it simply, this movie deals with the inner
emotional and spiritual struggles of a group of yuppies who try to come
to terms with their inner feelings.  (Don't ask me what that's supposed
to mean -- ask the nearest yuppie if you can pull him away from his
cappucino; I hope I misspelled that).  [You did.  -Moderator]
     While THE FISHER KING was a deep and powerful film on many levels,
GRAND CANYON is shallow and nauseating on many levels.  In one scene,
Kevin Kline's wife (Kevin plays a wealthy lawyer who, in spite of all
his material comforts, feels a gnawing, emotional restlessness.  I also
felt a gnawing restlessness -- in my stomach) finds an abandoned baby
while jogging.  Later, as she weeps pitifully, she tries to convince a
reluctant Kevin that they should adopt the baby.  She says to him, "You
think I want to adopt this baby because there's something missing in my
life, but it's not true!  This baby was brought to us by fate!"
     At this point several middle-aged women pulled out hankies.  I
pulled out a vomit bag.
     Danny Glover is equally sickening as sweet, wise, intelligent,
all-around *perfect* garage mechanic who is so introspective and so in
touch with his feelings that you'd swear the guy moonlights as a
spiritual guru somewhere in east Asia.  
     Naturally, the black working-class Danny (who of course has no
problems of his own to work out) helps the white, yuppie Kevin to come
in touch with his own feelings.  The male bonding between these two is
quite sickening -- not because there's anything wrong with male bonding,
but because the way this film does it you'd think that it's a growing
trend in the Nineties, like Rubick's Cube or skateboards.
     Of course, GRAND CANYON has the done-to-death theme of racist cops.
At one point Danny's young nephew is running along the sidewalk when,
for no reason, two L.A. cops pull a gun on him, yell at him and call
him names, and push him to the pavement.  They promptly slap on the
cuffs.  Several middle aged women in the audience slowly shook their
heads, oooing and aaahing at what a horrible, wretched, twisted
society we live in.  If the kind of trash that GRAND CANYON spouts is
true, no wonder people aren't in touch with their feelings -- they're too
busy being harassed by Nazi cops.  The middle-aged men in the audience
weren't oooing and aaahing; they were too busy pondering their own inner
struggles in light of this amazing film.
     Of course, just so the script writers can't be accused of being
*tooooo* biased, they threw in a nice cop.  In the most disgusting,
nauseating scene you'll have to endure in this glitzy piece of garbage,
this nice cop says to a weeping young woman (who plays Kevin Kline's
secretary in the film -- she's crying because he won't have an affair
with her) "I just haven't found the right girl...yet."  She eyes him
with stunned adoration.
     Most of the people in the theater leapt from their seats at this
point crying, "See?  You can still find love!  Even in the Nineties!"  I
wanted to hiss, "The Nineties have just started, you friggin' idiot!  What
makes them so unique!?!?!"  But I was too busy heaving into my vomit bag
for the second time.
     Steve Martin is quite good in this film, but only because he
parodies the million-dollar yuppie character that Kevin Kline glorifies.
However, Steve's character doesn't "get in touch with his feelings" and
we're left to mourn him by the movie's end for his, uh, spiritual
isolation (I guess).
     This movie ends with a scene so sentimental you'll want to
telephone Mom and Pop: the main characters all journey to the GRAND
CANYON (except for Steve's character -- we're busy weeping at his moral
decay, remember?  He doesn't get to come along on this feel-good
spiritual trip) and gaze with wonder and awe at the natural spectacle
before them.  In light of it all, (says Danny Glover) their own problems
seem rather small.
     Then the credits came up.  Credits have never looked so good.  I
leapt up from my chair and hurried out, making my way carefully past the
countless yuppie couples who were either in tears or excitedly
discussing amongst themselves how this movie must have come straight
from Mt. Sinai.  All I was thinking about, however, was how two hours
of my life had just been stolen from me.  I wanted to sue for damages.
     I still can't get over how that blasphemous fool I talked to
compared this movie to THE FISHER KING.  THE FISHER KING was a
brilliant, brilliant, brilliant film.  It was stunning in its emotional
power and amazing in its philosophical depth.
     GRAND CANYON, by contrast, was like a sentimental, two-hour episode
of MIAMI VICE: ridiculous in its attempt at being deep, and sinking
under the depth of its own pseudo-philosophical weight.  IF  you're a
yuppie who is itching to understand what the "Nineties are all about"
and are dying to get in touch with your inner karma, this film is for
you.

Author
Frank Maloney
     GRAND CANYON is a film by Lawrence Kasdan.  From a script by
Lawrence and Meg Kasdan.  It stars Kevin Kline, Steve Martin, Mary
McDonnell, Danny Glover, Mary-Louise Parker, Aifre Woodward.  It is rate
R due to language.
     Of the films I've seen recently, GRAND CANYON is most like CITY OF
HOPE.  GRAND CANYON has a large, ensemble cast who act out a veritable
anthology of interconnected storylines.
     However, this film lasts the political sensibilities of John
Sayles' film and it lacks that epic feel.  Kasdan's film is a much
smaller film in the sense that it doesn't offer us some of the
directorial and editing pyrotechnics of Sayles' film and in the sense
that Kasdan does not try to manage anywhere near as large a bundle of
threads.
     Yet, GRAND CANYON is anything but modest in its intentions, its
meaning or meanings, or its effect on the audience.  I take its subject
to be the meaning of chaos, and how to live with it.  Its message is,
inter alia, that life is shitty and dangerous and a lot of bad things
happen to us, but if we can manage to survive the bad things long enough
something wonderful, miraculous will also happen to us every now and
then.  Not too assuring as messages go, but it seems to describe my
life.  Certainly, incorporating concepts of chaos seems like a good idea
in modern life.  
     GRAND CANYON is by and large an enjoyable and original film, a film
that is somehow better than it ought to have been.  It is a personal
film for the Kasdans; one of its central episode is directly out of
Lawrence Kasdan's own life.  It is a very entertaining film with
excellent, ensemble performances  from some of Hollywood's most
recognizable stars.
     Kevin Kline and Mary McDonnell are the central couple.  They both
turn in interesting, intelligent, and film-saving performances.  They
have to rise above their yuppie characters, their quasi-mystical lines,
and their dubious relationships to establish their characters as real
people that are worth caring about.  Miraculously, they do it all.  When
McDonnell gets around to her speech on believing in miracles, she is
totally convincing.  And they are both very funny in the right places.  
     (Incidentally, Kline has a dream that is the occasion for the best,
most naturalistic dream sequence I've ever seen in a movie.)
     Danny Glover also registers an excellent performance as the
philosophical, brave tow-truck driver.  His sister is played by Tina
Lifford, who has a couple of showcase scenes, but who has less of an
opportunity to be fully established as a real character.  Similarly,
some of the other secondary characters, mostly women, suffer similar
fates of being only half-developed, in particular, Mary-Louise Parker as
a whiny secretary who finally figures it out, and Alfre Woodward as the
blind date.
     But the real star of the film has got to be Steve Martin playing a
schlock-film director, a glib, loquacious, rationalizing creator of
ultra-violent flicks, in the name of honesty.  It is said that his
character is a parody of Joel Silver, director of THE LAST BOY SCOUT.
Martin is becoming an actor of amazing pureness and transparency.
     GRAND CANYON is worth at least two viewings.  The first viewing may
leave you a little confused and even depressed.  But the second will
reveal to you a film of amazing, subtle powers, seamlessness, and
perfection, realistic but hopeful, a snapshot of the amazing mess we're
in.
     I recommend, obviously, GRAND CANYON, even at full price.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     You made a mistake.  Because of your mistake you are about to die.
Your loved ones will have to get along without you because they have seen
you alive for the last time.  You have just lost what would have been the
rest of your life.  Then a perfect stranger reaches out a hand and saves
your life.  It is just a tiny action, but it means you are back again in the
world of the living.  You are going to have that rest-of-your-life after
all.  Do you see the world any differently now?  Darn right you do!  Every
good thing that happens to you--and every bad thing--is a gift of the
stranger.  Now the whole world looks surreal.  You are much more aware of
the happy and unhappy events that make up the life you almost lost.  You
suddenly have a sense of wonder about incidents you might never have thought
about the day before.  That is at least one way to look at Lawrence Kasdan's
enigmatic GRAND CANYON.  My wife sat on my right and claimed to have seen a
film making a philosophical point about what comes of good intentions.  A
friend who sat on my left (even slopping over into my seat) saw a film
intended to make a strong but not overly familiar political point that our
cities are deteriorating beyond the point of repair.  These are remarkably
different interpretations of a single film.  Perhaps the greatest virtue of
GRAND CANYON is its strange ambiguity.
     Mack (played by Kevin Kline) is on his way home from a basketball game
in urban Los Angeles when his car breaks down in just the wrong
neighborhood.  He calls for a tow truck but has the feeling he may not see
it come.  Sure enough, five youths with obviously bad intentions are about
to attack him when the tow truck driver, Simon (played by Danny Glover),
arrives and diplomatically defuses the situation.  Mack is so grateful to
Simon he feels he wants to help improve Simon's life.  Then an unrelated
"miraculous" event happens to Mack's wife Claire (played by Mary McDonnell
of DANCES WITH WOLVES and MATEWAN).  Soon events are intertwining the lives
of these three people, Mack's secretary Dee (played by Mary-Louise Parker of
LONGTIME COMPANION and FRIED GREEN TOMATOES), Dee's friend Jane (played by
Alfre Woodard, who played Winnie Mandela to Glover's Nelson Mandela in--what
else?--MANDELA), and Mack's best friend Davis (played by Steve Martin).
     Lawrence Kasdan co-produced, directed, and co-authored the screenplay
with his wife.  Together, the Kasdans create a story of rapture and
disaster.  It is a story of mysticism and self-reliance.  It is about good
luck and bad luck, yet it never becomes soap opera.  It is always
captivating, yet it is never clear where it is coming from.  When the film
ends, you sit watching the credits asking, "Well, what was that about?"  I
give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  (P.S.  Checking the VARIETY
review, I find out that *they* think it is a film about survival strategies
in L.A.)
