Title
Review for Yatgo ho yan (1997)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is difficult to evaluate a Jackie Chan film like one evaluates
other films.  Was the plot any good?  Well no, it was pretty lame
actually.  Was the acting any good?  Well, no, that was not so hot
either.  Chan has a lot of personality--more so than just about any of
the martial artists who regularly star in films--but that is not the
same thing as acting.  Acting has to do with giving the viewer insights
deep into a type of personality or it can be just playing a certain
type of person very authentically.  However, there is nothing very deep
about the personalities Chan plays.  And since I doubt there is anyone
really like a Chan character, the whole question of whether he is doing
a good job of acting is moot.  Does a Chan film have good
cinematography?  Well, it probably is no easy task to keep in the frame
of the camera a moving target like Chan.  And there is some okay
location scenery of (in this case) Melbourne, Australia.  But it hardly
is what anyone would consider good camerawork.  All of what one thinks
of as the usual virtues of a movie do not apply to a Jackie Chan film
besides the general fact that it is entertaining.
     The virtues of a Jackie Chan film are not those of a film, they
are the virtues of a circus performance.  Are there fabulous stunts in
the film?  Is it impressive that a human being can do what his
character does?  Are the movements smooth and graceful and well staged?
There are the virtues one expects of more from Ringling Brothers than
from Warner Brothers.  I am sure when a new Chan film is being
considered choosing the stunts is the first order of business.  Then a
minimal story is written to tie the stunts together.
     In this outing Chan plays a chef on Melbourne television.  The
irony of having a martial artist in such a delicate profession as
cooking is already familiar from the UNDER SIEGE films.  In any case
Jackie seem equally adept at delivering a well-done karate chop and a
well-done lamb chop.  After a cooking show broadcast one day Jackie is
returning to his car when he sees a damsel in distress being chased by
thugs.  He jumps in and saves the woman and quicker than a three-minute
egg he finds himself in the middle of a three- way war between two
rival gangs and the police.  There is a plot with a missing
incriminating videotape and some unexplained detective work by the
baddies who have an uncanny ability to find Chan and the people under
his protection wherever they hide.  After several confrontations Chan
gets angry enough and brings his enemies to a crushing defeat.
     The story is pretty basic stuff, but does anyone REALLY care about
the plot?  Chan fans probably want to know what kinds of action scenes
there are and what kinds of props does Chan use.  The centerpiece is
probably a sequence with a horse carriage.  There are some sequences
with power tools including that old standard of villainous menace, the
buzz saw.  And at one point Jackie takes on a giant earth-moving
machine.  There is a comic bit in a building under construction that
has only walls and doors.
     Some people were disappointed with the conclusion of Chan's RUMBLE
IN THE BRONX. Instead of having a climactic martial arts battle, Chan
let a hovercraft do the fighting for him.  That history repeats itself
for MR. NICE GUY.  Reportedly Chan suffered a neck injury in the
shooting.  Again the audience does not get the final fight between Chan
and villain and a convenient vehicle does the real fighting for Chan.
Perhaps Jackie Chan is nearing the end of his run and is discovering he
can no longer take the risks he has in the past.  Time is catching up
with him.
     A film like this deserves multiple ratings.  The stunts are
enjoyable to watch and little else really matters to someone who would
come to see a Jackie Chan film.  The film is pretty much
interchangeable with any other Jackie Chan film.  For those who like
this sort of thing, go for it.  I give MR. NICE GUY a 6 on the 0 to 10
scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Jackie Chan does it all, often writing, directing, and starring in
his own films.  And, of course, the diminutive Hong Kong action star, who's
half cuddly koala bear, half springbok, does all of his own gravity-defying
stunts, risking life and limb in the process.
        With "Mr. Nice Guy," Chan's latest outing repackaged for the
American market, the likable action hero should have had the opportunity to
demonstrate some culinary arts along with the requisite martial variety,
since Chan plays a TV chef (kind of like "Yan Can Cook" for the
high-kicking set).  Unfortunately, apart from the opening credits sequence,
Chan doesn't cook a thing.
        Plots are generally inconsequential in Jackie Chan movies but this
one plays like a pilot George and Jerry could have dreamed up to pitch to
NBC (Chan forced to play a TV chef by an unsympathetic judge?).  Given that
Chan doesn't come anywhere close to a saucepan, or a stove, his occupation
here is moot.  The *idea* of Chan playing a TV chef is actually funnier
than the movie itself.  As for the film's "translated" title, the TV
reporter that Chan "rescues" early in the film thanks him and calls him a
really nice guy.  It probably wouldn't have taken a whole lot of effort to
have come up with something a little more creative.
         The film is set in Melbourne and I can only think of two reasons
why that is: 1) filming in Melbourne is cheaper than filming in Hong Kong,
and 2) all those Australian accents would have seemed peculiar otherwise.
        There are two sets of bad guys in the movie, one called The Demons
(snarling, accented dudes in mod clothing who look like rejects from a Dark
Bros. porno video) and the other a gaggle of suit-and-tied mobsters led by
a nefarious drug lord (Richard Norton) known simply as Giancarlo--ooh,
scary!  Neither appear to have watched any Al Pacino movies, as the drug
deal they're involved in early in the picture turns sour (ever see a drug
deal on film that didn't?).  Weapons are drawn, money is scattered, cocaine
is spilled.  Filming all this in an attempt to get a TV exclusive is
reporter Diana (played by Gabrielle Fitzpatrick), who runs into Chan and
the chase is on.
        The chase in question lasts about twenty minutes during which
Jackie--as he's called in pretty much all his imports--throws a kick and a
punch or two (make that closer to a hundred), and even tries to explain he
doesn't even know this woman, but the hoods aren't buying it.  Diana
settles down to watch the tape...in her underwear!...and realizes it got
switched somewhere back there, and the chase is on again.  Attempts to
retrieve said incriminating videotape by both parties prove to be the
central "plot" of "Mr. Nice Guy."
        The film's climax involves Chan commandeering a monstrous
earthmover and razing Giancarlo's obsessively-clean luxury mansion.  Glass,
concrete, and wooden structures burst into flames at the slightest of
touches.
        Jackie Chan's films are equal parts silly, cute, and exhilarating.
Chan himself is at his best when interacting with props--there's a
contrived but effective sequence on a construction site with a lot of
architecturally-suspect blue doors--or putting himself in physical danger
(watch out for that buzzsaw!).  Obstacles are irrelevant to Chan; he scales
them, avoids them, engages them, all with consummate ease.
        But his latest movie, although not without its flourishes, tends to
concentrate on the cute and silly stuff, leaving even the most diehard
Jackie fans screaming "no more Mr. Nice Guy!"

Author
Homer Yen
You can fault Jackie Chan films for having paper thin plots (it has
the complexity of a two-piece jigsaw puzzle).  You can fault him for
having one-dimensional bad guys (villains either wear sunglasses and
suits or look like snowboarding rejects).  You can fault him for
having a plethora of extraneous characters (there are always women
that need saving).  But it's hard not to like "Mr. Nice Guy."
Relentlessly animated and oozing with martial artistry, this movie
focuses on Jackie, a chef who just happens to be walking home one day
when he runs into an investigative reporter named Diana.  It seems
that people are chasing her because of a video that she just shot,
which would incriminate the local crime lord.  Being the chivalrous
guy that he is, he begins to chop and sock her pursuers.  At the end
of this entertaining chase/fight sequence, Jackie mistakenly and
unknowingly winds up with the video.  For the rest of the movie, the
bad guys are in hot pursuit of Jackie but our hero has no idea why.
At every turn, more bad guys come his way, and we are treated to a
variety of fight sequences that are artistically choreographed and
sometimes jaw-droppingly amazing.
Watch as he fends off bad guys in a moving horse and buggy traveling
out of control down a busy city street.  See how he skillfully employs
chairs, tables and garbage pails as his weapons.  Wince as he barely
escapes certain injury when he comes oh-so-close to a buzzsaw.  Be
amazed at his martial arts ability.  But you'll also laugh because
Chan's movies are kung-fu comedies that stress simplicity and fun.
These moviemakers don't want you to be absorbed with plot twists or
character development.  Rather, they create opportunities for Chan to
show his stuff.  And ample opportunities are created and Chan comes
through.
There are several things that pleased me about this Chan offering.  Up
to now, most of his releases had a very cheesy feel, especially
because of the dubbing.  Yet, while you may cock an eyebrow at the
insipidness of the bad guys, the story (filmed in English) seemed more
coherent and stayed focused on Jackie and his ability to take matters
into his own quick-as-lightning hands.  You won't be disappointed by
the amount of action in the film or the stuntwork performed by Chan.
His stunts are so wild that it's really hard to explain them in words.
You'll have to see it to believe it.
The best way to view Chan's offerings is not to think of them as
movies or Chan as an actor.  Consider "Mr. Nice Guy" as a show with
Chan as its lead performer.  Indeed, you'll be hard-pressed to find
entertainment like this anywhere else.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Jackie Chan teams up with his old buddy Sammo Hung to give us
another zero-calorie fight-fest. Gloriously foolish fun.
My wife had this to say about MR. NICE GUY: "As entertainment, it's great.
As a movie, it sucks." I was forced to agree: the plot was an afterthought,
the acting was hopeless, the script a throwaway. But it showcased Jackie
Chan's raucous physical comedy -- "martial arts" is the wrong word for it --
and was therefore more than worth it. It isn't the all-out roar of joy that
RUMBLE IN THE BRONX and especially SUPERCOP were, but it's still great fun.
Most movies that feature martial-arts action are about the giving and
receiving of violent pain. Jackie has a slightly goofier agenda, and is all
the better for it -- even if he's in a paper-thin story.
The plot (what a word!): Jackie is a TV chef living in Australia who
specializes in on-screen acrobatics with his food. One day he collides with
a journalist who's just filmed a drug deal that ended in violence, and
there's a mix-up of tapes. This of course puts him right in the path of an
endless stream of punks, henchmen, cigar-smoking baddies, and cops. That's
about it-- but ther are a host of tiny little departures, like his
girlfriend (Miki Lee) and his female assistant, who have a howlingly funny
scene that, due to language barriers, cannot be repeated here. Some things
you gotta see to believe.
Jackie's stuntwork needs a new vocabulary to describe it: it's like play, or
maybe a kind of dance. One scene has Jackie getting into a fight in
traffic -- on top of a flood of Pepsi cans. Another scene involves an
unfinished building and a whole maze of doors opening into empty rooms and
corridors. Hung (who directed) plays it like an homage to the Road Runner
and Wile E. Coyote cartoons. (Hung also films things a little more loosely
and fluidly than Staney Tong did: we get a lot of Steadicam work, lots of
things going on in different sectors of the screen.) Another, even more
mind-boggling scene, involves Jackie being forced to fight with henchmen
holding his limbs back with bungee cords. (Yes, he manages to get the upper
hand with that one as well. Don't ask how.)
The final scene gives us the Grand Guignol (sans blood) ending that a movie
like this deserves. Here's a hint: in the first five minutes, we see a giant
earth-moving vehicle used to bury someone. Seeing a thing like that in a
movie like this is (to quote Roger Ebert) like Camille coughing in the first
reel and not dying in the last: it *has* to make an encore. I was right.
Only this time, Jackie was driving.

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Edward Tang King-sang and Fibe Ma
Starring: Jackie Chan, Miki Lee, Gabrielle Fitzpatrick, Karen McLymont,
Richard Norton
Ingredients: TV chef, damsels in distress, runaway horse and buggy,
swiveling steel crane, shopping mall chase, bulldozing equipment, gun
swapping scene, hallway with many blue doors scene
Synopsis: 
MR. NICE GUY is a Jackie Chan action chase comedy. In the film Jackie
plays a famous TV chef in Melbourne who entertains guests with his ginsu
cooking moves. One day, a drug kingpin (Richard Norton, sporting a
Steven Seagal hairstyle) and his thugs go after a lady reporter named
Diana (Gabrielle Fitzpatrick) who has just filmed their dope deal with a
rival gang and has it on videotape. While grocery shopping, Jackie
stumbles into Diane, saves her and gets on the bad side of the thugs,
who are now desperate to find the videotape that contains evidence of
their drug dealing. The thugs chase Diana and Jackie. When Jackie's
assistant Lakeisha (Karen McLymont) visits Jackie's apartment, the goons
go after Lakeisha as well. Finally, when Jackie picks up his girlfriend
Miki (Miki Lee) at the airport, the crooks decide to kidnap Miki. The
lightweight plot is little more than one chase scene after another, but
of course it's all just an excuse for many wonderful and impeccably
timed comedic action sequences by Chan. Can chef Jackie save himself and
the three women from the drug kingpin?
MR. NICE GUY contains around nine fight scenes showcasing Chan's amazing
blend of kung fu and humor. 
Opinion: 
Jackie Chan easily ranks with the geniuses of the silent movie era; he
is the undisputed successor and next evolution of the style of physical
comedy pioneered by such screen greats as Buster Keaton and Charlie
Chaplin. In these kinds of comedies the typical hero is the humble guy
with the expressive face, who through comic timing and athleticism,
manages to survive peril after hilarious peril and incidentally save the
damsel(s) in distress. Chan is a master of comic facial expressions and
timing, and he adds martial arts choreography to the comedic mixture. He
aptly demonstrates his unique style and talents in MR. NICE GUY. 
To be truthful, plot-oriented people might be disappointed with MR. NICE
GUY's whimsical plot ("All this hoopla over a lost videotape?").
Similarly, politically correct people might gripe that the women in the
film are mere bikini fillers. And fans of Chan's previous movies might
say the ending takes it easy (using a bulldozer instead of kung fu). But
these are small things; on the whole MR. NICE GUY is pretty
entertaining.
What I would like to see in a future Jackie Chan movie is a layer of
situational comedy that uses the drama of the situation to give more
meaning to Chan's physical comedy. Another thing that would be good in a
future Jackie Chan movie is to have stronger parts for the female leads.

Author
James Brundage
 I really love Jackie Chan.  He's fun to watch, he's a break from the
ever-tedious norm.  But, Jackie Chan as ... the kung fu cook?  Come on.
 Jackie Chan plays opposite no names in Mr. Nice Guy, a film that rivals any
of the 50s B-movies or the 60s Kung-fu flicks.  It's high on fun, but low on
quality.
 The plot basically follows Jackie Chan playing... Jackie?, the Kung Fu
blackbelt and gourmet chef.  I think they're running low on plots.  And, to
add in other bit of cheesyness, he's running from bad guy drug dealers in
search of an incriminating tape.  Resisting the urge to make a joke about
Larry Flynt, Linda Trip, or anyone involved in any recent sex scandal, I can
only state that we all know just how many times people have wanted a tape.
To be quite honest, this bothers me as a plot device.  If they could just
shoot the person instead of asking for the tape, they'd save us and
themselves a lot of time and energy.
 Still, the plot devices in Mr. Nice Guy are as hackneyed as a whooping
cough, and I really can't stand the fact that they decide to put them in at
every turn.  It reaches a sad point when a theatre-released film with Jackie
Chan is worse than the HBO film "Jackie Chan's: Who Am I?", which at least
had action scenes.  But I don't even get that anymore.  Mr. Nice Guy has the
tendency to just bother someone with cheaply filmed action sequences.
 Although it doesn't usually bother me, the thing that bugged me about Mr.
Nice Guy wasn't only that it felt cheap.  It looked cheap, too.  The
explosions are obviously stock footage, and the film itself looks like a
home video with poor lighting.
 Anyway, the plot continues with them taking Jackie's girlfriend hostage and
Jackie coming and kicking everyone's ass.  To add in what people thought
would be fun, they decided to have a rival gang thrown into the mix.  Oh,
yeah, and the other main character is a member of the media who wants the
tape back just so she can get her story.
 You get the impression that the media is going to hate this girl, because
she rubs off as a total bitch, almost as much as Jackie's girlfriend rubs
off as a total ditz.  She resorts to parading around half-naked and accusing
people of fondling her to stay alive.  She acts like a hooker and runs off,
never to be heard from again, a half-hour from the end of the movie.  So
long, farewell, goodbye, good riddance.
 Another terrible aspect of this film was the accent everyone had.  I may
have missed something, but it apparently takes place in Sydney or London or
some city with a British accent.  Normally, again, accents don't bug me, but
this movie appears dubbed even though I don't think it was.  If Hollywood
made it, shame on them for doing so.  If Hollywood didn't, shame on whoever
turned it out.
 I'd like to tell you that the performances were good but they weren't.  I'd
like to tell you that it was enjoyable, but it wasn't really.  It was
enjoyable to the fact that I could sit through it, but I couldn't wait to
turn it off, either.  It runs about 90 minutes, and each one is worse than
the last.  I really can't stand it that films have gotten this bad, that a
person able to turn a cheesy film into something very funny can't do a damn
thing with this.  It just bothers me.
 It should bother you, too.  But, if you're lucky, you haven't seen it yet
and you won't.

Author
Steve Kong
When watching Jackie Chan's previous films I have always said to myself,
"Boy, Jackie would have a big hit if he were to do a film with no plot or
story but action from start to finish.  Why insert these mindless plots?"
Mr. Nice Guy is just the film I was hoping for, but it is also just the
film I was not hoping for.
Plot?  What plot?  In Mr. Nice Guy, Jackie Chan plays a TV celebrity chef,
Jackie.  A news reporter accidentally leaves Jackie with a videotape that
two opposing mob groups want.  The mob groups try to get the tape back from
Jackie.  Enough plot, let's get to the action.
Mr. Nice Guy is filled with action scenes, but most of them don't work for
one reason.  I love Jackie Chan films because of the stark honesty of the
action sequences: no overuse of slow-mo or quick cutting to cover up
stunts.  Unfortunately, in Mr. Nice Guy there is a heavy dose of both and
not only does it take away from the honesty (and thrill) of the stunts, it
gets downright annoying at times.  The slow-mo is used in all the wrong
occasions-do we really need a slow-mo Jackie running down a street yelling
"Miki"?  Do we need the quick cuts and unintelligible shaky-camera
technique during the action sequences?  No.  It's been shown in previous
Jackie Chan films that we don't need these fancy camera tricks-all we need
is Jackie.
Mr. Nice Guy is a less than average Jackie Chan film.  There is less plot
than his previous films and contrary to what I thought, this is actually
detrimental to the film.  Now, I think that Jackie Chan films should have a
little more plot than did Mr. Nice Guy-I also think that there should be a
90 minute film of just the outtake of previous Chan films.  For Mr. Nice
Guy, the end outtakes are the best thing in the film.  As much as I love
very amiable Jackie Chan and his films, I'd have to say, skip Mr. Nice Guy.
 Jackie has done better than this.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Sammo Hung
Cast:  Jackie Chan, Richard Norton, Miki Lee, Karen McLymont, Gabrielle
Fitzpatrick, Vince Poletto
Screenplay:  Fibe Ma, Edward Tang
Producers:  Leonard Ho
Runtime:  94 min.
US Distribution:  New Line Cinema
Rated PG-13:  action violence, minor sensuality and drug use
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        I'll sleep soundly under the assumption that most people reading this
review won't be too upset if I fail to criticize Mr. Nice Guy because of
it's hackneyed, overdone story, or because of the lack of convincing
acting, or because the entire film is a shameless excuse to show Jackie
Chan do a lot of really nifty stunts.
        Besides, to criticize the film on these points would be meaningless,
because I imagine the makers of Mr. Nice Guy knew exactly what they were
doing.   I haven't seen a lot of Jackie Chan flicks, but it's clear to
just about everyone that his films are goofy on purpose.  A deep story
and complex characters would probably take away from the entertaining
and often hilarious action spectacle that Chan never fails to deliver.
        But, since this is a review, I have to summarize the plot, despite its
unimportance.  Chan plays Jackie (I'm sure it's a coincidence that his
character has the same first name), a cop-turned-chef.  One day, he runs
into a woman named Diana (Gabrielle Fitzpatrick), who is being chased by
a bunch of guys that Jackie needs to beat up really fast.  
        Soon, Diana's struggle becomes clear:  she is in possession of a video
tape that will incriminate local drug dealer Giancarlo (Richard Norton),
so they want it back.  When Diana gets Jackie tangled in the situation,
he finds himself constantly beating the hell out of multitudes of Aryans
in sharp black suits. It probably won't win the Oscar for Best Original
Screenplay next year, but the story serves the purpose film nicely.
        Jackie Chan films are lots of fun, and that's because of Chan himself.
  He has such an energetic and likable screen presence that he not only
demands attention, but he makes us laugh.  It's such a rare combination
talents that he has: he's so physically skilled, and yet in such good
humor about himself and his films.   And he's not a bad actor:  most
martial artists are either deadpan and boring (Steven Segal), or just
not very talented (Jean Claude Van Damme).  Chan's martial arts displays
in his films never fail to amaze me.
        But even Chan could be defeated by an unoriginal and boring script and
execution.  Thankfully, director Sammo Hung (who has a very funny cameo
in the film as a nosy biker) has created a group of action sequences
that are thrilling and visually impressive.  The best in the film takes
place in a factory (or so it's called), which is composed of a lot of
concrete corridors and many blue doors.  And the finale, involving a
dump truck and a big house, is a lot of fun.  
        The performances fit the mood of the film.  Norton does a good job
hamming it up as the Bad Guy, always sneering and uttering his words in
some strange accent.  And Jackie's group of helpers, including his
adorable girlfriend Miki (Miki Lee), are a colorful bunch.  I can't
imagine that fans of Chan will be disappointed in this film.  I've never
been a huge fan of his, but the pleasant mood and sheer entertainment
value of Mr. Nice Guy has ensured that I will make it a point to see all
his films in the future.

Author
Michael Dequina
As with his other stateside releases, Jackie Chan's latest chopsocky
vehicle, Mr. Nice Guy, is contrived, blockheaded, and lacking in narrative
logic.  But also like those other films, it is a highly enjoyable ride.
Once again, Chan's screenwriters (here Edward Tang and Fibe Ma) have taken
the easy way out and named their star's character simply Jackie, with no
last name.  This Jackie is a world-class chef who co-hosts a popular
cooking show on Australian television.  Of course, Jackie also happens to
be a talented martial artist, and these skills come in handy when he
becomes involved in an ambitious reporter's (Gabrielle Fitzpatrick) expose
of a drug dealing ring.
Other plot details, involving a videotape and a biker gang, are
irrelevant; in fact, as is the case with most Chan films, the plot itself
is just about irrelevant.  The sole purpose of Mr. Nice Guy's existence are
Chan's comic fight scenes, and those here do not disappoint.  Director Samo
Hung (who has a cameo role), a longtime collaborator of Chan's, does not
waste any time putting Chan in action, diving head-on into a wild
chase/fight/shootout after a brief cooking show prologue.  Other impressive
set pieces follow, most notably a chase in a mall, which directly leads to
some frenzied, if cliched (can you say fruit cart?), business involving a
runaway carriage; and an extended late-film sequence at a construction
site, in which a hilarious pursuit through a maze of blue doors culminates
in some exciting fights involving boards, cement mixers, and a deadly
buzzsaw.  None of the action sequences in Mr. Nice Guy are as spectacular
as Supercop's thrilling helicopter-train finale or Rumble in the Bronx's
daring leap between two buildings; nor is anything as inventive as the
ladder fight or air tunnel climax in First Strike and Operation Condor,
respectively.  But the action delivers, even if the energy peters out
before the film's end (the finale, as spectacular as it is, is a letdown
for fans of Chan's athletic prowess).
Filmed almost entirely in English (even so, the voices of some
English-speaking actors are laughably dubbed), Mr. Nice Guy hints at Jackie
Chan's latest transition to Hollywood productions (he made ill-fated
attempts with 1980's The Big Brawl and 1985's The Protector); next in the
pipeline is Rush Hour, a stateside production co-starring Chris Tucker.
Hopefully that film will be a mere diversion in Tinseltown, and Chan will
continue with exuberant Hong Kong productions such as Mr. Nice Guy, for his
unique charm and reckless abandon are sure to be diluted by American hands,
much like they have been before.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
CinemaReview Magazine: http://www.CinemaReview.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
The greatest thing about Mr. Nice Guy is the anticipation.  We at one
point see a mass biker wedding, complete with great big balloons and
this huge giant wedding cake.  This shot is intercut with the usual
footage of Jackie Chan being chased by an army of gangsters.  And for a
moment, we see the biker wedding the way that Jackie Chan, filmmaker,
sees it, as a grand and glorious opportunity for comic chaos.  And sure
enough, Jackie gets one of the balloons airborne, the bad guys shoot it
down, and he falls splat in the middle of the cake while the biker
grooms do some damage to the party-crashing gangsters.  Even better, we
see the splashy, trendy house of the chief gangster (who gets in a snit
if people track in dirt) and we know, we just know, that there is going
to be some major remodeling done before the movie's through.  It's
exactly the same sensation you get when you see a table filled with pies
in a Three Stooges movie.
There are people who don't like Jackie Chan movies, and I'm not
surprised.  You can always find someone to criticize things that are
pure and good and fine.  There are people out there who don't like Dr.
Pepper and drink carrot juice or coffee or some other nasty beverage.
There's a percentage of people that will watch old people play golf on
TV while the Cowboys play the Packers.  I know people who don't like
peach cobbler.  The criticism of the good things in life by some ought
not to discourage the rest of us from enjoying them.
You will hear people say that Jackie Chan movies are poorly dubbed.
This problem has been (mostly) solved in Mr. Nice Guy, where all the
action takes place in Melbourne and everybody (even the Australians!)
speaks at least some English.  You will hear people say that Jackie Chan
doesn't speak English very well.  So what.  You will hear people say
that the movies are repetitive and formulaic.  What's your point?  So
are most of the movies coming out of mainstream Hollywood nowadays.
You will hear people say that Jackie Chan movies don't have a plot.
Does a Roadrunner cartoon have a plot?  A plot would only spoil things.
This outing, the fifth Jackie Chan movie placed in wide release in
America, accidentally places Jackie in possession of a tape showing a
drug deal by two rival gangs.  The gangs chase Jackie all around
Melbourne (which looks like a neat little town, someone call my travel
agent) in pursuit of the tape.  Unfortunately, Jackie's cop friend's
kids swipe the tape -- so since Jackie can't produce the tape, he gets
chased some more until the movie ends.
(The tape is hilarious, by the way.  It's ostensibly shot by two
repoters hiding upstairs, but when we see the tape, it looks like it's
been shot from three different angles -- including an angle which shows
the tape being made.)
The whole purpose of a Jackie Chan movie is to let Jackie show off his
impressive kung-fu skills and his impeccable comic timing.  Jackie is
fast with his fists, but he knows that he can't whip the entire gangster
army with his bare hands.  So he uses his brain and his quick feet and
the things he finds around him -- a portable cement mixer, a parked
18-wheeler, wooden pallets, the emergency brake -- to beat up the bad
guys and make them look foolish so we all have a good laugh.  More than
anything else, it's the sheer inventiveness that Jackie brings to the
fight scenes that makes the movie work.
The only thing lacking in Mr. Nice Guy is the climactic scene, which
features Jackie's duel with a giant earth-moving machine.  It's a
perfectly good bit, but it pales in comparison to the climactic chase
scene in Supercop, or the hoverboat chase in Rumble in the Bronx.
However, there's a lot for Jackie Chan purists to like -- for example,
when Jackie proves that, yes, he can beat up bad guys with his arms and
legs tied behind his back.
If you've still decided not to like Jackie Chan movies, I can't change
your mind.  But if you haven't ever seen one -- and most of you haven't
-- at least try one, OK?  Jackie Chan is a great talent, he's always
watchable, and there's never a dull moment in his movies.  Now, if he
just had a big budget and a decent supporting cast for a change....
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"I don't want to study law," she said with the
same tone as if she had been saying, "I don't
want to turn into a cockroach."

Author
James Berardinelli
     Reviewing a Jackie Chan film is a lot like reviewing a James Bond 
film – it's necessary to take the movie in the spirit it was intended, 
which means that, while familiar motion picture elements like plot and 
character development are necessary ingredients, they are not focal 
points.  In fact, judging any Jackie Chan movie by stodgy and 
traditional criteria would result in a rather lackluster result.  
Fortunately, there are enough other elements (comedy and action in 
particular) to more than offset the uninspired storyline.  Even at his 
worst, which MR. NICE GUY definitely isn't, Chan is fun to watch.
     Ever since New Line Cinema released RUMBLE IN THE BRONX three years 
ago, Chan's popularity in the United States has been on the rise.  
RUMBLE was quickly followed by American theatrical rollouts of FIRST 
STRIKE, SUPERCOP, and OPERATION CONDOR.  Currently, Chan's first major 
Hollywood feature, RUSH HOUR, is in production.  Meanwhile, the 
changeover of Hong Kong from British to Chinese hands has done nothing 
to dampen Chan's popularity in Asia, where he remains the biggest star 
in the firmament.
     MR. NICE GUY represents the next step in Chan's global conquest – 
his first all English-language picture.  Originally slated to be filmed 
in New York City, the location was changed to Melbourne for financial 
and logistical reasons.  The cast is comprised largely of non-Asian 
actors, including Western martial arts star Richard Norton, with whom 
Chan has worked twice before (TWINKLE TWINKLE LUCKY STARS, CITY HUNTER).  
The director, Samo Hung, has a long history with Chan, having directed 
him in seven previous pictures.  In addition to taking the helm, Hung 
makes an appearance in front of the camera in a small-but-pivotal comic 
role as a cyclist who gets pushed too far.
     As a change of pace, Chan doesn't play a policeman or secret agent 
this time.  Instead, he's a popular TV chef named Jackie.  Although 
fighting bad guys isn't his thing, he can't resist a damsel in distress, 
and, when a redheaded TV reporter, Diane (Gabrielle Fitzpatrick), is in 
need of help, Jackie's assistance causes him to be unwittingly pulled 
into a crime war that features drug dealers on one side and gang members 
on the other.  Meanwhile, there's the matter of an incriminating video 
tape that Jackie has which everyone wants.  To get it, they're willing 
to go to any lengths, including kidnapping Jackie's girlfriend, Miki 
(Miki Lee), breaking into his house, and terrorizing him at a public 
appearance.
     There's more action and comedy in MR. NICE GUY than in the last few 
Chan films.  Perhaps thankfully, considering how convoluted some of the 
storylines are, there's also less emphasis upon plot.  This allows us to 
concentrate upon Chan's spell without being distracted by implausible 
and unnecessary narrative details.  MR. NICE GUY gives us the basics:  
Chan at his action/comedy best, a bad guy (Norton) who enjoys chewing on 
the scenery, and three attractive women (Lee, Karen McLymont, and 
Fitzpatrick).  Throw in about a half-dozen high energy martial arts 
fights, several impressive action/chase sequences, and a spectacular 
finale, and the recipe is complete.  Who cares that there are some 
sizable storyline gaps or that one character, Diane, virtually 
disappears (without explanation) two-thirds of the way through the film?
     MR. NICE GUY contains its share of memorable moments.  The most 
dynamic of these involves Chan's attempts to avoid, then corral, a 120-
ton mining vehicle which is subsequently used to wreak mass havoc 
(including trashing a $1.5 million house).  There's also a fun chase 
with a runaway horse-and-carriage careening down Melbourne's Swanston 
Street.  Finally, there's an amazing fight sequence that features Chan 
having close encounters with some power tools, including two circular 
saws.  And for those who like unusual product placements, Pepsi gets 
one.
     As usual, however, the centerpiece of MR. NICE GUY isn't all of the 
expertly-choreographed action sequences, but Chan himself.  Unrestrained 
and charismatic, the international celebrity manages not only to smile 
his way through most of the film, but to cause audience members to do 
the same.  The action is never too violent, and it's always tinged with 
comedy.  Chan, whose mannerisms recall those of Buster Keaton and 
Charlie Chaplin, pays tribute to the silent comics in a hilarious scene 
that involves a bunch of opening and closing blue doors.  With its blend 
of crowd-pleasing elements, MR. NICE GUY is irrepressible fun.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Matt Williams
Mr. Nice Guy is the latest Jackie Chan film, so you should know what to
expect.  A weak plot, terrible dialogue, very little acting ability, but
some jaw-dropping action sequences that nearly make the rest of it
worthwhile. However, Mr. Nice Guy lacks the sparkle of Jackie's best
efforts, and its weaknesses are more glaring than ever.
Jackie Chan plays, who else, Jackie.  This time out, he's a famous chef
who hosts an Australian cooking show.  Not that it ever makes a
difference in the plot.  There are only two scenes of him cooking.  For
the rest of the film, somehow he mutates into Jackie Chan, Supercop.  It
never does explain why his character has such superb martial arts
skills...perhaps he was in the same cooking class as Steven Seagal in
Under Siege?
A TV newswoman, Diana (Gabrielle Fitzpatrick), covertly tapes a drug
deal involving kingpin Giancarlo (Richard Norton) and a local gang of
toughs, The Demons. Although she only has one camcorder, somehow the
result is full of close-ups and multiple angles...hmmm, shades of
Broadcast News???  Anyway, the goons discover Diana, and will do
anything to recover the tape. Here lies another crucial flaw in the
story:  doesn't anyone realize you can copy a tape?  Oh well, no one
ever said Jackie Chan movies had to make sense.
As luck would have it, Diana runs across Jackie, and, wouldn't you know
it, Jackie accidentally ends up with the tape.  This leads to countless
chase and/or fight scenes which look like they could have been lifted
from Rumble in the Bronx or nearly any other Jackie Chan movie.
In a move apparently designed to woo American (and other
English-speaking) audiences, the film uses English as its primary
language.  However, that doesn't mean an end to the atrocious dubbing
that has afflicted Jackie's recent Americanized releases.  Strangely,
many of the characters speaking English are overdubbed with English, and
poorly too.  Whether this is just a very bad case of looping, an effort
to minimize accents, or a simple case of nostalgia, it does achieve the
same level of distraction present in all of Jackie's dubbed films.
The plot in Mr. Nice Guy is negligible, merely an excuse to have Jackie
on the run from various goons.  But even though plots have always been
second to the action in Jackie's films, it seems odd that the filmmakers
have stuck us with this tired retread. Look, if you have Jackie Chan
playing a chef, why not use that to your advantage?  Watching Jackie
doing his stuff in a kitchen, beating the bad guys with foodstuffs
sounds like the perfect setup for innumerable comic stunts.
The action is a mixed bag here.  There's really only one no holds barred
fight scenes that have become the trademark of Jackie's films.  It takes
place in the arbitrary location of a construction site, apparently for
the sole reason that there are lots of nifty things lying around that
can be useful ala Jackie Chan.  The action in the film is neither
Jackie's best nor worst, but you long for some more inspiration in the
scenes.
The film's gratuitous use of slow motion is distracting.  Once or twice,
it may be useful to highlight a spectacular stunt sequence.  But to
slo-mo Jackie running?  Either this is a nod to the Six-Million Dollar
Man, or a pathetic attempt to disguise the fact that Jackie may be
slowing down.
If you've seen all of Jackie's films and are in need of another fix, go
ahead and see Mr. Nice Guy.  However, if you're just in the mood for
some good action, you'd be better off hitting the video store for some
of his better work, such as Supercop.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases
