Title
Review for In Custody (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Om Puri, Shashi Kapoor, Shabana Azmi, Sushma Seth, 
           Tinnu Anand, Neena Gupta
Director:  Ismail Merchant
Producers: Whahid Chowhan
Screenplay:  Anita Desai and Shahrukh Husain based on the novel by 
             Anita Desai
Cinematography:  Larry Pizer
Music:  Zakir Hussain and Ustad Sultan Khan
Released by Sony Pictures Classics
In Urdu and Hindi with subtitles
     The most stimulating and intellectually-challenging of ideas do
not always make the best of movies.  IN CUSTODY is a prime example of
this.  There is much meat here to chew on, but the flavor is in doubt.
By devoting all its attention to a dry, didactic examination of the
disappearance of the Urdu language, this movie has filled the screen
with poorly-realized characters that function as little more than
mouthpieces for getting across the director's point-of-view.
     Back in the early days of Merchant-Ivory, before the
producer/director team turned their attention to sumptuous British
dramas (such as A ROOM WITH A VIEW, HOWARDS END, and THE REMAINS OF THE
DAY), films such as SHAKESPEARE WALLAH explored India and Indian
themes.  In Ismail Merchant's directorial debut, this part of the world
is again visited, albeit with considerably less impact.
     The story begins with a meek teacher named Deven (Om Puri)
attempting to arrange a meeting with the great Urdu poet Nur (a
corpulent Shashi Kapoor, who was much trimmer when he appeared in
SHAKESPEARE WALLAH).  Armed with an antiquated reel-to-reel tape
recorder, Deven overcomes the financial demands of one of Nur's wives
(Sushma Seth), and the jealousy of the other (Shabana Azmi) to conduct
the interview.  Much to his dismay, however, Nur is not the great man
that his reputation suggests.  Rather than reciting verse and sharing
his philosophical views on life, he would rather drink rum and eat
biryani.
     Despite excellent performances from veteran actors Om Puri and
Shashi Kapoor, the two main characters in IN CUSTODY lack depth.  They
function as Merchant's tools to examine the dissolution of a language
and the subsequent impact of that event on Indian culture as a whole.
Never is a substantial emotional bond forged between the viewer and
either Deven or Nur.  When a film can't make an audience care about the
protagonists, how much more imposing a task is it to generate interest
in an issue?
     There are flashes of near-brilliance in IN CUSTODY.  The principal
theme--the shunting aside of Urdu for Hindi--is intellectually
engaging.  The parallels between the language's decline and that of its
premier poet are equally worthy of exploration.  Also, Merchant
displays a deft hand at capturing the essence of a poverty-stricken
India being reluctantly forced into the electronic age.
     Unfortunately, the glue to hold these elements together isn't in
place.  The tone, with its bursts of comedy and out-of-place melodrama,
is uneven, and IN CUSTODY's running time is far too long.  But the real
disappointment is that Deven and Nur are never more than shadows of the
personalities that they could be.  Too much time that could be used to
delve beneath the surface currents of these mens' lives is devoted too
reading poetry.
     Individual appreciation of IN CUSTODY will largely depend on what
you expect from a film.  Too many of today's theatrical offerings fall
into the "all form, little substance" category.  In this case, the
opposite is true.  What might make for an interesting dissertation
doesn't fare nearly as well in the context of a motion picture.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dennis Schwartz

IN CUSTODY (director: Ismail Merchant; screenwriter: Anita Desai  (also
novel) /Shahrukh Husain; cinematographer: Larry Pizer; editor: Roberto
Silvi; cast: Shashi Kapoor (Nur), Om Puri (Deven), Neena Gupta (Sarla),
Tinnu Anand (Murad), Sushma Seth (Safiya Begum, The first of Nur's
wives), Shabana Azmi (Imtiaz Begum, The second of Nur's wives), Sameer
Mitha (Manu), Chiku (Sagar Arya), Prayag Raj (Jain); Runtime: 126;
Channel Four Films; 1993-GB/India)
A slow developing tale about a university professor in a small northern
India town, who is hassled when trying to get an interview with someone
he idolizes, India's greatest living Urdu poet (it's a fictional
characterization). I guess to really enjoy this film, you would have to
speak the language to understand its poetical nuances, otherwise the
poetry as presented didn't seem like much. As well-acted and crafted a
film as this directorial debut was for Ismail Merchant, it still failed
to make the story interesting for a wider audience, as the poetry fell
on deaf Western ears even though the story's heart seemed to be in the
right place. The film still seemed to be too dry to care about an
unfamiliar Muslim language and an intellectual culture no longer in
vogue, dying a slow death. As worthwhile a project as it is, as adapted
from Anita Desai's 1987 novel, in which she also does the screenplay, it
still is hard to bring an intact literary work and make it viable as a
cinematic experience without changing it. The film's main failure is
that it never comes to life as a moving poetical work but always seems
like an academic exercise, through no fault of the director.
Deven (Om Puri) complains about the unruly college students he teaches
Hindi to and snaps at his overburdened and frustrated wife Sarla (Neena
Gupta), who is fed up with being a housewife and not appreciated. They
live in Mirpir with their precocious young son Manu (Tinnu Anand), where
the family is mainly concerned about money problems and with the father
being too busy to spend more time with the family. Deven, in an attempt
to keep Urdu alive, contributes articles to a small literary magazine in
his spare time. The magazine's editor Murad (Tinnu Anand) visits him
from the nearby bigger city of Bhopal and asks him to get an interview
with the once famous Urdu poet Nur (Shashi Kapoor) who is living in
retirement in Bhopal. The amateur poet in Urdu is more than pleased to
do so, though he does not feel secure that he is up to the task. He
meets the great man in his home, and is disappointed by what he sees.
Firstly, the poet has two wives who are competing for his attention by
constantly quibbling with each other. The older first wife (Sushma Seth)
is a harpy, who has charge of the downstairs in the large house and is
reduced to doing the cooking for the family. The much younger second
wife (Shabana Azmi), who bore him his only son and has a nasty
disposition--was working in a local brothel when he met her, though now
she aspires to be a poetess. He is an obese man in failing health, also
suffering from alcoholism, sloth, and having a rabble group of admirers
who shamelessly leech off him. The elderly poet hangs around with these
idlers everyday, which is making his ulcers even worse.
The first meeting between the admired poet and the lowly university
teacher goes poorly, as the poet gets drunk with his group of admirers,
and vomits in his second wife's bedroom. She treats the guest with
contempt, thinking he is just another one of the poet's foolish admirers
and makes him clean up the mess as if he were a servant.
Somehow, Deven gets invited back to the house and plans with the first
wife how to get the reluctant Nur to give him this interview for
posterity. The problem is that she wants money to arrange for the poetry
reading and for the private room he would need to get him away from the
second wife, who will not allow for the interview. But Deven's magazine
refuses to give the money and he has to go begging the college officials
for it. He finally manages to squeeze a little money out of the college
Registrar, saying that he will make a tape-recording and the college can
have the poet's voice to use as a valuable resource for its classes.
As things continue to go wrong for the serious-minded but naive Deven,
he finds that no one really cares about the poet, his poetry, and the
Urdu language, and he is stuck with being the only one who can do
something to save the language and restore its usage in intellectual
circles. The flawed poet has the even larger task, of being viewed as a
symbol for the entire Urdu tradition.
Deven gets a chance to hear sexy wife number 2 sing Nur's poems, as all
the admirers sit around and get their rocks off as she stirs them up
with sexual intonations and lyrics that go like this: "O candle, for the
sake of the moth do this little favor ... Flare up once and then die."
It must have been a cultural thing, because it went by me. To me, her
performance seemed as if it was as gaudy as an Esther Williams bathing
suit number in a Hollywood pulp film.
Once the poet is being audio taped in the private room, after Deven has
put his job on the line by taking off three days to make the tape, the
trouble begins, as he had to buy a secondhand tape-recorder that is not
reliable, and since he is not handy, as part of the deal he gets the
proprietor's moronic relative to work the machine. But he is more
harmful than helpful. The poet himself is only interested in getting
Deven to supply his admirers with rum and Biryani, and gives Deven very
little on tape that is useful. These scenes were played as lowbrow
comedy, showing the clumsiness of Deven in handling the tapes and the
awkward situation he was in.
The film ends with a heavy-handed symbolic message, which summarizes the
struggle to preserve the old traditions and clearly shows the director's
obvious love for Urdu, as an old rundown but beautiful mansion in Bhopal
owned by Deven's departmental chairman, is being knocked down to make
way for a shopping center, as the chairman, an enthusiast for Urdu, is
only happy about the money he is receiving for the property and could
care less about the historical value of his mansion.
The acting performances by Shashi Kapoor and Om Puri deserve special
praise. But I'm afraid the film was too stilted and unmoving; and, it
failed to capture the beauty of the ancient poetical language on film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
