Title
Review for Miami Rhapsody (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Gwyn Marcus (Sarah Jessica Parker) is in a quandary.  She has just
said "Yes" to Matt (Gil Bellows).  She thought a marriage such as her
parents Nina and Vic have (Mia Farrow and Paul Mazursky)  is just what
she would like for herself when she begins to notice that all is not as
appears on the surface.
     First time director/writer David Frankel has come up with a nice,
pleasant comedy and if the situations are somewhat forced but you are
able to accept them as comic you will enjoy the film.  For instance,
everyone, Gwyn discovers, is having affairs.   Her own sweet mother and
Antonio (Antonio Banderas) are meeting regularly, romantically.   He is
the young male nurse who is taking care of bedridden Grandma.
Meanwhile Dad is having a longtime fling with his travel agent.  In
fact the movie leaves no one out;  with the exception of poor innocent
Gwyn, everyone is doing it.
     Is this what Gwyn wants from marriage?  Is this what will be her
fate, too?   This being a movie and this being a comedy all ends
well ... or pretty well.
     The cast carries the story nicely: Mia Farrow is light-hearted
(unlike in Woody Allen films), Antonio Banderas is handsome, Gil Barrows
makes a nice boyfriend for Gwyn, and Sarah Jessica Parker continues to
do well as she has in her last half dozen films.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So would you like a show where you can kick back your heels, not
tax your overworked brain, have a lot of laughs, listen to well written
dialog, and watch some good looking actors and actresses? Well, I have
the movie for you--MIAMI RHAPSODY.
     First, let's play guess the director.  You have a movie set on the
East Coast and filled with Jewish people and comedy.  It starts with an
elegant typeface and has Cole Porter jazz music playing loudly yet
soothingly in the background.  When it cuts to the actors, you have
Sarah Jessica Parker talking documentary style to the camera.  She
delivers a soliloquy about her life to a never seen doctor behind the
camera.  Playing a lead role as her mother is Mia Farrow.  Finally, the
dialog is fast paced, witty, and 80% of the references are about sex.
     So you guessed it?  Woody Allen, right?  Wrong.  It was written
and directed by David Frankel who does a wonderful homage to Woody.  It
does not compare to Woody's best, but it is rather like his comedies
sans Woody's usual hidden darker meanings.
     The movie is about Parker's mother, dad (Paul Mazursky), brother
(Kevin Pollak), and sister (Carla Gugino).  They and everyone they meet
seem to be having or wanting to have sex with everyone and especially
with their friend's spouses.  This is not very done explicitly--it is
mainly handled with some funny dialog.  The only lines I can remember
are not suitable for printing, but you will laugh when you hear them.
The only jokes that had no place in it and certainly did not work were
a couple of tired, old anti-working women jokes that I have no idea why
they put them in since the rest of the script was bright and
intelligent.
     The main plot of the show is that mom and dad have been married
for a long time.  They have fought during most of their marriage and
both started having affairs to bring some fun and romance to their
lives.  In the early scenes each openly and causally tells this to
Parker who says she does not want to hear about them having sex with
each other much less with someone else!
     The rest of the show is just a lot of light hearted dialog.  There
is not much of a plot.  There is no tension or drama, and there is
certainly no hidden meanings or serious parts.  This movie is like a
meringue--not much there but sinfully fun to eat.
     The movie runs a breezy and perfectly short 1:35.  It is correctly
rated PG-13 for a few bad words and an adult theme.  There is no
nudity, violence, or drugs.  It would be fine for anyone over 12.  I
recommend it to you as a fun diversion and give it ** 1/2.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: February 9, 1995
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     David Frankel, who wrote and directed MIAMI RHAPSODY, has a style
much too close to Woody Allen's to be a coincidence.  He starts with a
jazz song, Louis Armstrong's rendition of "Just One of Those Things,"
under fairly plain-looking credits.  Allen would use white on black,
Frankel uses lavender on black, but it clearly is a conscious
imitation.  And the dialogue has the main character making just the
sort of wisecracks that Woody Allen would write.  And at least an
imitation of Allen at his most creative would be amusing.
Unfortunately, the story is slight and more than a little boring.  Part
of the problem is that the whole plot can be described in two
sentences.  I will not divulge the second sentence here, but the first
is that Gwyn Marcus (Sarah Jessica Parker) cannot commit to her
relationship with her fiance because every other couple she knows hasa
relationship that is falling apart because of infidelity.  The plot,
told in flashback and flashbacks-within-flashbacks goes through one
relationship after another, mostly in her own family, and each
relationship has one or both people fooling around on the side.  The
plot has more detail than that, of course, but it all adds up to Gwyn's
unwillingness to commit in her relationship.  Parker's Gwyn narrates
the film staring right into the camera, then popping into connecting
dramatized anecdotes about her family.  Her father (Paul Mazursky),
himself a philanderer, correctly suspects her mother of infidelity.
The mother is played by Mia Farrow who appears in this imitation Woody
Allen film purely for the artistic challenge of the role, no doubt.
Other flashbacks show Gwyn's siblings, each totally self-absorbed and
happy to cheat on any relationship he or she has.
     Sarah Jessica Parker is clearly a Woody-Allen-like character,
alternately indignant and sarcastic.  One can almost hear Allen's
delivery of some of her lines.  But she has a good delivery and a
screen presence that may get noticed after this film.  Antonio Banderas
plays Antonio, the male nurse of Gwyn's grandmother who gets involved
with the weird relationships in the Marcus family.  Gil Bellows is
Gwyn's fiance, who seems likable enough in the role as just about the
only decent person in the film, but he does not have a lot to do.
Kevin Pollak is also memorable as Gwyn's older brother who leaves his
own pregnant wife for the wife of his business partner.
     Perhaps MIAMI RHAPSODY could have worked better as a comedy with
more likable characters.  Instead there is a cold satisfaction in the
poetic justice that these characters are screwing up their lives and
will likely continue to do so.  In spite of the warm Miami settings,
this is a cold comedy about people it is hard to like or care about.
The story is told with affection for this family, but Frankel is not
yet a good enough writer to make us care for his characters.  This film
gets a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Sarah Jessica Parker, Antonio Banderas, Mia Farrow, Paul
Mazursky, Gil Bellows, Kevin Pollak, Carla Gugino.
Screenplay/Director:  David Frankel.
     The line between homage and cinematic plagiarism can be a
fairly fine one, and largely a matter of perception.  Then there are
directors who quote so frequently and so freely from their idols
that it becomes an exercise in supreme critical generosity not to
say that the sincerest form of flattery has become a faded photocopy
of a great work of art.  This week's winner of the Brian DePalma
Memorial Award for Stylistic Cannibalism is David Frankel, whose
MIAMI RHAPSODY, though frequently amusing, is such a blatant and
second-rate ersatz Woody Allen film that it might as well have been
called MIAMI HALL.
     MIAMI RHAPSODY stars Sarah Jessica Parker as Gwyn Marcus, a
clever but anxious writer for an ad agency.  After a two year
relationship she has finally become engaged to boyfriend Matt (Gil
Bellows), but Gwyn seems unsure about marriage.  Her uncertainties
are magnified when she discovers that virtually every member of her
family has been unfaithful.  Her father (Paul Mazursky) has had a
string of affairs; Mom (Mia Farrow) is involved with Grandma's Cuban
nurse Antonio (Antonio Banderas); brother Jordan (Kevin Pollak) is
cheating on his pregnant wife (Barbara Garrick).  Even her younger
sister Leslie (Carla Gugino), who has been married for just a few
weeks, is getting some on the side.  All these revelations force
Gwyn to consider whether the compromises necessary in marriage are
worth it all.
     Frankel has crafted a fairly simple story on which to hang his
witty observations about modern marriage, and has created an
interesting character to act as tour guide.  Gwyn is a smart and
funny woman, but an overthinker who uses her cutting remarks to keep
people at a distance.  Sarah Jessica Parker is an extremely
appealing actress, and she is full of energy and sparkle in this
role.  The problems begin when she opens her mouth.  Her character
is so obviously a gender-transferred version of Woody Allen's
compulsively self-analytical intellectual that every word out of her
mouth seems just horribly wrong, or a really misguided impression.
I kept waiting for Parker to put on a pair of horn-rims and be done
with it.
     If only that were the only thing Frankel cribs from Allen.
MIAMI RHAPSODY opens with a jazz score over credits on a black
screen, with cast listings in alphabetical order.  Sound familiar?
It should if you've seen any Woody Allen film in the last fifteen
years.  There are several lines and concepts taken whole cloth from
ANNIE HALL:  a reference to the fact that "love fades;" Gwyn's final
comments on relationships which are remarkably similar to Woody
Allen's "we need the eggs" rationalization at the end of ANNIE HALL;
even an oblique reference to the original title of ANNIE HALL
(ANHEDONIA, or aversion to pleasure) in Gwyn's line, "I'm just
terrified of anything good that might happen to me."  Add to that a
confrontation between Gwyn's father and his mistress which recalls
CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS, and the mere presence of Mia Farrow.  With
every sardonic quip and every recognizable setup, MIAMI RHAPSODY
began to feel more and more forced and artificial, like some film
school project to cram as many Woody Allen references as possible
into 95 minutes.
     None of this is to say that Frankel doesn't get off his share
of very funny lines, most memorably in a scene at Leslie's wedding
in which she and her husband exchange vows apparently written by Dr.
Seuss.  There are far worse models for making a film than Woody
Allen, and Frankel fires off so many jokes that several of them
invariably hit.  But while Frankel is adept at writing one-liners
for his characters, he doesn't really know how to place them in
interesting or memorable situations.  He also doesn't use his cast
particularly well, leaving Gil Bellows' Matt and Kevin Pollak's
Jordan to drift without a sense of who they are.  MIAMI RHAPSODY is
not without its moments, and I laughed more than a few times.  But
David Frankel is like that guy who quotes all the best lines from
his favorite comedies to his friends.  If I *really* want to laugh,
I'll watch the original.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Sarah Jessica Parker, Gil Bellows, Mia Farrow, Paul Mazursky, 
          Antonio Bandaras, Carla Gugino, Kevin Pollack, Barbara Garrick, 
          Bo Eason 
Director: David Frankel 
Producer: Barry Jossen and David Frankel 
Screenplay: David Frankel 
Cinematography: Jack Wallner 
Music: Mark Isham 
Released by Hollywood Pictures 
     Presumably, after making thirteen movies with Woody Allen, Mia 
Farrow has been missing the wry human insight and cleverly-concocted 
scripts which characterize Allen's work.  For obvious reasons, however, a 
Farrow/Allen corroboration isn't anywhere on the horizon.  So what's the 
actress to do?  Perhaps try something a little different, somewhat 
similar, and obviously inferior.  How about MIAMI RHAPSODY, or, by 
another name, Woody Allen lite? 
     Make no mistakes, those expecting something along the lines of ANNIE 
HALL or HANNAH AND HER SISTERS are going to be disappointed.  What 
writer/director David Frankel has managed with MIAMI RHAPSODY is to 
capture some of the feel of an Allen movie without nearly the same degree 
of intelligence or character realization.  This film stands up reasonably 
well against most contenders, provided you don't consider the really good 
ones. 
     MIAMI RHAPSODY is an anthology picture featuring no less than nine 
significant characters.  Of necessity, lots of corners get cut and, 
predictably, storylines are stripped to the bare bones.  The person 
around whom all the action swirls in Gwyn, a young copy writer who is 
trying to decide whether or not she's ready for marriage.  As portrayed 
by Sarah Jessica Parker, she's great with the barbed one-liners ("All the 
good moments are happening to someone else", "You have the subtlety of a 
woodpecker", "It's always natural for the female to be in agony") but 
weak on emotions.  As her potential fiance observes, all she wants to do 
is talk, and this diffuses any straight dramatic focus. 
     Everyone Gwyn knows seems to be cheating.  Her brother, Jordan 
(Kevin Pollack), has left his pregnant wife (Barbara Garrick) for a 
shapely model.  Her sister, Leslie (Carla Gugino), not yet three months 
married, is sleeping with someone else.  Her mother (Mia Farrow) is 
enjoying a fling with a male nurse (Antonio Bandaras), and her father 
(Paul Mazursky) is trapped in an extramarital relationship with his 
travel agent.  At least Gwyn's intended, Matt (Gil Bellows), is 
faithful... not to mention boring. 
     To Frankel's credit, he doesn't stay true to the easy romantic 
comedy model.  This is largely due to the Allen influence, but it gives 
MIAMI RHAPSODY a certain element of freshness.  Quite a few of the jokes 
are funny; the characters are generally affable, if not tremendously well 
fleshed out; and the story flows smoothly.  Often, MIAMI RHAPSODY attains 
the flavor of an intelligently-written TV sitcom. 
     MIAMI RHAPSODY probably aspires to something more grand than it 
succeeds at.  In attempting to explore the question "Is marriage, as one 
compromise after another, worth it?", the movie gives us glimpses of a 
variety of successful and failing relationships, but spends too much time 
on quips and too little on exploring lives.  In proceeding in this 
manner, MIAMI RHAPSODY proves that even with Mia Farrow, Frankel still 
has a long way to go to equal Allen. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
