Title
Review for Pola X (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Jeremiah Kipp.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/a07fa6bc7e25816d882569580004893c?OpenDocument
When I left the theater, an angry woman was berating her boyfriend for
dragging her to another one of those films, to which I assume she meant
a pompous French soap opera. Furthermore, she didn't understand what the
title had to do with anything. Seems she didn't read the press release,
which the theater was kind enough to dole out. Pola X is a French
acronym of the Hermann Melville novel on which this film is based (and
shakily updated to modern times): Pierre, Or, the Ambiguities. The X
stands for the tenth draft of the screenplay which writer/director Leos
Carax completed.
While the title, Pola X, certainly has a nice ring to it, it stands
representative of everything Carax's movie is: all flash, pointless
trickery, grating snobbery and, ultimately, no more substance than a
private joke only one person finds amusing.
As with most soap operas, the lead character, Pierre (lanky Guillaume
Depardieu, son of Gerard) is an affluent, slightly tormented and wholly
beautiful young writer who stays with his Oedipal mother, Marie
(Catherine Deneuve, adding a touch of elegance) on her lavish estate
near the banks of the Seine. He is happy enough riding around on his
motorcycle through the countryside, sitting on the hills, and enjoying
sunsets with his fiancée (Delphine Chuillot) and living the life of a
spoiled dilettante.
The cinematography by Eric Gautier is luscious, painted in golden
sunsets and the rich creamy whites of sheets and elegant tablecloths. As
Pierre and his mother coast through their lazy days, there's comfort to
be found in the crisp images of a fine chateau, or freshly trimmed grass
being watered by ominous sprinklers. This beauty gives way to a bleak,
bleached, Dickensian look when Pierre encounters a homeless stranger
(Yekaterina Golubyova) with a haunted expression in her eyes and a thick
Russian accent. This simple woman claims to be his sister, Isabelle.
In the longest scene in the film, the one which director Leos Carax
claims inspired him to shoot Pola X, this mysterious woman leads Pierre
deep into a fairy tale inspired by some tangled wood and spins a long,
slow dramatic monologue about her life of misery and squalor.
Golubyova's slow, mannered delivery was difficult to follow and my
attention continually wavered, but the plot thankfully marched on
thereafter.
To right the wrongs of his father, Pierre abandons his old life and runs
away with Isabelle to a life of filthy hovels, dirty apartments and art
communes with a strange John Zorn-experimental rock group in a cavernous
warehouse. They are accompanied by a vagrant mother, her precocious
"cute" little daughter (who tells passers-by that they stink -- ain't it
cute?) and Scott Walker's rousing score of lush violins.
"All my life," he whispers with vigor, "I've waited for something that
would push me beyond all this." Feeling as though he has never had any
true experiences in life, he throws himself into writing his Great Book
of Truths while sleeping with Isabelle in extended, fleshy sex scenes.
The body doubles are working overtime, as Leos Carax leaves no orifice
unturned. He'll go to any lengths to push the buttons of his audience,
though it seems to play merely for shock value alone.
Pola X has a terrific look to it. The homeless scenes seem inspired by
Mike Leigh's Naked, and Guillaume Depardieu, in his all-black attire,
long coat, and scraggly beard bears more than a passing resemblance to
an angry David Thewlis. Unfortunately, the story is an annoying mass of
manipulative contrivances involving Grand Drama, such as the main
character's descent into madness, the severe illness of another major
character a la Camille, accidents, suicide, children in peril, incest,
family secrets hidden behind a stone wall, and revelatory speeches.
These elements are more fitting of an opera than a motion picture.
Director Leos Carax sprinkles on some images that scream art-house
indulgence, such as a dream sequence where characters spiral naked down
a waterfall of blood. Despite his title, there's nothing ambiguous in
that at all. Excessive in every way, Pola X flounders and drowns in its
own melodrama.
Director: Leos Carax
Producer: Bruno Pesery
Writer: Leos Carax, Lauren Sedofsky, Jean-Pol Fargeau
Starring: Guillaume Depardieu, Katerina Golubeva, Catherine Deneuve,
Delphine Chuillot, Laurent Lucas
http://www.pola-x.com/index2.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 POLA X (director/writer: Léos Carax; screenwriters: Lauren
 Sedofsky/Jean-Pol Fargeau; cinematographer: Éric Gautier; editor:
 Nelly Quettier; cast: Katerina Golubeva (Isabelle), Guillaume
 Depardieu (Pierre), Catherine Deneuve (Marie), Delphine Chuillot
 (Lucie), Laurent Lucas (Thibault), Petruta Catana (Razerka), Mihaella
 Silaghi (The Child), Patachou (Margherite),  Miguel Yeco (Augusto);
 Runtime: 134; Winstar Cinema; 1999-France)
Pola X is a film by the 39-year-old French director Léos Carax (The
Lovers on the Bridge), who is noted for being an inspired madman. It is
adapted from Herman Melville's 1852 novel Pierre (Pola is the acronym of
the French title of Melville's novel, X stands for the tenth draft of
the screenplay which writer/director Leos Carax completed). It is a film
about madness and excesses, topics that are always fuzzy to portray on
the screen. It's set in modern France though it starts out looking like
a romantic 19th century literary work, where its background is a rich,
idyllic country setting in Normandy of palatial chateaus void of modern
traffic. We know it's modern times only because the protagonist rides a
motorcycle and uses a computer.
The story is about a pampered, handsome blond young man, Pierre
(Guillaume Depardieu, son of Gerard), a wealthy upper-class egotist who
has written a best-selling mystery novel under the pseudonym Aladin and
lives in his deceased diplomat father's chateau with his mother Marie
(Catherine Deneuve).
He has a very open relationship with his attractive, controlling mother
whereby they closely confide in each other keeping no secrets,
addressing each other intimately as brother and sister, and where he
feels free enough to converse with her while she's taking a bath. Their
relationship appears to be either completely innocent of any sexual
deviation, or perhaps of a incestuous one.
Pierre's girlfriend is his wealthy, attractive, blonde cousin Lucie
(Delphine Chuillot), also a child of an aristocrat, living in close
proximity to him in a chalet. They are soon to be married, and their
love is brimming with the joy of a storybook romance. Just returning
from doing a stint on the Chicago Stock Exchange, is his best-friend and
cousin, Thibault (Laurent Lucas), who shows a satanic jealousy that
Pierre has what he wants and is taking Lucie away from him. At one point
of the conversation between Pierre and him, he refers to them as "the
three inseparables," but the other two don't seem to share that same
feeling.
Pierre is stalked by someone he mysteriously only sees through the
shadows. But he has dreams about this mystery person being very
important to him. When he encounters this ghoulish looking women dressed
as a peasant, after chasing her down with his motorcycle, she goes into
a monologue about being raised in the woods and that she's the secret
child of his father's. It turns out she's an eastern European war
refugee named Isabelle (Katerina Golubeva), who claims to be his
half-sister. He suddenly decides to leave Lucie and give up his wealth
to live as lovers with the impoverished Isabelle, who is distinguished
by her straggly long brown hair falling over the side of her face so
that she is never clearly seen. She becomes his muse and his destroyer.
They also bring along with them to Paris an eastern European vagrant
mother with her little daughter. They stay for a while in the Hotel
Ahab, located in a seedy part of Paris, where he plans to write another
novel using his new found truths he found locked up in himself. But when
the young girl is killed after telling a passer-by that he stinks,
Pierre and Isabelle make arrangements to live in seclusion among a group
of terrorists and guerrilla theater musicians in a huge warehouse in the
outskirts of Paris.
This is a unique film, that has an inexplicable brilliance to it that
defies reason and its soap opera melodramatics. It is precious film,
though parts of it may not be pleasing or deciferable. But there is an
intelligence it has about it that should overcome all doubts about its
excesses: as the film goes from showing Pierre's change from being a
self-indulgent aristocrat to his complete breakdown as a self-indulgent
raving lunatic.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
