Title
Review for Big Sleep, The (1946)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"The Big Sleep" is the second of four films that
Humphrey Bogart made with Lauren Bacall.  It is also
the second most famous detective film that Bogart
made, after "The Maltese Falcon".
"The Big Sleep" is an entertaining film with a contrived,
overly complex plot.  The characters, however, aren't
complex at all.  It would be unfair to say that they are
one-dimensional, but generous to give them more than
two dimensions.  Carmen, for example, is lovely and
childish, but little else.  Harry Jones is the only
character to show vulnerability.  Still, the dialogue
(based on the novel by Raymond Chandler, but first
screen credit is given to novelist William Faulkner)
is good, especially between Bacall and Bogart, and
the cast and production values are first rate.
Philip Marlowe (Humphrey Bogart) is a private investigator
hired by General Sternwood (Charles Waldron) to stop
blackmail attempts against his two daughters Vivian
(Lauren Bacall) and Carmen (Martha Vickers).  Bogart's
investigation is hampered by all the suspects getting
murdered.  Bogart eventually falls for Bacall, despite
her showing up in all the wrong places, and telling him
a series of lies.
"To Have and Have Not" was Bogart and Bacall's first
film together.  The commercial and critical success
of that film, especially the dialogue between the stars,
was not lost on Warner Brothers.  "The Big Sleep" was
mostly filmed in 1944, but not immediately released.
Studio execs decided to replace several of the scenes,
reducing Vickers' role in favor of Bacall's.  Bogart
and Bacall were given suggestive dialogue unusual for
the era.  The two films have something else in common:
both directors apparently believed that Bacall could sing.
"The Big Sleep" is a male fantasy, as seen through the
eyes of Humphrey Bogart.  Something is always happening,
he knows the score, and women can't get enough of him.
The role is tailor-made for Bogart.
Since the plot is so confusing that you can't tell the
players without a program, I have done my best to make
a list of all the murders, in chronological order,
described by victim, killer, and motive.
Shawn Regan, detective for General Sternwood, murdered
by Carmen, who was jealous of his preference for Eddie
Mars' wife Mona (Peggy Knudsen).
Mr. Geiger, bookseller and apparent merchant in stolen
goods, murdered by Owen Taylor, who was General Sternwood's
chauffeur.  Geiger was blackmailing Carmen since he knew
she killed Regan.  Taylor was in love with Carmen, and
murdered Geiger.
Owen Taylor, murdered by Joe Brody (Louis Jean Heydt).
Brody, also a blackmailer, did not want competition for
Sternwood's payoffs.
Joe Brody, murdered by Carol Lundgren (Tom Rafferty).
Carol worked for Geiger, and thought Brody had murdered Geiger.
Carol hid Geiger's body to buy time to remove Geiger's
merchandise.
Harry Jones (Elisha Cook Jr), murdered by Canino (Bob Steele).
Canino worked for crooked casino owner Eddie Mars (John Ridgely).
Mars is attempting to blackmail Vivian.  Mars, for some reason,
didn't like Jones tailing Bogart.  Bogart is so impressed with
Jones' martyrdom that he praises him to the skies to anyone who
will listen, for the rest of the film.
Canino is later killed in self-defense by Bogart.
Eddie Mars, murdered by his own henchmen Sidney (Tom Fadden)
and Pete (Ben Welden).  They thought that they were
shooting at Bogart and not their boss.
Remember all this the next time you see the film, and it
will almost make sense!
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Frankie Paiva
Sometimes, when I'm really bored and I don't know of anything else that I want
to see, I'll just choose a movie that I've never heard of (except if it's like
Minors & Whips or Barely Legal IIV) and rent it just for the heck of it. Now
this method may not seem the best to you, the review reader, but I find it as
an easy way to select movies. That's how I came across The Big Sleep, I did not
learn until after viewing the film that is an everlasting legend. 
Philip Marlowe (do I really need to tell you who plays him?) is assigned to
cover up some family business, old man Sternwood is being blackmailed and wants
to know who's blackmailing him (or something like that, I'd have to see the
film again to be sure.) One of his lovely daughters, Carmen (Martha Vickers) is
high on something while a man is murdered. He must protect the drug addict
while dealing with her sister Vivian (Bacall) who is somehow connected. In the
meantime, other people get murdered, and he begins to fall in love with Vivian.
Marlowe's investigations eventually bring him to the casino of Eddie Mars (John
Ridgely) who becomes one of his prime suspects in the case. 
A groundbreaking film in the amount of violence that is used and the way the
film is shot. Now I'm no expert in classic film, but to me, it contains a lot
more violence than any film I've seen made in or before 1946. Scenes between
Bogart and Bacall are exciting and fun to watch. The case is also interesting
and entertains while it unfolds. Classic cinema that should be getting more
rents at the video store. In my opinion the film though, (or course it's my
opinion, this is my review!) it's still not as good as The Maltese Falcon, but
I still give it *** stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains several people being shot, kicked, punched,
etc. The film also contains drug use and quite a bit of alcohol. Good Age: 9 &
Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic
