Title
Review for GoldenEye (1995)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
     Today I went to see GOLDENEYE, and then I came home and saw two
reviews on CNN about the movie (one from Peter Travers and the other
person I can't remeber).  They completely missed the point.  They said
the new Bond is a total bust.  They said Pierce Brosnan shows too much
restraint and does not carry off his lines with the energy he did in
REMINGTON STEELE.  Boy, are they cynics.
     They maintained that a whole generation of people will not see any
of these problems.  They said they will just accept the new Bond for
who he is in GOLDENEYE and never complain that he was any worse or any
better.  OH BOY, are they wrong!
     I personally was raised with James Bond.  James Bond for me was
Roger Moore, but when I got older I got a chance to see Sean Connery as
Bond, and I can see why they say he is the best.  Peter Travers and
others would have you believe that a person like me would not see
anything wrong with Pierce Brosnan as the new James Bond.  As a movie
and James Bond lover, I take great exception to everything they have
said.
     GOLDENEYE is one of the best Bond movies I have seen.  It is
consistent with every previous Bond film in the characters, plot,
storyline, action, romance, and thrills.  Pierce Brosnan is remarkably
yet appropriately restrained as the new James Bond, the way Bond has
always been.  Peter Travers would have James Bond act like REMINGTON
STEELE.  I think not.  We are talking about the ultimate stud of the
universe here.  A man who can sleep with any woman, never use birth
control, and make the women feel like they'll never have any better.
James Bond has been, is, and always will be the greatest fantasy of men
everywhere (most notably American).  GOLDENEYE does not skimp on this
fantasy.
     My take on the Bonds of yesteryear:  Sean Connery was the best
because he was the first and, because he's Sean Connery.  George
Lazenby was a little underrated.  Roger Moore was good for a while, and
then his movies deteriorated into too much special-effects model
destroying and far too many one liners.  Timothy Dalton was brought in
because he was cheap, did his own stunts, and tried a more strict
interpretation of Ian Fleming's Bond, which is not what movie audiences
wanted to see.  Brosnan looks the part, feels the part, and I believe
carries the part much like Connery did in the early days of Bond (a la
DR. NO).  If Peter Travers and others like to come close to panning him
now, wait until he really gets his feet into this role.  They'll take
another look at GOLDENEYE.
     GOLDENEYE is a very good statring vehicle for Pierce Brosnan.  If
you take a look at the movies where there is a new actor bearing the
mantle of James Bond, you will see that they are all like this movie.
THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS was such a movie, even though Timothy Dalton
seemed like he was forcing every scene to come out.  ON HER MAJESTY'S
SECRET SERVICE was similar.  The cars are fast, the women are
beautiful, and the action is breathtaking.  Everything a fantasy like
this is supposed to be.  If you take it too seriously, you might come
out of the theater thinking that you were ripped off from your seven
dollars (or whatever your admission price may be).  If you were raised
with James Bond like I was, and you go in expecting an early
Connery-type James Bond, you won't be disappointed.  This is Brosnan's
introduction into the James Bond world; don't be too hard on him.  With
a little film history and what I like to call "future hindsight" under
your belt, it becomes easy to see that Brosnan will be recognized as a
very good Bond.  Sure Brosnan is nervous; if you were handed the role
of James Bond and were told you had to live up to its place in film
history and its institution-like status, wouldn't you be too?

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     James Bond is back, thought not exactly as we remember him.  Sure,
the girls and gadgets are all there.  As are the pithy one-liners and
the over-the-top stunts.  Check.  What's missing is the level of
technical polish that has best-characterized the 31-year-old series.
Thrilling, but tiring; Bonded, but bloated, GOLDENEYE is only a
half-success.  (Half shaken, not stirred?) Director Martin Campbell
(CRIMINAL LAW, NO ESCAPE) has loaded the post-Cold War story with
*plenty* of delightful bits, ranging from Bond's sexy showdown in a
St.  Petersburg steambath, to a tank/car chase through those same
Soviet streets.  (The plot involves quite a bit of vehicular traffic,
actually.  Even the old Aston Martin makes an appearance!)
     The problem is that these scenes, the best scenes, never gel into
a cohesive whole.  GOLDENEYE is an exciting, episodic film that lacks a
singular vision.  For that reason, it's difficult to properly gauge
Pierce Brosnan's performance as Ian Fleming's master spy.  He seems to
have more verve than his most-recent predecessor, Timothy Dalton, but
the overstuffed story never gives the actor any room to breathe.  It's
fight, dash, scowl, kiss, repeat.  Over and over and over again.
     Too much action is only one of the problems in GOLDENEYE.  The
absurd opening--involving, among other things, the bungee jump shown
in the trailer--sets the precedent that nothing in the story shall be
taken seriously.  Nothing new there.  The trouble comes when Campbell
tries to insert real drama into this classy, cartoon reality.  It
doesn't work.  Equally uncomfortable is the amount of graphic violence
that we're shown.  Bond is quite the indiscriminate killer in this one,
and that harder edge isn't effectively balanced by the bigger, sillier
stunts.
     Other problems include Derek Meddings' too-obvious miniatures, a
boring score from Eric Serra, and a wandering POV that strays too far
away from our favorite secret agent.  The laughs are there, though,
thank God, and the supporting cast is impeccable.  Some of the surprise
scene-stealers include Jon Don Baker, as Bond's cranky American
contact, Robbie Coltrane (!), as an ex-KGB heavy, and Famke Janssen, as
the Russian villianess with killer thighs.  Literally.  Peter Lamont's
production design is also very good.  The best visual metaphor of the
year may just be Bond's nighttime meeting in eerie junkyard
(graveyard?) of fallen Russian monuments.  Startling.
BOTTOM LINE:  For the Bond franchise, and for Brosnan, it's a start.  

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Pierce Brosnan; Sean Bean; Izabella Scorupco; Famke Janssen & Joe
Don Baker
This latest film in the 007 series finds the actor Pierce Brosnan in the
title role of the British secret agent. If a person were to compare Brosnan'
s portrayal of Bond to that of his predecessors, the most accurate
description would be to say that Brosnan is a cross between Roger Moore and
Sean Connery. Brosnan has the serious side that Connery brought to the
character. Happily, the element of campy humor that was present when Moore
played the Bond has returned. This is a welcome change from Timothy Dalton's
brooding incarnation in the previous two movies.
The premise of Goldeneye is simple. The Goldeneye is a killer satellite left
over from the cold war era that gets stolen by the usual collection of
villains that are always present in a good Bond flick. This includes one of
the most original "Bond girls" in a long while, played by the beautiful
Famke Janssen. Her outstanding trait is her ability to kill men using her
thighs. (Enough said) And while on the subject of female cast members,
British actress Judi Dench has taken over the role of "M", Bond's boss.
As with all Bond films, Goldeneye has its fair share of nifty spy gadgets
and car chases (and tank chases), enough to satisfy this James Bond fan
anyway. Unlike the previous Bond outing, this one never leaves you with the
feeling that the writers were struggling with the script.
All in all a solid value for your entertainment buck, and probably reason
that producers have signed Brosnan to star in the next bond film. Bond fans
will love this movie, and even folks who don't normally like James Bond
films are bound to have a good time as well.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Pierce Brosnan, Sean Bean, Izabella Scorupco, Famke Janssen,
      Joe Don Baker, Robbie Coltrane, Judi Dench
Director: Martin Campbell
Producers: Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli
Screenplay: Jeffrey Caine and Bruce Feirstein
Cinematography: Phil Meheux
Music: Eric Serra
U.S. Distributor: United Artists Pictures
     Like everything else, James Bond (Pierce Brosnan) has had to
change for the nineties.  The venerable 007, coming off a long hiatus,
has taken on his sixth face (the other five being Sean Connery, David
Niven, George Lazenby, Roger Moore, and Timothy Dalton), changed his
mode of transport from an Aston-Martin to a BMW, and now answers to a
female "M" (played dryly by Judi Dench).  Bond's attitudes towards
women have been modified--although not greatly.  Also, there's more
action in GOLDENEYE than in previous 007 entries--enough to keep a
ninety-minute film moving at a frantic pace.  Unfortunately, this movie
isn't ninety minutes long--it's one-hundred thirty, which means that
fully one-quarter of GOLDENEYE is momentum-killing padding.
     Despite the mostly-cosmetic alterations, the majority of fans won't
be disappointed by Pierce Brosnan's debut as their favorite spy.  His
Bond still quips at danger, takes his vodka martinis "shaken, not
stirred", enjoys gadgets and toys, and introduces himself as "Bond,
James Bond".  Moneypenny (Samantha Bond) and Q (played yet again by a
visibly aged Desmond Llewelyn) remain in the supporting cast, and the
familiar musical theme can be detected occasionally infiltrating Eric
Serra's upbeat, modern score.  For those who like opening credits, the
trademark surrealism, complete with hammer & sickle, guns, and women, is
fully in evidence.
     As for the leading man, he's a decided improvement over his
immediate predecessor.  Brosnan has a flair for wit to go along with his
natural charm; Dalton was stoic and sober.  Of course, the newest Bond
doesn't come close to Sean Connery's definitive portrayal, but he lacks
the fatuousness that marred Roger Moore's tenure.  Brosnan's approach
has invigorated 007 enough to overcome a movie that seemingly never
wants to end.
     The story is standard fare, mixing and matching cliches of the
genre.  The Russian mafia obtains a space-based weapons system called
Goldeneye that works by exploding a nuclear device in orbit, then
crippling a ground location with the resulting electromagnetic pulse.
It's up to Bond to save London from a vengeance-crazed megalomaniac.
Along the way, he runs into such diverse characters as a beautiful
computer programmer (Izabella Scorupco), a former partner (Sean Bean), a
wisecracking CIA agent (Joe Don Baker), an ex-KGB officer with a score
to settle (Robbie Coltrane), and a psychotic woman who likes squeezing
men to death between her legs (Femke Janssen).  Brosnan is supported by
an interesting troupe of actors, but the spotlight is always on him.
     GOLDENEYE keeps Bond's comic book-like stunts at an appropriately
absurd level.  Even given that we're in a reality where spies are more
like Superman than Bernard Samson (Len Deighton's popular MI6 agent),
suspension of disbelief occasionally becomes a challenge, especially
with visual effects that could be charitably called "subpar."  Some such
liabilities, however, can be forgiven in the name of fun.  And, with its
mixture of humor, interesting locales, high-speed chases, explosions,
and action, GOLDENEYE possesses that quality.  It is perhaps the best
entry in the series since THE SPY WHO LOVED ME, and, while that's not
saying much, this updated Bond should be able to stand toe-to-toe with
today's crop of heroes.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Louis Butler
     GOLDENEYE is the much anticipated debut of Pierce Brosnan as
everyone's favorite spy.  After a delay of over ten years, we finally
get to see Remington Steel utter the phrase, "Vodka martini, shaken,
not stirred." Was it worth the wait?  Well, yes, overall.  Mr.  Brosnan
was born to play Bond, a realization that first came to me when I saw
him in the middling to poor film adaptation of Forsythe's THE FOURTH
PROTOCOL.  In short, he fills the lines of the tuxedo quite nicely.
He's more of a man's Bond than Roger Moore was, and he doesn't have the
slightly stiff look that Dalton had.
     The plot is typical Bond fare, with a slight twist as we get a 00
agent other than Bond into the mix.  But no one goes to Bond films for
the plot.  These movies are a plethora of action, women, guns, evil
Communists (oh, and good Communists--it's the 90's) and the triumph of
good over evil.
     The gizmos are not nearly as inspired as they have been, but in a
refreshing change of pace, not every single gizmo given to Bond is used
during the course of the film.
     In short, if you like Bond films in general, Goldeneye is a film
worth seeing.  Certainly better then Moondreck (MOONRAKER) and it
doesn't have the presence of Tonya Roberts (A VIEW TO A KILL) to drag
it down into the depths.  The villains are outstanding, and 006 almost
walks away with the film.
     The main Bond woman in this film is Isabella Scorupco, and as far
as I know, this is her first film.  She plays a Russian computer
techie, second banana in her posting to a wonderfully nerdy Russian
Hacker named Boris (Alan Cumming).  There's some posturing about near
the end of the film that looks like the script was trying to establish
and actual relationship between Natalya and Bond, but the scene is
awkward and best ignored.
     Sean Bean, playing 006, almost walks away with the film, as I
said. He's a rotten bastard who is really just a reflection of Bond's
potentially very dark side.  It's fun to watch Bean and Brosnan up on
the screen, because you can easily believe that the characters were
friends.
     All in all, a worthy addition to the Bond pantheon.  No, it's not
one of the best Bond films, but it is one of the better ones.
-- 
kreme@netcom.com
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     You've played the video game, now see the movie.  That was the
plan in our household this weekend.  We've been working our way through
the entire Bond canon in order with our son Jeffrey, who has wanted to
see them - all for his first time.  He's got the GOLDENEYE video game,
which the whole family enjoys playing with him, and now we finally got
to the movie.
     Superheroes need superactions.  By that measure, the opening to
1995's GOLDENEYE does not disappoint.  Chasing a runaway, pilotless
plane, Bond, riding a motorcycle, follows the plane off the side of a
cliff.  In free fall, he catches up with the plane, crawls into the
cockpit and pulls it out of the dive just before it crashes.  This
stunt pushes any sane rules of credibility, but Bond films don't exist
in a world of Euclidean geometry, having instead their own set of
axioms.
     "Enjoy it while it lasts," a beautiful Georgian woman, Xenia
Onatopp (Famke Janssen), barks at Bond after he beats her at cards.
"Those are the words I live by," Bond, the ultimate hedonist, shoots
back.
     For the fifth time, a new actor has the role of James Bond,
supersuave agent extraordinaire.  Pierce Brosnan - yes, he's the one
from that campy and awful DANTE'S PEAK - takes his turn at the role and
turns out to be the best Bond since Sean Connery.  (Every time I review
a Bond movie, I get a slew of letters explaining how the actor playing
Bond is universally recognized as the best Bond ever and another batch
claiming the actor is widely accepted as the worst Bond imaginable.
Many of Bond's fans seem to be under the delusion that all agree.)
     Unlike Timothy Dalton's cold Bond, who seemed barely interested in
the gorgeous women who surrounded him, Pierce Brosnan is a self-assured
lover in the grand Bond tradition.  Brosnan is tough, confident and
sexy as Bond.  He does not try to mimic any of the previous Bond
actors, but establishes his own interpretation of the role.
     This time the plot has a rogue General Ourumov (Gottfried John)
and his sidekick Xenia taking control of Goldeneye, a secret Russian
technology for killer satellites.  They plan nothing less than "a
world-wide financial meltdown."  Xenia has a real crush on James.  She
likes to wrap her legs around his pelvis in an erotic maneuver that it
is actually the foreplay to a kill, not a romantic encounter.
     Several notable members of one of the strongest and most
intelligent supporting casts of any Bond movie include Judi Dench from
HER MAJESTY, MRS. BROWN as the new M, Alan Cumming from EMMA as
computer hacker Boris Grishenko, MRS. DALLOWAY's Michael Kitchen as
British Secret Service ground controller Bill Tanner, Sean Bean as 006,
GOOD WILL HUNTING's Minnie Driver in a cameo as a nightclub singer, and
the television detective from "Cracker," Robbie Coltrane, as ex-KGB
agent Valentin Zukovsky.
     "May I remind you, 007, that you have a license to kill, not to
break the traffic laws," Q, played by the always-reliable Desmond
Llewelyn, instructs Bond while giving him his sleek new BMW
convertible.  Its most powerful gadget is a pair of stinger missiles in
the headlights.  Don't mess with this car, or you'll be toast as fast
as Bond can find the right button.
     The picture, which blends liberal doses of humor with the action,
has CIA agent Jack Wade (Joe Don Baker) being required to show his Rose
tattoo to verify his identity.  The burly Wade lowers his colorful
boxer shorts in public in order to reveal his famous Rose tattoo with
the name Muffy on it - it's the name of his third wife.
     "The problem with the world today is that nobody takes the time to
do a really sinister interrogation anymore," Bond complains to his
Russian interrogator, Dimitri Mishkin (Tcheky Karyo), as Bond waxes
nostalgic for the cold war era.
     Your adrenaline will really begin to pump - which is after all one
of the prime reasons for seeing a Bond flick - when, while the Bond
theme blasts away, James drives a tank down a Russian street in hot
pursuit of the bad guy with the good girl.  And what vehicle is better
to crush the opposition that a big tank with humongous treads?  After
he's mauled just about everything in sight, he carefully adjusts his
tie.  One must be impeccably dressed to be James Bond.
     GOLDENEYE runs 2:10.  It is rated PG-13 for a number of sequences
of action violence and for some sexuality and would be fine for kids
around 9 and up.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, said it was almost his favorite Bond movie
but that he was sad that one of his favorite characters died in it.  He
thought Brosnan was a really good 007.

Author
Andrew Hicks
     I haven't seen many other James Bond movies to compare this new
one to (translation: zero), but it stands on its own as a decent action
flick.  I did find it an uneven movie to be mainly appreciated by
middle-aged adults who grew up on the Connery Bond films of the 60's
and are in need of something to cling on to in light of the recent wave
of P.C.-laden movies and sex-killer flicks.  And I was pretty much
proven right when my mom asked me how I liked it and I said "It was
okay." She replied, "Are you kidding? I loved that movie." And yes, I
do still see movies with my mother.  What's it to you?
     GOLDENEYE, at least, plays the outdated Bond movie staples for
laughs.  What else can you do but snicker at a movie with a
White-Anglo-Saxon-Protestant hero, an abnormal ratio of cigarette
smokers to non-smokers, helpless women, Russian villains, absurd
high-tech gadgets, explosions, red convertible sports cars and
ridiculously far-fetched death defying scenes?  Add in a beautiful yet
villainous masochist woman (Xenia Onatopp) who gets off on her fights
with Bond and the movie may as well be a time machine to a
long-forgotten era.  I was waiting for them to talk about President
Nixon or hot pants.
     Pierce Brosnan does a good job of playing 007 (which represents
his agent number and his I.Q.) here and, as usual, James Bond gets all
the chicks while making the world safe for kids to play in the
streets.  And what does he get for his efforts? People call him a
"sexist, misogynist dinosaur." This time, Bond has to protect the world
from a missile system that short circuits all the world's electricity,
undoing the progress the world has made in the last century.  Please,
this movie is far enough in the Stone Age already.

Author
Christopher Null
     After six years in the freezer, Bond is back.  Any 007 fan worth his
salt will be aware of the fact that Timothy Dalton is out, and Pierce
Brosnan is in as the U.K.'s ultimate spy.  Out is Bond's Aston Martin.  In
is a new BMW.  Out with another actor playing "M."  In with Judi Dench,
the first female to take the role of Bond's crusty boss.
     But some things remain the same.  Desmond Llewelyn seems unstoppable
at reprising his role of "Q."  Bondian gadgets still abound.  The vodka
martinis are still served shaken, not stirred.  And what would 007 be
without a parade of girls, girls, girls!?
     It's been six years, like I said, and the producers of GOLDENEYE seem
convinced to raise the stakes yet again, having before them the daunting
tasks of proving that James Bond is not dead, that Brosnan can cut it as
an action hero (never mind the suave act, the New Bond can bludgeon a guy
to death without mussing his tux), and most importantly, that people
really still care about a hero that's been around for 33 years.
     Apparently they do...a lot.  I've received more inquiries about
GOLDENEYE over the last month than any other movie of the year. 
*Everyone* is talking about it.  Step aside WATERWORLD, Bond's buzz has
you beat.  And for the most part, it's well-deserved.
     GOLDENEYE's storyline is basically lifted from 1971's DIAMONDS ARE
FOREVER.  A super-secret Russian spy satellite that can destroy an entire
city's electronics systems is aimed at London.  Bond's old friend, the
now-renegade 006 (Sean Bean) is behind it all, and 007 is on the case. 
Along the way, he encounters Natalya (Izabella Scorupco), the best-looking
computer programmer in Russia, who helps him out when she isn't busy
diving for cover in her mini-skirt (in the Russian winter, no less). 
Working for 006 is the deliciously evil Xenia (Famke Janssen), a
masochistic killer whose favorite M.O. is squeezing people to death with
her thighs.  Really.
     You're probably groaning that this sounds ludicrous, and of course it
is (remember MOONRAKER?).  After all, it *is* a James Bond story, and you
really have to leave your logical sensibility at the door.  Otherwise,
you'll spend the whole film wondering, "How'd they get that 100-yard
diameter satellite dish buried in Cuba without anyone noticing?  Just how
did he skydive to that nose-diving plane, climb in, and not crash into a
mountain?  Why would someone keep giant vats of kerosene out in the open
in their underground bunker?  How'd he get his BMW to Cuba, anyway...and
would *you* give your car to Joe Don Baker?"  And so on.  Old Bond fans
know that thinking too hard about things like this will only lead to a
severe headache.  In making the Bond-to-top-all-Bond films, something
(namely plot) has to give.
     With that said, Brosnan is admirable (better than Roger Moore, but no
Sean Connery).  The exotic settings, fight scenes, and car chases are also
good, and the supporting cast is admirable.  With the exception of some
rotten music and a few disappointing blue screen effects, GOLDENEYE is
overall a very likable film.  Sure, you could drive the Russian tank Bond
commandeers through all the plot holes...but you know it'd be one hell of
a ride.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Sue Roberts
Starring Pierce Brosnan, Izabella Scorupco, Joe Don Baker, Sean Bean,
Judi Dench, Famke Janssen.
The EVIL plot- to steal the "Goldeneye," which controls a space ray 
capable of  knocking out electric's for a thirty mile radius on earth. 
Can Bond find it before they cause terminal damage to all those 
computers? And just how many satellites are there?
Best opening graphics ever- fab. montages! I could have sat through two 
hours of just that. And don't you just love that theme music?
All the glamour and sweeping scale of the best 007 movies is on display.
However Brosnan is an entirely new kind of Bond, who views his opponents
with a hint of boyish amazement, (I mean, how could the cads behave like 
that?) And , of course, he charms the sox off the ladies!
Scorupco is excellent and plays the heroine, Natalya, using wide eyed 
innocence to disguise her intelligence. A beautifully judged parody of 
this role. 
They play the "Brit" card for all its worth. M's upstairs entourage 
stiffly maintain a facade devoid of panic, no matter how serious the 
situation, while downstairs in the gadget department the mask slips and 
we see a more genuine U.K. response to a crisis from Q, in a great cameo 
from David Llewelyn, and his backroom boys. 
The photography is excellent and in the second half we really get the 
benefit with all those great vehicles and effects. Cute helicopter, 
smashing train, and best of all, a car chase which is an absolute 
CLASSIC. "St. Petersburg" looks devastating..Anyway, the movie is worth 
seeing for that alone.
Oh, and I loved the "Post- Stalinist" graveyard. Totally surreal. I felt 
these touches worked best of all and were a nice contrast to the high 
tech. interiors.  
They stick to the formula, but manage to get plenty of variety into 
their locations.
What the heck this is all good Saturday night stuff. And the complexity 
of it! But come on guys- live dangerously! Just remember, we LIKE to be 
blinded by loads of scientific jargon. When you do the video, how about 
running some of that dialogue at 27 frames a second? It'll then match 
the momentum your SFX team have worked so well to create. It looks 
wonderful, but pace was always the hallmark of a Bond.

Author
Gerard Martin
Directed by: Martin Campbell
Photographed by: Phil Meheux
Written by: Jeffrey Caine and Bruce Feirstein
Based on a story by: Michael France
Edited by: Terry Rawlings
Music by: Eric Serra
Starring: Pierce Brosnan, Sean Bean, Izabella Scorupco, Famke Janssen, 
          Joe Don Baker, Judi Dench, Robbie Coltrane 
     James Bond is back!  And isn't he better than ever?  After what
amounted to a six year hiatus, GOLDENEYE is the latest Bond movie
addition to the long-running 007 series tradition.  It has been
estimated that half the world's population has seen a James Bond
movie.  Meanwhile, hasn't the world changed?
     This time, the premise of the story concerns two lost secret
military first-strike earth orbiting Russian satellites with the
potential to burn ever so brightly enough to produce a burst of
electromagnetic energy overcharging and obliterating the electrical
circuits of every instrument and light-bulb within its target range ...
including, of course, flying MiG jets, computers, and other
orbiting eyes in the sky.  Such tactical precision, however, is not
without its disadvantages.  Once triggered, the spectacular fiery
explosion also takes the `Golden Eye` satellite down with it.  So it is
also with almost every device, every deception and every appendage that
makes the James Bond spy-adventure epic bond so well together.  Yes,
"Bond, James Bond" is back and this time REMINGTON STEELE's Pierce
Brosnan is the debonair secret service agent with the Aston Martin, a
penchant for vodka martinis, all of the luck and most of the toys.
     GOLDENEYE's addition to the 007 licensed-to-kill epic truly frames
a golden age of James Bond spy action and adventure.  The cinematic
event holds a rich history behind it - a rich tapestry of traditions
upon which this latest edition stands.  Afterall, depending upon how
one counts them, GOLDENEYE is the eighteenth motion picture adventure
adaptation of the literary works of Ian Fleming and later, John
Gardner.  Though Pierce Brosnan is no David Niven, in some respects
GOLDENEYE can be said to be the culmination of all nineteen Bond
movies.  Along with the usual measure of repartee-style satire, there
is a bomb of sorts, there is a James Bond nemesis and there are love
interests that probe the mantel of the story and the characters of all
the participants.
     Natalya Simonova, played by Izabella Scorupco, is the
Internet-savvy computer programmer in step with an information-driven
society.  She's a protagonist with Bond.  There is also the CIA and the
marines, a new "M," another Miss Moneypenny and good old "Q" played
once again by Desmond Llewelyn.  For antagonists, there is Xenia
Onatopp (rhymes with "on the top"), played with carnal abandon by Famke
Janssen.  She is a Georgian ex-fighter pilot in vacuous partnership
with former secret service agent Alec Trevelyan, as played by Sean
Bean.  As surely as death follows asphyxiation, the fate of such
relationships are fastened.
     Relationships to the old and usual are crucial.  In the all
familiar casino scene, the playing cards have no numbers.  Unless one
takes the time to count, only the shapes made by the configuration of
clubs, hearts, diamonds or spades on the cards are there to indicate
the card's value.  The idea that information counts is meaningful to
the story.  Afterall, in a world with no electrical circuits, there can
be no flow of information.  Just like the way in which a deck of
playing cards complete with numbers must in history precede the deck of
playing cards without any numbers at all, the flow of knowledge from
one utility to another is all essential.  Such is the legacy of
history.
     But does one need to know the historical significance of villain
Alec Trevelyan's Cossack parentage, or how historically the Zaporozhian
Cossacks became an authority unto themselves and with their hetmans
elected chieftains who proceeded to initiate schemes and designs
rivaling even those of SPECTRE?  No, enjoyment of GOLDENEYE makes no
absolute claim on this knowledge.  But the weight of history is another
matter.  What's bred in the bones of this epic are so many monumental
remains.  Though they provide ballast, they also exact a heavy toll.
GOLDENEYE confronts both the forces of our expectations and the ongoing
presence of our departed history.
     In GOLDENEYE, James Bond is indeed back and, chances are, he will
be back again to serve the interests of world peace and movie-screen
carnage.  But, if nothing else, he will also serve as sometimes
poignant testimony to the passage of time.

Author
paul@discordia.org (Paul)
     It's been ages since I last saw a Bond film.  I think the last one
I saw was Dalton's first Bond film.  Pierce Brosnan is a major
improvement over Dalton.  Dalton was cold, angst ridden, and serious.
While this personality is probably closer to reality, Bond films have
never been very realistic.  They are in fact, very silly, with
megalomaniac villains who wants to take over/destroy the world.  Bond
is constantly being placed into "escape-proof" death traps which he
eventually escapes.  The appeal of Bond is his bad boy image.  Brosnan
restore some of that fun image to the character that Dalton had wore
away.
     Plot-wise, the film is unoriginal.  Bond must save the world once
again from a doomsday device, the Goldeneye, a weapon that can destroy
all electronics.  But people don't see Bond film for their plot, they
see Bond films for familar things like beautiful women, fast cars,
megalomania villains, and shopping trips at Q's.  Even if the plot is
rather predictable, there's enough action in the film to keep you from
falling asleep.
     The villain this time is 006, played by Sean Bean, who also act as
an angst generator because he was once Bond's best friend.  Rounding
out the villains list is Femke Janssen, who played a villainess who
likes to squeeze men to death between her legs (no, I am not kidding).
     What's interesting about the movie is that while bond has changed
very little (he still sleeps around, and drink Martini shaken but not
stirred), the world around him have changed considerably.  The women
are more assertive, and independent.  Bond's boss is now a woman who
tells Bond that he is a sexist relic of the cold war.  His female
co-star is constantly criticizing him about his "boys with toy"
attitude.  Moneypenny has  a life outside of the office.  In
some ways, James Bond is kind of like the super-hero mythos, constantly
being updated while remaining the same.
     Bond fans will not want to miss this movie.  For others, it's
worth a look if you're looking for a fun movie that you can watch with
half of your brain disconnected.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     As James Bond films go, GOLDENEYE is some distance from the bottom
of the pack, but more importantly it is also a long way from the top.
As an attempt to jumpstart the stalled series with an almost entirely
new crew of talent on both sides of the lens, it is a failure.  Without
Richard Maibaum's view of who Bond is, without the tension of a John
Barry score, with an almost entirely new cast including a new actor in
the role of Bond, GOLDENEYE comes off like an imitation of a Bond film.
And there is no shortage of imitations.  CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is a
better spy thriller and has more of a feel of authenticity than any of
the Bond films certainly including GOLDENEYE.  It doesn't help that the
film is trying to have as much sex and violence as ever while paying
lip-service to feminism and an anti-violence philosophy.  The new
distaff head of staff puts Bond down as a sexist, mysogynist dinosaur
and the woman that he saves puts him and the villain down as a "boys
with toys" and criticizes their violence.  Bond just takes it as if to
say of course it is correct.  If even the script says there is nothing
to admire about Bond, why should the audience feel any different?
     The film's biggest thrill is the gunsight-iris opening that is
like a trademark seal.  That says that what follows is a GENUINE JAMES
BOND FILM.  And it may be just from habit, but the beginning of a new
Bond film is still an exciting moment.  Unfortunately the thrill is not
sustained.  Replaying scenes of Bond winning in a casino against a
villain and then identifying himself as "Bond ... James Bond," and
recreating scenes from previous films are obviously trying too hard to
move Brosnan into the role.  The famous Bond wit has never been so
strained, with Bond making comments after a near-death in one close
call in a helicopter about "the things we do for frequent flier
mileage."  And wearing thin is the usual convention that the villains
kill people right and left, but cannot bloody their hands by putting a
bullet between Bond's temples.  Instead they time and again leave Bond
in shaky death traps from which he escapes.
     And in spite of the new post-Cold-War setting, the basic plot is
not so different from those done in the 1970s.  In fact, it probably
would have worked better then.  In GOLDENEYE the former Soviets have a
weapon that nullifies computers.  The weapon is stolen by an unknown
super-criminal with plans to use it on a major city.  Bond (played for
the first time by Pierce Brosnan) has to stop the criminal, but first
he has to determine who it is that he has to stop.  (It is not a tough
guess for the audience.)
     The film starts in flashback from nine years earlier with a
Pyrrhic victory for 007.  Bond destroys a Soviet nerve gas factory, but
in doing it loses personal friend 006 (Sean Bean).  Now back in the
present the death of 006 hangs over Bond and the events of the film.
After the pre-credit action sequence, the first part of the film deals
with the theft of the Goldeneye device.  This is a long sequence that
involves little participation from Bond.  It does, however, introduce
Bond to a new assassin, Xenia Onatopp (Femke Janssen) who gets a sexual
charge from danger and murder and who mixes love and death by crushing
men between her legs during love-making.  Bond is dispatched to
St. Petersberg to investigate the destruction of the base that might
have controlled the Goldeneye device.
     So how is Pierce Brosnan as the fifth James Bond of the United
Artists series?  In a word, disappointing.  He is a Bond in the
tradition of Roger Moore, which is just what the series does not need.
I will conclude this review with some comments about casting the Bond
role.  Femke Janssen is not entirely believable as an assassin, but she
plays so offbeat and enigmatic a character that she makes herself the
center of attention in all her scenes.  She certainly is one of the
better Bond villains.  Gottfried John is, like Brosnan and Sean Bean,a
TV veteran having had the most interesting role on the abortive series
"Space Rangers."  Here he does not have enough to do, but he is a good
actor.  Joe Don Baker is a bad choice for a CIA agent having played a
memorable villain in THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS.
     There are some serious problems with the script, but none worse
than in the pre-credit sequence.  That sequence is usually a throw-away
but here it sets up the whole story.  Also, it involves two very
impressive stunts.  The problem is that one of the stunts requires that
the sequence take place at a very large dam; the other requires that it
take place high in mountains where you do not generally find huge dams.
And when you see the mountain base from above there is no dam in sight.
It seems unlikely that the villains' dish could be built particularly
where it is without attracting a great deal of attention.  And it does
not take much knowledge of history to know that this particular local
government is very edgy about what can be seen from overhead
surveillance.  Nor could the antenna be hidden where it is without
damaging it, nor could it be brought out of hiding and so quickly not
show the signs of where it was hidden.
     I would complain that the Internet address that is mentioned in
the film does not follow the correct naming convention, but it is just
nice to see computer nerds as important figures in a James Bond film.
But not even a computer nerd types on a standard keyboard one-handed
while he fidgets with the other hand.
     There is just too much that is too silly about GOLDENEYE and too
many mistakes in the making.  It is not as actively stupid as some Bond
films have been, but it is well below average in intelligence for the
already not too cerebral series.  I give it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     A comment about the casting of Bond: As close as Sean Connery is
identified with the role, the actor who best embodies the character as
created by Fleming is Timothy Dalton.  Brosnan and Moore are too
smooth.  James Bond is at heart a thug for the Secret Service. He needs
a sharp, hard, flinty edge.  He can dress up in evening clothes and
appear charming but he never turns off the animal instincts just below
the surface.  Only Dalton brought out that aspect of his character.  If
Dalton is not going to take the role any more, perhaps they have the
right actor in this film in the wrong role.  Sean Bean did a very
impressive job in the two Richard Sharpe stories that have been shown
in this country.  He did a good job as 006 and should be at least
considered as 007, if it doesn't take too much time from the Sharpe
series, which frankly is better than the Bond series.  And they could
do a lot worse than to bring in Brian Cox, also from the Sharpe series,
to play M.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
(1995)
**
Directed by Martin Campbell.
Second Unit director, Ian Sharp.
Written by Jeffrey Caine & Bruce Fierstein from a story by Michael France.
Photography, Phil Meheux.
Second Unit Camera, Harvey Harrison.
Additional Unit directed & photographed by Arthur Wooster.
Production design, Peter Lamont.
Editing, Terry Rawlings.
Costumes, Lindy Hemming.
Special effects supervisor, Chris Corbould.
Miniature effects supervisor, Derek Meddings.
Visual effects photography, Paul Wilson.
Music, Eric Serra.
Cast: Pierce Brosnan, Sean Bean, Izabella Scorupco, Famke Janssen,
      Joe Don Baker, Robbie Coltrane, Tcheky Karyo, Gottfried John,
      Alan Cumming, Michael Kitchen, Serena Gordon, Desmond Llewelyn,
      Samantha Bond, and Judi Dench as "M."
A UA/MGM release.
130 minutes.
Rated PG-13.
     I keep reading respected reviewers who say that this is the 17th
James Bond flick, when I count it as the 18th.  I guess too many people
have read the presskit that mentions "the 16 previous Bond films"
without double-checking.  Never trust pressbooks.  They can provide
useful information, but they also abound in hype, often have bad
grammar, and bad spelling errors.  In their biographical notices,
unlike the total listings of credits you find in many European
pressbooks, they can also conveniently omit references to movies that
have bombed.
     The new Bond is Pierce Brosnan.  I'd rather see a Pierce-Arrow
classic car than a Pierce Brosnan.  Mind you, I wish him all the best,
along with the rest of humanity.  But without being bad, he is no suave
Sean Connery, no "isn't this a joke?" Roger Moore, no eager-somber
Timothy Dalton.  By comparison Brosnan lacks a marked personality, is
rather inexpressive and delivers his lines without panache.
     Dalton, by the way, was in the much-maligned 17th Bond movie,
LICENSE TO KILL (1989).  It is perhaps the most serious, cruel and
sadistic Bond movie, and for sure the most personal one, and
additionally the best role of Robert Davi (the villain).  It stands
high on my list of 007 entertainments.  And another Bond, George
Lazenby in ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE, has also been unfairly
defamed.
     Bond films have been a blessing, a mix of fantasy and adventure
that, because of their very whimsy, defanged their violence, unlike so
many other action movies.  Bond films never outstayed their welcome,
but GOLDENEYE seems to.
     I don't think that we've reached the point of saturation with 007,
or that lacking the Soviet adversaries or their surrogates, Bond has
run out of steam.  There is a great deal that could be Bonded if
cleverly adapted to the changing times--easily as much as before
since villainy is still all over and technology keeps leaping and
bounding, There are always new opportunities for 007 to reappear.  This
is still the time for all good men to come to the aid of their
country.
     GOLDENEYE opens with 007 and 006 (Sean Bean) facing unexplained
villains in Russia.  The pre-credit sequence has Bond do the longest,
most incredible bungee jump ever, fly through the air into a small
plane's seat, and other such goodies.  It is so outrageous that it
could put you in a state of amused euphoria.
     Then we cut to nine years later ... and filmic erosion sets in.
Bond's new boss M is played by talented Judi Dench.  She may be
familiar to you from the current, clever PBS British series "As Time
Goes By" in which she has the female lead as a mature lady who runs a
secretarial agency and who meets up with her former amour Geoffrey
Palmer--after 38 years.  Dench adds a so-called feminist or PC touch,
but is not especially interesting and her part is quite small.  Michael
Kitchen (whose credits are not in the presskit) is the actor who played
superbly Charles, Prince of Wales in something I saw on TV.  He has a
cultivated nasal voice, beautiful manners, a memorable presence.  Alas,
his role in GOLDENEYE is tiny too.
     The Aston-Martin auto of yore is now being upstaged by the blatant
product placement of a BMW.  How sad to see Great Britain yielding to
Germany.  The BMW is given nothing to do so far as I know, but then I
may have closed my eyes.
     The female villain (Famke Janssen) goes by the name of Xenia
Onatopp.  She is a paragon of unsafe sex, the summit of
sex-and-violence as one entity.  This long-nosed woman has killing
legs, like long-nose pliers that crush her bedmates to death during
copulation.  This is not particularly amusing, nor is the name
Onatopp.  It repeats the mistake of GOLDFINGER where a woman was called
"Pussy Galore," and the additional lapse of taste, almost twenty years
later, of baptizing another lady "Octopussy," in the eponymous movie.
Those names may have been in Ian Fleming's texts but they were
aberrations, snickering schoolchild humor that here becomes crass
stuff.  It takes away from the would-be classiness of 007 films.  And,
no, I am not a prude.
     Bond finds himself facing military and para-military Russian
gangsters who are out to join Capitalism (with a capital C) through the
use of a secret weapon.  I won't let the cat out of the bag save to
opine that unlike Bond's "shaken but not stirred" vodka martinis (yes,
these drinks are back too) the story neither shakes nor stirs you.
     Many of the old conventions are around, minus the old humor.
There are some attempts at jocularity but feeble and forced ones.
Boris the super-programmer who's also supposed to provide comic relief
is poorly handled.
     We get a car race, a baccarat duel with a mysterious woman at
Monte-Carlo's gambling tables, cleavage, kinky sex, orgies of action,
several locations, gadgets, and so on.
     What's new is the use of the paramount 1990s cliche: computers,
their wizard manipulators, the impossible things they do.  What's
almost new is that Bond, as sartorially impeccable as can be in his
Savile Row tailoring and what look to me like Turnbull and Asher
shirts, gets no tears, wrinkles, soot or spots and remains immaculate
while engaging in outlandish action.  See Bond driving a tank in the
streets of St. Petersburg as he chases a car.  See him attacking a
train with his tank.
     What's also new is the containment of Bond's sexism.  When Pierce
Brosnan vanquishes the villainness it is not because she's female but
because he is Bond.  For a change, there's just one new woman carnally
involved with James Bond.  She is no sex object but the pretty
Assistant Programmer who has brains as well as guts.  The actress is
Izabella Scorupco, a Pole from Sweden who has been a model abroad,
became a singer, was in a couple of Swedish films. "Scorupco" may sound
like the movie's fabrication, but is not.
     In case you wonder, the killer-lady Famke Janssen's real name is
apparently not a concoction either.  She is Dutch, moved to the States
eleven years ago, majored in writing and literature at Columbia
University, studied acting, has been on TV's "Star Trek: The Next
Generation" as Picard's love interest.  She had her movie debut in
FATHERS AND SONS.
     New too is the actual use of location shooting in the former
Leningrad.  I tip my synthetic fur hat to the filmmakers for achieving
feats of SFX (special effects) under impossible conditions and perhaps
surpassing most other Bonds in production values.  This is the reason I
exceptionally include some of the countless artisans/technicians in the
credits above--and upgrade the film to two stars.  By itself, the
technical prowess rates an A, but there's more to movies than
gizmoism.
     GOLDENEYE uses the splintered approach.  It is so busy with
action, explosions, computers, guns, planes, trains and automobiles
that it has no time for vignettes, relationships, or expanding
anything.  It is incoherent, diffuse, convoluted, with non sequiturs
and gaps as big as the Baltic sea--as opposed to wide lakes in most
other Bond films.
     The progression is artificial.  Past a point, its arbitrariness
becomes annoying.  Past the next point, it becomes a yawner,
dehumanizes the movie, desensitizes the viewer.  Gadgets and action and
SFX make the film illogical, not by ordinary standards of course (which
is to be expected) but by James Bond wild fantasy standards.
     New Zealand-born director Campbell has done some nice work in
England.  In the US his latest is the ho-hum NO ESCAPE with Ray
Liotta, not a hit but no disaster either.
     Richard Maibaum, the American who was the habitual screenwriter of
007 movies, died in 1991.  The new writers, also American, and here
with their first produced feature, seem to have taken ideas from
fifteen different Bond films and strung them together.  They are big on
lapses and mistakes.  For example Ms. Scorupco survives a catastrophe
magically.  The arch-villain suddenly turns lecherous for a brief
spell--and then nothing is made of this.
     The exchange of bullets goes beyond ordinary conventions: we
accept that movie bad guys will shoot the hero 100 times and not score
once, while the protagonist's marksmanship is perfect.  But a ratio of
1,000 to 1 in both cases?
     Saving graces.  A few bits are funny, like the tank's mayhem and
its snatching the statue of a winged horse, or like Russian gangster
club-owner Robbie Coltrane having a singer girl-friend who demolishes
amusingly the song "Stand by Your Man."
     There is also one subtlety of sorts.  In the Gospel According to
Bond it is the Brits who are the salt of the earth, often assisted by
their second-fiddle American cousins.  Bond has been played by a
Scotsman (Connery), an Englisman (Londoner Moore), an Aussie (Lazenby)
and a Welshman (Dalton).  Now comes the Irish Bond (Brosnan).  No
matter, they are all loyal subjects of H.M. in the films.
     The Bondian Standard has mostly odd-looking-and-sounding
foreigners as the enemy.  In GOLDENEYE there is a Very Bad person who
though not a foreigner, through a specious explanation does turn out to
be one after all.  It's really pushing the envelope, but at least the
trick saves British honor and fealty.  I can't give away more, but
you'll see what I mean if you watch the movie.

Author
Greta Christina
United Artists.
Starring Pierce Brosnan, Izabella Scorupco, Famke Janssen, Judi Dench,
         Sean Bean and Joe Don Baker. 
Produced by Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli.
Screenplay by Jeffrey Caine and Bruce Feirstein, story by Michael France. 
Directed by Martin Campbell.
Rated PG-13.
     Life is getting a bit too surreal for me, folks.  I just saw a
movie that had some of the best, most interesting, most varied female
characters that I've seen all year.  And it was a James Bond movie.  No
shit.  I kid you not; they made a James Bond movie with really
spectacularly cool women.
     I don't know what this world is coming to.  There's probably not
much point in summarizing the plot of GOLDENEYE; it's a James Bond
movie, and that's all you really need to know.  But I suppose a plot
summary is traditional in a movie review, so here goes.  James Bond
(Pierce Brosnan this time) runs around saving the world from a
brilliant but psychotic arch villain.  He drives fast cars, shoots big
guns, blows a lot of stuff up, sneaks around doing spy stuff, and
horses around with pretty women.  GOLDENEYE is a pretty good example of
the genre; the production values are high, the stunts and explosions
are bitching, and Brosnan does a more-than-adequate job as Bond.
     And the women are fucking amazing.  All of them (well, most of
them, anyway).  The women in GOLDENEYE are tough and strong and
competent.  No matter what field they're in, whether they're running an
intelligence agency or plotting to destroy the world, they know what
the hell they're doing, and they do it with gusto.  They don't wait
around passively for men to do all the fun important stuff; they're
active participants in the action, doing fun important stuff their very
own selves.
     Anyone who is familiar with the Bond ouvre will recognize
immediately that this is a radical departure.  Most 007 movies have
very specific, very standardized types of women.  There's the
fashionably beautiful airhead, generally in a bikini or an evening
gown, whose sole purpose in the movie is to fuck James Bond.  There's
the good-girl, also fashionably beautiful, marginally less airheaded
than the fuckbunny but with a pronounced tendency to cringe and cower
in a crisis, whose sole purpose in the movie is to get saved by James
Bond.  There's the villainess, often competent in some traditionally
male field but ruthless, unprincipled and indifferent to human life,
who acts as a foil to James Bond (although never as his primary
antagonist-- she always works for the arch-villain) and is killed or
destroyed in the end.  And there's the misguided bad-girl, who is both
beautiful and competent but has somehow been misled into working for
the bad guys, who is converted to Truth, Justice and the British Way of
Life by getting fucked by James Bond.  None of them ever instigate any
of the action, and their lives are entirely focused in one way or
another on Bond.  (In the interests of fairness, I should point out
that I haven't seen every single 007 movie every made; this analysis is
based on the six or seven that I have seen.)
     But GOLDENEYE departs from this formula in some very drastic
ways.  I'd like to start with the secondary characters; since one of
the more fabulous things about GOLDENEYE's women is their variety, the
minor characters wind up contributing a great deal to the surprisingly
feminist flavor of the movie.  Take the character of M, head of British
intelligence and Bond's superior officer.  "Now, wait a minute," I hear
you cry.  "M's not a woman.  M changes from movie to movie, but M has
never been a woman.  No woman has ever given James Bond his working
orders." Well, she is and she does in this one, played with a
delightful hardassed professional edge by Judi Dench.  Bond doesn't
much like her; but although he gives her shit, he doesn't question her
authority.  Interestingly, her management style is presented as less
intuitive and impetuous, more analytical and responsible, than the
spy-boys are really happy with; the exact opposite of the criticism
usually levelled at women in power.  And in her confrontation with 007,
she reads him the riot act with the best of them, calling him a
"sexist, misogynist dinosaur, a relic of the Cold War, whose boyish
charms are wasted on me."  Quite a departure from the female fawning
and groveling that characterizes most Bond movies.
     And look at Moneypenny (Samantha Bond), Bond's devoted assistant.
In previous 007 movies, Moneypenny is an aging, unattractive spinster
with a schoolgirl crush on 007 and no life outside her job, who lives
for the approval and bantering flirtation that James occasionally
deigns to bestow upon her.  In GOLDENEYE, however, Moneypenny is none
of the above.  She's attractive--not as a bimbo, but as a striking and
stylish adult woman--and she has a life as well as a career.  She
flirts with Bond, but the flirtation is anything but servile.  In fact,
when he makes some suggestive comment to her, she points out that what
he's doing could be considered sexual harassment--and then challenges
him to come through on all the innuendos he's aimed at her for so
long.  Again, I've never seen anything like it in any 007 movie.
     Moving on to the major characters, we have the villainess, Xenia
Onatopp (Famke Janssen).  That's right:  Onatopp.  Even the name is a
departure form previous Bond temptresses such as, say, Pussy Galore.
Onatopp is a ravenous, sadistic beauty, a former Soviet fighter pilot
who smokes cigars and drives Ferraris and gets sexually aroused by
machine-gun fire and kills men by crushing them to death between her
thighs.  She takes her martinis "straight--with a twist," and she looks
hot as hell in a uniform.  I, for one, have fallen in love.  (Side note
for Star Trek TNG fans:  Janssen, the woman who plays Onatopp, also
played Kamala, the metamorph babe who falls for Picard in "The Perfect
Mate."  Yum.)  In many ways she's quite similar to previous Bond
villainesses; beautiful but ruthless, sexy but dangerous, plays second
fiddle to the real (male) villain, dies a horrible death.  But her
appropriation of traditionally male attributes into a distinctly female
persona, as well as her aggressive, audacious, wildly kinky sexuality,
make for a significant deviation (if you'll pardon the pun) from the
007 standard.
     Finally, we come to the heroine, Natalya Simonova (Izabella
Scorupco), a cute but sort of geeky computer programmer.  Yes, folks,
blasphemy of blasphemies; Bond's girl is a smart, competent
techno-geek, a serious professional in her own right, who can do
something difficult and important that he can't do.
     Like the other women in GOLDENEYE, Natalya is utterly lacking in
the passivity and the cringing subservience that most Bond babes have
had in the past.  When her world comes (literally) crashing down around
her head, she uses her head to keep herself safe and then crawls out of
the wreckage with her bare hands.  She doesn't hesitate to mouth off to
Bond; in fact, she gives him a piece of her mind about his
testosterone-addled lifestyle on more than one occasion.  And when
they're sneaking around in the bad guy's hideout and Bond tells her to
stay put, she totally ignores him and runs to the computer room to jam
the bad guys' program.
     What's more, she dresses like a regular schmoe; during most of the
movie, she's in a cardigan and a plain skirt and thick black tights,
and for much of the rest of it she's in combat trousers and what looks
an awful lot like a long thermal undershirt.  They do get her into a
bikini at one point--it must be in the contract somewhere that Bond's
girlfriend has to wear a bikini for at least one scene--but for the
most part, she dresses like any sane human being would if they lived in
freezing Russia or were running around trying to defeat bad guys.
She's definitely a babe; the outfits suit her, and she does have the
standard Hollywood female body of the 90s.  But she comes across as a
sexy and attractive real-life non-plastic human being.  Once again,
quite unlike any Bond women I've ever seen.
     But what makes Natalya such a radical and delightful departure
from the usual good-girl Bond-meat isn't her skilled professionalism,
or her charming geekdom, or her feisty spirit.  It's not even her
intelligence or courage or physical strength.  What makes her so great
is her participation in the action of the movie.  She doesn't just run
around after 007, squealing and cowering and waiting to be rescued
(well, not much, anyway).  She gets in there and gets her hands dirty;
she can shoot guns and fly helicopters (no, I don't know why a computer
programmer would know how to fly a helicopter); she comes up with ideas
and whacks bad guys in the head.  And her computer skills are central
to the plot, indispensable to solving the puzzle and thwarting the bad
guys' evil scheme.
     Granted, it's still Bond's game; it's his puzzle that she's
solving, it's his arch-enemy that she's battling, and of course it's
his pants that she wants to get into.  But she's still one of the
coolest women I've seen on the screen all year.  She reminds me a lot
of the Sandra Bullock character in Speed; she's basically a regular
schmoe in a bad situation, and she does freak out about it on occasion,
but overall she handles the crisis with grace and courage and style.
     I'm impressed.  It's not just that I've never seen women like this
in any 007 movie; I've seen damn few women like this in amy movie.  The
filmmakers didn't just manage to come up with a decent female
character; they came up with several, all strong and competent and
nervy, and all in their own unique way.  It's almost as if Hollywood
finally figured out that lots of women enjoy action movies, and will
pay to see ones that don't insult us.  I applaud their efforts, and
hope they keep it up.
--
(Written for the Spectator; posted with permission.  Responses to this
review may be printed in the Spectator Express Mail section.  Please
indicate if your response is not for publication.)
Our WWW home page is located at http://www.blowfish.com/
