Title
Review for Fish Called Wanda, A (1988)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Peter van der Linden
     A local theater previewed A FISH CALLED WANDA last weekend.  A FISH CALLED
WANDA is an awkward title for a very funny film.  John Cleese (who wrote and
stars in, but does not direct this film) is back on form!  If you like zany
comedies, then you'll love this.  Some of Cleese's earlier solo films were
patchy (PRIVATES ON PARADE), and some were downright boring (CLOCKWISE), but
here we see sustained, clever, inventive comedy.  It simply gleams with wit!
     The story line is straightforward, based on a gang of double-crossing
jewel-thieves after a successful raid.  The story is set in London, and it's a
pleasure to see the care taken with the location shooting (apart from the final
shot of the speeding car heading from the Old Bailey to Heathrow; why are you
going via Oxford, John?)   Some of the film editing is a bit clumsy, too (how
does Michael Palin end up on the luggage conveyor at the airport?).  Kevin
Kline is superb as the ex-CIA hitman, sneering at the Brits.  
     The audience broke into spontaneous applause at the end of this film,  and
you don't hear that very often these days.  A FISH CALLED WANDA is funny,
contains sharp characterizations, and deserves to be an extraordinary success.

Author
Pedro Sena
If John Cleese is not a very good actor, at least he is a very good writer.
And together with the director, they came up with a very cute script, that
runs along very well, and is perfect for Cleese, who does not have to
overplay his part, and neither does he have to play the type he is so well
used to in FAWLTY TOWERS, and the famous MONTY PYTHON skits.  This is a well
scripted and thought out story, which has confined the advantages of each
actor into a nice little film.  While far from great, it still is nice to
sit through, and does have some funny moments, almost all of them centered
on John Cleese, who seems to be specially suited to playing eccentric
characters, the most difficult style of comedic roles.
The story is a bit on the weird side... two thieves, Jamie Lee Curtis (she
looks great) and Kevin Kline are attempting to get to some more valuables
and they will get involved with
just about anyone to get it done.  She ends up getting interested in John
Cleese for the wrong reasons, and has to play the role  of a lover, much to
the chagrin of her real lover (Kline).
In between, John Cleese gets his marriage turned upside down (it wasn't
worth it anyway !!), and becomes interested in the woman thief, whom he does
not suspect of any foul behavior.
A bit of a mess, but a perfect situation to set up gags for John Cleese to
get caught in, and display his incredible ability to hold it under the most
unusual circumstances.  I think he suffers from the Peter Sellers complex
that he must not crack up, no matter how difficult, and weird, the situation
can be.  He holds his own.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Very funny, well-written crime
     story/comedy combines the story-telling of the old Ealing
     comedies with the pace and outrageousness of FAWLTY TOWERS.
     This film makes one long for the days of better films by
     better writers.  We don't see many like this any more.
     Rating: high +2.
     I got complaints recently on my review of MIDNIGHT RUN.  I only mildly
liked a comedy-adventure in which you got to know somewhat two conflicting
character types, set on the background of a sort of race across country that
included cars chasing cars, helicopters cars, and double crosses.  Now,
eight days later, I see an English comedy-adventure, A FISH CALLED WANDA.
It too has chases, conflicting personalities, and double crosses, but the
poor British cannot afford to blow up helicopters and crash cars, so they
economize by getting good writers who can really write dialogue and create
characters, and at the same time be funny and tell a good story that keeps
an audience guessing how things are all going to turn out.  In short, A FISH
CALLED WANDA is not only a film that does things right, it is a film that
does some things astoundingly right.
     The film begins with a mismatched set of crooks pulling off a jewel
heist.  There are two English brothers (played by Michael Palin and Tom
Georgeson) and an American brother and sister, Otto and Wanda (played by
Kevin Kline and Jamie Lee Curtis).  The jewels are just barely stowed away
when the first double cross happens.  The second double cross is only a
short time after.  One double cross might have caused problems; with two,
all hell breaks loose in an amazing set of misunderstandings, dirty tricks,
counter-plots, and revenges.  Soon into the fray comes barrister Archie
Leach (does that name sound familiar?), played by John Cleese.  Wanda wants
to use Leach against the English brothers, but Otto's basic anti-British
prejudice starts fouling things up.
     A FISH CALLED WANDA was written by John Cleese and directed by Charles
Crichton (who directed great British comedies like THE LAVENDER HILL MOB).
It was based on a story by Cleese Crichton.  With that background, it is not
surprising that it has a feel of FAWLTY TOWERS combined with MONTY PYTHON
crossed with old Ealing Studios comedy.  A FISH CALLED WANDA has good
three-dimensional characters, has a good story, and is very funny at the
same time.  Rate it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Robiner
Director: Charles Chrichton
Screenplay by John Cleese
Produced by Michael Shamberg
Starring John Cleese, Jamie Lee Curtis, Kevin Kline, Michael Palin, and Wanda.
Seen at: USC, Norris Theater, July 14th
     This is one of those rare films that's as structurally sound as it is
hilariously funny.  The timing, characters, and the absurd situations are 
perfect and will be appreciated by even those who don't generally care for
Monty Python humor (of which John Cleese and Michael Palin are co-founders).
By the way, those who do will absolutely love this movie.
     The basic premise of four double-crossing criminals trying to outsmart
each other in order to find their hidden loot is well constructed and just
intricate enough to be interesting without becoming unmanageable.  Perhaps the
best part of this film is the wild and outrageous characters that Cleese has
come up with.  Curtis and Kline, both normally dramatic actors, pull off comic
roles like old pros and easily fit in with mainstays Cleese and Palin.
     A true test for a great comedy: it is even funnier when you think back on
it afterwards and get a bigger laugh.  A FISH CALLED WANDA definitely fits this
bill as a brilliant comedy a must see!  A + .
