Title
Review for Ben-Hur (1925)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
BEN-HUR (United States, 1925, silent)
Director: Fred Niblo
Screenwriters: Carey Wilson, Bess Meredyth
Cast: Ramon Novarro, May McAvoy, Francis X. Bushman
     Well, all in all, I'd rather be in Philadelphia.  This print of the 1925
silent epic (a film which almost broke Sam Goldwyn and MGM) is certainly of
interest to the film historian, archivist, and anyone who needs reminding of
why so few silent dramas are still shown.  It's been a while since I've seen
BIRTH OF A NATION; this production of BEN-HUR made Griffith's masterpiece look
restrained in comparison.  The actor playing Ben-Hur resembled a younger
version of John Lovitz's "Master Thespian" character on SNL -- you can just see
him winking to the other actors and actresses and whispering "I was only...
ACTING!"
     As to the plot, it appears to be Hollywood's effort to turn the Easter
story into a Western.  After beating his Roman enemy in the chariot races,
Ben-Hur becomes the richest man in all the world.  He raises two great armies
that will help Christ overthrow the Roman Empire ("Chapter IV: The evil Pontius
Pilate is building a giant Death Coliseum to destroy the rebel Christian
Alliance....").  But then word comes to him that Pilate is condemning Christ to
death.  Hur leaps onto his horse, yells for his men to follow him, and speeds
away to Jerusalem.  Will he make it in time?  Frankly, I thought SILVERADO did
it better....
     There are other humorous parts.  Ben's mom and sister have become lepers,
and wherever they go, people yell "Lepers, lepers!" in such a way that I was
reminded of Monty Python's "Llamas!  Llamas!" bit.  And, like many films
before 1950, Jesus's face is never shown; what's exceptional about BEN-HUR is
how clumsy they are at avoiding it.  You either see only his hands (sticking
out of the side of the picture like Mr. Hands on the Mr. Bill Show), or they
block his face with someone standing in front of him.  This could have been
done realistically, but it culminates in a scene of the Last Supper where some
guy (the waiter?) stands in front of Christ during the entire scene.  All you
can see is his halo, like a nimbus around the blocking actor...wouldn't it
have been easier simply to put a black square in front of his face, like they
do on 60 MINUTES?
     The Technicolor parts of the film are interesting -- 1925 is about the
earliest I ever heard of color being shown in theaters.  It's used strictly for
the scenes straight out of the Testament, and it gives them a rather
gospel-like look; they resemble the illustrations you find in religious
children's books.  The chariot races scene is exciting, also.  But it won't
keep you entertained for 2 hours, so I'd generally say skip it, except to the
most serious historian.
LINER NOTES:  I stuck around to see the short preceding the next film; it was
Bill Plympton's newest animated short, ONE OF THOSE DAYS.  Unlike YOUR FACE,
this was a straight-forward cartoon short where various pratfalls, accidents
and misfortunes befall a fellow (we see everything from the fellows point of
view).  Rather like a Tom & Jerry cartoon, except that Plympton's art makes it
funnier.  Nothing exceptional, though.

Author
PShug39980
Starring: Ramon Novarro, Francis X.  Bushman, May McAvoy, Betty Bronson,
Claire McDowell
First let me say, I was dragged kicking and screaming to this movie.  The
idea of sitting 2 1/2 hours watching a silent movie!  Silent! 
Well, I was wrong.  This movie was a marvel to me.  Released in 1926, it had
a "Titanic" budget of almost $4 million.  It was filmed in Italy and the US.  
Novarro is solid as Ben Hur, while Bushman is slightly over the top as
Messala.  The story goes that Ben Hur and Messala were childhood friends.  Now
that they are grown, Messala is more into being a Roman, and that spells bad
news for Ben Hur, a Jew.  Messala is embarrassed over their early friendship
and takes advantage of an accident, where a tile is knocked loose from a
balcony and hits a Roman dignitary, to imprison Ben Hur's mother and sister,
and send Ben Hur to a slave ship.
Ben Hur impresses the Roman Officer on the slave ship and is released from
his chains before a pirate attack.  The Naval battle is phenomenal. Filmed off
the coast of Italy, I read that they put Communists on one boat and Fascists
on the other, so as to make the fighting look more real.  Ben Hur rescues the
Roman Admiral and is adopted by him when they are picked up by another Roman
vessel.
Ben Hur becomes a champion chariot racer, but he still looks for his
imprisoned mother and sister. He eventually meets the old family slave who has
been guarding the family fortune for years. He uses his newfound wealth to
challenge Messala to a race, as a way to get revenge. The Chariot Race scenes
are a marvel to see. Easily as good as the scenes in the remake 34 years
later.
The life of Christ is interspersed throught the film and Ben Hur becomes a
believer and raises an army for the Christ only to have it stayed by Jesus'
wish.  They used an interesting technique of never showing Jesus' face.  At
times its a bit disconcerting, but overall, I thought it a nice touch.
The 2-color Technicolor bits were very impressive, and beautifully filmed.
The movie was accompanied by a small orchestra conducted by Gillian
Anderson(not the X-Files chick).  All in all, I am now a silent movie fan!
