Title
Review for Yeshou xingjing (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Vince Yim
Review: Ye Shou Xing Jing (a.k.a. Beast Cops)
Dir: Gordon Chan with Dante Lam
Starring Michael Wong, Anthony Wong, Kathy Chow, and Sam Lee Chan.
   Proving that North American filmmakers can easily learn much from
overseas film markets, director Gordon Chan (best known for a few Jackie
Chan films including Thunderbolt) and first timer Dante Lam put together
an entertaining package about the meeting of two cops running amok in
Triad infested Hong Kong.  Combining laughs, action, and a touch of
obligatory romance, the film almost tries to hard, yet is still a fun
film.
   One of the main characters, Cheung, is played by Michael Wong, best
known for his role in the John Woo's Once a Thief telefilm (and more
recently, Knock Offugh). Cheung is a straight-laced cop who is imported
to the police force in an anti-triad squad.  Playing off of him is Tung,
played by Anthony Wong, known for the villain role in John Woo's
Hard-Boiled.  Tung is the opposite of Cheung, the rogue cop that keeps a
liaison with the Triads, leaving the open question of who's really in
charge.
   The odd man out is Sam (played by Sam Lee Chan).  Best described as
the Hong Kong equivalent of Spud from Trainspotting, he is a young cop
with weird hair, funny looking glasses, and odd attitudes towards sex
(ie: appropriate condom substitutes). While a fun character that
guarantees a few laughs during his screen time, he is ultimately a
throwaway character.
   Unfortunately, this plays with the entire nature of the entire film.
The film is trying to be too much in too short of a span of time (either
that, or too much time is wasted to properly define the film). The film
takes on a documentary style (reminiscent of Cops), interviewing each
character. Then, the two main characters go off to the underground scene
of nightclubs and take drugs and stuff (Cheung mistakes them for Chinese
herbs).  After some comic scenes where Cheung stumbles around in a
drug-induced stupor, he falls in love with the Triad leader's girlfriend
(played by Kathy Chow). Much later in the film we have Tung taking a
handful of uppers and going on a suicide run to kill the new Triad
leader.
   Sequences are set up in an almost haphazard fashion, with some
elements left completely in the dust. Before the formal introduction of
Cheung, we are shown a brilliantly shot black and white flashback
sequence where he is forced to kill a fellow police officer. While the
filmmakers could have easily used this as a character development
device, it is instantly forgotten as Cheung graces the screen.
   Quickly jumping in transition from documentary to comedy to romance
to Romero-esque horror, these sequences are well constructed by
themselves. But as a whole, they ultimately fail to achieve balance.
Documentary style interviews were an interesting insight into the
character's lives, but ultimately feel out of place in the film.  The
scene where Tung takes on a demonic appearance after a machete fight
with Triads is darkly comic and fun to watch, but out of context with
the rest of the film (although it does justify the English title, Beast
Cops).
   Stylistically, this film is incredible. Slow motion tracking
reminiscent of John Woo's Hard-Boiled, strobe and handheld camera
effects reminiscent of Wong Kar-Wai's Chungking Express, brilliant
colours, and nice art direction make for a nice scenes. Unfortunately,
they do not always make for a great film.
   While a fun film, it is not a great film. Still, it is worthy of a
look if you can get a hold of it.
--

Author
Victor Nguyen
Beast Cops (aka Yeshou xingjing) (1998)
Starring Anthony Wong Chau-sang, Michael Wong Mun-tak, Kathy Chow, Sam Lee,
and Roy Cheung
Co-written by Chan Hing-kai
Written and Produced by Gordan Chan
Directed by Dante Lam and Gordan Chan
Rating: ***** out of *****
Review: Hong Kong films in 1998 have never been better than "Beast Cops".
This latest work from Gordan Chan and his protege Dante Lam is an immensely
entertaining character study, layered with shining performances, bouncy
camera-work, and an intelligent script with heavy doses of wit and humor.
The films plot centralizes around a decorated cop named Michael Cheung
(Michael Wong Man-tuk). Cheung has been appointed to the anti-triad division
of the force, and subsequently moves in with his cohorts, Tung and Sam
(Anthony Wong Chau-sang and Sam Lee). Sam is the slacker type who drives
around in a scooter, and prides himself as the "ladies man". Tung is a
pleasure seeker who's quick mouth makes himself popular with his
aquaintances. This feature makes himself especially popular with a local
triad group, with whom he's going undercover against. As Tung shows Michael
around his various hang outs, he brings him to a popular triad spot, where
Michael meets, and eventually falls for Yo Yo (Kathy Chow), a hooker who has
been left behind by the big brother who promised to run away with her. This
big brother (Roy Cheung), who is a friend of Tung's, is fleeing to escape an
unintentional murder rap. As big brother is gone, a young, arrogant triad
named Pushy Pin takes over. Pushy Pin has his own type of infatuation with
Yo Yo, and unsurprisingly, is furious to hear of Michael and Yo Yo's
relationship. He attempts to have Michael "bumped off", but his efforts
falter. This is where the film takes a sharp turn in the other direction
when big brother returns, only to be killed by Pushy Pin himself. Every
single twist and turn ultimately leads up to the over-the-top conclusion,
where it pits everyone, more particularly Tung and Pushy Pin, in a
no-holds-barred knife and fist fight.
As mentioned before, the main reason "Beast Cops" is one of the best of
98 is because it's script, which was jointly written by Chan Hing-kai and
Gordon Chan, manages to blend drama and violent action with scenes of
hilarious, and often dark comedy. The strength of all this is that even with
the mashing of genres together, the pace of the film still flows smoothly.
The film even takes a documentary type turn, in which the actors speak to
the camera, therefore breaking the fine line between them and the viewer.
Even the typical romantic subplot doesn't drag the film down, in fact, it
provides a good chunk of the humor (a particularly memorable scens features
Wong desperately searching for a substitute for condoms). All you have to do
is witness how well this film works, even with a bevy of genres that
confuses me when trying to categorize it.
As mentioned in plenty of other reviews, the title "Beast Cops", often
misguides the viewer, leading them to believe that the film they are about
to witness is a hardcore action film, in the tradition of other Gordon Chan
efforts like the often lampooned "Option" series (which also stars Michael
Wong). Instead, they are treated to a character study, leaving very little
room for action. When the action sequences do come, they again take the
documentary turn, as a handheld camera follows the action, swiping and
bouncing as in real life. Those gore hungry fans who are disappointed in the
limited action sequences that "Beast Cops" offers will definitely not be
disappointed in the gore factor. The film's action, especially the finale,
features plenty of brutal stabbings, maimings, and shootings, in the
tradition of Hong Kong cinema. The finale is a prime example of this, as
Tung and Pushy Pin are literally drenched in blood by the end. Again, be
forewarned, "Beast Cops" is one of those films in which the quote "Don't
judge a book by it's cover" comes to mind (Well, in this case, don't judge a
film by it's title).
Whew! While citing the superb script and how not to view "Beast Cops"
for the action, I forgot to mention my single favorite element to the film,
the powerful and superb performances, courtesy of a finely assembled
ensemble cast. Wait a minute, powerful and superb performances and Michael
Wong don't go together. Wong,  who is undoubtebly the most criticized actor
in HK cinema history, breaks that typecast by delivering the best
performance of his entire career. His use of the English dialogue to get
around the tougher Cantonese phrases is used to a minimum here, and he
manages to stand out during his key sequences. But as much as he stands out,
he cannot, even on his best day, make himself standout when the great
Anthony Wong Chau-sang is on screen. Wong, who appears a bit bloated in this
film (due to the fact of an illness he is recovering from), is the strongest
out of the ensemble cast. His lines are delivered with Wong's characteristic
wit and sarcasm. His dramatic scenes are well handled too, making this a
terrific all-around performance. Add this to one of the many awards Wong
should have received for best actor. Sam Lee, whose appearence is reduced to
a small role, gets some funny scenes, and basically provides some of the
comic relief the film contains. Kathy Chow is very effective as Yo Yo, while
Roy Cheung plays the role he does best, as a triad leader. To sum it all up,
the performances to not disappoint the least bit.
With it being the middle of November, it looks as if nothing in Hong
Kong will ever top "Beast Cops" as best film of the year. Although The
"Longest Nite" comes close, it's tiny subtitles have taken the enjoyment
factor out of me. "Beast Cops" is a pleasant change of pace in a cinematic
community where Hollywood films are currently dominating the territories own
box office receipts. With Hong Kong's decline in the quality of films,
"Beast Cops" (and virtually every Milky Way production) is a step in the
right direction. Ever since I read the first wave of reviews for the film, I
have been anxiously awaiting the day when I finally saw it. Let's just say I
share the enthusiasm contained in most of the reviews, and that the wait was
well worth it.
(Note: Beast Cops has not been released into the mainstream market. The only
way to view this film is by importing it. Another way is to seek out a
Chinatown video store. This film, due to it's immense popularity in it's
native Hong Kong, is almost guarenteed to be in one of those stores. I
suggest you get this film by any means necessary)
