Title
Review for Night of the Hunter, The (1955)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE NIGHT OF THE HUNTER (1955)
Starring:  Robert Mitchum, Shelly Winters, Lillian Gish, Billy Chapin,
Sally Jane Bruce.
Screenplay:  James Agee, based on the novel by Davis Grubb.
Director:  Charles Laughton.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Because I have been privy to the forty years of screen history which
followed it -- particularly the past fifteen or twenty years -- I watched
almost 90 minutes of THE NIGHT OF THE HUNTER with a combination of
technical admiration and vague consternation.  The problem was Harry
Powell (Robert Mitchum), the sinister minister who drives the narrative.
Dressed in a preacher's garb, Harry arrives in a small town to do as he
has done many times before:  rob a widow of her wealth before robbing her
of her life.  His target is Willa Harper (Shelly Winters), whose husband
shared a jail cell with Harry before his execution for killing two men
during a bank robbery.  The loot was never recovered, and only Willa's two
young children John (Billy Chapin) and Pearl (Sally Jane Bruce) seem to
know the whereabouts of the $10,000, though neither one is talking.
Spouting scripture and impressing the gullible townsfolk, Harry insinuates
himself into the Harper family to begin a greed-driven reign of terror.
     You can't blame me for fearing that THE NIGHT OF THE HUNTER would
turn out to be the prototype for more recent films depicting Christians as
either a) homicidal zealots, b) unctuous hypocrites or c) simple-minded
buffoons, if not all three.  With his "love/hate" finger tattoos and his
creepy repetition of a single old spiritual, Harry is a nightmare vision
of perverted religiosity.  
     But THE NIGHT OF THE HUNTER takes a surprising turn late in the
film.  Pursued relentlessly down the river by Harry, John and Pearl come
into the care of an elderly woman named Rachel (Lillian Gish) who has
taken to caring for orphans.  In a moment of chillingly perfect clarity,
Harry hovers menacingly at the garden gate, crooning that same solitary
spiritual:  "Leaning, leaning, leaning on the everlasting arm."  Rachel
recognizes the tune and begins to sing along, at which point it becomes
clear that Harry is omitting a fairly significant word from his version.
The word is "Jesus."
     THE NIGHT OF THE HUNTER has earned much of its praise over the years
for director Charles Laughton's stark visual style, praise it certainly
deserves.  Some of Laughton's compositions are remarkably assured for a
first-time (and, sadly, only-time) film-maker, haunting images of Harry as
a dark horseman on the horizon, and of a dead woman's hair streaming
underwater.  There are also unexpected flashes of wicked humor, including
a woman's can't-believe-they-said-it-in-1955 reference to her sex life as
"ly(ing) back and thinking of my canning."
     It is the canny set-up of Harry and Rachel as the "love" and "hate"
on Harry's fingers, however, which will linger longest in my memory.
Many conservative critics have railed against the movies as a haven for
Christian-bashing, charges which only bear the whiff of truth because the
films criticized don't do what THE NIGHT OF THE HUNTER does.  Harry Powell
may be a horrible human being, but he's not horrible because he's a
Christian.  Screenwriter James Agee makes Harry's fire-and-brimstone faith
a pathology justifying his selfishness and misogyny; Rachel interprets her
faith as a call to selflessness and defense of the defenseless.  The
narrative depth and cinematic richness of THE NIGHT OF THE HUNTER both end
up coming from the same place:  a juxtaposition of light and dark which
can be as satisfying and inspirational as it is bleak and disturbing.

Author
Pete Croatto
Until I saw The Night of the Hunter, it had been a long time since I had
gasped while watching a movie.  Forget The Others and The Deep End
(which veered toward strained dramatics), The Night of the Hunter is by
far the scariest movie I've seen so far this year.  Even though the
movie is nearly 50 years old and there's a not drop of blood to be seen.
Luckily, The Night of the Hunter, Charles Laughton's first and final
directing gig, has been restored by the UCLA Film and Television Archive
and is being re-released in October 2001.  So, there's still plenty of
time to spill your popcorn all over the place.
Robert Mitchum stars as Harry Powell, a reverend with a nasty habit of
courting and then killing widows for their cash.  His newest target is
young mother Willa Harper (Shelley Winters), whose murderer husband Ben
(Peter Graves) has hidden $10,000 somewhere.  Powell finds out about the
stash and decides to court Mrs. Harper after he's released and Ben is
hanged.  But finding the money isn't easy for Powell, who must contend
with his stepchildren (Billy Chapin and Sally Jane Bruce), who know
where the money is, but aren't telling.
The hard part about seeing a classic now is the pop culture monster has
usually drawn and quartered and then flaunted all the memorable moments,
thus ruining the spontaneity and adventure when we finally watch it for
the first time.  How many spoofs or salutes to the shower scene in
Psycho have we seen in other movies?  What about the brilliant baby
stroller sequence from Battleship Potemkin?  (No, I'm not blaming Brian
De Palma entirely for this sampling problem.)
Yes, there are some visual elements that other directors seem to have
borrowed from The Night of the Hunter.  Powell's "love" and "hate"
knuckle tattoos obviously influenced Spike Lee in Do the Right Thing
(remember Radio Raheem?).  And Powell's black suit, with black tie and
white shirt, could have shaped Quentin Tarantino's early visual style.
Seeing The Night of the Hunter for the first time, I was amazed at how
much it crackled with wicked wit and fright and how much intensity was
intact.  You can now sign me up as president of the Robert Mitchum Fan
Club.    He plays the role with a controlled malice that induces unease
every time he appears.  He's like the senior class president with an
evil streak.  If I ever need to stay awake, I'll just picture him
crooning, "Leaning... leaning...."  Any actor who wants to play a
character with a touch of evil should study his performance the way a
rabbinical student studies the Torah.
And credit must be handed out to Laughton and cinematographer Stanley
Cortez, who create a series of haunting, surreal shadowy images over the
rural Depression-era backdrop.  It's a testament to both men that
they're able to invigorate what has become a hackneyed storyline (kids
harassed by evil guardians) by sticking to the old maxim that we're more
scared by what we don't see.
Screenwriter and legendary film critic James Agee does a beautiful job
giving shape and substance to an array of supporting characters: the
drunk Birdie (James Gleason) who's haunted by his wife, and the Spoons
(Evelyn Varden and Walt Spoon) whose marriage has become a verbal
vaudeville act.
The only lapse is the movie's third act, when Pearl and John run away
from home and find a home with the motherly, Bible-reading Mrs. Cooper
(Lillian Gish).  Her showdown with Powell is memorable -- a battle done
with dueling hymns.  However, the whole segment feels a little rushed
and underdone, but it's still a thrill seeing the queen of the silent
film era handling a shotgun.
Do yourself favor and don't miss this if it comes to a nearby theater.
Note:  A series of revealing, but overlong, outtakes preceded the
movie.  The highlights included the legendary Laughton (who sounds
eerily like Mr. Pitt from Seinfeld) running Winters' lines with Mitchum,
and the adorable, tiny Bruce having trouble descending a coal pile. 
Hours more of such footage exists, as Laughton liked to keep the cameras
constantly rolling.
Screened as part of the 2001 New York Film Festival retrospectives
(feature story coming soon).
Director: Charles Laughton
Producer: Paul Gregory
Writer:  James Agee
Starring:  Robert Mitchum, Shelley Winters, Lillian Gish, Billy Chapin,
Sally Jane Bruce, Evelyn Varden, Don Beddoe, James Gleason, Peter Graves
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Max Scheinin
Charles Laughton's The Night Of The Hunter and Howard Hawks' The Big Sleep
are two primary examples of the genre known as film noir. During the 40s
and 50s film noirs were produced regularly in America. They featured
grotesque men who lurked in shadows, seductive women who were rarely seen
and large, looming camera angles that made their subjects look like
misshapen monsters.
Few films can send genuine shivers down your back; The Fugitive, Jaws and
of course Alfred Hitchcock's Psycho. Charles Laughton's The Night Of The
Hunter is capable of doing this. It's a smashingly scary romp that
demonstrates big, important special effects aren't needed to scare your
socks off. If you want your heart to stop don't read the following plot
summary. ( I knew the plot before I saw the movie; like Psycho it's a
modern legend. ) 
*Plot summary*
A psychotic preacher charms a town and marries a recent widow. ( Her
husband was hanged for stealing money he showed to his children before the
fatal day. ) He hopes to find the money himself and then move on. He kills
his wife and chases the children down the river in a nail biting scene that
somehow feels magical. The children are taken in by an old woman who has
the preacher arrested.
*Plot summary*
Ok, you say, what's so scary about that; and honestly nothing is or would
be scary if it wasn't for the direction. This was Laughton's only film,
reggretable because it is apperant that he could have been a great
director. As made by Hitchcock, this would have been more refined and
elegant. As made by Laughton it's mind numbingly suspensful, a rip your
hair out treat. For example here is a synopsis of one scene.
The children are hiding in the basement with the girl's doll in which the
money is hidden. Slowly the preacher comes down and finds them. He pins the
boy on a barrel and puts a sharp knife to his neck. "Where is it?", he
growls, Overcome the girl yells "It's in my doll." He laughs. "It's the
last place I would have looked." He sits down against the wall and the boy
drops a shelf on his head. He's dazed but he jumps out after them and
chases them up a flight of stairs with his arms stretched out in front of
him like a zombie. They slam the door on his fingers and quickly lock it.
The story is everything; many films ( see below ), are about style over
substance; The Night Of The Hunter is about substance. 
In The Big Sleep the story is nothng because it doesn't make much sense. If
in the middle of the screening I attended a man had leaned over and
whispered "What's going on?", I could have told him. If he had said "What
is this about?", I would have answered "Who knows?".
A quick summary: Marlowe is hired by a rich guy to get a blackmailer off
his back. The rich man has two daughters, Carmen and Mrs. Rutlidge. Alot of
people appear and get shot and Marlowe falls in love.
That's it. The Big Sleep is one of those movies that works entirely, but
only in it's own universe. The fact that it is pretty incomprehensible is
famous. Who knew it was this bad? ( Or this good? ) Watching it is like
watching something you go to see because your kid makes you. You put your
criticsms on hold and try to enjoy the show.
Howard Hawks directs with a crisp and refreshing to-the-pointness that has
you smiling at the sheer fun of it all. ( Is it a great movie? Yeah. It's
also greatly enjoyable. ) Max Steiner wrote the wonderful score that brings
it the same air as Casablanca which he also composed. ( He objected to the
use of 'As Time Goes By'. ) And how are the stars? Wonderful. Humphrey
Bogart - the ultimate noir man - and Lauren Bacall sizzle onscreen.
I saw it in the prerelease edition currently showing across the country -
and you should go see it now. Funny and entertaining, a breezy delight. At
the theater there was hardly a seat left. From the first shot to the last
the audience was drawn in, completely.
The only drawback was the final documentary shown afterwards of the version
originally released to theaters. Seen seperately I would have been
fascinated but with and after the film I was bored. I should have walked
out, still high on the experience and I wasn't given that opportunity.
Still it's a wonderful movie. ( It looks like a much better version then
the original which they show part of. ) An example of what can be done with
all the right people and nothing to work with.
