Title
Review for Boy and His Dog, A (1975)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
When people hear the phrase "post-apocalyptic" films, they
usually think about extremely violent low budget action
films, set in deserts that are supposed to represent the
modern civilisation turned into wasteland. Most of these
films were made in late 1970s and early 1980s, inspired by
the success of George Miller's MAD MAX 2 and new-born fears
of nuclear annihilation in Reagan's year. However, post-
apocalyptic films were made before late 1970s and they
didn't always belong to the area of action genre. One of
such examples is A BOY AND HIS DOG, 1975 black comedy
directed by L.Q. Jones and based on the award-winning
novella by well- known science fiction author Harlan
Ellison.
The plot of this film is set in Arizona in the year 2024
A.D. The world had been devastated by nuclear war seventeen
years ago, and the surface of the Earth is turned into
desert, roamed by various drifters in search of food, drink
and shelter. One of them is Vic (played by Don Johnson),
eighteen-year-old boy whose only companion is Blood (voice
by Tim McIntire), dog with whom he has telepathic
connection. Blood's instincts, wisdom, knowledge experience
help Vic in his everyday search for food, but so far Vic
can't find the only thing on his mind - a girl. Finally, two
of them stumble on a girl in the form of young Quilla June
Holmes (played by Susan Benton) and rescue her from
homicidal rapists and mutants. After a night of passionate
love Quilla disappears and Vic, against Blood's better
judgement, goes looking for her in the underground, where
some remnants of civilisation survived and turned into
grotesque version of ultraconservative America. The
underground men are sterile and Vic finds out that he had
been lured down in order to impregnate underground women,
but this task turns out to be anything but pleasant.
After the opening scenes of A BOY AND HIS DOG, when scenes
of nuclear explosions serve as backdrop for authors'
commentary on contemporary world, viewers instantly know
that he is going to watch black comedy, but hardly anything
can prepare them for the surprise and macabre twist at the
end - probably one of the best finales in the history of
cult movies. Between those two points we have an opportunity
to watch Don Johnson of MIAMI VICE fame in his early days,
when he very believably plays young, horny teenager.
However, the best thing about whole film is his interaction
with dog and Tim McIntire whose voice always spews critical
and right-on- target comments on boy's mundane and
irresponsible behaviour. The dialogue is extremely funny and
very entertaining, and Susan Benton also adds them
additional dimension when she enters the picture.
Unfortunately, in the segments that deal with underground
society, writer and director L.Q. Jones goes overboard with
his grotesque attempt of satire on conformist and
semi-totalitarian tendencies of small- town America. Those
segments provide opportunity for great Jason Robards Jr. to
give quite effective portrayal of soulless bureaucrat, but
that performance doesn't improve general impression. Another
problem with this film is obvious lack of budget that forced
filmmakers to shoot many scenes underground or at night;
inadequate lighting make many happenings on the screen
incomprehensible to the viewer. Those who are patient and
forgiving enough are going to be awarded with good acting,
sharp dialogue and effective black humour, so the cult
reputation of A BOY AND HIS DOG is well deserved.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 

Author
John Smyth
The year is 2024 and Earth has been rendered desolate by a nuclear
war. Vic (Don Johnson) is a teenager who is trying to survive by
foraging amongst the wastelands of post-apocalyptic USA. Life is
dangerous since many of the other foragers are deranged lunatics
with a penchant for killing anything that moves. Vic has only one
friend - his dog, Blood, who can communicate with Vic via telepathy.
Blood has plenty of guile and worldly wisdom, and Vic relies on him
to keep them both alive in such a dangerous environment.
Vic's primary concern is to find food and water, but being a young
man of a certain age, he is also looking for women. Alas, finding a
woman is no easy task since groups of marauding 'rippers' rape and
kill any woman they find. However, in the basement of a building,
he spies on a woman, Quilla June (Susanne Benton) and is fascinated
by her body as she dresses, unaware of Vic's presence. After some
initial protests, she has sex with him, and tells him of an
underground community which is much safer than the surface. Leaving
Blood behind (against the dog's better judgement), he follows her
and discovers a puritanical community led by Lou Craddock (Jason
Robards).
On the face of it, a post-apocalyptic world and a talking dog may seem like 
a bizarre scenario but A boy and his Dog is quite an enjoyable sci-fi tale 
(and has become something of a cult classic). Blood's voice is done as a 
narration, the cheapest way of conveying telepathic messages and Tim 
McIntire gravely voice (as Blood) strikes just the right notes of irony and 
wisdom. Don Johnson, the pastel coloured cop who would elevate the act of 
staring into space to an art form in Miami Vice, is quite good as the 
enthusiastic but naive, teenager. The film takes a firm swipe at American 
society, particularly when the action moves underground. Vic is initially 
delighted when he finds that, due to a lack of fertile men, he must 
'service' all the women in the community. He is not so happy when he finds 
out the consequence of his eager acceptance of that task. Craddock's society 
is a sick parody of what had existed before the nuclear war, and not much 
better or liberated than the misery on the surface. The analogy of the 
suppressed underground society, and the suppressed emotions and undercurrent 
of 1970's society is hammered home, but the film works just as well as a 
straightforward sci-fi tale.
This was L.Q. Jones last directorial effort as a moviemaker - he had
previously made a low-budget horror movie called The Devil's Bedroom
(1964). However, he has had a long and varied career as an actor (he
appeared in The Mask of Zorro last year), mainly in Westerns both in
film and TV. He appeared with Elvis in his one serious movie (The
Flaming Star,1960), with Clint Eastwood in Hang Em High (1967), before
hooking up with Sam Peckinpah, which led to roles in Ride the High
Country (1960), Major Dundee (1965), The Wild Bunch (1969), The Ballad of 
Cable Hogue (1970) and Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid (1973). One could 
possibly regard A Boy and his Dog (which was also entitled, somewhat 
luridly, as Psycho Boy and his Killer Dog) as a subversion of the typical 
western, just as Peckinpah's later work (particularly The Wild Bunch and Pat 
Garrett...) would transform the concept of the noble hero into an amoral 
anti-hero. Tim McIntire provided the voice of Blood and also composed the 
music for the film (he would commit suicide in 1986).
The movie is based on a story by Harlan Ellison, who has a long history in 
science fiction on TV and movies. Currently a script consultant for Babylon 
5, he has written for The Twilight Zone, The Outer Limits and Star Trek, and 
has a story credit for The Terminator, which was added just before that 
movie's release. (Legend has it that when Ellison had protested that the 
Terminator storyline was very similar to a story he had written for TV, 
Cameron's lawyers were going to contest his claim. They swiftly changed 
their minds when they found out that Cameron had boasted to the film crew 
that he had cobbled the Terminator story together from a couple of Outer 
Limits episodes).
Despite the low budget, the film is nevertheless entertaining, thanks
to Jones' assured direction, the black humour of the script and the
performances of the eponymous heroes. And the best scene is the very
last one.
(c) Review of Film, Stockholm Film Review

