Title
Review for Dune (1984)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Kevin Patterson
Dune (PG-13, 1984)
Written and directed by David Lynch. Based on the novel by Frank Herbert.
Starring Kyle MacLachlan.
        Whatever you want to say about Dune,  you can't say that the story
didn't have potential. At first glance, it might seem like the typical
science-fiction epic: the population of a desert planet known as Arrakis, or
Dune, rises up to fight the exploitation of their most valuable resource, a
certain type of spice, by a dictatorial emperor and his evil allies. Like Luke
Skywalker of the Star Wars  trilogy, the hero Paul Atreides (Kyle MacLachlan)
possesses supernatural powers that enable him to lead this revolution.
        Unlike in Star Wars,  however, the mythology behind this character and
his role in fulfilling an ancient prophecy are developed in considerable
detail. In fact, one might say that the primary plotline of Dune  is
Atreides's gradual realization that he is the long-awaited messiah and his
difficulties and trials in living up to these expectations rather than the
good-vs.-evil political conflict, although the film certainly does not shy
away from showing the evil-doers in all their revolting ugliness. Dune  thus
takes on a much darker and more mysterious tone, and gives us a more
sophisticated story, than most sci-fi epic adventures.
        Now for the bad news. First of all, the original cut of the film was
sliced up by the production company, who feared it would be too long. Instead,
they give us a film that just has too many loose ends; one of the story's
strengths-its attention to detail-also becomes a weakness as too many plot
points and characters are introduced but never fully explained. I can't speak
for everyone, but I personally would rather watch a long movie and come away
from it understanding these points than watch a shorter movie and leave
thinking that I was supposed to get more out of it than I did.
        David Lynch puts his directing skills to good use, especially when the
material allows him to exercise his talent for dark, surreal imagery. Paul
Atreides's mysterious visions can stand alongside any Lynch-directed dream
sequence, and the unnerving horror of the scenes with the sadistic Baron
Harkonnen is enough to make him a classic Lynch villain. Unfortunately, I
can't sing the same praises for Lynch's screenplay. There are a few things
that just probably aren't going to work in a movie, regardless of how
interesting the story is or how competent the acting and directing. One is
dubbed voice-overs of the characters' thoughts. Another is a duel between the
hero and a rather insignificant sleazebag thug at the end-after  the
climactic, effects-intensive, epic battle between "good" and "evil." Dune, 
alas, has both of these.
        What we have in Dune, then, is a great idea that is only partially
realized. It could have been a remarkably sophisticated and engaging hybrid of
supernatural drama and science fiction epic. But between the studio's
slicing-and-dicing of the original cut and Lynch's small but noticeable
tactical mistakes in narrative structure, it ultimately falls short of its
full potential.

Author
Tim Voon
Directed by David Lynch Cast Francesca Annis, Leonardo Cimino, Brad
Dourif, José Ferrer, Linda Hunt, Freddie Jones, Richard Jordan, Kyle
McLachlan, Virginia Madsen, Silvana Mangano, Everett McGill, Kenneth
McMillan, Jack Nance, Sian Phillips, Jürgen Prochnow, Patrick Stewart
Paul Smith, Sting, Dean Stockwell, Max von Sydow, Sean Young. Based on a
novel written by Frank Herbert
When one attempts to recreate a science fiction masterpiece, and a novel
as thick as Dune, it had better be well done, or there will be cries of
lynching or stoning from an angry mob. I cannot say that Dune is
exceptionally well done, when a good second half of the novel is
compressed into minutes of narration to help shorten the movie. So my
after thought is that perhaps a mini-series may have done this Epic
novel more justice than a feature length film.
One has to at least commend David Lynch for attempting a feat as
difficult as Dune. Although the special effects are not wiz bang
spectacular, he has managed to recreate the feel of the desert planet
Arrakis (aka Dune), which is the taste of Spice itself. Spice is the
most precious commodity in the universe. He who controls Spice controls
the world. For with it space travel or jumping is made possible, and it
is only found on one planet in the entire universe, on the desert planet
of Dune. The political scene is of an Emperor who controls the Spice but
is worried about the ascendancy of a rival House Atreides. To secure his
throne, he pits one powerful House against another. Namely Atreides
against Harkonnen, in order to weaken them, yet strengthen his own seat.
David Lynch best known for his dark, gothic, new age features like Twin
Peaks, in some ways is ideal for a movie like Dune. After all, one needs
a director to match the likes of the twisted yet brilliant mind of
author Frank Herbert. A prime example of the darker side, is the
homoerotic scene where a young man brings flowers in to the throne room
of the raving mad Baron Harkonnen. The obese and disfigured Baron
approaches the boy with a look of insatiable lust before ripping out his
heart plug. As the boy is dying, the Baron bathes in his victim's blood
before climaxing with an orgasm. The other scene of note is when an
enemy of the Baron is made to suffer by being made to shamefully milk
the antidote from a cat to counter the effects of a poison. Now if these
scenes do not encompass the meaning of perversity, I'm not sure what
does.
On a lighter and brighter note, less shadowed by the darker side of
Herbert and Lynch. This movie captures and recreates the wonders of dry
desert winds beating against frail human flesh; in a wilderness where
water is as precious as blood. Here the protectors of Spice are giant
Sand Worms which tower over the precious commodity like monolith
Colossi. This is a world where Bene Gesserit priestesses mind bend and
control the feeble minded, and the Fremen await the coming of a foretold
Messiah to inflame their blood with long awaited freedom. This is the
legacy of Dune.
Although Lynch has failed to recapture the immensity of the epic events
that unfold in the novel, he has succeeded in recreating the unique
flavour and feel of this most inspired of Herbert's works. On Dune,
Spice is the essence of life.

Author
Mike Watson
The following review encompasses two versions of DUNE:
DUNE: THE THEATRICAL VERSION (1984)
Runtime: 137 minutes
Rating: 2 out of 5
Capsule Review: Cut down to just over two hours by nervous studio
executives, the theatrical version of DUNE is a spectacular mess and
may be incomprehensible to those unfamiliar with the book.  The film's
visual splendour, mystical beauty and impressive action scenes only
partly compensate for gaping holes in the narrative.
DUNE: THE EXTENDED VERSION (1988)
Runtime: 189 minutes
Rating: 3 out of 5
Capsule Review: A bit of a throw-together assembled by MCA TV Special
Projects for cable television.  It was disowned by director David
Lynch but it's  considerably closer to his original vision by virtue
of its improved characterisation and clearer storyline.  Quality dubs
of this version from the out-of-print Japanese laserdisc release are
available from various dealers on the World Wide Web. 
Released in 1984 and made on a then mammoth budget of $40 million, the
film of Frank Herbert's cult novel DUNE was eagerly awaited by sci-fi
fans.  Director David Lynch (BLUE VELVET, ERASERHEAD, TWIN PEAKS) was
working on his biggest production to date, a mammoth undertaking
filmed under trying conditions on location in Mexico.  The screenplay
was Lynch's own, chosen after the script submitted by original author
Herbert was rejected.
DUNE is set in a universe ruled by powerful families overseen by a
successive line of Emperors.  The key to cosmic power is the planet
Arrakis (Dune), a windswept desert planet that's home to giant
sandworms and the precious spice melange.  The spice is the most
valuable commodity in the universe.  It extends the life and expands
the consciousness of those who consume it.  Most importantly, it
allows the navigators of the Spacing Guild (once human but now
hideously mutated) to "fold space" and navigate their spacecraft
across mammoth distances instantaneously, enabling interstellar
commerce and trade to flourish.
Lynch's film by necessity excises parts of the book while retaining
the story's two main strands.  One is the long-standing rivalry
between two families, Houses Atreides and House Harkonnen, and their
battle for lucrative mining rights on Arrakis.  The second strand is
the emergence of young Paul Atreides as the reluctant Messiah
long-awaited by the natives of Arrakis, the Fremen.  The deeply
religious Fremen want control over their homeworld, and young Paul may
be the fulfilment of their prophecy that a man would come from the
outer worlds and lead them to freedom.
Unfortunately, this epic story unfolds in a confusing and haphazard
manner in the theatrical cut of the film, which runs 30 to 60 minutes
shorter than what Lynch originally intended.  The thinking among
Universal's oh-so-wise money men was that films over two hours in
duration were not popular with audiences at the time and would not do
well at the box office.  With Lynch's initial cut running at closer to
three or more hours, the studio demanded that further cuts be made.
What a great idea!  Why not trim down an already complex film so as to
make it almost incomprehensible?
The most glaring consequence of this one-eyed stupidity is a
hopelessly jumpy narrative, leaving us with badly underdeveloped
characters.  Thus their personalities are vague, their motivations
unclear and, in the case of Paul's father Duke Leto, their demise
rather meaningless.  The end result is a distinct chill: we can't warm
to most of the cast and we don't care much for them.  And it hardly
helps that the voice-over narration is sparse and that the Dune-esque
language and terminology sounds like so much gobbledegook to those
unfamiliar with the book. 
DUNE is also a very serous film.  The constant "self-talk" by various
characters makes it SO serious and self-absorbed at times that you may
find it hard not to wince with embarrassment.  The overall impression
is a world full of people so intense that no one is allowed a joke
lest the universe come crashing down around them.  Humour - or at
least a gentle kind of humour as distinct from the Harkonnen's mad,
sadistic kind - is hard to find.  You may balk at the comparison, but
as a writer Lynch could well have done with some lessons from George
Lucus' STAR WARS trilogy.
The theatrical version is still some way from being a complete
disaster, however.  It still possesses enough of Lynch's stylistic
quirks and enough visual invention to sustain the interest of viewers
with a taste for imaginative sci-fi.  Special effects whiz Carlo
Rambaldi's giant sandworms are an awesome sight.  Both the production
design (Anthony Masters) and costume design (Bob Ringwood) are
striking and original.  And the magnificent score by Toto and Brian
Eno is one of the most underrated soundtracks of the last twenty
years.  With these elements in place and the benefit of Freddie
Francis' lush cinematography, the film is at least a feast for the
senses.  See it in the widescreen format if you can.
And despite all the cuts, several cast members still make a strong
impression, most notably Kenneth McMillan as the supremely nasty Baron
Vladimir Harkonnen.  Sian Phillips also registers strongly as the
Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, leader of the Bene Gesserit
religious order who's secret aim is to manipulate Paul's destiny for
its own shadowy ends.  As Paul Atreides, the young Kyle MacLachlan
starts off somewhat shakily, but as his character grows in strength so
does his performance and he emerges as a credible leader of the Fremen
crusade.
The conclusion?  Any assessment of this film must take into account
that Frank Herbert's original novel is a complex piece of work and
presents a tough challenge for any filmmaker.  David Lynch took a
brave stab at it and, partly due to forces beyond his control, ended
up with an officially released version that fails in several key
respects.  DUNE certainly confused and frustrated a lot of people on
its release.  Many chose to stay away altogether, as the film's
disastrous box office showing attests.
The extended version, however, is a rather different beast.  In 1984
Lynch stated his intention to release his own special edition
"director's cut" of the film on home video, a clear indication of his
dissatisfaction with the version that ended up in the theatres.  But,
alas, he failed to do so, choosing to move on to other projects.  In a
way, then, it is partly Lynch's own fault that what appeared instead
was an unauthorised extended version, put together in 1988 by MCA TV
Special Projects for airing on cable networks in the USA.
Stung into action, Lynch successfully petitioned the Director's Guild
to take his name off the credits and replace it with "Allen Smithee",
the standard pseudonym for directors who wish to disown their own
work.  He also had the screenwriting credit changed to the anonymous
"Judas Booth".
Certainly, looking at the results of MCA's handiwork there's at least
half a dozen instances that, for sheer technical sloppiness, are good
enough reasons for the director to object.  But these gripes must be
considered in light of the improvements that the extended cut of DUNE
offers in several crucial areas.
Most of the changes involve the restoration or extension of cut scenes
and the addition of extra narration, both of which fill many holes in
the original version's storyline.  Paul's relationship with his father
and associates is more intimate, with moments of humour and warmth
lacking previously.  The political skulduggery involving the Emperor,
the Spacing Guild, the Bene Gesserits and the two warring Houses is
far better explained.  Paul's initiation into the Fremen way of life
on Arrakis is also fleshed out considerably.  And as further
background, a new prologue has been added featuring narration and
painted stills to give us a brief history of the Dune universe.
As a piece of storytelling, then, MCA TV's version of DUNE is clearly
superior. As a piece of editing, however, it is at times surprisingly
inept.  The use of painted stills in the new prologue works well
enough, but their occasional appearance once the action begins is
inappropriate.  There's some sloppy cutting, too, and in a few
instances shots even appear out of order.  And the use of repeated
footage to fabricate certain scenes (eg. ships coming and going,
soldiers coming and going) is at times clearly out-of-context.  This
is the kind of thing to which Lynch objected, and rightly so.
It should also be noted that several questionable scenes and shots
from the theatrical version were deleted to satisfy the censorship
demands of U.S. television.  But the most notable omission is a
gratuitous piece of nonsense from Lynch that wasn't even in Herbert's
book.  The scene features Baron Harkonnen killing a beautiful young
man in front of his slobbering henchmen by pulling out his "heart
plug".  Its a surreal and disturbing episode that's very Lynch-esque
but adds nothing to what we already know: the Baron is a nasty piece
of work.
Despite its own peculiar flaws, then, the extended version of DUNE is
a generally superior film.  All up, it contains 35 minutes of restored
footage and approximately another 15 minutes of either altered,
fabricated or newly created sequences.  Unless the idiosyncratic Lynch
has a sudden change of heart, the "Alan Smithee" version remains the
closest we'll get to what the movie should have been.  On repeated
viewings, one suspects it is closer than what Lynch would be prepared
to admit.
Still, as one of this century's great science-fiction novels, some
fans and perhaps the late Herbert himself would argue that DUNE
deserved a better fate in its transfer to the screen.  With rumours
circulating of a new six hour mini-series planned by production
company New Amsterdam Entertainment in 1998, it is unlikely that we
have heard the last of the Dune saga.
*For background information a special thankyou to hiphats@aol.com. who
maintains the website DUNE: THE ARRAKIS FILE at:
http://members.aol.com/Hiphats/arrakis.html

Author
Dragan Antulov
When Frank Herbert's DUNE becomes a topic, the author of
this review tends to get a little bit sentimental. There are
two reasons for that. First, the Frank Herbert's
masterpiece, although not the first science fiction novel I
have read in my life, happened to be the first one which
blew me away. And, second, the movie based on a novel
happened to be the subject of the very first article I wrote
for a local fanzine. When I decided to write the review of
the film, I was contemplating a simple adaptation of the
original fanzine article. However, the reason prevailed over
sentimentality and I decided to write completely new piece.
As I said before, Frank Herbert's DUNE was the first piece
of science fiction that blew me away. But even then, when I
was engrossed in a beautiful, mystical and fantastic world
of planet Arrakis, I was imagining how would all those pages
translate into major motion picture. I didn't have as much
insight into film-making business as I have today, yet I saw
two great problems. The first one was the fact that the
detailed yet very alien Herbert's vision of distant futures
and worlds beyond our imagination required a huge, perhaps
even unthinkably high budget for film-makers. And, even if
some brave producer and director would somehow acquire such
great sums of money, they would be faced with another
problem. The hundreds and hundreds of pages of text, full of
detailed and elaborated scenes, numerous sub-plots and
interesting characters were, to say the least, very unlikely
to be squeezed into the regular feature film format.
When I began thinking about it, little did I know that
someone in the world was really faced with such problems.
That person was Dino de Laurentiis, respected Italian
producer who had a relatively good record with
science-fiction and fantasy genre, thanks to his previous
commercial and critical successes like FLASH GORDON and
CONAN THE BARBARIAN. For almost two decades, many people
were contemplating the cinematic adaptation of DUNE, yet de
Laurentiis was the first with the will and resources for
such endeavour. His choice for a director was, though,
somewhat risky; David Lynch was director who brought
attention with unusual visual styles and strictly personal
tendencies towards bizarre in THE ELEPHANT MAN, his first
mainstream picture, as well as with his experimental movie
debut and future cult classic, ERASERHEAD. Choice of Lynch
was a mix blessing for de Laurentiis; on the other hand,
Lynch would deliver science fiction spectacle very different
than usual genre products of those times, like STAR WARS or
BATTLESTAR GALACTICA; on the other hand, his unconventional
cinematic style was liability in terms of box-office
success.
Unlike many other adaptations of popular fiction, and
despite the fact that the Herbert himself had his own script
version rejected, the movie plot was unusually faithful to
the novel. It was set in a very distant future, some 25,000
years from now, when the humanity managed to conquer vast
distances between the stars and settle on numerous worlds.
The entire known universe is ruled by Padisha Emperor Shadam
IV (Jose Ferrer) whose Empire contains areas controlled by
different, and often feuding noble Houses. One of them is
House of Atreides, led by Duke Leto (Juergen Pruchnow),
whose charisma and popularity could be threat to the
Emperor's supremacy. So the Emperor plots a complicated
scheme, using the mortal feud between the Duke and rival
House of Harkonnen, led by evil and sadistic Baron Vladimir
(Kenneth MacMillan). He orders the Duke to occupy Arrakis,
desolate and desert planet also known as Dune, previously
controlled by Harkonnens. The planet is also rich with spice
melange, substance essential for the interstellar travel,
and of extreme importance for the powerful Guild of Space
Navigators. Soon after the arrival, Duke's 15-year old son
Paul (Kyle MacLachlan) begins discovering the planet's
mysteries. One of them is an existence of Fremen, local
people whose legends and prophesies speak of the Messiah
that would lead them to freedom.
Both those who like and who don't like the movie can agree
that David Lynch's DUNE stands out as a very original piece
of science fiction cinema. Lynch, together with the cast and
crew, took a lot of effort in order to make this movie as
different from other science fiction spectacles as possible.
First there was a production design by Terry Masters and
costumes by Bob Ringwood that gave the movie certain
pseudohistorical,  yet very recognisable atmosphere. Than
there was music by pop group Toto, whose ambientalist sound,
together with new age theme by Brian Eno, made the
soundtrack very different from conventional themes by John
Williams or Jerry Goldsmith. And, finally, Lynch himself was
less interested in making spectacular scenes or special
effects attractions than to use Herbert's script for his own
visual obsessions. So, the scenes of space travel or
prophetic visions are more surreal than spectacular; the
characters, especially the bad guys like Harkonnens, are
repulsive, both by their image and by their actions. Nice
example is character of Baron Vladimir Harkonnen; he is
hideously fat man with gruesome swellings on his face, and
the senseless and brutal violence is the only thing that
could provide him orgasmic pleasure. The character of Baron,
brilliantly played by late veteran actor Kenneth MacMillan,
is one of trademarks of the entire picture.
Under the shadow of MacMillan is a small army of other, very
respected and capable actors. Main lead, Kyle MacLachlan,
was a great fan of the novel, and the role of Paul Atreides,
his great movie debut, was a task he had hoped and prepared
for throughout his entire adult life. Lynch's choice in
casting was perfect, and both artists would later continue
their co-operation in other, somewhat more successful
projects. Francesca Annis also left strong impact as Paul's
mother Jessica, with her stunning combination of mature
sexuality and commanding presence. Sadly, almost nobody else
had a real opportunity to shine, because their characters
were underdeveloped or underused.
The reason for that lies in the problem I noted above.
Originally, Lynch envisioned DUNE as four hours long epic
and tried very hard to follow novel, using only minor
changes to the story or characters. Unfortunately, the
producers were too afraid to follow suit, considering any
movie over two hours long unprofitable at the box office.
Results is a movie sliced into two distinctive halfs. First
half is very good because the plot is followed very
meticulously, with very few omissions from the original
material. Lynch worked very hard to stay loyal to the novel;
even the inner thoughts of the characters, one of the
novel's most valuable elements, are delivered to the viewer
through  voice-over, although some of them happen to be
slightly annoying as the time passes by. However, that
annoyance is nothing compared to the second half of DUNE,
when the plot gets sacrificed for the sake of smaller
length. Many events from the novel, some of them very
important, are omitted, and the rest is simply narrated
instead of being portrayed according to novel. Character of
Chani and Fremen in general don't get the attention they
deserved. The rhythm of events finally slows down at the
end, but the timing is again wrong; the ending doesn't
follow the novel, and the anti-climactic duel between Paul
and Feyd-Rauta is there only to please Sting fans, who were
expecting some more screen time for the character played by
their idol.
Such flaws became evident at the movie's initial release,
when it flopped at the box-office. Reasons were simple: the
audience, who had expected conventional science-fiction
entertainment, was confused both by complicated plot and
Lynch's original style. Despite that, David Lynch's DUNE
managed to developed its own cult following, mostly thanks
to Frank Herbert fans, hungry to see their favourite novel
on the screen, even in such less than perfect condition. The
movie became almost obligatory for all those who enjoyed
Herbert's fiction; and such audience was the only one able
to understand the picture. The cult continued to grow, later
inspired entire new sub-genre of computer games (real time
strategies), and to this very day DUNE remains a strong
impulse for many people to start reading Herbert's books.

Author
Magus
Dune was first a book written in the early 1960's.  It did so well that its 
author, Frank Herbert, continued to write two more books and another trilogy 
after that.  A total of 6 Dune books.  A movie based on the first book, called 
Dune, was released in 1984.  I saw the movie after reading the book.  So let's 
get down to the point here- How is the movie?
First of all, Dune makes a lot more sense if you had read the book.  If you 
had not read the book, the movie is much more confusing and boring.  But 
anyway...
The plot of the movie Dune is fairly faithful to the original book.  It leaves 
out a few characters, but the basic point is made: Dune is a desert planet 
that has Spice.  Spice is used to fold space- travel without moving.  
Therefore Spice is valuable.  Spice is only on Dune.
Emperor Shaddam the IV is sending the Atreides to Dune and is moving out the 
Harkonnens at the same time.  The reason for this is that both "clans" are 
feuding.  The Atreides are supposed to go and live on Dune for a short bit, 
while the Emperor gives the Harkonnens extra troops to destroy the Atreides 
so there is no more feuding and fighting between the two.  The Atreides do not 
know this however...
That is basically the beginning of the plot of Dune.  I don't want to spoil 
any of the surprises, but other parts of the plot involve a traitor and the 
local people of Dune called the Fremen.
The actors they picked for this movie are ho-hum.  They have Patrick 
Stewart (Star Trek: Generations) as Gurney Halleck, the man who trained Duke 
Leto Atreides' son.  They have Sting as the son of Baron Vladimir Harkonnen.  
They have a lot of no-name actors as well.  Some do a good job, but the 
majority of the script focuses on Paul Atreides and his mother Jessica.  They 
do an OK job.
The special effects for this movie are definitely dated.  The sets are very 
good.  The music score mainly by Toto is also excellent.  
But the movie itself drags on at 2 hours and 20 something minutes.  Even at 
that length, Dune fails to describe the characters and flesh them out as well 
as the book does.
So what is my reccomendation?  Watch this movie if you wanna see a slightly 
technical sci-fi movie or if you have read the book.
