Title
Review for Blue Streak (1999)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
John Beachem
`Blue Streak', Martin Lawrence's newest outing and first appearance without a
big name star by his side (Life, Bad Boys), may be cliched and formulaic, but
it entertains, none the less. However, be warned that if you're not a Martin
Lawrence fan you should stay far away from this film, as it is carried almost
entirely by his comic antics.
The story opens with a gang of high-tech thieves led by Miles Logan breaking
into what appears to be a jewelry store. The robbery has just been completed,
when one of the gang pulls a double cross and accidentally alerts the police.
Miles manages to secure the stolen gem in an air duct of an uncompleted
building before the police catch him. Two years later, released from prison,
Miles goes back to recover his prize only to discover that the building is now
a police station. What is the most obvious solution? Why, to disguise himself
as a cop and join the ranks of course.
As a by-the-numbers piece of film making, it is fairly easy to guess the
outcome of this movie from the start, though I won't reveal it here. In fact,
the only things that truly make this worth seeing are the performances by
Martin Lawrence and Luke Wilson as his likable, yet incredibly naive partner.
Lawrence's talent stems mainly from his exaggerated speech and facial
expressions, and he puts this talent to good use here. Just watch his
expressions in a scene in which a dozen or so cops have cornered him and are
asking what his opinion is about some new piece of police equipment. 
Unfortunately, there are some rather large problems with this movie in addition
to the predictable script. First, there are several utterly pointless
characters such as Melissa Green, a defense attorney who appears in only three
or four scenes, and is apparently present only so the audience can dislike her.
The film's largest annoyance comes from Tulley, who is a friend of Logan's from
the jewel heist. Chappelle has such a whiny, obnoxious voice that I saw several
people in the audience cringing whenever he spoke. 
Despite these problems, the movie is a lot of fun, and Lawrence is clearly
having the time of his life making it. I simply hope that next time he finds a
more original script to house his rather considerable comic talent. For
delivering a lot of chuckles and a few belly laughs, I give `Blue Streak' three
and a half stars and a recommendation to try and catch a matinee.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
Martin Lawrence is in the first stages of big-time Hollywood fame. The
amiable comic got his very first breakout hit earlier this year with
Life, in which he co-starred with Murphy. Almost right on its heels
comes Blue Streak, another sure-fire box-office winner which puts
Lawrence at the head of a genre-hopping plot and an unexpectedly clever
script. He delivers and the movie triumphs. A nice recovery, also, on
the part of director Les Mayfield whom I all but gave up on after the
travesty that was Flubber.
Wasting no time, Mayfield throws us into the action. Lawrence plays
Miles Logan (have you ever heard a phonier Hollywood name?), a high-
stakes jewel thief, and in his latest heist, he has a complicated plan
to steal a diamond the size of a golf ball. He blunders big time and the
police are on to him, but before he can be arrested, he hides the
diamond in what seems to be the ventilation shaft of an abandoned
warehouse. After two years in the slammer, he comes back to retrieve his
treasure, only to find that his hiding place is now a police station and
the ventilation shaft is smack in the middle of the robbery homicide
department.
He attempts to infiltrate the building by posing as a pizza delivery
man. No luck there. "There are two kinds of people who get through that
door," he is told. "People wearing handcuffs and people wearing a
badge." Now there's an idea! He goes to an old buddy of his, who finds
it in his heart to make Miles fake police ID. He enters robbery homicide
claiming to be a newly transferred detective with an astonishing 16
(count 'em) citations in his former place of employment. Miles, being
the seasoned veteran that he is, is partnered with a newbie in the
department and proceeds to show him how the "big boys" work, often to
riotous results. He searches for "his baby" while attempting to come off
as a convincing police officer. He has unexpected success in the latter,
of course. He does find the diamond almost right away, too, but nothing
is that easy -- otherwise we wouldn't have a movie.
Blue Streak's plot is trite and generic, an assortment of formulas from
all different sources, including but not limited to the buddy movie, the
wacky cop movie and the always reliable mistaken identity caper. How
does it work, exactly? A lot of things come together for Mayfield, who's
a pretty lucky bastard, considering what he had coming into this high-
risk project: a sharp, witty script from Michael Berry and John
Blumenthal, as well as the extremely talented Lawrence, whose
performance will surely help his Hollywood status (read: raise his
asking price).
It got off to a slow start, and I was getting into that weird mind-set
of mine where I am actually excited about hating a film, but 20-25
minutes in, Blue Streak was beginning to grow on me. I realized that the
jokes were hitting the target. The script found new ways to wring laughs
out of tired situations, and though it wasn't consistently the most
hilarious things I've ever seen, I found solace in the fact that this
movie would still have been made had the writing relied only on old,
formulaic gags, like so many of today's Hollywood screenplays tend to
do. I enjoyed the parts that worked, and a good many did, but I could
even appreciate those that didn't quite get there, because most of them
found fresh ways to fail.
Martin Lawrence rises above the material every chance he gets. A
skillful ad libber, he is more than a fast-talking Eddie Murphy wannabe
(Chris Tucker comes to mind). He is a good actor with a tough but
strangely outgoing style. He has a way of looking like he wants to hurt
you when necessary, but really just wants to be your friend. As a
result, his characters tend to be less one-dimensional even when the
script calls for a walking cliché. Lawrence brings that same spirit to
Blue Streak, making what could have been a mean-spirited comedy an
affectionate one.
Look, this isn't Dr. Strangelove. It isn't even Bowfinger. But for what
it was, I liked it. Blue Streak is probably the most original unoriginal
comedy I've ever seen: a film that finds new ways to handle situations
you thought have been beaten into the ground by screenwriters past.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov

Author
Homer Yen
If you've seen "Beverly Hills Cop" or "Lethal Weapon"
or any of a dozen other cop/buddy/comedy movies, then
you probably know that all of these films follow a
very similar recipe:
Add 1 overzealous and reckless character that doesn't
quite fit in;
Add 1 subdued or perpetually naive partner;
Make sure one person is black and the other white;
Include at least two scenes of cars traveling
death-defyingly fast;
Liberally sprinkle bullets during the finale; and
Voila!
"Blue Streak" does not veer from this recipe, but
despite the cookie-cutter plot, what really makes or
breaks these kinds of movies for me is the energy
level of the main character.  And surprisingly (I say
surprisingly because I had low expectations for this
film), Martin Lawrence shows that he has the charisma
and the vigor to keep this movie breezing along.  
Lawrence actually isn't a police officer in this film.
 Well, not at first anyway.  He's Miles Logan, who is
quite an accomplished thief.  With his team of fellow
thieves and a plethora of high-tech equipment, he
easily enters the most secure buildings while
bypassing the most sophisticated alarm systems.  The
film's beginning is a fairly well-executed sequence
where Logan scurries his way into a building with the
ultimate goal of stealing a $17 million diamond.  By
disabling a key security monitor, stealthily hiding
behind furniture, and utilizing an array of thieving
tools that could probably also defuse a nuclear
warhead, he successfully captures his prize.  But his
jubilation will be short-lived.  Police have arrived
and the driver of the getaway car has sped off. 
Meanwhile, one of his men, Deke (                     
       ),  turns on him.  He wants the diamond for
himself.  Logan manages to barely escape from Deke to
a nearby construction site.  But the police are
closing in.  He quickly hides the diamond inside of an
air conditioning duct before being arrested.
Two years elapse, and when he's finally released from
prison, he revisits the site of his precious diamond. 
Unfortunately, he learns that the new building houses
the Los Angeles Police Department.  Security is tight
and the place is teeming with officers.  There's no
way for him to just stroll in and to start crawling
through the ventilation system.  His plan is simple. 
Steal a security access pass; forge identification;
and walk on in and retrieve the jewel.  Well, two out
of three ain't bad.  Unfortunately, he is mistaken for
a new transfer and is immediately dispatched on a
case.  To make matters worse, he is paired with a
rookie partner (an affable Luke Wilson) who always
drives the speed limit and stops when the traffic
light changes yellow.
Logan will have to solve the case his own way, using
his acquired street smarts and thieving background, in
order to speed his return back to the police
department.  He does impressively well as a man of the
law, and his unorthodox manner and tactics draw praise
from his colleagues.  But this attention can only
endanger his true identity.  Meanwhile, he is given
more dangerous assignments and by now, Deke has
reappeared to track Logan down for the diamond.  "Blue
Streak" may not break any new ground, but I was
pleasantly surprised at how well the movie held
together.  This is one of those rare times where the
actual film is much better than the previews had led
me to believe.  I also enjoyed Lawrence's performance
who is likeably glib.  The movie moves along at a
brisk pace and despite Lawrence's reputation as a
sometimes-crass comic, the film is appropriately rated
PG-13 for some mild gunplay.  With so many mediocre
thrillers and dramas in the theatres, this film makes
a fine Saturday afternoon choice.

Author
Bob Bloom

 Blue Streak (1999) 1/2 star out of 4. Starring Martin Lawrence and Luke Wilson
 "Blue Streak" is unoriginal, uninspired and derivative. Plus it stars
Martin Lawrence, a comic who thinks he's an actor in the Eddie Murphy mode
of the fast-talking con man who's smarter than anyone else - especially the
white cops with whom he becomes involved.
 Lawrence plays Miles Logan, a master burglar who steals a diamond valued
at nearly $20 million. On the verge of being caught, he hides the gem in a
building under construction.
 Released from jail two years later, he goes to the construction site only
to discover that the new building is a police station.
 Failing to gain entrance disguised as a pizza delivery man, he comes up
with fake credentials and foists himself off as a new detective.
 Luke Wilson plays the Judge Reinhold role of the not-too bright, eager,
white partner who is in awe of his new buddy's police skills.
 The reason I mention race is because we have reached a point in movies in
which a new kind of black stereotype has evolved. From illiterate and
subservient slaves and servants, this revised image is that of a
hip-hopping, quick-talking/thinking, con artist who makes white people look
like buffoons.
 Now, I am not opposed to the notion of mocking white people. As a matter
of fact, I'm not opposed to mocking any people as long as it is not
mean-spirited.
 What is pertinent is that no matter which stereotype you consider - and
admittedly the contemporary one is preferable - it is still an insidious
method of classifying one group of people and setting them apart.
 The film industry has made very large strides in nearly erasing the color
barrier. But films such as "Blue Streak" are a step backward and only
reinforce this new distortion in the minds of those ignorant enough to
believe it or base enough to try to use it for their own bigoted agendas.
 Enough, I'm stepping down from the soapbox.
 Plotwise, "Blue Streak" is filled with holes and missteps that are obvious
to even the most casual moviegoer.
 Lawrence does not act - he mugs, struts, shouts and makes faces. He lacks
charm and charisma.
 The rest of the cast really has nothing to do but stand around and look
amazed as Lawrence's Logan acts like a hot-shot detective and solves crime
after crime.
 The ending is ludicrous, unbelievable but expected when considering this
type of fare.
 "Blue Streak" is a childish fantasy for little boys who like playing cops
and robbers.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
James Brundage
Written by Michael Berry, John Blumenthal, and Steve Carpenter
Starring Martin Lawrence, Luke Wilson, and Dave Chappelle
Typecasting.  Definition, when writers pigeonhole you into one role, assuming
you can do nothing more than that.  However, typecasting is not just a product
of the writers.  It is not just a product of your Hollywood image.  It's a
product of what you choose to do.
Case in point Martin Lawrence, whose new movie Blue Streak seems like a
carbon copy of his last one, Nothing to Lose.  The jokes work off of the same
punch line, the scenes seems stolen from one another.  Everything is placed
towards a completely predictable ending.
Oh, yeah, and its inexplicably enjoyable.
We've seen the buddy comedy a thousand times before.  Cheech and Chong,
Nothing to Lose, The Grand Jury Testimony of William Jefferson Clinton.  Well,
maybe not the last one, but we've seen 'em all and laughed at 'em all, being
fully aware of how cheap the laughs they evict are.  We don't laugh that hard,
and we don't laugh that much.  We don't care about the characters and the
story means as much to us as an anthill in Africa.  But watch we will.
Blue Streak is a movie that fits perfectly into the interracial buddy comedy.
 Streetwise Jewel Thief Miles Logan (Lawrence) infiltrates the LAPD to get
back a $17M diamond he stole, teams up with
homegrown-country-boy-newly-promoted-from-traffic-cop Detective Carlson (Luke
Wilson) and the two end up fighting crime while Lawrence tries to get his
diamond back.
Every possible obstacle that can be put in his way is.  Every possible laugh
is exploited for all that is worth.  Thus we get the general aura of the
movie: squeezed.
The movie feels as if it has nothing left about five minutes into it, and
pulls it along on the buddy comedy shoestring for the next hour and a half. 
You get frustrated, you wait to laugh.  You want the characters to die, trip,
and fail.  You are getting very sleepy.  You are listening only to the sound
of the DTS.
Yeah, it's the buddy comedy.  We've seen it a million times before and it
ain't getting any better.  Blue Streak is just 1,000,001, and isn't worth the
time or money.
MovieKritic2000: Reviews for the Generation of a New Millenium
http://www.geocities.com/moviekritic2000/
Help support MK2K, become a member of http://www.epinions.com/.  It's free and
you can post opinions on books, movies, music, travel, software, and just
about anything else under the sun.
To subscribe, email MK2K-subscribe@listbot.com
To email the critic, email MK2K@usa.net


Author
Harvey S. Karten
   I'd like a dollar for every time a colleague of mine in the
high-school drug counseling enterprise told me, "This druggie
kid asked me what I could possibly know about addiction:
'Did you ever smoke or take horse'?" Of course the teachers,
whether they inhaled or not, had to be like candidate Bush
and deny having taken any illegal substance during the past
25 years.  Result: who'd trust these advisers?  After all, it
takes one to know one, and truth to tell, lots of people in the
drug counseling business outside the school system are
reformed addicts themselves.  Their experience gives them
credibility.  Who, then, could better advise a police
department about the criminal transport of drugs and about
the art and science of burglary than one who is himself a
thief?  This is the motif of Martin Lawrence's latest vehicle,
"Blue Streak," which deals with a career burglar, Miles Logan
(Martin Lawrence), who must impersonate a police detective
in order to find a huge diamond that he stole two years back.
   The thirty-four-year old Lawrence, who treads on much the
same territory of Eddie Murphy, made his movie rep in '95 in
a movie with a similar hook, Michael Bay's "Bad Boys."  An
action film situated in Miami, "Bad Boys" dealt with two cops
who are forced to switch roles after they're mistaken for each
other during a drug-murder case.  A blockbuster hit despite
its being nothing more than a padded sitcom, this was a
perfect role for the guy who starred in a Fox TV sitcom,
"Martin," who was featured on HBO's Def Comedy Jam, and
who gets roars from his target audience for his slam-dunk, in-
your-face acting.  Few others can draw chuckles and guffaws
by exposing one side of his teeth, or opening one eye real
large or landing an edgy smirk on the camera during his
many close-ups.  "Blue Streak," loaded with fast-paced, car-
chase scenes, is no model of subtle or especially witty
dialogue but Lawrence brings in the howls whenever he pulls
off one of his many impersonations, his body language
substituting for cosmopolitan colloquy.
   Starting off with a surprisingly bloody (for a comedy) action
sequence which sees one villainously selfish criminal kill a
colleague at point-blank range to increase his own share, the
movie focuses on Miles Logan as the head of a jewel heist
gone awry.  Miles pockets a valuable diamond and, on the
verge of being arrested, tapes it to a wall in a heating duct. 
Emerging from jail two years later, he discovers to his horror
that the duct is part of a police station in the LAPD.  Needing
access to the building which is under heavy security, Miles
tries to enter disguised (much like Kit Ramsey's brother in
"BOWFINGER") as a delivery man with protruding teeth, bad
hair and thick glasses.  Foiled, he is mistaken for a new
transfer, a detective with an astonishing resume, and given
dangerous assignments as head of the burglary division with
wide latitude to shake up the department.  Each task paves
the way for Lawrence's nonpareil mugging as he fakes his
way time and again despite his commission of small errors. 
When getting into a car with his new partner, for example, he
automatically takes the back seat, moving forward only when
told "you can ride up front."  Behind the lectern, he is asked
by his fellow cops whether he intends to keep the P31
weapon or switch to the P40.  He cleverly turns the query
around like an LAPD version of Dudley Moore (who once
faked his way in a similar fashion as a man impersonating a
doctor) by asking the crew, "What do you think?"  
   Miles' first-hand knowledge of crime makes his star rise
with the LA police, who wonder whether he is actually from
Internal Affairs, an FBI plant, or a Navy seal.  "Blue Streak" is
as light an actioner as you can get, even in the summertime,
a frolicsome film that's destined to bring in a fun-seeking teen
audience.

Author
Christian Pyle
When cat burglar Miles Logan (Martin Lawrence) rips off a $17M diamond just
before the cops close in, he has to leave the stone behind:  duct-taped inside
the heating system of a building under construction.  A couple years later,
Logan gets out of jail and returns to the building to find that it's an LAPD
precinct.  To get inside, he gets forged credentials and passes himself off as
a new transfer to the robbery division.  
With his dorky white partner Carlson (Luke Wilson) in tow, Logan hits the
streets and discovers that being an experienced thief comes in handy for a
detective.  Before long, he's promoted to lead detective.  Meanwhile, his
partners in the diamond heist (Peter Greene and David Chappelle) want their
share, but getting the diamond out of the station proves to be harder than
Logan thought.
For a Martin Lawrence project, "Blue Streak" is surprisingly tame and
mainstream.  It's almost a Disney movie.  This may be the influence of director
Les Mayfield, whose last two films were "Flubber" and "Miracle on 34th Street,"
or it could be the screenwriting team of Michael Berry and John Blumenthal,
whose previous collaboration was another tame cop comedy, "Short Time" with
Dabney Coleman.  At any rate, it's strange company for a comedian with
Lawrence's raunchy rep.  (Maybe he has his eyes on the lucrative family market
that revived the careers of Robin Williams and Eddie Murphy).  
The script milks its premise for every gag it can, but it's Lawrence's
high-energy performance that yields the laughs.  His best moments have the
freshness of improvisation, a welcome contrast to the stale script.  Compared
to Lawrence, the rest of the cast seems to be moving in slow motion.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Greg King
Martin Lawrence (Bad Boys, etc) has always been something of a
second rate Eddie Murphy wannabe, lacking charm, charisma and the same
assured style.  His latest film, the tailor-made action comedy Blue
Streak, is his second rate Beverly Hills Cop try hard.
Lawrence plays Miles Logan, a thief, who hides a valuable
diamond in a building site after a carefully planned robbery goes
wrong when one of his team gets greedy.  After two years in prison,
Logan returns to the construction site hoping to recover the diamond.
Unfortunately the building is now the home of a new LAPD precinct.  As
Logan discovers to his dismay, there are only two types of people who
enter beyond its high tech security - those wearing handcuffs or those
carrying them.
In a desperate attempt to get inside the building and recover
the diamond Logan poses as a detective.  But due to a misunderstanding
he is accepted as the new lead detective for the department, and
becomes a reluctant cop.  His maverick attitude and street smarts,
shaped by years of criminal experience, make him a good cop, and he
quickly impresses his superiors and his dim-witted, rookie partner
(Luke Wilson).
Blue Streak becomes merely another formulaic odd couple, buddy
cop pairing, which relies heavily upon Lawrence's irreverent talents
to carry its uninspired scenario along.  However, director Les
Mayfield (Encino Man, the recent Flubber, etc) has little control over
the antics of his narcissistic star, and seems to have little idea of
the demands of this overworked genre.  Lawrence's unfunny mugging and
raucous routines are overbearing, dull, and at times a little
excessive, particularly in the scene in which he does a two minute rap
dance.
The film moves between slapstick comedy and fast paced action,
with lots of chases and shoot-outs, little of which is entirely
believable or particularly original.  Blue Streak is something of an
uneven mess, a result of the unsatisfactory fusion of the three
distinct styles of its different writers.  The basic premise itself is
full of holes, and not even Lawrence's irritating presence can
distract from its ludicrous nature.
The ending itself makes little sense, dramatically or
logically.  Many in the audience may have a problem with the film's
message that crime does sometimes pay.  While this device may
sometimes work (especially when the criminal is played by a likeable
and charismatic actor), here it merely grates because of Lawrence's
overbearing and basically unlikeable persona and our lack of empathy
for him.
Nonetheless, there are plenty of fans out there who will
undoubtedly lap up this substandard effort!

Author
Steve Rhodes
Squirrels hide their treasured food and then forget the location.  But
not master jewel thief Miles Logan (Martin Lawrence).  In BLUE STREAK he
knows exactly where he hid his treasured diamond, but that isn't enough.
The location has become inaccessible to him.
Two years earlier, Miles was caught in the process of a big high tech
robbery, a la ENTRAPMENT's opening sequence, so he taped the $20,000,000
diamond that he had stolen into an air-conditioning vent of a nearby
building that was under construction.  Released from prison, he returns
to collect his prized gem.  But -- horror of horrors! -- the building
turns out to be occupied by the L.A. Police Department.
Miles needs a ruse to get himself through the tight security.  In a
slapstick sequence, he puts on the world's worst fake teeth in order to
impersonate a dimwitted, pizza deliveryman.  Dancing and prancing with
exuberant confidence, he still doesn't get in.
Switching techniques, he obtains a phony police id and badge.
Practicing police maneuvers by mimicking the gestures on the television
series, "Cops," he becomes proficient in law enforcement practices.  The
problem is that, once he's inside, he's assumed to be the new detective
in charge of the robbery division.  Having been in robbery all his life,
he has just the right skills to trap the crooks since he can think like
them.  The story's running joke is that Miles keeps getting interrupted
in looking for the diamond as he is called away to lead various robbery
investigations.
Carlson (Luke Wilson, Drew Barrymore's boyfriend in HOME FRIES), a
recent transfer from the traffic department, is assigned as his partner.
Carlson, a naďve and incompetent rookie detective, is as timid as they
come.  Soon, however, under Miles's tutelage, he's driving like a maniac
when pursuing criminals.
Miles's old girlfriend (Tamala Jones) refuses to have anything to do
with him once he's out because she didn't realize his line of work until
he was arrested.  "You told me you were a banker," she says.  "No, a
bank robber," he explains, "sometimes I stutter." Most of the
lightweight jokes in John Blumenthal's script are at that level,
producing many a nice grin, but no big laughs.
The movie's trailers, thanks to much punchier editing, make the script's
best jokes come alive.  With the film's more languid pacing, they come
across flat.  Some have been eliminated entirely.  If you've seen the
trailers, you can easily fix your expectations for the movie itself,
which is a notch below them in quality.
The good-spirited movie breaks no new ground.  The tired buddy format
has been used hundreds of times before -- sometimes better, sometimes
worse.  Lawrence proves a likable lead and there's nothing much in the
film to criticize or to praise.  It's an inconsequential movie that
you'll enjoy while watching but forget completely by the time you get to
the parking lot.
BLUE STREAK runs 1:33.  It is rated PG-13 for some profanity and
violence and would be fine for kids age 9 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, really liked it and gave it *** 1/2.  He
especially liked the show's twists and the ending.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky CriticŽ movie reviews: Blue Streak
Rated PG-13, 93 minutes
Starring Martin Lawrence, Luke Wilson, Peter Greene, Dave Chappelle and
William Forsythe
Written by Michael Berry & John Blumenthal and Steve Carpenter
Directed by Les Mayfield
website: http://www.sony.com/bluestreak
IN SHORT: Fall's first popcorn flick. (and only two weeks early . . .)
So... Cranky mingles with the crowd filing in to see a sneak of Blue
Streak but he's stopped at the door by a press rep demanding... "Do you
need notes?" Has demographic targeting gone so far that a pale guy can't
enjoy a Martin Lawrence flick? Or is it that, after five years of
running the preview route, these guys have finally figured out that I'm
in this end of the biz for the long run? I'll choose the latter, 'cuz
Blue Streak is a decent comedy popcorn flick and good comedy knows no
racial barrier. To put it another way, Blue Streak's script lingo
doesn't drown you in street talk and the music to talk ratio is
remarkably low, so anyone in fear of rap music or slang need not fear.
Here's what I consider interesting. The reviewers who saw Blue Streak
long before me are busy making comparisons to black comedians whose
shadows dominate the field. There's a longer, and sadly long forgotten
shadow that Blue Streak's comedy is closer to, and those are the films
of Jerry Lewis, the guy who does the MDA telethon every year. Those
flicks went like this: Ordinary guy has to go to extraordinary lengths,
usually involving outrageous disguises and impersonations to obtain a
goal. That goal was usually a date with a girl -- it was the 50's.
Considering what Lewis' stock character was, getting a date was almost
as implausible as finding the Holy Grail.
In Blue Streak, ordinary guy Miles Logan (Lawrence) has to go to
extraordinary lengths, including one outrageous costume and one major
impersonation to obtain his heart's desire. This being the 90s, Lawrence
is a hi-tech jewelry burglar who gets double crossed by one of his crew,
and is forced to stash a stolen diamond worth $17 millions inside a
building under construction. When Miles goes to retrieve the loot after
a two year prison term, he discovers that the building houses the 37th
Precinct of the LAPD. To get into the building, he tries to sneak into
the building as a pizza delivery man, complete with Lewis style glasses,
buck teeth and dead on Lewish shtick. It's too obvious to be anything
but an homage, which is why I've spent so much time on the comparison.
That attempt fails, so the only logical next step is to impersonate a
cop.
Which, of course, he does brilliantly, having spent many man hours
watching COPS. Yeah, I've blabbed a gag. The shtick which comes before
and after is plentiful, so nothing's been ruined. The supporting cast,
including Peter Greene and Dave Chapelle as the rest of the burglary
crew, Luke Wilson as the traffic cop turned detective and William
Forsythe as top cop is strong and though there is one point where the
needs of the story force an unbelievable coincidence to occur, Blue
Streak provides a fun time.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Blue Streak, he would have paid...
Dateflick level. Buy the big popcorn and settle in.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Michael Dequina
Martin Lawrence is a talented comedian, but too often he gets stuck with
creaky material, such as the script to the mediocre action comedy
_Blue_Streak_.  Lawrence plays Miles Logan, an expert jewel thief who
poses as a cop to retrieve a diamond he unwittingly hid at a
then-under-construction police station years ago.  Far-fetched
fish-out-of-water hijinks ensue, with Miles somehow getting promoted up
the ranks and showing the ropes to a wet-behind-the-ears partner (Luke
Wilson).  There are a handful of funny lines and situations, but Lawrence
is always better than the script, his charisma and infectious energy
shining through, even during some forced set pieces such as one scene
where Miles does an unfunny dance dressed as a pizza delivery boy.
Like _Blue_Streak_, once-great NBA rebounder Dennis Rodman's latest bid
for big-screen stardom, _Simon_Sez_, is actually an _intentional_
comedy--but one quickly wishes that the film were played as straight as
the advertising.  That's because the sight of Rodman earnestly growling
such tough guy lines as "It ain't... _over_" as Interpol agent
extraordinaire Simon is infinitely more hilarious than the excrutiating
"comic relief" provided by his perpetually punchlining sidekick (Dane
Cook) and a couple of goofy "cybermonks" (don't ask).  With such sheer
ineptitude onscreen--get a load of the obvious blue screen compositing
and phony-looking visual effects--it's amazing that this hack job didn't
go straight to video.  But that's just as well--it's probably already
hitting shelves as you read this.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Only three weeks before the release of his film, actor Martin Lawrence
keeled over while taking a jog draped in a moose-fur sweater in no less than
100 degree weather. It was an extremely unfortunate and life-threatening
situation, which left him in a coma for about three days. He's currently
recovering. I'll admit that I had this incident on my mind when I went in to
see this movie, but five minutes in, Martin Lawrence, the talented comedian,
had me forget all of that, and let me to enjoy this predictable, yet funny,
movie.
PLOT:
A lifetime criminal gets caught during a diamond heist but leaves the $17
million stolen diamond hidden in a vent of a building under construction. As
soon as he gets out of jail, he returns to the scene of the crime, only to
find that the building has been turned into a police station. The only way
into the edifice is to "pretend" to be a police officer, which is exactly
what our con man sets out to do.
CRITIQUE:
If you like Martin Lawrence, the stand-up comedian, you will most likely
enjoy this movie packed with Lawrence-based humor, as long as you can
dismiss its generic screenplay which is predictable and spotted with
forgivable holes. I enjoy Lawrence when he's "on", and baby let me tell you,
this film lets him go all out! The premise of the movie allows you to be "in
on the joke" from the start, giving you more reason to laugh when Lawrence
goes off on his crazy shite. I laughed out loud during several scenes of
Martin's schtick, but also noticed a couple of lulls here and there, and a
horribly annoying rap-electro-dance soundtrack. Drag that damn cow out to
pasture already! Having said that, Mrs. JoBlo loved the soundtrack, so it
might just be me. :) Idiot white-boy sidekick Luke Wilson also did a decent
job of acting like a bumbling fool, as did the rest of the paper thin
characters spread around Martin's ball of contagious humor.
Don't get me wrong here, folks, I don't go into these films expecting
awesome screenplays and deep characters anyway, so I won't bother rating
this film on that unrelated scale. You go to see this kind of movie because
you want to laugh. Did I laugh? Yes, I laughed a-plenty and it eased away,
at least for that sweet moment, some of the pain that continually drips
through my useless existence from the minute I step out of my grungy bed in
the mornings, to the moment I drop the proverbial kleenex in the toilet bowl
at nights (Just kidding! Just wanted to make sure that people are actually
reading my reviews all the way through :). Gotcha! Anyway, back to my
critique. Martin Lawrence is a funny man, and if you don't think he's funny,
do not go see this movie, because besides him, there ain't much else going
on. Consider it a BEVERLY HILLS COP Junior, cloned within 48 HOURS, but
without the over-abundancy of swear words. I also enjoyed it from a child's
perspective, since Lawrence's character was essentially getting away with
everything that I wanted to be as a kid...and kickin' some mighty ass in the
meantime, I must say! All in all, a funny, safe Martin Lawrence vehicle
based on a cute premise.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actor Martin Lawrence is born in...Frankfurt, Germany!? That's apparently
so. He won the 1987 "Star Search" stand up comic award, and married, and
subsequently divorced, Patricia Southall, a former Miss Virginia. They had
one daughter together. Martin's life has been plagued with many unorthodox
incidents over the past few years. In 1996, he was found waddling aimlessly
through Ventura Blvd., while spouting nothings in the air. He was taken to a
psychiatric hospital. In 1997, he was twice arrested. The first time was for
carrying a loaded gun in a suitcase at the Burbank Airport, and the second
incident occurred outside of a Hollywood nightclub, after police were called
in by a man who claimed that Lawrence had punched him.
Actor Luke Wilson once dated smile-a-lot actress Drew Barrymore for a few
years. Then, they broke up. He also played the character of Billy in the
fake horror movie within a movie, STAB, in SCREAM 2 (7/10). His brother is
Owen Wilson, the goofy dude from THE HAUNTING (4/10), who also happened to
co-write RUSHMORE (8/10) and BOTTLE ROCKET.
David Chappelle's role was originally scripted as a cameo, but the chemistry
between him and Lawrence was so dynamic, that his role was consequently
expanded.
Not that anyone should be too surprised to find this out, but apparently
Martin Lawrence improvised a few of his scenes in this film, despite three
screenwriters having written the script. You go, boyee!
Some of you may remember actor/bad guy in this film Peter Greene from his
role as Zed from PULP FICTION (7.5/10). The cop dude who was f**king the
Ving Rhames character in the derriere, when all hell broke loose. In real
life, Mr. Greene apparently had a bad heroin addiction over the past few
years, which presumably kept him off many major roles on the big screen.
Let's hope that he's cleaned up his act, and keeps up the good, bad guy
work. His birth name is Peter Green.
Screenwriter Steve Carpenter has written and directed a few films in his day
as well. He wrote and directed three horror flicks in the 80s called THE
POWER (1980), THE DORM THAT DRIPPED BLOOD (1981) and THE KINDRED (1986).
Director Les Mayfield is the man responsible for other comedies such as
FLUBBER and ENCINO MAN, his directorial debut.

Author
Jamey Hughton
Blue Streak, while not to be mistaken for a cinematic masterpiece, is a
moderately amusing diversion. It circulates around a familiar
fish-out-of-water plot, has the regular cardboard characters, and never
does anything special with the formula. But energetic star Martin
Lawrence is fun to watch, and although a large portion of Blue Streak is
messy and poorly assembled, it's sure to be an audience favorite. You
could call it Rush Hour's little brother (without Jackie Chan, of
course).
The film starts on a high note. Miles Logan (Lawrence) and his burglary
team are in the process of pulling off the heist of a priceless diamond.
Due to certain complications, the plan goes awry, and the vicious Deacon
(Peter Greene) double-crosses Logan for a bigger share of the profits.
Miles is able to escape the surrounding police and enter a separate
building, where he tapes the diamond to the interior of a ventilation
shaft for safe keeping. It's off to jail for Logan and his associates,
but after his short term is over, Miles knows he's going to be a very
wealthy man.
Two years later, as we are informed, he is out of the slammer and
looking for redemption. He ventures over to the location of his
priceless rock, only to realize that (*gasp*) it has become a police
station!! Dressed as a nerdy pizza delivery boy with massive incisors,
Logan is denied entry, and informed that the only ones permitted are
those `wearing hand-cuffs or a badge'. Luckily, Logan has connections,
and is able to get his hands on a fake ID that will enable him to enter
the station and retrieve his stolen goods. It all sounds so very
easy.....
Logan's new partner, Carlson (Luke Wilson), is a bumbling idiot who can
hardly drive. Then again, everyone in the police force must have a very
unflattering IQ to actually believe that Lawrence is indeed a dedicated
cop, despite the fact he has no past records on file. These people are
so stupid that they actually promote the impostor to lead detective in
the burglary division. They call him a `super cop', even though he
hasn't a clue what a P-31 is. And naturally, Logan continues to dig
himself deeper into the unbelievable mess while attempting to locate his
diamond.
Blue Streak never breaks formula, but it delivers the goods in a
reasonable fashion. The situation develops nicely and often blends
seamlessly to the audience's liking. The comedy is inconsistent, to say
the least, but when director Les Mayfield (Flubber) is on target, there
are some fireworks. In the supporting category, Peter Greene is
completely under-used in the psychotic bad guy role, and motor-mouth
David Chappelle has the effect of fingernails across a blackboard. Only
Wilson and William Forsythe, as another hard-nosed cop, register
alongside the star.
Which brings us to Martin Lawrence, who injects energy into the plot
like bursts of Ritlin. If you hate Lawrence and everything he does, do
not even consider seeing Blue Streak. It is a Martin Lawrence movie,
where everyone else plays second fiddle. But if you have a special place
in your heart for the comic and enjoy his goofy shtick, you are going to
have a lot of fun. The star is enthusiastic and likable, and rarely
shows signs of desperation even with the occasionally weak material.
There is also a healthy dose of action, well choreographed by Mayfield
and the remaining technical team. In-between gags there are breathless
car-chases, all of which exist for the purpose of making us forget the
mediocre plot and dialogue. Do they succeed? It all depends on whether
you enjoy this kind of thing. I was diverted enough by Lawrence's
abounding energy that I dismissed the gaping plot holes, sat back, and
had some fun. Despite all of it's flaws and an unsatisfying wrap-up,
Blue Streak never loses the ability to entertain.

Author
Frankie Paiva
For being an early fall movie, Blue Streak strikes quite a few resemblances.
Obviously, there's the Beverly Hills Cop factor, which seems to supply most of
the action plot, and fast-talking bad-mouthed African-Americans to this movie.
Then there's Rush Hour who teamed up the unlikely pair of Chris Tucker (Martin
Lawrence in this picture) and Luke Wilson (an interesting choice.) While the
movie leans heavily on the success of these pictures, it isn't as funny or no
where near as good as the other two.
Miles Logan (Lawrence, jumpstarting his career again and making a big comeback)
is a jewel thief who happens to hide his rock while being chased by the police
in the third floor of a soon-to-be-constructed building. When he is released
from jail two years later, he discovers that the building he hid it in is now
the Los Angeles police department. When trying to sneak in as a pizza delivery
man doesn't work, he hires a friend to make him a fake badge so he can go in
and retrieve his prize.
But when he tries to enter the vent (where he hid it) through the ladies
restroom, he accidentially captures a criminal that was about to escape. The
chief notices his skills immediately and soon makes him the head of burglary.
Teaming him up with Carlson, (Wilson) a cop who he's supposed to help (he
recently got promoted) he must fight crime on the streets.
Eventually one things leads to another and Miles has to get his diamond from a
big package of heroin that an evil drug lord has. Will he save the day? Will he
get caught? These are all shocking questions...
You might as well just watch the trailer for Blue Streak, it shows everything
that's funny and action-packed in the movie. The rest is full of stupid scenes
that we're supposed to laugh at that are too much like the two films that I
mention earlier. The film's ending is not exactly a stroke of genius either.
Lawrence is good, I especially liked him as the pizza delivery man, and I'm
sure that he'll be appearing in more comedies soon. As for the rest of the cast
(including the usually good Wilson,) they are cast aside as this is obviously
Martin's picture. Just a so-so rating for Blue Streak, which gets ** stars.
The Young-Uns: An incredible amount of language for a PG-13 movie and lots of
action and innuendo. Good Age: 13 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "BLUE STREAK" (Columbia Pictures)
         Martin Lawrence reminds me of Jerry Lewis with his silly
antics in this action comedy and of Eddie Murphy with his fast-talking
glibness. Lawrence plays a jewel thief who, after spending two years
in prison, discovers that the under-construction building in whose air
duct he stashed a $20 million diamond is now the 37th L.A. Police
Precinct.  Undaunted by this ironic stroke of bad luck - and unable to
infiltrate the crime unit disguised as a buck-toothed pizza delivery
man - the ex-con concocts an outrageous plan to impersonate a cop so
that he can gain entrance, locate and retrieve the gem in a matter of
hours. But, as fate and the screenwriters would have it, he
inadvertently captures an escaping convict (Dave
Chappelle). Everything that could go wrong does go wrong, and so it
goes...
Director Les Mayfield ("Encino Man") attempts to keep the pace
fast but, despite lots of shtick, the necessary energy just isn't
there. He also relies heavily on Martin Lawrence to carry the vehicle
as an action hero which is a mistake. There's lots of action - sound
and fury - but it signifies very little. Now, if you're a real Martin
Lawrence fan, devoted to his raw, edgy stand-up comedy, and
sympathetic after his recent collapse while jogging, I don't want to
discourage you. It's just that the plot is predictable and has too
many holes in it to suspend disbelief - besides, you're in on the joke
from the beginning. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Blue
Streak" is a manic, formulaic 4. I'd advise you to go to a bargain
matinee or wait for the video.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Les Mayfield.
Cast: Martin Lawrence, Luke Wilson, Dave Chappelle, Peter Greene, William 
Forsythe, Nicole Ari Parker, Tamala Jones.
1999 - 96 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and violence).
Reviewed September 19, 1999.
Ever seen "Beverly Hills Cop?" "48 Hours?" "Lethal Weapon?" "Rush Hour?" 
Well, if you have, in fact, seen any one of these films, then there's no 
reason to waste your time and money seeing "Blue Streak," yet another 
action/comedy (that seems strangely very old) that pairs a stock, 
wise-cracking african-american with a buddy of a different race. This 
tried-and-true formula can turn into financial gold, as proven by every one 
of the aformentioned pictures, but basically they are all the same, and "Blue 
Streak" is the most generic one yet. Sure, it is being released the exact 
same weekend that "Rush Hour" came out on last year, but it is almost devoid 
of that film's snappy writing and standout performances (from Chris Tucker 
and Jackie Chan).
Starting off with a typical jewel heist prologue, in which a thief, Miles 
Logan (Martin Lawrence), attempts to steal a $20-million diamond, he is 
ultimately caught when the plan goes awry, but is able to hide the highly 
valuable jewel in the ventilation shafts. Switch to two years later, Miles is 
released from prison, and immediately rebuffed by his old girlfriend (Tamala 
Jones), whom he lied to. "I thought you were a banker," she tells him. "No, a 
bank robber," he corrects her. Making his way to the location where he 
stashed the diamond, he is horrified to discover that the building is now the 
station for the LAPD. Through a sneaky series of misunderstandings on the 
police's part (including a fake badge, stolen ID, and forged paperwork), 
Miles is believed to be his alter ego, Detective Malone, and is almost 
instantly paired up with a partner, Carlson (Luke Wilson), in the robbery 
division. So as Miles must fake his way through being raised to the position 
of lead detective (something he knows nothing about), he also must find a way 
to track down the diamond, which is sure to be still lurking in the 
ventilation ducts.
Even if the basic premise is as old as the Rocky Mountains themselves, it can 
be done well, as long as the screenplay is witty and appropriately humorous, 
and the main actor is likable. Unfortunately, neither of these vital aspects 
hold up here. The screenplay, laughably written by three people, Michael 
Berry, John Blumenthal, amd Steve Carpenter, has nary a memorable line of 
dialogue nor one original thought in its head. Clearly aiming to be a funny 
comedy, the laughs are few and far between, and even then they cause nothing 
more than a brief giggle, only for the joke to be forgotten about five 
seconds later.
One thing these derivative cop comedies usually do get right is its lead 
star, but Martin Lawrence is never given the opportunity to strut his comedic 
talents (as he was in 1997's superior "Nothing to Lose"). It also doesn't 
help that his character of Miles has next to no redeeming qualities, and 
therefore, I didn't like or root for him. Miles is a thief, nothing more, and 
nowhere in the process of the film does he ever grow a conscience or realize 
he is just a low-life criminal. The plot developments in the last scene are 
especially unforgivable, as they make you question just what the point of the 
film was, and why it needed to be made in the first place.
All the other actors are unnecessarily wasted, and given very little to do. 
Faring the best (and a more winning presence than Lawrence) is Luke Wilson as 
his straight-arrow partner, Carlson. Wilson, previously seen in 1998's "Home 
Fries" and "Rushmore," is an up-and-coming performer who hopefully will go on 
to better, more established, film roles, rather than waste his time playing 
second fiddle to the zany likes of Lawrence. The lack of any true female 
characters is also disappointing. Tamala Jones (1997's hilarious "Booty 
Call") disappears after one scene near the beginning, while Nicole Ari Parker 
(1998's "Boogie Nights"), in a throwaway 5-minute role as a public defender, 
could have easily been further developed and have become a possible love 
interest for Lawrence. It sure needed something because, as is, the film has 
only one story (with absolutely no subplots), and is utterly empty and 
unsatisfying because of this.
A comedy without the laughs, and an action film with a non-existent level of 
excitement, "Blue Streak" is an obvious and misguided effort, with an 
inauspicious directing job by Les Mayfield. No technical attributes are worth 
mentioning either, as everything about the film, right down to the smallest 
detail, is nearly as cliched as a "Friday the 13th" movie, and as forgettable 
as an early-afternoon dream. What was the film's title again? Oh yeah, "Blue 
Streak." I better write that down before I forget it.

Author
Jeff Bogart
* * *1/2 out of four
   I got the chance to catch a sneak preview of this film before it was
released back a few weeks ago, along with The Runaway Bride ?(review already
posted). I'll admit that this film was poorly advertised. The previews made it
look pretty bad, but I am surprised and in many ways glad to say that Blue
Streak was an excellent comedy.
   In this film Lawrence plays a jewel thief, who, during the opening heist,
finds his driver gone and one of his accomplices has turned on him. Then he
must find a place to hide the precious tennis-ball sized jewel he'd just
stolen. He finds a nearby building being constructed across the street and
hides it in the heating duct just as the cops find him. He is then put away for
two years (I believe) only to find out, once he is released, that the building
is now a branch of the LAPD.
   In order to get his jewel he'll, through the help of his "prop-master"
uncle, pass himself off as a cop. But then everything gets out-of-hand, he is
mistaken for the new lead detective and through every illegal and forceful
tactic he uses, gains more respect from his colleagues. 
   Yeah, it may seem typical -- and in many ways it is. The plot has been done
before (in general aspects) but was handled in a fresh and intriguing manner.
Martin Lawrence is by far one of the better comedic actors out there today. His
style is slick, cool and to-the-point. And he's a good actor as well. Not just
comedically. I could honestly see him in the future doing drama... but I would
not suggest it; he's too damn funny for that.
   Blue Streak was a film that was fast-paced, straight to the jokes, and
believe this: Lawrence is clean! Now, if you've seen or are a fan of some of
his earlier projects such as Bad Boys and Nothin' to Lose (both films I'd
highly recommend to you if you want a good laugh that won't make you feel
guilty about it in the end) which had continuous and constant language. Proves
that all Lawrence needs to be funny is his abilities.
   If there is anything to expect in a Martin Lawrence film, it is that it'll
be cool. He's got that quality to his acting. And if there is anything in this
film that can be construed as such, it was the action sequences. Some call them
"out of place," I call 'em fun. Well-made, exciting action. Whether it's
essential or not it certainly adds to the entertainment values involved in the
film and while some of the camerawork was flawed and a tad over-dramatic, in
some cases it worked. Although freeze-frames and frame-by-frame went out a
while back, the method in which it's introduced is both attracting and amusing.
That is a great topic sentence to sum up my overall feelings of the movie,
minorly flawed in a good way.
   Many have compared this film to other good films like Beverly Hills Cop and
the Lethal Weapon series. But not in a pleasant way, they call it a rip-off. My
response to this: Absolutely, and I loved every minute of it!     A-
Check out the new and improved Movie Page
better quality, easier to load, more reviews.
just go here: http://moviepage.hypermart.net/
