Title
Review for Ginger e Fred (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
It seems that I have become more curios about this director since his
honorary Oscar, this past year.  While he is not a great writer of film, he
is a fun director to watch, because like Jean Luc Godard, he is quite
impossible to predict.  There are some stories here and there, and this film
has it, but all in all, it isn't the story of two dancers that entertained
the ballrooms of Europe by doing their imitation of the famous pair, as much
as it is the story of Fellini's opinion of the very Rome he lives in.  Maybe
we should assure him a candidacy for a top post, and he will accomplish a
bit more than Ciccolina ever has done, though it is felt by many that she is
doing a very good job.
Right from the start, we see the incongruencies, which Fellini wants us to
see about Rome.  It is dirty, ugly, and the Italians take to the streets
with a reckless abandon of dialogue, which can't be scripted, and is simply
shot as is.  As is costumary, the city life does not stop for the filming of
this work, and life just seems to continue
as if nothing had happened.  And the television studio, which is  sponsoring
the massive program, makes sure that everyone in this large cattle call gets
their two cents worth in.   Amidst these 'fifteen minute'rs' are Ginger and
Fred.  And it is a good thing
that there isn't a soccer match on television during the running of this
show, because no one would have paid attention to the show at all, if it
had.  In the beginning of the film, when some of the characters are checking
into the hotel, there is a major game, and the whole staff is more
interested in the game than  they are in the guests.
Amidst the life in the film of Fellini is his constant attack on the
insensitivity of many people, and also their sexual proclivity which appears
to run rampid.  It is all a part of the Rome, most tourists might never have
a chance to see.  And when the dreamy
qualities of the Ginger and Fred characters shine, the film literally
stops, and the music starts up.
While it isn't as bombastic as FELLINI'S ROMA, or SATYRICON, or the works
which were more extravagant and gave us a copy in KEN RUSSELL, it is still a
nice movie to see.  Despite the wonderful acting of both Masina and
Mastroianni, this film plods along with many gags and digs at the film
business, from its make up moments to the
costuming moments, to just about any second during the production at the
end.  And of course, every dignitary is present, including the Mafioso that
is being escorted by the police.  And the new age gets ripped apart, with
its idealistic look at things, rather than accept the reality of the moment.
Good Fellini film.
Fun to watch, and would give you an idea how much many Hollywood films have
influenced the television productions in Europe.  The stage show would do
Busby Berkeley very proud.
