Title
Review for Conte d'automne (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
Sitting through Eric Rohmer's AUTUMN TALE (CONTE D'AUTOMNE) is rather
like being trapped at a small dinner party with a half-dozen, loquacious
strangers.  As they drone on and on, you realize why this form of
conversation is called small talk.  The people seated around you are
nice enough, but nothing they have to say holds much genuine interest
for you.
The story, written by Rohmer, concerns a middle-aged winemaker, Magali
(Béatrice Romand), and her lack of a love life.  A divorcée whose kids
have recently left home, she throws herself into her work.  An earthy
woman with frizzy hair twice the size of her head, she claims to be no
longer particularly interested in men, which means, of course, that she
is.
The story is about two matchmakers who try to fix her up with a new
husband.
Her son's girlfriend, Rosine (Alexia Portal), is one, but not for the
reason you might imagine.  Rosine has fallen for the mother, and not, as
she points out, in a mother-daughter sort of way.  She tries to get her
ex-boyfriend, Etienne (Didier Sandre), an older teacher of hers,
interested in Magali. Rosine's boyfriend thinks this is nuts.  "Your ex
as my stepfather!" he says in shock.  "It'd be monstrous!"  This is
further complicated by the fact that Etienne still likes Rosine.
The other one trying to locate a husband for Magali is her long-time
friend, Isabelle (Marie Rivičre).  Isabelle's solution is to run an ad
in the personals section of the newspaper, using Magali's name.  Through
this ruse, Isabelle, as Magali, checks out a would-be suitor, Gérald
(Alain Libolt).  When he proves acceptable, she tells him the truth and
then arranges for him to meet the real Magali.
As an outline, the story has promise.  The script, however, gives the
characters lots to say but very little of interest.  One long sequence,
for example, involves a discussion of weeds.
The director, who has done much better work (RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS being a
recent favorite), keeps his actors here on a short leash.  The acting
stays within such narrow emotive ranges that the picture will likely put
many to sleep.  AUTUMN TALE isn't a bad movie, but one that has little
to recommend it.
AUTUMN TALE runs a long 1:52.  The film is in French with English
subtitles.  It is rated PG for mild thematic elements.  It would be fine
for any age but would probably not interest kids less than 13.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
AUTUMN TALE (CONTE D'AUTOMNE) (France, 1998; US release 1999)  *** 
1/2 Directed and written by Eric Rohmer. Producers, Francoise 
Etchegary, Margaret Menegoz, Eric Rohmer. Photography, Diane 
Baratier. Editing, Mary Stephen. Cast: Marie Riviere (Isabelle), 
Beatrice Romand (Magali). Alain Libolt (Gerard), Didier Sandre 
(Etienne), Alexia Portal (Rosine), Stephane Darmon (Leo), Aurelia 
Alcais (Emilia),Matthieu Davette (Gregoire), Yves Alcais 
(Jean-Jacques). An October Films/USA Films release. In French with 
subtitles. 112 minutes. PG.
In the 100-plus years of cinema, the most important, influential and 
long-lasting "movement" (which, like Expressionism, Poetic Realism, 
Neorealism, etc. was  not a real movement-- but I'll skip the 
lecture) was the French New Wave of the late 1950s and the 1960s. The 
best directors and writer-directors included Jean-Luc Godard, 
Francois Truffaut, Alain Resnais, Claude Chabrol, Jacques Rivette, 
Eric Rohmer. They're all unclassifiable, yet for many viewers some 
key words may come to mind: Godard= avant-garde, Truffaut= romantic, 
Resnais= thinker, Chabrol=satirist, Rivette=lengthy, Rohmer=searching.
Abroad, they are all admired film giants. In the United States, 
Truffaut is/was the best-known and by far the most popular; Godard, 
the most imitated (badly); Resnais, by now, little known; Chabrol 
too, though when known, entertaining for his Hitchcockisms; Rivette, 
hardly seen;  Rohmer, beloved by specialists only.
Rohmer, born in 1920, may be even less classifiable than the others. 
His films are talky, as are almost all French movies, but then 
Rohmerian talk is the mainspring of his works, not just an adjunct or 
a part of them. All develop via dialogue, yet there is nothing 
"theatrical" about them. Oddly enough though, Rohmer, who came to 
cinema through literature, is, in original ways, closer to the great 
18th century playwright Marivaux and to the best 19th century French 
playwright, Alfred de Musset.
Most Rohmer movies deal with people, predominantly young and younger, 
who talk of love and get in and out of relationships. And the older 
Rohmer gets the younger his movies seems to be. His characters argue, 
prod, discuss, flirt, advise, shift, all in what appear to be 
ordinary or at least real settings and situations. The movies are low 
budget, non-studio-ish, beautifully shot in cities, beaches, 
apartments and subtly symbolic nature. The dialogues are carefully 
crafted to be convincingly true, as well as improvised.
Rohmer, among his other works, has concentrated in groupings: Six 
Moral Tales; Six Comedies and Proverbs (a la Musset); Tales of the 
Four Seasons, the last and latest of which is Autumn Tale.
It is the story of two women in their mid-40s, best friends for ages, 
in the Cotes du Rhone wine-growing region. The actresses are veterans 
of Rohmer films. The rest of the perfecr cast are unknowns or 
little-known. Magali, a vineyard owner, is widowed with children 
(grownup). Isabelle, a married bookseller, secretly decides that it 
is time for her friend to have a man in her life. In the matchmaking 
process, there are twists and turns, disguises and tricks, surprises 
and shocks, complications,quid pro quos.confusions, mix-ups, and, 
and... No, I will not drop any hints -- see for yourself. It is all 
wonderful, intelligent, subtly sophisticated, clever but not 
smarty-pantsy, touching but not penny-dreadful-sentimental. It is 
funny, humorous and witty.
What's familiar for Rohmer habitués may be that the (at the time of 
filming) 78-year old maker has an unmatched understanding of people, 
including the youths. Also (look at the credits) the importance of 
women as his collaborators. What is new is that Rohmer has upped the 
age of his protagonists. Which brings me to a "review" I ran into but 
I can't find, alas. So I'll give you what I remember. The writer, a 
male, said in effect that the film was dull especially because he 
sees movies to look at beautiful chicks, and the two women 
protagonists were old and homely.
Anyway, Rohmer movies are made for gourmets, sophisticated 
cognoscenti who know their film cuisine.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
AUTUMN TALE (CONTE D'AUTOMNE)(director/writer:Eric Rohmer;
cinematographer: Diane Baratier; cast: Marie Riviere (Isabelle),
Beatrice Romand (Magali), Alain Libolt (Gérald), Didier Sandre
(Etienne), Alexia Portal (Rosine), Stephane Darmon (Leo), Aurelia Alcais
(Emilia ), Matthieu Davette (Grégoire), Yves Alcais (Jean-Jacques),
1998-France)
Things in life are not perfect. The beautiful wine-growing region of the
Rhone Valley in southern France is nearly perfect, but it has an
eyesore, two smoke stacks from the power plant that smother the natural
view. For the 79-year-old Eric Rohmer (My Night at Maud's/Claire's
Knee/Perceval le Gallois), who spent his career making films in the
school of realism, it is the natural things of life that provide him
with his sense of wonder and beauty. To prove his point, we sit through
a lecture on various weeds found where the grapes grow and note how
unnecessary it is to spray poison on them and harmfully affect the
grapes growing there, just because some people are put-off to look at
them and insist on having things all tidied up. For him, nature is
perfect and only man distorts it, and all he can do as a filmmaker is
try to get at that natural beauty without distorting it further. He
considers his filmmaking analogous to a religious person worshipping
God. You could substitute him with his winemaker in the film and see
that for them their work is an art not a business, that she makes her
wine solely for the connoisseur who recognizes that her local Côte du
Rhône is as good as a Gigondas is. So it is with Rohmer, who in
actuality might not be such an exacting realist as first thought, but
more of an artist who happens to be a realist, perhaps in the mode of a
Monet, whose artistic work is appreciated because his water lilies mean
more to him and should to us than just the flowers they are.
This is a very ordinary love story between middle-aged lonely people who
are unable to make a connection with someone else, even though they are
people who have a lot to give and are far from being losers. We see how
they are unable to be completely happy without someone to love, that
their work is only a small consolation for what they are missing. It
might take a matchmaker to bring them together, but what will keep them
together is the love they have for a moral and physical beauty, that it
has to be both that attracts them in order for the romance to be
complete. For Rohmer, being moral is simply living as simply as one
would: being natural.
Being a French film, it is very chatty. It also takes a long time to
develop as it makes sure that we understand all the people involved and
what kind of philosophy about life they have, before we come to the crux
of the story. How the people speak and how they react to the ordinary
things in life, is really what Rohmer is interested in. It is what gives
this film its flavor and distinguishes its director from others of the
French New Wave, of which he is a part of.
To watch a Rohmer film like he intended it to be observed, is to take in
the magnificence of the natural, whether it is the opening of the film
when we are introduced to the town's  older white buildings, as the
light falls against them and contrasts its whiteness with its black
shadows or if we view the verdant fall colors of the countryside and its
sense of a cultivated peace as the sun shines on it. This sense of
beauty has stood the test of time and is worth savoring.
The middle-age winemaker, with the frizzy black hair and alert
dark-eyes, is the widowed Magali (Romand), whose grown daughter and
college student son live away from her. She confides to her close
childhood friend and town bookseller, Isabelle (Riviere), who visits her
vineyard to invite her to her daughter Emilia's (Alcais) wedding, that
she is not interested in having a man, she is too busy with the harvest;
but, she also confides to her that she is lonely and could be with the
right man if he would just appear. She seems to be disconsolate about
her chances of getting the right man saying, "At my age, it's easier to
find buried treasure than a man." Isabel is struck by her neighbor's
plight and suggests taking out an ad in the paper, but that is soundly
rejected by the proud and conservative woman. The happily married
Isabel, decides to take the ad out without telling her friend. When she
makes contact with the right guy, Gérald (Libolt), and goes out with him
three times to make sure that he's right for her friend, she then
surreptitiously invites him to her daughter's wedding to meet the
unsuspecting Magali, that is after she surprises Gérald and tells him
that the ad was not for her but for her vintner friend. Of course, she
feels good that she can still attract a man and also do this good deed
for her friend.
There is one more matchmaker in this film, Rosine (Alexia), a sweet but
manipulative college student who is going out with Magali's son Leo
(Darmon), on the rebound, after having a recent affair with her much
older philosophy professor, Etienne (Sandre). Rosine loves Leo's mother
but does not love her son, to his disappointment, and says she is only
seeing Leo so she can continue talking with Magali. She has ended the
affair with the professor, insisting on them remaining friends so she
can pick up any pearls of wisdom he might throw out as they converse.
She seems to love his philosophy more than she loves him. He, of course,
can't keep his hands off her. Rosine feeling the emptiness in her
friend's life, decides to bring the professor to Emilia's wedding and
introduce him to Magali (figuring this way she can kill two birds with
one stone, find him a woman and then she can feel safe to be his friend
and in that way she will always have Magali, also, for a friend). she
does this after she shows snapshots to each and tells them what she is
doing. What distinguishes her matchmaking from Isabelle's, is that she
does everything the proper way, telling all parties concerned, even Leo.
But her matchmaking doesn't work because there is no chemistry them.
What is most endearing about the film, even if it is a bourgeois tale,
is that it has a French charm to it and a deep-seated respect for all
the people involved. That the amorous professor and the playful and
impulsive Rosine and the dull Leo are shown in equal terms with the
industrious Magali and the elegant Isabelle and the sincere salesman
Gérald, which is a sly way of telling the story in a non-judgmental way.
There's much to recommend in this film that feels right and touches a
sore subject that should interest mostly those in their forties and
later years of life; what the story lacks is a great deal of imagination
and a something more substantial in it to make the modest story have
something more to say than it does. The film only goes so far in being
realistic before it has to resort to farcical contrivances to keep our
interests. But even if it is not always interesting, it does keep us on
our toes rooting for the nice winemaker to come up with something more
than a bumper crop.
This was Rohmer's fourth and final film about the seasonal cycle, and it
might be the best one, letting in the most sunlight and being very
pleasurable to watch, highlighted by fine acting by all concerned. By
the time the film ends, we have the feeling that we really know these
individuals, it is as if we met them in real life and they have become
our acquaintances.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
