Title
Review for Fábula de la Bella Palomera (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A wealthy, powerful, and very vain man meets and falls in love with a beautiful
woman who raises pigeons.  The fact that she is married does not deter him, and
he sets out to win her, at any cost.  Very slow-paced, but should appeal to
fans of romance films.
Brazil (English subtitles), color, 1988, 73 minutes.
Director: Ruy Guerra
     Set in 1892 in a small town in the Caribbean, this is the story of Don
Orestes, a wealthy, powerful, and vain man.  Don Orestes is middle aged (though
he still lives with his mother), owns a rum brewery, and spends a lot of time
looking at his reflection in the mirror.
     Don Orestes is a man that is used to getting what he wants, whether it is
an object, or a person.  He has a continuing sexual relationship with his
friend's wife.  One day he meets Fulvia, a stunningly beautiful young woman who
raises pigeons.
     Complications arise; Fulvia is happily married, and has a young child.
She gives Don Orestes a homing pigeon, as thanks for him helping her when they
first meet.  Don Orestes sends her a romantic note via the homing pigeon.  He
continues to send her notes, which she ignores.  This makes Don Orestes
unhappy, and he is ready to do whatever is necessary to win her.  The story
continues with his new efforts to win her, and the consequences thereof.
     This is a very well made film, and the contrast between Don Orestes (with
his slick, black hair) and Fulvia, in white dresses with white pigeons, is
quite striking.  However, it does have an extremely slow pace, which will deter
some viewers.  The ending is very "interesting," though obviously details are
not given to avoid spoilers.
     The slow pace of the film prevents me from recommending it to a general
audience.  However, fans of romance films will probably like it and should give
it consideration.
Distribution.  Currently being screened at some art houses and repertory
theaters in the U.S., it is part of a set of films being marketed under the
title "Dangerous Loves."  These films, originally made for Spanish television,
are based (sometimes loosely) on stories by Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
