Title
Review for Pecker (1998)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
James Sanford
PECKER (New Line)
Directed by John Waters
 Once renowned as the man behind such cinematic atrocies as "Pink Flamingos"
and "Female Trouble," writer-director John Waters has gradually eased into
the mainstream during the past decade, first with his 1988 "Hairspray," the
movie that brought Ricki Lake to prominence, and then with the lavish 1990
musical "Cry Baby," showcasing Johnny Depp, a film that plays like an
acid-soaked "Grease." Most recently, Waters gave Kathleen Turner her best
role in ages when he cast the femme fatale as the title character in 1994's
"Serial Mom," the story of a housewife who resorts to murder to solve her
domestic troubles. Fans of "Flamingos" will probably gripe that "Pecker" is
diluted Waters, but there's more than enough disturbing behavior and
off-the-wall satire here to shock the faint-of-heart and delight those who
enjoy the director's quirky sense of fun.
 Despite the pornographic-sounding title, "Pecker" is no skin flick. It
does, however, manage to detail exactly what is involved in what male
dancers call "teabagging," and to include the only voting booth sex scene in
any film in recent memory. The action is underscored by songs by such 1950s
novelty acts as The Nutty Squirrels and The Henhouse Five Plus One, which
should give you an idea of how seriously the author takes his material.
 In his short career, Edward Furlong has been known to suffer from the Daryl
Hannah Syndrome: He's only as strong as his director. Working with a James
Cameron in "Terminator 2" or Tony Kaye in "American History X," Furlong can
excel; under lesser talents, he generally flounders. Waters knows how to
bring out Furlong's goofy/grungy appeal -- here, Furlong has the silly grin
and wobbly voice of a little boy who managed to break into Daddy's liquor
cabinet -- and the character of Pecker, a happy-go-lucky amateur
photographer who is literally an overnight sensation among the culture
vultures of New York's art scene, seems tailor-made for the actor.
 Waters has also handed juicy parts to Christina Ricci, who's divinely sour
as Shelly, a laundromat manager who treats stains and customers with equal
severity, and Martha Plimpton, a solid riot as Pecker's sister Tina who
operates a bar specializing in "trade" dancers and who almost dies of grief
when a burglar makes off with her prized Liza Minnelli CDs. Brendan Sexton
III, best known as the scuzzy delinquent of "Welcome to the Dollhouse," is
utterly charming and quite funny as shoplifting ace Matt, Pecker's best
friend.
 In terms of its content, "Pecker" breaks little new ground in Waters'
world. It's set in and around Baltimore -- his locale of choice -- and
involves class clashes (as in "Hairspray" and "Cry Baby"), unsavory
businesses (like "Polyester") and slightly twisted but kindly folk, such as
Pecker's mom (Mary Kay Place), who runs a thrift store that puts
streetpeople into colorful new outfits. There are also a few gross-out
moments along the way, most of them involving either food or vermin.
Although "Pecker" rarely hits the comic heights of Waters' best films (his
movies just haven't had the same zing since the passing of his premiere
leading lady Divine in 1988) and it will do nothing to convert those who
abhor Walters and what he represents, it's a solid example of the director's
rude but good-natured style.
James Sanford

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  John Waters
Cast:  Edward Furlong, Christina Ricci, Mary Kay Place, Brendan Sexton,
Martha Plimpton, Lili Taylor
Screenplay:  John Waters
Producers:  John Fiedler, Mark Tarlov
Runtime:  87 min.
US Distribution:  Fine Line Features
Rated R:  sexuality, graphic nudity, language, drug use
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
John Waters' new film, Pecker, tells the story of its title character,
a teenage boy (Edward Furlong) who likes to take pictures of everything
he sees.  The film closely follows a few months of his life, during
which we are introduced to the various people he knows.  There's his
girlfriend, Shelley (Christina Ricci), a harsh and cynical girl who runs
the local laundromat; she's very decided on her laundromat policies. 
Then there's his insane and intensely happy family, soccer-mom (Mary Kay
Place) and bartending dad (Mark Joy), and his maniacal sugar-freak
sister, Little Chrissy (Lauren Hulsey).  Included in, but not residing
with, the family is Tina (Martha Plimpton), who DJs in the local gay
bar.
All of this is a rather colorful backdrop to a strangely perfunctory
subplot involving art dealer Rorey Wheeler (Lili Taylor) who sees
Pecker's work at his first show (which he holds in a burger joint).  She
thinks he's "brilliant" and "a genius" (those art dealers are always so
quick to label), and soon the entire art world agrees with her.  He has
his opening in New York, and his photos immediately sell for huge
amounts of money.  With his popularity, however, Pecker soon becomes
disliked in his hometown of Baltimore as the residents are hounded by
reporters wanting insights into Pecker's life.  
Waters, over the last few decades, has made some interesting pictures,
almost none of which I've seen.  The only one I have seen is Serial Mom,
which I enjoyed immensely.  Pecker is also enjoyable, and often
hilarious, but, by the end, I wondered what it was all about:  the film
really has no center.  Its themes are pretty limp; we've had more than
one criticism of the art world this year (Henry Fool and High Art come
to mind), so Pecker seems weak by comparison.  As entertainment, it more
or less works, but I can't help thinking that the film could have been
better.  
I like Furlong as an actor, but I haven't seen him do much of anything
interesting since Terminator 2.  He's not unlikable here, but he
displays very little of the energy that he did in his first
performance.  I think he can act, and he does have presence, but he
doesn't show much of that in Pecker.  Ricci, on the other hand, has
certainly proven herself (even if you only count 1998 films); she's also
strangely sedate here, though she has a few shining moments (the scenes
involving her attacking her customers are very funny).  Most of the
other performances are highly energetic:  Place and Joy create
wonderfully cloying parents; Plimpton is likable as a
homosexually-obsessed woman; Taylor is perfectly pitched for satire; and
young Hulsey is dead-on as the ADD child.
But I'm not sure what brings it all together.  Waters is telling a
story, but the story is one we've heard before:  small-town kid makes it
big and decides he doesn't like it.  What makes Pecker unique is its
unbelievable sense of giddy madness.  This film is ridiculously happy
and upbeat; Pecker's home life, for instance, is everything a kid could
hope for (actually, the family values displayed in the film are
surprisingly strong).  But how does this compare to the dirty scenes
featuring lesbian strippers (one of the film's funnier moments)?  The
last line of the film, which has Pecker shouting, "I think I'm gonna
direct movies!" makes me wonder if Waters was attempting some kind of
rough autobiography.  In all honesty, I don't know what the film is
about, and I left it feeling rather indifferent.
I did, however, enjoy myself as I watched it.  I laughed frequently,
the high points including the lesbian dance sequence (truly hilarious)
and a great scene outside a male strip bar where heterosexual patrons
are dying to get "tea bagged."  Pecker has its moments -- and there are
many -- but I wish Waters had been a little more straightforward with
what he was trying to accomplish.  It's a film that will make you laugh
and leave you feeling unmoved, unless, of course, you've never ever seen
a film about a small town kid making it big.  Even so, it doesn't add
much dimension to the premise.  

Author
Greg King
PECKER (M).  
(New Line Cinema/Village Roadshow)
Director: John Waters
Stars: Edward Furlong, Christina Ricci, Martha Plimpton, Brendon
Sexton III, Mary Kay Place, Mark Joy, Lili Taylor, Patricia Hearst,
Bess Armstrong, Mink Stole, Jean Schertler, Lauren Hulsey
Running time: 87 minutes.
Over the past decade, John Waters seems to have adopted a more
mainstream ethos with his decidedly off beat comedies that satirise
certain elements of contemporary culture (Hairspray, Cry Baby and
Serial Mom).  However, Baltimore's most notorious cult film maker has
still not lost his flair for tasteless and tacky observations about
human nature.  Those more familiar with Waters' past work will
probably not be surprised that the director seems to have mellowed
with age and experience.  Nor will they be overly surprised at the
almost uncharacteristic restraint shown in Pecker.  Although Pecker is
nowhere near as outrageous as his earlier films (Pink Flamingos, etc),
there are still many moments in this clever and quite funny film that
will shock or upset some elements within the audience.
One of Waters' better and more accessible films, Pecker is a
dry, witty and deliciously off beat take on the nature of celebrity,
which often comes at a high price.  This is territory that has been
explored recently by Woody Allen (Celebrity) and Ron Howard (Edtv),
but Waters gives us his own idiosyncratic take on the issue. The film
also pricks the pretensions of the sycophantic art world and New York
(although sometimes the two are synonymous).  Waters also takes a
gentle swipe at the narrow minded attitudes and hypocrisy of the
working class in insular, small town America.
Pecker primarily traces the loss of innocence of its eponymous
hero, played with a wonderful combination of appeal and naiveté by
T2's Edward Furlong.  Eighteen year old Pecker is an amateur
photographer who snaps candid shots of the residents of his hometown
of Hampden.  When he arranges a small exhibition inside the sandwich
shop where he works, Pecker's life changes.  He is discovered by Rorey
(Lily Taylor, from I Shot Andy Warhol, etc), a voracious New York
dealer who quickly transforms him into the next big thing in the art
world.
But as fame and potential fortune are Pecker's for the taking,
he finds that the unwelcome spotlight of media attention also falls on
his culturally challenged family as well as his friends.  His
girlfriend Shelley (beautifully played by teen indy queen Christina
Ricci, in a role originally intended for Ricki Lake), who officiously
runs the town's laundromat, finds herself alienated from Pecker and
his sudden fame.  His kleptomaniac best friend Matt (played with
enthusiasm by Brendon Sexton III, from Hurricane Streets, etc) also
finds his lifestyle altered as he is unable to enter those stores
where he practised his "five fingered discounts."
Even the townsfolk of Hampden turn on the gay subculture and
the sleazier elements that they had reluctantly tolerated for years,
until they were thrust into the public spotlight through Pecker's
pictures.  Pecker is faced with the choice of pursuing his art at all
costs or returning to the unassuming small town amateur he once was.
Waters traces Pecker's getting of wisdom with a raunchy humour
and a real affection for the character.  He obviously identifies
strongly with Pecker, and Furlong's sympathetic portrayal also endears
him to the audience.  The ensemble cast all deliver solid performances
and bring to life Waters' wonderfully colourful gallery of eccentric
characters.

Author
Bill Chambers
starring Edward Furlong, Christina Ricci, Lili Taylor, Brendan Sexton
III
written and directed by John Waters
I wish so badly I could call myself a John Waters fan. His brand of
outrageousness is gleefully offensive and wholly sincere; Waters'
gross-out tendencies are his second-nature. It is his emotional
detachment, rather than his penchant for the perverse, that turns me
off. PECKER starts out promising, and it is a warm-hearted movie, I
suppose, but ultimately Waters goes through his standard
motions-suburbia as sideshow. 
T2's Furlong stars as Pecker, nicknamed so because he eats like a
bird. He is an obsessive photographer, snapping anything that falls
before his lens. His girlfriend, Shelly (Ricci), is a bitter
laundromat manager; his big sister (Martha Plimpton) works at a gay
strip bar; his best bud (Sexton) is a professional shop lifter; his
grandmother (Jean Schertler) does a Charlie McCarthy routine with a
Virgin Mary puppet; his little sister is addicted to sugar (as
Chrissy, Lauren Hulsey thieves every scene she's in); and so on. They
are all his subjects; when one of his exhibits is observed in a
Baltimore sandwich shop by Rorey (Taylor), a traveling New York art
dealer, Pecker and co. pack it up and head for the big city, where
they cause quite a stir. Rorey is allured by Pecker's naivete,
lavishes him with money and gifts. The impact is negative: the people
of his hometown begin to resent Pecker's success. 
Scenes of Pecker taking pictures with his beaten up camera are
inspiring and amusing. (His work is terrific.) The trouble is, that's
all there is to Pecker: he is a shutter-happy machine. While Furlong
is likable in the role, his character is never anything more than a
nice guy with an awe-shucks demeanor that contradicts his
surroundings. As well, the culture clash between the Manhattanites and
the 'Baltimore Hillbillies' that transpires is disappointingly
obvious. Waters has given the film a more realistic look than some of
his beach movie-coloured fantasies of the past, which is why some
scenes-like a surrealistic advertisement for Ritalin-induce more
discomfort than laughs: they feel out of place and laboured. Yet I was
never less than entertained by PECKER--the cast looks like it's having
a ball--and it's sure to start THE new term: teabagging. (I'll let
your imagination run wild.) Fine Line Pictures, which is releasing the
film, certainly agrees: after the press screening, they passed out
teabags inscribed with the "Pecker" logo. 
In this scatalogically-desensitized landscape, the most shocking thing
Waters could do these days is make a movie without any repulsive
jokes. Like Pecker, perhaps he should take a more observational
approach: in 1998, reality is much weirder than his blatant cinematic
universe. 

Author
Susan Granger
  John Waters may be an acquired taste but his "Serial Mom"
(1994) with Kathleen Turner still ranks as one of the funniest films
I've seen.  His latest black comedy satirizes a photographer's rise to
fame and fortune, contrasting sleazy, blue-collar Baltimore with the
sleek, sophisticated Manhattan art world.  Edward Furlong stars as
Pecker, named for his childhood habit of "pecking" at his food.  He's
an unassuming 18 year-old who works in a sandwich shop when he's not
taking pictures of his loving but bizarre family. By chance, his
weird, grainy, often out-of-focus pictures are "discovered" by a New
York dealer, Lili Taylor, who declares him a genius. There's a
hilarious scene at his art opening in Chelsea, where the uninhibited
Baltimoreans - like his obnoxious, candy-chomping six year-old sister
and his grandmother who sells pit beef and totes around a Virgin Mary
statue that says, "Full of grace" - mix with the brittle New Yorkers,
including Patty Hearst as a wealthy art patron who gets drunk in a bar
and dances around with the strippers. Eventually, Pecker discovers the
cost of celebrity and instant over-exposure and must choose between
his old, familiar world and the new horizons opening to him. In the
title role, Furlong is goofy and engaging, while Christina Ricci is
bewildered as his girl-friend who takes her work at the Spin 'n' Grin
Laundromat more seriously than his photographs, perceiving, "You see
art when there's nothing there." And Martha Plimpton scores as his
older sister who works at a gay male strip bar. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pecker" is a hip, irreverent, hilarious 8. It's
gleeful, outrageous good fun!

Author
Steve Rhodes
Pecker, using a cheap camera from his mother's thrift shop, has become
famous in the New York art world.  The newspaper critic refers to his
work as "delicious photography of his culturally-challenged family."
(Trust a critic to use adjectives in ways that no normal person would.)
The locals in Baltimore, where Pecker used to work at a sub shop, are
much less impressed.  As one of them points out, his photographs "aren't
even in color."  They are out of focus too, but this is attributed to
the camera equipment rather than the operator.
In writer and director John Waters's PECKER, the lead doesn't just take
photographs, he obsesses over them with his shutter clicking faster than
a cricket's chirp.  From pictures of copulating rats to ones of his
family and friends, he shoots everything he sees.  The picture that
launches him on his career is one of a woman's pubic hair shot so
close-up that some can't even figure out what it depicts.
Waters, who is fascinated by people on society's fringes, last gave us
the marvelously funny SERIAL MOM, starring Kathleen Turner.  His latest,
PECKER, has his usual montage of quirky characters, but the script is
more like an outline that he never quite got around to filling in.  Some
of the characters and situations are humorous, but the story has trouble
ever gelling.
The supporting cast is strong, with the exception of a formless
performance by Brendan Sexton III as a thief who is Pecker's best buddy.
As usual, Christina Ricci, as Pecker's girlfriend, steals the show with
her sarcastic brand of humor.  She plays an angry laundromat manager who
keeps her nefarious customers on a tight leash.
THE BIG CHILL's Mary Kay Place does a wonderful job as Pecker's overly
generous mom.  She literally gives the coat off her back to the
homeless.  "We know how to make a dollar holler," is her thrift shop
motto.
Martha Plimpton is Pecker's boisterous, bartender sister.  She works at
a gay bar featuring male strippers who specialize in "teabaggin'" --
don't ask.
The biggest problem with the casting of the film is the weakness of the
lead, Edward Furlong as Pecker.  Furlong gives a vapid performance and
never gives us a reason to care about Pecker.  An enigma, Furlong is
just the blank face on the other side of the camera lens.
Some of Waters's jokes probably sounded funnier in the script that they
came out in the celluloid.  Typical of these is the long running joke of
Pecker's ventriloquist grandmother, who throws her voice to a large
statue of the Virgin Mary.
Although John Waters's PECKER never really comes together, it is
entertaining.  The frustration is that, having spent 4 years since his
last film, he didn't come up with a more fully developed one.
PECKER runs just 1:27.  It is rated R for nudity, profanity, sex and a
brief drug usage scene and would be fine for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
John Waters has been known to make comic masterpieces. Well, perhaps not
masterpieces, but he's still known to make movies that are pretty darn funny,
and this film is no exception. It's sort of a documentary of people who live
their lives a little differently from our own, what becomes of it, and how it's
viewed by the outside world.
Pecker (Furlong, a very wise casting choice) is obsessed with taking photos of
everything around him. In the opening scene, he goes through an entire roll of
film while sitting on the bus. His girlfriend is Shelly, (Ricci) she runs a
laundromat and poses often for his work. He also knows a thief named Matt,
(Brad Sexton III) and he films him stealing things from the supermarket. 
One day when Pecker (known for the way he eats, like a bird) has displayed some
of his work in the sub shop that he works at, a New York art gallery owner
(Lili Taylor) walks in and is overcome with enthusiasm, because she's found a
new talent. The art world is set on fire with Pecker's visions of small town
life, but their interests and influences, soon find his way of life becoming
more and more like theirs.
The film is very, very funny. Only mastermind Waters could dream up an old
woman that gives a voice to her statue of the Virgin Mary, (if this is giving
you major question marks or if you have other inquiries just rent it) not to
mention a young girl that snorts sugar and vegetables like drugs. Other
characters like this are present to give the film even more wackiness than
recent comedies.
Pecker does have some problems though. There are countless sex and nudity
scenes (strip clubs, angry lesbian strippers, etc.) there aren't really needed
and warrant the film a higher rating than it deserves. Most of the film feels
implausible, and some dialog and situations seem forced. Performances are good
all around with Furlong (who is shaped up to become a big actor) and Brad
Sexton III leading the pack. Do you enjoy funny movies? Of course you do! So
see Pecker, which gets ***1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains female nudity and several scenes in a gay
strip club with lots of men in thongs. The film also contains several bad
attitudes towards people and authorities. Good Age: 15 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Jerry Saravia
There are always films that you are better off renting on video than seeing at
a theater. "Pink Flamingos" is one of those films that I wish I had seen in a
theater - it's designed for the midnight movie circuit. "Pecker" is one of
those films designed for the Staten Island trash circuit. It is not meant to be
seen in any cinematic form. It is so thoroughly revolting and unfunny that I
have to hold my breath to remind myself that director John Waters made it. 
Revolting may not be the best term to use for "Pecker," since John Waters used
to be the king of bad taste (hence "Pink Flamingos"). I am more astonished by
how putrid the writing and directing are in "Pecker" - it has no redeeming
value whatsoever. 
This trash concerns a kid named Pecker (Edward Furlong), who works at a
sandwich store in the run-down section of Baltimore. He constantly snaps photos
of everything he sees, including steaks; his girlfriend's breasts; his sugar
freak sister; a group of men "teabagging" customers at a local club; his best
friend (Brendan Sexton III) posing before shoplifting from supermarkets; his
grandmother's Virgin Mary statue, and on and on...But is any of this funny or
remotely engaging? No. 
Before you know it, Pecker is discovered by a New York art dealer (Lili Taylor)
and becomes a media sensation, as does his whole family. He appears on the
cover of Vogue magazine, invites comparison to Diane Arbus, and attracts the
attention of the famous photographer Cindy Sherman! But this story of how fame
and fortune can be more damaging than staying true to yourself is a theme that
has been done to death, and Waters does nothing to keep it new, fresh or
interesting. 
The actors are embarrassingly bland and uninvolving, including the always
sprightly Lili Taylor. Furlong exudes little charisma or depth, and Christina
Ricci as Pecker's girlfriend - an expert on stains - is needlessly over-the-top
and unintelligible at times. The only actor that delivers an ounce of wit is
Waters regular Mink Stole, as a voting booth attendant - she makes the screen
sparkle for the few seconds she appears. 
"Pecker" is brainless, unrewarding junk that will make you wince at how
shockingly bad it is. Almost every scene is flatly staged and acted. Along with
"Cry-Baby," this is Waters at the extreme bottom-of-the-barrel level. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Seth Bookey
"Life isn't anything if you're not obsessed," declares young Pecker
(Edward Furlong). He ought to know. He's obsessed with taking photos of
everything he sees, froom a burger sizzling in griddle grease to rats
rutting in the trash. The movie opens in an almost sitcom fashion as we
are introduced to all the other obsessed people in his life. There's his
girlfriend Shelly (Christina Ricci), who controls her Spin and Grin
laundromat with neurotic verve; sister Tina (Martha Plimpton) is
enthusiastically gay friendly as she emcees the gay male go-go bar
dancers; friend Matt (Brendan Sexton III) sees his shoplifting tendencies
as a career choice; his father is obsessively anti-pubic hair; thrift-shop
running Mom (Mary Kay Place) is passionate about treating the homeless
humanely; kid sister Little Chrisy (Lauren Hulsey) shrieks until she is
plying her face with sweets; even Grandma ("Memama"; played by Jean
Schertler) has her shtick--treating her statue of the Blessed Virgin like
she's Charlie McCarthy.
Pecker holds a photo show in the greasy burger joint where he works, and
art dealer Rorey Wheeler (the ubiquitous Lili Taylor) walks in and turns
him into a star. She holds a show of his artwork up in New York, and has
her sights set on a show at the Whitney.
In equally sitcom fashion, there is a trip made up to his gallery show,
by all the aforementioned principals. Their homey and homespun obsesses
Ozzie-and-Harrietness is contrasted as fundamentally good and pure next to
the pretentious New York art scene. Mom has the homeless in for dinner
while his shoplifting buddy gets unheard-of action from not one but two
girls--being an instant celebrity just for appearing as a photo subject at
a gallery.
Fame and fortune turns them all off, and turns their lives upside down.
Pecker ensues by eschewing New York and his opportunities by only having
his art shows in Baltimore. A lot of this clearly comes from writer and
director John Waters's own experience from dealing with the New York art
world, and having home in both cities. But Baltimore is home and where his
heart is. And this is part of why the movie fails. The heavy handed
treatment of Baltimore is good and real and New York is bad and
pretentious makes everything a little stilted. It's like a campy version
of *Sunrise*.
But there are lots of wonderful little John Waters moments and dialogue
throughout the film that alleviate the sitcom stylings and more
black-and-white nature of the two-city rivalry. There are some great
lines, too: "I beg of you, do no become an asshole," "Public hair causes
crime," and Rorey telling Pecker, "How can you be so kind and gentle and
still have talent?"
And while the stiltedness is oppressive, his love of Baltimore is not. He
clearly loves his home town. I haven't seen so many scenes on public buses
since *A Bronx Tale*. The distinctly nondescript skyline of Baltimore is
featured prominently. A pit beef stand and a lesbian strip joint called
"The Pelt Room" are shown with great love and affection, as are most
of the "little places" and "little people" in the film.
One of the best scenes: Pecker and Shelly make out in a voting booth while
an unnaturally obsessed election worker seeks out the troublemakers
disrespecting the sanctity of the polling process. When disturbed, Shelly
retorts "I'm trying to VOTE!"
*Pecker*. Not one of John Waters's best, but still very enjoyable. Be
warned: Hairspray it ain't. Cameo appearances by Patty Hearst, Greg
Gorman, and photographer Cindy Sherman. Original music by Stewart
Copeland.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
Pecker, using a cheap camera from his mother's thrift shop, has become
famous in the New York art world.  The newspaper critic refers to his
work as "delicious photography of his culturally-challenged family."
(Trust a critic to use adjectives in ways that no normal person would.)
The locals in Baltimore, where Pecker used to work at a sub shop, are
much less impressed.  As one of them points out, his photographs "aren't
even in color."  They are out of focus too, but this is attributed to
the camera equipment rather than the operator.
In writer and director John Waters's PECKER, the lead doesn't just take
photographs, he obsesses over them with his shutter clicking faster than
a cricket's chirp.  From pictures of copulating rats to ones of his
family and friends, he shoots everything he sees.  The picture that
launches him on his career is one of a woman's pubic hair shot so
close-up that some can't even figure out what it depicts.
Waters, who is fascinated by people on society's fringes, last gave us
the marvelously funny SERIAL MOM, starring Kathleen Turner.  His latest,
PECKER, has his usual montage of quirky characters, but the script is
more like an outline that he never quite got around to filling in.  Some
of the characters and situations are humorous, but the story has trouble
ever gelling.
The supporting cast is strong, with the exception of a formless
performance by Brendan Sexton III as a thief who is Pecker's best buddy.
As usual, Christina Ricci, as Pecker's girlfriend, steals the show with
her sarcastic brand of humor.  She plays an angry laundromat manager who
keeps her nefarious customers on a tight leash.
THE BIG CHILL's Mary Kay Place does a wonderful job as Pecker's overly
generous mom.  She literally gives the coat off her back to the
homeless.  "We know how to make a dollar holler," is her thrift shop
motto.
Martha Plimpton is Pecker's boisterous, bartender sister.  She works at
a gay bar featuring male strippers who specialize in "teabaggin'" --
don't ask.
The biggest problem with the casting of the film is the weakness of the
lead, Edward Furlong as Pecker.  Furlong gives a vapid performance and
never gives us a reason to care about Pecker.  An enigma, Furlong is
just the blank face on the other side of the camera lens.
Some of Waters's jokes probably sounded funnier in the script that they
came out in the celluloid.  Typical of these is the long running joke of
Pecker's ventriloquist grandmother, who throws her voice to a large
statue of the Virgin Mary.
Although John Waters's PECKER never really comes together, it is
entertaining.  The frustration is that, having spent 4 years since his
last film, he didn't come up with a more fully developed one.
PECKER runs just 1:27.  It is rated R for nudity, profanity, sex and a
brief drug usage scene and would be fine for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jamie Peck
PECKER
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
"Pecker" gets its title from the nickname of its main character, played 
by "Terminator 2"'s Edward Furlong. Called such for his childhood habit 
of eating like a bird and not because of any "Boogie Nights"-esque 
endowment (though that detail _would_ feel right at home in a Waters 
film), the 18-year-old simpleton is at his happiest while taking amateur 
snapshots of his family, friends and just about everything else around 
him - even rats copulating in a tipped-over trash can. When savvy New 
York art dealer Rorey (luminous Lily Taylor) stumbles across one of his 
makeshift shows in the sandwich shop where he works, she loves what she 
sees, and Pecker and his pictures become an overnight success in the 
trendy, pretentious world of Big Apple artistes. 
Plucking Pecker's kin out of blue-collarville is just the icing on the 
proverbial cake, largely because each character is such a genuine comic 
creation on his or her own. Mom (Mary Kay Place) manages a thrift store 
where the homeless get unsightly fashion tips, dad (Mark Joy) fixates 
over regional mandates regarding pubic hair while tending the family bar 
and kid sibling Little Chrissy (Lauren Hulsey) is a sugar-dependant who 
devours Domino straight from the sack. Grandma (Jean Schertler) divides 
her time between maintaining the title of "Baltimore's pit beef queen" 
and handling a statue of the Virgin Mary like it's a dummy in a really 
bad ventriloquist act - "Full of grace!" it screeches, whilst the 
puppeteers lips move all too conspicuously in the background. 
But it's the perfectly deadpan Christina Ricci and full-tilt bonkers 
Martha Plimpton who rack up the films highest laugh quotients, 
respectively cast as Pecker's gal pal Shelly and big sis Tina. Ricci has 
a handful of choice moments, whether running a local laundromat like 
Patton or waxing poetic over "the brilliant green of a grass stain." 
Tina, an emcee at a gay club called the Fudge Palace, is the most 
brilliantly warped personality here, and Plimpton, unrecognizable under 
a black Judds hairdo, has a loud and proud time bringing her to life. 
Furlong's limited range is evident when acting opposite burgeoning 
thesps like Ricci and Brandon Sexton III (who plays his klepto best 
bud), but he still radiates a goofily charismatic vibe, readily getting 
into the wacky Waters swing of things. 
There are a few lulls to the comedy (there are a few lulls to _every_ 
comedy), especially after Pecker's instant fame adversely affects all 
those around him you're still laughing, though not nearly as much. But 
this is only a slight flaw in the long run, since the movie regains 
momentum as it nears its giddy conclusion, a big party sequence that 
brings all the players and their unusual obsessions together - love the 
twisted new addiction given to Little Chrissy. Waters deserves as much 
credit as his completely game actors for keeping "Pecker"'s many running 
jokes fresh and funny each time they're rehashed; a filmmaker less 
imaginative and experienced with humorous crudity might run all this 
straight into the ground. 
The most surprising thing about "Pecker" is how sweet it is in its 
dealings with familial bonds, a focus Waters often employs. This could 
lead some diehard fans to accuse the writer/director of softening with 
age bona fide Waters jolts (including a sudden close-up anatomy lesson 
and a taboo stripper practice known as "teabagging") number relatively 
few here, and they're not going to shock anyone who bore witness to Ben 
Stiller's zipped-up cojones in "About Mary." But there's no shortage of 
other assorted crotch jokes with the kinder, gentler Waters; its just 
that you might have to make a trip to the video store if you want to see 
him at his nastiest. For everyone else, however, "Pecker" is a welcome 
pseudo-change.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: John Waters
Starring: Edward Furlong, Christina Ricci, Lili Taylor, Mary Kay Place,
Mark Joy, Brendan Sexton III, Jean Schertler, Martha Plimpton, Lauren
Hulsey, Patty Hearst, Bess Armstrong, Greg Gorman
If you look at the statue of Benjamin Franklin that stands above all the
buildings in Philadelphia from a certain perspective, it seems as if he has
a giant erect penis.  Looking at things from a different perspective and
discovering humor in them is one of the things that make life tolerable,
and the lead character in this film, nicknamed Pecker for his bizarre
eating habits (yeah, right), sees this, a habit which is introduced in one
of the film's first images, that of a statue of George Washington looked at
from a different perspective that makes is eerily similar to the Franklin
statue in Philadelphia.  Is there a connection between all the stautes of
these Revolutionary Era heroes?
Played by Edward Furlong, Pecker is a cheerful teenage photographer living
in Baltimore who takes pictures so much that whenever he needs Kodak film,
he sets up an elaborate shoplifting scam from the local grocery store. 
Using a small camera he got from his mom's Thrift store, he takes pictures
of anything even remotely interesting, and has become a bit of a celebrity
around town because of it.
Of course, it helps that he has pretty interesting subjects.  His
girlfriend, Shelly (Christina Ricci, who has officially become "la reine
d'art house"), is a laundromat-nazi who occasionally pulls down the zipper
on her blouse so Pecker can take a pic of her cleavage.  His younger
sister, Chrissy (Lauren Hulsey), is a notorious sugar fiend.  His older
sister, Tina (Martha Plimpton), works at a gay strip bar named the "Fudge
Palace."  His father (Mark Joy) works at a bar which is losing business
because a lesbian tittie bar has opened across the street from him, causing
him to bitch about how it's against the law to show beaver whilst serving
liquor.  His best friend, Matt (Brendan Sexton III, from "Welcome to the
Dollhouse"), is a masterful thief.  His grandma (Jean Schertler) has a
statue of the Virgin Mary that talks...with grandma pulling a switch on its
back that moves its lips and doesn't seem to realize she's doing
ventriloquist work for the voice.  And there's his mom (Mary Kay Place),
who happily works at the Thrift Store and boasts she can dress anyone
nicely for a mere quarter.
When Pecker shows a free art show at his work, a New York art dealer, Rorey
(Lili Taylor), shows up and immeadiately loves his work, and gets him a
show up in New York.  The critics and art freaks love his work, dubbing him
"a more humane Diane Arbus."  Pecker has become a little Andy Warhol: a
young artist who's discovered from a small home town.  But Warhol stayed in
New York, while Pecker finds he has to decide what he wants to do.  His art
ends up doing more harm to his family than good, but on the other hand,
he'll be the toast of the New York art world and will be set for life.
"Pecker"'s the latest from John Waters, the hilarious man with a paper-thin
moustache, and known for his ghastly disgusting films, the most notorious
being "Pink Flamingoes," the film that shocked the world over 25 years ago
with images such as a woman eating shit and a song and dance done by a pair
of testicles.  I've, sadly enough, never seen one of his films, but have
come to admire the guy from interviews, articles, and most brilliantly, a
guest appearance on "The Simpsons" that was nothing short of absolute
hilarity.
But with "Pecker," he must have calmed down.  A lot.  Sure, he shocks us
with a couple jokes.  There's a shot of what has to be the closest image of
a woman's pubic hair in an R rated film.  There's the image of two rats
fucking.  There's the hilarious introduction to a gay-bar fetish known as
"tea bagging" (guess what it entails).  And I almost don't need to mention
that the title is the best of the year (after seeing it, you can tell your
friends "Yeah, I just saw John Waters' 'Pecker'").  Of course, when a
film's title is the film's best joke, you're really in trouble, and after
these few jokes, varying in hilarity, that's really about it as far as
jokes that are actually humorous.  Waters has become infamous for making
people laugh with disgusting images and scenes, those which cross over into
what is commonly referred to as "bad taste," but which can easily become
comedy to anyone who doesn't always need subtlety with their humor.
But that's not what's really wrong with this film.  We do expect something
extremely shocking from John Waters, but it would still be fine if he did
calm down and made a film that was hilarious without resorting to NC-17
tactics.  The problem is it's just not very funny.  Nor is it subtle. 
Waters has created a film here that really could be very hilarious.  Take
the joke about the Virgin Mary statue - there are countless jokes that
could be really funny about this.  Waters uses about two of them.  And
they're not really the really funny ones.
Instead of really funny humor, with scenes that are so vile and gross that
we just can't help but kick the chairs in front of us with fitful laughing,
we get scenes that are so blatant in their message and so jaw-droppingly
unfunny that we can't help but just sit there, staring at it, and wondering
what Waters thought was exactly humorous about them.  In one scene, Shelly
discovers Pecker kissing Rorey in his basement, and a chase ensues between
Pecker and Shelly which ends up in a voting booth (I guess when you have to
vote, you have to vote), where they have loud, physical, and clothed sex. 
Just not funny.
It's sad, too, that Waters can't do satire without subtlety.  His
characters say exactly what the problem is whenever the problem arises,
like "My pictures are turning my life inside out."  And while the culture
shock between the odd balls of Baltimore and the art world of New York is
occasionally funny (when coming home from New York, some Baltimorians kiss
the street), it's shots at the art world are stale.  As if they actually
needed skewering.  It would be funnier if a new angle was taken or if the
Baltimorians were more humorous.
"Pecker" may be pretty much bad and unfunny, but it's not totally
unworthwhile.  Some of the performances, particularly the ones by Christina
Ricci and Mary Kay Place, are right on.  There are some moments that are
oddly funny, like a bizarre scene where a social worker makes a house call
to put the younger sister on Ridlin.  These are what redeem it slightly. 
But when there's a dinner scene where Pecker makes a lengthy, corny speech
where he thanks everyone from his hometown for inspiring him while there
are numerous annoying side comments, and this scene is not the worst scene
in the film, well, that just doesn't leave a whole lot to recommend.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Joy Wyse
When you first hear that Pecker is a John Waters film, you know that you
are in for something unusual.  Pecker is certainly that, and more.
Pecker, played by Edward Furlong, spends his time with an inexpensive
camera taking photos of everything that he sees and loves, and Pecker sees
beauty in everything, and everybody.  From his girlfriend, [Christina
Ricci] who runs the local Laundromat, to his grandmother who sells pit
beef sandwiches from a stand in front of their house, and has a statue of
the Virgin Mary that talks.
This very dysfunctional family has no idea that they are not your
everyday normal group.  Pecker's mother, played beautifully by Mary Kay
Place, runs a thrift shop catering mainly to the homeless.  This is where
she got the camera that Pecker uses to change their lives.
Pecker's father runs a local bar that is being run out of business
because of another bar down the street that presents full female frontal
nudity, even though it's against the law.
Pecker had two sisters, as well.  The younger one is a hyper child
addicted to sugar.  The older sister is the hostess at a gay bar, trade
show.
They are all his subjects. It is through the thieving of Pecker's best
friend that he has plenty of film for his masterpieces.  With a bit of
misdirection, he loads his pockets with rolls and rolls.  When they
convince Pecker's boss at the diner to allow a "showing" of his photos,
all of his subjects come to view them.  Additionally, an artist's rep from
New York sees a flyer and visits as well.  She loves his work and arranges
a showing in the big city.  That's when all of their lives change.  There
are some very funny moments.  Except for the "beaver" shot in the illegal
show, there is not really any nudity.  Rather there are somewhat
suggestive scenes of all types, especially in the gay bar.
It is an enjoyable movie if you are an aficionado of Waters' films.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Mary Kay Place, an accomplished performer who attended
a recent invitational screening of the film "Pecker" (in which
she plays the mother of the title character), was stopped on
the way out by two enthusiastic women in the audience.  "Oh,
you're Mary Kay Place, my favorite actress!" one cried out, in
a manner befitting a wide-eyed tourist more than a New York
cineaste.  Do actors really like receiving this notice wherever
they go?  More likely they're embarrassed.  If not, why would
they walk the streets with dark shades, false moustaches, and
baseball hats with low-slung peaks?  You spend years
working for public recognition and the rest of your career
trying to avoid it.  This invasion of Ms. Place's privacy--which
probably echoes a hundred-fold each year for actors
everywhere--is the price that celebrities pay for their status
and ironically enough is one of two central themes of John
Waters's latest picture, "Pecker."  Waters unfolds a palette of
colorful, blue-collar folks in his native Baltimore who gain their
fifteen minutes of national fame.  Like any who at one time
put on a middle-school show and later achieve renown, they
like the attention at first.  They soon realize that prominence
has its price.  In "Pecker" each character in turn is deprived of
his privacy and suffers a pitiful loss.  In showing us this cycle
of happy, homespun lives ruined by the limelight, Waters also
sends up New York's pseudo-sophisticated set of fashion
fixated gallery hoppers, comparing them unfavorably with the
working-class people he apparently relishes in the
unacclaimed stretches of backwater Baltimore.
   Adventurous moviegoers remember John Waters as the
creator of outrageous but accessible comedies like
"Hairspray" (a fun story featuring Sonny Bono in a nostalgic
satire about the a TV teen dance program in 1962 Baltimore);
"Polyester," (a more mainstream feature about a housewife
driven to he brink by her nightmarish family); and "Serial
Mom" (a satire of Marin County, California and its residents'
obsession with sexual trends and psychological cant).  With
"Pecker," Waters is aiming for an audience with just slightly
more commercial tastes as he contrasts the earthy, though
not quite bland, residents of Baltimore's Hampden
neighborhood with the bogus Manhattan sophisticates who, to
their credit, keep museums and art galleries flourishing but
who cannot resist trendy schlock.
   The schlockmeister this time is actually a nice 18-year-old
kid, Pecker (Edward Furlong),  who compulsively takes photos
of the oddballs of the vicinity and who makes no pretense that
his glossies are art.  He captures his friend Matt (Brendan
Sexton III) in the daily act of shoplifting; his girlfriend Shelley
(Christina Ricci), who tyrannically manages the local
laundromat; his kid sister Chrissy (Lauren Hulsey), a sugar
addict who eats Domino straight from the bag; his older sister
Tina (Martha Plimpton) who works at a gay male strip bar; his
grandma Memama (Jean Schertier) whose statue of Virgin
Mary frequently speaks; and his mother Joyce (Mary Kay
Place), who runs a thrift shop and advises the homeless how
to be fashion plates for a quarter an outfit.
   When Pecker's grainy photos come to the attention of a
New York art mavin, he is propelled into luminary status and
is given a gallery show that attracts the city's fashionable
community.  The notice placed on him and the members of
his photographed circle draw some unwanted attention. 
Chrissy is visited by a medical social worker who puts the
chocoholic on Ritalin, turning her into a zombie-like carrot-
lover.  Joyce and her husband are written up in the
fashionable journals as "culturally challenged."  Others in his
circle lose their jobs, and that's just the starter.
   Essentially, though, Waters appears to focus more on the
one-liners than on a story with a robust center, and the film
must be judged on the success of these quick gags.  Here is
one movie, believe-it-or-not, that could profit from one of
those obnoxious laugh-tracks popular with TV sitcoms.  Each
time a pompous New Yorker exposes himself for the fraud he
is, he appears to pause as if waiting for the obligatory giggle. 
Whenever a white-trash Baltimorian shows himself for the
hayseed he is, he looks almost embarrassed as if he has
come onstage to do a neophytes improvisations rather than a
professional's prepared shtick.  A good example of a physical
gag that falls flat is Matt's secretly piling up the shopping carts
of supermarket patrons with inappropriate stuff: a muscular
health nut is tossed Preparation H without his knowledge,
another man is given a box of Tampax.  As they reach the
checkout counter simultaneously complaining that they had
not selected the items, Matt goes to work on the shelves
lifting every product in sight.
   "Pecker" is suprisingly toned down for a John Water picture,
and even its depictions of the activities inside a gay bar
emceed by Tina would scarcely raise Dan Quayle's eyebrow. 
Christina Ricci stands out in this crowd as the acid-tongued
overseer of the neighborhood laundromat laying down the law
to a clientele of weirdos who do everything from pouring
strong dye down the mouth of a washer to using a vibrating
machine as a sex doll.  The New York world of art
cognescenti parody themselves in that city's museums and
galleries quite well without needing a filmed lampoon, and the
Baltimore working-class community are too close to normal to
evoke more than a chuckle.
