Title
Review for Grease (1978)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Bob Bloom
 The question isn't why has Grease been reissued. The answer to that one is
easy: To celebrate the movie's 20th anniversary and to make more bucks for
Paramount's coffers because John Travolta is once again a hot commodity.
 No, the question that ought to be asked is: Should Grease be reissued?
 Grease is a fun movie, an entertaining fantasy of the '50s, embodying all
the cliches of that era. The music is lively and the dance numbers,
choreographed by Patricia Birch, are energetic and high-spirited.
 Travolta was at his pinnacle as a sexual icon, cool, but non-threatening.
 But Grease didn't break any new cinematic ground. It was not a milestone
in movie history such as Citizen Kane or Easy Rider.
 What Grease is - or has become - is the highest-grossing musical in film
history.
 OK, let's not be a spoilsport. Grease is a fun and entertaining movie,
even though it stretches credulity to see such performers as Travolta,
Olivia Newton-John, Taxi's Jeff Conaway and the multi-talented Stockard
Channing try to act like high schoolers.
 It's nostalgic to recall how good a dancer Travolta was, and it's sad to
think of what could have been had not a few missteps sidetracked his
career. He could have become a musical comedy star in the tradition of Gene
Kelly.
 Cinematically, the musical comedy has basically gone the way of the
dinosaur. Between Grease and 1996's Evita., you can probably count the
number of movie musicals on one hand.
  Two reasons have contributed to the demise of the genre: The first is
that movie audiences have become more sophisticated, no, make that cynical
and jaded. Today, if a character began to dance and sing with no orchestra
in sight, he or she would probably be hooted off the screen.
   Today's audiences lack the innocence, that belief in movie magic that is
required for a musical to succeed.
  Secondly, a lack of talent. Performers with the charisma, the style, the
larger-than-life panache of Fred Astaire, Gene Kelly, Ginger Rogers and
Judy Garland are gone.
  Most singers and dancers remain on the stage, and those who do succeed in
movies usually wind up in serious dramatic parts. A good example is Gregory
Hines, one of the greatest dancers in the world. He danced a bit in The
Cotton Club, Tap and White Nights, but those were essentially dramatic
vehicles.
  So, perhaps the reissue of Grease can serve a purpose. If audiences show
enough interest, meaning if the re-release earns the studio enough revenue,
it may spark a revival in movie musicals.
  Perhaps not original musicals such as Singin' in the Rain , An American
in Paris or Seven Brides for Seven Brothers, but for Broadway properties
that have been in the planning stages for film adaptations for several
years.
  At one time or another, according to the industry rumor mill, Hollywood
has been set to create an animated version of Andrew Lloyd Webber's Cats, a
filming of the popular Phantom of the Opera  as well as Les Miserables and
Chicago, the latter reportedly to star Madonna.
  So, let this Grease be the forerunner of an armada of movie musicals. Let
Grease be the word that sparks this revival.
   Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
Ind. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com

Author
Jamie Peck
GREASE
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
A very skinny John Travolta and a very young Olivia Newton-John have the 
respective leads of Danny Zuko and Sandy Olsson, and their pairing still 
ranks as one of screendom's most effervescently charming. For those 
eight of you who aren't familiar with the story, here's a brief recap: 
Greaser bad boy Danny and Aussie good girl Sandy are reunited for their 
1959 senior year at Rydell High after a brief fling during the summer; 
both thought she was going to return to her native continent before 
school started, but both were wrong. Sandy tries to rekindle their 
relationship, but Danny's too cool a cat to fall for her wholesome 
appeal in front of his T-Bird buddies (including Jeff Conaway). So Sandy 
hooks up with a gang herself -- the Pink Ladies, headed by sassy, sexy 
Rizzo (Stockard Channing, just superb as an independent woman well ahead 
of her time) -- and Danny, who still really feels love for her, attempts 
a compromise of ideals in order to win her back. 
The drag race finale is yet something of a drag, and I never have 
thought much of "Greased Lightening," the film's big "guy" number (that 
choreography -- ack!), but "Grease"'s flaws amount too few to carp. The 
movie's first showpiece is "Summer Nights," where Danny and Sandy 
separately recount wildly different versions of their fun-in-the-sun 
romance. Not only is "Nights" tremendously catchy, but it's also a smart 
look at how men and women see the same events with varying eyes. There 
has yet to be a live-action musical sequence that rivals the one-two 
punch of "You're the One That I Want" and "We Go Together," "Grease"'s 
euphoric cappers. All this and some of the most pleasing moments come 
from the smaller, quieter moments; the Oscar-nominated "Hopelessly 
Devoted to You" is a lovely showcase for Newton-John, and Channing's 
lamenting ballad "There Are Worse Things I Could Do" is one of 
"Grease"'s most unjustly overlooked tunes. 
The soundtrack is remastered (though Travolta still hits that awful high 
note at the end of "Nights") and the restored widescreen allows us to 
see previously pan-and-scanned-out choreography, but nothing else has 
changed -- no computer-generated backgrounds, no outtakes or new musical 
numbers, no Jabba the Hutt cameos. And it's a testament to "Grease"'s 
timeless success that nothing needs to be changed -- it's the same 
all-around blast it's always been, with an appealing cast in a fun story 
told with great music. To '90s viewers, "Grease" will probably recall 
disco and bellbottoms as much as it made its original audience nostalgic 
for doo-wop and poodle skirts. But regardless of what decade it 
transports us to, we can all agree on one thing -- without a doubt, 
"Grease" is still the word.

Author
Berge Garabedian
Originally launched in 1978, this popular film was re-introduced in
1998 to a whole new generation of moviegoers. Based on the mighty
successful musical from Broadway, GREASE was followed in 1980 with the
less stellar GREASE 2 (6.5/10), starring a young Michelle Pheiffer in
one of her first feature film roles.
PLOT:
High-school musical set in the 1950's showcasing the relationship
between the cool Danny Zuko of the T-Birds (Travolta) and the innocent
and pure Sandy Olsen (Newton-John) from Australia. The film follows the
couple and their vivacious friends during their last year at Rydell
High through song, dance and humour.
CRITIQUE:
Fun-loving, energetic and innocent look back at times much simpler.
This movie effectively juggles a thin romantic story line and the
overall experience of the 1950's, with a superb soundtrack and some
great dance numbers. Admittedly, I am somewhat biased in this opinion,
since this film blasts me into my past as a rebellious youth (GREASE
was one of Schmoe's first big-screen experiences, and every other scene
sends me reeling into the times of my elaborate GREASE bubble-gum card
collection), and the lesser responsibilities that I possessed at that
time. But apart from the nostalgic vibe, I was still extremely
impressed by this film, as it continued to amuse me, despite my
previous dozen or so viewings.
This film took John Travolta from a dim-witted "Sweathog" on TV's
Welcome Back Kotter, and transformed him into a movie-star of
spectacular proportions (SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER (7.5/10) in 1979
confirmed that sudden popularity). Unfortunately for the rest of the
cast, his popularity was not terribly contagious, despite their
effective showings in this classic movie.
On the down side, some of the absolute innocence in this film might
bore or turn people off (like when Sandy sings about "drinking
lemonade" and "staying out until 10" with Danny in "Summer Nights"),
and the plot isn't exactly the most elaborate story-line ever created,
but despite these small reservations, this movie carries enough great
music and high energy to keep anyone amused through its rapid 110
minute running time (And believe me...I am not a fan of the
musicals!!). Make sure to look for a young Lorenzo Lamas in the static
role of the brainless football player, as well as the National
Bandstand dance contest as one of the film's absolute highlights. And
don't forget to buy the popular soundtrack afterwards, so that you
could listen to its peppy tunes whenever you're feeling a little blue. 
 Little Known Facts: 
Henry Winkler, of TV's Happy Days' Fonzie fame, turned down the part of
Danny Zuko because he did not want to be typecast for the rest of his
career.
Both Travolta and Conaway were smitten by Newton-John during the
filming of this picture. Conaway eventually bowed out of the woo-fest,
and married Newton-John's sister a year later (divorced after five
years).

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The 20th anniversary re-release of GREASE is further proof that pop
will indeed eat itself.  Based on the successful Broadway musical by Jim
Jacobs and Warren Casey, GREASE was orginally released in 1978 in part to
cash in on that decade's wave of 1950s nostalgia -- "Happy Days,"
thin-Elvis idolatry and the like -- becoming in the process the most
successful musical in box office history.  It returns to screens in 1998
in part to cash in on this decade's wave of 1970s nostalgia -- disco
revivals, thin-John Travolta idolatry and the like.  The layers of
cultural cannibalism involved are simply staggering.
     I must admit that I was shocked by the $13 million GREASE took in on
the first weekend of its re-release.  Paramount had previously misfired
with anniversary re-releases of THE GODFATHER and -- a Grand Prize Winner
in the "Okay, I'll Bite...Why?" Sweepstakes -- DIRTY DANCING, and there
hardly seemed to be a STAR WARS-like clamor from a generation of
movie-goers deprived of watching "Hand Jive" on the big screen.  Yet there
they were, coming out in force for the simple adventures of greaser Danny
(Travolta) and Australian exchange student Sandy (Olivia Newton-John) as
they struggled to make it works from opposite sides of the Rydell High
School tracks.
     It's difficult to make sense of why GREASE is once again the word,
especially when it's difficult to make sense of why it was the word in the
first place.  The cast of "teenagers" -- Travolta, Newton-John, Stockard
Channing as lead "Pink Lady" Rizzo, Jeff Conaway as Danny's pal Kenickie
-- generally looked old enough to be attending high school reunions rather
than attending high school; the songs were an uninspired combination of
throwback homage and 70s schmaltz-pop; the dialogue and performances were
at best a half-step removed from the wooden posturing of 1950s juvenile
delinquent melodramas.  Nevertheless it thrived, both in an era where its
star was a teen heartthrob and in an era where he is a "serious actor."
What could be the common thread?
     I hope it's not just the eternal optimist in me which makes me
believe that GREASE works because it finds an audience hungry for
musicals.  Of course, this is a very different age from the Golden Age of
movie musicals, a more cynical one.  Arguably, however, the late 70s were
even more cynical -- post-Watergate national disillusionment, gas lines,
out-of-control inflation.  GREASE provided the same basic appeal the
classic musicals provided:  it was movie-going as pure escapism, full of
utterly improbable musical numbers, fresh faces and plenty of enthusiasm
set in a mythologically simpler time.  At the same time, it brought just
enough attitude and polished-up teen rebellion that young audiences could
convince themselves they weren't watching something "corny."  They could
have their SINGIN' IN THE RAIN and their ANIMAL HOUSE all in one sitting.
     It would be amusing indeed if, buried beneath the meta-nostalgia of
the GREASE re-release, you could find a nostalgia of a different kind.  I
suspect few people old enough to have seen GREASE the first time around
mark it as a seminal movie-going experience; I suspect even fewer young
movie-goers are that anxious to see what Travolta looked like before he
was big enough to play Clinton without padding.  Maybe even a mediocre
musical reminds folks of a cinematic vitamin deficiency they didn't even
known they had.  Maybe there's a part of every movie-goer that wants to go
back to the time when you could watch people sing and dance on screen
without rolling your eyes.  Maybe this kind of musical, one with
sophomoric pranks and plenty of almost-but-not-quite sexual content, is
the kind that allows viewers to let their guard down.  Somewhere, even if
they don't know it, audiences watching GREASE may be watching the 1950s of
James Dean but _seeing_ the 1950s of Gene Kelly, all filtered through the
1970s of John Travolta.  Maybe GREASE _is_ the way we are feeling.  

Author
Ryan Davis
        Twenty years is a long time. You would think that a movie considered
"hip", by teenagers twenty years ago, wouldn't sit that well with today's
teens. Well, if you thought that about Grease you'd be wrong. I attended
the film on it's opening night, March 27th, it was a sold out viewing- with
more teen girls then I saw at Titanic. What is it about this movie that
keeps yet another generation fascinated? Who knows…
        Danny(John Travolta) is the coolest greaser at Rydell High, and a member
of the T-Birds. During the summer he meets an Australian girl, Sandy(Olivia
Newton-John), at the beach. He enjoys his summer fling with her, but when
she doesn't return to Australia and shows up at Rydell, things get a little
complicated. Danny is forced to decide if he should try to impress Sandy by
becoming a jock, or continue hanging out with his T-Bird gang. 
        I have seen this movie many times, but never in the theater. It was a
totally new experience seeing it with other people, who sang along and even
did the hand jive in their seats. The audience I saw it with seemed to have
a great time, and even applauded when it was all over. The music is really
catchy and the dancing is nicely choreographed. It is a fun movie, and
while it may not be anywhere near perfect it is a great experience.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: John Travolta, Olivia Newton-John, Stockard Channing, 
      Jeff Conaway, Barry Pearl, Michael Tucci, Kelly Ward, Didi Conn, 
      Jamie Donnelly, Dinah Manoff, Eve Arden, Frankie Avalon, 
      Joan Blondell, Edd Byrnes, Sid Caesar, Alice Ghostley
Director: Randal Kleiser
Producers: Robert Stigwood and Allan Carr
Screenplay: Allan Carr, Bronte Woodward based on the play by 
      Warren Casey and Jim Jacobs
Cinematography: Bill Butler
Music: John Farrar, Bill Oakes, Louis St. Louis 
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     GREASE is a perfect way to become immersed in the recent past.  Not 
only was it one of the top box office draws in 1978, but it capped off a 
decade of '50s frenzy (that began, ironically, with the off-Broadway 
opening of the play GREASE in 1972).  The stars were '70s icons, with 
John Travolta having come off his phenomenally successful outing in 
SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER and Olivia Newton-John having made her American 
acting debut after repeated stays atop world-wide pop charts.  The songs 
are '50s style hits that have shown their enduring popularity.  The 
soundtrack for GREASE sold well in 1978 and is still going strong two 
decades later.
     Many fans of movie musicals recall GREASE with fondness.  It 
certainly isn't a momentous film, and stands a considerable distance 
downslope from the pinnacle its genre, but it became a huge hit in an 
era when the musical was well into its death throes.  Aside from the 
likes of LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS (1986), the Disney animated films, and 
EVITA (1996), there have been few memorable, big-budget motion picture 
musicals since GREASE.  The film was also popular enough to spawn a 
sequel, catchily titled GREASE 2, but the less said about that sad 
endeavor, the better.  
     There are several reasons why Paramount Pictures has chosen to re-
release GREASE on its twentieth anniversary, all of which have something 
to do with money.  '70s nostalgia is in full bloom (America has a thing 
about looking back 20 years), Travolta is hot again, and the CD is a 
cash cow.  The biggest reason, however, is the unexpected windfall 
created last March when 20th Century Fox unveiled a spruced-up STAR 
WARS.  No one thinks GREASE's 1998 box office total will come close to 
that of the first installment of George Lucas' space opera, but it 
should still make a tidy profit.  The digitally-remastered soundtrack 
(which sounds great) and the enhanced color can only help.
     GREASE boasts what all successful motion picture musicals have:  
likable stars, a simple but not trivial plot, and a lot of enjoyable 
music.  Familiarity with the soundtrack is undoubtedly one of the 
reasons for the film's popularity – several of the songs have achieved 
pop hit status.  Who can't recognize "Grease," "Hopelessly Devoted to 
You," "You're the One that I Want," "Greased Lightning," and "Summer 
Nights"?  These may not represent great music, but they're a lot of fun 
to listen to, as their abiding appeal proves.  (Incidentally, three of 
those, "Grease," "Hopelessly Devoted," and "You're the One" were penned 
specifically for the movie; the others are leftovers from the stage 
show.)
     The plot, such as it is, opens during the summer of 1958 when, to 
the tune of "Love is a Many Splendored Thing," Danny (Travolta) and 
Sandy (Newton-John) fall in love.  After pledging their undying 
affection, they go their separate ways, returning to the reality that 
every teenager must face after Labor Day -- high school.  The two are in 
for a surprise, however.  Sandy has changed schools, and, unbeknownst to 
Danny or her, they are now both in Rydell High's Senior Class.  Their 
eventual reunion, however, is anything but joyous.  Although Danny is 
secretly delighted to see Sandy, he realizes that an overt display of 
joy will look bad in front of his tough friends, so he plays it cool.  
To Sandy, the reaction is like a slap in the face.  The two then spend 
the rest of the movie dancing around each other, eventually getting 
together for the musical finale. 
     In addition to the songs, highlights of GREASE include Travolta's 
daffy, limber performance as Danny, Newton-John's sexy-but-sweet Sandy, 
and a cast of adults trying vainly to pass themselves off as high-
schoolers.  Despite all of the silliness and singing, the exuberance of 
youth lies at the core of GREASE, and, although everything is greatly 
exaggerated here, the film brings back memories of what it was like to 
hang out in the school yard, take a date to a drive-in movie, and attend 
a prom.  
     As Danny, the leader of the leather jacket-wearing T-Birds, 
Travolta is a riot.  Alternately swaggering to prove his "coolness" and 
re-affirming his ability on the dance floor, the actor gives the kind of 
performance that's perfect for the role.  His comic aptitude, often on 
display during the '70s in "Welcome Back Kotter," is used to good effect 
in a montage where Danny tries out at several sports in order to prove 
his worth to Sandy.  Meanwhile, Newton-John is equally solid, even 
though, at the time, she was far better known for making records than 
movies.  Sandy's transformation from shy wallflower to leather-clad babe 
is one of the film's best-remembered moments.  (During that sequence, I 
especially like the panicked glance Sandy casts at her friends when 
she's not sure what to do with the cigarette.)  Newton-John and Travolta 
develop a palpable chemistry, which is why they re-teamed five years 
later in the failed romantic comedy TWO OF A KIND, a movie that was 
unable to revive their then-flagging careers.
     The supporting cast contains a number of familiar faces.  The T-
Birds are played by Jeff Conaway, Barry Pearl, Michael Tucci, and Kelly 
Ward, while their female counterparts, the Pink Ladies, are Stockard 
Channing (as the tough-talking Rizzo), Didi Conn, Jamie Donnelly, and 
Dinah Manoff.  Frankie Avalon, the teen idol who spent a lot of time in 
the '60s on the beach with Annette Funicello, has a cameo as an angel.  
Eve Arden, of "Our Miss Brooks," is Principal McGee.  Comedian Sid 
Ceasar plays Coach Calhoun, Alice Ghostley (Esmeralda on "Bewitched") is 
Mrs. Murdock, and the singing group Sha-Na-Na doubles as Johnny Casino & 
the Gamblers.
     GREASE works as a musical, a comedy, a light romance, and a gentle 
satire of teenage life during the '50s.  In part because of its 
persistent high spirits, it's a delight to watch, even 20 years after it 
first appeared on the screen.  There's no doubt that GREASE has a 
devoted legion of fans, so it will be interesting to see how well the 
movie performs at the box office.  After all, it is readily available on 
video tape, and, unlike last year's big re-release, there are no 
restored outtakes and enhanced special effects.  The only things GREASE 
has to rely upon are its reputation and its music.  For me, at least, 
that's enough for a trip to the theater.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Randall Kleiser
Screenplay: Bronte Woodard and Allan Carr (adapted by Carr from the
musical by Jim Jacobs and Warren Case)
Stars: John Travolta (Danny), Olivia Newton-John (Sandy), Stockard
Channing (Rizzo), Jeff Conaway (Kenickie), Didi Conn (Frenchy), Eve
Arden (Principal McGee)
MPAA Rating: PG
Review: *** (out of ****)
After the phenomenal success of the re-release of "Star Wars" last year,
the fifties'-style musical "Grease" seems like a logical flick to bring
back to theaters. Not only was it an enormous hit back in 1978, but like
"Star Wars," an entire generation of kids have grown up with it on
video, but have never seen it on the big screen. Not to mention, John
Travolta is even hotter now than he was in '78, the public is hungry for
seventies' memorabilia, and the music is still an ageless trip. The
soundtrack continues to sell well after twenty years, and a year ago the
"Grease Megamix" (a souped-up re-mix of bits and pieces of all the hit
songs) was one of the most requested tunes on pop stations around the
country.
So now "Grease" is back on the silver screen, and watching it again
feels like going to a class reunion. Seeing Travolta back in his early
twenties, with a lean body and greasy black ducktail makes it all the
more amusing to drop next door and see him playing a gray, overweight
Clinton clone in "Primary Colors." In both movies he radiates off the
screen like a true movie star, but in "Grease" it's a more primal,
teen-angst kind of stardom, like the kind Leonardo DiCaprio is currently
enjoying. And, like DiCaprio, Travolta was not only desired for his
physical attributes, but also for his talent -- he rode into "Grease" on
the critical and commercial success of "Saturday Night Fever," for which
he was nominated for a Best Actor Oscar.
In viewing "Grease" today, we are effectively in the late nineties
watching a film that was made in the late seventies reminiscing about
the late fifties. When "Grease" was made, there was a strong nostalgic
feel for the innocence and joviality of the late fifties; as the
turbulent seventies were coming to a close, with the emphasis on
Vietnam, Watergate, racial tension, and general unpleasantness, it was a
nice returning to a time when black leather, fast cars, and necking in
back seats were harmless means of being bad. Movies at the time were
gritty, urban tales of corruption and moral ambiguity, and "Grease" made
itself out to be the absolute antithesis.
Of course, the fifties portrayed in "Grease" is a time period that never
really existed.  It's more a whimsical version of how we think it was --
filled with shiny hot rods, black leather jackets, hip diners, clueless
principals, and gangs with names like the T-Birds and the Pink Ladies.
Everything is simplified down to its barest essentials, and that what's
so nice about the movie. It doesn't demand much of anything from the
audience, other than they check their problems at the door and have a
good time. The story about the good greaser Danny (Travolta), and his
love for the squeaky-clean new girl in town, Sandy (Olivia Newton-John),
is a kind of ageless high school myth.
"Grease" would probably never get made today (musicals are pretty much
dead, even when they're starring Madonna). Based on the hit Broadway
show by Jim Jacobs and Warren Case, "Grease" is imaginatively campy,
kind of goofy, but always energetic and fun. The music, ranging from the
disco-inspired opening song by Frankie Valli, to the infamous "Greased
Lightning" with all its automobile-inspired sexual innuendo, was hot
stuff then and still is now.
The songs, brought to life by the lively performances by Travolta and
Co. and the fantastic choreography by Patricia Birch, have a campy,
timeless quality that always makes you want to sing along with them, no
matter how cheesy (how can you not at least tap your feet to "Summer
Nights" or "You're the One That I Want"?). In fact, the musical
sequences will be the most eye-opening to those who have never seen
"Grease" on the big screen before. Those poor souls who have been stuck
with lousy pan-and-scan copies on video will be amazed seeing it in
widescreen for the first time, which finally allows full viewing of
Birch's dance numbers.
Probably the only let-down of "Grease" is how little it did for its
performers. It's easy to assume that a hit like this would be a
launching pad for its twenty-something actors and actresses, but in
fact, almost none of them went on to meaningful film careers. Jeff
Conaway, who was so good in the role of Danny's best friend Kenickie,
went nowhere. Didi Conn, who played the unforgettable Frenchy, didn't
even get that far (she was desperate enough to show up in "Grease 2").
Even Stockard Channing -- whose performance as Rizzo, the leader of the
Pink Ladies, gives "Grease" the closest thing it has to real drama --
had a mostly uneventful movie career until she resurfaced in the early
nineties with her Oscar-nominated role in "Six Degrees of Separation."
And what of the leads? How did Olivia Newton-John's career take off?
Does "Xanadu" ring a bell? And even Travolta, whose career seemed
infallible at the time, made one good film ("Blowout"), one okay film
("Urban Cowboy") and two really bad films ("Staying Alive" and "Two of a
Kind") before sinking into a fifteen-year rut until 1994's "Pulp
Fiction" set him free.
Nevertheless, "Grease" was a huge success for its time because it bucked
the trends and gave moviegoers something they hadn't seen in a long
time. Upbeat, funny, occasionally witty, and always enjoyable, "Grease"
is no great piece of art, but with its complete lack of pretension, it
is about as fun a movie experience as you can get, even with inflated
ticket prices.
Visit "Charlie Don't Surf!"
an eclectic collection of film reviews by James Kendrick
http://www.bigfoot.com/~jimkendrick
E-mail: jimkendrick@bigfoot.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As the petticoats fly, the kids in GREASE engage in wild dance
gymnastics.  Their high school hop is being televised, and the dancers
are participating in a national dance-off to pick the best teenage
dancers in America.  23-year-old John Travolta as greasy-haired Danny
Zuko and 29-year-old Olivia Newton-John as goodie-two-shoes Sandy Olsen
hope to be the winners of the local contest.  In this parody of the 50s
made from the perspective of the late 70s, their ages present no
problem.  Newton-John, especially, looks exactly like an innocent,
young high school senior.
     A new print with a remastered Dolby soundtrack has been released
to the theaters to celebrate the movie's twentieth anniversary.
Although Travolta's SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER, which he made the year
before, would have been more deserving of a reissue, GREASE is
nostalgic, silly fun that is well worth another run.  And for those,
like this reviewer, who haven't seen the film in a long time, they may
be surprised at how raunchy the humor is.  Throwing non-stop sexual
insults at each other, the kids are typical teenagers.  There's even a
hilarious condom scene that happens in the backseat of a car parked at
one of those infamous lover's lanes that were so popular in the 50s and
60s.  For a PG movie - they didn't have PG-13 in 1978 - the humor is
surprisingly frank.
     Danny, who swivels his hips like Elvis, acts the part of the tough
kid, which he isn't.  His gang of pseudo-tough guys, called the
T-Birds, fights the other gang with a car race rather than fists.  His
girlfriend, Sandy, dresses in virginal whites and creamy pastels.  She
acts like she would wash her own mouth out with soap if she
accidentally said "darn."
     Today, it seems hard to believe that neither Travolta nor
Newton-John was the first choice for the roles.  In fact, Newton-John
wasn't even sure if she could act the part, so she demanded a screen
test first to see if she was credible.
     In sharp contrast to Sandy is her friend Rizzo, who dress in
voluptuous, snug red outfits reminiscent of clothes found in wild west
saloons.  Rizzo, played with a beautiful swagger by Stockard Channing,
provides the hard-edged contrast this cream puff of a movie needs.
When she thinks she is pregnant, her character also injects the only
serious subplot.
     The boys hang around and talk about girls who "put out."  The
girls have slumber parties, where they sip pilfered booze and do
exercises in vain attempts to make their breasts larger.  The funniest
scene in the picture happens at the slumber party, when one of the
girls does a great mimic of the chipmunk that did the old Ipana
toothpaste jingle - "Brusha.  Brusha.  Brusha.  Get the new Ipana."
     The most compelling reason to see the movie is none of the above.
It is the energetic and good-spirited song and dance numbers in which
the movie really comes alive.  Although none of them are great, they
all go down as easily as a chocolate malt from the kids' favorite soda
fountain.
     GREASE runs 1:50.  It is rated PG for sexual humor and situations
and for brief male nudity.  Although there were girls seven and younger
in our audience, I am going to be conservative and recommend the
picture for kids around 10 and up, given the very explicit sexual humor
and situations in the movie.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: John Travolta, Olivia Newton-John, Stockard Channing, Jeff
Conaway, Barry Pearl, Michael Tucci, Kelly Ward, Didi Conn, Jamie
Donnelly, Dinah Manoff, Eve Arden, Frankie Avalon, Joan Blondell, Edd
Byrnes, Sid Caesar, Alice Ghostley
Australian re-release date: July 2nd
This review is also available with pictures from the film and extra
production information at the following address:
http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au/Reviews/Grease
A daring thought, if I may: Grease in the 70's is no where near as
impressive as Grease in the 90's.  Whilst the film; first released in
the beginning-of-the-end of "the psychedelic era", may have been a
spectacular, vivid musical celebration back then, I sense that it means
so much more now.  Not only is it a celebration, but it's a
retrospective celebration.  It's a journey back in time to when leather
jackets clearly defined the cool from the nerdy, when Jimi Hendrix
rocked on and when sex was safe.  It looks genuine, because it is.
Through the span of twenty years, Grease has lost none of its charm and,
if anything, is more magical now than ever before.  In summary: it was
great back then.  It's even greater now.
John Travolta (at that time, famous for his role in Saturday Night Live)
stars as the now legendary character of Danny Zuko, who had the perfect
summer romance with Australian Sandy Olsson (Olivia Newton-John).  But
school comes all too soon for the two, and they split paths - mistakably
thinking that they will never see each other again. On the first day at
Rydell High we find Danny with a slick, leather jacketed image as the
leader of the "T-Birds."  The rebellious T-Birds comprises of Danny and
his friends - Kenickie (Jeff Conaway), Doody (Barry Pearl), Sonny
(Michael Tucci) and Putzie (Kelly Ward).  Meanwhile, the T-Birds female
counterparts - the "Pink Ladies" - welcome Sandy (who transferred
schools to Rydell) to the school.  It doesn't take long for Danny and
Sandy to meet again, but this time Danny has a reputation to live up
to - so things don't go as well as he would have liked.
As the couple begin to appreciate each other again, different subplots
emerge as the Pink Ladies' Rizzo (Stockard Channing) has the possibility
of being pregnant from a rousing night with Kenickie, and Frenchy (Didi
Conn) quits Rydell to go to beauty school.
If I did have a gripe about Grease, it's a small one: occasionally, the
films conversion from spoken dialogue to sung is not as good as it
should be.  In one scene, involving Frenchy and her "guardian angel," a
rendition of "Beauty School Dropout" is included simply to add another
song to the track list.  It may be enjoyable, but it isn't entirely
appropriate - the best types of musicals are those that feel exactly
like one, not just a collection of scenes with musical slabs meshed in
to create a higher entertainment level.  But on the whole, Grease's
lyrics are wonderfully written, and the unashamedly 70's style dialogue
is charming and easy to absorb.
I have no doubt that the same people who have ignored Grease's
flourishing existence will dodge the re-release at all costs.  But for
many - fans and spectators alike - Grease should still be the word as we
remember, with loyal respect, such a screen wonder that paved its way
through two grueling decades of film - looking better with every year
behind its back.
Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Movie Zone:       http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au
Mostly Movies:         http://welcome.to/mostlymovies

Author
Michael Dequina
Twenty years after its initial theatrical release, Randal Kleiser's film
of the '50s-set stage musical Grease is just as popular, if not moreso,
than it was in 1978.  How can such a cinematic trifle have such enduring
appeal?  Quite simply, this tuneful look at one eventful school year at
Rydell High is one of those rare films where just about every last thing
about it falls magically into place.
Grease's remarkable staying power can first be attributed to the immense
appeal of its romantic leads, John Travolta and Olivia Newton-John.  For my
money, Travolta's turn as bad boy Danny Zuko is the quintessential Travolta
performance--effortlessly supercool and confident with a sweet, goofy
innocence lying underneath a slick veneer of decadence.  Although his '90s
comeback has included some of his best work as an actor, the recent
Travolta he has never been the astonishingly charismatic presence he is
here (the closest he has gotten is in 1995's Get Shorty), whether leading
his fellow T-Birds during the energetic "Greased Lightning" number or
hilariously attempting various sports to impress Newton-John's Sandy Olson.
 Critics blasted Newton-John as being too bland, but they missed the
point--Sandy, fresh-off-the-boat from Australia, is _supposed_ to be bland,
which is not to say that she's boring.  Newton-John _is_ incredibly
wholesome, but in a pure, radiant sense.  She has a glowing, angelic
quality that is captivating, which is not to say that she isn't able to
pull off Sandy's eventual image makeover; spiritedly shimmying in black
leather, Newton-John more than proves to be up to the task.
A musical lives or dies by its soundtrack, and it is here that Grease
truly soars.  The opening number "Summer Nights," in which Danny and Sandy
recall their summer romance, isn't the biggest karaoke tune of all time for
nothing; it's as deliriously buoyant as they come.  That classic song and
the others that originate from Jim Jacobs and Warren Casey's stage score,
including the aforementioned automotive celebration "Greased Lightning" and
bad girl Rizzo's (Stockard Channing) showcase lament "There Are Worse
Things I Could Do," are great, but the musical highlights are the three
tunes written expressly for the film.  Newton-John is at her heartfelt best
crooning John Farrar's Oscar-nominated ballad "Hopelessly Devoted to You,"
where Sandy soliloquizes on her love for Danny after he rebuffs her.
Tables are turned later on in the film, which sets the stage for Travolta's
best number, Louis St. Louis and Scott Simon's "Sandy," which includes the
immortal verse "Stranded at the drive-in/Branded a fool/What will they
say/Monday at school?"  Perhaps the best-known song from the film aside
from "Summer Nights" is Travolta and Newton-John's hit duet "You're the One
That I Want," also written by Farrar.  With its "Oooh-hoo-hoo, honey"
chorus, this toetapper is catchy almost to the point of annoyance.  Almost.
But what really takes the film over the top--and makes it such an enduring
entertainment--is its joyful exuberance.  From the knowingly cornball "Love
Is a Many-Splendored Thing" prologue to the "Born to Hand Jive" dance-off
to the"We Go Together" closing production number, there is never a dull
moment in Grease.  The energy is so infectious that it carries the audience
through the more ridiculous scenes, most notably "Beauty School Dropout,"
where a guardian angel (Frankie Avalon) advises would-be beautician Frenchy
(Didi Conn) to return to high school.  There are a few rough spots that
cannot be overcome; I was never a fan of the animated opening credit
sequence nor of the Barry Gibb-penned, Frankie Valli-sung title tune that
accompanies it; and while the too-old-for-high-school appearances of the
cast are generally forgivable, there is one huge exception--Annette
Charles, who plays sexpot dancer Cha Cha, looks downright elderly.  But
those are very minor quibbles.
So why go to the theatre and see a movie that is so widely available on
home video?  If you've only seen Grease on the small screen, you really
haven't experienced it at all.  The big screen restores the film's wide
2.35:1 CinemaScope aspect ratio, correcting the damage wrought by the
video's horrible pan-and-scan job--no longer are half of Travolta and
Newton-John's faces missing for the last line of "Summer Nights."  But most
impressive is the digitally remastered sound, which enhances sounds one
wouldn't be likely to catch before, such as background vocals on
"Hopelessly Devoted to You" and jet-propulsion noises when Danny and
Sandy's car takes its magical flight to happily ever after.
So it's no wonder why this incredibly fun slice of '50s nostalgia has
stood the test of time.  Much like how the assembled Rydell graduates sing
"we'll always be together," Grease will always be around, and it will
remain "the word" for generations to come.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Only in the 90's are we fully beginning to appreciate this 
70's movie about the 50's. GREASE is a cult favorite that appeals to 
everyone from teenagers to nostalgic baby boomers, even people 
like me who aren't too fond of musicals. So what's the appeal?
        Let's start with John Travolta. He's been enjoying the 
comeback of a lifetime these past two years and so have all his old 
movies. Saturday Night Fever, Grease, Urban Cowboy, 
they get rented out of the video store on a daily basis. People are so 
Travolta-hungry they watch the dread American Bandstand reruns 
on VH1 waiting for the one episode he performed (i.e. lip-synched) 
in.
        Then there's Olivia Newton-John. She's actually pretty in 
GREASE, you can't say that about her "Physical" and "Twist of Fate" 
days of the 80's. This is also her only good movie -- you can't say 
anything nice about XANADU, so don't say anything at all.
        People also love GREASE because it's the quintessential 
50's nostalgia movie. It has everything, from the slumber party and 
malt shop to the dance contest and drag race. Better yet, it has a 
sense of humor about those days, to the point of including ultimate 
icon Frankie Avalon in the "Beauty School Dropout" dream 
sequence.
        That brings up the main draw of GREASE -- the music. As 
I type this, at least one Top 40 station across the country is playing 
the "Grease Megamix," a medley of the three most popular songs 
from the movie ("You're the One That I Want," "Greased 
Lightning" and "Summer Nights"). Travolta and Newton-John's 
songs in the film have become karaoke favorites, and the movie 
soundtrack is actually back in the upper reaches of the charts.
        Travolta, the archetype of cool, plays Danny Zuko, car-
loving greaser who bosses around a bunch of tough-guy clones. 
Newton-John plays Sandy, the virginal good-girl from Australia he 
had a fling with over the summer. They parted ways, him headed for 
his senior year and her headed back for Australia, only to find 
themselves at the same school. Sandy finds out that the sensitive, 
caring boy she knew over the summer acts completely different at 
school, but she's hopelessly devoted to him anyway. There's a song 
about it, of course.
        The plot is thin and transparent but has to be that way so 
that all the production numbers and requisite scenes (dance contest, 
drag race, etc.) can be worked in. GREASE is a fun movie that 
features something you don't see anymore. No, not Olivia Newton-
John, I'm talking about John Travolta singing. As far as singing 
actors go, he's leagues ahead of Don "Heartbeat" Johnson, Bruce 
"Respect Yourself" Willis and Patrick "She's Like the Wind" 
Swayze. Travolta still dances in most of his movies, but when are 
we going to hear his velvety vocal prowess again? It will probably 
be years before the world is ready for Pulp Fiction: The 
Musical.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!

Author
Jamie Peck
GREASE
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
A very skinny John Travolta and a very young Olivia Newton-John have the 
respective leads of Danny Zuko and Sandy Olsson, and their pairing still 
ranks as one of screendom's most effervescently charming. For those 
eight of you who aren't familiar with the story, here's a brief recap: 
Greaser bad boy Danny and Aussie good girl Sandy are reunited for their 
1959 senior year at Rydell High after a brief fling during the summer; 
both thought she was going to return to her native continent before 
school started, but both were wrong. Sandy tries to rekindle their 
relationship, but Danny's too cool a cat to fall for her wholesome 
appeal in front of his T-Bird buddies (including Jeff Conaway). So Sandy 
hooks up with a gang herself -- the Pink Ladies, headed by sassy, sexy 
Rizzo (Stockard Channing, just superb as an independent woman well ahead 
of her time) -- and Danny, who still really feels love for her, attempts 
a compromise of ideals in order to win her back. 
The drag race finale is yet something of a drag, and I never have 
thought much of "Greased Lightening," the film's big "guy" number (that 
choreography -- ack!), but "Grease"'s flaws amount too few to carp. The 
movie's first showpiece is "Summer Nights," where Danny and Sandy 
separately recount wildly different versions of their fun-in-the-sun 
romance. Not only is "Nights" tremendously catchy, but it's also a smart 
look at how men and women see the same events with varying eyes. There 
has yet to be a live-action musical sequence that rivals the one-two 
punch of "You're the One That I Want" and "We Go Together," "Grease"'s 
euphoric cappers. All this and some of the most pleasing moments come 
from the smaller, quieter moments; the Oscar-nominated "Hopelessly 
Devoted to You" is a lovely showcase for Newton-John, and Channing's 
lamenting ballad "There Are Worse Things I Could Do" is one of 
"Grease"'s most unjustly overlooked tunes. 
The soundtrack is remastered (though Travolta still hits that awful high 
note at the end of "Nights") and the restored widescreen allows us to 
see previously pan-and-scanned-out choreography, but nothing else has 
changed -- no computer-generated backgrounds, no outtakes or new musical 
numbers, no Jabba the Hutt cameos. And it's a testament to "Grease"'s 
timeless success that nothing needs to be changed -- it's the same 
all-around blast it's always been, with an appealing cast in a fun story 
told with great music. To '90s viewers, "Grease" will probably recall 
disco and bellbottoms as much as it made its original audience nostalgic 
for doo-wop and poodle skirts. But regardless of what decade it 
transports us to, we can all agree on one thing -- without a doubt, 
"Grease" is still the word.
