Title
Review for Turner & Hooch (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
        Tom Hanks has seemed determined lately to flush his career down the
toilet.  In his previous movie, THE 'BURBS, he played the only normal guy
on his block.  The character was a dead bore and a waste of Hanks' comic
talent.  In TURNER & HOOCH, Hanks is stuck in another mundane role, playing
straight man to a slobbering, butt-ugly canine.  Yes, that's right, Hanks'
co-star is a dog and so is the movie.
        Hanks plays an obsessively fastidious detective whose
highly-organized life is turned upside down when he teams up with a dog to
solve a murder.  The dog, Hooch, is a homely mutt with an attitude problem:
he's mean, he's grumpy, and he slobbers like Niagara falls.  The movie is
supposed to show how Hooch teaches the uptight detective how to be more
easy going.  Heck, the dog even helps Turner get laid.
        TURNER & HOOCH is too light-hearted to be an effective crime
thriller.  It's not funny enough to be a good comedy.  And it's too
contrived to stir up any serious drama or character development.  In order
to get easy laughs, the script caters to the lowest common denominator,
which in this case is saliva.  Nearly every scene includes a drool gag, and
in my book, resorting to slobber for laughs is about as low as a comedy can
sink; we're talking a level of sophistication on par with vomit and snot
jokes.  But TURNER & HOOCH doesn't have the decency to stop at drooling;
showing no mercy, it even inflicts the dreaded fart joke on us.  The movie
never really decides what road it wants to take: in one scene it gives us
the flatulence gag, in the next a suspenseful shootout, and at the end a
shameless, tear-jerking finale.
        Hanks is at his best when he plays off-beat characters, like the
12-year-old in BIG and the narcissistic comedian in PUNCHLINE.  Movies like
THE 'BURBS and TURNER & HOOCH should be burned for failing to tap Hanks'
immense comic potential, let alone his capacity for drama.  Unfortunately,
in TURNER & HOOCH we get to see only fleeting moments of the actor's comic
genius.
        On the other hand, as Hooch,  Beasley delivers a riveting,
Oscar-calibre performance; I'd definitely nominate him for best dog in a
major motion picture.  As one audience member exclaimed: "That dog's so
ugly it's cute!"  I must admit Beasley does possess an incredibly
expressive face, and he's perhaps the finest actor in the movie.
        Actually, in all seriousness, that honor probably goes to Mare
Winningham as the veterinarian who becomes Hanks' love-interest.  What
little screen time she has is precious; she turns in a credible performance
in a forgettable film.
        TURNER & HOOCH might have created more sparks if it had been from
the dog's point of view or, better yet, if Turner and Hooch had switched
minds halfway through the movie.  Now that might have been funny: Tom Hanks
mimicking a canine.  The mind-switching doggie movie--it's never been done
before!
