Title
Review for When the Sky Falls (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
Hot on the heels of her critically acclaimed performance in The
Contender, Joan Allen stars in When the Sky Falls, a straight-to-cable
biopic about a ballsy investigative reporter who made a name for herself
by fingering several of Dublin's most notorious drug kingpins.  The film
is a true story with fictionalized names based on The Sunday
Independent's Veronica Guerin – the first Irish journalist ever to be
assassinated.
Allen plays Sinead Hamilton, a reporter from the fictitious Sunday
Globe.  Her fearless style and penchant for sniffing out the truth
aggravated the purveyors of organized crime in Ireland but made her a
favorite daughter of Dublin.  The film begins with the slaying of a
character played by Pete Postlethwaite (Among Giants) that I think was
supposed to have been Martin Cahill (whose life was dramatized in the
far superior film The General).  Falls is set over a two-year period in
the mid ‘90s, where Hamilton's pieces on the country's most notorious
criminals were gobbled up by readers that had grown exceedingly tired of
Dublin's growing drug problems.
Allen does a good job but seems very miscast here.  Her accent shows up
only at the end of each sentence.  The whole martyr thing was a little
too much to take as well, but being a true story, you can't really
complain too loudly about it.  The story of Guerin's real assassination,
while depicted somewhat accurately, is a lot more chilling than in
Falls.  For some reason, the filmmakers left out a call the journalist
made to her home while she was being gunned down.  Patrick Bergin (Eye
of the Beholder) and Liam Cunningham (RKO 281) turn in decent supporting
roles.
Falls was directed by John Mackenzie (The Long Good Friday) and penned
by three debut screenwriters – Ronan Gallagher, Colum McCann and Michael
Sheridan.  Guerin also collaborated on the screenplay in an attempt to
tell the stories that her newspaper wouldn't.  I'm sure she never
envisioned her version ending quite like Falls.  Her death, which
occurred just eight months before Falls began principal photography,
resulted in tough new Irish drug laws and a crackdown that netted 150
criminals.
1:47 – R for graphic violence, sexual content, drug use and adult
language
