Title
Review for Nénette et Boni (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
France, 1996
U.S. Release Date: Summer 1997
Running Length: 1:43
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/3/97 & 5/6/97
Cast: Gregoire Colin, Alice Houri, Valeria Bruni Tedeschi,
      Vincent Gallo, Jacques Nolot, Alex Descas, Jamila Farah
Director: Claire Denis
Producer: Georges Benayoun
Screenplay: Claire Denis, Jean-Paul Fargeau
Cinematography: Agnes Godard
Music: Tindersticks
U.S. Distributor: Strand Releasing
In French with subtitles
     NENETTE AND BONI is Claire Denis' followup to her 1994 made-for-
French-TV film, U.S. GO HOME.  While Denis employed an unusually
straightforward approach to that movie (necessitated by the demands of a
short, 60-minute running length), here she has returned to her more
familiar, elliptical style.  This method of film making allows the
characters to develop slowly while affording the viewer an opportunity
to think about what's going on.  And a chance to reflect is needed,
because Denis eschews standard narrative techniques, leaving all sorts
of unresolved issues and unanswered questions.
     Despite being siblings, Nenette (Alice Houri) and Boni (Gregoire
Colin) are not close.  The son of divorced parents, Boni sided with his
late mother while his sister lived with their father.  But, when teenage
Nenette discovers that she's pregnant and runs away from home, she has
no one to turn to but her brother.  Reluctantly, Boni agrees to let
Nenette stay with him, but, as the days pass, her presence alters from
being an unwanted intrusion to an integral part of his life.  More
importantly, while Nenette is seemingly indifferent to her unborn child
(she would have an abortion if it wasn't too late in the pregnancy), the
upcoming birth means everything to Boni.
     The story told by NENETTE AND BONI is simple; the relationships are
not.  The film is about two characters -- a brother and sister -- who
complete each other.  Each has something that the other lacks, and, as
the film progresses, they grow inexorably closer, finding a sort of
spiritual common ground.  Outwardly, they are often cool and distant to
each other, fearful of where the relationship might lead if given free
reign.  And, while there is no overt sexual contact between them, their
emotional bond transports them to a level of intimacy beyond incest.
     In addition to dealing with the brother/sister association, Denis
explores the rifts that can develop in families.  Boni's hatred for his
father (Jacques Nolot) is raw and unchecked.  We don't know exactly what
happened to split the family -- that's not important to Denis -- but we
observe the ruined aftermath, and, in understanding what Boni has lost
in the breakup, we see why he is so determined to offer a better
alternative to Nenette's child, and how that baby fulfills a need in his
life.
     Three members of NENETTE AND BONI's cast are returning from U.S. GO
HOME.  Gregoire Colin and Alice Houri are again playing brother and
sister, and their chemistry here is as effective as it was in the
earlier movie.  Both are naturally charismatic performers and clearly
understand what motivates their characters.  Vincent Gallo, who was a
soldier in U.S. GO HOME, is an American baker living in Marseilles. 
Valeria Bruni-Tedeschi portrays the baker's wife, who also happens to be
the object of Boni's erotic fantasies.
     This is Denis' most sensual motion picture.  Without ever showing
more than a flash of exposed skin, she manages to convey heavy
eroticism.  Take for example, the scene where Boni kneads the dough as
he might a woman's breasts -- playing with it, caressing it, and kissing
it.  It's a stirring and evocative scene, and no one in the audience
will be oblivious to what it symbolizes.  NENETTE AND BONI is replete
with moments like this.  The real core of the film, however, lies in the
complex tangle of emotions that lurk just beneath the polished surface. 
Some viewers may feel cheated by the film's apparent incompleteness,
but, as dissatisfying as the conclusion may seem, such loose ends are
worth putting up with for the privilege of experiencing what comes
beforehand.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
NENETTE ET BONI
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Strand Releasing
 Director:  Claire Denis
 Writer:  Claire Denis
 Cast: Gregoire Colin, Jacques Nolot, Alice Houri, Valeria
Bruni-Tedeschi
   Nenette et Boni takes place in Marseilles but as the film
progresses, that French seaport town looks more like
Metaphor City.  Winner of the 1996 Locarno Film Festival
Best Film award, this movie is nothing if not original: though
its dysfunctional family theme has been dramatized in
thousands of narratives, from Agamemnon, Medea and
Lysistrata through Hamlet and The Myth of Fingerprints,
director Claire Denis has forsaken narrative structure for a
particularly elliptical method of telling her story.  Particularly
inviting is her way of letting her principal character slip into
fantasies and dream sequences without giving the audience
much of a clue as to which is reality and which is the illusion.  
  But all this structural technique takes a back seat to the
film's hub, which is the particular bond felt between the title
characters, who are brother and sister.  Denis seems to say
throughout that there is something quite special about this
attachment, a link not as closely associated with that between
parent and child or an individual and his friends.  Brothers
and sisters may argue and become distant, suffer episodes of
envy and hate; but they are the same flesh and blood.  As
Ms. Denis stated in an interview, "We don't know the bodies
of our parents as we know those of our brothers and
sisters....We were fed with the same milk, something creates
a tie."
   Cinematographer Agnes Godard's camera focuses most of
the time on 18-year-old Boni (Gregoire Colin), who, in an
opening sequence fires his BB gun at his neighbor's cat.  But
he is a good lad, one who takes loving care of his adorable
white bunny.   A school dropout, he spends time in a pizza
wagon when he "feels like working," but Boni, who like his
sister Nenette despises his father, has a fantasy life that
would be the envy of Walter Mitty.  When he kneads the pizza
dough, it is obvious to the audience that he is metaphorically
caressing a woman's breast.  When he gazes tenderly at a
brioche, he is likewise thinking of a bosom.  Boni has wet
dreams particularly of a woman (Valeria Bruni-Tedeschi), the
alluring and happy wife of an American baker (played
humorously by the American actor, Vincent Gallo).  We often
are not sure whether his relationship with her is part of his
fancy or is reality, particularly in a scene in which she has
invited him for coffee and he is strangely passive.
   The core of Claire Denis's movie is the affinity between
Nenette and Boni, each possessing what the other is lacking. 
Boni is tragically lonely, seeking connection though his
dreams.  He needs someone to fill the space.  His 15-year-old
sister Nenette, by contrast, is burdened with the last thing she
wants: she is seven months' pregnant, too late to abort, and
utterly indifferent to the baby when the birth takes place.  
   The chemistry between brother and sister is the high point
of this drama.  Gregoire Colin is perhaps known to the
American art-house crowd from his role in "Queen Margot"
and has appeared in a number of French films with limited or
no exposure in the States.  Throughout the moments of
friction between him and his sister, played by the Alice Houri
(who has had relatively little exposure in film), the audience
senses the love that flows beneath the surface, a fondness
that reaches its peak when Boni rescues Nenette from a
particularly silly attempt at home-made abortion.  
   "Nenette and Boni" is likely to be off-putting to those who
believe that cinema, as opposed to theater, is a realistic
medium.  Denis takes her time to develop her characters,
during which duration we are unsure of what she is getting at. 
The piece comes together by the conclusion as Boni finds
fulfillment, leaving Nenette at bay, yet to work out her
difficulties.  Not Rated.  Running Time: 103 minutes.  (C)
1997 Harvey Karten
