Title
Review for Phenomena (1985)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton
A review by Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton of http://www.stomptokyo.com/
The really challenging part of writing a review of Creepers is not making
a "Jeepers Creepers" joke. Only those with a really strong will could
resist.
Jeepers creepers, in this movie we get to see the world through an
insect's peepers!
Okay, so you would have to have a will much stronger than ours. Creepers
is an Italian horror movie by one of the most popular directors of Italian
horror movies, Dario Argento. Creepers is also an early starring vehicle
for Jennifer Connelly (Labyrinth, Mulholland Falls), and she plays a girl
who loves insects. There is a scene in which she falls into a pool full of
maggots, and another in which she gags herself to induce vomiting. In
other words, it has everything you expect to see in a Jennifer Connelly
movie.
Connelly plays Jennifer Corvino, the daughter of a famous movie star who
is enrolled in a boarding school in Switzerland. It turns out that in the
general area of the school there has been a series of gruesome murders of
primarily young women going back at least a year. And it doesn't so much
seem that the police are baffled, as that the police don't care, judging
by how easy it is for a young woman to end up alone at night.
Jennifer is not happy with her new digs, which is understandable, because
the school is housed in the second scariest building in all of Zurich. The
other schoolgirls make fun of her, and the headmistress is creepy. Worst
of all, Jennifer starts having fits of sleepwalking accompanied by weird
hallucinations. During one of these trips, Jennifer wanders into the lab
of Dr. McGowan (Donald Pleasence), an entomologist. This is a happy
coincidence, because it turns out that Jennifer has the psychic power to
control insects. Oh, and McGowan is confined to a wheelchair, and has a
laser-guided chimpanzee that helps him out around the house.
McGowan realizes that Jennifer might be able to solve the recent rash of
killers. Good idea: send the 12-year old girl out after the killer who has
a proven track record of killing 12-year old girls. The plan involves
Jennifer following a carrion fly around until it leads her to dead bodies.
Somehow this works, but she only finds suspects, not definite answers.
Before anything interesting can happen, Jennifer finds out that her father
has decided to pull her out of the school. Fortunately for the plot, there
are no flights leaving that day, and she has to stay overnight with the
school's Mrs. Bruckner (Daria Nicolodi), who lives in -- guess what -- the
scariest building in Zurich. From this point on, it's one shocking twist
after another (eight -- we counted).
Well they would be shocking twists, if it weren't for the fact that nearly
everything that has gone before has nothing to do with what happens in the
house. The movie keeps laying on all sorts of subplots, but there are no
clues as to the killer's identity until it is revealed. There are some
very impressive visual sequences early on in the film, like Jennifer's
nocturnal hallucinations, but they never seem to mean anything. We got the
impression that the hallucinations might have been brought on by some sort
of childhood abuse, but after the first fifteen minutes of the film they
are never referred to again. Then there is the fact that Jennifer's love
of insects seems to come and go from scene to scene.
And just because this is an Italian movie, don't think that the characters
somehow avoid the American horror movie convention of acting stupid. At
one point Jennifer needs to get the phone which has just fallen into a
hole in the floor of the scary house. She could either pull the phone up
by its cord, or she could crawl down the hole. Which does she choose?
"Let's see. I'm trapped in the scariest building in Zurich, there is an
insect infested hole in the floor, should I go down there? It's danker,
darker, scarier and it's quite likely to empty into some sort of
subterranean pit where the killer lives. Yep, guess I'll crawl down
there."
The film is full of Argento standards: abrupt music cuts, a rock n roll
score, young women running scared through the woods. Plus, there's plenty
of gore and gross stuff, although we probably could have done without the
maggot pit.
The original Italian title for Creepers is Phenomena, and the original
version runs nearly 30 minutes longer. While this may seem like a lot of
cuts, it is our understanding that most of the cuts are to dialogue
passages that don't make a lot of difference to the narrative, such as a
little more explanation as to why it takes so long for Jennifer's father
to get her out of the boarding school. 30 minutes of dialogue in this film
might not be as much as it sounds, because the actors in this movie
converse in a tortuously slow pace usually found only on C-SPAN.
We have long held the opinion that Donald Pleasance (known to most horror
fans as Dr Loomis from the Halloween franchise) has the ability to raise
whatever movie he's in to a slightly higher standard. He always takes his
roles seriously and delivers his lines earnestly. In Creepers, he plays a
Scots, and guess what? He actually has a subtle Scottish accent! Despite
the fact that his sidekick is a monkey, he plays the role with some
dignity.
Connelly is at least trying to do a good job. Some of her line delivery is
a little awkward, but she does have a natural screen presence. It's nice
to see someone as young as she was do a credible job outside of a movie
that stars a basketball-playing dog or trained whale. (No, razor-wielding
monkeys don't count.)
As valiantly as they may try, the actors here can't make up for the fact
that some of the plot details are pretty silly (like the distinct lack of
police presence for most of the movie), or for the fact that the director
made some bad cinematic decisions. For instance, animating a firefly at
normal speed and then playing the scene in slow motion completely destroys
the illusion. In addition, the film's opening decapitation scene is
hilariously sloppy.
As we have mentioned in our review of Cemetery Man, we are not big fans of
European gore films, or giallo, and Creepers did little to change our
opinion. If you are a big fan of giallo, you might want to try this film.
On the other hand, if you are a big fan of Jennifer Connelly you may want
to skip this film. Unless you have really weird fantasies about Jennifer
Connelly, in which case we don't want to know about it.

Author
Mike Watson
The "Italian Hitchcock" and acknowledged master of the giallo
murder-mystery Dario Argento again offers us a fascinating turn on the
formula in PHENEOMENA.
This time the twist comes in the form of Jennifer Corvino (Jennifer
Connelly), a bright teenager with gift for telepathically
communicating with insects.  Sent to a girls boarding school in
Switzerland, she soon learns of a series of bizarre disappearances and
at least one murder that has the school's population terrified.  A
chance meeting with a brilliant entomologist (Donald Pleasance) leads
the two of them to team up and solve the mystery with the aid of her
remarkable gift.
PHENOMENA is an imaginative, original thriller.  Writer/director
Argento creates several sequences of surreal, haunting beauty here,
including a masterfully shot sleepwalking episode and a striking scene
when a swarm of flying insects descends on the school at Jennifer's
beckoning.  The plot takes some wonderfully bizarre turns and the
killer's identity is genuinely shocking and surprising.
The director took a big gamble with a soundtrack that mixes elements
as diverse as heavy metal band Iron Maiden, ex-Rolling Stone Bill
Wyman, and Argento's favourite Gothic/electronic outfit Goblin.  But
it gels surprisingly well.  The film's opening music reccurs several
times, an eerie and evocative score that perfectly sets the overall
tone.
Argento fans beware: the film was released outside Europe in a
terribly butchered form re-titled as CREEPERS.  This deleted nearly
half an hour of footage, mainly of key dialogue scenes.
