Title
Review for Henry V (1989)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Camera Three in San Jose is continuing their six weeks long
Shakespeare festival.  This week I saw Kenneth Branagh's brilliant
HENRY V (1989).  It number one on my best of the year list for 1989,
but since I wasn't a movie critic then, I never wrote a review of it.
     "A kingdom for a stage, princes to act," begins the careful
narration by Derek Jacobi ("I Claudius").  His is the canonical British
actor's accent - rich and melodious.  Truly, he could read the
encyclopedia, and people would pay to listen.  His small part is a
crucial one for he provides the tensive glue that binds the play
together.
     The secret of this movie is the star, the screenwriter, and the
director, namely Kenneth Branagh.  He is arguably the preeminent
Shakespearean interpreter in the world today, and the best of all of
his works is this production of HENRY V.
     I've thought about what it is that makes his Henry V come alive
so, and it may come down to the basics.  He is the master of
Shakespearean enunciation.  Every word is clear and forceful even when
he speaks in whispers.  Most Shakespearean actors run through their
lines in a blur as if either they have so much to say they have to talk
fast or, more likely, they don't fully comprehend them all.  Branagh
gives the impressions that he has been studying the Bard's original
folios since birth.  He presents each word to maximum effect.
     Any film that is smart enough to get Simon Rattle and the
Birmingham Symphony to do the music has already proven their
seriousness of purpose.  For those of you not familiar with them,
Rattle and his orchestra are arguably the best Mahlerian interpreters
in the music world today.  Since Henry V has the force of a Mahler
symphony, what more appropriate group to play the film's music (Patrick
Doyle).  Their sounds in the film are full of power and energy that
further illuminate and enhance the action.
     The cinematography by Kenneth MacMillan (A SUMMER STORY, OF MICE
AND MEN, and CIRCLE OF FRIENDS) is inviting.  The interior scenes are
not only lit strictly with candles, but the light even flickers on the
players as real candles would.  When HENRY V enters the room for the
first time, he is in shadow and framed in bright lights from behind.
As he walks forward, the camera is below him to increase his stature.
This all combines to give the king the aura of a god.  Since I am about
Branagh's height, I thought, now that's how I'd like to be framed.
     Actually, Branagh's physical appearance makes gives him a unique
force of presence.  His thin lips almost vanish as he speaks which
force the viewers attention even more on his words.  His brow radiates
energy and optimism as he delivers the best speech in the play, the St.
Crispin day speech, "We few, we happy few, we band of brothers."
     Branagh's Henry V is the epitome of self-assurance.  No matter how
bleak the odds, he has the force of will to convince his men they could
defeat a army of any size.  His facial expressions radiate confidence.
You see him, and you believe.
     Branagh, the director, is a master at opening up the Bard's plays.
The interior scenes are intimate, but it is in the exterior where his
directorial genius shines.  His outdoor scenes are full of power to
complement the words that are spoken.  There are also realistic.  His
battle of Agincourt becomes a mud bowl and the march to it even worse.
His soldier's lives are truly miserable.
     Emma Thompson has a fairly small part as Katherine, the daughter
of the French King (Paul Scofield).  She and her companion, Mistress
Quickly (Judi Dench), supply the comic relief in the story.  They
giggle their lines, which are almost exclusively in French.  My
favorite is Dench who steals her scenes with her perky and silly little
mannerisms.
     As a frequent visitor to the British Isles, I loved Constable's
(Richard Easton) line toward the end when he can not figure out how
anyone who lives in a country with such miserable weather could have
the strength to defeat them.  "Where have they this mettle?  Is not
their climate foggy, raw and dull?"
     As the battle of Agincourt ends, an exhausted Henry confesses to
the French envoy Mountjoy (Christopher Ravenscroft), "I know not if the
day be ours or no."  To which Montjoy simply replies, "The day is
yours."
     I could go on and on about this film.  The rest of the cast is
outstanding.  Even the small details like the sounds of the rush of the
arrows in the battle is impressive.  A film to be seen and savored,
again and again.
     HENRY V runs 2:17.  It is rated PG for some tastefully done, but
realistic war violence.  There is no sex, nudity, or bad language.  The
film would be fine for any kid old enough to be interested in the play.
I give the picture my strongest recommendation and rate it ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Screen adaptations of William Shakespeare's plays used to be
made since the moment of Lumiere brothers' invention, but
many might get an impression that the number of such films
reached its peak in 1990s, and that the trend continues to
this day. Every now and then we hear about another of
Shakespeare's plays being turned into prestigious Hollywood
production. In many of such cases producers try to overcome
the gap between Bard's 16th Century worldview and modern-day
audience by using the new settings (ranging from 1880s Italy
to 1930s fascist Britain in alternative historical timeline)
or adding new content (gunfights and musical numbers).
Kenneth Branagh, British actor and director who is the best
known Shakespearean filmmaker of today, has also
experimented with new techniques, but his first major
Shakespearean adaptation, 1989 version of HENRY V, is one of
the most faithful and conventional adaptations in the
history of film. Interestingly enough, it was also one of
the best Shakespeare adaptations, at least judging by the
critics who heralded 28-year Branagh as "new Laurence
Olivier" and instantly called his work as "the masterpiece
of British cinema".
The plot is based on the historical play Shakespeare had
written in the earlier phase of his career and begins in
1415, during the lulls in Hundred Years War between England
and France. Young Henry (played by Kenneth Branagh) has
recently ascended English throne and many consider him
inexperienced and still unfit to be the king, mostly due to
his youthful rowdiness and friendship with notorious John
Falstaff (played by Robbie Coltrane). Henry needs to
establish his authority and the best way to do it is
military campaign against France whose weak King (played by
Paul Scofield) wants to deny him the right to succeed him at
the French throne. When jingoistic French Dauphin (played by
Michael Maloney) sends him tennis balls instead mandatory
tribute, Henry would use this diplomatic insult as a pretext
for war and rallying his nation. His army lands in France
and takes the strategic port of Harfleur after prolonged and
bloody siege; this victory is short-lived because Henry's
army, exhausted by diseases, casualties and short on
supplies must retreat towards their stronghold at Calais.
When his route to safety gets blocked by huge French army
Henry refuses French offer to surrender and instead prepares
for the battle. The next day - October 25th 1415 - would
enter military history as well as the name "Agincourt".
HENRY V is probably the most popular of all Shakespeare's
historical plays, and this might be explained with its tone
being somewhat different from the rest of Shakespeare's work
in that period. Instead of complicated and often depressive
tales of endless feudal backstabbing, Shakespeare provided
us with story that provides clear definition between Good
(English) and Bad Guys (French) as well the inspirational
and uplifting story about triumph of human spirit against
overwhelming odds. Strong patriotic and jingoistic overtones
of that play explain why Laurence Olivier used it in order
to make his 1944 film version while Britain was involved in
war against Nazis. Almost half a century later, Kenneth
Branagh didn't feel the need to incite patriotism in his
fellow British, but jingoism of the play nevertheless had
something to do with his choice of the project, although on
more personal level. Branagh probably found many things in
common between himself - young actor directing first major
film - and Henry - young monarch being put to the first
serious test of his reign. So, in many ways, this film has
very personal dimension for its maker, which is usually one
of the elements of true masterpiece.
Aware of the unavoidable comparisons between his and
Olivier's version, Branagh was determined to be as different
as possible. First of all, his version is more faithful to
Shakespeare's text and it is more realistic. Despite the
budget that seems ridiculously small compared with Hollywood
standards, he decided not to turn HENRY V into stage play on
film (like Olivier did in his version). Instead, HENRY V
looks like full-blooded historical spectacle. Branagh also
keeps some elements of Shakespeare's text that Olivier had
felt uncomfortable with in 1944 war-torn Britain - like
episode with English nobles betraying their king, English
soldiers being hanged for stealing from church, and,
finally, Henry himself capturing French town by publicly
making threats that would look gross even to Rwandan war
criminals. Furthermore, the lack of budget actually works to
the film advantage - unburdened with the need to impress the
audience with lavish costumes, thousands of extras or
magnificent vistas, Branagh tries to suspend viewer's
disbelief with naturalism which comes in many forms. For
example, although Shakespeare's poetic language might sound
artificial and out of place when it comes from the mouths of
career soldiers and petty criminals, Branagh's adaptation,
as well as very convincing acting performances, make those
lines quite natural and believable in the context. Branagh,
who lacked budget for extras or technology for CGI, had to
forget about truly spectacular depictions of Agincourt, but
his version compensates the lack of spectacle with intensity
of action. Although their numbers could have hardly filled
the ranks of two soccer teams, players and extras (Branagh
had to use services of his composer Patrick Doyle) manage to
create illusion of terrible slaughter that featured
thousands of men by sheer intensity of bloodlust. Branagh
uses slow- motion in almost the same manor Peckinpah did and
the fighting scenes are very violent despite not being
excessively gory. And after the battle, when victorious
English begin to march out from the battlefield followed by
Patrick Doyle's triumphant soundtrack, their blood-stained
faces and muddy clothes speak volumes about the scope of the
battle - more than thousands of extras would do.
However, the real strength of HENRY V lies in truly superb
acting. Branagh was lucky to assemble great cast, the cr確e
de la cr確e of the British actors, and, yet those giants,
unlike in similar productions, work together in magnificent
harmony. We have the opportunity to see great variety among
them, sometimes in rather unusual roles, like Dame Judi
Dench who had made a career with roles of tough and powerful
women; here she plays rather common wife of mercenary
soldier. Branagh's regular Michael Maloney gives another
powerful performance as neurotic French Dauphin, while we
also have the opportunity to see young Christian Bale as
Falstaff's Boy. Branagh, being an actor himself, understood
his colleagues very well and almost anyone made great
performance. That includes Emma Thompson who was Branagh's
wife at the time and with whom Branagh shares charming,
although not very necessary seduction scene at the end of
the film. Another Branagh regular, Derek Jacobi plays Chorus
who is there not only to serve as an excuse for low
production values (like in Olivier's version) but also to
put events of the play into historical context.
Great acting, great respect for the source material, great
experience and great talent - these are all ingredients that
made Branagh's HENRY V into one of the best film adaptations
of Shakespeare. Even those who aren't enthusiastic about the
Bard or those who don't like historical dramas would
probably enjoy this superb piece of filmmaking.
(Historical note: While most of period epics tend to
sacrifice authenticity for the sake of drama and spectacle,
HENRY V takes the different route. Battle of Agincourt is
depicted in the way it probably happened, although Branagh
decided to follow Shakespeare rather than historical record
in some details. For example, unlike the film, English army
had more men than French. However, Henry's army was
exhausted by long marches and dysentery, and French had more
of armoured knights in their ranks. Same as in the film, the
battlefield was muddy and that prevented French from using
the numerical advantage of their armoured cavalry; their
knights were forced to fight on foot, making them an easy
target for the favourite English weapon - Welsh longbows
that decimated their ranks. Although a great English
victory, Battle of Agincourt produced more English and less
French casualties than in the figures presented by the film
and Shakespeare's play.)
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The advantage of the longbow over its shorter predecessors is, of
course, range.  It is entirely feasible to create a shower of falling arrows
that your enemy must enter before he can even come near you, provided you
have brought enough arrows along.  This is *probably* the reason that the
English at the Battle of Agincourt were able to kill what is quoted as ten
thousand French while losing only 29 of their own numbers.  Bill
Shakespeare's script for the current HENRY V tends really to downplay the
technological advantage the English had at the battle, implying the
imbalance in casualty figures can be attributed instead to the fact that Old
Hank really knew how to give one heck of a good pep-talk.  Well, song-
writers tend to glorify song-writers, and film-makers like to make films
about film-makers, so it isn't surprising that Shakespeare's stuff tends to
glorify wordsmiths.  Even though the actual casualty numbers were probably
closer to 200 and five thousand, Shakespeare still seems to over-rate
Henry's speech-making.
     That technical issue aside, how is HENRY V anyway?  I do not claim to
be a judge of Shakespearean acting and presumably the main virtue of this
film is Branagh's much-vaunted interpretation of Henry.  I can tell you that
in the early scenes he delivers his lines with very little expression at
all.  I am sure this is intentional, but after a supremely dramatic entrance
he strikes the viewer as being a sort of a cold fish.  As time goes by he
puts more emphasis in his words, and by the love scenes at the end he seems
not just human but positively likable.  One gets the impression that henry
was a wild teenager who rises to his office as king while we watch.  Still
Branagh seems only a good actor who has the audacity to cast himself in a
great role.  He may become a Rupert Pupkin of Shakespearean actors.
     This is a Shakespeare for the late Twentieth Century, with far more
dramatic visual images than in previous versions.  Notable particularly are
Henry's entrance and a scene of Henry on a rearing steed at "the breach,"
back-lighted by fire.  The battle scenes are beautifully filmed, somewhat in
the style of EXCALIBUR.  Ironically, the narrator tells the audience to work
hard to picture the scene while the audience have only to sit back and let
it flow over them.
     While they did not remove the line to tell the audience to work to
visualize the scene, some liberties were taken.  Flashback scenes were added
to show Henry's past with Falstaff.  Presumably Branagh undertook to write
these himself in a Shakespearean style.  There was a deletion to references
to the English killing French prisoners which probably would not play as
well on modern audiences as it did in Shakespeare's time.
     This is a memorable film and probably one that will be playing on PBS
in 2010 when most of the rest of this year's films are forgotten.  My rating
is a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
HENRY V (UK, 1989) **** Directed by Kenneth Branagh . Shakespeare's play
adapted by Branagh. Cinematography, Kenneth MacMillan. Editing, Michael
Bradsell. Production Design, Tim Harvey. Costumes, Phyllis Dalton. Music,
Patrick Doyle.
Cast:  Derek Jacobi (Chorus); Kenneth Branagh (Henry V), Simon Sheperd
(Gloucester), James Larkin (Bedford), Brian Blessed (Exeter), James Simmons
(York), Charles Kay (Canterbury), Alec McCowen (Ely),  Fabian Cartwright
(Cambridge), Stephen Simms (Scroop), Jay Villiers (Grey), Edward Jewesbury
( Erpingham), Ian Holm  (Fluellen)  Daniel Webb (Gower), Jimmy Yuill
(Jamy), John Sessions (Macmorris). Shaun Prendergast (Bates), Patrick Doyle
(Court), Michael Williams (Williams), Richard Briers ( Bardolph),  Geoffrey
Hutchings ( Nym), Robert Stephens (Pistol), Robbie Coltrane (Falstaff),
Christian Bale (Boy), Judi Dench (Mistress Quickly), Paul Scofield
(French King), Michael Maloney ( Dauphin), Harold Innocent (Burgundy),
Richard Clifford (Orleans), Colin Hurley (Grandpre), Richard Easton
(Constable), Christopher  Ravenscroft (Mountjoy), Emma Thompson
(Katherine), Geraldine McEwan (Alice). David Lloyd Meredith (Governor of
Harfleur), David Parfitt  (Messenger), Nicholas Ferguson (Warwick), Tom
Whitehouse (Talbot), Nigel Greaves (Berri), Julian Gartside (Bretagne), et
al.
Produced by Stephen Evans  (executive), David Parfitt  (associate),  Bruce
Sharman. A Samuel Goldwyn release. 138 minutes. PG-13.
The first film directed by Laurence Olivier, at age 36,  was HENRY V
(1944). It was and still is a triumph, a yardstick of cinematic excellence.
The first film directed by Kenneth Branagh, at age 28, has five hard
Shakesperean acts to follow.
In both movies the directors  played the title role. Both films are of the
same length. Comparisons are unfair because Branagh did not set out to
remake Olivier but to present us with something entirely different.
Comparisons, nonetheless, are inevitable.
Olivier's HENRY, made (incredibly) in wartime, was a paean to English
fortitude, a  proud, rousing booster of the spirits of the embattled
British. It was also a poetic, stylized work with  many sunny images right
out of The Book of Hours of the Duke of Berry.
Branagh's version has a somewhat revisionist and naturalistic approach , a
much darker view --psychologically and visually. It is the product of a
modern anti-war sensibility, though not entirely so, since the negative
view of fighting is at the same time a celebration.
Olivier looked and sounded  patrician, and moved with supple grace. Branagh
has a proletarian's stockiness and a glamorless potato face. There are
moments when you may think you are watching a British pop musician who is
also a great actor.
Branagh and most of his companions  --a Who's Who of British
talent--deliver splendidly intense performances. So intense that
Shakespeare's scene-closing couplets become here thunderous conclusions, as
opposed to Olivier's gentler introductions.
The difficulty for Branagh must have been that he wanted both to impose his
vision and avoid any duplication of Olivier, even if he found in Olivier
elements that coincided with his own.
Both men made cuts in the text. Chorus, in Olivier's prologue, stuck to
Shakespeare, with imaginative staging. Branagh's trick is to set his Chorus
(Derek Jacobi) in an empty sound-stage. He fiddles with the lines and
Jacobi's commentator throughout the play has tones of Brechtian
distanciation. But then, to give cinematic specificity to his work, Branagh
goes all out for close-ups of faces, unrelenting, pervasive, sometimes
suffocating shots where the large screen is filled with visages, often from
hairline to chin cleft.  The huge heads interfere with the language and
oddly reduce the distanciation effect.
Branagh's intention was to show a young monarch burdened with the guilt of
his crown-seizing father, establishing closer relations with his people and
maturing to grand leadership. This aim is reached and Henry's progress is
clear.
But audiences unfamiliar with Shakespeare will not quite grasp the
significance of Henry's lineage or  Prince Hal's abandonment of Falstaff,
shown  in a flashback from HENRY IV. Paradoxically though, this is the
point where the film hits its first private, emotional peak.
Olivier, in the trying times of World War II England, eliminated most
references to the islanders as vengeful patriots. Branagh retains many, and
, in the modern, respect-your-enemy way, transforms Olivier's foppy French
into worthy adversaries, especially the Dauphin who underestimates England
("She is so idly kinged" ) and  Paul Scofield's mesmerizing, thoughtful,
sad King Charles. Scofield transforms prose into poetry, as does the
Hostess (Judi Dench) in her gut-wrenching account of Falstaff's death, as
does much of the cast.
The major  exception is in the "funny" or romantic scenes of French
princess Katharine learning  English and, at play's end, being courted by a
"Kiss Me Kate " Henry. Emma Thompson (Branagh's wife at the time) speaks
atrocious French .
Henry's nocturnal peregrinations in his camp, and the famous speeches like
the St. Crispin exhortation are state- of- the- art. But the battle of
Agincourt  is muddled, small-scale (for budgetary reasons), does not
explain the role of the English spikes and long bows with which  the
immensely outnumbered English  defeated the French horsemen who wore
cumbersome suits of armor.
The battle though a fairly somber sight, does not go far enough in its
blood and guts. This and the slow-motion photography cry out for a Sam
Peckinpah.
Even so, the Bard's sublime language is beautifully served throughout, the
players are humanized as much as possible, the first-time direction is
impressive.Notwithstanding some objections, this HENRY V is a top-notch
film.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel
