Title
Review for Eureka (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Laura Clifford
Brother and sister Naoki (Masaru Miyazaki) and Kozue (Aoi Miyazaki, "One 
Summer's Day") leave their rural Japanese home for school as their mother
waves
in the distance.  They board a bus which snakes along country roads.  One
quick edit later and that bus' windows are covered in newspaper, all other
passengers save the bus driver Makoto (Koji Yakusho, "Shall We Dance?")
are dead and a crazed hijacker (Go Riju) talks to police on his
cell phone while ruminating on Naoki and Kozue's fate in writer/director
Shinji Aoyama's Cannes 2000 Ecumenical Jury prize winner "Eureka."
Makoto bravely saves the day and he and the children survive the horrific
event only to watch their lives unravel.  Naoki and Kozue's mother leaves
their home for another man after being beaten by their father, who kills
himself in a drunken car wreck.  The two children withdraw from society,
cease speaking, and live alone in their odd, chalet-like home.  When Naoki
receives a phone call from an aunt (clearly more interested in insurance
money than the childrens' welfare), he simply hangs up on her.
Makoto arrives home after an undetermined, but obviously lengthy, absence.
He obtains a job as a day laborer with his old friend Shigeo (Ken Mitsuishi,
"The Pillow Book"), who tells him about the children living alone in the
strange, isolated house.  Misunderstood by his family, Makoto arrives at
Naoki and Kozue's home and quietly becomes the patriarch protector of 
the silent duo.  Twentyish city cousin Akihiko (Yoichiro Saito, "Wild Life")  
arrives to spend his summer holiday (clearly also acting as a scout
for that noisy aunt) and livens things up, but a pall is cast over the town
when it becomes apparent that a serial killer is targetting its young women.
After Mikiko (Machiko Ono), a young woman who'd taken a shine to the distant
yet polite Makoto, is found dead, Makoto is arrested as a suspect by the
same cop who witnessed his heroism, but he's released for lack of evidence.
Makoto buys an old bus, converts it for travelling and takes his two charges
and an initially reluctant Akihiko on a journey to find themselves and begin
again.
The heavily spiritual feel and theme of "Eureka" are similar to Peter
Weir's "Fearless," yet Shinji Aoyama ("Wild Life") takes a completely 
different approach.  "Eureka" is shot in black and white (sepia and white, 
actually) and unfolds at a languid pace over 217 minutes.  Aoyama's ambitious 
story also covers more ground, addressing not only survivor's guilt, but
loss, 
unspoken communication and family.  Unfortunately, his serial killing subplot 
rings false, severely damaging the impact of this otherwise unique and 
fascinating film.
Koji Yakusho grounds the film with his emotional truth while Ken Mitsuishi
and Yoichiro Saito provide some much needed levity, particularly in their
country man/city boy verbal sparring scenes together.  Masaru Miyazaki plays
Naoki as a sullen cipher except when we see him alone, thinking, while 
Aoi Miyazaki portrays Kozue as a more normal, albeit silent, child with 
a trusting, loving nature.  Machiko Ono is touching as Makiko.
The film is an artistic stunner.  Cinematographer Masaki Tamura can make
heat shimmer almost yellow in a black and white world, a light which often
threatens to obscure the film's images.  The three central
characters are frequently framed in center, like a still photograph which
accentuates their alienation.  The slow moving images are punctuated with
squeaky cricket chirping and the sound of waves which symbolically open and 
close the film (sound by Nobuyuki Kikuchi).  Original music by Shinji Aoyama 
and Isao Yamada features guitar, flute and piano lends a dreamlike quality.
"Eureka" demands that the viewer accompany its characters on a long, sometimes
arduous journey.  While one of its major roads leads to an unsatisfying
destination, the trip on the whole is one worth taking.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Shooting Gallery
 Director: Shinji Aoyama
 Writer:  Shinji Aoyama
 Cast: Sayuri Kokusho, Yutaka Matsushige, Ken Mitshuishi, Aoi
Miyazaki, Masaru Miyazaki, Go Riju, Yohichiroh Saitoh, Kimie
Shingyouji, Sansei Shiomi, Koji Yakusho
   An 16-year old MTV fan asked me whether he'd be interested in
"Eureka." I told him that this was in Japanese with English
subtitles; that it moved slowly along, its director Shinji Aoyama
needing to make a specific point by lingering on the landscape;
that two of its characters who were about his age hardly spoke at
all; that it was in black-and-white-sepia until the final
moments; and that it went on for three hours and thirty-seven
minutes.  "I'm outta here," was his reply, not unexpected. And
yet, there's something mighty surprising about "Eureka."  Despite
what most people would consider a torpid pace with all the other
ways that the film is distinct from the Hollywood blockbuster,
the three-and-a half hours moves so swiftly that when the picture
ended I shook my watch in disbelief.  What this means is that at
least to some people, a speedy pace with witty dialogue and
plenty of comic breaks is not always needed.  "Eureka" is a mood-
creating picture, on in which the final redemption of its three
principal characters requires that most of the frames be bleak in
order to the make their ultimate inner peace as glowing as
fireworks on the fourth.
  Some might argue that this new film is really about the trauma
faced by the Japanese population after Hiroshima and Nagasaki,
which is not a bad guess at all, considering that director Aoyama
probably meant to be transcendent--to go beyond a simple
description of a trio of ordinary people shellshocked by a
hideously crowd, lunatic act.  
  The action takes place in a small community in southwest Japan,
the scene of a bus hijacking.  As driver Sawai Makoto (Yukusho
Koji, known from the popular movie "Shall We Dance") moves down
an empty road with his vehicle, his bus is boarded by a strange
character (Rijo Go), who without warning pulls out a pistol and
shoots at random, leaving only four survivors.  A brother-sister
couple who attend a middle school are stunned into
speechlessness, not surprising considering that their father was
dead and their mother had left them for good to get along by
themselves on insurance money.  When the driver is unable to
continue his career, he leaves his home and moves in with the
youngsters, pretty Kozue (Aoi Miyazaki) and sullen Naoki (Masaru
Miyazaki).  Later the three are joined by a 22-year-old cousin of
the youngsters now on college vacation, Akihiko (Yohichiroh
Saitoh), an arrogant sort who makes like Tiger Woods--practicing
his golf swings by the hour outside the rural home of the
children.
   Aoyama shows how the three traumatized individuals help each
other, the kids by taking in the startled bus driver, and the
driver by becoming a surrogate parent of the children.  
   The austere film, which seems to have been influenced by Alain
Resnais's "Hiroshima mon Amour," shows the audience what the
world looks like through the eyes of the survivors.  This is far
from the Japan that tourists flock to see.  The landscape is
dotted with cows, some people frolicking at a distance, the sea
and the sand. The driver seems to have passed up an opportunity
to forget his troubles when he an attractive woman unsuccessfully
flirts with him.  We are privy to some of the firings of the
weapon of the crazed gunman, and somehow a plot is shoehorned
into this still simple film about a serial killer on the loose,
Sawai being a prime suspect of the local detective.
   As "Eureka" moves along at its own pace, giving off striking
visuals which add to the storyline and to the sense of anxiety
and desperation of the characters, "Eureka," one of the grimmest
pictures to come out of any country in the past decade, succeeds
in involving its targeted audience in a thoughtful meditation on
life, on people who try to help one another to summon the courage
to go on despite their utter despondency.
Not Rated.  Running time: 217 minutes (C) 2001
by Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
