Title
Review for Barbarians at the Gate (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  James Garner, Jonathan Pryce, Peter Riegert, 
           Joanna Cassidy, Fred Dalton Thompson, Leilani Ferrer
Director:  Glenn Jordan
Producer:  Ray Stark
Screenplay:  Larry Gelbart based on the book by Bryan Burrough 
             and John Helyar
Music:  Richard Gibbs
Released by HBO Pictures (in association with Columbia Pictures)
     BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, a made-for-HBO movie, recounts the events
surrounding the biggest leveraged buyout in history, that of RJR
Nabisco in 1988.  Based on the bestseller of the same name, this film
presents in some detail the decisions leading up to and the process by
which RJR Nabisco's CEO F. Ross Johnson (James Garner) attempts to buy
out his own company.  Of greater interest, however, is the power
struggle that develops between Johnson and Wall Street investment
banker Henry Kravis (Jonathan Pryce), who intends to force Johnson out
and take over RJR Nabisco on his own.
     In general, the quality of most made-for-TV movies is abysmal.
Low production values, shoddy direction, and poor acting abound.  There
are exceptions, of course, but not many.  For that reason, in a year
when there have been three too many Amy Fisher movies on the small
screen, it's refreshing to come upon something with the intelligence,
wit, and general high quality of BARBARIANS AT THE GATE.
     BARBARIANS AT THE GATE is a story of high stakes, betrayal, and
one- upsmanship that is told with a flair.  Despite the nature of the
subject, the general tone is lighthearted and at times even playful.
From start to finish, there are few powerfully serious dramatic moments
in BARBARIANS AT THE GATE.  The film offers a different point-of-view
on leveraged buyouts and other such mega-buck dealings.  Most of us are
used to looking in from the outside on these high-profile financial
struggles; BARBARIANS AT THE GATE presents an insider's perspective -
and not just any insider, but that of the "man at the top".
     It's a credit to the production team that they're able to do so
much with this movie.  There's a lot of humor (most of it dry), a fair
amount of tension, and numerous subtle-yet-pointed jabs at a "game"
that rewards the losers with $23 million (after taxes).  Pacing is
excellent, especially during the last half-hour as the story builds to
its climax.  The furious rushing around of the characters is
effectively translated to the audience.  Whether you know the outcome
or not, BARBARIANS AT THE GATE is captivating.
     One would think that it would be difficult, if not impossible, to
present a story with someone like F. Ross Johnson as the protagonist.
After all, this is a very rich man involved in the kind of financial
slight-of-hand that most Americans despise.  However, screenwriter
Larry Gelbart (taking cues from the Burrough/Helyar book) has managed
to make Johnson a sympathetic and often-likable figure.  Admittedly,
the movie takes a few liberties.  Some of Johnson's less-admirable
traits have been downplayed, and he's presented as caring more about
the work and the people who do it than the money he stands to make.
     If this isn't the best performance of James Garner's career, it
certainly tops anything he's done recently.  It's difficult to gauge
how much of the audience's rapport with Johnson comes as a result of
the actor playing the role, but the job done by Garner is no small
factor.  His portrayal perfectly mixes greed, humanity,
good-naturedness, and incompetence.
     As Johnson's rival, Henry Kravis, Jonathan Pryce is equally as
good, albeit with less screen time.  Pryce makes the most of his
opportunities and, although the Kravis is presented as a
two-dimensional villain, Pryce's steely-eyed, tight-lipped performance
gives the audience a good sense that this is a man not only to be
reckoned with, but feared.
     As much as the average person may despise the financial fakery of
a leveraged buyout that results in thousands of lost jobs, BARBARIANS
AT THE GATE, by looking at the situation from a different perspective,
turns into a highly-entertaining film.  Strong performances, coupled
with a lively, clever script, are enough to draw the audience into the
world of F. Ross Johnson.  His morals, like those of anyone in a
situation where a million dollars is small change, are screwed up - and
the film takes delight in showing this in several wickedly-funny scenes
- but the presentation of how he manages, and sometimes mismanages, the
buyout is fascinating.  More engaging is the battle between Johnson and
Kravis, which has all the tension and drama of a high-stakes chess
match.
     BARBARIANS AT THE GATE is certainly a worthwhile effort, and, for
those who can get past the natural distaste of the subject matter,
likely to provide a witty, entertaining two hours.  It's the equal of
many of the better theatrically-released mainstream movies.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
