Title
Review for Kama Sutra: A Tale of Love (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Trimark)
Starring:  Indira Varma, Sarita Choudhury, Naveen Andrews, Ramon Tikaram,
Rekha.
Screenplay:  Mira Nair and Helena Kriel.
Producers:  Mira Nair and Lydia Dean Pilcher.
Director:  Mira Nair.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  119 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It is a frequent lament of critics that movies today seem to be
churned out on conveyor belts, each new release looking and sounding just
like the one which preceded it.  Rare is the film to appear on American
screens which shows audiences a completely different world, a world like
the 16th century Indian kingdom which is the setting for KAMA SUTRA: A
TALE OF LOVE.  In this case, however, I think I understand _why_ we have
never seen this world before:  apparently, it was the Cradle of
Monotony.  KAMA SUTRA is a ridiculously tedious study of Indian power
politics in which writer/director Mira Nair manages to take exotic
locations, torture and plenty of sex and weave them into an uninvolving
bore.
     KAMA SUTRA is the tale of a friendship between two young women in
India -- Tara (Sarita Choudhury), a high caste princess, and a servant
named Maya (Indira Varma).  Maya's beauty and sensuality inspire great
envy in Tara, but it is Tara who is taken in marriage by the powerful
prince Raj Singh (Naveen Andrews).  An angry Maya seduces Raj Singh on his
wedding day, and finds herself exiled when her actions are discovered.
Maya is then taken in by a sculptor named Jai Kumar (Ramon Tikaram), and
the two begin an affair which Jai finds hard to reconcile with his
artistic life.  When Maya is rejected by Jai, she decides to train with
Rasa Devi (Rekha) to become a concubine, and eventually finds herself once
again entangled with Tara and Raj Singh in a struggle for power in the
palace.
     For about ten minutes, the glorious production design of Mark
Friedberg and the cinematography of Declan Quinn might allow you to
forgive the plodding pace.  Relish those minutes as you would relish water
in the desert.  KAMA SUTRA rolls along like a block of granite, moving
from scene to scene with a wearying lack of grace.  Nearly every character
is one-dimensional, and that one dimension tends to be sullen and
unlikeable; Indira Varma at least has a certain fresh appeal, but the
script turns her into a Disney cartoon heroine trying to find something
more from life (though I don't imagine Uncle Walt would approve of that
"something" being life in a harem).  The relationships and conflicts
between the characters don't provide much more worth caring about,
displaying the kind of melodrama which would make Aaron Spelling blush.  
As KAMA SUTRA wanders into its second hour, you may find yourself at your
watch every five minutes and feeling as though it were moving backwards.
     You'd think that a film named after an ancient book of sexual wisdom
at least might generate some heat, and unfortunately you would be sadly
mistaken.  There is a fair amount of skin in KAMA SUTRA, and a few lengthy
sex scenes, but without any real passion or connection developed between
the characters Nair's direction makes those scenes look like the soft-core
porn of a Playboy instructional video.  Even those scenes don't make sex
seem as abstract and impersonal as the occasional snippets of Kama Sutran
erotic philosophy dispensed by Rasa Devi.  Overseeing the kind of classes
which would definitely get her in hot water with any P.T.A. in this
country, Rasa Devi holds forth on the mystical nature of sexuality like a
cross between Dr. Ruth and Yoda, except slightly taller.  If someone from
another culture were to learn from KAMA SUTRA, it is that a droning
lecture on sex can be just as soporific as a droning lecture on any other
subject.
     The most distressing thing about KAMA SUTRA is what a conventional
story it turns out to be, its unique setting notwithstanding.  Peel away
the fuzzy-focus scenes of toe kissing and back scratching and you have a
predictable romantic four-some complicated by class, like a Jane Austen
novel with saris.  Nair and co-scripter Helena Kriel seem so desperate to
make KAMA SUTRA seem like a metaphor for something that they toss in a
military sub-plot about intrigue to overthrow Raj Singh which gives the
film an overtone of RICHARD III; there is even a hunchback prince as a
particular reminder.  Perhaps the libidinous, opium-smoking Raj Singh is
meant to represent the corrupting influence of lust untempered by love,
which may at least provide a whisper of a message in keeping with the Kama
Sutra.  It's still not nearly enough to make KAMA SUTRA worth two hours of
your life, even with the opportunity in the final moments to see a man
executed by being stepped on by an elephant.  If this is what passes for
showing us new worlds in the movies, sign me up for another year of
National Geographic.

Author
Michael Redman
Although the plot (commoner and princess vie for the affection of a
king) comes straight from a Harlequin romance, this Indian film is so
rich with sensuality and lush richness that it is a joy to behold.
Directed by Mira Nair (Salaam Bombay!, Mississippi Masala), the
tale follows two young girls Maya (Indira Varma) and Princess Tara
(Sarita Choudhury) as they mature in the ways of sex and politics. Tara
marries Raj Singh (Naveen Andrews) but not before Maya seduces him the
night before.
On her wedding day, Maya tells her "All my life I have lived with your
used things. Now something I have used is your forever." Tara is not too
happy with this turn of events and Maya is banished from the village.
Wandering through 16th century India, she comes upon royal sculptor who
turns her on to a Kama Sutra class. This prepares her for her new
occupation as courtesan to the same king that her childhood friend
married.
The story isn't much, but the costumes and sets are grand. The real star
of the film is the erotic love-making. The scenes are hot without being
explicit, sweaty without being offensive and certainly qualify as some
of the best filmed sex scenes to hit the cinema. See it and take a close
personal friend.
[This appeared in the 5/2/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Let's be honest.  There are some movies that don't need to be
made.  With movies able to show almost any sexual behavior known, is
there any longer any reason for one of those pseudo-instructional films
on sex?  In the 1960s that was a popular way to get sex and nudity past
the censors, but today our movies are quite explicit, too explicit some
will undoubtedly argue.
     Respected director Mira Nair (SALAAM BOMBAY! and MISSISSIPPI
MASALA) takes us back to sixteenth century India for a fictionalized
tale using the "Kama Sutra of Vatsayana" as the guidebook.  In one of
the most pedantic shows in some time, characters read from the
instructions on sex and love with complete seriousness and devotion,
but it is dry as reading the phone book.  Okay, maybe as lively as the
dictionary.
     Looking something like an aerobics class, the teachers in KAMA
SUTRA read to groups of women students the precise way to caress the
toes.  (There is precious little actual sex or nudity in the movie
although there is some.  Just like in the old risque pictures, more is
promised than delivered.  The script titillates while insulting the
audience's intelligence.)
     Because the last Indian film I saw, JAYA GANGA, was such an
unexpected delight, I naively went to KAMA SUTRA with positive
expectations.  Within 15 minutes of arrival, however, I was already
checking my watch.
     KAMA SUTRA's rich sets by Mark Friedberg, gorgeous cinematography
by Declan Quinn, and elegant red and gold costumes by Eduardo Castro
are the only reasons to see the picture.  But, as people rarely buy
Playboy to read the articles, the only possible reason people would
stay to see all of KAMA SUTRA is to wait for another brief glimpse of
flesh.  (Well, there are those of us who are critics who feel compelled
to stay, but the temptation to leave is almost irresistible with this
class, I mean picture.)
     To the extent that this pointless story has a plot it can be
summarized thus.  The King (Naveen Andrews) marries a woman named Tara
(Sarita Choudhury).  Having a wandering eye, he first has an affair
with Maya (Indira Varma), who is in Tara's entourage.  Maya, in turn,
falls for the stone mason Jai (Ramon Tikaram).  You can guess whom Jai
will end up sculpting and what trouble this will cause.
     The actresses are all lovely lasses who look like their last job
was a photo shoot for Vogue.  The men are hunks who look like they have
been posing for the covers of those romance novels known as
bodice-rippers.  No genuine acting is in evidence.
     The dialog by Helena Kriel and Mira Nair sounds as if it could
have been written on a lark by a bunch of freshmen taking their first
college English class.  ("One day you are your father's property," says
the king to his new queen.  "One day you are your husband's property.
It must be difficult.")
     As I sat trying to endure the film, I tried to pass the time by
figuring out which film KAMA SUTRA most reminded me of.  The first that
came to mind was I AM CURIOUS (YELLOW) from 1967.  Finally, I decided
KAMA SUTRA was closest to EVITA.  Both KAMA SUTRA and EVITA are lovely
for the eyes to behold but have few other redeeming qualities.
     If you want an erotic film, KAMA SUTRA isn't it.  If you are
searching for a meaningful experience at the cinema, KAMA SUTRA will
not supply it.  If you want a movie with depth, this isn't it.  If you
want romance, try THE ENGLISH PATIENT.  The only possible motivation
for paying your hard earned cash to see this picture is if you like
being teased and hearing someone reading passages from obscure and
didactic manuals on sexuality.
     "Some things don't make sense immediately," cautions the Kama
Sutra teacher in the film to her eager female pupils.  And then some
movies never do.  Whatever your reason for going to this film, I
suspect you will leave disappointed and perhaps angry that this
filmmaker has wasted your time with such drivel.
     KAMA SUTRA runs an incredibly long 2:00.  It is in English.  It
is rated R for full frontal nudity, sex, drug usage, and gratuitous
violence.  I see no reason for your teenagers to see this movie, but
if they do, they should be mature.  I recommend you avoid this
meaningless film.  I give it a single * only for the technical aspects
of the production.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
India, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 2/28/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:57
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Sex, nudity, frank sexual language)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
     A controversial film does not necessarily equate to a good film.  
This is true whether the movie is a big budget Hollywood release 
(SHOWGIRLS) or an art house special (CRASH).  And, while director Mira 
Nair's latest, KAMA SUTRA, isn't receiving the same kind of press 
accorded to David Cronenberg's sex-and-accident-fest, it has still 
generated a great deal of censorship and certification wrangling.  In 
the United States, Trimark Pictures, convinced that the film would be 
branded NC-17, chose to release KAMA SUTRA unrated.  In India, Nair had 
to fight long and hard to avoid cutting 11 minutes of celluloid (the 
eventual cuts numbered 2 1/2 minutes).
     THE KAMA SUTRA OF VATSAYANA, written sometime during the fourth 
century, is known primarily as a catalogue of sex positions.  In fact, 
that's only one aspect of the volume, which teaches lessons about the 
spiritual and material differences between sex with and without love.  
And, like the book from which it takes its name, Nair's picture is only 
tangentially about positions.  Instead, it's about sexual geometry (as 
in triangles) and power moves, and the importance of sex in both love 
and war.  However, while Nair (SALAAM BOMBAY!, MISSISSIPPI MASALA) is 
attempting to strike a potentially-rich vein of thematic material, she 
unwisely chooses an overwrought, period melodrama as the means by which 
to explore it.
     KAMA SUTRA looks great -- it's sumptuously crafted with vibrantly 
colorful costumes and impeccable production values -- but there's a 
distressing lack of substance beneath the style.  The movie has the 
basic narrative structure of a soap opera or a sudsy romance novel.  The 
sex scenes, which are numerous (although perhaps not numerous enough to 
satisfy those who are hoping for a soft-core art house experience), are 
actually KAMA SUTRA's most notable feature, not because of their 
controversial nature but because they display an almost-spiritual 
eroticism that few directors attempt to capture on film.
     The story, which takes place in 16th century India, centers on Maya 
(Indira Varma), a servant girl working for a princess, Tara (Sarita 
Choudhury).  Throughout her entire life, Maya has been forced to subsist 
on hand-me-downs from Tara, but now, on the eve of the princess' 
wedding, she sees a chance for revenge.  Tara is to be married to the 
King, Raj Singh (Naveen Andrews), a lustful monarch who enjoys the 
pleasures of the flesh.  And Raj is deeply attracted to Maya -- so she 
gives herself to him, then cattily tells Tara: "All my life, I have 
lived with your used things; now, something I have used is yours 
forever."  When word gets out of Maya's tryst with Raj, she is branded 
as a whore and run out of the palace.  She seeks refuge with a former 
courtesan (Rekha), who teaches her the lessons of the KAMA SUTRA.  At 
the same time, she falls in love with a sculptor (Ramon Tikaram).  But 
her path is destined to cross Tara's again when the King wants Maya to 
enter his harem.
     The basic material comprising KAMA SUTRA isn't fundamentally bad -- 
it's a little silly and formulaic, but at least events keep the story 
moving.  The real problem is that the tale is told from Maya's point-of-
view, and the actress in the lead role, newcomer Indira Varma, can't 
act.  She's sensual and sexy, looks great both in and out of her 
costumes, and steams up the screen during the love scenes, but her 
dramatic range is nonexistent.  Her performance is so weak that we never 
accept Maya as a character, and, without Maya, KAMA SUTRA comes across 
as little more than an artsy Harlequin paperback.  
     The most interesting character is Tara, who is developed by actress 
Sarita Choudhury (MISSISSIPPI MASALA) into an intriguing woman suffering 
conflicted emotions about both Maya and her husband.  She's confused, 
humiliated, and frightened by her own sexuality, until Maya skillfully 
instructs her how to use her body as a weapon.  Unfortunately, after 
playing a prominent role in several early scenes, Tara disappears for 
the better part of an hour.  Meanwhile, in another key supporting part, 
Naveen Andrews (THE ENGLISH PATIENT) is merely adequate as the debauched 
king.
     There's no debating that Nair skims some interesting aspects of the 
politics of sex, but none of these themes seem more than half-realized.  
KAMA SUTRA is a brave experiment, but "brave", like "controversial," 
doesn't mean "successful."  The film's interesting issues get trapped in 
the melodrama like insects in amber, and, no matter how hard they 
struggle to escape, they're ultimately smothered by KAMA SUTRA's clunky 
plot. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
