Title
Review for Down in the Delta (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Joy Wyse
Do not dismiss Down in the Delta as a `black' film.  The feeling of
family that it portrays applies to any and all ethnic groups. It is only
the specific connection to slavery that sets it apart.
Alfre Woodard, as Loretta Sinclair, stars in a role that deserves an
Academy Award nomination.  She is the unemployed and unmarried mother of a
10 year old son, Thomas, and a 4 year old, autistic daughter, Tracy.  She
lives in Chicago with her widowed mother RosaLynn Sinclair.  Loretta's
sense of hopelessness is obvious as she turns to liquor and marijuana to
make it from day to day.
Unexpectedly RosaLynn receives a letter from her brother-in-law, Earl
Sinclair, who lives in Biloxi.  It seems that there have been bad feelings
between RosaLynn and Earl because of `Nathan'.
In desperation, hoping that life away from Chicago's crime-ridden streets
can help her daughter and grandchildren, RosaLynn sends them to Biloxi, a
`dry' area, for the summer.  She believes that Loretta can work for Earl
in his chicken restaurant and regain some self-esteem.
Upon arrival in Biloxi they are surprised to learn that Earl's wife,
Annie, is in the final stages of Alzheimer's.    Esther Rolle could
possibly be nominated for best Supporting Actress posthumously.  She is
totally believable as the delicate Annie.
Wesley Snipes is listed in the credits as a co-Executive Producer, as
well as appearing in a relatively small role as Earl and Anne's successful
lawyer son.   There are numerous supporting roles worthy of recognition by
other family members as by Loretta Devine as Aunt Annie's companion.
Maya Angelou, in her directorial debut, creates a film as beautiful as
her poetry.  It is only in the final montage that her direction falters. 
The last few scenes are anti-climatic and unnecessary.  It is because of
this that I give it an A-.  I hope that it gets the recognition that it
deserves.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Some people think that families screw you up.  Others
believe that families are the greatest thing since sliced bread. 
For most of us the answer lies between the two extremes. 
Even Todd Solondz, in his wonderfully edgy "Happiness,"
provides some respite, some redemption for the dysfunctional
unit he portrays: pederast Dr. Bill Maplewood has a lovely
relationship with his eleven-year-old boy Billy.  And while the
families in Pleasantville seem to be as functional as they can
get, we soon see the distortions which are covered up by
surface affability.  In "Down in the Delta," directed from Myron
Goble's debut screenplay by the notable author Maya
Angelou, Angelou shows how a strong, stable, happy family
unit can overcome some trenchant dysfunction, turning
alienated, weary people into cheerful, accomplished,
optimistic souls.  If the transformation is too sudden and
complete to be convincing, "Down in the Delta" nonetheless
offers some heartwarming moments with keen insight into the
problems that can befall people of any ethnic group,
particularly if they are poor.
   What Brian Friel did for his characters in a movie opening
one month before this, "Dancing at Lughnasa," Angelou
achieves for her film.  "Lughnasa" deals with a quintet of
unmarried, poor sisters living in Ireland during the 1930s, who
manage to remain bonded and reasonably content despite
lost opportunities.  "Delta" considers the fate of two units of a
single family, one virtually crushed by the boot of
irreclaimable misfortune, whose present-day activities are
strongly influenced by previous generations--though one of
the two segments is wholly unaware of this remarkable
leverage.  
   Loretta (Alfre Woodard) lives in a Chicago ghetto with her
mother Rosa Lynn (Mary Alice), her bright son Thomas
(Mpho Koaho) and her autistic daugher Tracy (Kulani
Hassen).  Addicted to alcohol and to some extent dependent
on drugs, Loretta is persuaded by her mother to take her kids
and spend the summer in Mississippi with her elderly uncle
Earl (Al Freeman), who lives with his Alzheimer's-affected
wife Annie (Esther Rolle).  Having been unable to find a job
in Chicago because of her lack of education and the general
shortage of work, Loretta is taken in tow by her prescient
uncle, who puts her to work in his cafe, preparing chicken
sausages at first but then moving on to become a waitress
and cashier.  Delighted by the affection she receives from her
rural relations, Loretta thrives in her new environment and
even her mentally-challenged little girl stops her sudden,
sharp outbursts and learns to say a couple of words.  Away
from drug dealers, indifferent employers and schools that
search kids daily for weapons, Loretta and her kids reinvent
themselves, learning the value of steady work and
responsibility as they breathe the cleaner air supplied by that
southern state.  Through a meeting with another member of
the family, Will (Wesley Snipes)--a Buppie lawyer who bills
$100 an hour but is unhappy with his snobbish wife Monica
(Anne-Marie Johnson)--Loretta makes even further strides,
and prepares to become an entrepreneur.
   Much is made of a solid silver candlestick holder named
Nathan, which serves as the film's central metaphor.  The
object of much affection, Nathan was "lifted" by a distant
relative from a former slaveholder just after the Civil War and
has seen been passed down through the generations until it
wound up as Rosa Lynn's property.  Sharing a trajectory with
"Beloved," a far more ambitious project, "Down in the Delta"
relies for its energy on brief flashbacks to antebellum times
as slaves were sold like cattle in the marketplace, families
broken up, and the candlestick holder used as payment to
purchase human labor.
   Though Loretta's recovery is too swift and complete to be
believed and while the movie is infused with homilies and
tends toward mawkishness, "Down in the Delta" goes beyond
mere sentimentality to evoke a warm portrait of a family on
the ropes which is redeemed by a change of venue.  Al
Freeman is particularly effective as the strong uncle who
steers Loretta in the right direction with Mary Alice turning in
a robust role as the sturdy grandmother who realizes her
impotence in the face of the unhealthy attractions of a large
urban center.  Toronto stands in for Chicago and a suburb
forty miles north of that pretty city becomes the rustic utopia
which is home to a kindly and even charismatic older man.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Down in the Delta (1998)
Alfre Woodward, Al Freeman Jr., Mary Alice, Esther Rolle, Loretta Devine, 
Wesley Snipes, Mpho Koaho, Kulani Hassen, Anne Marie Johnson, Justin Lord.
 Produced by Rick Rosenberg, Bob Christiansen, Victor McGauley, Wesley 
Snipes, Reuben Cannon. Co-produced by Terri Farnsworth, Myron Goble, 
Alfre Woodward. Screenplay by Myron Goble. Directed by Maya Angelou. 114 
minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
In a crowded Christmas marketplace, it would be easy for a little movie 
like "Down in the Delta" to get lost in the shuffle. Hopefully, positive 
reviews and good word-of-mouth will help audiences discover that, despite 
some flaws, this is a film far more deserving of their attention than 
material like "You've Got Mail," "Stepmom" and "Patch Adams." Poet Maya 
Angelou's debut as a feature director is a solid, often moving story 
about family, love, reconciliation and self-determination. "Down in the 
Delta" resolutely avoids the clichés that most productions embrace, 
resulting in one of the only holiday offerings this year that is both 
heartwarming and genuine.
Loretta (Alfre Woodward) is an unemployed single mother in a Chicago 
ghetto who uses alcohol and drugs to mute her pain; neglecting her 
autistic daughter Tracy (Kulani Hassen) and driving her mother, Rosa Lynn 
(Mary Alice), and son, Thomas (Mpho Koaho) to distraction. Desperate to 
jolt her daughter out of self-medicated numbness, Rosa Lynn insists that 
Loretta and the children spend the summer with Uncle Earl (Al Freeman Jr.
) in the family's Mississippi Delta hometown. With great reluctance, 
Loretta boards the bus with the kids, bound for a three month stay in 
Hooterville Hell. 
Initially, things look as bad as Loretta expected. The rural home is in a 
dry county. Earl's beloved wife, Annie (Esther Rolle) suffers from 
Alzheimer's disease and requires constant attention from her husband and 
Zenia (Loretta Devine), a caregiver who views Loretta with suspicion. To 
make matters worse, Loretta must drag herself out of bed early each 
morning to make chicken sausages in Earl's diner.
Things change, of course, but not in typical Hollywood fashion. Loretta 
doesn't find romance in the bucolic setting. There are no melodramatic 
outbursts or hokey speeches and, best of all, Myron Goble's script 
doesn't whip out a terminal illness to tidy things up. Instead, we're 
presented with well-rounded characters and reasonable plot developments 
leading to a conclusion that doesn't feel the least bit contrived. 
Pure and simple, this is a rich story about the power of family, with a 
terrific ensemble cast. Mary Alice is forceful as stubborn matriarch Rosa 
Lynn, young Mpho Koaho gives a remarkably assured performance as Thomas, 
a child mature beyond his years, and the late Esther Rolle, in her final 
film appearance, is heart-breaking as a once-vibrant woman turned into a 
jittery child by Alzheimer's. Wesley Snipes, appearing midway through the 
film as Earl's son, Will, a successful Atlanta lawyer, does fine work, 
adding more texture to an already multi-layered story.
Even though Alfre Woodward is the central figure in the tale, Al Freeman 
Jr. walks away with the film as Earl, a seasoned, sturdy, inherently 
decent man who earns respect by living his values, rather than 
pontificating. Our world would operate much better if everyone had an 
Uncle Earl in their life.
Despite the wealth of vivid characters around her, Alfre Woodward's 
Loretta remains a bit too sketchy and her journey to self-actualization 
is overly abrupt. We see her change, but don't really feel it. The 
addition of a revelatory scene or two would have given her character more 
resonance.
I suspect the problem lies more with Maya Angelou than Woodward. "Down in 
the Delta" was originally intended to be a made-for-cable movie and it 
shows. While the film represents an impressive directorial debut, it is 
clearly a first-time effort. Too many scenes end with slow fades to white 
or black, and flashback sequences of a nightmarish family trauma during 
the Civil War are amateurishly staged and replayed excessively. 
Problem areas aside, "Down in the Delta" is a powerful, rewarding 
experience. It is rare to see a film extol the values of devotion, hard 
work and dedication without becoming leaden or preachy. Hopefully, 
audiences will sift through the heavily-advertised holiday trifles and 
seek out the understated rewards of this small treasure.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     DOWN IN THE DELTA, a paean to the importance of family ties, stays
such a course of earnestness and muted conflict that it's hard to work up
much emotion about the people involved.  The story opens in Chicago, where
Loretta Sinclair (Alfre Woodard) is responding to the challenges of
unemployment and single parenthood -- including an autistic daughter --
with alcohol and drugs.  Recognizing a disaster in the making, Loretta's
mother (Mary Alice) threatens Loretta with the loss of her kids if she
doesn't take son Thomas (Mpho Koaho) and daughter Tracy (Kulani Hansen)
to spend the summer at the Sinclair family's Mississippi homestead.  There
Loretta meets her Uncle Earl (Al Freeman Jr.), a restaurateur caring for
his Alzheimer's-stricken wife Annie (the late Esther Rolle) and committed
to holding the Sinclairs together.
     The first act of DOWN IN THE DELTA gets it off to a rocky start,
presenting the inner city background with all the urgency of a generic
studio back-lot.  Young men hang around cars looking surly, while second
unit footage passes buildings that might as well have "The Projects"
stamped across them.  It's important to the film's themes that the city
feel chaotic, a fragmented collection of people from fragmented homes, but
it feels false right down to the crack-house apartment where Loretta goes
to get high; even the always-reliable Woodard appears adrift in some
mediocre TV-drama episode.  Director Maya Angelou almost seems afraid of
getting her hands dirty, as though the story's more uplifting message will
be sullied by showing inner city life at its worst.
     DOWN IN THE DELTA gets much stronger when the setting shifts south,
and not just because the location feels more genuine.  Al Freeman Jr.
radiates patriarchal gravity and moral strength as Uncle Earl, his keen 
eyes providing an added intelligence to every word of wisdom from his
lips.  He serves as the example of committed family responsibility --
attending to his ill wife where Loretta's husband ran out on his ill
daughter, teaching young Thomas about Sinclair ancestors so he'll
understand the power of familial love.  Screenwriter Myron Goble
occasionally pushes too hard on these themes, stumbling over the vague
estrangement of Earl's son Will (Wesley Snipes), but Freeman is always
there to bring them back into focus.  You never doubt for a moment that
Earl is the kind of man who can straighten out the lives of others not by
lecturing to them, but by showing them the right way.
     DOWN IN THE DELTA is the kind of film you'll probably walk out of
with a good feeling, even though you may not necessarily have enjoyed it 
all that much.  The key dramatic points prove to be exceedingly tame
stuff, adding to the impression that the film is just cruising along on
the momentum of its good intentions.  Usually films of this kind struggle
by becoming too strident; this one struggles by being not nearly strident
enough.  Freeman alone makes this film worth watching, guiding both
viewers and other characters to an understanding of what can be 
accomplished through a sense of shared responsibility.  Still, it should
have been easier to be more supportive of a film with as many valuable
things to say.  DOWN IN THE DELTA's soft-spoken drama is more likely to
move you to respectful nods than to social action.
