Title
Review for Up Close & Personal (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Director Jon Avnet's UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL is a movie, a la
BROADCAST NEWS, about news anchors that want to be rising stars.  It
starts off as a romantic comedy and evolves into a romantic drama.  As
a comedy, it is superb with a bright script by Joan Didion and John
Gregory Dunne.  As a romance, it partially works but with stars this
beautiful and charismatic, I would rate the romantic angle as a major
disappointment.  Based on the trailers for the movie which makes the
drama look contrived and silly, I was surprised at how chillingly
effective the dramatic last quarter of the film is.
     As the show starts, a famous Tally Atwater (Michelle Pfeiffer) is
delivering a speech reminding her fellow newscasters that, "What we in
the news business can never forget is that we are only as good as the
stories we tell."  From there it flashes back to her story and how she
talked her way into the news business with a promo tape where she says
"I am Sally, and I going to be a star."
     The only station news director that would hire her is Warren
Justice (Robert Redford) of WMIA in Miami.  After making her do the
newsroom equivalent of months of cleaning the latrines, he finally lets
her have a crack in front of the camera doing the weather.  He changes
her name dynamically to Tally during the broadcast since he decides
Tally is a better choice than Sally.  Tally is a disaster doing the
weather, but Warren sees greatness in her since "she eats the lens," so
he gives her a job as a reporter.
     I should point out that although the banter between the two of
them is funny, in reality he would be facing a multimillion dollar
sexual harassment lawsuit for what he says to her.  Actually, the
relationship kept reminding me of Holly Hunter and William Hurt in
BROADCAST NEWS, but everything in BROADCAST NEWS was better which is
not surprising since I rated BROADCAST NEWS as the best movie of the
entire decade of the 1980s.
     The news anchor at WMIA, Rob Sullivan (Scott Bryce), thinks he is
God's gift to women.  He calls himself Uncle Rob to them, and Tally
loathes him.  She even sprays her private space with perfume when he
leaves.  Rob explains his news philosophy as, "some of the people in
this business get jaded because it's the same awful stories, and it is
the same awful stories.  It just happens to different people."
     Both of the leads are quite good at their parts and have great fun
making the movie.  Pfeiffer gets to belt out her rendition of "To reach
the unreachable star" on the fifty yard line of an empty stadium while
Redford listens high up in the stands.  Other than it would be fun to
do, there seems little purpose in including the scene in the final cut.
     The movie is pure formula from the beginning to the highly
manipulative and telegraphed way in advance ending.  After she becomes
a reporter, she rises to coanchor the news with "Uncle Rob".  She hates
him, and in one of the funnier sequences, they have an on the air
verbal war.  This happens while they are smiling ear-to-ear with the
credits rolling and the newsroom mikes muted.  Later talking about Rob,
she tells Warren that, "he's so stupid!", to which Warren retorts,
"he's an anchorman."
     Tally wants to be a comer so she enlists the help of superagent
Bucky Terranova (Joe Mantegna).  Bucky tells her, "Your voice is full
of money."  He moves her to Philadelphia which is a bigger media
market, but she has to compete with Marcia McGrath (Stockard Channing)
for the anchor slot, and Marcia thinks she is an old pro and an
upper-class intellectual while Tally is just a young kid from the
sticks who doesn't have a clue.  Marcia tells Tally, "You get to be 42;
you know what it takes to jump off the high board."  Later Marsha
admits that, gasp, she is actually 44.
     There is a subplot of how Warren has gotten such a bad reputation
that no one will hire him.  I found this part of the script more of a
diversion and only mildly interesting at that.  Eventually, Pfeiffer
tells him that living with him is not good enough and that she wants to
get married.  She explains, "I want you around in the morning."  He
looks bewildered and replies, "You already have me around in the
morning.  How, I have no idea."  In the perfect retort line, she says,
"I want you legally to be required to be there."  She does this
beautifully with her chin resting on her hands, and this is the only
time I found her love for him convincing.
     Although you probably saw it in the trailers, I will not reveal
the drama that wraps up the film.  Suffice it to say that it shows how
a remote television control booth can be a hotbed of excitement.
Redford is at his best in these scenes.
     The ending of the show contains a tearjerker that probably tested
well, but is so easy to predict and so formulaic that I hated it.
There is one great scene toward the end of the show when, after hours,
she tries out the network newsdesk for the first time.  She fondles the
marble desk and gives an expression of total rapture.  Indeed, she has
come to the promised land.
     One footnote.  Alanna Nash's biography of Jessica Savitch titled
"Golden Girl" is listed as the "inspiration" for the movie.  I read
that they were originally going to make the book into a movie but after
a dozen rewrites, they kept Savitch's blond hair, but nothing else from
the book.
     UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL runs a little long at 2:03.  It is rated
PG-13 for a little bad language and a little violence.  There is no sex
or nudity.  Actually I would have preferred a little more romantic
action from the stars.  Certainly their love making which consists of
little more than a few lame kisses is not convincing.  I think the
movie as constructed would be fine for any kid over say 8, but I think
they might need to be a little older to be interested.  I recommend
this funny show to you, and I give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Michelle Pfeiffer, Robert Redford, Joe Mantegna, Stockard
Channing, Kate Nelligan, Glenn Plummer, James Rebhorn Director: Jon
Avnet Screenplay: Joan Didion & John Gregory Dunne, suggested by the
book GOLDEN GIRL by Alanna Nash
Sleep your way to the top, but first, play hard to catch.
Tally Atwater (Pfeiffer) is an unknown reporter from a small town whose
dream is to become a 'star'. So she sends a fake resume to Warren
Justice (Redford), the director of a news broadcast in Miami and is
hired. At first she fetches his coffee and dry cleaning; then is given a
stint at being the weather girl before progressing to news reporting.
Pfeiffer is in my regards a good actress; however, she is just not
reporter material. The idea of dying her hair brunette to bring herself
credibility is as ludicrous as calling elephants pink, but what would I
know.
Redford becomes her teacher, mentor and lover. In a matter of years she
progresses to being a news anchor woman for the nations prime time news
station;  but this is not before she survives a prison riot where she is
locked up with angry, hostile, sex-deprived prisoners and comes through
unscathed!
Comment: She should have stayed the weather girl.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The nicest thing that you can say about this movie is that it's
*extremely* easy on the eyes.  Robert Redford plays a seasoned news
producer, Michelle Pfieffer is his ambitious young protege, and,
together, they lend a suitable star power to an otherwise lousy movie.
UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL is a grand failure because it's ultimately about
*nothing.* No social statement, no compelling drama, and not even a very
good love story.  We're in fairy-tale land, here, where a female
anchor's drive has less to do with her career than her co-dependency,
and where the biggest story surprise is guessing which hideous hairdo
that Pfieffer will wear next.  Ugh.
     Early in the movie, Redford says of his co-star's character: "She
eats the lens." This fact is also true for the actors as actors.  Sure,
they're too old for their happily-ever-after roles, but R.  and M. bring
an illusion of buoyancy to a steadily sinking ship.  With those two on
screen, who wants to leave early-- even in the middle of a movie as
meaningless as this?
     Unwatchable?  No.  Awful?  Often.  The low points lay like land
mines, ranging from a succession of stomach-turning love scenes to what
must be at least *four* different endings.  And what's with all those
early shots of Pfieffer bending over??  Somewhere in the middle of UP
CLOSE AND PERSONAL-- which was based on the life and times of Jessica
Savitch, until Disney got a hold of it.  Now it's merely "suggested
by"-- the two travel to the Florida Keys, over the highway bridge that
James Cameron destroyed in TRUE LIES.  I kept wishing for those Harrier
jets to return, to blow-up the bridge that would strand them there that
would stop the movie that would send us all home.  It didn't happen.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Michelle Pfeiffer, Robert Redford, Joe Mantegna, 
      Stockard Channing, Kate Nelligan, Glenn Plummer, James Rebhorn
Director: Jon Avnet
Producers: Jon Avnet, David Nicksay, and Jordan Kerner
Screenplay: Joan Didion & John Gregory Dunne, suggested by the 
      book GOLDEN GIRL by Alanna Nash
Cinematography: Karl Walter Lindenlaub
Music: Thomas Newman
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL, the new film from director Jon Avnet (FRIED 
GREEN TOMATOES), is a splashy, beautifully-framed, nicely-photographed 
soap opera.  Taking its inspiration from the life of news anchor Jessica 
Savitch (as told in Alanna Nash's biography, GOLDEN GIRL), UP CLOSE AND 
PERSONAL presents a sanitized version of a gripping, tragic tale.  The 
true facts of Savitch's life are far more interesting than what's 
presented in this film, but Avnet wanted something more upbeat than the 
story of a woman who pursued success like a bloodhound, then self-
destructed when she achieved it.
     Like all good soap operas, UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL puts romance 
first.  As a love story, this film is affecting; as a look inside TV 
news, it's diverting (although not in the same league as BROADCAST 
NEWS);  but as a drama, it's weak.  Avnet is interested in manipulating 
the audience, not presenting any really arresting or thought-provoking 
material.  The director enjoys orchestrating tearful moments.  He did it 
in FRIED GREEN TOMATOES; he does it here again, and there's not much 
subtlety in his methods.
     UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL starts out in Miami, where Tally Atwater 
(Michelle Pfeiffer) has just been hired as an assistant to news producer 
Warren Justice (Robert Redford).  After several months of desk work, 
she's given a one-shot on-air chance as WMIA's weatherperson.  While 
giving five-day forecasts clearly isn't her forte, Warren is impressed 
by the way "she eats the lens", and promotes her to reporter.  Soon, 
she's on camera every night, even moving up to co-anchor.  Meanwhile, 
Tally and Warren become romantically involved.  But, when Tally's agent, 
Bucky Tarranova (Joe Mantegna), gets her a job in the nation's #4 
market, Philadelphia, Warren elects to remain behind in Miami.  In his 
words, he's been where Tally is going, and he has no desire to return.
     The core story of UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL -- Tally's maturation as a 
newswoman -- is rendered blandly and without color.  Frankly, if the 
romance wasn't appealing, this movie would be dreadfully uninteresting.  
Avnet attempts to add some tension by placing Tally in the middle of a 
prison uprising, but most compelling aspect of these scenes isn't how 
she responds to the situation, but how Warren reacts -- juggling news 
feeds and phone calls from the network while worrying that Tally might 
be killed.
     Even though he's showing his years, Robert Redford is still 
charming and charismatic as a romantic lead.  He and Michelle Pfeiffer 
develop an agreeable rapport that enables us to accept their 
relationship in spite of the age difference.  Their scenes together 
don't smolder, but they are warm and pleasant, and we find ourselves 
rooting for these two to find some way to be happy together.  Alas, in 
this land of predictable melodrama where A STAR IS BORN meets BROADCAST 
NEWS, there's always some plot contrivance designed to keep them apart.
     There are some worthwhile elements floating around in Avnet's soapy 
water.  Some of the behind-the-scenes newsroom bickering is 
entertaining, and Karl Walter Lindenlaub's camera manages to capture a 
few memorable shots, including one of Pfeiffer and Redford enjoying a 
quiet moment with the darkened Philadelphia skyline as the backdrop.  
Mostly, though, UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL is about Warren and Tally's 
relationship, and, if there's a reason that this film doesn't gel 
completely, it's because neither character is absorbing on their own.  
While mining for gold, UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL unearths bronze -- still a 
shiny metal, but not nearly as rare.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Christopher Null
     If nothing else, UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL will remind you just how
hideous the hairstyles of the 1980's were, especially among media
personalities.  Fortunately, the film accomplishes a lot more than that,
giving us a nice romance that isn't harmed too much by its attempts at
melodrama.
     UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL tells the loosely-based-on-reality story of
Sally (who becomes Tally) Atwater (Michelle Pfeiffer), a vain upstart girl
from Reno who wants to make it big in television.  Robert Redford costars
as Warren Justice, a Miami news director who gives her her big break and
takes her under his wing.  Under his influence, Tally is transformed from
brash loudmouth to The Next Big Thing, and of course, the two fall madly
in love along the way.
     With a smart script enhanced by some excellent comic relief, Pfeiffer
and Redford work together with a good chemistry.  And while there are a
few substantial plot gaps as the film tries to do too much in too little
time, the exciting climax set in the midst a prison riot makes up for any
holes in the movie's continuity.
     Still, this isn't NETWORK, and at times UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL really
can't decide between being romantic comedy or a tough drama.  This
unfortunately creates some unevenness and a couple of false endings with a
tacked-on tearjerker finale.  The supporting cast is also uniformly bland,
with Joe Mantegna's talents totally wasted and both Kate Nelligan and
Stockard Channing looking very scary and beyond over-the-top as cutthroat
"I'm so tough I eat men for breakfast" newswomen.
     But there I go, nitpicking again.  Altogether, UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL
mostly works and only occasionally doesn't.  It will certainly be
successful as a pleasant spring romance flick with broad appeal, but most
importantly, it's a whole lot of fun.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter  /  Novelist  /  Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Michael Redman
Robert Redford and Michelle Pfeiffer in a romantic drama about television
news. Wow, two personal faves in a favorite genre and setting. How could it
miss? Read on and find out.
Pfeiffer is a neophyte television reporter hired by Redford, seasoned veteran
who's had his time in the sun and settled into a comfortable production
position. Their mentor/student relationship quickly develops into a romantic
one with all of the difficulties associated with ex-partners and the
instability of the profession.
On her way to the top, the beautiful reporter moves from situation to
situation with the help of her coach until she reaches a position where she
must move from Miami. Redford follows and she arranges a job for him with her
new station. This doesn't set well with his ego. Somewhat of yet another
remake of "A Star Is Born", at least the milieu is different from the previous films.
Although each star has an impressive track record and powerful screen
presence, the chemistry between them is slight. Redford plays the stable older
man but shows virtually no emotion throughout the movie. Until the second
half, Pfeiffer's emotional range runs the range of A through B.
There are two different films here. The first follows the development of
their relationship and her career and is filled with longing gazes, a
VH1-inspired beach scene and unimportant scenes. The other begins when she is
behind the scenes during a prison riot and is much more dynamic. The earlier
portion is an important set-up to the second, but could have done with severe editing.
Not a bad film, just another one where the execution doesn't live up to the promise.
[This appeared in the 3/7/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Joan Ellis
"Up Close and Personal" is the movie critics love to hate.
Apparently, it is also a movie audiences love to see. Certainly
the negative reviews didn't bring 14,000,000 people to the
theaters in the first week alone. That's pretty good for a movie
that has been generally panned. 
Perhaps this is yet another signal that Americans are sick
of Hollywood's obsession with violence. This movie, along with
"Mr. Holland's Opus," has given them a way to express their
impatience. "Up Close" is an old-fashioned romance, a spiritual
descendent of Hollywood's Golden Age, when movies had a hero and
heroine, and audiences spent two hours hoping they would get
together.
When someone dies in this movie, it happens quickly and
cleanly, so the audience is affected by the loss of the human
being rather than the now standard barrage of graphic violence.
We are given time to care about the people we are getting to
know. And that's the real key:  we actually have a story here.
Tally Atwater (Michelle Pfeiffer), an ambitious blond who
has waited tables and dealt craps in her hometown of Las Vegas,
brings that questionable experience to her new job at Channel 9,
Miami. Her boss, Warren Justice (Robert Redford), is a fallen
Washington press corps hero exiled to the hinterland.  Warren
knows smart when he sees it, so he teaches Tally the rules of the
trade while he falls in love with her.
Their courtship takes place on the causeways, balconies,
rowboats, and beaches of Miami and the Keys. Their other life
takes place in the television studios, where Warren recognizes
and encourages Tally's determination to break onto the "A" team.
It is Warren who finally convinces her to tell viewers the truth
instead of the pablum that station bosses concoct for their
listening pleasure. 
That's a romantic notion, isn't it? An Edward R. Murrow
view of a newsman's role, so out of date today that just being
reminded of it brings a certain nostalgic pride that once upon a
time such people roamed the globe looking for the truth of a
situation. This movie is shot through with that kind of thing-- 
principles and constancy.
Michelle Pfeiffer gives Tally both raw ambition and the
sense to listen to Warren when he sends her toward--dare I say
it?--the truth and integrity of real reporting vs. the ugly path
to being a blow-dried anchor. Robert Redford makes Warren a
little seedy, very understated, with a core of values wrapped in
steel.   
Remember that Warner Bros. released "Casablanca" as a B-
picture whose unexpected legend derives from romance and
integrity. O.K., this isn't "Casablanca," but its two icons have
the same kind of firepower. Robert Redford and Michelle Pfeiffer
know how to make love the old-fashioned way--with their eyes and
their smiles as well as in bed. Have we all become too cynical to
enjoy a stylish, romantic story that turns on the intelligence
and sparkle of two very appealing actors?   


Author
Edwin Jahiel
UP CLOSE & PERSONAL ** 1/2  Directed by Jon Avnet.  Written by 
Joan Didion and John Gregory Dunne, suggested by the book 
"Golden Girl" by Alanna Nash. Photography, Karl Walter 
Lindenlaub. Editing, Debra Neil-Fisher. Production design, 
Jeremy Conway. Music, Thomas Newman. Produced by Avnet, David 
Nicksay and Jordan Kerner. Cast: Robert Redford (Warren 
Justice), Michelle Pfeiffer (Tally Atwater), Stockard Channing 
(Marcia McGrath), Joe Mantegna (Bucky Terranova), Kate 
Nelligan (Joanna Kennelly), Glenn Plummer (Ned Jackson), James 
Rebhorn (John Merino), et al. A Touchstone release. 124 mins. 
PG-13.
Hereafter this uncatchily titled movie will be referred to as 
UCAP, which sounds like another University of California 
campus yet. There is nothing academic about the movie though, 
except for the academic response by those who persist in 
connecting the film to "A Star Is Born" or ASIB. In this, they 
have been influenced by the fact that Joan Didion  and husband 
John Gregory Dunne (novelists, non-fiction writers, 
screenwriters), had also penned the third version  (1976, with 
Barbra Streisand) of ASIB -- the fourth, if you include  "What 
Price Hollywood" (1932), the root-film. (Be it said in passing 
that the 1976 film was far inferior to all its predecessors).
In the earlier movies, a male celebrity brings fame and 
fortune to an aspiring younger woman. As her star rises, his 
falls. In ASIB 1 and 2, the man is a Hollywood star named 
Norman Maine. He sinks into alcoholism and commits suicide, 
upon which, his widow Vicki Lester (nee Esther Blodgett) 
addressing the public, starts with the famous: "This is Mrs. 
Norman Maine." 
There is really very little of ASIB in UCAP. Here,Sallyanne 
Atwater (Michelle Pfeiffer) is an untutored nobody from 
Nevada. Determined to make her way into TV, she fakes her 
credentials,does not fool Warren Justice (Robert Redford),the 
news director of a Miami station, yet still gets hired as an 
assistant.
The movie opens like a sitcom, with Sally's silly string of 
little accidents. It also telegraphs immediately the 
inevitable love affair.Indeed, the very names Pfeiffer and 
Redford do this, even if you haven't seen the film or heard of 
it. To its credit, unlike the zillion flicks that set up 
antagonism-that-will-turn-to-amore, the relationship of the 
couple is cool, un-strident and quite harmonious.
To make a long story short (TMLSS), ambitious Sally gets her 
chance, muffs it, but Warren dismisses this, hyperbolically 
declaring that "she eats the lens" (don't try this at home). 
He grooms, protects, molds Sally, rebaptized Tally. She 
becomes, with peculiar swiftness and no obvious reason (except 
her looks), a star. 
The other side of the coin is that Warren, a bastion of 
journalistic integrity, won't play footsie with 
TV-exploitation and will find his star waning. (It had 
happened to him before, but never mind). 
There's a bunch of colorful happenings in the depiction of TV 
station life: professional rivalries, banter, competitiveness. 
These may not be authentic, but, as Hitchcock used to say, 
it's only a movie. Most of the shenanigans are interesting, 
some of the gags and the like fall a bit flat. You can tell 
which  those are by listening the the audience: it laughs 
louder. 
By minute 40 there is a loss of momentum, especially with an 
interlude where Tally goes to Reno to rescue her sister and  
Warren  surprisingly shows up and lends a hand. Unconvincing.
Sex comes in at minute 54, right after Tally gets an offer to 
move to another, bigger affiliate, in  Philadelphia. Pleasant 
romantic stuff, but did writers Didion and Dunne have to 
include the inevitable cliche of the couple having fun on the 
beach to the off-screen sounds and soupy lyrics of a love 
song?  Mercifully,this second interlude is brief.
Tally goes to Philly, has to put up with the barbs of older 
anchorwoman Stockard Channing (as always, very good) who sees 
the handwriting on the wall, meaning that Tally will probably 
replace her. Tally does well, but has some troubles. Warren to 
the rescue. They also marry. 
Warren is out of a job but manages to remote-control Tally, 
stuck inside a rioting prison, into doing a great telecast. (I 
don't see what's great about it, but never mind). Her star 
skyrockets and she's offered to anchor (for weekends only) at 
the network. Oh, bliss. Further developments will not be 
disclosed.
The film, genuinely or not, is well fleshed out with the 
hectic, frantic atmosphere of big-time TV. Above all, there's 
that couple that drips charisma. That Pfeiffer is almost 40 
and Redford almost 60 makes no difference. Her beauty, in the 
small group of a Loretta Young or a Pamela Kohn, is buttressed 
by charm. His oxymoronic laid-back intensity is a joy. The 
electricity is good. And it is not Redford's fault that 
Didion-Dunne dreamed up the silly, in-joke name of Warren 
Justice (Chief Justice Earl Warren, get it?). 
Director Avnet directs well, but, keen as he reportedly is for 
every shot to be perfect, he sometimes neglects the cartilage 
between shots,the editing. 
The movie, at some point, was to be based on the short unhappy 
life of the late TV news-star Jessica Savitch. Happily, 
there's nothing of that left in the final script, which is a 
hybrid of older movies.  
It's no "Network," no "Broadcast News" in depth or intensity, 
no "China Syndrome" in suspense. It is no "Switching Channels" 
(the undervalued remake of "The Front Page" and "His Girl 
Friday" shifted from press to TV) in comedy. UCAP is more skin 
than nerves, yet a good pastime and no rip-off of your time 
and money. 
