Title
Review for Delicatessen (1991)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Ted Prigge
Directors: Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro
Writers: Giles Adrien, Jean-Pierre Jeunet, and Marc Caro
Starring: Dominique Pinon, Jean-Claude Dreyfus, Marie-Laure Dougnac,
Chick Ortega, Jean-Francois Perrier, Silvie Laguna, Edith Ker, Karin
Viard, Anne-Marie Pisani, Ticky Holgado, Pascal Benezech, Marc Caro,
Rufus
With "Alien: Resurrection" out just now and all, I thought I'd FINALLY
see "Delicatessen," an earlier flim by its director, Jean-Pierre Jeunet,
who had co-directed it with Marc Caro, but had not done the same with
the new "Alien" film (bringing about some tension over whether or not he
was the one with talent - by the way, it was good).  "Delicatessen" is
an amazing film, filled with amazing style, a wonderful off-beat tone,
and some bits of satire which work with the film instead of being apart
from it.
"Delicatessen" takes place in a post-apocalyptic future where there's
apparently a shortage of meat.  We meet a ex-clown turned wanderer named
Louison (Dominique Pinon, who was Vriess in the new "Alien" film), who
finds a room at an apartment building with a butcher shop in it, run by,
well, the butcher: Clapet (Jean-Claude Dreyfus).  He gives him a job as
his assistant, which basically means he goes around painting and doing
odd jobs about the bizarre building.  Little does he know, this is a
very temporary job as he will be chopped up after a week or so, and fed
to the apartment dwellers (we find this out in the first scene).
The film chronicles his going-ons in the apartment, as well as that of
the inhabitants.  Everyone in the building is eccentrically weird in one
way or the other.  For instance, there's an old man who lives in an
apartment filled with water so frogs and other amphibians can live with
him.  There's also the aristocratic suicidal Aurore (Silvie Laguna), who
is always setting up overly-elaborate death traps for herself which
never work out (one has the old electrical appliance dropped into a
bathtub).
The only ray of sun-shine in the gloomy, bizarre building is that of the
mousy Julie Clapet (Marie-Laure Dougnac), daughter of the butcher.  She
and Louison immeadiately hit it off, and start a kind of bittersweet
romance which never gets really sexual or anything, but is never
overly-corny.  There are great scenes they have together, including one
where they play a duet together: she on the cello, and he on a saw (it
sounds really cool too), and they become a symbol of light in the gloomy
post-apocalyptic world.
As the film goes on, the need for meat gets worse, and soon other people
are being hacked for the good of the rest, mostly since Louison is an
excellent worker.  A subplot involving a group of renegades who live
underground is also introduced, and they struggle to stop Clapet from
killing more people.  The climax is wonderfully long, and incredibly
elaborate, bringing the film to a very satisfying conclusion, but not
becoming overly grand.
One of the many great things about this film is how it refuses to get
off on its gimmick.  The cannibalism idea is one that could bring about
a huge gorefest a la "Dead Alive."  While this is not a bad idea, I
really admired how un-gory this film really is.  Jeunet and Caro barely
show the killings, making it more effective.  Sure, there's some gore in
it, but it never glamorizes or over-does it.
The style is the best thing about this film, even though it is
jam-packed with wonderful things.  It is incredibly off-beat, and shows
us some truly bizarre characters, as well as some wonderfully weird and
imaginative scenes.  One of the best parts of this film deals with sex
going on, which is then juxtaposed through certain other scenes of
people doing things, all in rhythm with the other, and ending in a
wonderfully inspired climax (i.e. Julie playing her cello in synch with
everyone else, and resulting in her breaking her bow).  And one scene
dealing with the grandmother is truly classic.
I also admired how sweet and gentle it could be.  While its style is so
offbeat that even the Coen brothers would drop their jaws, there are
moments and scenes that are just wonderfully calm.  There's a scene
towards the beginning where Louison is unpacking which is strangely
melancholy, which is one thing this film usually isn't.  And the scenes
between Louison and Julie are wonderfully bittersweet and strangely
touching.  Pinon and Dougnac have great chemistry, which helps.
A special note should be made to Jean-Claude Dreyfus who is absolutely
awesome as Clapet.  While being hysterical and all, he also shows some
truly human signs in quieter scenes, and just does a great job with the
role.  Another note should be made to Chick Ortega who steals scenes as
a freaky mailman with a crush on Julie and a penchant for shooting
anything subversive.
But most of all, this film is truly a masterpiece of a black comedy. 
It's hysterical, moving, and just jaw-dropping to watch visually.  There
are some minor flaws (the rebel underground subplot really never goes
anywhere), but overall, the film is more than a rewarding experience,
and a symbol of sheer filmmaking craftsmanship.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
George V. Reilly
     DELICATESSEN is a film directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro
and written by Jeunet, Caro, and Gilles Adrien.  It stars Dominic Pinon,
Marie-Laure Dougnac, and Jean-Claude Dreyfus.  French with subtitles.
     DELICATESSEN calls to mind all sorts of adjectives: surreal,
bizarre, grotesque, hilarious.  It has been likened to Terry Gilliam's
BRAZIL.  To me it's more like Gormenghast---a huge, rambling house, set
in mysterious isolation, peopled with the oddest characters.
     In the post-apocalyptic world of DELICATESSEN, food is at a
premium: fresh meat is impossible to get.  Clapet (Dreyfus) the butcher
has hit upon the answer.  He lures unsuspecting young men to the house
which he runs, fattens them up a little, then kills them, and sells the
meat to his tenants.
     Such an innocent is Louison (Pinon), a clown who lost his job when
his partner, Mr.  Livingstone the chimp, was killed and eaten when he
strayed.  Louison is taken on as a repair man in exchange for free food
and board.  Soon he meets and enchants Julie (Dougnac), Clapet's timid
short-sighted daughter.
     Julie falls in love with Louison and decides to save him.  She gets
in touch with the Troglodytes, who are literally the Underground
Resistance.  They are unwilling to help her, fearing a trap, but she
convinces them with the intelligence that her father's cellar is filled
with food.
     The Troglodytes, who are howlingly inept, mount their combined
attack and rescue on the next night, the same night that the butcher has
decided to kill the unwitting Louison.  The events of this night take up
the latter half of the film.
     The characters are delightful.  Louison, the circus clown, with his
funny-ugly face is gravely hilarious.  Julie, is shy and innocent but
determined to save her love.  Clapet is both malevolent and insinuating.
Much of the first half of the film is devoted to a series of vignettes
about the minor characters.  Aurore Inteligator who hears voices and
attempts suicide with a succession of ever more elaborate Rube
Goldberg--like devices.  The two men making a collection of toys that
moo when they are turned over.  The old man in the half-flooded basement
surrounded by snails and frogs which he eats.  The two boys who steal
and sabotage their neighbours' property in ingenious manner.  The
Troglodytes, like taller Time Bandits.  The Postman, Clapet's crony and
Julie's would-be lover, who acts like Dirty Harry and who always get the
mail through.
     Perhaps the funniest scene is when the butcher is making love to
his mistress.  We never see them directly, just the underside of the
bouncing bed and the squeaking springs.  The sound of the springs is
conducted all over the house by the pipes and the airvents to Julie
playing her cello, to a woman beating a carpet, to Louison painting the
ceiling with a roller while attached to the wall with his braces
bouncing back and forth, and to a metronome.  As the butcher increases
his speed, the springs squeak faster and faster, louder and louder,
pulsing through the house, and we cut more and more quickly from the
springs to the cello to the carpet beating to the rebounding painter to
the metronome and back to the springs, until finally we have reached a
throbbing intensity which is released---at last---when the butcher
climaxes.  The audience laughed themselves silly as this happened.
     Visually, DELICATESSEN is interesting too.  The house is dark and
gloomy, suggestive of what goes on there.  Only Julie's room is bright,
an oasis amidst the evil.  The characters are dressed in 1940s styles
and would not have looked out of place in France under the Nazis.
     I greatly enjoyed DELICATESSEN and I recommend it.
________________
George V. Reilly
GeorgR@microsoft.com  (formerly gvr@cs.brown.edu)

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DELICATESSEN (directors: Marc Caro/Jean-Pierre Jeunet; screenwriters:
Gilles Adrien/Marc Caro; cinematographer: Darius Khondji; editor: Herve
Schneid; cast: Dominique Pinon (Louison), Marie-Laure Dougnac (Julie
Clapet), Jean-Claude Dreyfus (Clapet-The Butcher),  Karin Viard
(Mademoiselle Plusse), Ticky Holgado (Marcel Tapioca), Anne-Marie Pisani
(Madame Tapioca), Jacques Mathou (Roger), Rufus (Robert Kube), Howard
Vernon (Frog Man), Edith Ker (Granny), Boban Janevski (Young Rascal),
Mikael Todde (Young Rascal), Chick Ortega (Postman), Silvie Laguna
(Aurore Interligator), Howard Vernon (Frog Man); Runtime: 96;
Miramax/Constellation/UGC/Hatchette Premiere; 1991-France)
A black comedy set in the near future in a boarding house run by a
depraved butcher. The comedy is played more in comic strip style for
entertaining value than for deeper satire, as it features mostly zany
sophomoric sight gags and relies heavily on special effects. The world
has fallen on hard times and there are food shortages which include no
meat, so the butcher serves up meat from human flesh to customers who
pay with grain, almost as valued a commodity. That's the big joke in the
film and the novelty of that cannibalism idea wears thin mighty fast, as
the characters are too absurd and sketched too thinly for us to care
about them. This tasteless postapocalyptic French comedy is a first
feature for the co-directors Marc Caro/Jean-Pierre Jeunet. It failed to
reach my funny bone and instead left me mostly annoyed at its slight
story and its dark projections for the future.
An ex-circus clown named Louison (Dominique Pinon), the film's
too-good-to-be-true hero, answers an ad for work as a handyman for
Clapet (Jean-Claude Dreyfus ), and the butcher and landlord, offers him
room and board in his house. The butcher's clumsy and near-sighted
daughter Julie (Marie-Laure Dougnac) falls in love with the skinny,
weird looking clown, and the two make some music together, with her
playing the cello and him a saw. They are the innocents, surrounded by a
boarding house of misfits suffering from fear and watched over by her
overbearing father, who has lured into his tenement the clown, as he has
his past innocent victims, so that he can put his cleaver to him and
then sell him as meat, which he intends to do as soon as the clown fixes
up the tenement.
The entire film takes place in the shabby tenement, and the tenants are
an odd lot of bizarre malcontents, who do not trust each other. There
are two youngsters (Boban Janevski & Mikael Todde) who do any kind of
mischief they can. A frog man (Howard Vernon) who lives with water on
the floor so he can raise his frogs and snails that he eats. Two
brothers (Mathou & Kube) who create little cow-moo novelty toys. A man
(Holgado) who sells a bullshit detector to the butcher for his piece of
meat. A slutty woman (Karin Viard), who lives with the butcher and only
wants his meat. The aristocratic woman (Silvie Laguna) who tries
numerous times to commit suicide but is too inept to do it right.
The tenants are too afraid to come out at night because they know what
the butcher is up to, so they are forced to communicate with each other
through a pipe that runs through the building (in one scene they are all
in musical harmony to the lovemaking of the butcher and his gal, as
their bedsprings squeak).
There is also a sex-crazed postman (Chick Ortega), who lusts for the
butcher's daughter and carries a gun while delivering the mail.
There is also an underdeveloped subplot about a band of incompetent
underground veggie fanatics, called Trogolodistes, who have been
summoned to rescue the clown and steal some grain. The directors
overloaded the film with too many eccentrics, as the comedy seemed
forced while the surreal look of the film added no dramatic intensity.
Delicatessen could have some appeal to the cult film crowd who like
their meat sliced thin, Monty Python fans, and those who liked Terry
Gilliam's Brazil, a film similar in spirit.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Pedro Sena
Some films are difficult to discuss.  Either they are serious stuff that is
trying to make a point, or they are stuff that is just making fun of people,
and their ways.
DELICATESSEN is one of those films.  Amidst a totally surrealistic
atmosphere, that includes some mime work, and many dreams, this film plods
along until it finally finds a reasonable 'peace' in the end, by making sure
that all the characters that live in fear, and are involved in the making of
the ugly scares, are either gone, or have gotten their come uppance.  In
between a surrealistic group, that looks like the same group that was the
revolutionary statement in the film BRAZIL, is engaged to get some of this
work done, but never does, and may even  be at the wrong address.
After the war, this family, living in one house is full of people and
relatives that do not have a job.  A butcher is the leader of the house, and
one day hires a young man who has pledged to do a good job.  And amidst the
usual odd events is the fact that there is a 'butcher' that also scares a
few people with his cleavers, and occasionally uses them. The suggestion is,
that in the hard times, any mender of the family that is just dead space
will be hacked up to provide some money for everyone.
The newly hired young man is a curious sort.  He is an ex- circus performer
with a very famous name, and the trickery doesn't get him.  He returns in
kind, and becomes in the process enamored with the butcher's daughter, who
also likes him.  As soon as the butcher is aware of this, he decides the
young man is the next target.  But we never really know in whose mind this f
ear is living, or if it is real, except that in the end of the film, there
are only the two young lovers sharing a roof playing  their circus like
music in their instruments.  A measure of peace has been  established in
this house, so it seems.
In the middle of it all, it is a surrealistic bunch of segments that just
come and go, as the butcher helps us learn who the next victim is, and in
the case of the grandmother, she dies of a heart attack, by just
'imagining' the butcher with a clever ready to attack her.
A fun, and weird movie to watch, it is well written, and filmed with your
confusion in mind, which makes it fun to follow.  Every so often there is a
new wrench in the works, and you go ... what..?? is going on..?

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
At a time when food is scarce and cannibalism rampant, a butcher obtains
meat to sell by hiring handymen and then, when the time is right,
chopping them up.  His daughter falls in love with the latest handyman,
an unemployed circus clown and vegetarian, and tries to save him.  Sick,
demented, warped, and, of course, outrageously funny!  More a black
comedy than a horror film; will appeal to fans of EATING RAOUL.
France (English subtitles), color, 1991, 97 minutes.
Directors:  Jean-Pierre Jeunet, Marc Caro.
     Let me begin by saying that although the subject of the film is
cannibalism, there is very little blood or gore in the film.  Some, but
certainly not all, of the violence in the film is implied.  The (human)
"meat" that the butcher sells is packaged in opaque, paper packages; it
is all very sanitized.  However, if the film's visuals don't gross you
out, the film's very sick humor may!
     The film takes place at some undetermined time in the future, when
food is scarce.  Although it is not explicitly stated, it appears there
was a war that stopped food production.  Grain is so scarce it is used
as money, and cannibalism is rampant.  A butcher owns a small apartment
block; he routinely runs an ad in a newspaper for a maintenance worker.
The butcher's practice is to hire a new maintenance worker, then kill
him and sell the meat to the residents of the apartment building, who
are all cannibals.
     The butcher hires a new maintenance worker, an unemployed circus
clown (and vegetarian) named Stanley.  Soon Stanley meets the butcher's
daughter, and love blossoms.  The butcher's daughter tries to convince
her father to spare Stanley from the chopping block, but her father
refuses.  Distraught and desperate to save her beloved, the butcher's
daughter seeks help from the Troglodytes, an underground (literally)
vegetarian group that tries to rescue people from cannibals....
     Although this is one of the sickest films I have seen in some time,
it is also very, very funny.  The emphasis of the film is on black humor
rather than gore or blood.  Perhaps the best comparison film is EATING
RAOUL, another warped comedy about cannibalism.  Although many viewers
will appreciate and enjoy the film's warped humor, others may find it to
be in very poor taste!
     The film is well-made and conforms to high production standards.
The art design is excellent and contributes substantially to the strange
atmosphere of the film.  The writing is truly excellent, with plenty of
dry, sarcastic, very sick humor to delight (or offend) the viewer.
     One of the film's weak points is the Troglodytes, a weird gang that
live in the city's sewer system.  The film never makes it clear exactly
what they are; it is suggested that they are vegetarians rescuing people
from cannibals.  However, they are portrayed as a bizarre and totally
incompetent cult (one could claim that the cannibals are shown in a
better light in the film).  Certainly their weirdness is funny at times,
though I felt they added little to the film.
     I would recommend the film to fans of EATING RAOUL, and to those
that enjoy black humor that is truly warped.  Sensitive, easily offended
people should avoid the film as you probably won't enjoy its humor.
Distribution/Print Source: Currently on the festival circuit, i.e.,
showing only at film festivals.  The U.S. distributor is Miramax Films,
so it will be released in the U.S. in the future (no info. on timing).

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Weird and morbid comedy about life in
     some strange post-Holocaust future.  Cannibals and
     vegetarians battle in a world where the only meat available
     is from other people.  Meanwhile, life goes on in a strange
     apartment house over a delicatessen.  Offbeat is putting it
     mildly.  Rating: high +1 (-4 to +4).
     The time is the future, perhaps ten years after it all went bad.  The
sky is thick yellow fog.  Humans have two legs and frogs have four, but the
only other animals left alive have six or eight.  Legal tender is bags of
lentils or corn.  And something else has disappeared with the world we knew.
What is missing is something like sanity.  With so few animals around,
society has been broken into two classes, vegetarians and those who have
taken to heart the adage that one man's meat is another man's person, so to
speak.  The setting is an apartment house standing over one of the few
remaining delicatessens.  And only rarely does the delicatessen have meat.
In the apartment there are the long-term residents and the transients.  The
transients do not so much move out as disappear.  And as their luck would
have it, they always disappear just in time to miss one of the meat days at
the delicatessen.
     In the apartment building live a typical bunch of people.  There is the
supremely myopic cello player who has nearly given up on finding a husband.
There are two men who make those toy cylinders that when turned upside down
moo like a cow used to.  Then there is the nice woman who hears voices
telling her to commit suicide.  She tries to oblige in complex and creative
ways.  Fortunately or not, her Rube-Goldberg-like suicide mechanisms just
don't work.  Into this old neighborhood moves an ex-circus clown ear-marked
to be literally dead meat.  Somehow he evades the butcher's knife and falls
for the nearly blind cello player.
     With many a supremely gruesome twist and turn, this film is a logical
descendent of the British film THE BED-SITTING ROOM and the French LE
DERNIER COMBAT--two very strange slice-of-post-holocaust-life black
comedies.  And it perhaps is the most entertaining of the three.  Some of
its visual style is also reminiscent of BRAZIL.  the style is mostly short
gag scenes that eventually add up to a plot which in the final third is
somewhere between madcap and frenetic.  This is a film for particularly
morbid tastes in comedy.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
104 min., not rated, Drama/Comedy, 1991, French w/ English subtitles
Directors: Jean-Pierre Jeunet, Marc Caro
Cast: Dominique Pinon, Marie-Laure Dougnac, Jean-Claude Dreyfuss,
      Karin Viard, Rufus, Ticky Holgado, Silvie Laguna, Jaques Mathou,
      Jean-Francois Perrier, Anne-Marie Pisani, Howard Vernon,
      Chick Ortega
     In the post-apocalypse future, when fresh meat is almost impossible
to come by, Jean-Claude Dreyfuss runs a delicatessen/apartment house.
Dreyfuss gets meat for his delicatessen by getting handy men to come to
the apartment building, and after they have done some work, Dreyfuss
slaughters them.  After clown Doninique Pinon's partner is killed by
roving savages for meat, he goes to work for Dreyfuss as a handyman, not
knowing what his fate is going to be.  Marie-Laure Dougnac, Dreyfuss's
daughter, falls in love with Pinon and tries to save him from Dreyfuss.
     I found DELICATESSEN to be an extremely enjoyable film, and highly
recommend it to anyone who has a taste for the bizarre.  I have been
waiting since I saw the first review on DELICATESSEN for it to come to
my local art/import theater so I could see it because it sounded really
good.  I am pleased to say that after seeing the film I am really happy
that I went to see it.  It was better than I expected it to be.  On a
scale of zero to five I give DELICATESSEN a five.  DELICATESSEN is not
rated but contains violence, explicit language, and adult situations.
     The actor who I felt did the best job is Chick Ortega, who played
the mailman.  His character seemed to really have depth.  I also
thought that his character was one of the neatest, although all the
characters in the film were fascinating, and bizarre, in their own way.
The acting in the film was great.  The story line was well written.
All of the characters in the film were interesting, but weird.  I felt
myself wanting to know more about each one.  They were each unique, yet
they were all alike.  I really got drawn into this film and I would have
gone to see it again, but before I got a chance to go back the film had
finished its run as it only played for seven days.  If this film comes
to a theater near you, I highly suggest that you go see it.  I loved it
and I am not the biggest fan of foreign films.
     The scenery was bleak, yet interesting.  The world that was created
is MAD-MAX-like, which could be expected because they are both post-
apocalypse.  I found myself wondering though, what was beyond the
delicatessen, or if it was all wasteland.  The one part of the film that
I found rather hard to accept was how bad the technology was.  None of
the items used by anybody was new.  It was, I would estimate, pre-50's.
Is the film implying that all of the new technology will be wiped out
with the nuclear war?
     One last note, this film is subtitled and the language spoken is
the original language.  I prefer subtitled film to dubbed films because
it annoys me when the mouths are saying something different than what I
hear.  Those people who hate subtitling will probably get annoyed with
this film and might prefer to wait for a dubbed video cassette version
as one will probably show up.
