Title
Review for Kevin and Perry Go Large (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Icon on 21 April, 2000; certificate 15; 83 minutes; 
country of origin UK/USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Ed Bye; produced by Harry Enfield, Peter Bennett-Jones, Jolyon 
Symonds.
Written by David Cummings, Harry Enfield.
Photographed by Alan Almond; edited by Mark Wybourn.
What we have here is the worst possible way to adapt "Harry Enfield's 
Television Programme" for the big screen. "Kevin & Perry Go Large" simply 
takes the most tiresome and obnoxious routine to ever play on that comedy 
sketch show and spins it out to feature length. Enfield could have given us a 
better film by searching the video vaults of the British Broadcasting 
Corporation for anything he'd previously done, arranging it in any order and 
transferring the result straight to celluloid.
The title characters, played by Enfield and Kathy Burke, are two teenage 
slobs desperate to lose their virginity. Dialogue tells us they are fifteen 
or sixteen years old, but their actions are more suited to retarded infants, 
and it's hardly a surprise that the closest they've got to sex is buying a 
porn magazine from the local corner shop while getting red-faced and 
suppressing giggles. Whenever they see girls they leer, drool and make loud 
whimpering noises like dogs with rabies and bullet wounds.
As fans of computerised 'dance music', the pair decide they will take a 
summer vacation to Ibiza, where English clubs are big, and, according to 
Perry, "It'll be easy to get a shag!" Nobody would ever make love with these 
boys in real life -- their walk is a mixture of hobbling and jumping, they 
talk in gulps, groans and squeaks, and their wrong-size clothes are ugly and 
inside-out. But of course the film must end with some ladies jumping all over 
them, after an 83-minute journey of whatever lame sight gags the filmmakers 
come up with. You can predict every move of a film like this just by looking 
at the trailer.
According to Enfield, who co-wrote, it's a send-up of the teenage years. But 
if satire is the intention the method is too ham-handed and obvious. Kevin 
and Perry say things like "I'm a profound artist waiting to be discovered," 
and we're supposed to laugh just because they're so oblivious to their own 
stupidity.  I find Enfield's own attitude funnier than that of his 
characters. He thinks he's given us a sharp comedic commentary, when he's 
really just created two annoying dopes and surrounded them with toilet 
humour. "Kevin & Perry Go Large" finds grand mirth in close-ups of acne, 
erections, gaping jaws and defecation. The film's most sophisticated running 
joke is that Kevin puts on an awkward James Bond voice whenever he is in 
female company. And what are we supposed to make of the fact that this is a 
professionally-made motion picture featuring an adult man and woman playing 
adolescent boys?
Teenage virginity is indeed embarrassing. I remember my own -- a period in 
which the only thing my friends and I ever thought about was getting laid. 
The constant chasing after girls, the silly 'foolproof' plans on how to woo 
them and the pathetic adherence to bad fashions in an attempt to impress them 
could all make a poignant, funny movie. I did not expect "Kevin & Perry Go 
Large" to be that movie, but that doesn't change its badness, or the fact 
that its budget could have been better spent.
The film does have one funny moment. It comes when Kevin's parents have 
agreed to let him and Perry go to Ibiza. The boys look down at the kitchen 
table, and are momentarily shocked by the huge logo on the plane tickets: 
Virgin Airlines.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic
