Title
Review for Usual Suspects, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Andrew Hicks
        No matter what you suspect, this isn't your usual action 
thriller. THE USUAL SUSPECTS is an intelligent crime mystery story 
from up-and-coming director Bryan Singer. It's one of those movies 
that, after everything is revealed rapid-fire at the end, you immediately 
want to rewind and watch again because earlier scenes take on a new 
light. Plot twists a-go-go are what you get here -- I gave up trying to 
figure out the mystery of Keyser Soze after awhile and just sat back 
and waited for them to reveal it to me.
        Keyser Soze is a name you'll hear at least a hundred times if 
you watch THE USUAL SUSPECTS and for good reason. It's not only 
the name of the mysterious (and possibly even mythical) crime boss in 
the movie, it also sums up the movie -- "Keyser Soze" in Latin means 
"an intelligent crime mystery story from up-and-coming director 
Bryan Singer." Or maybe I shouldn't have bought a foreign-language 
dictionary from the same company that makes those 99-cent 
encyclopedias sold in supermarkets.
        At the movie's opening, a group of known criminals are 
brought in for a police lineup, including McManus (Stephen Baldwin), 
Keaton (Gabriel Byrne), Fenster (Benicio Del Toro), Buckney (Kevin 
Pollack) and Verbal (Kevin Spacey, winner of the Best Supporting 
Actor Academy Award{SYMBOL 153 \f "Times New Roman" \s 10 \h} for his performance in the movie). Verbal is 
so-named because he frequently rambles on about anything or nothing. 
He also earns his name as the movie's narrator, spouting memorable 
lines like "The greatest trick the devil ever pulled was convincing the 
world he didn't exist" (although, obviously, he does exist -- What else 
could explain Kris Kross having a comeback in 1996?) while being 
interrogated by police detective Chazz Palminteri (any actor with 
multiple Z's in their name is okay in my book).
        We see the story unfold as Spacey retells it. The five felons, 
upon being released from the lineup, get their revenge on the police by 
exposing a corrupt taxi service -- whereby elite criminals pay to be 
smuggled through town in cop cars -- and stealing all the money and 
drugs in the car. It's a definite case of male bonding for the five 
criminals, who later find out they were brought together by the unseen 
Keyser Soze, who sends a minion to them with an offer they can't 
refuse. Namely, they have to destroy Soze's main competitors in 
organized crime by infiltrating a ship, shooting a bunch of people, 
burning all the drugs and stealing $91 million cash.
        Spacey does a terrific job of bringing his seemingly 
unintelligent "cripple" character to life and Baldwin, Byrne, 
Palminteri and the rest make for a good supporting cast. THE USUAL 
SUSPECTS is one of those movies that deftly mixes scenes of violence 
and explosions with an underlying sense of mystery and suspense, 
keeping the viewer guessing until the very end -- and then still leaving 
a few details open for scrutiny and discussion. I suppose all that would 
be cleared up if I really had rewound the movie and watched it again 
instead of changing the channel and wondering in disbelief what the 
hell Kris Kross was doing on MTV. A different mystery, I guess, 
which may turn into a _murder_ mystery if that video ever comes on 
again...
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Christopher Null
     THE USUAL SUSPECTS, the heavily hyped new film from Bryan Singer,
is finally here, and with it comes the answer to the riddle posed in
its high-powered ad campaign, "Who is Keyser Soze?"
     Keyser Soze is a semi-mythical crime kingpin who ultimately
directs the actions of five small-time hoods.  With the promise of $91
million and the opportunity to keep their lives, the enigmatic Keyser
sends the quintet on a fool's errand in San Pedro harbor: to stop a
competitor's huge cocaine sale that would interfere with Keyser's own
drug operation.  As the film opens, we see the catastrophic results of
the mission.
     The band of unlucky criminals includes the classy Dean Keaton
(Gabriel Byrne), palsied Verbal Kint (Kevin Spacey), hardware
specialist Hockney (Kevin Pollak), entry-man McManus (Stephen Baldwin),
and the mush-mouthed Fenster (Benicio Del Toro).  Kint, the lone
survivor of the five felons, is quizzed by U.S. Customs Agent Kujan
(Chazz Palminteri) about the crime.  The remainder of the movie shows
us the tale he weaves.
     THE USUAL SUSPECTS puts some neat twists on the classic crime
drama, and it's one of the blackest comedies you'll see this year.  All
the actors nail their parts with ultra-cool finesse, and just listening
to Del Toro mumble his lines is worth the cost of the ticket alone.
Singer's direction is also completely on target.
     My problems with the film come from the plot.  The primary
difficulty is that the movie sometimes gets a little too clever for its
own good, the same problem Hal Hartley ran into with this year's
AMATEUR.  While it keeps you in stitches, the film takes its
multi-layered riddles a little too far, and while this is somewhat
critical to the film, it's still a bit much.  The end result is a
picture bogged down by the weight of maintaining an overdone mystique.
     The other "minor" problem is the mystique itself, regarding the
identity of Keyser Soze.  45 minutes into the film, I placed my bet on
the name of Soze's alter-ego.  An hour later, I won, despite some
rather unfair trickery on behalf of the script.  While the flashback
clues can be very misleading (a la Hitchcock's STAGE FRIGHT), they
never come out and deliberately lie to the viewer.  Regardless, it
still shouldn't stop the audience from figuring it all out, well in
advance.
     Despite all this, THE USUAL SUSPECTS is a funny, visually
stunning, and much-needed change of pace from recent thrillers, which
have had the originality of a Xerox machine.  I'm happy to say that
this one's no copy.
-Christopher Null, Mike's FEEDBACK Magazine / null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Film Critic, Screenwriter, Novelist (Mailing list available)

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Gabriel Byrne, Kevin Spacey, Stephen Baldwin, Kevin Pollak,
      Benicio Del Toro, Chazz Palminteri, Pete Postlethwaite, Giancarlo
      Esposito, Suzy Amis, Dan Hedaya
Director: Bryan Singer
Producers: Michael McDonnell and Bryan Singer
Screenplay: Christopher McQuarrie
Cinematography: Newton Thomas Sigel
Music: John Ottman
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     The "usual suspects" are five men: Dean Keaton (Gabriel Byrne), an
ex-cop-turned-crook who's known for his steely demeanor and nerves of iron;
Michael McManus (Stephen Baldwin), a psycho entry man; Todd Hockney (Kevin
Pollak), a hardware specialist with an instinct for self- preservation; Fred
Fenster (Benicio Del Toro), McManus' partner; and Verbal Klint (Kevin
Spacey), a crippled con man.  As the movie opens, these five are being
bundled into a lineup.  A truckload of stolen guns has been hijacked and the
cops, led by U.S. Customs Special Agent Dave Kujan (Chazz Palminteri), are
primed to get their man.  But no one cracks, and as the criminals sit
together in jail waiting to be charged or released, they hatch a plan for an
elaborate emerald heist.
     The story is told in two different time frames.  In the present,
looking back on events, Klint sits across a desk from Kujan, unfolding the
tale as he remembers it.  But the con man is an unreliable narrator, and
viewers of THE USUAL SUSPECTS are constantly kept guessing about what
"truth" is.  In fiction films, we're used to getting an impartial take on
"reality;" this picture twists that principle.  Not everything presented in
THE USUAL SUSPECTS actually happens, and some things occur differently than
shown.  The opening sequence, which details the climax of the gang's capers,
teases the audience about what may or may not be the ultimate resolution.
     Director Bryan Singer, who debuted in 1993 with PUBLIC ACCESS, has
crafted another in the recent batch of '90s noir thrillers.  THE USUAL
SUSPECTS is steeped in atmosphere, and borrows heavily from dozens of
sources -- Hitchcock, Scorsese, the Coen brothers, and just about every
master of the genre, past or present.  Like Quentin Tarantino, Singer's
greatest strength is culling moments from other sources and using them in
his own mold.  There aren't many unique instances in THE USUAL SUSPECTS, but
the entire film is infused with a freshness that results from the manner in
which Singer has produced it.  The energetic, serpentine plot provides the
perfect playground in which a series of deliciously devious characters can
have fun.
     As the narrative progresses, THE USUAL SUSPECTS constantly raises the
stakes.  The audience is only slowly let into the story -- at the beginning,
everyone on-screen knows more than we do.  Gradually, however, the skein of
deceptions and plot devices is untangled by the switches back and forth
between present and past.  This film requires that a viewer pay careful
attention to details.  Those who get lost have only themselves to blame --
THE USUAL SUSPECTS doesn't take any prisoners.  A trip to the bathroom or
the snack bar will leave you floundering when you return.
     The cast is solid, and several of the actors play against type.  Kevin
Pollak (A FEW GOOD MEN), typically known for comic relief/nice guy roles, is
cold-blooded here.  Kevin Spacey (THE REF), in the best performance of the
film, is completely convincing as the gimpy coward who prefers jobs that
don't require killing.  Gabriel Byrne (LITTLE WOMEN) pulls off his role as
the most enigmatic of the quintet, and Stephen Baldwin (THREESOME) is the
perfect maniac.  Benicio Del Toro (FEARLESS) provides most of the humor,
much of which comes as a result of his nearly indecipherable accent.  The
supporting cast includes Giancarlo Esposito (DO THE RIGHT THING), Pete
Postlethwaite (IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER), Suzy Amis (THE BALLAD OF LITTLE
JO), and Dan Hedaya (BLOOD SIMPLE).
     Singer does an excellent job of blending humor into his noir thriller.
There's enough to avoid a sense of ponderousness, but not so much that THE
USUAL SUSPECTS becomes campy.  Unlike many motion pictures, this one
continually builds to its conclusion.  It starts out as the story of a small
job, then evolves into a search for the dreaded Keyser Soze -- a legendary
criminal of such viciousness that even hardened men like Keaton think twice
before crossing him.  As THE USUAL SUSPECTS moves towards its inevitable
finale, Soze's shadowy presence becomes increasingly more ominous and
important, and we get the sense that those who think they hold the cards
actually have the weakest hands.  In the way it folds its various elements
into a single resolution (which the astute viewer will be able to guess
beforehand), Singer's film can be accused of toying with the audience.
However, at times like this, when the person tugging the strings is adept at
his craft, being toyed with can be a worthwhile experience.  THE USUAL
SUSPECTS is an accomplished synthesis of noir elements and, as such, is an
entertaining entry to the genre.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Zak Forsman
Last year's winner of the Oscar for Best Original Screenplay went to THE
USUAL SUSPECTS (an award I was hoping would go to SMOKE, but that wasn't
even nominated). This film has an impressive run of dialogue and is
well-acted, but in my opinion the story suffers from a serious defect. It
seems the story exists only to set up the audience for the twist at the
film's end, which by now I'm sure many of you have seen. The sequence is
certainly exciting and it is interesting to watch it unfold, but when it
is finished, what do you have? Nothing, which can only mean that the story
was a perfunctory step on the way to the 'cool idea' that McQuarrie had
for an ending. A true use of a twist (or twists) that exist in service the
story is CHINATOWN.  "...my sister, my daughter, my sister and my
daughter!"  Each surprising turn moves you closer to opening up the heart
of the story, instead of devoiding it of worth. And that is what THE USUAL
SUSPECTS did. It essentially said, "most of what you have just seen was a
lie."  In my opinion, that is nearly as bad as the "it was all a dream"
bit used most notably in NORTH. This is something I refer to as cinematic
suicide. However, this in no way compares to my disdain over the fact that
the story existed only for the sake of the twist/ending.
This film was directed much in the same manner by which it was written. 
Bryan Singer is the type of director that would be described as
stylistic.  I put him in the same league as someone like Michael Bay who
has brought us the likes of BAD BOYS and THE ROCK. Both of these directors
are out to prove that they can do 'cool shots', plain and simple. It's the
Tony Scott brand of filmmaking. An example of Bryan Singers work in THE
USUAL SUSPECTS would be the matching dissolve he performs from the
circular cave scene at the beach to a coffee mug. What was the reasoning
for this, you ask?  What motivated the apparent relationship between that
scene and the coffee mug? Nothing. There is no relationship. Perhaps if
the scene at the cave had a strong relation to the man, Kobayashi, which
we eventually learn is actually written on the bottom of the coffee mug,
there would have been a valid reason for the dissolve.  However, the only
motivating factors were that they were both round and that Singer thought
the dissolve would look neat. Bryan Singer's stylistic approach to
filmmaking is about the most superficial I've ever scene--second only to
Michael Bay's.
Now, the actor's performances are something to behold. Kevin Spacey
(GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS) won an Academy Award for this role and he is a very
good character actor. Although, I think he's done a few other films in
which he was even more deserving of the award. Gabriel Byrne (MILLER'S
CROSSING) perfectly underplays his character as a thoughtful man who seems
uninterested by what happens around him until it directly affects him. The
rest of the cast performs together well with one exception. Kevin Pollak
(A FEW GOOD MEN) does not have a hold on his character at all. He seems to
be trying to do a tough guy, but he comes across as, in all honesty, like
he's acting like a tough guy. He's done better work before and this hit me
as a surprise.
Anyway, you'll either love or hate this film--there's no middle ground
because there is very little depth here. I'd say it has about as much
depth as PULP FICTION, which I liked because it was about its characters,
not the technique. This is also the only film that a certain friend of
mine and I disagree on. He called it 'refreshing'. I call it a gimmick. 
Ratings are based on the four-star system.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE USUAL SUSPECTS is a fascinating movie that will reward the
careful viewer, but may leave the dilettantes dazed and confused.  The
star of the show is the Escher-print style script by Christopher
McQuarrie.  The plot is dense, but intriguing.  It keeps your eyes
glued to the screen.
     An excellent director, Bryan Singer, assembled a wonderful
ensemble cast that has a stronger second string of players that the
stars of most movies.  As the movie starts, Dean Keaton (Gabriel
Byrne), Todd Hockney (Kevin Pollak), Michael McManus (Stephen Baldwin),
Fred Fenster (Benicio Del Toro), and Verbal Klint (Kevin Spacey) are
five crooks that have been rounded up by U. S. Customs Special Agent
Dave Kujan (Chazz Palminteri) for a lineup.  The five think something
is up because, with the exception of Verbal, they are all big time
crooks whom the police would never put in the lineup together.
Moreover, they do not think the cops believe they are responsible for
the crime, so why are the cops doing it?  This is one of the delicious
enigmas of the story.  Stay with it and pay attention for there are
many more.  The plot has more twists than Lombard street in San
Francisco.
     The interaction of all the characters is both fascinating and
unusual.  A typical scene is the start of the interrogation of Verbal
by Agent Kujan.  The agent boasts, "Let me tell you something.  I'm
smarter than you are.  I'm going to get it out of you whether you like
it or not." To which, Verbal retorts, "I'm no rat" and promptly
attempts, unsuccessfully, to shut up.
     The actors were finely tuned and well controlled by the director.
Only Gabriel Byrne gave just a pedestrian performance.  The others were
quite good.  The biggest surprise for me was Stephen Baldwin who gave a
performance reminiscent of James Woods.  Baldwin was giddy and hyper in
every scene, and you felt like he might explode at any minute.  Chazz
Palminteri was compelling as a tough but very smart cop who was
constantly being outfoxed.  Kevin Spacey played a part slightly out of
character for him, but he was excellent at it.  Nevertheless, I have
liked Spacey better in other movies; see, for example, his wonderful
role of The Other Man in CONSENTING ADULTS.
     I refuse to say more about the plot other than its central theme
revolves around a character known as Keyser Soze (pronounced Kai-'zer
Sue-'za).  This guy is likened to the devil in the movie, but the
closest character in fiction would be Professor Moriarty from Sherlock
Holmes.  As the movie unfolds, it is not clear whether Keyser Soze
exists or if he is just a legend.  Moreover, for those who might be
inclined to believe in him as Agent Kujan does sometimes, it is even
less clear whom he might be.  An enigma wrapped in an enigma as they
say.  This conundrum alone was worth the price of admission.
     The ending makes the show.  I am not good at nor I do not enjoy
trying to guess whodunits.  In THE USUAL SUSPECTS I got part of it
right but only part.  Stay to the end even if you hate the show.
     The supporting cast, especially Jack Baer (Giancarlo Esposito),
Jeff Rabin (Dan Hedaya), and Kobayashi (Pete Postlethwaite), as
previously mentioned was quite strong.  The best was Pete
Postlethwaite.  How he got his name of Kobayashi as one of many
mysteries that is wrapped up in the last few minutes of the show.  In
tiny parts were Suzy Amis as Edie Finneran and Paul Bartel (from EATING
RAOUL) as an unnamed Smuggler.  Let me say that EATING RAOUL should be
required viewing for anyone interested in film as it shows how funny
and innovative a low budget picture can be.
     The camera work (Tom Sigel), the editing (John Ottman), the music
(Larry Groupe) and to a lesser extent, the sets (Howard Cummings) were
other parts of the movie that gave it high energy and made it so
unusual.  A typical scene would have sharp cuts to tight close-ups with
dramatic music to accentuate the cuts.  The lighting was frequently
such that part of the character's face was bathed in light and the rest
of the scene was naturally dark.  Frequently the camera angles were
strange and the editing was at times and at a pace that surprise you.
     THE USUAL SUSPECTS runs a fast 1:46.  The movie is rated R mainly
for funny, but quite filthy dialog.  Like GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS, the
dialog worked.  Profanity, in my book, is not bad in a movie per se, it
just depends.  There was a lot of violence of the seeing the blood on
wall kind, but I found none of the violence excessive.  I think the
movie would be fine for mature teenagers.  I recommend this picture to
you if you like obscure plots where you have to pay close attention,
and I award it ***.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 1, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Sridhar Prasad
Starring Kevin Spacey, Stephen Baldwin, Benicio Del Toro, Gabriel Byrne,
Kevin Pollak, Chazz Palminteri, and Pete Posthelwaite
    In 1995, Brian Singer and Christopher McQuarrie dreamed up a simple
concept: the audience isn't stupid.  From that, they went on and created the
most plot-driven, intricately pieced movie in the last 25 years.  The
result: the Usual Suspects, one hell of a movie that redefines the word plot
twist.
    The story is convoluted, and is really confusing to read, although easy
to follow on screen.  Special investigator Kujan (Chazz Palminteri) grills
"Verbal" Kint (Kevin Spacey), a crippled con-man who is the lone survivor of
an LA boat explosion that claimed more than 20 victims. Kujan wants to
confirm that his nemesis, the rogue cop Keaton (Gabriel Byrne), is actually
dead. Kint relates the majority of the film in flashback, beginning with the
fateful day when five shifty guys meet in a police-station lineup in New
York City. Along with dour Keaton, Kint encounters cheerfully sociopathic
McManus (Stephen Baldwin), mordantly sarcastic Hockney (Kevin Pollak), and
Fenster (Benicio Del Toro), whose speech is virtually incomprehensible.
Together they plot to steal a small fortune in gems from "New York's Finest
Taxi Service"--crooked cops who provide escort service for visiting drug
kingpins. What follows is a shell-game of violence and betrayal, all hinging
on the identity of a mysterious villain called Keyser Soze.
    The film is brilliantly compact: its the shortest 90 minutes you'll ever
spend in a movie theater.  The cast is exceptional.  Palminteri shines, he
is brutally honest, a true cop, one who is going after the whole story
because its there.  Byrne is terrific, his brooding character, his
seriousness is needed to supplement the hysteria of Benicio Del Toro, who is
a riot as Fenster.  Del Toro is brilliant, his lines are a jumbled mess, you
can't understand a word the man says, but it sure is damn funny.  Baldwin is
also very good, he is careful, methodical, and cold, a chilling character
with a nasty streak of hot-blooded sarcasm.  Pollak is also terrific as
usual, a very good character actor.
    However, this will be forever known as the film that launched Kevin
Spacey.  Spacey is simply breathtaking, he is a force on screen, giving a
magnetic performance that jars the senses at the end of this twisting maze.
Spacey's performance will be remembered for years, for it is the best of his
career, it may be the best supporting actor performance in the last 50
years.  Verbal Kint is a clever storyteller, weak, oppressed, and gleefully
evil to the bone, yet pitiful, one who draws sympathy.  The film is a good
one, a decent film until the last 10 minutes.  What this film boils down to
is the greatest ending in cinematic history, for me at least.  The
revelation of Keyser Soze, the closing gunfights, it is something wondrous.
You have to see this movie about 10 times to believe what they do.
    Kudos to McQuarrie and Singer for giving the audience a delightful,
fast-paced, furiously plot-driven movie with quirky characters, phenomenal
acting, and some hilarious moments stuck in the middle.  McQuarrie refuses
to believe the audience is dumb.  Without furnishing too many details, he
concocts his story and lets it run, hoping the audience gets it at the end.
We do.  This might just be the finest cinematic puzzle ever created.  Kudos
also to Singer and John Ottman, who created the score.  They both create
what is a true film-noir setting, carefully setting up this intricate puzzle
until the final, jarring ending.  There are flaws: more questions raised
than answers, lack of character development, and no strong female characters
(save one).  However, the plot, and that stunning ending, make up for all
the flaws and more.
    If you haven't seen the movie, rent it.  Watch it.  Then rewind the
tape, and watch it again.  Trust me, you'll be amazed.

Author
Michael Chen
Rating: **** (out of ****)
Rating: 9.5 (out of 10)
Director: Bryan Singer
Starring: Stephen Baldwin, Gabriel Byrne, Chazz Palminteri, Kevin
Pollak, Pete Postlethwaite, Kevin Spacey
Screenplay by: Christopher McQuarrie
Duration: 105 minutes
If plagiarism were a crime in film techniques, director Bryan Singer
would be imprisoned for life. Screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie would
be serving a similar sentence. However, since it is not, Singer and
MacQuarrie (who have joined forces again after the not-so-successful
PUBLIC ACCESS) took advantage and duplicated nothing but the best. From
CASABLANCA to PULP FICTION, and even a version of a line (intentionally
or otherwise) from BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID.
The opening credits run while we see water, discernable by the
reflection of streetlights, quietly flowing in the background. It is
dark, and a chilling melody creeps. When the formalities conclude, we
are aboard a ship. It is ‘last night'. We meet a couple of people who
have a brief conversation. Soon after, the ship explodes, and we the
audience have absolutely no idea what's going on, but are dying to know
more.
The principal story starts ‘6 weeks ago', and revolves around five
hardened criminals, who seem unable to escape from the law – even if
they haven't done anything. The five are round up on suspicion of
hijacking a truck carrying gun parts. When they are inevitably released
they team up to plan and execute crimes – including revenge. But they
soon sense that someone is controlling them – someone with power –
knowing their every move. In amongst all this is a cop, at ‘present
day', who is obsessed with pinning down one of those five usual suspects
– an ex-cop.
There should not be more revealed about the plot, as this is a story
that has a twist-in-the-end. However, even if you can anticipate the
surprise, there are copious amounts of clever directing (especially the
final sequence) from fresh-face Bryan Singer with interesting camera
angles that upholds the film. Even though Singer borrows heavily from
prominent directors, he adds ingenious touches of his own for greater
effect. Along with the adroit directing there is nail-biting suspense,
slow-motion action, and superb acting. Not one actor is out of place.
All five criminals are distinct, have different fields of expertise, and
all are characterised brilliantly. The mania of McManus (Baldwin), the
calm authority of Keaton (Byrne), the insouciance of Hockney (Pollak),
the shadowy cowardice of Kint (Spacey), and the unfathomable speech of
Fenster (Benicio Del Toro). Then there's the assertiveness of Special
Agent Kujan (Palminteri), and the unquestioning loyalty of Kobayashi
(Postlethwaite) to his master, and other absorbing characters portrayed
by Suzi Amis, Giancarlo Esposito, and Dan Hedaya. Kevin Spacey is the
prize in this colossal pack, and was honoured with an Academy Award for
Best Supporting Actor. McQuarrie also picked up an Oscar for his
captivating original screenplay.
John Ottman was responsible for the expert editing. Believe it or not he
also composed the enthralling original score. From the first note of
‘Main Theme' to the last note of ‘The Greatest Trick' the music offers
substantial support for the film's atmosphere. Ottman was also the
editor and composer of PUBLIC ACCESS.
Many people oppose watching a film with a twist a second time. I
disagree. By watching it again you can observe how the director and the
screenwriter have hidden and revealed clues, how they have tried to
steer the audience away from the ending. First time is for
entertainment. Second time is for art. This film is certainly worthwhile
to see again. To date, I have watched it five times. (Two of those five
times I thought, ‘well, I'll just watch about half-an-hour,' but ended
up watching the entire film because it is so entertaining.) I'm not
exactly a noir fan, so it is assured that this particular crime film
appeals to a wider audience.
One minor thing I would like to point out is that the hospitalised
Hungarian's speech should have been subtitled because it is of some
importance.
THE USUAL SUSPECTS has a skilled director, an engrossing screenplay, and
ten praiseworthy performances. The film runs a fast 105 minutes. Don't
miss a minute of it.
Welcome any questions, comments, and criticisms to
microchip81@hotmail.com.

Author
Joan Ellis
     THE USUAL SUSPECTS is confusing, implausible, and very successful.
If that's convoluted, so is the movie.  It shows that a cast with
self-confidence and style can take a plot full of holes and wrap it in
panache.  It doesn't matter a whit that nothing in the movie makes
sense.  Just watching the chaos unfold in the hands of these actors is
reward enough.
     The film opens with a rare moment of clarity as five very literate
felons appear in a police lineup.  Tossed into a communal jail cell,
McManus (Stephen Baldwin), Keaton (Gabriel Byrne), Hockney (Kevin
Pollak), Fenster (Benicio Del Toro), and Verbal Kint (Kevin Spacey)
wonder why the cream of their criminal crop would be rounded up and
impounded together, but proceed anyway to plan an operation so
undefined that is impossible to describe, much less understand.
     There is a lot of dying in this movie, but it's fairly impersonal
because the trigger man usually lurks in the shadows, of which there
are many.  Twenty-seven bodies are laid out on a pier in the opening
scene, and the movie works its way backward from there, trying to
figure out who they are and how they got there.  What we do know is
that the dazzling finale is the illogical outcome of the jail cell
plotting session.
     Over the whole intricate web hangs the spectre of Keyser Soze, an
infamous villain who assumed mythical qualities in the criminal world
after committing some unimaginable symbolic gesture.  The unseen Soze
sends Kobayashi (Pete Postlethwaite), a chillingly cruel emissary, to
our quintet of bandits.  It is Kobayashi who inspires terror the
old-fashioned way:  with cold eyes and words far more powerful than
guns.  Postlethwaite freezes us in our seats with his performance.
     Chazz Palminteri puts his personal stamp on a good cop determined
to untangle the yarn, and the gifted Suzy Amis is on hand as the lawyer
who inspires in Keaton dreams of going straight, but hers is virtually
a non-speaking part.  This is a movie about bad guys doing bad things
with eccentricity and style.  How long has it been since you sat
frozen, watching a hatch lever turning in the belly of a ship, knowing
that the devil himself is on the other side?
     Director Bryan Singer has created the feel of a sophisticated 30s
mystery; Christopher McQuarrie delivers the dialogue in a great mix of
standard four-letter stuff and cerebral criminal thinking; each actor
in this first-rate cast makes his character memorable.  It's a hat
trick.
     From beginning to end, the story is overwhelmed by style.  This
is a time to forget the plot for once and concentrate on enjoying an
actors' field day with a good script.  Newton Thomas Sigel's
photography is wildly sophisticated and works with John Ottman's
ominous score as a real suspense builder.  You may well find delicious
pleasure in being thoroughly caught up in a movie you don't
understand.  Remember, nothing's perfect.


Author
James Brundage
There are really two types of crime movies: the ones that suck you in with
their complex plots, interesting characters, and intense situations, and the
ones that you spend two to three hours in front of a television bored out of
your gourd. With two Academy Awards (Best Supporting Actor, Kevin Spacey,
Best Original Screenplay, Christopher MaQuarrie), I shouldn't have to tell
you which category "The Usual Suspects" falls under.
The movie, filled with intricate plot twists, follows a five-criminal bunch
who you love to hate as they get their revenge upon the NYPD for arresting
them one too many times – only to discover that the scheme itself has more
to it than it seems, cumulating with 27 bodies on a pier in San Pedro,
California and $93M sitting in a truck.
Believe me, no matter how smart you are, the ending to "The Usual Suspects"
will never strike you as Usual.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When most films end people get up, go to their cars, and drive
away.  Then there are some films that get a significant part of the
audience standing around and discussing--maybe even puzzling over--what
they have seen.  There are a lot of decent films in the first category,
but there are almost no bad films in the second.  A new film to discuss
and puzzle over is THE USUAL SUSPECTS.  This is a complicated crime
story, occasionally violent, but one that builds compellingly to one
climax, then suddenly turns into a complex set of logic puzzles that
must be solved to understand what actually happened in the story.  This
is not like RASHOMON which throws up its hands and says truth is
unknowable because everybody sees things differently.  Instead, it is
closer to Raymond Smullyan's logic problems where we know only that
certain things are true if other things are false.  One feels all the
information is there to figure out the truth, if only one can work the
puzzle.  But a complete understanding of the plot may not be possible
without multiple viewings.  But worry not, you don't have to solve the
puzzles completely to enjoy the film.
     The film begins with a cryptic but beautifully filmed crime scene.
A man is apparently shot; a fire is set.  But what exactly have we
seen?  The police (played by Chazz Palminteri and Dan Hedaya) pick up
the aptly-named Verbal (Kevin Spacey) and he begins his tale of the six
weeks that led to the crime.  In flashback, when a police operation
fails, the police bring to a line-up five suspects, and based on this
chance introduction the five decide to combine their various talents on
a job.  Along with Spacey, the five are played by Gabriel Byrne, Kevin
Pollak, Stephen Baldwin, and Benicio Del Toro.  From there the plot of
the film doubles and redoubles in complexity.  And casting his shadow
over the whole plot is a mysterious international criminal, Kaiser
Soza, who may be real or may be a total myth.
     The film was co-produced and directed by Bryan Singer, whose only
previous film is the relatively unknown PUBLIC ACCESS.  Here he directs
a clever screenplay by Christopher McQuarrie.  Singer and McQuarrie
manage nicely to characterize each of the criminals with just a few
moments in the line-up and in the subsequent police examination.  But
even with the characterization, they keep the story moving forward ata
headlong pace, forcing the audience to work to keep up.
     Curiously, for a film as small and somewhat experimental as this,
the producers have chosen to go for a cast with a surprising number of
familiar actors.  We are generally used to seeing at most one or two
recognizable actors in independent films and, indeed, those films are
often the route actors use these days to become more familiar.  The
producers have chosen to go with a cast of familiar and established
character actors, even in some roles that really do not require it.
Concieveably with the film's main attraction being its writing, the
budget elsewhere was low enough that the producers could afford to go
with an established cast.  It is not clear it pays off for them,
however.  Putting an actor like Paul Bartel in a tiny and undemanding
role may be more of a distraction than a casting necessity.  Still, a
veteran cast does deliver the goods for Singer.
     This is a film that looks good, and has good actors, but the
writing is really the film's strongest point.  This is a film that
demands some thought and perhaps even multiple viewings to understand
fully and it gets a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Russell C. Friedberg
     Hello everybody, I've been lurking here for more than a year, but
have never been moved to post until now.  I've seen basically every big
release movie and many small ones over the last few years, but I watch
a movie as a fan not a connoisseur.
     Last night I went to see a showing of THE USUAL SUSPECTS, a movie
I had only heard of from an article in GQ magazine.  Let me just say
one thing: WOW!!!
     This was the finest picture I've seen in a very long time.  I
actually clapped at the end!  The ensemble cast actually worked as an
ensemble, and every single character, even the small part supporting
cast, was intriguing.  The acting was wonderful!  The directing was
wonderful!  The plot was far beyond wonderful!  A million little twists
all of which make perfect sense as you go forward in the movie, and
even better sense looking back after the end.  One of the few movies
which twists the plot for the sake of the plot, not for the sake of the
twist.  I won't tell you what the movie is about, just recommend that
you pay very close attention to everything that happens, and even then
if you figure out where the movie is heading before there are only
fifteen minutes left, I'll be impressed.
     I just wanted to say this, because I'd like to see more movies
which are even almost as good as this one.  I'd highly recommend going
and putting in your money to tell Hollywood they should make more like
this!  Kudos to Bryan Singer (the director), and every member of the
cast!

Author
Ian Rooney
     THE USUAL SUSPECTS is a bad film that somehow got rave reviews.
>From the monotonous opening credits I knew I had been taken.
The film opens opens with about a five-minute nighttime shot of
shimmering black water, nothing else.  Nothing but the opening credits,
light shimmering on black water and ominous, melodramatic music.  I
recall thinking of how inexpensive it would be to go with five minutes
of black water and generic music that was probably recorded in the
1960's.  Having just paid $8 and change to enter, and then paid out for
popcorn that costed the equivalent of a full-course dinner at Swiss
Chalet, I grew a little impatient waiting for something to happen.
Unfortunately, something did happen.  A grimy little low-budget film
with lots of vulgarity and violence is what happened.  Not even Pulp-
Fiction level vulgarity and violence, either.  Boring cliche's, macho
stereotypes,  1970's-TV-Cop-Show familiarity with a lot of vulgar
language and grimy homo-eroticism thrown in to spice it up.  Cheap!
Cheap!  It screams cheap!  They must have found some old New-York hacks
to write and direct this piece of shit.  It is almost like they just
dusted off an old film from the seventies and released it.  What an
appalling.  PULP FICTION was gross and vulgar, yes, but at least whoever
made it had enough class to get away with it.  Whatever low-life made
THE USUAL SUSPECTS has no business playing with vulgarity and violence
because those are extra luxuries that a film like this simply cannot
afford.
     The low-lifes in the media who both enjoyed this film and gave it
a good review should have their heads checked so that they qualify for
disability when they are fired.  A lot of people will be disappointed
and ripped off by THE USUAL SUSPECTS.

Author
Bryant Frazer
     RESERVOIR DOGS (1992), of course, is the epochal film by
Quentin Tarantino that borrowed most of its ideas from the bank of
movie history, and then put such a hip, self-aware spin on the
proceedings that it pretty much revolutionized American movie-going, if
not filmmaking.  RASHOMON (1950) is the epochal film by Akira Kurosawa
that told the story of a crime four different ways, from four different
perspectives, and thoroughly debunked the veracity that had previously
been ascribed to stories told with the motion picture camera.  Like
RASHOMON, THE USUAL SUSPECTS shows us key events only in flashback, and
since we're hearing the narrative from a con man who's being
interrogated by a cop, we--like the cop--have to wonder whether he's
telling the truth.  Like RESERVOIR DOGS, it gives us an assemblage of
hoods who would be fairly distasteful and uninteresting if not for a
skewed code of values, and relies on snappy dialogue and character tics
to build their personalities.
     The problem comes when screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie tries to
cross Kurosawa with Tarantino, and winds up subverting both of them in
search of a big payoff that apes Hitchcock.  Director Bryan Singer
works so hard at evoking an air of world-weary fatalism that it's a
shame to find out, at the end, that the little things--like characters
and story--don't matter as much as the oh-so-clever denouement.
     The movie opens "last night," as a subtitle explains, when some
kind of a gunfight has ended with the death of nearly everyone on-board
a ship that's been burned to a crisp at the docks.  In the "present
day," customs agent Kujan (Chazz Palminteri, who was so good in BULLETS
OVER BROADWAY but has less to do here) is grilling a survivor of the
shoot-out nicknamed Verbal (Kevin Spacey) about the events that
transpired since he and four other ex- convicts were gathered "six
weeks ago" for a police lineup having something to do with a hijacked
shipment of guns.  The rest of the movie switches between Kujan's
interrogation of Verbal and Verbal's recollection of how he and his
co-conspirators found themselves in the middle of a $91 million deal at
the docks.  Among the neat tricks that this structure allows (it
actually reminds me most of CITIZEN KANE) is a couple of scenes where
Kujan gets a new lead on the case during real time and then bursts back
into the room to pull his new knowledge on Verbal, who's visibly
agitated that the cop knows so much.
     What's Verbal got to hide?  Well, that's unclear until we
eventually learn about a mythical Turkish figure who's putting these
hapless characters through their paces, and who Verbal fears will have
him killed if Verbal spills the beans.  This figure, named Kaiser Zose
(sp? My kingdom for a press kit!), is probably the movie's most
interesting creation.  The only one of Verbal's companions who's of
much interest is Gabriel Byrne's Keaton, the ex-con with a heart of
gold who's trying to build a new life for himself.  Of course, we've
seen this character about a zillion times before (most recently played
by David Caruso in Barbet Schroeder's KISS OF DEATH), but Byrne is
endearing, and his lawyer girlfriend Edie (played by Suzy Amis, who has
a small role, but a knack for picking interesting scripts) is testimony
to his new domestic impulses.  The script goes out of its way to paint
Byrne's Keaton as a decent man trapped in a noirish downward spiral,
and the most intriguing part of the movie may have to do with the
questions that begin to swirl about his real intentions.  Kevin
Spacey's performance as Verbal is thoroughly engaging, which is
fortunate, since he's the real story-teller.  It's the rest of the gang,
who act more like stereotypes from made-for-cable thrillers, that turn
us off from caring too much about their plight.
     Is it spoiling anything to say that this movie's raison d'etre is
the surprise ending?  I haven't seen a critic yet keep his or her mouth
shut about it (shades of THE CRYING GAME), and your enjoyment of the
movie may well hinge on exactly how much you appreciate the plot
twists.  THE USUAL SUSPECTS is one of those movies that's terrifically
entertaining, but leaves you somewhat cold afterward.  I can't imagine
sitting through it a second time, although some folks say that's
exactly what they did, to make sure they got everything straight.  The
dialogue is pretty stiff (with Palminteri's standard-issue whodunit
monologue near the end a stand-out example), and it becomes hard to
care about characters when we know the movie really doesn't.
     The editing (by John Ottman) is very interesting, with certain
scenes shot and put together seemingly to maximize confusion.  In other
places, the narrative becomes disjointed, with near-jump cuts from
character to character threatening to befuddle the casual viewer.  The
direction also veers toward a jarring artiness, with a flashback
dissolving into a coffee cup, the camera making Caligari angles out of
an elevator shaft, and a few more apparent sub-Scorseseisms.  All of
this looked a little careless on the surface, but I suspect the
artifice was carefully employed to maximize audience involvement with
an edgy story line that is, really, coming out of the mouth of one of
its characters.  The technique seems to have worked -- the Friday night
crowd I saw it with was quite willingly strung along, with folks
sitting forward in their seats to pay closer attention, gasping at all
the right moments and chattering happily, minds boggled as they spilled
out onto the city sidewalks for the walk home.
     Like this spring's SHALLOW GRAVE, THE USUAL SUSPECTS is a
crowd-pleaser, but I'm similarly suspicious of the film's merits.
Quentin Tarantino is a very clever filmmaker, but he's also a
perfectionist auteur whose whacked-out persona shines loud and clear
through his pictures, even the one (TRUE ROMANCE) he didn't direct.
Clever by itself isn't enough, and it takes a little more raw energy to
propel a film that's about an ensemble of characters who are doomed
even before the first reel threads its way into the projector.  And
while Singer happily acknowledged the influence of RASHOMON in
pre-release interviews, somebody here seems not to have noticed that
the only reason the trick worked for Kurosawa is that lives were
changed by the way that those stories were told.  The only thing that
really changes over the course of THE USUAL SUSPECTS is a policeman's
ideas about who was responsible for a crime, and an audience's ideas
about what the hell is going on.
DEEP FOCUS: Archived Movie Reviews by Bryant Frazer
http://www.panix.com/~bfrazer/flicker/ bfrazer@panix.com

Author
Joe Clark
Collar enough Hollywood B-list actors for a single picture-- Gabriel
Byrne, Kevin Spacey, and a very greasy Stephen Baldwin, among others--
and boom, you've got a gestalt. Bryan Singer's The Usual Suspects sets
something of a high-water mark for the crime-gone-wrong genre and
rivals Pulp Fiction for moxie. Screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie's
unrelentingly intelligent, multi-layered storyline is so intricate
that to tell you anything about the plot would set the rest of the
story unraveling. (Truly.)
So let's talk about subtext. This is a blood-stained but strangely
sexless guy movie. I counted all of four female characters, but they
barely surface amid the main cast's riptide of uneasy male
camaraderie. This is the '90s, so of course a palpable homo friction
is part of the weave; while it ain't homoerotic per se, it is
homo-interesting, with only one "fag" epithet to sock you in the eye.
Still, hyper-leftist cinephiles obsessed with the Holy Trinity of
minority representation ("in the name of the Gender, the Race, and the
Sexual Orientation") will have their hands full grappling with the
film's portrayal of disability: It's every bit as nuanced and depraved
as the disabled character himself. The Usual Suspects is exciting,
daring, and gripping, but it's also the most feverishly anti-crip
movie of the last 20 years, a fact I was almost enraptured enough to
forgive. Almost.

Author
Chad Polenz
The Usual Suspects
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, R, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
[mystery/crime]
starring: Kevin Spacey (Verbal), Gabriel Byrne (Keaton), Stephen Baldwin
(McManus), Chazz Palmintari (Customs Special Agent Dave Kujon), produced by
Bryan Singer, Michael McDonnell, written by Christopher McQuarrie, directed
by Bryan Singer.
If O. Henry was alive today, "The Usual Suspects" might be the type of story
he would write. This film is jam-packed with details, detective work,
conspiracies, action, adventure, and most of all mystery. It's interesting to
watch because of the way that the story is told, but what holds it back is
the fact it's too much of a confusing Hollywood mystery to take seriously.
The story is a generic crime/mystery story. We  work our way up  to "now"
through a series of flashbacks. We meet our main character, Verbal (Spacey),
a small time hood who is about to post bail in L.A., but Customs Special
Agent Dave Kujon (Palmintari) thinks there's more to the story than he's
telling them. He interviews Verbal about the history leading up to the
incident that is the climax and most important part of the story. 
Basically, the story surrounds five different hoods who are arrested because
they are, as the title states, the usual suspects. Gabriel Byrne is fine as
Keaton, the so-called leader, while Stephen Baldwin goes a bit overboard as
the wannabe psycho McManus. But considering the casting of such characters,
the film's first major flaw is evident (Kevin Pollack as a dangerous, wanted
felon?). In fact, the characters themselves seem very out of place.
Eventually the story gets past this and starts to tell its complicated story
of international crime and conspiracies.
The gang is confronted by a European businessman who works for Keyser Soze,
supposedly the most ruthless gangster on the Earth (although no one has heard
of him). The man leaves behind evidence that could convict them all without a
shadow of doubt. It turns out each of them had all stolen from Soze, but didn'
t know it at the time. In order to make restitution, they must destroy a
Hungarian ship supposedly carrying $91 million in cocaine from one of Soze's
rivals. This is could be considered a typical gangster movie plot device, but
it's not told in a typical manner. 
The element of the mythological, devil-like Soze is creative, but it doesn't
have as much effect on the mood as it wants to. It's almost as if the film is
trying to take some of the things that made "The Crow" excellent and apply it
to a more realistic setting.
Most of the film is a serious of crimes and other events between the gang
and associates of Soze. There's a lot of action, but it's not always exciting
because it's so difficult to tell what's happening and why. The ending is a
real shocker though, it almost makes you want to watch the whole thing over
again.
"The Usual Suspects" is a well-made picture, but it just tries too hard...
period.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Sridhar Prasad
Starring Kevin Spacey, Stephen Baldwin, Benicio Del Toro, Gabriel Byrne,
Kevin Pollak, Chazz Palminteri, and Pete Posthelwaite
    In 1995, Brian Singer and Christopher McQuarrie dreamed up a simple
concept: the audience isn't stupid.  From that, they went on and created the
most plot-driven, intricately pieced movie in the last 25 years.  The
result: the Usual Suspects, one hell of a movie that redefines the word plot
twist.
    The story is convoluted, and is really confusing to read, although easy
to follow on screen.  Special investigator Kujan (Chazz Palminteri) grills
"Verbal" Kint (Kevin Spacey), a crippled con-man who is the lone survivor of
an LA boat explosion that claimed more than 20 victims. Kujan wants to
confirm that his nemesis, the rogue cop Keaton (Gabriel Byrne), is actually
dead. Kint relates the majority of the film in flashback, beginning with the
fateful day when five shifty guys meet in a police-station lineup in New
York City. Along with dour Keaton, Kint encounters cheerfully sociopathic
McManus (Stephen Baldwin), mordantly sarcastic Hockney (Kevin Pollak), and
Fenster (Benicio Del Toro), whose speech is virtually incomprehensible.
Together they plot to steal a small fortune in gems from "New York's Finest
Taxi Service"--crooked cops who provide escort service for visiting drug
kingpins. What follows is a shell-game of violence and betrayal, all hinging
on the identity of a mysterious villain called Keyser Soze.
    The film is brilliantly compact: its the shortest 90 minutes you'll ever
spend in a movie theater.  The cast is exceptional.  Palminteri shines, he
is brutally honest, a true cop, one who is going after the whole story
because its there.  Byrne is terrific, his brooding character, his
seriousness is needed to supplement the hysteria of Benicio Del Toro, who is
a riot as Fenster.  Del Toro is brilliant, his lines are a jumbled mess, you
can't understand a word the man says, but it sure is damn funny.  Baldwin is
also very good, he is careful, methodical, and cold, a chilling character
with a nasty streak of hot-blooded sarcasm.  Pollak is also terrific as
usual, a very good character actor.
    However, this will be forever known as the film that launched Kevin
Spacey.  Spacey is simply breathtaking, he is a force on screen, giving a
magnetic performance that jars the senses at the end of this twisting maze.
Spacey's performance will be remembered for years, for it is the best of his
career, it may be the best supporting actor performance in the last 50
years.  Verbal Kint is a clever storyteller, weak, oppressed, and gleefully
evil to the bone, yet pitiful, one who draws sympathy.  The film is a good
one, a decent film until the last 10 minutes.  What this film boils down to
is the greatest ending in cinematic history, for me at least.  The
revelation of Keyser Soze, the closing gunfights, it is something wondrous.
You have to see this movie about 10 times to believe what they do.
    Kudos to McQuarrie and Singer for giving the audience a delightful,
fast-paced, furiously plot-driven movie with quirky characters, phenomenal
acting, and some hilarious moments stuck in the middle.  McQuarrie refuses
to believe the audience is dumb.  Without furnishing too many details, he
concocts his story and lets it run, hoping the audience gets it at the end.
We do.  This might just be the finest cinematic puzzle ever created.  Kudos
also to Singer and John Ottman, who created the score.  They both create
what is a true film-noir setting, carefully setting up this intricate puzzle
until the final, jarring ending.  There are flaws: more questions raised
than answers, lack of character development, and no strong female characters
(save one).  However, the plot, and that stunning ending, make up for all
the flaws and more.
    If you haven't seen the movie, rent it.  Watch it.  Then rewind the
tape, and watch it again.  Trust me, you'll be amazed.
