Title
Review for Octopussy (1983)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Roger Moore, Maud Adams, Louis Jourdan, Kristina Wayborn, 
      Kabir Bedi, Steven Berkoff, Desmond Llewelyn, Lois Maxwell, 
      Robert Brown, Walter Gotell
Director: John Glen
Producer: Albert R. Broccoli 
Screenplay: George MacDonald Fraser and Richard Maibaum & 
      Michael G. Wilson
Cinematography: Alan Hume
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: MGM/UA
     It's probably just a coincidence, but the two Bond films that Maud 
Adams appeared in -- THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN and OCTOPUSSY -- are 
easily the silliest entries in the long-running series (not counting the 
intentional spoof CASINO ROYALE).  In a duel of dumb storylines, 
OCTOPUSSY loses, but only by a length.  There's a fine line between wit 
and absurdity, and this particular movie too often falls on the wrong 
side.
     1983 was the year of competing Bonds -- Connery against Moore; 
NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN against OCTOPUSSY (the thirteenth "official" 
entry).  Even though Connery's return was a remake of THUNDERBALL and 
didn't have the John Barry/Monty Norman theme music, it was still better 
than OCTOPUSSY.  After twelve years off, Connery was up for playing 007 
again.  Moore, on the other hand, had been at it for a decade, and was 
just going through the motions.  Fatuousness replaced flair.   Bond, 
never the most rounded character at the best of times, had become a 
caricature of himself.
     The plot for OCTOPUSSY is so circuitous and convoluted that it 
doesn't make much sense.  Bond movies are at their best when they have a 
straightforward storyline -- viewers don't want to piece together 
different aspects of the film.  However, even deep thought won't resolve 
all of OCTOPUSSY's tangled plot knots.  This movie mixes jewel 
smuggling, counterfeiting, a circus traveling through East Germany, and 
a maverick Soviet general bent on setting off an atomic bomb.  Who else 
can the British government call upon than 007 to get to the bottom of 
matters?
     There are two "top" villains in OCTOPUSSY:  Kamal (Louis Jourdan), 
the smooth head of the smuggling/counterfeiting operation, and General 
Orlov (Steven Berkoff), the cold warrior who believes the time is ripe 
for a Soviet invasion of the West.  While Jourdan is deliciously cool, 
Berkoff gives the worst performance, bar none, of any Bond bad guy.  
While a certain element of over-the-top acting is expected from everyone 
in a 007 adventure, Berkoff does an offensively bad job that renders 
every scene he's in almost unwatchable.
     Despite having the title role, Maud Adams doesn't have much more to 
do than in THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN.  The film's second Bond girl, 
Magda (Kristina Wayborn) is equally in the background.  This isn't a 
film where 007 is especially concerned with the women, except to slip 
into and out of their beds.  The on-screen camaraderie shared by Moore 
and his leading ladies since THE SPY WHO LOVED ME died with OCTOPUSSY.  
     The film moves from India to Cuba to Germany.  The most foolish 
elements of the film include a bizarre chase through the streets of New 
Delhi, Bond doing a Tarzan imitation, and an attack by circus performers 
on the villain's hideout.  007 has a variety of disguises here, 
including a mechanical crocodile, a gorilla suit, and a clown costume.  
OCTOPUSSY has its funny moments, but there are a few too many times when 
we're laughing at the movie rather than with it.  
     Ultimately, it's the extravagant stunts and chases that save 
OCTOPUSSY from the scrap heap.  The pre-credits episode features a 
stunning race between a 12-foot long jet and a heat-seeking missile.  
Later in the film, there's a pulse-pounding chase-and-battle sequence 
that takes place on the roof of a moving train.  The climactic struggle 
manages to top that, transpiring on a plane in flight.
     After OCTOPUSSY, Roger Moore announced his intention to retire from 
the role.  Considering his lackluster performance here, which is at 
least partially responsible for this film's absence of flair and energy, 
the decision seemed appropriate.  Ultimately, however, Moore returned 
for one more outing, and, while that film (A VIEW TO A KILL) wasn't a 
positive triumph, it at least gave the actor a better story with which 
to depart.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I had no idea what this movie was about but decided to watch 
it anyway because--hey, who can resist a title like that? And it makes 
you wonder what kind of woman actually has eight of those. Fine, I'm 
a pervert, but what kind of a reaction does a title like OCTOPUSSY 
expect to elicit?
        OCTOPUSSY is one of the more absurd episodes in the 
James Bond series, but then I'm pretty sure every Roger Moore effort 
tips the scale of absurdness. And when the female lead is someone 
named Octopussy, the absurdity springs up. The perversity seems to 
spring up too, at least in a small dose, especially when Octopussy 
reveals that her name was given to her by her father, who always 
called her "my little Octopussy." Funny, I didn't know Jerry Lee Lewis 
had a daughter.
        This time, Bond is out to some some Faberge egg forgers (the 
bastards!), led by Octopussy and her male partner Kamal (at least 
they didn't name him Octodick). Bond meddles in Kabal's business 
one time too many and ends up captive in his palace. He escapes, but 
comes back a little later to get some octopussy. The two find out 
afterwards that they have more in common than just compatible body 
parts and, when Kabal doublecrosses her by placing the customary 
atomic bomb (no Bond movie would be complete without one), 
Octopussy joins Bond's side.
        OCTOPUSSY has its share of good and bad scenes. Good--
the plane chase teaser, the auction scene, the train chase and the circus 
scenes at the end. Bad--the other plane chase, the stuffed sheep head 
dinner (which pushes the limits of good taste... Monkey brains are 
okay, sheep's heads, no.) and that overlong chase through the streets of 
India, culminating in one of the bad guys being impaled on a bed of 
nails. "Get off my bed!" an Indian yells. A failed comic relief moment, 
to say the least. Almost as bad as my Octodick joke.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The Russians have amassed huge armored forces, much stronger than
the West's, along the Czechoslovakian and East German border.  In the
secret councils of the Russian army, the hawks, and what goes for
doves, argue over the strategy to best deal with the West.  The most
ardent nationalists are willing to risk world war and a potential
nuclear holocaust to reign supreme over their Western foes.  Meanwhile,
someone on the Russian side is starting to flood the world's art market
with fake Faberge eggs.  Thus we set the stage for OCTOPUSSY - you
gotta love those Bond names -- 1983's episode of the James Bond saga,
and Roger Moore's penultimate appearance as the famous secret agent.
     Louis Jourdan, as Kamal Khan, is one of the most debonair and
suave of all of Bond's villains, who traditionally are crude ones like
Spectre's #1 or Goldfinger.  Khan has the looks and demeanor that come
closest to rivaling Bond's own.  The smooth talking Khan, wearing
clothes that look like retro Mao, never breaks a sweat.  Going back to
the earlier films, in which Bond is as successful at gambling as with
women, James joins a rigged game of Baccarat with Khan and destroys him
with the ultra-confidence that comes from knowing just how Khan is
cheating.
     For exotic locales we have a most colorful India and a bleak East
Germany.  We are introduced to two Indias, one with the abject poverty
of the street vendors and the other with the opulence of marbled
palaces complete with an array of elegant waiters.  And in a scene
designed solely to shock, we find that the superrich view sheep's eyes
as a special delicacy.  In order to make the ever-gray East Germany
interesting, the picture is visually enlivened by setting it in a
circus, bursting with characters in colorful costumes.
     The best action sequence has Bond himself turned into sport and
hunted like a tiger with men on elephants and on foot, yelling, blowing
horns and banging sticks and drums as they hunt him down.
     John Barry, the Academy Award winning composer for BORN FREE, THE
LION IN WINTER, OUT OF AFRICA and DANCES WITH WOLVES, produces the most
haunting and lovely score of any of the Bond films.  This along with
director John Glen's deliberately slower pacing gives the strangely
serene film the feel more of a romance than an action thriller.
     In the title role of Octopussy we have Maud Adams, who, a decade
earlier starred in THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN.  Octopussy -- her
friends drop the octo - got her name from her father.  She and her
minions wear robes and have tattoos of colorful octopi.  Octopussy's
purpose is more to provide a romantic element than to provide an
another villain.
     The endings of Bond pictures are traditionally full of theatrics.
The overblown conclusion of OCTOPUSSY includes a sequence of James
ridding high above the battle on a hot air balloon made of bright
British flag material.
     OCTOPUSSY runs too long at 2:05.  It is rated PG for comic
violence and sexual innuendo and would be fine for kids around 9 and
up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, thought it was an okay movie but
complained that there weren't any real bad guys in it and that he
didn't understand what all of that egg thing was about.  Overall he
felt the show just didn't make enough sense for him.
