Title
Review for Extreme Adventures of Super Dave, The (2000) (V)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
Ever wished longingly for the glory days when you could watch "Late
Night with David Letterman" and catch a little bit of that wacky Super
Dave Osborne, the stuntman who just can't get things right?  Well now
you can relive those happy moments at your leisure, by taking Super Dave
home in his theatrical -- er, straight-to-video -- debut: THE EXTREME
ADVENTURES OF SUPER DAVE!
What, you aren't frantically dialing your phone to reserve your copy at
the video store yet?  Take off your shoes and put down the car keys.  If
this video has proven anything, it's that what can be funny for 1/2 a
minute probably usually won't make it for 91.  Oh, how SUPER DAVE proves
it.
In the film, Bob Einstein, aka Super Dave Osborne, finds himself a
washed-up stuntman.  His manager has run off with his fortunes, his fun
park is failing, and he finds himself in the charge of a sick little
boy.  Dave retires to train up-and-coming stunt stars, and soon an heir
apparent arises, even dubbing himself Super Dave Jr.  But Jr. turns out
to be a traitor in the employ of Dan Hedaya's evil promoter.  A grudge
match is announced, and Super Dave must jump half a mile of cars in
order to win the prize and save the kid.
That smell is not your garbage can, it's this movie, which has all the
plot of a box of Cheerios.  Perhaps less, if you include the maze on the
back.  Most of the nutty stunts are repeats from "Letterman"'s of old,
and while a few earn a chuckle or two, you aren't likely to break much
of a smile during the running time of this dog.  The production might as
well have been made with a Handicam, and the shot sequence of Dave - car
falling - dummy gets crushed by car gets very old, very fast.
But wait!  Don't give up yet!  filmcritic.com's exclusive inside news
says that next we can expect a feature-length "Top Ten" list!  You gotta
dream.
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
