Title
Review for Fils du requin, Le (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Max Hoffmann
THE SON OF THE SHARK France, 1993, 90 min.
In French  with English Subtitles 
Director: Agne'S Merlet
Producer:  Francois Fries
Screenplay: Merlet, Santiago Amigorena
Camera: Gerard Simon
Editor: Guy Lecorne, Pierre Chaukroun
Cast: Ludovic Veadendaele, Erick Da Silva, Sandrine Blancke, Maxime Leroux
Print Gaumont
     It's HOME ALONE meets THELMA AND LOUISE.  Two young brothers toss
any sense of connection to their community (or humanity) to the wind
and go on a wild and crazy  crime-spree/romp.  They are possibly the
most annoying child characters since Pippi Longstocking vacated the big
screen sometime in the 70s.  By the way, the film is not intended to be
a comedy.  The vacant feeling one leaves the film with makes any
reviewer resort to clutching at straws to classify the experience.  As
the festival program relates: "As Martin, Vandendaele is extraordinary,
communicating more with his eyes than with words as he draws us, albeit
cautiously, into his lonely, battered world."
     Merlet's directoral debut, which won the international critic's
prize at Venice last year) *is* a technical marvel (stunning
photography, totally believable child acting, an intense story line,
thoughtful directing) but the sum of the parts is far greater than the
final "hole."
     Veadendaele and Da Silva play two young brothers (circa ten and
twelve years old) who are already hardened criminals.  Their mother
abandoned them, and their alcoholic father lives in a vacuum, barely
aware of them.  It's not hard to imagine why!  The merry pranksters run
the gamut from driving a bus over a cliff, breaking windows in a
butcher shop and hauling the meat out into the street, to wrapping
excrement in newspapers, lighting them on fire, and fleeing in giggles
after ringing the door bell.  One brother puts a new spin on cake
decorating by letting his bloody nose drip over the dessert tray in a
cafeteria.
     With little hoydens like that, the director/screenwriter failed if
we're supposed to blame their parents and feel sorry for them.  I found
myself not only starting to "understand" Governor Pete Wilson and his
support of "three strikes and you're out" but ruminating on the
possiblity of lowering the age limit.  (Well, the film's set in France,
so that's no good.)
     The two imps prefer to repeatedly run away from home, or juvenile
hall, and live like the homeless, wrecking a trail of vandalism and
crime where-ever they go.  Agnes Merlet was inspired to write the
screenplay based on a small news article she read.  The fatal flaw with
this film is that there is no arc of development for either the
characters or the audience.  You leave the theatre knowing and feeling
nothing more than you did when you entered (except perhaps, an intense
feeling of disgust.)
     But the most disturbing and offensive element of the film is its
casual attitude towards rape and sexual abuse of young girls.  The
young boys are on the brink of "normal" sexual development.  Not fully
understanding their new found attraction to the opposite sex, they
approach physical relations with girls the same way they deal with
items they steal from the local merchants.  Twice the young boys come
very close to completing a rape with a terrified young girl at knife
point.  Through the preceding scenes of the film, the camera glimpses
these victims as beautiful, but distantly hollow ornaments, much the
way the hubba hubba factor is injected into most music videos.  Not
only do the young boys show no signs of remorse for their actions,
but the girls are completely dropped from the plot after their
abuse, and there are no consequences for the crime whatsoever.  It
is inescapable that the director somehow viewed their criminal
tendencies as "forgivable" or "to be expected" considering their
circumstances.  By the time the second rape scene came around I was
wishing the young French girl was more familiar with the ministrations
of Lorena Bobbit (it might have changed the entire tone of this
review).
     The film's title comes from a book that one of the brothers
constantly reads and rereads.  It is the only tangible relic from his
remote mother's presence.  He constantly reads about fish, and
fantasizes about being "the son of a shark....  I wouldn't be so mean."
On viewing this film, by the last reel one could only wish that sharks
eat their own young.
