Title
Review for Serial Mom (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
James Brundage
Starring Kathleen Turner, Sam Waterson, Ricki Lake, Matthew Lillard, Scott
Wesley Morgan, Walt MacPherson, Justin Whalin, and Patricia Dumnock
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 In famous words: they don't make em like they used to.
 When they used to make serial killer movies, the serial killers were guys.
When they used to make serial killer movies, the serial killers used an axe
or a chainsaw.  When they used to make serial killer movies, the serial
killers weren't happily married with children.
 Hey, things change, and change is good.
 Serial Mom is a serial killer so different from the norm that you have to
laugh out loud.  Sure, its got enough gore to satisfy any horror fan, but it
also has a nice satiric edge to it, one that will make anyone with a dark
sense of humor laugh.
 Taking a stab (sorry, couldn't resist) at the golden age of television, you
have Beverly Sutphin (Kathleen Turner), who appears to be a nice mother on
the surface but inside is a completely deranged serial killer.  The motives
for her crimes are silly breakings of social convention (cutting people off
in the parking lot of Jo-Anne's fabric, standing a girl up at a flea market,
eating chicken, wearing white shoes after labor day, etc.), to which she
responds with a viscous psychopathic murder spree (is there any other
kind?).
 Her son is obsessed with horror movies, her husband a mild mannered
dentist.  Her daughter is a social reject, and she is a pillar of the
community.
 The film goes incredibly fast, displaying the time periodically at the
bottom of the screen, so as you are constantly aware of how quickly the
story is progressing in the scary world that the movie creates.  As she
kills, evades police officers, and goes on car chases, Beverly acts as if it
was all a game (she's smiling and giggling all the time).
 Almost a precursor to Scream (which ironically also featured Matthew
Lillard), Serial Mom also picks on horror movies.  A trio of teenagers is
always watching them, and the movies are what initially piqued Beverly's
fascination with gore.  Of course, she only likes gore in the movies.  When
the time comes that she has to remove a bodily organ from the end of a fire
poker, she's all "ewww."
 A warning for potential viewers of this film: you must have a dark sense of
humor.  I'm not talking pseudo-dark. I'm not talking "I thought Scream was
funny" dark.  I'm talking laughed like Robert DeNiro in Cape Fear during
Very Bad Things dark.  You've got to be able to find humor in the most
pessimistic of situations, while keeping your mind open to the general gist
of the movie (the McCarthy era was that of complete repression, which has
potentially insane side effects), and that's very tough.
 Another warning, this film is not for the weak of stomach.  It's got gore
all through, and has enough violence to generate a lobbyist feeding frenzy.
 This film should also probably be seen as a warning against those that are
fascinated and deify the violence on the screen.  A highly comedic and
strangely moral story, Serial Mom is a film that makes every other horror
movie you have ever seen seem tame in comparison.  It can function as a raw
horror movie, but can only be truly appreciated outside of the realm of
campy teenage viewing.  Half of the jokes are too old for most teenagers to
get, anyway.
 Kathleen Turner shines as the psychopath, giving one of the most memorable
performances as a villain in the 90s.  Sam Waterson crawls out of his usual
"Law & Order" shell as the husband of a serial killer.  Mathew Lillard
reminds me of Nicole Kidman's character in To Die For: someone willing to
ride the hype wave of a murder for all that its worth.  Ricki Lake actually
gives a half decent performance, but she's under the skillful direction of
John Waters (Pecker).
 If you're not weak of stomach, heart, or mind, go see Serial Mom.  If you
are weak in any one of these three aspects, the film will murder you.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     If memory serves, Kathleen Turner was originally offered the role
of the neurotic nanny in ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES.  Joan Cusack took
it--and ran with it--and Ms. Turner lent her body heat to less-popular
films like UNDERCOVER BLUES.  Judging from her performance in the new
comedy SERIAL MOM, Ms.  Turner would've made an admirable addition to
the FAMILY.  As it stands, her portrayal of a Betty Crocker killer is
the *only* thing funny in this rather unfunny film.
     Meet Beverly Sutphin (Turner)--a happy homemaker with a happy home
and a happy family.  Dad (Waterston) is a dentist, daughter's (Lake) in
college, and son (Lillard) is a high-school-aged gore-film freak.  They
all smile in the sunshine and beam over breakfast and Mom sends her
clan packing with fresh fruit in their lunches.  But once they've left,
her countenance cracks and Beverly becomes the Housewife From Hell.
     Her "day" begins with obscene phone calls to a neighborhood
woman.  Then comes a visit to the high school and a suggestion from a
teacher that her son seek therapy.  Beverly snaps and, on her way out,
calmly runs the man down with her car.  The body count begins as frau
Sutphin sets her sights on everyone from her daughter's impolite
boyfriend to a nosy neighbor who doesn't recycle...
     Buyer beware, director John Waters--two words: PINK
FLAMINGOS--pushes the "R" rating to the limit.  SERIAL MOM is an
omnibus of gross-out gags and *nothing* is sacred in these Waters.  You
can imagine the director's glee in letting his players play with
everything from fresh phlegm to eviscerated internal organs.  Yum yum.
     Very black it is, very funny it ain't.  SERIAL MOM covers familiar
ground with yet another satirical slam on white-bread America.  Heck, we
saw it only last week in Michael Ritchie's less-daring but far-funnier
COPS AND ROBBERSONS.  Plastic America is a tired cliche.  Period.
     SERIAL MOM also targets the current craze of courtroom
celebrities.  But let's face it, we've already *had* our laughs at
Lorena Bobbitt and Tonya Harding and Menendez and Mendendez.  How can
the film's mildly amusing trial sequence ever *hope* to compete with
Letterman or Leno on a good night?
     Equally distressing is the missing climax.  SERIAL MOM ends
abruptly and without anything resembling a "big finish." Too bad.
     Kathleen Turner is a stitch as June-Cleaver-with-a-cleaver and her
manic mood changes are the lifeblood of SERIAL MOM.  Turner brings a
campy charm to all of her scenes, including an inspired moment of
Hitchcock homage with Beverly bludgeoning a woman (with a leg of lamb,
no less!) who is watching and singing along to ANNIE.  The rest of the
cast--and the film--should be so funny.

Author
Mark R. Leeper

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Kathleen Turner, Sam Waterston, Ricki Lake, Matthew Lillard 
Director:  John Waters 
Producers:  John Fiedler and Mark Tarlov 
Screenplay:  John Waters 
Music:  Basil Poledouris 
Released by Savoy Pictures 
     SERIAL MOM is a failed satire that isn't especially amusing.  From
director John Waters, whose list of credits (including POLYESTER,
HAIRSPRAY, and CRYBABY) are decidedly non-mainstream, this is an
attempt to savage the perfect American family by revealing some
unsavory truths about Mom.  While the idea sounds fertile, the
execution is uneven, and the laugh-provoking comedy sporadic at best.
     When you're around Beverly Sutphin (Kathleen Turner), you'd better
watch what you say and do.  An ill-advised word about her dentist
husband (Sam Waterston) could get you a knife in the belly.  Failure to
rewind a rented video tape is a no-no, as is making derogatory remarks
about the movie-watching habits of her son (Matthew Lillard).  Don't
even consider standing up her daughter (Ricki Lake) on a date.  And
whatever happens, don't wear white shoes after Labor Day.  You see,
even though Beverly is the June Cleaver sort of mother on the surface,
scratch a little deeper and you'll discover a cold-blooded, calculating
murderess.
     One of the film's major flaws is its handling of the main
premise.  SERIAL MOM self-consciously and clumsily establishes
Beverly's homicidal tendencies.  Too little time and effort is spent
setting her up as a representation of the middle-class ideal, and the
early parodies of suburbia (a ripe enough target) are poorly-realized,
not to mention lacking in originality.  For the revelations about
Beverly to cause more than a momentary smirk, the set up has to be
stronger.
     There are exceptions, of course, but most of the humor in SERIAL
MOM is too forced to be funny.  To its detriment, the movie keeps
trying, but the jokes rarely click, and Turner's performance is a
little too automated to be effective.  Even in parodies, it's necessary
to have some character identification.  Here, there is none.
     The best part comes during the last twenty minutes, when the
film's observations on society's love of scandal and violence are
scathingly on-target.  In this case, Waters' vision is perfect, and
the result is the only worthwhile portion of an otherwise-dreary
movie.
     Sam Waterston, Ricki Lake, and Matthew Lillard are solid in
supporting roles.  Director Waters has peppered the movie with an
interesting slate of cameos, including Traci Lords, Suzanne Somers, and
Patricia Hearst.
     Regardless of how good SERIAL MOM's concept sounds in print (and
how delightfully-offbeat the previews and TV ads look), the resultant
product is disjointed and disappointing.  It's easy to forgive faults
in a picture like this if it delivers enough laughs or presents
something inventive, but neither of those qualities is in evidence.
Ultimately, SERIAL MOM is deserving of the same fate as any of
Beverly's victims: a quick death.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Frank Maloney
     SERIAL MOM is a film directed and written by John Waters.  The
cast includes Kathleen Turner, Sam Waterston, Ricki Lake, Traci Lords,
Suzanne Somers, Patricia Hearst, and Mink Stole.  Rated R for violence.
(Also rough language.)
     SERIAL MOM is both a return and a departure for John Waters, the
insightful auteur of bad taste, whose string of midnight classics began
with MULTIPLE MANIACS, reached a climax of a sort in PINK FLAMINGOES,
and continued with FEMALE TROUBLES and DESPERATE LIVING.  Starting with
the 1981 film POLYESTER, famous for its scratch 'n' sniff Odorama cards
if nothing else, Waters moved out of the midnight ghetto; he has since
followed with the musicals HAIRSPRAY and CRY-BABY.  These latter-day
Waters films have their charms, but they lack the over-the-top
grossness and vision of the midnight days.  So to that extent SERIAL
MOM represents something of a return to offensiveness and
truth-telling.  On the other hand, Waters has never had the services of
such a well-known actress as he had in the person of Kathleen Turner.
     Turner has found her metier in SERIAL MOM.  I have the feeling
that lately she has been struggling to find a niche for herself as a
middle-aged woman in an industry that often thinks women are over the
hill and unemployable after 30.  Turner tried the hard-boiled detective
in V. I. WARSHAWSKY and the spy with a child care problem in UNDERCOVER
BLUES, but basically she hasn't had a hit since 1989's WAR OF THE
ROSES.  Of course, we always knew she was a talented comedienne;
ROMANCING THE STONE established that.  And as the title character in
SERIAL MOM she is perfect, unfailingly funny, and as deadly a wielder
of black comedy as she is of pokers and legs of lamb.  She is the last
word in the out of control, self-controlled control freak who insists
that everyone play by her rules.  She never loses her cool or her
confidence.  She knows with an unshakeable surety that one does not
wear white shoes after Labor Day and that the seat belt law must be
obeyed.  She lives in the perfect world of the upper middle class
suburb; she oversees the perfect family.  Nothing must be tolerated to
threaten that perfection.  She makes no effort to cover her crimes and
she gets away with them.  After all, she is right.  Anyone who refuses
to rewind her rental tapes deserves to die; anyone ought to be able to
see that.  Turner never breaks character, never once retreats from the
smug savagery and the complacent campiness of her role.  In the hands
of a lesser actor, the part could have been career suicide.  For
Kathleen Turner, it is likely to be a career revivifier.
     As for Waters, nobody does it better, and it is a genuine pleasure
to have him back behind the camera producing a mainstream version of
his 70s masterpieces.  Waters is a film maker of extraordinary vision
and clarity.  He *sees* America in a way very few do; he makes us laugh
at its viciousness, it violence, its hypocrisy; what else can we do?
And he translates his black vision into films no one else could make,
despite his many imitators who content to go for the gag but not the
content.
     And he continues to give us the pleasure of his company of unique
actors.  We cannot have Divine any longer, but there are still Ricki
Lake, Traci Lords, Mink Stole, and a further collection of wonderful
faces and bodies that have nothing to do with Hollywood.  In this
regard (and others), Waters is America's equivalent of that other
great, gay film maker and visionary Pedro Almodovar, and for me that is
high praise indeed.
     I recommend SERIAL MOM most highly.  Pay what you must; it will be
worth it.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SERIAL MOM is non-stop cute.  It is a comedy/documentary/horror
movie.  I smiled from the opening credits where they told you it was a
true story till the last credit where they reassured you that "no flies
were injured or killed in the making of the film."  Whew!  I was
worried until those ending credits.  I never laughed out loud, but I
kept a constant grin on my face from ear to ear.
     Remember Ozzie and Harriet?  Well, this time Harriet is cuter than
ever, BUT she is a serial killer.  The mom is played perfectly by
Kathleen Turner in one of the best performances of her career.  The dad
(Sam Waterston) and the kids (Ricki Lake and Matthew Lillard) were
great too as the quintessential American family.  Looking at this
family, it was hard not wanting to be a part of it.  You had to keep
reminding yourself that no matter how sweet the mom seemed, she WAS a
serial killer after all.  Great cameo roles too by Suzanne Thighmasters
Summers and Patty Lets-Rob-a-Bank Hearst.
     The movie was filmed in bright lights and vivid primary colors by
Robert Stevens and Robert M.  Stevens.  The music by Basil Poledouris
was continual sweetness and happiness.  It really set the tone well.
The sets was right on the mark.
     Equal to Turner's performance was John Waters's direction.  He is
a leading cult director having done five cult classics (POLYESTER, PINK
FLAMINGOS, MONDO TRASHO, HAIRSPRAY, and CRY-BABY).  I have seen none of
these and had it not been for the wonderful trailers I saw ahead of
time, I think I never would have seen SERIAL MOM because I hate slap
stick comedy, but this was a highly controlled comedy - certainly not
slap stick.
     Okay, so what is wrong with it?  It was way overboard too gory.
Turner does not need to wave the hearts and livers of her victims
around the room.  Other than that, which cost the movie a half star in
my ratings, I found no other faults.  Waters does exactly what he sets
out to do, and Turner delivers a terrific performance.  Less cuteness
and bigger laughs would have help get it another 1/2 star from me.  The
sight gags made you smile, but the dialog rarely elicited laughter.
     SERIAL MOM runs a quick and breezy 1:34.  It is rate R for the
intense gore.  Teenagers can probably handle the movie fine.  I rate it
** 1/2 and recommend you see it but be prepared to look away when
during the bloody scenes.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
David Wilcock
Here we have another watered down John Waters film. While his earlier
films were, frankly, digusting (see Pink Flamingos) after Hairspray
(1987) his films generally toned down quite a bit. So although this
does have a few gross things in it, theres nothing here that will make
you physically sick.
Turner plays a mom who cares about her family. A lot. in fact, if you
say anything nasty about them, she'll probably kill you. So, a lot of
murders are going on in her town, and gradually the police narrow down
the murderer to her.
The films deaths are actually quite funny, and Turner gives a good
performance as the murderous mother. Also, the film isn't very long
(just over 90 mins) so it isn't one of those films that go on for
another 30 mins even though they've ran out of jokes. It is directed
well enough, and the supporting cast (which includes Ricki Lake) are
good.  In fact, it is the strengh of the cast that makes this film much
funnier than it really ought to be. Overall, enjoyable, trashy fun.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Kathleen Turner, Sam Waterston, Ricki Lake, Matthew Lillard,
           Mary Jo Catlett.
Screenplay/Director:  John Waters.
     Let's compare the cinematic Bards of Baltimore for a moment.  In
one corner, we have Barry Levinson, who painted the city in nostalgic
sienna tones with DINER, TIN MEN and AVALON.  In the other is John
Waters, with POLYESTER, HAIRSPRAY and now SERIAL MOM.  If I'm guessing,
I'd say that the Chamber of Commerce might lean towards Levinson.
However, when putting their latest films head to head, I think my
choice is obvious.  Levinson's JIMMY HOLLYWOOD was a slapdash attempt
at social commentary; SERIAL MOM is a sly bullseye, hitting every
target in sight with a return to the gloriously grotesque John Waters
of PINK FLAMINGOS fame/infamy.
     Kathleen Turner stars as Beverly Sutphin, a suburban housewife
with everything:  loving husband Eugene (Sam Waterston); feisty son
Chip (Matthew Lillard); sweet daughter Misty (Ricki Lake).  She also
has a little secret:  she kills people.  A lot of people.  Anyone who
crosses her, really, from the teacher who insults her son to the boy
who jilts her daughter.  With the growing body count, Beverly
increasingly becomes the object of suspicion, especially when Eugene
finds correspondence between Beverly and Ted Bundy.  Eventually,
Beverly is brought to trial, a trial which becomes a huge media event
and a potential TV movie starring Suzanne Somers (herself).
     Waters manages to comment on so many different aspects of
contemporary society that it's hard to believe he intended them all.
At the top of his hit list is our fascination with tabloid
sensationalism, and the cult of personality which develops around
anti-social behavior.  Beverly reads _Helter Skelter_ and collects
clippings of mass murder stories; Chip is delighted by the fame Mom's
trial brings.  Even the neighborhood busybodies who are quickest to
condemn Beverly get together to watch talk shows about girlfriends of
serial killers.  Without hand-wringing, Waters points out our
complicity in such crimes through our fascination with them.  But he
doesn't stop there.  Also under his scrutiny are the latent vigilantism
borne of feelings of powerlessness, and the foibles of both
conservatives (Beverly's rigid sense of propriety) and liberals (one
witness against Beverly is discredited because she doesn't recycle).
His one stumble into heavy-handedness comes when Chip's girlfriend
reacts to the difference between real blood and movie blood, but
basically Waters keeps the tone light with his cartoonish style.  This
is "Twin Peaks" as performed by The Three Stooges.
     Social commentary aside, SERIAL MOM is just plain funny.  Waters
goes for the gross-out from the get-go, as his name in the credits
appears under a crushed fly; this leads to Beverly skewering her
daughter's would-be beau, inadvertently removing some viscera, and to a
messy sneeze which leads to anarchy in a church.  There is a gleeful
scene as Beverly clubs a woman to death with a leg of lamb while
singing along to "Tomorrow" from ANNIE, and another at a concert where
Beverly is led away in cuffs to a chant of "Serial Mom!  Serial Mom!"
The highlight, however, is definitely the trial, where Beverly defends
herself in some very creative ways, while her family hawks "Serial Mom"
T-shirts outside the courthouse.  The opening is a bit slow, but SERIAL
MOM finishes with high energy.
     Waters sprinkles SERIAL MOM liberally with kitschy cameos like
Somers, Patricia Hearst (as a juror who becomes the object of Beverly's
ire) and riot girl band L7, but it is Kathleen Turner's performance as
Beverly which sparkles.  Turner has suffered through so many bad films
in recent years that it is a pleasure to see her with something she can
sink her teeth into.  Her smiling amalgam of Donna Reed and Hannibal
Lecter is frequently campy, but always appealing, creating another
level of identification which implicates the audience.  It's true that
the characters in SERIAL MOM are one-dimensional, but that's almost
appropriate given the film's framework as a "true-crime" re-enactment
of the real events.  SERIAL MOM is fun with an edge, and it killed me.
