Title
Review for Night of the Living Dead (1968)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Duane Jones; Judith O'Dea; Karl Hardman; Marilyn Eastman & Keith
Wayne
It seems that something is happening to the East Coast of the United States.
The dead are starting to rise again, and they are now flesh-eating zombies.
Those that they kill quickly rise again to join their killers in their
bloodthirsty exploits. This movie centers on a group of individuals who have
sought shelter in an old farmhouse to get away from the suddenly walking
dead. The group is now trapped in the house, which is surrounded by the
walking dead. They then have to try to figure out a way to escape without
becoming dinner to the ghouls.
Having already seen the 80's remake of this movie, I'll have to admit that
it took a bit away from the experience. Specifically, some of the scenes
that probably should have been a bit more shocking weren't, since I had a
pretty good idea at all times what was coming next. When I saw the remake, I
really thought that the actress playing the character of Barbara was one of
the least talented that I had ever seen. I was wrong. The original Barbara
(Judith O'Dea) is ten times worse. And as bad as she is, the rest of the
cast isn't a hell of a lot better. The possible exception is Duane Jones,
who does a decent job surrounded by bad actors and dead people knocking at
his door.
Over the first half of this movie, I'll admit that I really had no idea why
this movie has been so revered over the years. The acting isn't especially
good, the photography is dark and grainy (at least the print I was
watching). And there was really nothing particularly scary about what was
taking place. Not to mention that the film was released in 1968, but it was
still black and white.
By the second half, the film started to show a few small, but critical
differences, from its poor white trash remake. There are protracted scenes
involving TV news clips with people trying to deal with the ghoul crisis.
While they are a small part of the movie, they do add to it significantly.
Although, they certainly do nothing to add to the main part of the movie,
which is this group stuck in the farmhouse. Maybe I'm the only one who ever
thought of this, but these zombies are walking slower than a 90-year-old
with a walker. Why didn't these people just walk right past them?
I guess that maybe that is why I don't make horror films. My IQ seems to be
above the normal cut-off point for horror film writers. Anything above that
of a cabbage, and you aren't allowed to write horror films. Sure, there are
some very impressive exceptions, but the writers responsible for this movie
sure aren't among them. If you are curious to see what the hype is about,
check it out. If you are in the market for some scares, look elsewhere.
