Title
Review for Rendez-vous de Paris, Les (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Clara Bellar, Antoine Basler, Mathias Megard, Judith Chancel, 
      Aurore Rauscher, Serge Renko, Michael Kraft, Benedicte Loyen, 
      Veronika Johansson
Director: Eric Rohmer
Producer: Francoise Etchegaray
Screenplay: Eric Rohmer
Cinematography: Diane Baratier
Music: Sebastien Erms
U.S. Distributor: Artificial Eye Film Co.
In French with English subtitles
     If Paris is indeed the city for lovers, then Eric Rohmer has 
perfectly captured the mood in his 1995 film, RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS, 
which, like most of Rohmer films, has taken over a year to finally reach 
U.S. screens.  Rohmer, one of France's most respected directors, is 
seventy-five years old, but his vision is that of someone less than half 
his age.  He writes for young characters better than most twenty-
something screenwriters, yet the thoughts and ideas presented in his 
films are valid for all ages.  
     The best thing, and sometimes the only thing, about Rohmer's work 
is the dialogue.  No one makes films quite like him, and, any time a 
movie is distinguished by intelligent, meaningful conversation, the 
French film maker's name immediately comes up (check out reviews of 
Richard Linklater's 1995 romantic comedy, BEFORE SUNRISE, for examples).  
Films like CLAIRE'S KNEE, CHLOE IN THE AFTERNOON, and A TALE OF 
SPRINGTIME keep us engrossed for their entire running length not because 
the plot goes anywhere in particular, but because we're always 
interested in hearing what the characters are going to say next.
     RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS is a trilogy of short stories about people 
meeting, and sometimes missing each other, in Paris.  Each segment 
introduces new characters, but there are certain common themes that wind 
throughout all three.  With this triptych, Rohmer is illustrating the 
many ways that human interaction can occur.  He shows people in love, 
pretending to be in love, and wishing they were in love.  If you meet 
someone on the street, how different will things be if you keep walking, 
or if you follow them?  Rohmer shows the importance of fate and 
coincidence in determining our choice of companions.  A rendezvous, 
after all, can be planned or unexpected, pleasant or undesirable.  
     The first story in RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS is "The Seven O'Clock 
Rendezvous."  It introduces a young couple, Esther (Clara Bellar) and 
Horace (Antoine Basler), who appear to be very much in love.  However, 
Esther soon learns that her lover may be unfaithful, and, although she 
wants to trust him, doubt gnaws at her.  At this juncture, a young, 
attractive man (Mathias Megard) approaches her uncertainly on the 
street, wanting to go out with her.  After a short conversation, Esther 
arranges a seven o'clock rendezvous with him at a cafe.  Much more 
happens in this episode, but I don't want to reveal anything else, 
except to say that Rohmer has a few delicious twists in store for his 
viewers.  Of the three parts of RENDEZVOUS, this is the most plot-
oriented.
     "The Benches of Paris" is a two-character play.  It introduces a 
pair of teachers (played by Aurore Rauscher and Serge Renko) who are 
falling in love.  They are not lovers -- she is still involved with 
someone named Benoit, whom she claims to feel nothing for.  The couple 
strolls through Paris, going from parks to cemeteries to greenhouses, 
enjoying each other's company and talking about love, life, and whether 
kisses are more memorable in icy weather.  Eventually, on one of these 
walks, they decide to consummate the relationship by taking a room in a 
hotel after pretending to be tourists in Paris.  But fate has one final 
obstacle to place in their path.  
     "Mother and Child", the most talky segment, concludes the trilogy.  
It begins with a painter (Michael Kraft) showing his work to a Swedish 
visitor (Veronika Johansson) for whom he's playing tourist guide.  When 
he tires of her banal conversation, he drops her off at a museum to see 
a Picasso exhibit.  On the way home, the painter's attention is 
captivated by a girl he passes on the street (Benedicte Loyen).  He 
follows her, and, when he eventually meets her, discovers that his 
powers of seduction aren't as irresistible as he thinks.
     Of the three episodes, the second is my favorite.  The chemistry 
between the two leads is amazing.  The dialogue is perfect, causing the 
half-hour to pass too quickly.  It's a wonderfully romantic situation 
that underscores Rohmer's directorial skills.  Don't just listen to the 
way these two talk, watch their body language.  Rohmer is a master of 
subtlety -- these kinds of little details are evident throughout.  For 
example, when a stranger visits Esther's room in the first segment, 
watch her eyes as she covertly takes in her surroundings.
     I've never before seen any of the actors in this film, but they're 
all wonderful.  Rohmer has chosen a group of young people who are not 
only attractive, but capable.  With so little time to present their 
characters, each effectively accomplishes the aim, and, even though some 
of them are on screen for only a few minutes, they fashion men and women 
that we can identify with, even when we don't particularly like them.
     With RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS, as with many of his other films, Rohmer 
proves that social intercourse can be as delightful as the sexual 
variety.  Hal Hartley's recent FLIRT fails to do much the same thing 
that RENDEZVOUS succeeds at:  show the varied, unpredictable results of 
basic, flirtatious human contact.  RENDEZVOUS isn't among Rohmer's great 
movies -- although dialogue is always the chief pleasure of his films, 
the full-length features allow us to delight in conversations while 
growing to appreciate the characters.  The half-hour length of 
RENDEZVOUS' segments limits character identification.  Nevertheless, in 
each of his three short episodes, Rohmer gives us more substance than 
that which is found most two-hour movies.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Do you like reading short stories?  Are you willing to stay with a
picture where not much happens but where you get to eavesdrop on a host
of endearing characters?  Well, if you do, I have just the film for
you, RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS (LES RENDEZ-VOUS DE PARIS).  This old
fashioned film is 75 year old writer and director Eric Rohmer's (CHLOE
IN THE AFTERNOON and CLAIRE'S KNEE) homage to romance especially
flirting and to Paris.
     Films today either sex or don't.  There is little time for
romance.  When it is there, it is quickly dispensed with so they can
get to the sex.  Actually, that is over with quickly too so they can
cut to the action scenes and the violence which is understood to be
what it takes to sell tickets these days.  Remember nothing sells
popcorn like a film full of fistfights and car chases.
     There is a subtler form of romance known as flirting and few films
waste time with that.  RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS has such non-stop flirting
that it could have been called FLIRTING except that title was taken.
All of the characters in RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS flirt - even the ones not
in romantic relationships with each other.  When you leave you may
yourself winking at the person at the snack bar unless you are careful.
This film puts you in love with love.
     The format for the film is that there are three short stories.
Introducing each are some hokey street singers and images that look
like they are lifted straight out of a 50s film.  The picture itself
was consciously filmed with a hazy look by cinematographer Diane
Baratier.  The director wanted this nostalgic look, but it may send you
to the concession stand to complain until you know it is on purpose.
     In the first story, entitled "The Seven O'Clock Rendezvous,"
Esther's (Clara Bellar) boyfriend Horace (Antoine Basler) is supposedly
running around on her according to her friend Felix (Malcolm Conrath)
so she devises a complex ruse to make Horace jealous.  A stranger named
Aricie (Judith Chancel) enters the story and after a scene where the
two women flirt with each other, Esther leaves to trap Horace.
     In "The Benches of Paris" two lovers meet at benches all over
Paris.  The woman (Aurore Rauscher) lives with her boyfriend, but is
cheating with a man (Serge Renko) whom she meets at places where she
will not be seen by her live-in boyfriend.  The unnamed man and woman
spend the entire time flirting with each other and engaging in closed
mouth kisses.  This story ends in the biggest twist, but all three
stories have somewhat of a surprising ending.
     We were in Paris this summer, and I found the second story
reminded me of our trip.  We saw more intense necking on the streets in
a week than I've seen in several years in cities in America.
     In the concluding story, "Mother and Child," a painter (Michael
Kraft) has a gorgeous Scandinavian visitor (Veronika Johansson).  They
disagree on paintings, arguing about who is a cubist and who is a
surrealist.  When they go to a museum, he leaves her to flirt
incessantly with a less attractive married woman (Benedicte Loyen).
The married woman, who is in Paris only for the afternoon, flirts with
him too and creates the biggest mystery of all of the stories - where
will this all lead.
     RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS is a wonderful talkfest of a film.  If there
is any recent movie that even remotely resembles it, it would probably
be that wonderful film BEFORE SUNRISE from last year.  Some may
criticize RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS as being inconsequential, but for me it
is a real treat that grows on you as you see it and is one of those few
films whose images are indelibly marked in your memory.
     Finally, the actors are mainly a bunch of unknowns, but all
deliver strong performances.  Their screen presence is incredible, and
the camera is love with them.
     RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS runs a breezy 1:34.  It is in French
(appropriately called the language of love), but with sharp and easy to
read English subtitles.  It is rated PG, and there is nothing to offend
anyone of any age.  There is no sex, nudity, violence, or bad language.
Except that three year olds will have little interest in romance, the
film could easily have been rated G.  I recommend the show to anyone of
any age interested in love and flirting, and I award it ***.  Now,
don't forget to be careful when you pass the person at the snack bar if
your spouse is with you.  In the real world, flirting can get you in a
lot of trouble.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
