Title
Review for Shadrach (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Columbia Pictures
 Director: Susanna Styron
 Writer:  Susanna Styron, William Styron, Bridget Terry
 Cast: Harvey Keitel, Andie MacDowell, John Franklin Sawyer,
Scott Terra, Daniel Treat, Monica Bugajski, Darrell Larson,
Deborah Hedwall, Tom Bower, John Sawyer, Martin Sheen
   If this story's narrator were alive today, he'd be 73 years
old, a certainty that's difficult to accept since we see him as
an adorable, sensitive lad just ten years old in the
Depression-torn America of 1935.  "Shadrach," told from the
point of view of little Paul Whitehurst (Scott Terra), deals with
the boy's encounter with a 99-year-old black man who has
walked all the way from Alabama to rural Tidewater, Virginia,
to request burial in the land of his birth.  The tale is a quietly
moving one based on a short story by William Styron which
was published in Esquire magazine in 1978 and which has
been carefully and decorously adapted for the screen by his
daughter, Susanna, with the help of Bridget Terry.  Though
this is a simple Depression story, plainly told and without the
complexities of John Steinbeck's "The Grapes of Wrath," it
has a universal resonance that goes beyond its unadorned
details.  The title figure, Shadrach (John Franklin Sawyer), is
going home to die, and by communicating his burial wishes
provides for the young people a graphic lesson: death is a
part of life and is not to be feared.  
   The tale opens on the Whitehurst household in the
Tidewater, Virginia of 1935, one which appears untouched by
the Depression.  Paul dad (Darrell Larson) and mom
(Deborah Hedwall) enjoy the services of a cook, they all dress
for dinner, and use their shiny, new motorcar to enjoy regular
vacations.  Yet they are not snobs, allowing their youngster to
play with his best friend, Little Mole (Daniel Treat), who lives
in ramshackle quarters on the other side of the tracks. Little
Mole's father, Vernon Dabney (Harvey Keitel) and mom, Trixie
(Andie MacDowell), earn their scant living by selling bootleg
liquor, and Vernon blames his financial problems, strangely
enough, on President Franklin D. Roosevelt whose New Deal
does nothing for him.  As he describes his woes, cursing
intermittently, photographer Hiro Narita's camera pans the
warren, formerly part of a lush plantation, to observe several
pregnant young women; a quick, distant look at a couple
making love in a beat-up car; and the adult inhabitants
guzzling bottled beer by the case.  When the 99-year-old
Shadrach appears, he does not make his presence felt with a
melodramatic flourish, but seems to materialize out of
nowhere.  In barely audible tones, he informs the Dabney
family of his desire to be buried on their land and is looked
after sympathetically by Trixie, Vernon, Paul, and by the
Dabney youngsters.  Informed by the sheriff that burying a
black man on Dabney's own land is illegal in Virginia, the
Dabneys employ the services of a black undertaker in a
nearby county whose $35 fee is considered exorbitant.  The
family must resort to imaginative tactics to fulfill Shadrach's
wish.
   "Shadrach" is wonderfully acted, particularly by Andie
MacDowell as a beer-swilling, earthy wife who loves her
family, tolerates her poverty, and shows particular sensitivity
to the plight of the stranger in their midst.  The story is
directed with no sense of urgency by Susanna Styron, who
had thought about making this movie since her dad published
the tale in 1978.  Her dialogue is anything but pressing: 
   Shadrach: "I'd like to see the mill pond."
   Trixie: "How come you want to see the mill pond?"
 Shadrach: "I want to see the mill pond."
   Paul takes in this dialogue, cleverly figuring that Shadrach
does not long for his slave days but wants only to recapture
his innocence, the one untroubled part of his life.  In one
compelling scene, the Dabney children are skinny-dipping in
the pond when they turn into Shadrach as a young boy,
swimming likewise with his friends in the very same water,
giving the whole narrative a feeling for history.
   While the targeted audience for "Shadrach" is probably
children of the ages of 8-15, the film is a heart-rending, even
stirring story for mature adults as well. The movie is in no way
marred by literary devices, particularly Martin Sheen's
occasional narration.  At times it runs the risk of seeming a
defense of slavery, in that Shadrach longs to be buried on the
land in which he was born to servitude and insists that he
considers himself a Dabney, a part of the plantation-owning
family.  When Vernon Dabney exclaims that some black
people were better off before they were emancipated in 1865,
his statement is far from laughable.  After all, he points out,
the slaves were taken care of better than they were after they
took on paid jobs as sharecroppers: they were buried right on
the plantation after their death under a system which became
ironically illegal after the liberation.  That family members
could be wrenched apart by being separately sold off is
indicated only briefly, in passing.  By the conclusion of the
tale, we can see why ten-year-old Paul's rendezvous with
Shadrach became the most consequential experience of his 
life.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of 'SHADRACH" (Columbia Pictures)
Based on a short story by William Styron, "Shadrach" is a piece
of Americana, set in the Depression-era of 1935, as a young boy
recalls three unforgettable summer days when he was ten years old. As
the only child in a proper, middle-class Virginia family, Paul
Whitehurst (Scott Terra) often escapes to the ramshackle house of
impoverished neighbors, the earthy, volatile Dabneys (Harvey Keitel,
Andie MacDowell), who have seven mischievous children, one of whom is
his best friend. One hot afternoon while the boys are shooting
marbles, a frail, 99 year-old former slave, Shadrach (John Franklin
Sawyer), appears, having walked from Alabama to be buried on the old
Dabney grounds he fondly remembers from childhood. When the Dabneys,
who have fallen on hard times, realize his quest, attempting to
fulfill his final wish and allowing him to die in dignity has a
profound effect on everyone, as the family embarks on a heartbreaking,
hilarious expedition to the dilapidated family plantation, discovering
"Death ain't nothing to be afraid of. It's life to be feared of."
Harvey Keitel's benign bigot, who is touched by an old slave, is the
kind of character he hasn't done before, just as the beer-guzzling
mother is a change of pace for Andie MacDowell.  First-time
writer/director Susanna Styron's integrity scores with her father's
fictionalized, autobiographical, character-driven material, touching
our human chord of kindness. Curiously, both "Shadrach" and William
Styron's "Sophie's Choice" are about living survivors of the defining
tragedy of their century: slavery and the Holocaust, respectively. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Shadrach" is a poignant,
compassionate 8. It's a gem, a gentle, funny, family story that will
find a place in your heart.
