Title
Review for Sound of One Hand Clapping, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW: The Sound of One Hand Clapping (1998)
Note to readers outside Australia:  The Sound of One Hand Clapping is an
Australian film shot in Tasmania, and has been selected for the 1998 Berlin film
festival.  As far as I know, it has not yet been slated for a US release date.
>From the haunting book comes the haunting film  The Sound of One Hand Clapping
is by no ones standards an easy film to watch or enjoy.  I havent read the
book myself, but since the writer (Richard Flanagan) is also the films
director, its a fairly safe bet that what is on the screen is in close context
with what Flanagan has written.
36 year old Sonja Buloh hasnt had an easy path down the road of life  her
mother abandoned her at the age of two, had various physical and emotional
troubles through childhood and was driven to move away from her alcoholic father
Bojan when she was sixteen. Now, twenty years later (and pregnant), Sonya visits
him in Tasmania after all those years of absence.  She discovers Bojan is
distraught and aggrieved, drained of all emotion and resorting to a life of
booze and cigarettes.
As Sonja begins to piece together hidden parts of her childhood, and the dark
secrets of her families past, we begin to realize the severity of the pain has
been subjected to.  Through a draining collection of fragments from her own
experiences, a detailed portrait of Sonjas suffering is powerfully painted.
The Sound of One Hand Clapping is a prime example of how one character can be
carved into tragically different, isolated others.  There are three main
versions of Sonja Suloh  the three-year-old (Arabella Wain), eight year old
(Rosie Flanagan) and the present day Sonja (Kerry Fox).  Through frequent
flashbacks the film jumps to different times in her life, and what is impressive
about this is that we are able to accurately feel the sadness and joy from most
of her previous experiences.   What is not impressive is that these versions of
Sonja are separated far too much, so her character can never truly entrance us
or keep us eagerly watching.
There are a few other things that irritated me about the film: the dialogue is
bewildering and a little sluggish, _ is at times very unconvincing in her role
and the Scooby Doo Family Mystery isnt all that entertaining.
What The Sound of One Hand Clapping does deliver, however, is consistent to the
style it sets early in the film  so if youre lucky, you can be impressed from
start to finish.  But on the other hand, you could hate it all too.
Either way, compliments have to be made: Kristof Kaczmarek brings an energetic
and sensual presence to his role, Australian cinematographer Martin McGrath (A
Little Bit of Soul, Muriels Wedding) successfully captures the beauty of the
Tasmanian landscape and Cezary Skubiszewskis resplendent music composition is
notably enjoyable.
If youre prepared to be exhausted and depressed by an overworked yet still
impressive flick, The Sound of One Hand Clapping may hit the right note.

