Title
Review for Ikiru (1952)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: One of the best dramas ever made, a movie about life and death,
and the Big Question of both of them.
"This is an X-ray of the stomach of the man in this movie," intones a voice
at the start of Akira Kurosawa's IKIRU, one of the best dramas ever made.
The voice is flat, mechanical, maybe even a little officious. "He has
cancer. He's dying, but he doesn't know it yet. As a matter of fact, he's
hardly even aware that he's alive."
The man in question is a middle-level Tokyo-city bureaucrat named Kanji
Watanabe, and is played by one of the most remarkable actors in the
Japanese studio system aside from Toshiro Mifune: Takashi Shimura. If
you've seen other Kurosawa movies, you've almost certainly seen him at some
point, playing gentle, almost grandfatherly types. In IKIRU he manages to
make himself look anonymous, Everyman-ish, and it works. From the minute we
see him, we simply accept him as being the dull little man we need to see
him as. His performance is so understated, it works subliminally.
Watanabe, as the introduction makes plain, has stomach cancer, and he
learns the truth of his condition in a scene of almost unbelievable
emotional intensity. While waiting for the doctor, he is confronted by
another patient, who describes in sarcastic and cynical language just how
the cancer patients get dealt with. He describes and anticipates all of
Watanabe's symptoms dead-on. The camera has the other patient in the
background, almost talking to himself, with Shimura almost up against the
lens -- staring and staring, like a rabbit trapped in a car's headlights
before it's crushed.
Watanabe does not handle the news well: his first impulse is to get drunk,
and he does this with a companion in a series of scenes that play like he's
wandering through the circles of Hell. But as he sinks into his misery, we
see more and more about how he's come to be like this. His son sees him as
a cipher. His co-workers never saw him as a human being (his office
nickname was "The Mummy"). And when a spirited younger co-worked quits and
takes a far lower-paying job in a factory to simply stay sane and not die
of boredom, he follows her in an almost puppyish attempt to perhaps acquire
some of her energy.
Slowly, Watanabe puts together a plan to fight back against death, by
pushing through a project to build a playground that has been
systematically turned down by one arm of the city bureaucracy after
another. He finds a purpose, and in that purpose reinvigorates himself long
enough to see the job through. There is one scene, frightening in its
power, where he has run afoul of a yakuza, and only smiles knowingly when
the other man threatens him with a knife. He has already stared death down
and won.
The movie's final stretch is unusually constructed: it takes place after
Watanabe's death, at his wake. His do-nothing co-workers arrive, quarrel
over what was going on in Watanabe's life when he died, learn the truth,
and then pledge to change... but in an emotionally overwhelming conclusion,
we find that nothing is ever that easy. Some people have found the ending
unsatisfying, but on a second viewing of the movie, I realized it was the
only ending that made sense. By having the rest of the office betray
Watanabe's memory, we are invited to proselytize in their place.
IKIRU is a sad movie, but it earns every moment. It is not a "tear-jerker";
it doesn't attempt to manipulate us unfairly. It just presents us with a
case of a man faced with a giant and unanswerable question: How should we
live? More importantly, how should we live in the shadow of death? IKIRU
confronts this question, certainly the largest and most difficult question
any of us would have to wrestle with, and comes away with an answer -- not
bromides, not placation, and not cant, but an exhortation. Roger Ebert has
said that if there was ever any one movie that he felt could truly induce
its viewers to make a change in their lives, this would be it, and I agree.
Akira Kurosawa seemed determined to make one movie in every genre before he
died, and in IKIRU he made one of the most emotionally affecting and
enduring dramas ever. This is a bold and direct movie about life as well as
death, something that very few works of fiction are ever able to approach
without descending into preachiness or sentiment.

Author
Pedro Sena
This is one of Akira Kurosawa's earlier films.
An elder gentleman finds out that he is going to die soon, and begins his
depression.  After his affair with the drink, one day he comes face to face
with one thing which saves him.  He becomes a bit of a child again, and sees
an old run down area, and decides that a park should be built there for
children.
And much to the chagrin of anyone who gets in his way, the old man succeeds
in bypassing all the red tape, and gets the job done.  One good deed which
made his life seem totally worthwhile.  He was no longer empty.
Simplest of stories, simplest of shoots, and yet, as is customary of
Kurosawa, the combination of the two makes for an extraordinary film which
few people get a chance to see, and which our local video store probably got
by accident.
There are many touches through out this film that differ from the Kurosawa
mold. One keeps expecting to find a grandiose film with magnanimous gestures
and filming, and instead one finds a rather intimate film that uses the
close up, not for acting this time, but to get us to understand what is
happening around this man. The directing touch is so sweet, that it is
difficult to dislike this film, and it makes it very deserving of its
awards.

Author
Daniel Saunders
      You may not have heard of "Ikiru", but it's considered to be one
of the classics of foreign cinema, and one of the finest films ever
made. It is in black and white, 2 1/2 hours long, directed by Akira
Kurosawa, and set in contemporary Japan. It is a story about the
dehumanizing effects of bureaucracies, the power of the individual to
make change, and the importance of living a meaningful life. Watanabe is
a middle-aged petty bureaucrat, the chief of the Citizen's section of
town hall. As a rather intrusive voice-over tells us, "He has gastric
cancer, although he doesn't know it yet. In fact he's already dead. He's
been dead for the last thirty years." He shuffles papers on his desk and
looks busy.
        Meanwhile a group of women from a nearby slum area have come to
town hall to complain about a cesspool near their homes. Their request
is that it be drained and replaced with a playground. They are shunted
from one bureau to another, from Citizen's, to Public Works, to Parks,
to the Deputy Mayor, and then back to the beginning. The bureaucratic
techniques of passing the buck and stalling are well illustrated.
        Watanabe, experiencing stomach pain, goes in for an X-ray and
figures out (although the doctors won't tell him) that he has less than
six months to live. The first half of the film is all about his various
reactions to this death sentence. He tries to make peace with his son,
for who's sake he closed himself off after his wife died, and with his
daughter-in-law, but he doesn't tell them about the illness. He
withdraws his savings and spends a decadent night on the town with a
self-styled Mephistopheles, a writer he met in a bar. He forms an
attachment with a young woman in his office. None of these help in the
end, until he remembers the cesspool. The first half ends with him
pledging to build the playground at whatever the cost.
        The second half is told in flashback from his funeral, where all
the civil servants are gathered, swapping stories of Watanabe's almost
fanatical devotion to the project. They end with teary, alcohol induced
pledges to all behave like Watanabe. However the next day we find
exactly the same situation as the beginning of the film.
        This is not a light film. Most of my family had left by the time
it was over, finding it just too slow. I found, however, that if you
stick with it, you become involved in the plotline and stirred by its
humanistic message. One great strength is a masterful performance by
Takashi Shimura as Watanabe. He played the benevolent samurai leader
Kambei in "The Seven Samurai", and here he convincingly portrays a sad,
sick old man, looking back over his life and seeing only emptiness.
Actually one thing that made it especially enjoyable for me was spotting
actors from other Kurosawa films. Like some other great directors, he
has a "family" of actors that he uses frequently in his films, and
almost all of the seven samurai can be spotted in "Ikiru", as well as
some of the actors from "Rashomon". If you're in the mood for a slower
paced but powerful, life-affirming movie, "Ikiru" is an excellent
choice.

Author
Eugene Xia
Kurosawa's Ikiru is a story of a man (Wanatabe) dying
of cancer trying to reclaim his life in his remaining
days.  The film contains technical elements that reminds
me of the various elements in Fellini films and "It's a
Wonderful Life" and Kurossawa's later film "Ran".  While 
watching it, I kept thinking that this is Capra with 
depth and Fellini with a soul.
As soon as Wanatabe realized his condition, he decided
to experience life one more time before his death.  He
started drinking and asked a writer he encountered in a bar
to show him the life he had been missing for the last
twenty-five years.  With that we entered the decadent and
self-indulgent world of Fellini.
The first half contains scenes that are straight
from "La Dolce Vita", but are done with taste and
restraint.  Moreover, they are there to serve a purpose--
to build up to the moment when Wanatabe sings his
"Life is short, dear Maiden.  Fall in love..."   At this point
Wanatabe made the discovery that all is empty and shallow in
this world.  In fact, the world of the writer (who jokingly
calls himself, Mephistopheles) was hell.  When morning
came, Wanatabe was hollow and miserable as ever.
As in "It's a Wonderful Life", Watanabe had his own
guardian angel in the form of the young
coworker.  She was ill equipped to handle
the formidable task of giving direction to a dying
man who had been lost for longer than she had lived.
Fortunately, Watanabe was a much older and wiser
man than his Jimmy Stuart counter part.  All he
needed was an insight in the right direction.
This the girl provided, not in the form of wisdom
but in the form of her innocent ideal and vision.
The final encounter of the two was one of the
greatest cinematic moments.  It began with a static
scene where Watanabe and the girl sat in a
Chucky Cheese style restaurant in silence.  In the
background, the restaurant staff was preparing a birthday
party and bright youthful marching music was coming
through, but the girl sensed a gravely troubled man.
Wanatabe began to tell the story of his life and the
tension gradually mounted as the music grew and grew.
Finally Wanatabe asked for directions for the short
remaining days of his life.  We saw the girl was
afraid and we feared for her.  How could anyone offer
advice to a dying man who was three times one's own age?
But Wanatabe's instinct was correct.  She offered him
exactly the wisdom he lacked.  After a few brief moments
of intense contemplation, Wanatabe reached his moment
of enlightenment and the background music exploded into
a thunderous "Happy Birthday to You!"
When I was watching the film on tape, I kept rewinding
and repeating this part.  On the fourth repeat,
my eyes got misty.  In Asian fables, it is usually
the old who offers wisdom and insights to the young 
who has lost his way.  Here it is the opposite.  
Wanatabe lost his life a long time ago and his innocent 
guardian angel helps him to regain it back.
The film is not without weakness.  The sobbing fest
among Wanatabe's coworkers should be cut short.  Instead
of letting those clowns diminishing the mood of the film,
they should simply end the film with Wanatabe sitting
on the swing (which is another moment that made my
eyes misty).  There is too much of this Confucius
philosophy/lecturing of what a good bureaucrat should be.
In the final analysis, Ikiru is an optimistic film
with an inspiring message even though the mood of
the film is intensely somber.  It invites us to 
exam and re-exam our lives and offers a way and hope 
for the dying that is all of us--not in the form of 
our own salvation, but how to help others achieving 
theirs and our salvation comes as a result of this
giving not the purpose.
