Title
Review for Of Mice and Men (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:59, PG-13, Drama, 1992
Director: Gary Sinise
Cast: John Malkovich, Gary Sinise, Sherilyn Fenn, Ray Walston,
      Alexis Arquette, Joe Morton, Casey Siemaszko, John Terry,
      Noble Willingham
     Gary Sinise and John Malkovich are migrant farm workers.  John
Malkovich isn't very bright and keeps getting the two in trouble.
Sinise watches over Malkovich and tries to keep him out of trouble.
They go to work on Noble Willingham's farm where Malkovich starts
having problems with Willingham's son Casey Siemaszko.
     OF MICE AND MEN is the third film version of John Steinbeck's
novel.  I haven't seen the 1939 version yet.  I think that this version
of OF MICE AND MEN is much better than the 1981 television film (which
received a three).  This film follows the novel very closely.  I
definitely recommend this film to everybody.  On a scale of zero to
five, I give OF MICE AND MEN a five.  OF MICE AND MEN is rated PG-13
for explicit language and graphic violence.
     The cast for this version is much better than the '81 version.  I
think that John Malkovich (SHADOWS AND FOG, EMPIRE OF THE SUN) does a
much better Lenny than Randy Quaid did.  Likewise Gary Sinise does a
better George than Robert Blake did.  Ray Walston (BLOOD RELATIONS,
POPCORN, and for all of you who wrote back on my review of POPCORN, "My
Favorite Martian") gave the best performance in this film.  Walston
plays the old man on the farm and I feel that he adds a lot to the
film.  Sherilyn Fenn (MERIDIAN: KISS OF THE BEAST, BACKSTREET DREAMS)
gives her best performance since TWO MOON JUNCTION as Casey Siemaszko's
flirtatious wife.  Casey Siemaszko (BREAKING IN, THREE O'CLOCK HIGH) is
great as the boss's cruel son.
     This film is very well written, and gets extremely dramatic in
places (I haven't seen so many wet eyes leaving the theater).  I think
that this film will have a better impact if you see it in the theater,
so do so if you have the chance still.  It has been released on video
cassette.  Both the settings and photography for this film are top
notch.

Author
Frank Maloney
     OF MICE AND MEN is a film directed by Gary Sinese, from a
screenplay by Horton Foote, based on the novel by John Steinbeck.  It
stars Gary Sinese, John Malkovich, Sherilyn Fenn, Ray Walston, Casey
Siemaszko, and Joe Morton.  Rated PG-13, due to mature themes, brief
violence.
     OF MICE AND MEN was first adapted to the big screen in 1939 in a
film directed by Lewis Milestone and starring Burgess Meredith and Lon
Chaney, Jr., and music by Aaron Copeland, a mere two years after the
novel's publication.  The story was adapted twice for TV (once with
Robert Blake and Randy Quaid, once with George Segal and Nicol
Williamson); it was also made into a opera that was produced twice by
Seattle Opera.  The script for this newest version was written by Horton
Foote (THE TRIP TO BOUNTIFUL), who downplays the novel's political
subtext, a call for a humane socialism where people take care of one
another.  Instead, Foote's version is content to redefine the human
condition on the individual level only.  This new version does succeed
in capturing Steinbeck's special feeling for the land.  The film was
stunningly photographed in California's Santa Ynez valley, a rolling
land of golden grass and live oaks.
     This film marks the introduction of director-star Gary Sinese as
one of the  future lights of Hollywood.  Sinese founded the Steppenwolf
Theatre in Chicago in the Seventies.  It was there that he and John
Malkovich first played George and Lennie in 1980.  As a director Sinese
shows a spare, delicate style.  As George, the smaller, smarter migrant
worker who has fallen reluctantly into the role of Lennie's protector,
Sinese is especially sympathetic and effective.
     As Lennie, the child-like giant, John Malkovich presents a more
problematic performance.  Malkovich is a star, not a character actor.
We are watching a star do a star turn when we watch Malkovich parade his
formidable and showy arsenal of shtick, the hands floating, bouncing,
the mouth in search for a shape, the stutters, shambling walk.  These
things might have worked brilliantly on stage, but on the big screen
they serve only to draw attention to the actor, not the character.
     On the other end of the end of the scale is the wonderful Ray
Walston as Candy, the withered old hand whose old dog foreshadows the
eventual culmination of the story.  Walston, perhaps best known to many
as Uncle Martin in that silly old TV series "My Favorite Martian", and
who had a brilliant career in musical comedy in the Forties and Fifties
(SOUTH PACIFIC, DAMN YANKEES), registers a heartbreaking performance as
the old man who says, "I wish someone would shoot me when I'm of no use
anymore.  But they won't, they'll just send me away."
     Among the other noteworthy performances are those of Casey
Siemaszko as the brutish Curly, Sherilyn Fenn, his unnamed wife, and Joe
Morton as Crooks, the broken stable hand.  Fenn in particular presents a
new take on her character.  The wife in this version is far more
dangerous and predatory than in Steinbeck's novel.  Initially acting
quite sluttish, she shows us eventually to be naive, lonely, and trapped
in an abusive marriage; she acts as a voice for a feminist consciousness
that probably never occurred to Steinbeck.  Likewise, the wonderful Joe
Morton (BROTHER FROM ANOTHER PLANET) begins as the brutally, cruelly
angry Black man, eventually shows his pain and loneliness.  Both of
these unhappy people are brought out of their shells in contact with
Lennie, the confessor who understands almost nothing they tell him, so
they can tell him anything.
     I recommend OF MICE AND MEN without reservation even at full price.
It is visually beautiful.  It is thematically intelligent and important.
It is sensitive to its source and the debut of a great new movie talent.
Really, you must go.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     My introduction to John Steinbeck's OF MICE AND MEN was a terrific
television production with Nicol Williamson as Lennie and George Segal as
George.  Envy me.  At least as far as I am concerned no other production has
been as moving.  Steinbeck's very short novel is one of the greatest tragic
stories of world literature, ranking (in my opinion) almost up to Hugo's LES
MISERABLES.  And it is probably shorter than Hugo's chapter on the Paris
sewers.  Actually, on my last reading--about a year ago--it occurred to me
that what I was reading was not a novel at all, but a play in paragraph
form.  There is only minimal description in the novel, enough to set the
scene, and the rest if dialogue.  As I have heard subsequently, it was
originally a play by Steinbeck and he later rewrote it in paragraph form.
This 1992 adaptation is at least the fourth non-live version I have seen.
Supposedly the classic version, but one I have not cared much for, is the
1940 film with Burgess Meredith and Lon Chaney, Jr.  Nor was I fond of the
1981 television movie version with Robert Blake and Randy Quaid.  Having
seen three versions already that are close to the book and having read the
book who knows how many times, I find it hard to rate the film as if it is a
new story.
     Now I am not going to tell you the plot of OF MICE  AND MEN.  If you do
not already know, your assignment is either to read the book--it will take
you only an hour or so--or to see the movie.  Suffice it to say that Lennie
Small (played by John Malkovich) is anything BUT small in stature, though he
does have the mind of a child.  He travels with George Milton (played by
Gary Sinese), a reasonably sharp thinker who for reasons not immediately
apparent chooses to partner with Lennie.  What really drives the
relationship is part of what this story is about and told sparsely and with
eloquence by John Steinbeck.
     Sinese, who also directed the film, does a fine job as George, a part
that could easily be overshadowed by that of Lennie.  Sinese has starred in
stage versions of both OF MICE AND MEN and THE GRAPES OF WRATH.  Somehow
Malkovich manages to look like a giant playing Lennie and at the same time
gives the part more personality than it has had in the past.  Neither Ray
Walston as Candy nor John Terry as Slim manage to look as grizzled as their
characters call for, though Walston still carries off his role.  Terry is
just too handsome and young to be slim, in my opinion.  But a lot of this
film really is just too pretty for the film's own good.  It seems too
pleasant to "buck" barley in these golden surroundings.  One violent scene
is just too bloody really to make sense.  Horton Foote's screenplay leaves
most of the book intact but like the 1981 version adds sequences to the
story.  Any variation from the novel seems out of place, since the novel is
so near to being a script.
     By most measures this is a very good adaptation of a great book.  It is
a wonderful story that is an essay on loneliness and pain.  It is the only
film that literally brought tears to my eyes this year.  As an adaptation of
an often-dramatized novel, I give it a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.  But if
you do not know the story, *rush* to see this film.   Then read the book.
