Title
Review for Edward Scissorhands (1990)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     Yep, I'm catching up on my movie-going.  I have to, with both
HAMLET and AWAKENINGS opening up on the same weekend here next month!
     Anyway, Leslie and I went to see EDWARD SCISSORHANDS today, the
modern fable about the manufactured boy with scissors for hands.  It was
a fine movie, made with intelligence and wit.  Tim Burton scores another
winner.  It won't make nearly the money that BATMAN did, but at least
BATMAN gave him the clout to continue making off-beat films like Edward.
     Like all the other Burton movies, the film dances between the real
world and someplace else entirely.  The "real world" here has the look
and feel of California in the mid-60s.  Peg, the friendly Avon lady,
played by Diane Wiest with just the right amount of Girl Scout, finds
Edward, abandoned, in a creepy old castle surrounded by wonderful
topiary.  She takes Edward home, and, in the tradition of Chance, the
gardener from BEING THERE, he agrees.  Edward is played by Johnny Depp,
and he gives a marvelous performance, balancing his need for love
against the fact he's been left alone for much of his life.  Like most
movies of this type, the "alien" has the biggest heart, and displays the
most humanity.
     The supporting cast is kind of a "Greek Chorus" to the proceedings,
and act in concert throughout the movie.  Most of the supporting cast,
led ably by Kathy Baker and Conchetta Ferrell, are bored 1960s housewives
who spend their time entrenched in one another's lives.  Other members
of the cast include Alan Arkin as Bill, the archetypal 1960s Dad, and
Anthony Michael Hall (remember when he was the skinny dweeb back in 16
CANDLES?) as Kim's menacing boyfriend.
     Kim is played by Winona Ryder, Peg & Bill's all-American daughter.
She is horrified by Edward at first, but eventually becomes his friend.
Ryder is literally transformed in this movie, from being a vacuous
teenager early in the movie to taking enormous risks for Edward by the
end of the film.
     When you go see this movie, remember that it is a fairy tale, like
"Beauty and the Beast."  Tim Burton makes his points about humanity and
isolation without beating you over the head with them.  This is one of
the best movies I've seen this year.
     Kid rating---Leslie hid at some of the parts where she felt Edward
was going to be embarrassed (you can see most of these moments coming).
The language was a little strong at times, and there were some fights
but no gore.  The movie may be a little slow for kids who need action to
keep them interested in a film.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Tim Burton has been emblematic of what has been going wrong with
popular films since STAR WARS.  Burton has a very strong visual sense, but a
weak story-telling ability.  His BATMAN had a beautiful vision of a dark and
mordant Gotham City, but the story itself was weak and even then there were
gaps in the telling.  His earlier BEETLEJUICE had a less developed visual
sense but even worse story-telling.  One moment characters would find
themselves floating around the room or compelled to sing calypso, and a
moment later they would be apparently overlooking the incident like they
would a burp.  In both films (as well as PEE WEE'S BIG ADVENTURE) there are
nice scenes but they are just not well sewn together.
     My guess is that something very interesting happened with Burton's
EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.  Burton told his rather Oz-ian idea about a boy with
scissors for hands to one Caroline Thompson.  As she says, "The minute he
said to me, It was so resonant and so powerful and such a clear expression
of feelings that it just set the whole thing off.  The story is about not
being able to touch anything, about feeling that everything you touch turns
to tatters.  It's about being awkward."  Remarkably, that was the story she
was able to write and the chemistry between her story-telling ability and
Burton's visual sense make a film orders of magnitude better than anything
Burton has done without her.
     Aside from some creative play in the very first frames of the film, the
first remarkable thing about the story is the setting.  You have a John
Waters suburbia jammed together with a Jean Cocteau fairy tale castle.  On
the hill, everything is magic and unworldly, while the valley wallows in
20th century pop culture and bad taste.  One day the Avon Lady (played by
Diane Wiest) crosses the boundary and drives up the hill in the quest for
new customers.  There she finds the sad and lonely Edward Scissorhands, a
dough-cutting machine incompletely transformed into a real boy, by a kindly
old scientist-wizard.  The wizard is a sort of likable Rotwang played by
Burton's childhood idol Vincent Price.  Our Avon Lady brings this enchanted
creature to the less-than-enchanting suburbia where Edward (played,
incidentally, by rock singer Johnny Depp) attempts to adapt and apply his
talents to modern life.  Edward faces a public who has a thin veneer of
xenophilia over a deeper core of xenophobia.  Further complicating matters,
he must face his own sexual repression and stigma when attracted to Kim
(played by Winona Ryder), the pretty daughter of the Avon Lady.
     EDWARD SCISSORHANDS misses being a great fantasy--and I think it does
miss it only marginally--by spending too much time in the John Waters world
and complicating the plot with Edward having an unexplained power to unlock
doors and hence being used in an illegal plot by Kim's boyfriend Jim.  Jim
is played by Anthony Michael Hall, and the years have not been kind to poor
Anthony, I'm afraid.  They have robbed him of his teenage ungainliness and
left him a rather ordinary-looking adult with little screen chemistry.
     EDWARD SCISSORHANDS still needs a little of the fine-tuning that could
have made it a classic film of a tragic hero of the order of PHANTOM OF THE
OPERA.  But it works for many of the same reasons PHANTOM does, with its own
tragic hero suffering stigma and sexual repression.  I am told that Burton
likes to work over and over with the same actors--one reason why Michael
Keaton was Batman--and I hope he feels the same about screenwriters.  I want
to see more of what Burton and Thompson can do together.  I really doubted
that I would ever give any Burton film a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.  But
Burton has finally found the magic.

Author
Arnold Kim
The story of Frankenstein is probably one of the more known horror tales 
of this century, and the famous Boris Karloff image has certainly 
profligated.  Director Tim Burton's "Edward Scissorhands" takes some of 
the basic elements of this story and provides a whole new spin on it.  
The film, written by Burton as well, is about its title character,
Edward (Johnny Depp) and his hands made of scissors, who is a creation
of an old scientist living in a home in a secluded corner of
civilization.  One day, Edward, who lived alone after the scientist
died, is discovered in that castle by a door-to-door makeup
salesperson (Dianne Wiest)and is taken home by her.  At first he is
accepted and welcomed by the rest of the neighborhod, especially
because of his hedge sculptures and women's haircuts.  However, things
go awry when he is persuaded to break into someone's home, and the
whole town turns against him, with the exception of his new family,
especially thier daughter, Kim (Winona Rider), who has developed
feelings for him.
The most noteable element of this film is the presentation itself- it
comes off as a very simple, storybook-like tale.  First of all, it
actually is a tale being told by an old woman to her grandchild.  The
art direction, which is amazing, effectively uses colors without great
detail on neighborhood houses, while using dark, cold features for
Edward's palce of origin, both of which harken back to, once again, a
storybook-like feel.  This is a gorgoous looking film, as are most of
Tim Burton's works.
But beyond that lies the heart of the story- the ideas of the meaning
of humanity through the quickly changing perspective on Edward of the
townfolk, and Kim's realization of her feelings for him.  The
townspeople are in love with him first- but only as a novelty of
sorts.  After he 's caught breaking into a house, he is seen as
nothing but a terrible monster.  Either way, none of the neighbors
ever really saw him for the person he was beyond a superficial level,
except for Kim.  The power of the story is the combination of the two
elements- the expression of the heart through the feel of the story-
enahnces the power and emotion of the film.  The story this film told
moved me, and did so in an original way.
Aiding this, of course, are the performances of some of the actors.  Johnny 
Depp creates a very moving character in Edward, showing us his shy, 
innocent, childlike ways effectively.  Winona Ryder is also commendable, 
showing first fear, then frustration, then respect, then loveand making the 
transitions without much of a hitch.  Dianne Wiest was charming, in the 
doting, motherly role.  Only real weak link might be Anthony Micheal Hall, 
but I think his "Breakfast Club" identity might have gotten in the way.
These three main elements- the visual style of the film, the story
itself, and the performances, all combine under the master plan of
director Tim Burton to create an effective, moving film- truly a
Frankenstein with a twist.  On a scale of 10, I give this film an 8.

Author
Malcolm Austin
     I saw EDWARD SCISSORHANDS last night at the Ziegfield theatre is
NYC.  (A *great* movie theatre in terms of picture and sound quality.)
Here are some quick impressions, if you are deciding whether or not to
see it.
     ES is directed by Tim Burton, whose credits include BATMAN,
BEETLEJUICE, and PEE-WEE HERMAN'S BIG ADVENTURE.  The film is great
visually, and Danny Elfman has contributed a good, not-just-Batman-
reedited score.  The plot is quite weak.  Winona Ryder looks about as
bad as she possibly can (which isn't very) in a blonde wig.
     The bad news is that the story is kind of limp.  But the film looks
great.  This is more than the costumes and sets--it is also how the
scenes are put together, how the characters behave, and where the camera
is and how it moves.
     A truly fine movie needs several strong elements--the script,
direction, and acting must *all* be good, and the producers need to have
sufficient resources in money and technical types to create the sort of
film they want to make.  It doesn't have to be a lot of money, depending
on what they want to do, and how clever their people are.
     EDWARD SCISSORHANDS is not a truly fine movie.  The only thing that
works really well here is the visuals.  The acting is professional but
nothing more, the story fails to convince even in its own "fantasy"
genre, and there is very little originality in what the plot contains,
or how it unfolds.
     If you only see one film this year, don't pick this one.  But a
film does not have to be truly fine in order to be worth seeing.  If you
enjoyed THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN, you will almost certainly
like this movie.  Warning for parents though, it contains somewhat more
violence than MUNCHAUSEN.
     It is easy to compare Tim Burton to Terry Gilliam (JABBERWOCKY,
TIME BANDITS, BRAZIL, MUNCHAUSEN).  Their films have similar strengths.
Burton is somewhat more childlike and carefree in his imagination, and
Gilliam is significantly better at moving the plot along.  Maybe he just
has a better editor.
     Among Burton's other films, I would say that EDWARD SCISSORHANDS
is better than BATMAN, if you take away Nicholson's performance, and not
as good as BEETLEJUICE.
     Sorry for the rambling nature of this review, but I am pressed for
time, and am trying hard to avoid spoilers.  To sum up, I enjoyed it
purely for the look of the movie.  It has little else to recommend it,
but what more do you need?

Author
Kevin Patterson
Tim Burton's EDWARD SCISSORHANDS is a cinematic fairy tale, a flight of
fancy that sails on the wings of Burton's vivid imagination, and yet it
still bears implications upon the real world. It's a film which is narrated
in flashback to a little boy's question about where snow comes from. It's a
film in which the protagonist, a boy named Edward (Johnny Depp), was
invented by a strange scientist living in a castle (Vincent Price) and is
eventually discovered still living there, many years after the scientist's
death, by none other than the Avon lady. And yet it's also a film in which
the fundamental conflicts and relationships are the same ones that we find
right next door.
Burton's films have generally met with mixed reaction among both critics
and the general public. Even his less-than-stellar efforts, however, are
infused with a unique and remarkable visual style that sets him apart among
modern filmmakers. EDWARD SCISSORHANDS is no exception, as Burton creates
both an unnervingly bright and colorful suburbia that is somehow
intimidating in its cheerfulness and a majestically constructed Gothic
castle that has been Edward's home. Composer Danny Elfman supplies the film
with a score that is appropriately both whimsical and sad, a perfect fit
for this warm-hearted but ultimately tragic tale of an outsider trying to
find his place among "normal" people.
The aesthetics of EDWARD SCISSORHANDS place it definitively within a
fantasy universe. This is a good thing, because otherwise viewers might ask
questions such as why no one aside from the Avon lady ever wanted to have a
look inside the mysterious castle sitting at the end of Main Street, or
what kind of scientist could create a an otherwise perfectly functional
human being but not be able to get the hands right, or why on earth he gave
Edward scissors  as a replacement until he figured it out. In any case, the
Avon lady decides to bring Edward out of his lonely castle and into her
home. At first, he's a sensation: all the neighbors come to visit the
family and see the strange boy who can perform tricks such as sculpting the
bushes into fantastic sculptures. All too quickly, however, he is
unwittingly dragged into a robbery by the Avon lady's daughter Kim (Winona
Ryder) and then incurs the wrath of her jealous boyfriend when she starts
to fall in love with Edward. Prejudices take over, and Edward comes to be
seen not as the kind-hearted but easily confused individual that he is, but
as a dangerous monster who must be driven out of their community.
It would be easy to see Edward as nothing more than a generic freak, a foil
for an "it's okay to be different" message. I think that Burton and his
screenwriter, Caroline Thompson, intend for Edward to serve as a metaphor
for something a little more specific: the naive, socially inept artist. He
is liked and admired when he's performing elaborate tricks for an audience,
but few if any of them care about him as a person: he's just another
novelty for them to enjoy. He is easily manipulated, and ends up being the
fall guy for a crime which he barely understands simply because a beautiful
young woman whom he trusts asked for his help. Worst of all, his attempts
to fit in and help others often go wrong, provoking further anger and
alienation, in his case because he has a tendency to literally cut things
up by accident when he gets confused and uneasy.
There are quite a few clichés in EDWARD SCISSORHANDS, though not all of
them detract from the story. There is almost no development of the romance
between Edward and Kim, but the film gets away with this due to its fairy
tale format. Even Kim's mean-spirited boyfriend, a cardboard cut-out from
the Book of Evil Teenage Movie Characters, manages not to irritate for the
most part. Still, the film would have been fine without a duel to the death
at high altitude. There are also a couple of the townspeople who are just a
little too over the top, such as the Bible-thumping fundamentalist who is
convinced that Edward is a demon and the seductive hair stylist who finds
Edward attractive.
In the end, however, the film's good qualities are enough to carry it past
any mistakes. Imaginative, clever, and strangely touching, EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS stands as a high point of Burton's career.
Send comments to ktpattersn@aol.com.
Film Reviews Archive:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Frank Maloney
     Tim Burton is the director who brought us BEETLEJUICE, BATMAN, and
now EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.  EDWARD SCISSORHANDS is, briefly speaking, a
kind of fairy tale version of FRANKENSTEIN, but unfortunately the fairy
tale element is not made clear early on and the enormous holes in the
story are pretty darn distracting until you accept the conventions of
fairy tales and throw logic and verisimilitude onto the trash heap (if
you do).
     There are indeed yawning chasms in the story's logic which are only
bridged by the sense of wonder and delight which Johnny Depp elicits in
your humble poster.  OK, I'm going to be perfectly frank with you and
say I have not a clue as to who Johnny Depp is, what he does, or even
what he looks if he doesn't look like Edward Scissorhands.  I have it
in my mind that he might be a musician.  But actor or musician,
pre-Edward, he ought to be recognized from now own as a brilliant
comedic actor, highly reminiscent of Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton.
I have to say that his performance is nothing less than inspired; it
absolutely saves the movie from its own inconsistencies and illogic.
     On the other hand, or scissors, Winona Ryder is completely lost
inside her blonde wig in this movie, to say nothing of wasted.  Burton
seems to have directed her to shed all hints of personality.  Quite
honestly, any presentable young woman off the street could have
delivered the same performance.
     Fortunately for me, she is shines with intense brilliance in
another Christmas movie this season, MERMAIDS, otherwise I might write
her off as completely forgetable.
     Diane Wiess plays Winona's mother, an Avon lady who discovers
Edward in his castle on the edge of the most outrageously bland
subdivision ever put on film; Burton out-Waters John Waters in his
vision of a pastel hell.  Wiess is her usual, reliable, wonderful self;
mothering, protecting, always slightly out of synch with the world she
lives in.  When she enters the castle, which was decorated by a spacey
descendant of the person who did up Dracula's, and she says "It's your
Avon lady," it's completely right.
     Burton, the director, shines in the look and feel of EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS, but his story sense is as out of control as ever.  And
will he realize that Danny Elfman's music is as irritating and
distracting as it is ugly and pretentious, and stop using him?
     Another surprising deficiency were the models and mattes used to
establish the castle and the suburb.  Completely unconvincing,
embarrassingly obvious.  For a movie that puts such an emphasis on its
look, has spent lots of time and money on special effects, make-up, and
cutlery, this seems especially odd.
     But to end this on a positive note, let me mention the small role
of the Scientist as played by Vincent Price, who is looking rather old
and frail these days, but is still an icon to be reckoned with.  It was
the Scientist who created Edward and died before he could give him
hands.  In a flashback, we visit his laboratory cum factory.  He is not
so much a Mad Scientist, as he is a Whimsical Scientist; his machines
are humorously anthropomorphic and I for one will forever envy him his
cookie cutters.
     I recommend EDWARD SCISSORHANDS if you can leave your logic in the
lobby; only then will you enjoy it as it should be enjoyed.
