Title
Review for Hannah and Her Sisters (1986)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Long Che Chan
I don't know why I like Woody Allen's films so much.  He, like myself,
admires Ingmar Bergman's films and his movies have a sort of wonderful
way of making you feel giddy.  Most of them are funny.  Hannah and Her
Sisters has its big laughs, but its primary purpose isn't to get giggles
out of you, but to elaborate on a moral that is told, loosely or
obviously, in most every Allen movie I've seen- life will fall into
place, the outsider will one day be an insider.  There is a Tolstoy
quotation mentioned in the film in which the author states that "life is
meaningless." It seems to me that this movie is trying to prove Tolstoy
wrong.
Perhaps Allen was aspiring to more Bergmanesque heights when he adopted
three sisters as his main characters for this film.  Hannah and Her
Sisters is a skillful and fun study of these three women and their
relationships with each other, their parents, and the men in their
life.  These three sisters belong to a successful show business clan and
Allen uses their annual Thanksgiving dinners as the link between each
other.   It's a very hopeful and perky movie, beginning and ending with
Thanksgiving dinners, each marking significant turning points in the
characters' lives.
The sisters are a suffering bunch- not as miserable and sullen as the
threesome in Cries and Whispers, but very much weary of life, people,
and sometimes, of each other.  Hannah (Mia Farrow) is the "head" sister,
the woman "in control" of her life, who is generous, understanding, and
nearly perfect.  However, she is so full of her charity, she forgets
herself.  She says she has needs, but one of the film's minor flaws is
that she never expresses them.  Throughout the movie she is a tame
earth-mother who never seems to needs anything.  Lee (Barbara Hershey)
is a vibrant, young woman who is trapped in a cage constructed by her
and her also-caged boyfriend (Max von Sydow), a pitiful man who
"teaches" her about art, mocking people's enjoyment of pop culture.  She
just so happens to share romantic feelings for Hannah's second husband
Elliot (Michael Caine), a sweet, confused financial-consultant.  The
third sister is Holly (Dianne Wiest), a mess of a lady who has a
terrible cocaine addiction, an impotent career as an actress, and no one
who loves her.  Within the span of two years their lives will change,
will weave in and out, go from turmoil to bliss.
Woody Allen has a character, a neurotic hypochondriac named Mickey
Sachs, the ex-husband of Hannah.  I think he's the most important
character in the film- he is the one who, in the end, realizes life is
not meaningless, that it's a ride, and it is on this note the film
ends.  Maybe surrounding the whole movie around himself was a scheme of
vanity on Woody Allen's part, but the movie wouldn't work without his
hilarious and ridiculous cynicism and, later, his change of heart.
Mickey Sachs is the outsider of the family, an outsider trying to belong
somewhere, and in the end, he finds his way into the clan.  This is a
man who is like all of Allen's other characters he has written for
himself, an erratic shrimp drowning in his own neurosis, a man trying to
find the meaning of life.  Throughout the beginning of Hannah, Mickey
obsessively worries over a possible brain tumor causing his ear
infection.  He wakes up in the middle of the night screaming like a
lunatic.  When he discovers he is out of danger's way, he concludes that
life is meaningless and goes on a quest for a religious belief to
brighten up his existence.  Woody Allen never strays from his usual
topics- religion, art, death, life, love- and here, he seems to have
come to a point where he has found the answer- there is no answer.
Life's meaning is that there is no meaning.  We are here for the ride
and those who are ceaselessly plagued by pointless matters like death
are squandering their time on Earth.
The decisive point of the movie for the sisters, as a group, (spoilers
ahead) is a scene in a restaurant- Holly has been disappointed yet again
with an audition failure and is, once again, asking for Hannah's money
so she can pursue writing; Lee has had her fling with Elliot and it's
getting much too complicated for her; and Hannah is exasperated with
Holly's unsettling insecurity.  As the camera circles endlessly around
the table, a wellspring of emotion pours out of the actors and begins to
finalize their characters' suffering, or at least make it evident to
each other.
The definitive point for Mickey Sachs is (more spoilers) a screening of
the Marx Brothers' Duck Soup and as the lunacy of the movie begins to
engage Mickey, he realizes, finally, what he has been searching for.
The whole plot is tied up very nicely at the end.  The way the movie is
structured is wonderfully different from any other previous Allen film-
each new chapter of the movie is introduced with a title card showing a
quotation (like the Tolstoy one), or a character's current thoughts.  It
is a brilliant style that doesn't draw attention to itself, unlike the
remarkably ingenious construction of Annie Hall did.  The movie is very
light and fluid and thoroughly enjoyable because it's smart.  By the
way, it was also made the year I was born, and I hate the fact that the
Academy's Best Picture award that year went to Platoon, a bloody war
film, instead of a feel-good comedy-drama like this.  The script is less
of a dissection and more of a contemplation.  I don't think it's Allen's
best (Annie Hall holds a dear place in my heart), but it's certainly his
most complete.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        HANNAH AND HER SISTERS is an intricate, well thought-
out ensemble drama from Woody Allen, who began with this movie 
a string of adult dramas like CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS, 
SEPTEMBER and ANOTHER WOMAN. This one follows the loves 
and ambitions of one extended family, all of whom are connected 
by a woman named Hannah (Mia Farrow). Michael Caine, her 
current husband (and probably the only man who looks goofier 
than Woody Allen), is infatuated with Hannah's sister Lee (Barbara 
"Collagen Lips" Hershey), who is married to a moody artist (Max 
von Sydow).
        Then you've got the two other sisters, Holly (perennial 
Allen favorite Diane Wiest) and April (Carrie Fisher), in 
competition for the same man, along with Farrow's ex-husband 
(Allen), the hypochondriac producer of a sketch comedy show 
(In a rare moment that reveals a little too much of Woody, he 
complains about a sketch that the censors have ordered cut, 
wondering why they could be so narrow-minded, when his head 
writer Julie Kavner replies, "Child molestation is a very touchy 
subject.) who comes face to face with death and eternity when 
he finds out he may have a brain tumor.
        As if all these story lines weren't enough, Allen manages 
to work in a few of his customary flashbacks, one a scene in which 
he and Mia find out he's infertile and have to ask two of their best 
friends if they wouldn't mind donating some sperm for a worthy 
cause, and the other a comic sequence of a blind date from hell with 
Allen and Wiest. The latter is loaded with the usual Woody Wit and 
figures into the plot toward the end, the former is unnecessary and 
is never resolved. We see the friends react in disgust at the 
comment, "All you have to do is masturbate into a cup" (which 
Woody would no doubt videotape), but later we find out Woody 
and Mia had two kids together. Who's the father, out of curiosity?
        Although the whole sperm storyline is out of place, the 
others are delicately balanced so that we retain interest in all of 
them as they develop and eventually intertwine. Allen has an 
obvious talent for juggling multiple story lines even if the 
resolutions for some of them aren't ideal. In HANNAH AND 
HER SISTERS, he tackles his familiar topics of adultery and the 
philosophical mysteries of life as his character receives a reprieve 
and gets a new lease on life for only a little while before realizing 
death is still inevitable and life is still as meaningless as ever. 
He tries to convert to Catholicism and later Hari Krishna, but to 
no avail. Only Woody could make so many serious points about 
an issue like that while also keeping the comedy going. HANNAH 
AND HER SISTERS marked the beginning of a new era of large 
scale seriousness in comedy from Mr. Allen.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Mike Watson
One of the very best films in Woody Allen's considerable career,
HANNAH AND HER SISTERS is an utter delight from start to finish.
Allen's observations of family life and relationships have rarely been
sharper, funnier or more honest.
Like so many of Allen's films, the setting is once again in New York.
But it's a testimony to the universality of his writing that the
location, while certainly inspiring, doesn't really matter in the end.
One doesn't have to have even set foot inside the USA, let alone the
Big Apple, to find these characters so real, so familiar, so achingly
lifelike.
The film focuses on the lives of three sisters: Hannah (Mia Farrow),
Lee (Barbara Hershey) and Holly (Dianne West).  Though a quite a few
different plots run simultaneously though the film, Allen's screenplay
tells two principal stories.  Firstly, the secret extra marital affair
between Hannah's husband Elliot (a wonderful Michael Caine) and his
sister-in-law Lee.  Secondly, we follow the trials of Hannah's
ex-husband Mickey (Woody Allen), a hypochondriac who undergoes a major
personal and spiritual crisis about the meaning of life after
seemingly staring death in the face.
Caine's multi-faceted character is one of the film's standout
performances.  He's both refreshingly honest and oddly calculating in
his agonising over his long-held feelings for his wife's sister and
the passionate affair that follows.  Also outstanding is Allen
himself, playing a variation on the same neurotic character he's done
a million times before but investing the character with real pathos
and humanity.  He's also very, very funny.  Sample: in a flashback
discussing his just diagnosed infertility with his then wife.  Farrow:
What have you done that could have caused this, was it excessive
masturbation?  Allen: Hey, now you're knocking my hobbies!
The smaller details and the secondary plots in this film are equally
as satisfying is the principal storylines.  The sisters' parents are
two showbiz types with big egos; dad trying to grow old gracefully,
mum trying to keep her youth and flirting with men at every
opportunity, much to her husband's disgust.  There's the brain-dead
rock and roller who wants to buy "big art" for his mansion and who
finds himself in an explosive encounter with Lee's first lover
Frederick, an ageing artist and snobbish intellectual played superbly
by the Max Von Sydow.
This is a remarkable, richly textured film, full of warmth, humour,
sadness, and a touching humanity.  The cast of stars is sensational,
taking to their well-defined roles with focus and, it seems, some
humility.  There's no scenery chewing performances here.  And Woody
Allen's script as near to flawless as one could possibly hope for.
HANNAH AND HER SISTERS.  In a word: brilliant.  See it at all costs.
