Title
Review for Foreign Correspondent (1940)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alfred Hitchcock
Writers: Charles Bennett and Joan Harrison
Starring: Joel McCrea, Loraine Day, Herbert Marshall, George Sanders,
Albert Basserman, Edmund Gwenn, Edward Cianelli, Charles Halton, Ian
Wolfe, Harry Davenport, Robert Benchley
Propaganda in film is always best when it's extremely subtle, as it was
in John Ford's "Young Mr. Lincoln," which was propaganda against FDR at
the time.  But this film proves that blatant propaganda in film can
work, if it doesn't harm the story or anything else, but works as just
one of the many things that the film goes for.  Not many filmmakers can
these elements together.  But that's why Hitchcock's a god and you're
not (hee hee).
"Foreign Correspondent" pulls an interesting albeit not very huge twist
on one theme that's pertienent in almost all of his film: an innocent
man wrongly accused.  Our protagonist is an off-the-wall journalist for
an American paper - Johnny Jones (Joel McCrea) - who get himself
involved in all sorts of espionnage, danger, and various other cool
stuff in his pursuit to discover the truth about everything.  Instead of
running from trouble all the time and trying to get to the authorities
like protagonists in most Hitchcock films, he's almost looking for it.
Johnny is sent over to England to be the foreign correspondent for his
paper when the correspondents over there aren't gathering much
information.  He's a wild boy, and does anything for a story, and that's
why he's sent over there by his boss, Mr. Powers (Harry Davenport), who
changes his name for the "better" to the more formal and dashing Huntley
Haverstock.  Over there, war is brewing, and he begins to get info for
his paper, and does so in the most direct way possible: by actually
confronting some of the major politicians over there.
After the witnessing the public assasination of an italian diplomat, Mr.
Van Meer (Albert Basserman), up close and personal, he chases them to a
prairie populated by windmills.  Various twists in the storyline pop up,
most notably the discovery that Van Meer was not actually killed, but
was a double so some devious men can hold him hostage.  Twist upon twist
pops up, leading up to a startling discovery half way through the film,
and then finding a way to save Van Meer and alert the media about it.
There is, of course, a romantic subplot (what Hitchcock film would do
well without one?), involving Johnny/Huntley and Carol Fisher (Loraine
Day), daughter of a famous politician, Stephen Fisher (Herbert
Marshall).  But this relationship is not a boring one (what Hitchcock
romantic subplot is uninteresting?), carrying several twists and turns
in itself, of which I will not divulge because they're just too much
fun.
One of the greatest things about this film is how everything is balanced
well.  The plot, the intrigue, the propaganda, the romantic subplot, and
the humor are all at the correct levels they should be to bring out the
maximum effect.  The story is constantly moving, and the twists are
plausible and shocking.  The propaganda is blatant without becoming too
discreet or too blatant.  The romance is believable, funny, and always
interesting, and never harms the story, but actually adds some depth to
it.
And the humor is great.  Like "The Thirty-Nine Steps," this film has an
amazing screenplay, filled with great lines, banter, and zingers here
and there.  A friend of Carol's as well as a journalist much like Johnny
is Scott ffolliott, who explains that the reason the first letter of his
last name is lower-case is because "one of my ancestors has his head
chopped off by Henry VIII, and his wife dropped the captiol in the
letter to commemorate the occasion."  There are scenes that are
humurous, clever, and plausible at the same time, such as a scene where
Johnny isn't allowed to transmit information to America, but does so in
a very sneaky and hilarious way.  I love Hitchcock the best when he adds
comedy to his intrigue, and this is a prime example of how brilliant he
is with this.
Hitchcock is also well-known for his amazing set pieces which stand out
in the brain long after the film is over.  There are several here, my
favorite being the assasination of the fake Van Meer scene, which takes
place in the rain, and has the assasin sneak away through a crowd of
people who are all holding up black umbrellas.  It's an amazing
sequence, stunning to look at, and clever as hell.  There are also the
scenes with the windmills, a hysterically clever escape attempt by
Johnny where he not only escapes but is able to create enough
pandemonium to get his clothes under the nose of his perpatrators, and a
scary-as-hell plane crash over the Atlantic which looks surprisingly
realistic for the time period.
Also notable is how well his characters are defined and the wonderful
actors who portray them.  Joel McCrea creates a down-to-earth Johnny,
who jokes around all the time, but is still obsessed with getting his
story.  Loraine Day adds intelligence to what could have been just
another woman role, even tricking Johnny a couple of times, and playing
hard to get for awhile.  Herbert Marshall adds human qualities to his
role, who may be just a tad shady.  Edmund Gwenn, who would go on to
play Santa Claus in the original "Miracle on 34th Street," is hilarious
as a would-be-assasin.
But the acting prize, for me, goes to George Sanders as Scott ffolliott,
who is an amazing scene stealer (and was one in Hitch's other film made
in '40, "Rebecca"), and plays his role with the right amount of
suaveness and humor.  If his cool voice sounds familiar, that's because
he was also the voice of Sherr Khan the lion in the animated version of
"The Jungle Book."  Anyway, his performance is just one of the many
great things about this movie.
"Foregin Correspondent" is actually one of Hitchcock's underrated films,
but even today, it is one of his most satisfying, hilarious, and
intelligent films.  Many thrillers strive to be too many things and can
never level anything out exactly, but this film shows that it all can be
done: humor, intelligence, propaganda, and plot twists are all balanced
wonderfully.  I know it sounds almost redundant to say that this is one
of his best films (aren't most of them?), but this one truly is one of
his very best and satisfying films.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A Dutchman named Van Meer is about to speak at a key peace
conference just before the outbreak of World War II.  As the addled or
drugged Van Meer, Albert Bassermann gives an aptly mysterious
performance.
     When Van Meer vanishes after just his arrival, Carol Fisher, the
daughter of conference organizer Stephen Fisher, steps in and delivers a
big hearted but vacuous talk in his place.  As the innocent Carol,
Laraine Day uses her pixyish and wide-eyed good looks to charm the
conference attendees, especially a newly arrived foreign correspondent
named Johnny Jones.  Johnny thinks she is just about the best thing he
has ever seen.
     Joel McCrea with his malleable everyman face plays Johnny in 1940's
FOREIGN CORRESPONDENT by Alfred Hitchcock.  You can almost feel the
great master sculpting McCrea's face to fit the story.
     Although the two leads' love story is secondary, the chemistry
between the them is genuine and makes for an interesting little side
plot.
     When someone looking like Van Meer later appears, he is shot.
Hitchcock, ever the master at the staging of a thriller, films the
killer's escape with the camera high above the crowd.  In the heavy rain
the umbrellas rustle swiftly in a clear rhythm as the killer runs unseen
through them.  You can feel the tension without seeing it or even
witnessing the looks on the faces of the crowd.
     (So when does Hitchcock appear in the movie?  13 minutes into the
picture he is shown clearly walking down the street reading a
newspaper.)
     Using Hitchcock's favorite theme of one man against a multitude,
the correspondent bravely holes up in a windmill to keep an eye on a
host of bad guys -- Dutch and German.  As Johnny tries hard not to be
discovered, he gets his coat caught in the spokes of the windmill.  As
we all grimace, his arm is about to be chopped off when he pulls it out
of his coat just in the nick of time.  With a huge collective sigh of
relief we realize that our hero is saved and has not been detected
afterall.
     Hitchcock doesn't need to show violence to frighten.  One horrific
scene happens off camera, but the accompanying screams and the fear in
our hero's eyes make the scene's terror palpable.
     Although made in a time when special effects did not so dominate
movies as they do today, the film ends in a dramatic and fairly
realistic disaster.  The picture is not the best of Hitchcock's body of
work, but it is quite a well done film and well worth looking for.
     FOREIGN CORRESPONDENT runs 2:00.  It is not rated but would be PG
for violence and adult themes and would be fine for kids around ten and
up.
