Title
Review for When Brendan Met Trudy (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Robin Clifford
Brendan (Peter McDonald) is a Dublin high school teacher that loves music
and movies, but hates teaching. When an extraordinary young woman named
Trudy (Flora Montgomery) enters his life, he soon learns that there is more
to living than Bogart and Brahms in "When Brendan Met Trudy."
The movie begins a la "Sunset Boulevard" with a body lying motionless in
the gutter and a voice over explaining how he, Brendan, could arrive at
such a nadir of life. As the story unfolds and more film references are
mentioned and shown, we begin to understand that our hero is a tormented
individual who is in desperate need of a change. His profession, teaching
history and English at a Dublin high school, is unfulfilling, to say the
least, and he seeks solace in his movies and his passion for song. This
changes when Trudy enters the picture.
Trudy, Brendan learns, is a professional burglar and he, at first, is
energized by the excitement of her crimes. Things are looking up for the
teacher until he makes a big mistake and introduces his new girlfriend to
his family, especially Nuala (Pauline McLynn), the sister from hell.
Brendan succumbs to family pressure and, soon after, he and Trudy are no
longer an item. This is when he ends up in the gutter, shown in the
beginning of the film, pretending to have been hit by a car in a vain cry
for sympathy from Trudy. It takes an act of selfless bravery, later, by
Brendan to impress Trudy and she agrees to take him back - if he helps her
rob Nuala's home. The excitement of the deed drives Brendan to an even
grander criminal plan - steal all of the hated computers from his school.
But, things go awry and Trudy ends up in jail, shielding Brendan from
arrest.
 When Trudy is sentenced to two years in prison, Brendan mopes around,
guilt-ridden and lonely over his loss of love. Even the heroes in his
movies, his only comfort in the past, seem to mock him for letting the love
of his life take the rap for him. He musters the courage to visit Trudy in
prison and finds she has forgiven him. He unabashedly breaks out in a song
that is both joy and redemption.
"When Brendan Met Trudy" is a nice idea for a film, but is less than it
could be in the hands of first time feature director Kieron J. Walsh. The
helmer hales from advertising and TV and it shows in the two-dimensional
nature of the story and its protagonists. The tale focuses on Brendan and
his passion for film and music is an integral part of his makeup. Peter
McDonald doesn't take us far below the surface of the feckless Brendan, but
the offbeat love story, music and film references are entertaining.
Flora Montgomery has the harder role as the self-assured, criminally minded
Trudy. Her toughness opposite Brendan's milquetoast character is supposed
to be a turning of the tables with the couple reversing conventional roles
of tough guy, subservient gal. Trudy is too bubbly to come across as a
tough-as-nails thief, but Montgomery does her best to breathe life into her
role.
There is little going on to distract the viewer from the central story.
Wacky and weird family members make up the background, but they, too, fail
to come across as real people, though Brendan's speak-her-mind mom (Marie
Mullen) gets some shock value out of her foul-mouthed judgements.
"When Brendan Met Trudy" tries to be a romantic comedy with the leads
reversing conventional roles. There isn't a firm enough hand behind the
camera to control the bland script by Roddy Doyle. As such, it moves along
OK and has some kitschy film references with snippets of such classics as
"The Quiet Man," "Africa Queen," "The Producers" and more but fails to
satisfy the film buff in me. I give it a C.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
After "The Commitments," "The Snapper," and "The Van," Roddy Doyle's "When
Brendan Met Trudy" is a real disappointment from the Irish novelist and
screenwriter.  Compared to those smart, snappy screenplays, Doyle's latest
is a minor work indeed.  It tries too hard to be quirky.  It tries too hard
to be hip.  And all too often it winds up committing the greatest crime of
all: it's boring.
With its fanciful tale of a mild-mannered (read: feeble) schoolteacher
(Peter McDonald) who forms an unlikely relationship with a free-spirited
(read: rude) petty thief (Flora Montgomery), the film has its moments but
labors under Doyle's insistence on cramming his screenplay chock full of
cinematic references.  Brendan (McDonald), who moonlights as a choirboy, is
also an avid movie buff so these film references come thick and fast.
There are nods towards Godard, John Wayne, Polish films (especially the
one made in color!), "Sunset Boulevard," film noir, Leone's spaghetti
westerns, "Rocco and His Brothers"--even the film's title is a rather
obvious play on "When Harry Met Sally..."
By the time this longer-than-it-need-be film is over, all this forced and
frantic cleverness feels rather obvious too.
McDonald, who played opposite Brendan Gleeson in the splendid Irish
gangster flick "I Went Down," is required to sleepwalk his way through his
milquetoast role.  Montgomery (as the carefree, abrasive Trudy) is
accommodating, but her character is a strangely unappealing one.  The end
result is a character-driven story with two lackluster leads: not your best
of combinations by a long chalk.
Brendan and Trudy meet in a pub (where else; this is Dublin!) where Trudy
is taken by Brendan's singing ability.  Brendan is attracted to Trudy's
insouciance (which justifies her standing him up on their first date,
naturally).  They meet; they get the hots for one another; they take it
from there.  But where do they take it, exactly?  Not very far.  The sex
scenes are good though (in a natural, awkward, non-Hollywood way).
Reportedly Doyle specifically asked Kieron Walsh to direct the project
(the two had worked together in television but Walsh had never directed a
feature film before).  Walsh's rookie handling of the material might be
somewhat responsible for the film's lack of charm, but when you come right
down to it Doyle has done much, much better.
Let's hope McDonald and Montgomery are given a better vehicle than "When
Brenda Met Trudy" next time out.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Laura Clifford
Straight arrow Brendan (Peter McDonald, "The Opportunists") is a school
teacher who visits his local pub after choir practice where he meets
Trudy (Flora Montgomery).  She tells him she's a Montessori teacher and
gets him to sing a hymn.  But Brendan will do more than sing for his supper
once he discovers Trudy's true profession in "When Brendan Met Trudy."
We first meet Brendan lying in a rain filled gutter, recreating the drowning
scene that opens "Sunset Boulevard."  Brendan's a film buff and writer
Roddy Doyle ("The Snapper," "The Commitments") peppers his film with constant
movie references.  We flash back to the titular meeting before catching up
with that opener about two thirds into the film, when Brendan's life has
spun out of control due to the wild ways of Trudy, who's a professional
thief.  Brendan hates Trudy's friends.  Trudy hates Brendan's family, 
particularly his witchy sister.  In order to win Trudy back after the gutter
incident, he has to agree to accompany Trudy to rob his sister's house and
do unmentionable things to her living room carpet.
"When Brendan Met Trudy" is a terribly uneven film which doesn't roar into
life until its final thirty minutes.  Brendan and Trudy never seem like a
couple.  They'd probably hate each other in the real world.  While McDonald
gives an appealing performance, Flora Montgomery is a bit too forced, like 
the film itself.  Essentially, it's a boy-meets-girl, boy-loses-girl story by 
way of the 'is my significant other a psychopath?' films such as "So I Married 
an Axe Murderer."  Its charms are to be found in the flourishes.  Brendan's 
imaginative film fantasies find him exitting a frame a la John Wayne in "The 
Searchers."  Trudy's influence morphs his hymn singing into the most outrageous 
cover ever of Iggy Pop's "The Passenger."  His all boy class starts getting 
assignments like "Jane Austen loved a good laugh - discuss with reference to 
'Persuasion.'"  Brendan's headmaster, who we're fooled into thinking is about
to fire him, turns out to be a sympathetic eccentric who fully appreciates
making a fool of oneself for the love of a woman.
Director Kieron J. Walsh does well with the whimsy, yet allows his 95 minute
flim to drag in its first hour.  "When Brendan Met Trudy" never quite attains
the frothy heights it's aiming for.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
One of the liveliest comedies to come along in a decade, When Brendan
Met Trudy is an imported riot that messes with the romantic comedy genre
in such a way that it might never recover.  And I mean that in a good
way.
An offbeat Irish film, When Brendan Met Trudy is at its heart a simple
love story between staid schoolteacher Brendan (Peter McDonald) and the
mysterious Trudy (Flora Montgomery).  Brendan, an enthusiast for the
church choir and old movies, encounters Trudy in a pub after choir
practice one night, and soon enough an awkward and budding romance is
born.  Trudy says she is a Montessori teacher, so wouldn't they be a
natural fit?  Surprise, Trudy soon reveals that not only is she not a
Montessori teacher, she's really a professional burglar, and wouldn't
Brendan like to prove his nascent love by coming along on some jobs?
In other words, it's a story we can all relate to: Duplicity and its
place in romance.
It's always difficult to write a movie review that explains in words how
funny a comedy can be.  I won't do it justice, but When Brendan Met
Trudy is simply hilarious, full of small touches that no mere mortal
should have been able to dream up.  After one of their many spats, a
panicked Brendan pretends he's been hit by a car and flops down into a
rain-filled gutter, hoping Trudy will take pity on him.  Of course, she
doesn't.  In a moment of triumph, we freeze-frame on Brendan as he leaps
into the air to click his heels.  The freeze-frame ends, and Brendan
crashes down to the earth, a mess.  It's all so funny because it's all
so unexpected, and rarely in my moviegoing career have I been so
surprised by the direction a film has shot off to with the turn of each
scene.  (Not to mention: Trudy has the funniest "so-and-so became a
such-and-such" denouement subtitle sequences since Animal House.)
The man to thank for this brilliance is screenwriter Roddy Doyle, also
responsible for such Irish classics as The Commitments, The Snapper, and
The Van.  Doyle is working in a bit less family-friendly milieu this
time out, and clearly he's let his imagination run wild.  Virtually
unknown director Kieron J. Walsh -- and his two leads -- shine
throughout the picture.
Sadly, Trudy would certainly merit an even higher rating if it weren't
so difficult to understand the dialogue.  The accents, Montgomery's in
particular, are extremely thick -- we're talking Trainspotting thick; I
screened the film on video and was constantly rewinding to pick up what
had just been said.  In several instances, I never could figure out the
punch line -- and a few jokes had to go by the wayside.
Ultimately, that's of little matter.  It's too bad this film wasn't out
in the States in time for Valentine's Day, because you aren't going to
see a better bit of romance all year.  (Add a star if you're a native of
Ireland.)
http://216.167.20.103/main.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
When you recreate scenes from classic movies in a new film, or use actual
clips of those landmark pictures in your project, there's a fine line
between taste and excess. Use too many clips, and your film will look like
the HBO series Dream On. Borrow too many familiar incidents (unless it's a
spoof, like Scary Movie), and people will accuse you of being unoriginal
(or, in certain cases, a plagiarist).
If you use the clips and the situations, you get When Brendan Met Trudy, a
light romantic comedy from Ireland that spits out film references quicker
than Russell Crowe beds famous actresses. From its title (swap "Brendan"
with "Harry" and "Trudy" with "Sally") and very first shot of a man laying
face down in the gutter (a la Sunset Boulevard), the film plays like an
hour-and-a-half homage to the filmmaker's favorite pictures. Like Dream On,
it only works a little more than half of the time.
The guy in the gutter is Brendan (Peter McDonald), a film-obsessed Dublin
schoolteacher who sings in his church choir and is very unlucky with the
ladies. One day, after choir practice, he stops into a pub and meets a
peppy, extroverted young lass named Trudy (Flora Montgomery). They begin to
date and, after a series of disastrous encounters, they eventually fall for
each other and make sweet, sweet love.
Somehow, in between clips of films like The Producers, The Man Who Shot
Liberty Valance and The Hunchback of Notre Dame, swipes at Jean-Claude Van
Damme and Emma Thompson, and restructuring of classic scenes originally done
by everyone from Jean-Luc Godard to John Woo, Trudy becomes an Irish version
of So I Married An Axe Murderer. It turns out that men in Dublin are under
siege from a black-clad vixen responsible for a string of brutal
castrations. Since Trudy mysteriously sneaks out each night (dressed in
black - she's a cat burglar), Brendan thinks he's dating the diabolical dick
dicer. Is he right, or is it just a crazy Three's Companyesque coincidence?
Even though most of Trudy is based on a handful of old films, and it offers
the basic "boy meets girl, boy loses girl, boy gets girl back" story, it
remains surprisingly fresh thanks to the great chemistry between the two
extremely likeable leads. The soundtrack includes a great, eclectic bunch of
songs (one from Sebadoh, no less), and I can't convey how wonderful it is to
see a film set in Dublin where people are clean, have nice jobs and live in
nice homes.
Trudy was directed by Kieron J. Walsh and written by Roddy Doyle, who is
probably best known as the author of the novel that became "The Barrytown
Trilogy" (The Commitments, The Snapper, and The Van). For its closing
credits, Trudy offers a hysterical look at what happens to each of its
characters. Again, the idea isn't something original, but it is executed in
a way that doesn't seem too stale.
1:35 - Not Rated but contains nudity, strong sexual content and adult
language
