Title
Review for AntiTrust (2001)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Robin Clifford
Gary Winston (Tim Robbins) is a Bill Gates style entrepreneur on the brink
of deploying a vast, satellite-based communications system that will change
the world. He recruits a brilliant young computer nerd, Milo Hoffman (Ryan
Phillippe), to implement the final piece of software and bring the system
on line. But, Milo soon finds out that his benevolent mentor is no Mr. Nice
Guy in "AntiTrust"
You can tell when the movies of the New Year begin showing up at theaters.
We go from the sublime work with year-end films like "Traffic" and
"Thirteen Days," to the ridiculous dreck of the likes of "AntiTrust." The
sophomore effort by director Peter Howitt ("Sliding Doors") is a ho-hum,
routine action thriller that lacks any thrills, is badly paced and poorly
written.
The premise surrounding "AntiTrust" is a typical David versus the corporate
Goliath. The good guys, Milo and his friends, are on the verge of creating
a startup company that could shake things up in worldwide communications.
Winston, with his billions of dollars, is the main competition for the
lads. He uses his money and kind and friendly demeanor to tempt Milo to
come on board his precious project. The temptation is too much for the
young genius and Milo, with the encouragement of his girlfriend Alice
(Claire Foleri), goes over to the enemy, shirking his friends.
Things look bright and perky for Milo as Gary acts as his mentor and
provides for all his worldly needs. But, things aren't what they seem.
Winston, miraculously, can always "find" the software that Milo needs to
complete his piece of the project, called Synapse. Recent reports of the
bizarre deaths of some of the area's top programmers don't sink into Milo's
head until he learns of a supposed hate crime - the brutal murder of his
best friend and startup crony, Teddy (Yee Jee Tso). As the pieces fall into
place in his mind, Milo sees that Winston is the root of the corporate evil
that threatens to rule the world's communications system.
This David and Goliath yarn incorporates stock suspense items like racing
against the clock and risking capture to break into the company computer -
not once, but twice. We get the cheap, jump out of the dark scares that are
a trademark for a lack of imagination in writing. There are also twists and
turns in who is on Milo's side and who wants him dead, so not all the
characters, like his girlfriend Alice and co-worker Lisa (Rachel Leigh
Cook) are not who they seem to be. All these gyrations do not make the
story more interesting, just confusing.
I'm not a fan of Ryan Phillippe, finding the actor too mannered and wooden.
He is just that in "AntiTrust," evoking neither sympathy nor empathy for
Milo. Tim Robbins' Gary Winston is a near carbon copy of the role he played
in "Arlington Road" a year or two ago. The difference is, Robbins had a
well-developed character to play in the older movie. Here, he is given
virtually nothing to do. Supporting cast is nondescript.
Production values are decent, but, without a good story or characters to
hang them upon, they are a wasted effort. Let's hope that "AntiTrust" isn't
the new standard for Hollywood filmmaking. I give it a D-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Ross Anthony
"In the computer business there is no second place; it's binary, one or 
zero, live or die," a suspiciously familiar hi-tech czar played by Tim 
Robbins propa-"gates" his software product and company (Nurv) as he 
defends his corporate monopoly, "Hey, some kid in some garage could take 
us down at any time." 
Milo is working over time with best bud Teddy (in a garage)... hoping to 
do just that when the phone rings. It's Bill (I mean Gary Winston, Nurv 
CEO) offering him a job. The offer splits these best friends as Milo 
goes off to work at Micros ... (I mean Nurv), and Teddy, repulsed by 
Nurv's fascist strategies, seeks private investors for his own software 
projects. It's actually a great springboard into a movie about best 
friends turned competitors. But that's not how the film is programmed. 
With young sharp techno-geeks dropping like flies, the film changes 
genres midstream; from smart buddy film, to cheap thriller, and almost 
back again. 
Though not a great film, "Antitrust" handles several elements very 
nicely. I especially love Milo's realization scene. It's a crunch of 
sound and video that hit home. Speaking of sound ... the quality of the 
tracks in this production is quite high: the choice of alternative rock 
(which started in Seattle - nudge, nudge, wink, wink), the score, and 
the careful crisp mix. The acting is respectable, while the camera 
movement, direction and editing are very professional. Together they 
make this "B" movie look very good. 
But this is still a "B" movie. At times the sharp script dips into the 
ridiculous, reducing the battle of geniuses to fodder for warehouse 
chase scenes ... complete with false scares and all. More than once, 
this audience giggled at the silliness projected on screen. Still, never 
a dull moment, well paced and suspenseful to the end. You'll fall more 
than once for the film's twist-traps and enjoy being fooled. As with 
"Save the Last Dance" I think it's a strong film for 14 to 18 year-olds. 
Antitrust. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Ryan Phillippe, Rachael Leigh Cook, Claire Forlani, Tim 
Robbins, Douglas McFerran, Richard Roundtree. 
*  Directed by Peter Howitt. 
*  Written by Howard Frankin. 
*  Produced by Nick Wechsler, Keith Addis, and David Nicksay at MGM/Hyde 
Park/Industry Ent. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   I have a pal, real nice fellow (call him Pete), who could
easily pass for the all-American guy except that he's pro-Fidel
Castro...thinks everything in Cuba would be just swell except
that the American embargo keeps that island nation
oppressed.  During the election campaign just passed, I
asked him how he could justify Castro's remaining in power
without opposition for the past forty-one years, reaching fpr
Queen Victoria's record and for the tenure of some pharaoh
or other while in our democracy we have elections every two
years, four years, six years. He replied that the U.S. has a
government just as permanent as Fidel's and what's more
this immutable power structure is far more reaching and
undemocratic than anything you can find in Havana.  Invoking
former President Eisenhower who warned against the
military-industrial complex, he insists that all 281 million of
our residents are under the heel of the mega-corporations,
who control most important aspects of our lives to say
nothing of keeping the politicians dancing to their tune.  Is it
any wonder that Pete loved Peter Howitt's movie "AntiTrust"? 
For "AntiTrust" (one of those titles with a double meaning, as
in "whom can you trust" and "hey that business of yours has
squashed all competition") is a warning to all of us that the 
corporate structure in the United States is going to control our
lives more than ever by dominating all aspects of
communication.  And what's more, a single company is going
to do this without the help of any rivals.
   If this scenario brings to mind the recent action of the
Justice Department against the giant Microsoft corporation
led by Bill Gates; and if Tim Robbins, who performs in the
role of Gary Winston, head of the cutthroat company NURV,
makes you think that we're already too late to head the
communications giant off at the pass--then Howitt, giving
scripter Howard Franklin's a taut, fast-paced and youthful
evocation of an information-age message monopolizer, is on
the money.  Despite some occasionally stiff acting and just a
smidgen of laughable dialogue, "AntiTrust" succeeds in
making its portentous meaning more than reasonably
entertaining.  While the danger sometimes facing the world of
computer geeks is not original--Irwin Winkler's 1995 movie
"The Net" featuring Sandra Bullock as a mousy computer
whiz whose identity is deleted by a group of weirdos more
interested in a disc than in discotheques--"AntiTrust" is the
first film that has ever represented sesame seeds as a
murder weapon.
   The movie centers on Milo (Ryan Philippe), a 23-year-old
man so brilliant that NURV's CEO Gary Winston (Tim
Robbins) counts on him to deliver a satellite-communications
breakthrough ahead of the competition.  He is given just
forty-two days to accomplish the task, which signals to us
that "AntiTrust" is going to have its characters racing against
the clock--which they do not just once or twice during the
film's 108 minutes.  Best friend Teddy (Yee Jee Tso) is angry
that Milo has even accepted a job with NURV and not
because of envy: Teddy opposes the corporate giant's
hegemony over so many aspects of communication because
he is idealistic enough to believe that human knowledge
belongs to all of us--it should be free--and Teddy remains in
the proverbial garage pounding out programs in his attempt
to break a code and deliver an information-age Shangri-La to
the world.  As Milo becomes suspicious of his boss' intentions
and methods and begins to realize that billionaire Gary
Winston may have bought off people in the Justice
Department and even placed a spy in his own home, he puts
his life in danger by working overtime to establish proof of his
impressions.
   Ryan Philippe looks "hot"--as the women in the critics'
audience seem to feel, or so I gather from the looks on their
faces. When not hititng the keyboard, the young thesp casts
sexy glances at his girl friend Alice (Claire Forlani) and flirts
with a strangely diffident coworker Lisa (Rachael Leigh Cook). 
Philippe turns in a convincing peerformance as a kid who
looks as though he's just started shaving but whose
cybergeek activities help him to save the world from a
corporate behemoth.  Tim Robbins is even better, given his
need to show us that his agenda as head of a Microsoft-style
business is in an ethical gray zone (if you can dismiss an
occasional murder ordered at his behest).  While he is
certainly rich enough to retire to his yacht and take things
easy, he gets his kicks from manipulating people and binary
numbers; donating millions of dollars to art museums and
thousands of computers to eager schoolchildren but also
engaging in nefarious plots to be the first to perform a major
communications breakthrough.  
   If the plot often seems to be as predictable as a computer
going about its tasks without making a single surprising
calculation, the movie itself adds up to an diverting vehicle. 
With pulsating music like "Son of Sam" and "Nietzsche"
pumping up the action and some cool effects by Metrolight
Studios spinning numbers across the screen, "AntiTrust" has
enough suspense and cybertalk and sesame seeds to allow
us to suspend disbelief, and could conceivably make Newt
Gingrich and Malcolm Forbes question the ethics of
capitalism for a couple of hours or so.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 108 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
ANTITRUST, a thinly veiled cinematic diatribe against Bill Gates and 
Microsoft, is a thriller about truth, justice and the open source code 
movement.  Tim Robbins (ARLINGTON ROAD) stars as Gary Winston, the head 
and founder of a monopolistic software conglomerate known as Synapse 
which like Microsoft is based in the Pacific Northwest.  Gary is made to 
look and dress almost exactly like Gates.  He lives in a home like 
Gates's island house, right down to the electronic paintings on the 
walls.  Synapse even has the government on his back like Microsoft does.  
"The Justice Department is driving me nuts!" Gary complains.  But wait, 
Synapse has more than killer apps.  They've got killer thugs on the 
payroll.
In a pseudo-wink to the audience, Gary says that he's not like Bill 
Gates.  With this line the studio can argue, perhaps not with a straight 
face, that Gary Winston really isn't meant to be Bill Gates after all.
Putting aside the Bill Gates connection, the movie is pretty much a 
standard thriller in which no one is quite who they seem to be.  
Sinister actions abound, even at Synapse's on-site day care center.  
Robbins approaches his role like that of a cad in a vaudeville 
melodrama.  You half expect him to grab a cloak, cover his nose with his 
elbow and sneer into the camera with a "Ya, ha, ha."
Still, as an over-the-top thriller, it is far from the worst.  The film, 
directed by Peter Howitt and written by Howard Franklin, works hard to 
get the details of the technology and the slang right.  Even if what 
they claim to be able to accomplish with their gadgets may have more 
technologically sophisticated viewers guffawing, the script is at least 
fairly consistent.  Basically, Synapse is an Evil Empire with incredible 
snooping powers that it would leave the CIA and the KGB in awe.
Gary, who munches Pringles non-stop and guzzles Pepsi, -- don't you love 
those product placements? -- personally recruits Milo Hoffmann (Ryan 
Phillippe).  Milo, is a new Computer Science graduate from Stanford.  
His graduate buddies want him to take the money from the venture 
capitalists and work with them in their Palo Alto garage.  How do you 
spell cliché?  Well, Gary has been watching Milo -- and I do mean 
"watching" -- and wants him to come to work instead on Synapse's hottest 
product.  It's a bet-the-company project that must ship in less than two 
months.  Quickly, it's goodbye fellow nerds for Milo.  He's gone to join 
the enemy.  You see, we are lectured about how nefarious Synapse is 
because it will not give away its source code.  (Did I mention yet that 
Microsoft archrival Scott McNealy from Sun Microsystems gets to do a 
cameo?)
"The software business is binary," Gary, acting like some kind of cult 
leader, lectures Milo.  "It's either one or zero.  You're either alive, 
or you're dead."  Gary, who speaks in something approximating marketing 
slogans, likes to scream things like, "No limits!"
With all pervasive villainy, Gary and his minions surreptitiously drain 
the collective programming knowledge of the world and pump it into their 
headquarters.  Milo is ready to fight back, if he can just figure out 
whom to trust.  Want to bet on who will win?  Oh well, given the other 
films opening Friday, ANTITRUST can lay claim to the title of only the 
third worst film of the week.
ANTITRUST runs 1:43.  The film is sometimes in technogeek, but there are 
no English subtitles.  It is rated PG-13 for some violence and brief 
language and would be acceptable for kids around 11 and up.  
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ANTITRUST (director: Peter Howitt; screenwriter: Howard Franklin;
cinematographer: John Bailey; editor: Zach Staenberg; cast: Tim Robbins
(Gary Winston), Ryan Phillippe  (Milo Hoffman), Yee Jee Tso (Teddy
Chin), Rachael Leigh Cook (Lisa Calighan), Claire Forlani (Alice
Poulson), Douglas McFerran (Bob), Richard Roundtree (Lyle Barton), Tygh
Runyan (Larry), Nate Dushku (Brian Bissel), Ned Bellamy (Phil), Scott
Bellis (Randy); Runtime: 110; MGM release; 2001)
A casual, inane throwaway film, directed by Peter Howitt, of "Sliding
Door" infamy, without aplomb and best viewed as being a film about a
geek getting a dream job that turns out to be nightmare. A film geared
for those who can't get enough of geek angst, PC's, and cappuccino into
their system, and therefore need unrealistic thrillers about geek
lifestyles to inspire them with more highs from cyberspace. While, for
others, they can relish in the film's anti-Microsoft feelings.
"Antitrust" plays on the Bill Gates persona ad nauseam and has Tim
Robbins as Gary Winston, the antihero, billionaire geek and the
silky-smooth head of the shady NURV, based in Portland, which is the
biggest software company in the world. Gary takes that Gates persona on
and runs with it into murderous territory, where even Gates' harshest
critics haven't gone in their description of him. The company is
criticized for putting out inferior products, stealing other people's
genius, not making Internet information free to the public, and of
stopping the geeks in the garage from getting their product to market.
The Justice Department is investigating NURV and is gathering evidence
to file an antitrust suit against them for preventing competition.
On an infomercial video given to NURV employees, Gary states his deep
philosophy in a nutshell: "This business is binary. You're a one or a
zero. Alive or dead." The geeks in the garage also have a motto:
knowledge-belongs-to-the-world.
The hero of the film is idealistic computer programer, Stanford grad
Milo Hoffman (Ryan Phillippe), partners with another genius geek, Teddy
(Yee Jee Tso). About to be funded by venture capitalists, they are ready
to form their own Internet startup company with their friends, as they
work out of their garage, using their tech breakthrough in the field of
open source codes. Gary recruits them, as he follows geek geniuses all
over the world, to try and get them to keep his empire always moving
forward. He is involved with a costly Synapse project (it's a satellite
system that will link every existing communication device into one
network) and needs to meet a deadline on its global-communications
breakthrough, needing their particular skills for him to finish on time.
Through his snakelike charm, which hides his evil intentions, he lures
Milo to work for him. Milo's partner chooses not to work for the
capitalist pigs, but Alice (Forlani), Milo's attractive live-in squeeze,
encourages him to jump at the opportunity.
A tour of NURV's ultra-modern geek headquarters, which is a campus with
multi-buildings and satellites on it, fills us in on the atmosphere
around such high-tech complexes. In the security tight building Milo is
assigned, it is filled with computers and geek employees worshipping at
the feet of Master Gary. But to Milo's great satisfaction, Gary singles
him out for special treatment, anxious to have him find a way to
interface his system with NURV satellites before the critical deadline.
Milo quickly forgets his ideals and loses contact with the still
idealisticTeddy, as he settles into the NURV family and immensely enjoys
his new lucrative job.
Milo gets help from Gary every time he seems stumped in his quest, as he
is provided with new information from an unidentified source, which Gary
gets irritated with him when he asks the name of the genius source.
However his suspicions really get aroused when Ted, who was on the verge
of a breakthrough on the same techie thing he was after, is found
battered to death, in what is labeled a hate crime, and he is given the
data Teddy was working on. Wheels start spinning in his cranium and the
film moves in the direction of a murder mystery.
Not trusting the FBI, after one of their agents (Richard Roundtree)
offered him $42,000 and a Buick to spy on NURV, he decides to tell his
co-worker genius, an elusively troubled, attractive girl named Lisa
(Rachael Leigh Cook), that he suspects Gary of masterminding the killing
off of his competition to get code, and enlists her help in trapping
Gary.
"Antitrust" goes under the moment it turns the corner and becomes a
paranoid action thriller only, mixing together a plot about the villain
using both high-tech and old-fashioned methods to secure his ignoble
aims. He uses high-tech fiber-optic video surveillance to spy on all his
workers and his competitors, and he uses low tech methods to get people
to betray others for him. He also gets goons to hit his competition over
the head with a baseball bat in order to maintain his status as numero
uno.
The hero uses his computer skills to hit all the right keys, as he
gathers incriminating evidence to bring down the powerful villain and
his evil empire. The film enters the world of make-believe and has the
same empty feeling to it as a Bond film. In the end, the hero screams
out his youthful motto: "human knowledge wants to be free." Our hero,
after a selfish start, proves that he is truly selfless, much like the
heroes in the past who save the world from despots, despite personal
dangers, and then ride off into the sunset as if they were the Lone
Ranger.
Speak about perfect casting, then you must speak about Tim Robbins. He's
really fun to watch in his understated but brilliant performance as the
sociopath billionaire, a clone of Bill Gates. He even looks like Gates.
It was fun to watch him munch on his Pringle potato chips as he acts the
part of a geek to pretend having a chumminess with Milo. Ryan Phillippe
is energetic and believable as the curly-haired nerd, who can't say no
to capitalism, even if he can't say yes to it. The film is modestly
entertaining. It is certainly diverting. It is also senseless and
unimportant. It's a Hollywood film, a nostalgia film about the heyday of
Internet startups in the 1990s and of the powerful global influence of
the Microsoft empire it emulates and the many geeks it drew into its
sticky web and through stock-options made some millionaires and some
billionaires. A film for those who are into 'virtual unreality.' There
is no message in this improbable tale that isn't garbled. The filmmaker
had a chance to say something, but prefers to play it safe and come up
with a possible blockbuster out of a film rife with mindless action
sequences. I could see an audience for this film consisting of
cyberspace junkies willing to see anything about computers. It is an
absurd film that was one mouse click away from crashing.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Dequina
_Antitrust_ (PG-13) no stars (out of ****)
If I hadn't already been aware that it was January, _Antitrust_ would
have been a stinging jolt of reality.  This thriller in name only is all
too characteristic of the cinematic scrap heap that is the first month of
the year: surface slickness in lieu of the slightest sign of substance.
With the toplining female stars being Rachael Leigh Cook and Claire
Forlani, one expects the male lead to be their respective
_She's_All_That_ and _Boys_and_Girls_ paramour, Freddie Prinze Jr. 
Thankfully, the poster boy for teen schlock is nowhere to be found in
_Antitrust_; unfortunately, the person in his place is no better: fellow
_I_Know_What_You_Did_Last_Summer_ star and _Tiger_Beat_ staple, Ryan
Phillippe.   The improbably cast Phillippe plays the improbably named
Milo Hoffmann, a brilliant young computer programmer (!) who is suddenly
recruited to join big-name firm NURV (an acronym for "Never Underestimate
Radical Vision," if you had to ask) by its Bill Gates-ish founder, the
insanely wealthy and brilliant Gary Winston (Tim Robbins).
Or maybe Winston isn't so brilliant, for it is not long before Milo
deduces that his mentor's revolutionary, monopoly-pushing ideas are
actually stolen from young programmers from across the country--who have,
perhaps not so coincidentally, all died mysterious deaths.  When the
latest victim of a shady, untimely demise is none other than Milo's best
friend/sacrificial token minority Teddy Chen, Milo sets out to find the
truth, a task that proves to be not as difficult as finding a trustworthy
ally (hence the oh-so-clever double entendre of a title).
Writer Howard Franklin's premise is lifted directly from John Grisham's
_The_Firm_ (albeit with a chic computer angle), but given Hollywood's
generally environmentally conscious attitude regarding story ideas,
that's not so much a problem as _Antitrust_'s failure to generate the
faintest hint of suspense.  When one of the big would-be nailbiting set
pieces is a frantic search for sesame seeds in some home-cooked Chinese
cuisine (don't ask), any hopes of experience real thrills are quickly
laid to rest--not to mention those of finding any trace of basic
believability.  Add in Peter Howitt's overwrought direction (heavy on the
meaningful montage and strategic slo-mo) and the urge to laugh at all the
flabbergasting happenings is impossible to stifle.
The cast appears to operate under the belief that the more serious they
take the ludicrous material, the better; were they ever mistaken. 
Casting Phillippe, who has heretofore displayed a very limited acting
range at best, is always a huge risk, but giving this pretty boy the role
of a brain is a flat-out invitation for disaster.  It takes more than a
simple pair of glasses to add wisdom to the frozen male model pout of his
face, and his affectless voice further mangles the already-awkward,
techno-jargon-heavy dialogue.  Cook and Forlani's work essentially boils
down to varying degrees of deer-in-the-headlights looks, but to be fair,
it's hard to imagine anyone having a clear idea how to tackle the
barely-thought-out female roles.  Cook's role as Milo's co-worker Lisa
Calighan is especially problematic, thanks to an arbitrary "dark secret"
that plays into the story in the most insulting way imaginable.  Robbins
was obviously brought aboard to give _Antitrust_ some appearance of
class, but he takes a general cue from Howitt's direction by overplaying
the one-dimensional villainy.
_Antitrust_ is this year's _The_Skulls_: a glossy product where a
teenybopper idol is plopped into an intelligence-free thriller-type
vehicle.  But I can't imagine this film eking out the same frightfully
decent box office take as that equally inane Joshua Jackson showcase;
after all, the fawning female Phillippe fans hankering for a hit of the
hottie hunk don't get anything on par with _The_Skulls_'
Josh-running-on-a-pier-in-a-snug-singlet scene.  And if _Antitrust_ isn't
even good for cheap exploitation of its heartthrob star for his
adolescent admirers, then it truly is worthless for all audiences.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Michael Redman
The cultural phenomena of the rise to power of the computer geeks over the
past several years has been fascinating to observe. Those loner kids with
skin tones missing any trace of color from sitting in their rooms hunched
over a keyboard are now billionaires and rule the world. In a complete
turn-about, head-hunters are searching high school yearbooks for members of
the Chess Club and the AV Crew.
You would think that Hollywood would recognize the vast audience of young
people in touch with that scene and release films that appealed to them. And
you would be wrong. Instead they give us "Antitrust" which appeals to
teenage girls in touch with how pretty Ryan Phillippe is.
Stealing most of its plot from "The Net" and "The Firm", this film is old
hat. Young computer genius Milo (Phillippe) is seduced by Bill Gates
lookalike Gary Winston (Tim Robbins) away from his buddies and into the
world of corporate code-writing.
In short order, Milo discovers the underbelly of Winston's evil empire and
sets out to put everything right with the world. Not a bad concept, but it
fails on almost every level.
Admittedly it's difficult to make typing seem exciting even on the big
screen, but the opportunities to generate tension are ignored. This is a
prime example of one of the worst film genres: the thrill-less thriller. The
scene where Milo discovers the secret plan is remarkably lifeless.
Maybe I've seen too many films. I found myself annoying my companions by
predicting the rest of the movie during the first 15 minutes and was only
able to stop after repeated beatings. In a story where people are supposedly
not who they appear to be and shocks await around every corner, it's
probably not such a great idea to make everything so obvious. This might
work with the target audience of young girls who may not be acquainted with
the hundreds of films this one copies, but for anyone else, it flops.
The one bright spot is Robbins' portrayal of the amoral software
gazillionaire. Why this multi-talented man is in this movie is a mystery for
the ages, but he does Bill Gates to a T.
Geeks in the audience will be searching in vain for the "Restart" key
minutes after it starts. But there is no hope. Nothing to do except watch
the program crash and burn.
(Michael Redman has written this column since before computers became
domesticated and had more fun de-fragging a hard drive than watching this
movie. Email tales of geekdom to redman@bluemarble.net.)
[This appeared in the 1/18/2001 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net.]
-- 
mailto:redman@bluemarble.net
Film reviews archive: 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Michael+Redman

Author
Laura Clifford
Young computer genius Milo Hoffman (Ryan Phillippe, "The Way of the Gun")
plans on partnering a hi-tech startup with his best friend Teddy (Yee Jee Tso) 
to provide digital convergence as open source software.  Then he gets a call 
from Gary Winston (Tim Robbins), the Bill Gates-like owner of N.U.R.V. (Never
Underestimate Radical Vision), who wants Milo's expertise for his similar
SYNAPSE project.  Milo's charmed by Winston and disappoints his friend by 
going with 'the enemy,' only to learn that the big corporation is indeed
a dangerous foe in "AntiTrust."
"AntiTrust" is like "The Firm" without the suspense or romantic intrigue,
(I suppose that's what one would expect exchanging software nerds
for lawyers) with a dash of "Enemy of the State" thrown in for good measure.
The film, written by Howard Franklin ("The Man Who Knew Too Little") has
an intriguing enough, albeit unoriginal, premise - what if a Microsoft-like 
behemoth was squashing the little guys by stealing their software and then,
well, squashing them.  Unfortunately, the film's so obvious it invites
laughter in all the wrong places.
Milo leaves southern California for the misty Northwest (Portland rather than
Seattle) with his girlfriend Alice (Claire Forlani, "Meet Joe Black") and
falls for the apparent programming eutopia that is N.U.R.V's campus.  He
gets Winston as his personal counselor (a first time honor at N.U.R.V), a
beautiful new home, flashy new car and a look from Lisa, (Rachael Leigh Cook,
"She's All That") the loner female programmer that has the nerds drooling.
He also gets unexpected help from Winston in programming the highly complex
adapter that will allow any digital device to communicate with any other
digital device.  The first time Gary presents him with a CDROM, Milo's
desktop is displaying CNN footage of the car accident death of a top MIT
software engineer - my, could there be a connection here?  Milo doesn't get
a clue until it's hammered into his head - not only does his best friend
get murdered in an apparent hate crime, but Gary parrots back Teddy's very
words as he slips Milo yet another disk.
"AntiTrust" is the type of ludicrous flick that has a CEO whipping up his
team to produce a highly sophisticated product within 49 days, then shows 
that project's lead programmer playing Nancy Drew while the rest of the team 
generally keeps 9-5 hours.  A supposedly exotic plot twist involves an allergy
to sesame seeds.
Director Peter Howitt, whose last film, "Sliding Doors," was a pleasant 
enough entertainment, doesn't just take a step back, he falls wildly
backwards into a ditch.  He gets little in the way of performances.  Phillippe,
who showed surprising depth in "The Way of the Gun," acts by way of his
eyeglasses in this one.  Robbins pulls out his "Arlington Road" villain and
makes him less interesting.  Rachel Leigh Cook is a statue while Forlani fares
somewhat better by at least using facial expressions.  
John Bailey's ("For the Love of the Game") cinematography is nice enough, but 
relies on 360 degree camera swirls once too often.  Editting by Zach Staenberg 
("The Matrix") throws the film's pacing off - it flows along too leisurely then 
lurches forward with too many important plot points compressed into too little
time - repeat cycle.  Some special effects are interesting, such as the
changing digital art in Winston's palatial home. 
The climax of the movie requires one too many leaps of faith from its audience
(as if it hasn't already been taxed at this point).  "AntiTrust" is a hack.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom

Antitrust (2001)  2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Ryan Phillippe, Rachael
Leigh Cook, Claire Forlani, Tim Robbins, Douglas McFerran and Richard
Roundtree. Written by Howard Franklin. Directed by Peter Howitt.
 Computer geeks take heart. You have been elevated in the cinematic
world to the level of dashing romantic hero, able to perform Bondian
derring-do, while keeping you wind-swept, but somewhat disheveled hair
perfectly coiffed.
 Now you are the savior of the common man, the everyday computer user,
whom you are protecting from the big, bad nefarious computer designers
out to make millions off the latest technology, even if it means
committing murder.
 My, how things have changed. A few years ago men such as Bill Gates
were admired, almost worshipped. They were the good guys who were making
our lives easier through their various innovations.
 Today, they are the villains who rob, steal and kill in order to corner
the software marketplace.
Thus we now have Antitrust in which young hunk Ryan Phillippeís Milo is
a computer genius recruited out of college by a Gates-type named Gary
Winston (Tim Robbins), who needs the young manís expertise to help him
complete an ambitious project ó Synapse.
 And what is Synapse? Merely a program that, using satellites, will link
every computer, TV screen, cell phone and any other electric gizmo and
gadget worldwide.
 The entire affair sounds like silly hokum, and, to be truthful, it is.
But itís also fun, not something to be taken seriously as some dire
warning about the perils of computer technology or even about
monopolies.
 The paranoids in the audience will have a field day with Antitrust.
Every time one of them turns on his or her computer screen, they will
begin looking over their respective shoulders.
 The story, written by Howard Franklin, was inspired, according to
Antitrustís press kit, ěwith the personalities and machinations at the
core of the computer software industry. He was intrigued by the fiercely
competitive search for The Next Big Thing ... and ... the intense power
struggles between huge computer corporations and young geniuses in
garages who can potentially put the big guys out of business with one
great idea.î
 Of course, Franklin merely used a traditional thriller plot
substituting software for the latest deadly weapon or miracle drug. But,
as I said, this is no cursory warning about the evils of the computer
software industry. Itís merely an amusement park ride with various
twists and turns to hold the audienceís attention.
 Antitrust is a smooth, sleek little B-programmer with sharp
performances by Phillippe, Robbins, Rachael Leigh Cook and Claire
Forlani.
 After viewing this movie, the status of computer geeks is moving up. So
guys, better brush up on those social skills, the chicks are going to be
banging down your doors.
 Now, how about a movie in which a small-town film critic saves the
world ... Naw, no one would believe it.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com. Other
reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com at golafayette.
 Reviews by Bloom also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom
