Title
Review for Big Country, The (1958)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jude Wanniski
Memo To: Website browsers, fans & clients
Author: Jude Wanniski http://www.polyconomics.com
Re: #4 The Big Country
Continuing with the "movie list," here is number four of the 
ten films that most shaped my life. These are not my favorite 
films. They are the movies I've seen that have had the greatest 
influence on my thinking, my character, my life. Some are 
favorites that I enjoy watching over and over again, which you 
can tell as you read each entry. Try to think of your own 
experiences with films and how they influenced the course of 
your life. It makes life more interesting to be aware, as you 
live it, to know how things such as books and films and magazine
 articles alter your path in significant ways. Sometime last 
year the Sunday NYTimes "Arts and Leisure" section had a piece 
on how difficult it is to think of a movie that may have changed
 history. The only movie they could think of was a silent film 
by D.W. Griffith, Birth of a Nation, which had a scene about the
 KuKluxKlan that the author believes changed national thinking 
about the KKK. How silly. Each of the ten films listed here 
changed my history, and if I had not seen them, I would not have
 helped change history in the ways that I have. Films don't move
 masses. They move individuals who move masses.
4. "The Big Country" (1958) Another picture that I can watch at 
least once a year, never tiring of its strong men and beautiful 
women of the old west against gorgeous scenery and magnificent 
music. Gregory Peck and Charlton Heston are protagonists, with 
Chuck Conners thrown in for added manly tension. At another 
level there is the conflict between two older men, Burl Ives 
and Charles Bickford, ranchers who fight over the water of the 
Big Muddy. Jean Simmons and Carroll Baker are the beauties. Some
 critics saw this superb western as a metaphor for the Cold War,
 with Ives representing the proles, Bickford the capitalists. 
You can bear this in the back of your mind, although I didn't 
see it at first. The scene that most affected me, telling me it 
was okay to be a leader even if no one would follow, was 
Bickford riding into Blanco Canyon alone, when none of his men 
would follow him to what seemed certain death. Charlton Heston 
finally said "what the hell," and the rest came along too. It 
sounds like a man's movie, but it plays to all genders and ages.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Posted using Reference.COM                  http://WWW.Reference.COM 
  FREE Usenet and Mailing list archive, directory and clipping service 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
