Title
Review for Searchers, The (1956)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SEARCHERS, THE (director: John Ford; screenwriters:Alan Le May (novel)
/Frank S. Nugent: cinematographer: Winton Hoch; cast: John Wayne (Ethan
Edwards), Vera Miles (Laurie Jorgensen ), Jeffrey Hunter (Martin
Pawley), Ward Bond (Reverend/Captain Samuel Johnson Clayton ), Natalie
Wood (Debbie Edwards (older)), Henry Brandon (Chief Scar), Hank Worden
(Mose Harper), Walter Coy (Aaron Edwards), Dorothy Jordan (Martha
Edwards), Harry Carey Jr, (Brad Jorgensen), Ken Curtis (Charlie
McCorry), Olive Carey (Mrs. Jorgensen), John Qualen (Lars Jorgensen),
Pippa Scott (Lucy Edwards), Lana Wood (Young Debbie), Robert Lyden (Ben
Edwards), Peter Mamakos (Jerem Futterman), Beulah Archuletta (Look,
Indian bride of Martin), Antonio Moreno (Emilio Figueroa), 1956)
John Ford's epic Western about America and its racial past, is the
quintessential American film about what it once meant to be American,
more than any other film that I could think of, and that includes
Citizen Kane. It is Ford's best, one that is much more than the Western
it appears to be; it is a film that is eventually about self-discovery,
seen symbolically through the eyes of one man, John Wayne. The Searchers
tells of the perilous and obsessive 5-year quest to find 10-year-old
Debbie, the niece of Ethan Edwards (John Wayne), who was abducted by a
raiding Comanche party, under Chief Scar (Brandon).
The embittered Ethan arrives home to Texas in 1868 after serving the
Confederacy and riding on his own for the last 3 years, probably robbing
banks, as he shows up with bags of newly minted coin, which he does not
explain how he got, riding to the isolated ranch of his brother Aaron
(Coy) and his wife Martha (Jordan), and their children, Ben (Lyden),
Lucy (Pippa), and Debbie (Lana), and the part-Cherokee (one-eighth) son
they adopted, Martin Pawley (Jeffrey Hunter), whose parents were
slaughtered by Comanches and was found by Ethan.
Ethan treats Martin with utter disdain, saying he could take him for a
half-breed, and refuses to have him call him uncle. Soon after Ethan's
return, a raiding party under Chief Scar kills Aaron, Martha, and Ben;
while a posse, Wayne and Martin among them, was out looking for what
they thought were rustlers. The Indians abduct the two girls, keeping
Debbie but killing her older sister.
Wayne searches for her with Martin and Brad (Harry), the boyfriend of
Lucy, but when Lucy is found dead by Ethan, Brad in a craze rushes off
to charge the Indians and is killed. Ethan pushes on relentlessly
following their trail, aiming to kill Debbie and her captor, Chief Scar,
for violating her- declaring that once a white girl is captured by
Comanches, she is no longer white. Martin goes along so that he can
prevent Ethan from doing something vengeful.
It is a psychologically dark story of a man who is heroic but filled
with a bitterness that he can't get out of his system. There is not one
single actor in the world who could have played this part better than
Wayne. His odyssey, as he strikes the pose of a loner, a self-assured
rugged individualist, filled with racial hatred and love for his kin,
takes place in the beautifully photographed vistas of Monument Valley,
where cinematographer Winton Hoch caught the mythic landscapes of the
West, with its red earth and mesas, and all its splendor and ominous
passages and isolation.
Ford threw the whole panoply of Western gear into The Search, from the
slapstick antics of Mose Harper (Worden), playing the Shakesperian fool,
leading Wayne to the trail of Debbie twice, only asking in return to be
taken home to sit by a fireplace in a rockin' chair, to the garrulous
Texas Ranger Captain / Reverend Clayton (Ward Bond), who comically
switches roles from gunfighter to man of peace without batting an
eyelash.
The two main questions John Wayne faces are: What to do with Debbie?
And, from the words in the Stan Jones ballad sung in the opening
credits, that asks, "What makes a man wander and turn his back on home?"
The second question becomes, will Wayne ever come home? In the opening
scene, he is only there briefly and does not feel very comfortable in
that short stay, even when idolized by the children. In the last scene,
when he finds redemption, not killing Debbie after he rescues her and
raises her up in his arms, reminded in that split-second of how he held
her as a child, thereby changing his mind and bringing the 14-year-old
home to his closest neighbors, the Jorgensen's, to stay for good. But he
never crosses the doorway to his home; his home is in the past, just as
Chief Scar's is. It is a past that goes no further than the wars fought
and the hatred ingrained in them. He will not go to California and will
not advance civilization, he represents the past that must be put
asunder before others can move on and turn the desert into farm land and
ranches.
For Martin, the quest will end in domesticity, as he will marry Laurie
(Vera Miles), the daughter of the Jorgensen's. Wayne will be like the
dead Comanche he shot the two eyes out of, so he can travel the spirit
land forever, never finding a proper resting place.
Ethan does not belong to either the white settlers or the Indians. That
he hates Indians so much, yet speaks their language and feels
comfortable with their ways, more so than he does with white society,
makes it difficult to figure why he has so much hatred for them.
His disdain for society and home life is evident in the brooding figure
he presented himself as, when he first came home. Aaron is not as
pleased to see him as is his wife, who it is implied loves Ethan and
might have been involved with him romantically before marrying Aaron.
Ethan's generosity to the children is shown by the gifts he gives them,
a saber for Ben and his war medal to Debbie, so that she can have
something to wear around her neck just like the gold pendant he gave to
Lucy when she was younger.
The John Wayne character is a complex one, having many paradoxes, such
as all his loves and hates for people. His story is visceral poetry, a
tragedy that turns ridiculous, as Ford wanted it to be, and it has
unexpected psychological twists to it that can be read into the story by
one's own relationship with America. It is hard not to substitute his
hatred for Indians into a hatred for blacks, and it is easy to see how
Wayne's soul could be construed as America's soul.
Make no mistake about it, this is not an ordinary or very good Western,
this is undoubtedly a masterpiece of American cinema, one that many of
the early 1950s film critics couldn't see. It is not that it is a
particularly profound movie, but it is one that caught the emotions and
the metaphors of a rich country with a paradoxical past and an
intangible future. Over-the-years, the status of this film has grown
immeasurably, to the point that its anti-hero hero is now a fixture on
the cinematic scene, along with the recognition that Ford has created a
work that searches deeply into a man's interior and into the country's
consciousness. If there was a more perceptive Western made, one that
captured the visions of America better, I have not seen such a film. If
there is such a film out there, I will take the liberty of using Wayne's
favorite retort in the film: "That'll be the day."
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dragan Antulov
First time I heard about THE SEARCHERS, 1956 western by John
Ford, it was mentioned as the best film of all times. At the
time, I was rather sceptical towards all those critics
pronouncing the best films of all times and I had to wait
few more years before I understood the real importance of
THE SEARCHERS. Soon after I had watched BANOVIC STRAHINJA,
1981 medieval drama shot in former Yugoslavia, I read few
articles that claimed that the story had been obviously
inspired by Ford's film. The story was actually inspired by
15th Century Serbian epic poem, and since it is rather hard
to imagine John Ford taking such an exotic and obscure
inspiration for his westerns, another conclusion must be
drawn. The story of THE SEARCHERS probably has a lot of
resemblance with many similar stories, myths and legends
told in different centuries on different continents - it is
one of those rare films that actually looks like a part of
universal collective unconscious. That is the reason why
this film is so important, and why it is considered to be
one of the best films by John Ford, but also one of the best
films made in this century.
The story begins in Texas in 1868. Three years after the end
of Civil War, Ethan Edwards (played by John Wayne), former
Confederate soldier is now wandering through the wastelands
of Texas. Brief visit to his brother Aaron (played by Walter
Coy) is interrupted when the group of Texas Rangers, led by
Reverend/Captain Samuel Johnson Clayton (played by Ward
Bond), comes to recruit volunteers in order to pursue group
of cattle thieves. Ethan joins the party, together with
Martin Pawley (played by Jeffrey Hunter), Aaron's
part-Cherokee adopted son, and they follow the trail until
they find the cattle slaughtered. They soon realise that the
cattle was stolen by a Comanche war party led by Chief Scar
(played by Henry Brandon), only to lure the men out of their
farms and leave their families unprotected. Rangers rush
back but it is too late for Aaron's family, which is
savagely massacred, with sole surviving little girl Debbie
(played by Lana Wood) taken captive. Ethan and Martin are
going after Comanches in order to rescue little Debbie and
take revenge. But the Chief Scar and his band prove elusive,
and two men spend years roaming the West in fruitless
search. Younger Martin is actually ready to quit, settle
down and marry his sweetheart Laurie Jorgensen (played by
Vera Miles). The only thing that prevents him is Ethan and
his ever growing hatred towards Comanches, hatred that might
even lead to killing Debbie, now probably turned into Indian
squaw after all those years outside Western civilisation.
Great popularity enjoyed by THE SEARCHERS among the critics
and film scholars could be explained with the fact that
Ford's movie explores some great philosophical questions -
human identity, eternal struggle between irrational and
rational tendencies within human beings. And such questions
don't appear in some hermetic "artsy" movie, they are asked
in a movie that belongs to the genre of rather
crowd-pleasing western. All this is wrapped nicely in the
script by Frank S. Nugent, based on a 1954 novel by Alan Le
May. On the other hand, splendid colour photography by
Winton C. Hoch and beautiful landscapes of Monument Valley
locations shouldn't fool anyone - THE SEARCHERS is very
serious and dark film, one of the darkest films of its time.
It shows Old West as visually magnificent, but very dark and
unpleasant place to live, always ready to awaken darkest and
most irrational tendencies among human beings - material
greed, sexual depravity and homicidal rage.
Dark overtones of the films are best embodied by its
protagonist. Legendary John Wayne gives another great and
memorable performance as typical hero of American West -
tough, hardened Westerner, one among those who turned savage
backwater of the world in the world's greatest superpower.
But, in the same time, Wayne reveals the hidden, often
forgotten other side of coin; his Ethan is tough Westerner
who fought the wilderness in order to civilisation, but in
the process he also became part of that wilderness. The real
test for every actor is play the convincing villain, and
Wayne passes that test with flying colours, because his
Ethan, although being nominal protagonist, also happens to
be the villain. His past is murky, he fought to preserve the
slavery, it is suggested that he robbed banks and probably
committed other crimes in order to earn the living. But the
most disturbing element of his character is racism, first
hinted in his mistreatment of his half-breed companion
Martin, than finally revealed in his acts of mindless,
pathological violence. Wayne should be really praised
because he managed to portray that unsympathetic character
with subtlety.
Ford also should be praised, because THE SEARCHERS was a
film that faced America with some thorny issues. One of
those issues was the real cause of racism among white
people. THE SEARCHERS, rather explicitly for its time,
confronts viewers with the ultimate nightmare for any
racist, open or closet - interracial sex, or, to be precise,
"violation" of white women by non-white men. Ethan is
clearly less disturbed by the fact that his family was
massacred by Indians than with the fact that the women were
raped in the process. His intent to kill Debbie becomes
evident in a moment when he realises that she is grown
enough to be regularly taken advantage of as Indian squaw.
Ford also shows a hypocritical nature of such racists - when
white men have sexual liaisons with non-white women (as
hinted in semi-humouros episode with Martin's "wife") Ethan
is joking; when there is other way around, he becomes
homicidal maniac.
After showing such racist attitudes, that were the dark side
of glorious American past, Ford also explicitly shows its
aftermath. Indians are portrayed as vicious killers, but
they are also portrayed as victims too. Glorious, mythical
7th Cavalry Regiment shows its true nature by
indiscriminately killing Indian women and children. Scar's
murderous rampage is also motivated with the revenge towards
white people who had killed his sons. In the end, both men -
Ethan and Scar - almost look like reflections of each other.
THE SEARCHERS is very good film, one of the best made in its
time, but the author of this review has some reservations
towards using the word "masterpiece". Film is rich with
details that could be discovered only with multiple
viewings, but those multiple viewings also reveal many of
the film's flaws. For example, use of comedic subplots and
characters, like eccentric Indian hunter Mose Harper (played
by excellent Hank Worden) sometimes does give a flavour of
realism and authenticity to this dark and depressing story,
but very often that could turn into grotesque, like the
presence of singing cowboy Ken Curtis playing Laurie's
"civilised" suitor, and the wedding scene is rather farcing.
The end is rather disappointing, with rather unexplained
Ethan's transformation from homicidal maniac into kind and
forgiving family man; that was probably made in order to
give this film a required happy ending.
In the end, THE SEARCHERS is film that belongs to the
category of so-called `important" movies - those which are
remembered less by their own merit, and more by the way they
influenced future film- makers. On the other hand, due to
the climate of "political correctness" it is unlikely that
today's Hollywood would dare to tarnish such important
legacy with a remake. This would probably represent the good
things for all those film-lovers who would like to be
introduced to that exceptional piece of classic cinema.

Author
Brian Koller
"The Searchers" is a very good western, directed by
John Ford and starring John Wayne, one of many films
that they made together.  Considered by many to be
one of the best western films ever made, it falls
short of that lofty standard.  However, it is very
entertaining, with Wayne as commanding a presence
as ever.
The story begins in 1868.  Ethan Edwards (Wayne) is a
former confederate soldier, finally returning home after
three years of wandering.  He stays with his brother
and his family, which includes a wife, children Debbie,
Lucy and Ben, and adopted son Martin (Jeffrey Hunter).
An attack by Comanche indians results in the kidnapping
of ten-year-old Debbie.  Ethan and Martin then spend
seven years searching for Debbie.  Ethan, while familiar
with the ways of the Comanche, despises them.  Martin
fears that when Ethan finally encounters Debbie (Natalie
Wood) that he will kill her for becoming a Comanche.
There are many good things to say about "The Searchers".
The cinematography (Winton Hoch) is excellent.  Wayne
proves again that, despite his reputation, he can act.
Hank Worden is an entertaining character actor.  The
script is good, and there is much suspense.
But what keeps "The Searchers" from being an outstanding
film?  Perhaps the focus is too heavily on Wayne, who is
obligated to carry the film.  When they finally find Debbie,
she doesn't want to leave the tribe.  When they find her
again, shortly later, she is eager to leave.  These lines
are Wood's only dialogue in the film, and her character
isn't further explored.  Wayne's motivation to find Debbie
is questionable.  He obsessively searches for her for seven
years, when he is likely to kill her when he finds her.
Then there is the character of Laurie (Vera Miles), a
hot-tempered Swedish woman who waits for Martin for years.
Her character is similar to, but lacks the depth of, Maureen
O'Hara's in "The Quiet Man", another Ford-Wayne collaboration.
By an amazing coincidence, Ethan and Martin finally return
home during Laurie's wedding ceremony.  In an unlikely
development, her hayseed groom (Ken Curtis) decides not to
marry her.  Finally, Martin manages to penetrate an indian
village, kill Chief Scar (Henry Brandon), and flee with
the now-willing Debbie, all promptly before the cavalry
arrives to wipe out the village.  Martin, whose character
is clumsy and has comic elements, has never demonstrated
the ability to succeed in such an adventure before, and it
is not part of his character.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
