Title
Review for Pretty Woman (1990)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Frankie Paiva
Prompted by the recent Runaway Bride, (a diaster all it's own) I decided to
rent Pretty Woman to see what got this tepid film made. It all flashed before
my eyes, it was the world's first glimpse into the world of cutesy Julia
movies. A fun, inventive romantic comedy that starts and ends just like it
should.
Edward Lewis (Gere) buys companies, takes them apart, and sells them bit by
bit. He meets Vivian (Roberts) on Hollywood Way when he asks her for directions
to Beverly Hills. Asking her what her name is, she says "What do you want it to
be?" Needing to take a load off, he hires her for the night. Taking a liking to
her, he then hires her for a whole week.
But he needs to clean Vivian up. Buying her dresses and having her learn table
manners to attend various dinners so she can appear as his date soon becomes
his prime concern. He begins to fall in love with her, but it takes awhile for
her to return his affections. Vivian also helps him see through buying another
family owned company by bringing out the more emotional side of him.
Pretty Woman is extremely cute. Cute is the only world for it. I also liked the
fact that prostitutes are portrayed as people that need help (much in the same
way that African-American gangsters were showcased in Slam.) The film turns in
fine performances by it's two leads, but also from Hector Elizondo as the hotel
manager, and Laura San Giacomo as Julia's prostituting pal. Despite minor
cliches and problems, the fun romantic comedy Pretty Woman still gets ***
stars.
The Young-Uns: The title character is a prostitute and there is some sexual
discussion as well as bad attitudes towards her. There is also some mild
language. Good Age: 12 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Garry Marshall.
Cast: Julia Roberts, Richard Gere, Laura San Giacomo, Ralph Bellamy, Jason 
Alexander, Alex Hyde-White, Amy Yasbeck, Hank Azaria, Elinor Donahue.
1990 - 119 minutes.
Rated R (for sexual situations, brief nudity, mild violence, and profanity).
Reviewed July 30, 1999.
Known as the most successful, highest-grossing romantic comedy in history, 
director Garry Marshall apparently struck gold with "Pretty Woman," which 
opened quietly during the summer of 1990 but, thanks to positive 
word-of-mouth, was able to reach upwards of $175-million in theaters alone. 
The question of why it worked so well lies directly with the film's two 
charismatic stars, Richard Gere and Julia Roberts, since the story itself is 
none too original or even believable. The other winning element that makes 
"Pretty Woman" so entertaining is its genuine sweetness and innocence, which 
is rarely as palpable in today's films as it is here. 
Edward Lewis (Richard Gere) is a suave, extremely wealthy business mogul who, 
at the start of the picture, breaks up with his girlfriend over the phone 
after a nasty argument, and abruptly takes his friend's car and gets lost on 
Hollywood Boulevard while trying to find his hotel. Stopping the car along 
the street, he asks a woman, obviously a prostitute, for directions. Agreeing 
to get in his car and show him for ten bucks, Edward ultimately accepts, they 
strike up a conversation, and before long she has been asked up to his 
penthouse room on the top floor. This meeting does not lead to sex, however, 
as Edward confides that he'd rather just have someone to talk to, and offers 
her $300 to spend the night. Just as well, since the hooker, named Vivian, is 
a beautiful, generally upbeat young woman who is the type of person that can 
lend an understanding ear. The meeting between these two completely opposite 
people does not end the next morning as planned, when Edward finally offers 
to pay Vivian three-thousand dollars if she will stay with him for six days 
and nights while he is in the area, keeping him company and acting as his 
companion to business dinners and get-togethers. Since Vivian firmly tells 
Edward at the beginning that she will do anything with him except kiss him on 
the lips, which always leads to unwanted intimacy when dealing with her 
customers, the obligatory rule of the genre says that by the third act, 
Edward and Vivian will finally, truly, kiss.
Allegedly planned as a grim, downbeat drama until Garry Marshall came on 
board as director, "Pretty Woman" has been transformed in all senses of the 
word into a classic fairy tale, a la "Cinderella." The premise is hardly 
believable and its portrait of prostitutes hanging out on the streets of 
Hollywood Boulevard is just about the most idealized portrayal that there 
could have possibly been. You honestly don't need a high-IQ (or any IQ, for 
that matter) to guess how the film will end, and the story is as old as my 
Great Great Grandma Bertha. The supporting characters are almost all 
sketchily written and less-than-gratifying, and the screenplay is no award 
winner. And yet, amidst all of these qualms and flaws, "Pretty Woman" is an 
astoundingly charming motion picture, and it is definately easy to see why it 
became such an overnight sensation with moviegoers. You'd actually be amazed 
how far bemusement can go, and there are a few select moments (not even whole 
scenes, mind you) that are as romantic as anything I've seen on film in the 
1990's.
Additionally, the film belongs, and its success can be attributed, to two 
people and two people only, and they are Richard Gere and Julia Roberts. 
Playing sex symbols throughout the '80s with such pictures as "American 
Gigolo" and "An Officer and a Gentleman," Gere branches out here to play a 
more quiet, almost shy, but still alluring, character that believably could 
sweep Julia Roberts off her feet, and vice versa. Julia Roberts, in her 
breakthrough role after 1988's well-received "Mistic Pizza" and 1989's "Steel 
Magnolia," for which she was nominated for an Academy Award, is radiant and 
funny as the wordly Vivian, who surprisingly could be a role model for 
impressionistic viewers, not for her line of work, but more for her sheer 
intelligence. It would have probably been easy to have written Vivian as 
merely a flake, but screenwriter J.F. Lawton clearly cared too much about his 
central characters to do such a thing. After "Pretty Woman," Roberts, along 
with Meg Ryan, became the reigning queen of romantic comedies (with her 
latest being the just-released "Runaway Bride," which repairs Gere and 
Roberts together once again), and no wonder. Roberts has continually proven 
to not only be a strong actress with a flare for comedy, but also one who can 
efficiently do drama, and in almost every film she appears in, it is 
difficult not to fall in love with her along with her male co-star. 
An especially strong scene that Gere and Roberts do together takes place 
after Edward foolishly tells one of his co-workers that Vivian is actually a 
prostitute, and he then approaches her, making sexual advances. No only does 
this make Vivian feel cheap, especially since she had previously been posing 
as a more professional, eloquent young lady, but it also maddens her that 
Edward would demean and betray her in such a way, and ultimately causes her 
to question where exactly her life is leading, and if she likes this 
particular path. On the more dreamy side, the film is filled with romantic 
scenes that are simply effervescent to behold, especially one in which Edward 
enters into the hotel's lounge to see Vivian turn around and not only reveal 
her marvelous cocktail dress, but also her inner (and outer) glowing beauty. 
Another subtle moment has Vivian lovingly blowing a kiss to Edward, who is 
asleep, and placing it on his lips, since she still is unsure if she should 
be getting attached to this man who may very well be out of her life forever 
in a short couple of days.
"Pretty Woman" does not blatantly step wrong until the very last scene, which 
is a happy ending (as you'd expect, and wouldn't have it any other way) that 
somehow does not work, perhaps because of its undeniable contrivances. This 
one misstep does not put a damper on the rest of the film, though, because 
there is just far too much magic at work here to disaffirm such a petty 
problem. Helped along by a warm, memorable supporting performance from Laura 
San Giacomo, as Vivian's best friend and roommate, and a fabulously catchy 
soundtrack, in which all of the songs prominently aid in the movie's overall 
fulfillment, "Pretty Woman" is a sparkler of a motion picture, and has what 
it takes to act as a blueprint on how to make the quintessential romantic 
comedy.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman 
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
JM Ivler
Overview: Take one *very* rich man.  Add one "smart cookie" who has not had
good breaks and is "working the streets."  Mix well.  Add one very sappy
ending.  Serve.  For a formula movie, it was entertaining.  Not recommended for
children.
     The acting was above par (Gere downplayed, Roberts overplayed) and 
although the plot left a lot to be desired (anyone could have figured it out
from the first few frames) it proved to be a fun movie.
     Some of the characterizations and motivations that surrounded Gere and
Roberts were poorly drawn sketches that lacked any real substance.  Others were
well defined and were played by actors clearly able to understate the roles.
The overall lack of emotion throughout the film may make it seen disjointed at
times, but also provides an excellent counterbalence to those times when the
emotion is show.  Those emotions, sometimes a delicate as the changes in
Roberts face as she watches her first opera, have far more impact than they
would have had this picture been made with a constant flow of emotional highs
and lows.
     Although the plotting is somewhat predictable, almost everyone can leave
it with a smile (maybe shaking their head no, since it is so predictable, but
smiling).  A feel-good movie that doesn't require a large amount of thought,
but does provide entertainment.

Author
Jaye Mathisen
     Richard Gere plays Edward Lewis, a powerful, aggressive, and very rich
business man who buys up companies, and spits out the pieces for profit.  With
his limousine jammed in a parking lot, he grabs his lawyers' Lotus Esprit.
After the standard "Where's first?" and "How to use a clutch," he ends up lost
on Hollywood Boulevard looking for driving lessons, and directions to his ritzy
hotel in Beverly Hills.
     Enter Vivian Ward (Julia Roberts), a hooker, who needs rent money.  For
twenty bucks, she not only gives him directions to his hotel, but also drives
him there after he gives up handling the Esprit in exasperation.  After
arriving at the hotel, Edward almost leaves her outside waiting for a bus back
to Hollywood Boulevard, but finally decides to invite her up to his room.
     There are some cute scenes where they enter the hotel, accompanied by the
expected dropped jaws, tongues on floor etc.  etc.  After reaching Edwards'
room, Edward is a little at a loss as to where to start the evening, but we
find out that Edward is very serious about what he does, he has no current
romantic interests, he doesn't drink, doesn't smoke, doesn't do drugs, and
finds watching Vivian watch 'I Love Lucy' to be a turn-on.
     Later, we find that Edward is in the process of buying out a large
corporation, and that the owner of the corporation wants to chat with Edward
about his plans for the company.  On his lawyer's advice, Edward is to make the
evening a social event, rather than a business meeting, so he needs a date.
After some tough negotiating in the tub, Vivian agrees to be at Edwards' beck
and call, for the remainder of the week for the paltry sum of three thousand
dollars.
     Romance blossoms, with Vivian falling in love with Edward, and Edward (in
his own way) falling in love with Vivian.  There are some funny scenes
including a scene in a restaurant with the ages old dilemma of which fork to
use, pointers on how not to deal with escargot, and scenes of Vivian trying to
shop on Rodeo Drive while not dressed appropriately.  After being asked to
leave a swanky clothes shop, Vivian returns to the hotel, only to be greeted by
the manager (Hector Elizondo), who suggests that since Mr. Lewis is such an
important person to the hotel, they will permit her to stay, but as soon as
Mr. Lewis goes home to New York, they'd rather not see her at the hotel again.
     One scene that had me in stitches occurs when Edward finds out that the
one shop on Rodeo Drive threw Vivian out, and he takes her to another dress
shop, where they spend "an obscene amount of money" for clothes and some
general "sucking-up."  The manager of this store reminded me of Wesson oil.
     The end of the week rolls around, and Edward is talking to Vivian about
how he'd like to see here next time he's in L.A.  He offers to set her up with
an apartment, car, money, and everything else she needs or wants.  Vivian
passes on the deal, and tells Edward about how she always dreamed of the knight
in shining armor riding up to her and rescuing her from the tower, but the
knight never said, "I got you a condo to stay in...."
     Edward and Vivian part company, and Vivian prepares to move to San
Francisco, while Edward is readying for departure back to New York.  Somewhere
on the ride to the airport, Edward realizes that Vivian was the best thing that
ever happened to him, and takes the white limo to her apartment to "rescue
her."
Rating:
     As a technical marvel, or as a brilliantly written screenplay, the story
never reaches greatness.  A flimsy plot, and some oddly-placed asides by Vivian
left me wondering if there were some important chunks of film still on the
cutting room floor.  So it rates 2 stars (**,average) on the 1 to 4 star scale.
Enjoyability
     Disregarding the above, the film is great.  I enjoyed it very much, with
Robert's performance being at the proper times funny, sassy, sad, and mushy.
Richard Gere plays the businessman just like it should be done: suave, cool,
and debonair.  Edward's lawyer has just the right amount of sleaze and
ruthlessness about him.  The other actors and actresses in the supporting roles
were also appropriately funny, and lent a light touch.  My wife loved it, I
liked it, I'll buy the video tape when it comes out, and so it rates a high 3
stars (***) on the 1 to 4 scale.

Author
James Sanford
        No matter how many times you've seen "Pretty Woman," there's
still plenty about the Richard Gere/Julia Roberts film you don't know.
For instance, when Roberts first appears onscreen as the
down-on-her-luck hooker Vivian, she's wearing a coat the movie's
production team bought off a theater usher. A young Hank Azaria
("Tuesdays with Morrie," "Godzilla") plays the detective lurking around
outside her Hollywood
Boulevard apartment. And if you look carefully during a breakfast scene,
you can watch a pancake in Julia's hand turn into a croissant and then
back into a pancake again.
These and scores of other behind-the-scenes secrets are revealed
in director Garry Marshall's commentary on the "Pretty Woman - 10th
Anniversary Edition" DVD (Buena Vista Home Entertainment). In addition
to Marshall's often funny observations about the impact of the
enormously successful romantic comedy -- "tourists to this day still
come to the Regent Beverly
Wilshire looking for Julia Roberts or Vivian or ladies of the night;
they're not there," Marshall says with a sigh - the DVD adds an extra
six minutes worth of scenes left out of the theatrical release, some
candid video of Gere and Roberts horsing around on location, the
original trailer for the film, and a music video for Natalie Cole's
"Wild Women Do."
What are most intriguing, however, are the bits of gossip and
trivia Marshall dredges up. He's willing to identify the brief shots in
which a body double was employed for Roberts and quick to point out
every editing gaffe, noting in his defense that he'd rather make his
actors look good than worry about whether his heroine is holding a
pancake or a croissant in her hand.
In case you've forgotten, Roberts and Gere both look very good
indeed in "Pretty Woman," the movie which single-handedly elevated her
from ingenue to A-list star and revived his career, which had slumped
badly since the steamy days of "An Officer and a Gentleman" and
"Breathless."
Despite their different approaches to acting ("Richard liked to
rehearse; Julia liked to wing it," according to Marshall), the stars
proved to be electrifying together, a feat they repeated in last year's
"Runaway Bride." "Pretty Woman" certainly has its share of clever lines
and seductive moments, but it was ultimately the combined magic of Gere
and Roberts that propelled this modestly budgeted film to a worldwide
gross of $438 million.
"A nicer couple you rarely find," Marshall says of his stars.
Audiences obviously agreed. James Sanford
