Title
Review for Chandramukhi (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Well, to start with, much of what I say here is purely conjecture.
I am writing about a Hindi film made for the Indian market that was not
subtitled.  (In what follows I am not talking about Indian films
intended for an international market like those of Satyajit Ray.  I am
speaking of the sort of film that makes up the huge volume of
entertainment films made for neighborhood theaters in India.)  For
someone who does not speak Hindi, this means that enjoying the film
requires some guesswork ... but not nearly as much as you might think.
It requires a lot less guesswork than would watching a non-subtitled
Chinese film, for example.  A Hindi film will almost always have a
surprising amount of English in the dialogue.  Certainly it is enough
to give clues every now and then of what is going on.  A character will
use a phrase like "half-breed" or "Chinese torture."  Also, the plots
are not difficult to figure out.  Indian domestic films are aimed
rather low with fairly simple plots, often carried by action.  Every
film is a musical--approximately every half hour there is a big
production number.  Most are in large part comedies--even if the rest
of the film is suspense or horror.  When seen in theaters almost all
run about ten minutes shy of three hours but have a ten-minute
intermission.  When traveling in India, I recommend taking in a film or
two as an alternative to sightseeing in the hot sun while being chased
by aggressive touts.  You may learn more than you might expect about
Indian culture.  CHANDRAMUKHI was a film I went to see in India, but it
had finished its run and we ended up seeing DAALAL instead.  I probably
would have enjoyed CHANDRAMUKHI more since it is more fun than any of
the films I did see.  This is not to say it is actually good.  For
quality of filmmaking it is roughly on a par with our SANTA CLAUS
CONQUERS THE MARTIANS.  And that is not intended as a dig.  Standards
and audiences are very different in India.
     In any case, do not take what I say about this film as being
absolutely true since holes are filled in with conjecture and
inference.  But here is what the plot seems to be....
     The film opens with gangsters making a plot of some sort.  From
context, it is probably plans for a kidnapping.  Also, we appear not to
be in India but in East Africa someplace; it looks like Kenya.  The
scene flashes to some boys living in the Indian community who are
friends and ride their bicycles together looking at the wildlife.  One
of the boys is Raja.
     The scene flashes to an alien world or heaven--I am not sure
which--where we see some celestial beings.  It is not clear if they are
supposed to be aliens or something supernatural, but they are
sufficiently advanced that from our perspective they are magical in one
way or another.  I will assume they are magical and supernatural.  One
female, Chandramukhi, goes flying.  She has the flowing silk dress you
might associate with a Chinese goddess, at least in a Hong Kong film.
But I mean she really goes flying ... without benefit of any
equipment ... like Superman ... and runs afoul of some sort of flying
demon--we will see more of him later--who shoves her to make her fall.
Fall she does, all the way to our planet.
     Upon landing she is chased by the criminals for some reason you
need to understand Hindi to follow, but she is discovered by Raja.  So
the story comes down to one of the title character using magic (in the
tradition of "Bewitched") and helping the kids against the gangsters.
And she is a good ally to have.  She shoots magical rays from her eyes;
among the things she does is make angry people meek and friendly, not
unlike Obi-Wan Kenobi,  By just gesturing she cleans up Raja's bedroom.
Then when she is hungry she eats telekinetically.
     Does all this seem a little simplistic?  Is this not enough plot
for you?  Okay, she magically ages Raja to an adult.  Now he has to
come to terms with an adult body as well as gangsters.  At the same
time.  The makers of this film apparently knew that they had almost
three hours to fill and were more concerned about the danger of letting
the story slow down than about making its being difficult to believe.
Indian neighborhood audiences want a good time, not a whole lot of
credibility in a film story.  There are some nice whimsical touches
that come across the language barrier.  One of the gangsters is half
Indian and half English so calls himself "a half-breed."   And being a
half breed he dresses like Horst Bucholtz in THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN.
But that is still not all, since I have not even mentioned the lost
civilization that captures everybody.  This script is not one that
anyone would call restrained.
     What can you say about the style of a Hindi film?  This is a film
that has had everything lavished on it but money.  The special effects
are poor even by American TV standards.  Generally a scratch on the
film is used for a ray blast.  Martial arts skills are created,
brazenly cheating, by running the film backwards.  The only things
polished are the musical numbers.  That is pretty close to par for a
Hindi film.  Indian audiences demand big musical sequences in every
film, some to sing along and some to go out for snacks.  This film has
a whole production number before the opening credits.
     CHANDRAMUKHI is a film you have to meet halfway, like most Indian
domestic films,  If you catch it in when you are in the right mood, it
can be fun.  And it may tell you more about Indian culture than you
expect.
