Title
Review for Castaway (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
Of all Nicholas Roeg's films, there is one that stands out very nicely and
shows that you don't have to say and do something meaningful to make a film
that is very good, and get the same things across.
CASTAWAY, is pretty much like that.  A simple story, that in itself is
meaningless, but as a whole, it is important, because it is about the way we
relate to each other, before, during and after all the games we play just to
communicate with each other.
A reasonably well to do gentleman wants to go spend a year in a desert
island, and he places an advertisement for a lover for that year in the
'paradise island'.  In comes Lucy, a very independent woman, who decides for
her own reasons that the idea is an exciting event for her own growth.  She
wants to do this for herself, not for another person. And off they go to the
island paradise.  Because of the English and island laws, they are forced to
'marry' so they can get their passports in order.  And to the chosen island
they finally arrive.  It really is a paradise of sorts.
For the duration of the year, the two manage to withstand each other, amidst
personal crisis, and territorial problems with each other. They learn to
fish and what they can eat.  Things get tough, and Gerald is getting
diseased feet, and she is losing weight.  And he is even more disappointed
in her because she does not live up to her 'marriage' agreement, by denying
him sex.
The film is a veritable gourmet of visual images, aided by a few lines here
and there.  In between there is more tension that a bunch of shark infested
waters.  And the camera never takes sides, although in the end, Lucy's
decision to leave after her one year is up, is looked at as a cop-out, but
she has her reasons.  She has experienced what she wanted to try, and is
finished.  Gerald has dedicated himself to this lifestyle, and has pretty
much left the social milieu behind, although he does now mix in with the
indigenous cultures in various other islands.  He has become an important
fixture in their lives because he can fix the old boat engines, and has a
mechanical ability which few are capable of.
Beautifully photographed, with very fun moments. ( " Isn't it better than
sex " says Gerald about an imaginary meal he is talking about ) .  Amanda
Donohoe is excellent, and not self conscious in a role which is not
convertible to all, and to someone like Oliver Reed, who is known to be a
rebel rouser. Even he, locked up in an island to make a film, seems like an
odd thing.  But both of them are excellent, and really show a lot more
acting ability and communication than most people will ever have in their
own lives.
And it is the type of film that I personally wish Nicholas would do much
more of.  Like WALKABOUT ( 1972 ), it just does its thing  without having to
say very much.  It just speaks for its own actions, rather than have to
hammer us with meaningful situations, which are more showy than they are
helpful.  And a lot of it may be
because the diary which this is based on, is an extensive study of two
people's minds, which really helps the story develop.  We already have the
changes, and the actors only have to play them. And I think the independent
Ms Irvine, would even enjoy the film, maybe even Gerald, if ever a film
theatre would moke it to the
'end of the world'.
