Title
Review for Raw Deal (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
According to Hollywood, being forced to live in rural
America is fate worse than death. And this is exactly the
thing that happened to the protagonist of RAW DEAL, 1986
action thriller directed by John Irvin. In the beginning we
are introduced to Mark Kaminsky (played by Arnold
Schwarzenegger), sheriff in small North Carolina town who
used to be FBI agent before being kicked out for roughing up
suspect. Dull and monotonous rural life is something
Kaminsky can handle, but this is not the case with his
sensitive wife Amy (played by Blanche Baker) who finds
comfort in alcohol. In such circumstances Kaminsky is
approached by his old friend and FBI agent Harry Shannon
(played by Darren McGavin) whose son had been killed by
goons belonging to Chicago mob boss Patrovita (played by Sam
Wanamaker). Shannon wants to bring down Patrovita and his
organisation, but he needs outsider for the job, since FBI
and law enforcement have always been compromised by leaks.
Kaminsky agrees to help him, stages his own death, assumes
new identity and comes to Chicago in order to join ranks of
Patrovita's gang. He manages to impress Patrovita's
lieutenants by spectacular display of physical force, which
is something Patrovita needs in the new war against his
former partner Lamanski (played by Steven Hill). Kaminsky
seems to enjoy mobsters' trust and collects valuable
information from the inside, but his mission becomes
complicated after meeting with Monique (played by Kathryn
Harrold), beautiful woman with gambling problems.
RAW DEAL is one of the more obscure titles in Arnold
Schwarzenegger's filmography, but it is not as bad as such
obscurity would indicate. Made immediately after TERMINATOR
and COMMANDO, this film obviously tried to exploit
Schwarzenegger's new image of unstoppable one-man army. The
main problem with this comes from the script by Gary de Vore
and Norman Wexler. The genre of police thriller and the
urban Chicago setting are not suited for the carnage we
expect from Schwarzenegger's characters in 1980s movies.
Screenwriters and director John Irvin seem aware of this and
until the very end this film looks surprisingly good -
characters seem realistic, mostly due to the presence of
very talented ("over-qualified", cynics would say)
supporting actors who do a fine job (with the exception of
Steven Hill of LAW & ORDER fame in more than thankless role
of Jewish mobster). Even the story works good, with few not
so predictable twists and even some bad dialogue is
tolerable. However, the film begins to crumble when
Schwarzenegger's character prepares to single-handedly take
down scores of armed opponents in a scene that is almost
shot-by-shot remake of similar segment in COMMANDO. What
happens after that scene borders on parody, with our
unstoppable hero casually mowing down thugs and driving in
the same time, accompanied by "Satisfaction" by "Rolling
Stones". Depending on the viewers' previous expectations,
some would be satisfied with the spectacular armed
confrontation that finally delivers Schwarzenegger's
trademark goods, while others would be disappointed by
cheesy scenes that compromised otherwise serious film. In
any case, when the end credits come, RAW DEAL looks like a
mildly entertaining little exploitation film that
nevertheless leaves the general impression of plenty of
wasted potentials.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 
