Title
Review for No Small Affair (1984)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dan Navarro (eldorado@jetlink.net)
        About halfway through "No Small Affair", there's a scene where
Laura, the singer played by Demi Moore, belts out a knockout rendition
of the Madeira/Dorsey standard, "I'm Glad There Is You."  It's a jazzy
paean to romance.  Watching the movie again recently, I was jolted
when Laura sang the line about "underrated treasures", because it's a
capsule description of the film itself.  "No Small Affair", unheralded
in its day and rarely revived since, is itself a treasure, a gem among
the gravel of cynical 1980s films.
        It's a coming-of-age tale, chronicling the conversion of
Charles Cummings (Jon Cryer) from gawky teenager to confident young
adult.  Nothing new there, except that director Jerry Schatzberg and
screenwriters Charles Bolt and Terence Mulcahy have fashioned a
charming film that sings with a bittersweet passion about Cummings'
wrenching transformation.  His catalyst is Laura, the 23-year-old
saloon singer played by Demi Moore.  With her youthful yet worldly
manner, and her scratchy violin voice playing its siren song on
Cummings' sensibilities, the lad is a goner.  What ensues is a funny
and endearing rite-of-passage story with brilliantly clever
complications.
        Cummings -- he prefers not to be called Charles -- is a
16-year-old amateur photographer who likes to shoot pictures of
colorful San Francisco locales.  One day, when Laura and a friend
wander into camera range, Cummings waves them off, but not before he's
snapped a few shots of Laura's beautiful face.  Seeing that face later
in his proof sheets, Cummings is hooked.
        Infatuated beyond reason, Cummings searches for his new
beloved.  He begins by staking out the dock where he first saw her.
After several hours of fruitless waiting, he sulks: "Someone said, if
you stand in one spot long enough, the whole world will pass by.  I
don't know who said that, but he's an idiot."
        Fortune finally smiles on Cummings on a night out with his big
brother Leonard (Peter Frechette) and Leonard's fiancee Susan
(Elizabeth Daily).  Armed with a fake ID, Charles joins the pair at a
downtown nitery, and there, on the tiny stage, the object of his
affections warbles into a hand mike, barely audible above the blare of
a heavy-metal band.  But the next morning, Cummings' exhilaration at
finding Laura is tempered by the news that her band is breaking up,
and the lady may wind up out of a job.
        Worlds above Cummings in sophistication, Laura nevertheless
turns to her new friend for comfort when her career goes sour.  One
afternoon, she accedes to his request to pose for his camera, and we
can feel their deepening friendship as the hours pass by and Cummings
shoots roll after roll of film, happily taking pictures of this
glowing Circe in front of some of San Francisco's most picturesque
landmarks.  Night falls, and the pair are tired, hungry, and broke.
So they decide to crash a wedding reception and help themselves to
food and drink.  When they are caught by the father of the bride and
threatened with arrest, Cummings makes a deal with the irascible
paterfamilias: Let Laura sing for their supper.  To everyone's
surprise, including Laura's, her rendition of a classic ballad (the
above-mentioned "I'm Glad There is You") is a big hit.  Who knew this
grunge diva could sing pop?
        This revelation inspires Cummings to take drastic action.
Rounding up his life's savings, he pays to have Laura's likeness and
telephone number posted on taxicabs all over the city.  He's hoping
the publicity will attract attention to Laura's talents, but at first
it seems only to attract heavy-breathing weirdos.  Exasperated, Laura
pulls her phone out of the wall.  But a newswire service picks up the
story about the young fan and his generous gesture and prints it, and
soon the phones are ringing at Laura's old place of business.  The bar
owner, Jake (George Wendt), pleads with Laura to return and sing at
his establishment.  She agrees, but she is still furious with
Cummings.
        Laura's "debut", in front of a packed house that includes
record company talent agents, is a success.  She is offered a
recording contract, and the possibility of stardom beckons.  But now,
in a neat reversal of the first half of the film, the hunted becomes
the hunter, as she tries frantically to locate Cummings and thank him.
        What makes "No Small Affair" so winning is the delicious array
of comedy performers director Schatzberg has united for his film.  Jon
Cryer, making his first film at age 19, has all the right moves,
whether making sheep's eyes at his costar or doing a nifty moonwalk
upon receiving a bit of good news.  Demi Moore, in her first starring
role, makes Laura tender/tough, a savvy woman who combines a strong
sense of independence with a most touching vulnerability.  (In one
climactic scene, Laura wraps her arms around her young benefactor and
says, "When I grow up, I want to be just like you.")
        Among the supporting players, none resonates more delightfully
than Judy Baldwin as Stephanie, the elegant call girl Cummings meets
at his brother's bachelor party.  Baldwin's bit is little more than a
cameo, but her luminous and hilarious scene with Cryer will be
remembered long after most of the other performances are forgotten.
        "No Small Affair"'s penultimate scene reunites the two
protagonists, briefly, just before she is to leave for Hollywood and a
career.  In a sweetly written scene, they swear eternal friendship,
then surrender to the stirrings within.  Cummings is initiated at
last.  But his moment of glory is at once his triumph and his
Waterloo, for now that he has touched Laura's soul, he must let her
go.  It doesn't seem fair.  Welcome to the real world, kid.
        Still, this is a comedy; so don't be surprised to find the
bittersweet ending leavened with a bit of sugar, in the person of
Cummings' pretty classmate Mona (Jennifer Tilly).
        Along with the performers mentioned above, splendid turns are
provided by Hamilton Camp as the cranky father of the bride, Ann
Wedgeworth as Cummings' ditsy mother, and singer Chrissy Faith,
whose excellent voice was used to dub Laura's vocals throughout
the film.  
