Title
Review for Niagara, Niagara (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael Dequina
Niagara Niagara (R) *** (out of ****)
        Bob Gosse's Niagara Niagara follows a blueprint not unlike a lot of
young-lovers-on-the-road movies.  Wild Marcy (Robin Tunney) and calm Seth
(Henry Thomas) meet cute, literally running into each other while
shoplifting at a local store.  A mere couple of scenes later, the two
embark on a journey to Toronto from their small, unnamed American town in
pursuit of a rare doll that Marcy desperately wants.  Along the way, true
love inevitably blossoms.
        What sets Niagara Niagara apart, though, is that Marcy is afflicted with
Tourette's Syndrome, a neurological disorder that causes sudden muscle and
vocal tics.  Tunney, displaying an acting range not hinted at in the
teenage witch thriller The Craft, delivers an astonishing performance that
won her the Best Actress prize at last year's Venice Film Festival.  To
term her work a tour-de-force is not to imply that she attacks the scenery;
Tunney's effectiveness lies in her modulation and vulnerability, which
makes her depiction of Marcy's illness--which often causes her to act
violently--that much more convincing and tragic.  She and the nicely subtle
Thomas develop a sweetly innocent and beguilingly off-kilter chemistry.
        Their journey hits a few rough spots creatively along the way, mostly the
fault of writer Matthew Weiss.  A detour involving a kindly widower
(Michael Parks) who takes the couple in brings the story to a screeching
halt, and the key character of a trigger-happy pharmacist (Stephen Lang) is
highly unbelievable.  But these missteps do not blunt the power of Tunney's
bravura turn, which carries Niagara Niagara to a level of poignance it
would not have otherwise achieved.  (opens March 20)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
CinemaReview Magazine: http://www.CinemaReview.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Matt Williams
Niagara Niagara is a road movie that shouldn't be one.  Telling the
story of two loners tossed together by fate, the film survives only on
the basis of one strong performance.
Seth (Henry Thomas) and Marcy (Robin Tunney) are shy outcasts.  They
come from different worlds (Seth is poor, Marcy rich), but neither has
felt love.  The two loners literally run into each other while
shoplifting at the same store, and immediately hit it off.  Before they
know it, the couple begin a road trip to Canada in search of an elusive
black Bobbi head.
Marcy isn't like other girls, however.  She has Tourette's Syndrome. At
first she tries to restrain her tics and unintentional vocal outbursts,
and Seth is too timid to ask her about it.  But eventually, she informs
him about her condition.  It turns out there is a prescription drug
which could help her, but she left her prescription at home.  Rather
than simply contacting her doctor, or getting a new prescription, she
and Seth decide to try every pharmacy the run across during their road
trip.  Surely some nice pharmacist will give her the drugs, no questions
asked.
Robin Tunney delivers a good performance, even if the premise is a bit
forced. She delivers the various tics and idiosyncrasies with natural
ease, making them seem to emerge from the character, rather than the
actor.
Yet, the movie seems trapped by its own conventions.  What might have
been a touching love story is shackled by being forced to conform to its
preconceived "road movie" standards.  The movie is pointlessly filled
with bizarre characters, such as the psycho druggist, or Walter (Michael
Parks), the chicken-obsessed tow-truck driver.  None of these characters
seemto flow with the story.  Rather, they are artificial constructions
which are meant for amusement, but only serve to disappoint.
At any time when the relationship between Seth and Marcy seems to get
interesting, all of a sudden the movie's MacGuffin raises its ugly head
(or Bobbi head as the case may be).  The goal of the pair's quest is
only interesting to the audience to the extent that it motivates the
action and reveals the characters.  In Niagara Niagara, the trip is more
about the trip than Seth and Marcy.
Overall, the only reason to see this film is the performance by  Robin
Tunney.  It definitely fails as a road movie, a crime spree, or even as
much of a romance.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases
