Title
Review for My Son the Fanatic (1998)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
"My Son The Fanatic", the latest from director Udayan Prasad, is an
occasionally comedic drama that tackles an important subject, but does
so incoherently. Om Puri gives an exceptional performance as Parvez, a
Pakistani cab driver in Northern England whose son has just called off
his wedding to an Englishwoman because of his budding Islam
Fundamentalist beliefs. Parvez, who recieves most of his business by
driving around prostitutes(most notably Bettina, played by Rachel
Griffiths), puts up his argument for British conformity against his
son's Muslim idealism. The interesting thing about "My Son The
Fanatic" is that both arguments are convincing. But while the film's
conflict is a relevant one, the film itself is poorly wrought.
Despite a few powerful scenes, "My Son The Fanatic" is largely dull
and uninviting. The elements of comedy that are worked it seemed
forced and unnecessary, since the theme of the film is decidedly
downbeat.  Director Udayan Prasad has decided to forget about style
and structure and let the actors do their work. Om Puri brings a lot
of emotion to his role as the torn father; while bit players Rachel
Griffiths and Stellan Skarsgard seem merely competent in his
presence. "My Son The Fanatic" presents many moral questions, and in a
better-made film, they would have been answered.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Steve Rhodes
Udayan Prasad's MY SON THE FANATIC asks "what constitutes success?"
To a Pakistani-born cab driver like Parvez (Om Puri), living in a
working class city in Northern England, success comes from toiling 12 to
14 hours a day in order to provide a middle-class lifestyle for his
family.  An enthusiastic adherent to the work ethic, he's proud to have
the opportunities he does.  Even when other immigrants, like his friend
Fizzy (Harish Patel), have become wealthy, he isn't jealous.  He takes
pride in having loaned Fizzy his first five pounds.
With a pockmarked face, whose every scar seems to hold some untold
story, Parvez is a gregarious father who likes to think he's in charge
of his family.  In a scene of delicate and revealing intimacy, his wife,
Minoo (Gopi Desai), massages his toes after a hard day on the job.
Their closeness is never better felt than in this moment.
Parvez's dreams are coming true through what he has been able to give
his son, Farid (Akbar Kurtha).  Growing up with the possessions than
Parvez never had, his son would appear to have it all.  About to be
married to the daughter of the city's "top cop," Farid has every reason
to feel as fortunate as his father.  But he doesn't.
Right after the picture starts, Farid sells off all of his worldly
goods.  Although his father suspects drugs, Farid has become obsessed
with something else entirely.  He has become an Islamic fundamentalist.
Based on the title, one might reasonably suspect that this promising
story would take center stage in the movie, but it doesn't.  Instead it
is relegated to the side.
The movie occupies most of its time observing the small relationship
that Parvez has with a prostitute named Bettina (Rachel Griffiths,
Academy Award nominee for HILARY AND JACKIE).  Bettina becomes his best
friend and advisor.  Their stiff relationship is never convincing, and
the two actors have no natural chemistry.
To this mix is added Stellan Skarsgĺrd as a rich German businessman
named Schitz, who keeps Bettina on an extended retainer during his
visit.  Skarsgĺrd's part is so underwritten that it's not clear why he
accepted it.
Whenever the movie has the good sense to cut back to the conflict
between father and son, it begins to develop momentum.  Most of the time
however, it is bogged down in long, uninteresting scenes between Parvez
and Bettina.  The powerful and predictable ending confrontation shows
how good the picture could have been.
MY SON THE FANATIC runs 1:27.  It is rated R for cocaine usage, nudity,
sexual situations and profanity and would be acceptable for older
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Let's take for granted that most liberal, broad-minded
moviegoers would like to a society that is not racist, one in
which extreme beliefs of any sort are unwelcome and in
which people of all races, national origins and religions get
along and even fall in love with one another.  But how
didactic our school lessons on these issues have been!  And
how intriguing a good, sincere, solid and well-developed film
can put dramatic and comic touches alike on these themes. 
One such adventure in storytelling is Hanif Kureishi's "My
Son the Fanatic," with Udayan Prasad at the helm and
featuring one of India's most celebrated performers, from
whose point of view the tale progresses.  
   The movie, which takes place in Northern England in an
area inhabited largely by immigrants from Pakistan centers
on Parvez (Om Puri), a middle-aged man who drives a taxi
for a living.  A hard-working fellow who puts in twelve hours a
day, Parvez tries to make ends meet by hooking up rich
clients (including tourists) with prostitutes in the area.  He is
particularly fond of one streetwalker, the lonely Bettina
(Rachel Griffiths), whom he recommends highly to a notably
prosperous German businessman, Schitz (Stellan Skarsgard. 
Though in some circles Parvez could be considered a pimp,
one who goes so far as to arrange orgies as well as handle
the driving, we in the audience see him as a decent, secular
Muslim who has largely assimilated into the British culture. 
Nonetheless, in one embarrassing instance he is taunted by a
racist stand-up comedian.  He cannot count on his home life
for relaxation: his wife Minoo (Gopi Desai) is never "tender"
with him and though she wears conventional South Asian
dress she complains that Parvez never takes her anywhere. 
What is more disturbing is that his 18-year-old son, Farid
(Akbar Kurtha), has just broken off his engagement to the
daughter of the chief police inspector and has joined a
Muslim fundamentalist group which preaches against "white
and Jewish propaganda that there is nothing to our lives but
the empty accountancy of things."
   Though Parez is indeed pimping to raise extra money to
support his family and has taken to more than casual
drinking, he gains the sympathy of the audience by his
tolerant demeanor, particularly for the empathy he feels
toward one hooker.  He relies on Bettina to provide him an
understanding ear for his distress at his son's new zealotry
and, despite their differences in age and religion, Parvez falls
in love with the younger woman and starts an affair. 
Bettina's is attracted to Parvez who, she feels, is the only
man who has not exploited her, and when they kiss she
declares that he is the first man with whom she has done this
in a long time.
   Essentially, through its involving story featuring well-
developed characters, "My Son the Fanatic" takes a noble
stand against extremism of all kinds.  The fundamentalist 
Pakistanis are skewed, particularly for their hypocrisy (the
bearded head of the local cult, a man who whines about
England's corruption, asks for Parvez's help in arranging for
additional immigration), and partly because they take the law
into their own hands.  In the picture's most dramatic episode
given added tension because the tautness is carefully built
up, a band of fundemantalists attack a whorehouse, lobbing
Molotov cocktails through the windows and punching out the
women as they flee into the street.  But writer Hanif Kureishi,
though his principal character, takes a stand as well against
the hedonistic businessman appropriately named Schitz and
played villainously by the wonderful Stellan Skarsgard.  Schitz
uses his hooker as a plaything, giving lavish tips to Parvez
for catering to his needs, but cares nothing about anyone but
himself.  We can see that Farid's rage against the secular,
capitalistic state is fired by his experience with people like
Schitz and also by the behavior of his dad--who, though a
Muslim, is absolutely tolerant of prostitution.  Because these
motivations are carefully developed, we wonder at the essay
of critic Harvey Thompson of the World Socialist Web Site,
which finds a weakness in that "the explanation of
[fundamentalism's] attraction for large numbers of youth is
somehow shallow."
   "My Son the Fanatic" is solid fare for the arthouse circuit
with particularly fine performances from veteran actor Om
Puri ("Gandhi") and Rachel Griffiths ("Hilary and Jackie").  It
should serve to make thoughtful people even more
maddened by the so-called high government officials who
pronounced a death sentence on Salman Rushdie.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
MY SON THE FANATIC (director:Udayan Prasad; screenplay: Hanif Kureishi
based on his novel; cinematography: Alan Almond; cast: Om Puri (Parvez),
Rachel Griffiths (Bettina), Stellan Skarsgĺrd (Schitz), Akbar Kurtha
(Farid), Gopi Desai (Minoo), Harish Patel (Fizzy), Bhasker Patel (The
Maulvi), Sarah-Jane Potts (Madelaine), Geoffrey Bateman (Chief
Inspector), 1998-UK)
An attempt at being a dramatic social conscience film, based on the
short story by Hanif Kureishi (My Beautiful Laundrette/Sammy and Rosie
get Laid), about an emigre family who came 25- years ago from Pakistan
to the economically depressed industrial city of Bradford, in the north
of England. The father is the pock-marked, leathery faced, middle-aged
taxi driver Parvez (Om Puri), who has assimilated into the English
culture, snobbishly looking down his nose at those who don't behave
properly. His wife Minoo (Gopi Desai) is subservient to him but not
respectful of him, never having fully adjusted to her adopted country,
saving all her love for her spoiled son Farid (Akbar Kurtha), as her
husband works long hours and to her, seems to be without ambition, as
their relationship grows distant. At the start of the story, Farid is a
seemingly typical self-satisfied second generation son of an immigrant,
who is a studious accountant college student and a fun loving guitar
player. He is engaged to an English girl Madelaine (Sarah-Jane Potts),
who works as a bank teller; her father is the local police chief
(Bateman), which pumps Parvez up with pride that the son of a
dark-skinned immigrant could be going out with a local white girl, who
comes from a family that has such prestige in town. In an unconvincing
and one of the film's many overdramatic scenes, Farid breaks off the
relationship because of his sudden new interest in Islamic
fundamentalism and his reaction to how the local population disrespects
the dark-skinned "Pakis" and look down at his father because of his
lowly status. His new stance in life brings displeasure to his father,
though it brings happiness to the police chief, who by his tight facial
expression when in the presence of the family, displays his racial
prejudice.
This very predictable social drama will have every character be a
walking cliché, every major event be a contrived one, and it will do
everything it could do to convince the audience that assimilation is the
way to go, but get out on the pulpit and preach against racial hatred.
It is good to have such tolerant beliefs, don't get me wrong, but to
make such a boring and muddled picture about it, is not a good thing.
The naive but indulgent father, is hard-working, though is not always as
ethical as he should be (he drinks too much, stays out late with another
woman, and is sort of a pimp to a local prostitute). While his
reactionary son, is someone who spouts fundamental diatribes against
white people and, especially, Jews, as they clash over what each of them
believes to be true. Parvez spends most of the film railing against his
son's belief and his ingratitude for how hard he had to work to support
the family, rationalizing his own worldly beliefs, while his son's
disappointment with his father's Western ways, gives way to a hatred for
his father, as he rejects him and goes marching off with his militant
fundamentalist group.
The film's themes about religious fanatics, family problems,
prostitution, hypocrisy, jealousy over a friend's success, the
immigration problem, bigotry, the problems a young man has in growing
up, a father-son frictional relationship, social hierarchy, male abuse
towards women, the tribulations of a workaholic, love, loneliness, the
need for warmth, and cultural clashes, are just too many themes for one
film to have. The filmmaker is all over the cricket field with these
problems, but just can't make this long list of problems have any
lasting interest for the film goer. And, as if these weren't enough
problems, some more come up when the taxi driver takes as his fare, a
German industrialist, Stellan Skarsgĺrd, who goes by the name of Schitz
(you can see for yourself what goes for humor here, as you try to
pronounce that name). He comes here on business and as a diversion,
Parvez supplies him with women and one in particular, Parvez's dear
prostitute friend, someone he feels very comfortable talking to, Bettina
(Rachel Griffiths). As a way of incrementing his salary, Parvez arranges
places for the sexually masochistic industrialist to have orgies in and
pays off the girls with the industrialist's cash. But he develops a
serious relationship with the prostitute who has a heart of gold (Did
you ever hear of any other kind of a prostitute in a cliché movie?), as
she gives him the warmth he can't get at home, and their relationship is
built on a mutual trust for each other.
When it comes down to the nitty-gritty of things, this uncompelling film
can't make up its mind on how it stands on some of the major issues it
brings to the table. By the film's end I don't know how to feel about
Parvez's romance with the prostitute, as it certainly breaks up his
family life but gives him a temporary renewed self-respect and hope. But
there is no resolution to what all the fuss was about over her being a
prostitute and what will come of their relationship. Is the filmmaker
for or against prostitution? And the question remains, what was that
final scene all about, of angry Moslems stoning and bombing a whorehouse
in the neighborhood of the Mosque, while the father pulls his son away
from Bettina and then throws the German industrialist out of his cab.
For me, it was just an unbelievable scene, and to boot, it didn't clear
up anything about the mainstream Moslem official position on the
negativity toward prostitution. In fact, I didn't learn anything about
Moslems except to see them as the stereotypes they are most of the time
depicted as in most other mainstream films.
Om Puri (In Custody/City of Joy/Target) is an accomplished actor from
India, whose trademark face and ability to be very expressive and
exuberant, engages the film with his sense of what it is to be a decent
person. He looks at his adopted country like an exile- with one foot
planted back to his native Pakistan but his other foot firmly planted in
the new country. There is something about him that identifies with those
who are outsiders, as long as they are not fanatics or troublemakers.
But the filmmaker doesn't even attempt to play fair, the story is told
totally from his point of view, all the others around him are
one-dimensional characters, who are not only uninteresting but they are
for the most part made to appear annoying. I'm talking about his
fanatical son, his old-fashioned wife, his vulnerable prostitute friend,
the industrialist (his part was the most undeveloped one in the film),
and the moralizing friend he came from Pakistan with, Fizzy (Harish
Patel), the one he is envious of, who became a successful restaurant
owner and a better provider for his family than he was, but who adds
nothing but more clichés to a story that is already full of clichés.
In the closing credits we see how isolated the exiled father is
(meaning- he will always be an exile in his adopted England). This is
pointed out as he goes from room to room in his empty house and a jazz
song plays "There is no peace till hatred passes."
That Parvez is a decent guy, with a good attitude, is probably not as
true as the filmmaker thinks. Didn't he treat his wife unfairly and fail
to communicate with his troubled son? That this film doesn't have the
power to say anything important that hasn't been heard many times
before, is my take on it. But the worst thing about this film, is that
it is a snoozer, not able to make its story about the virtues of being
faithful to your culture and your wife come to life, as it is mired down
in one cliché after another. The best thing to say about this art- house
type of film, is that it should upset no one: it is so bland and
unexciting that it is hard to tell what all the fuss is about. I can't
get too worked up over a father who is the rebel in the household
instead of the son, or if the father falls for the heavenly prostitute
who is so human (she even snorts coke), or about a bunch of intolerant
religious fanatics who are hypocrites, who descry the West but
nevertheless want to live here. There was just nothing here to get
worked up about. I just assume people immigrate to Western countries to
earn a better living, there is no big deal in exposing that. But, you
can be sure of one thing, this Moslem filmmaker did not pull a Salman
Rushdie with this film. He won't be on any fundamentalist hit list.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MY SON THE FANATIC (UK, 1998) *** Directed by  Udayan Prasad. Script 
by Hanif Kureishi from his short story. Photography, Alan Almond. 
Music, Stephen Warbeck. Cast: Om Puri, Rachel Griffiths, Stellan 
Skarsgĺrd, Akbar Kurtha, Gopi Desai, Harish Patel, Bhasker Patel. A 
BBC production released by Miramax. 89 minutes. R (sex, prostitution, 
drugs) At the New Art Theater.
Om Puri, a major actor in India (with credits in Western productions 
too), was 46  or 47 when MSTF was made. With his leathery, pitted 
face, he looks older than that, but is as energetic as a younger man. 
He plays Pakistani-born taxi-driver Parvez who came to Bradford, in 
the industrial Midlands, 25 years ago. He has a Pakistani wife 
(Desai) and one child, the  English-born, twentyish Farid (Kurtha).
he film opens with dad, mother and son visiting the home of 
Madeleine, the daughter of the local Chief Police Inspector, to 
celebrate her engagement to Farid. Quickly and deftly it sketches 
Parvez as an exuberant, voluble extrovert who is happy with his 
family's new connection with (for him) upscale Brits. But a discreet 
subtext implies that the Inspector and his spouse are politely 
displeased by their alliance.
Proceeding to its main themes, MSTF makes its main points clearly. 
These are based on a reversal of the more familiar mentality of 
immigrants, where the older, often-homesick and traditional 
generation has trouble assimilating, while the young people feel at 
home with their Englishness. Here, Parvez feels totally Westernized 
and happy to be so. But soon enough, Farid falls under the spell of 
Muslim fundamentalists, joins them, breaks his engagement, gets 
religious fervor, even transforms his parents' home into a 
guest-house for visiting, white-garbed co-religionists. The friction 
with his father grows. The young man accuses him of being blind to 
the decline of a West that has no values yet demonizes the Muslims: 
"You have swallowed all this white and Jewish propaganda."
Farid's mother seems to accepts ther son's changes. She also accepts 
her new status as the inferior gender that  cooks for the visitors 
and takes her own meals alone in the kitchen. Kureishi's script is 
not overtly political. It is obvious that he does not want the fate 
of Salman Rushdie. But it is also obvious where his sympathies lie.
>From the very beginning two threads are developed. In his taxi Parvez 
also ferries prostitutes and their clients, considers sex in the back 
seat and his providing visitors with information about hookers to be 
natural parts of his job.
One girl in particular, Bettina, has a friendly rapport with Parvez. 
An attractive, quiet, natural charmer, she is  played by Aussie 
Rachel Griffiths with a certain cachet and inner elegance. Her 
excellent movie debut was in the Australian "Muriel's Wedding" where 
she was second-billed, as Muriel's lively and promiscuous first 
friend. Her other credits include "My Best Friend's Wedding" and 
especially "Hilary and Jackie" (NOT about Mrs. Clinton and 
Mrs.Kennedy ) which brought her several festival nominations, plus 
one for an Oscar.
Parvez and Bettina are thrown closer when the cabbie is regularly 
hired by  Mr.Schitz, a visiting German businessman (played by the 
Swedish actor Stellan Skarsgĺrd) who also keeps hiring Bettina. 
Skarsgĺrd has been in many movies since 1972, yet is familiar mostly 
from the 90's films "Breaking the Waves" and "Ronin."  His accent is 
oddly American, his part so underdeveloped that no persona emerges. 
We only know that he is heavily  and cynically  into sex and does 
drugs. He uses Parvez as a sort of pimp, even pays him to recruit 
hookers and organize taxis for their transportation for an 
ill-defined orgy, presumably to improve his business contacts. At the 
end of this affair, Parvez is given money to pay the girls one by one.
The several scenes that include Schitz are murky. There is also some 
lack of connection, continuity and development in other sections, 
including those with or about Parvez and/or Bettina. But at least 
there is enough rapport as well as superior acting (it feels 
effortless and natural)  between the older Pakistani man and the 
British girl, before, during and after they become lovers. In fact, 
in different, diffident, idiosyncratic ways, the cabby and the hooker 
have sweet --but never maudlin-- and touching personalities and an 
evolving relationship treated with much originality.
The gulf between father and son reaches a point of no return when an 
intolerant  Muslim group sets fire to a dwelling of hookers, attacks 
them physically. Farid beats Bettina, his father comes to her rescue.
With the young convert taking off with his fellow-believers, and with 
the mother leaving the home, Parvez finds himself alone in an empty 
house. But without hints about the fuure. There is, to the picture's 
credit, no closure.
MSTF, though imperfect, is a warm, gripping film. Its major flaw, in 
common with many contemporary British movies, is that no concessions 
are made to non-British ears. The melding of British English and 
sing-song Eastern  intonations (Parvez, his wife, etc), as well as 
the "white" Midlands accents , made the film critics at the movie's 
preview agree that only  50 percent of the dialogue was understood. 
The sounds of speech, and their recording are increasingly neglected 
in many movies from the UK and the USA.
Much of this is avoidable. The proof is that Parvez has an erratic 
enunciation which ranges from impenetrable to (in his quiet talks 
with Bettina) perfectly clear. On the other hand, the dialogues we 
miss are not all that important, since Parvez and Bettina
are wonderful at body language and facial expressions. There is also 
a particularly good (and symbolic) use of Western pop and jazz  that 
Parvez loves, while some Muslim chants and sounds are heard as 
counterpoint.
Although MSTF was released in England in 1998, it was premiered in 
the Directors' Fortnight series at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival. Its 
source was a short story by Hanif Kureishi in the New Yorker 
magazine, later collected in the writer's Love in a Blue Time. Three 
previous films scripted by Kureishi were "My Beautiful Laundrette" 
and "Sammy and Rosie Get Laid" directed by Stephen Frears and "London 
Kills Me" directed by the writer.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "MY SON THE FANATIC" (Miramax Films)
 This is an unconventional love story about a Pakistani
immigrant who strays from his wife and the stability of his home when
he falls in love with a British prostitute. But what makes it even
more compelling is that screenwriter Hanif Kureishi ("My Beautiful
Laundrette") satirically reverses the conservative, middle-aged
father/freedom-loving son rebellion axiom, giving it an unexpected
twist. Acclaimed Indian actor Om Puri ("Gandhi," "City of Joy") is
superb and utterly convincing as a Scotch-drinking, cricket-loving,
jazz enthusiast who has spent 25 years driving a taxi in industrial
Bradford, England. He is worried about his beloved son (Akbar Kurtha)
who has broken his engagement to the Caucasian daughter of a British
police detective and is selling off his "capitalist pig" possessions
as part of a religious conversion to militant, fundamentalist Islam,
with all of its anti-semitic overtones, in order to find personal
identity after many years of being made to feel like an
outsider. Directed by Udayan Prasad with a cast that includes Rachel
Griffiths (Oscar-nominated for "Hilary and Jackie") and Skellan
Skarsgard ("Good Will Hunting"), the film probes universal conflicts,
using disparate lives to examine the broad moral themes of love versus
duty and happiness versus personal sacrifice - in addition to the
racial and cultural problems inherent in assimilation. It gets a bit
melodramatic towards the conclusion but, on the whole, it's quite
engaging, pursing the point that "After a certain age, there's no
point in saying 'No' to everything."  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "My Son the Fanatic" is a bittersweet, compassionate 7. It's
engaging, off-beat art house fare but, for those with auditory
problems, it's often difficult to decipher the North London burr and
the Pakistani accent.

Author
Murali Krishnan
People emigrate from the Indian subcontinent to the West for a variety
of reasons, but the most common is to just make a living, because for
many that is easier in the foreign land than it is at home. The
sacrifice that is made, often unknowingly, is a way of life, and often
the scorn of the Westerners who see the newcomers as threats. Some
people are able to retain the value system of their old culture, but
many also assimilate into the new surroundings. Some do this because
they know their existence in the foreign land is more than temporary,
so they try to be less foreign. Others do it simply because they want
to fit in more easily, and be accepted by the locals so they can live
their lives without disturbance.
Hanif Kureishi has written many stories centered around Pakistanis who
have settled in England. Some have been produced as films, most
notably My Beautiful Laundrette and Sammy and Rosie get Laid. My Son
the Fanatic is an adaptation of one of his short stories. Usually his
main characters are highly assimilated members of the second
generation. These people often identify themselves mainly as British,
but are still influenced by the Eastern culture of their parents. The
roles are reversed in this story, because it is the parent who has
assimilated, while his son is driven into a zealous pursuit of
religion and culture in an attempt to fill his self-realizational
needs.
Parvez (Om Puri) is a taxi driver in an economically depressed English
city. Although it once had a thriving textile industry, the factories
have gone and the population has faced hard times. Parvez often sees
the dark underside of the town as his job takes him through all parts
at all times. Parvez's friend Fizzy (Harish Patel) arrived in England
the same time as Parvez, twenty five years prior, but the two men's
fortunes followed different paths. The enterprising Fizzy has worked
hard and become a restaurant owner. The unambitious Parvez has been
driving a cab for a quarter century. Although Parvez barely makes a
living, he is fully content with his lot in life. However, his
self-satisfaction contrasts with the attitude of his family. His wife,
Minoo (Gopi Desai), resents the fact that Parvez has not risen to a
more respectable profession and become a better provider. Besides the
fact that driving a taxi pays minimally, it keeps Parvez occupied and
outside the house, leaving him little time with his family. Over time,
the relationship between Parvez and Minoo has become distant, but a
deeper split emerges between Parvez and his son, Farid (Akbar Kurtha).
Farid has grown up in England, is studying accounting, plays guitar,
and has gotten engaged to an English girl. At the start of the story,
Farid is cast as a typical second generation immigrant--he is aware of
his culture, but has apparently assimilated. However, there are
barriers to his assimilation that anger Farid. He sees that people
look down on his family because not only are they dark-skinned
"Pakis", but also because his father is a lowly taxi driver. Farid
reacts by rejecting the Western culture that rejects him. He breaks
off his engagement and joins a group of devout Muslims who decry the
immorality of Western culture. He is also angry that his father
accepts the place in society that they are forced into. Such concerns
really do not register to Parvez. His whole approach to life is mellow
and accepting. Although he does face bigotry, he is not affected by
it. He accepts it as one of the facets of his world.
Parvez finds a kindred spirit in Bettina (Rachel Griffiths), one of
the many prostitutes who ply their trade on the streets that Parvez
drives. In fact, they have almost become business associates because
their occupations bring them in contact so often. Over time they have
developed a friendship. Bettina is grounded and self respecting, and
Parvez is a rare man who treats her with kindness. Bettina a is caring
listener who has learned quite a lot about Parvez's feelings and
concerns from the time they have spent together. Parvez finds and
acceptance and admiration from Bettina that he does not get from
others. Although he does not care any less for his wife and son, he
has developed a tender relationship with Bettina.
The story takes on several serious issues and is engaging. However, it
does appear weak in one place--the character of Bettina. The character
of a sympathetic prostitute is hardly original. Although Griffiths
gives a capable performance, she is limited by the stereotype. In
contrast, Puri gives an exceptional performance as Parvez. There is
nothing extreme about Parvez, but Puri molds a character that the
viewer fully understands, appreciates, and admires by the end of the
film. Parvez's strength, his fairness and sensibility, are not
extruded at discrete moments, but rather the character builds with all
he does and says. He is written with depth, and portrayed effectively.
No one else is developed as thoroughly as Parvez. Farid is given
relatively little depth. At the beginning of the story his is on the
cusp of his rejection of Western values and his immersion into
fundamentalism. After that he is given little development, but this is
because as a character, he is not important. He represents an
antagonistic view to Parvez's general outlook. This conflict is
intelligently portrayed because Parvez does not directly represent the
values opposed by his son. The conflict is not between Parvez and
Farid, but rather it is between the many components of Parvez's world.
Highly recommended. It is a very ambitious film, but the story does
take shortcuts. This is easily forgivable because it also takes on
serious subjects and does not feel the need to preach.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
