Title
Review for Central do Brasil (1998)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Oscar-nominated Fernanda Montenegro plays Dora, a retire school
teacher who earns a modest living working in Rio's Central Station, a
bus and train station.  She writes letters for the illiterate.  But she
rarely if ever mails the letters.  Instead, she cynically uses her
position to look into the lives of her uneducated clientele to laugh at
and despise them.  Hers is one of many dirty businesses that prey on
people who travel through the station.  One day Dora sees one of her
clients accidentally hit by a bus and killed leaving the client's son
Josua (played by Vinicius de Oliveira) homeless.  She is initially
untouched by the boy's plight.  Eventually she is drawn in and decides
to accompany the boy on a bus trip to be sure he finds his father.  Her
journey takes will take on many meanings as she learn to love first the
boy and through him the illiterate poor of Brazil as she learns to
understand each better.  Unlike the approach that would likely be taken
with an American or British film the poor are not shown to be quirky
and humorous.  Director Walter Salles, Jr., gives them a quiet and
pious dignity.  Chance makes Dora herself one of the rural poor, even
if only temporarily and from this vantage point she sees the poor very
differently.  She also will see this journey as a sort of last chance
to grasp life and a last chance to escape her cynicism actually feel
inspired as she once did.  Salles shows us she is in more desperation
than the boy she is helping.
     A Frank Capra would have handled the story making the people that
Dora meets offbeat. Salles is not quite so subtle.  He floods the film
with Biblical and religious allusions.  In the United States, religious
imagery in film often has a sinister overtone.  Certainly American
filmmakers are frequently willing to show a sinister side to religion.
Our films frequently portray fraudulent evangelists like Elmer Gantry
or vaguely sadistic Catholic schools as we saw in THE SAINT.  Salles is
making a film for a Brazilian audience for whom fervent Catholicism is
an unquestioned virtue.  For that reason frequently a viewer in the
United States will be wondering what point Salles may be trying to make
when, in fact, he will have already made his point.  We may wonder at
the significance of the Biblical names of men in Josua's family, when
the real point is just to say that these are all simple and good
people.
     Salles does create a definite dichotomy between city people and
country people.  City people, particularly those who work in the
station, are soulless people who look dispassionately on death for
minor infractions like shoplifting.  The country people, never well
defined, are simple, pious, and pure.  When they use Dora as a scribe,
they open into their lives a window that is purer and finer than what
Dora sees in the city people.  Oliveira's acting as the boy is simple,
but very natural.  But of equal importance with the actors is the
setting.  We see Brazil with its road stops.  We see people willing to
show Dora small kindness that it is implied they would not show her in
the city.
     Central Station is a road picture touching look into the lives of
the people of Brazil.  Perhaps it simplifies them a bit, but Fernanda
Montenegro gives a solid performance as a woman going through
unexpected changes.  Part of what makes her stand out for audiences is
her worn face, almost like a female Humphrey Bogart.  But her
performance is what gives the film what power it has.  I rate CENTRAL
STATION a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Sony Pictures Classics
 Director: Walter Salles
 Writer: Joao Emanuel Carneiro, Marcos Bernstein
 Cast: Fernanda Montenegro, Marilia Pera, Vinicius de
Oliveira, Soia Lira, Othon Bastos, Otavio Augusto, Stela
Freitas, Matheus Nachtergaele
   When Dan Quayle was campaigning for the presidency, he
was advised to make a good-will trip to Latin America,
presumbly to capture the votes of people from those lands
now living in the U.S.  He reportedly demurred: "How can I
give speeches there?  I don't even speak Latin!"  Too bad. 
When the former vice president does learn enough of the
language, perhaps there's a place for him as mayor of Rio de
Janeiro.  Family values are sorely needed there, even more
than they are in his home country.  If a kid has no parents or
relatives willing to take him in, he's not likely to be picked up
by a welfare organization.  It's life on the streets with a career
as a petty thief.  Things could be worse, though.  Given the
lack of respect accorded to young street people, he could be
shot by police for no particular reason or beaten up just for
the heck of it.  "Central Station," a Brazilian film which has
made the rounds of the festivals including Sundance and
Berlin, is a remarkable study of an unfortunate kid and how
he is saved by a most unlikely benefactor.  Directed by Walter
Salles, heretofore known more as a documentary film maker
than a story teller, "Central Station" is a poignant road movie
about the unlikely friendship between a cynical sixty-seven
year old woman and a nine year old boy she meets outside
Rio's principal train station.
   The two leads are as implausible a combination as the
people they play. The part of the aging woman, Dora, is
performed by Brazil's most celebrated actress, Fernanda
Montenegro, while her counterpart, the 10-year-old Josue, is
rendered by a Vinicius de Oliveira who not only had no acting
experience but had not even been inside a movie theater. 
(Oliveria won the part against a field of 1500 lads and what's
more he prevailed by accident: the director ran into him, a
shoe shine boy at a small airport in the center of Rio, and
was asked to help him to buy a sandwich, promising to return
the money when Salles came back from Sao Paolo.)
   The story opens on Dora, a retired elementary school
teacher, who works as a scribe outside Rio's Central Station. 
Catering to a largely poor and illiterate clientele, she writes
letters which they dictate to her, charging one dollar each for
her services, but she has such contempt for her customers
that she later trashes ninety percent of the mail.  When a
woman, accompanied by her son Josue, is hit by a bus and
killed, Dora takes the boy temporarily to her home, then sells
him unwittingly for one thousand dollars to a man who intends
to have the kid killed, his organs sold to rich clients in the
west.  When Dora hears of the scheme from her neighbor
Irene (Marilia Pera), she abducts Josue from the criminal's
home and takes him by bus on a long journey to locate his
father, a drunk who had run away from the family some time
earlier.
    Manipulating the trenchant screenplay by Joao Emanuel
Carneiro and Marcos Bernstein and jogging the emotions with
a robust piano sound track, Salles takes us from Rio to a
poor, dusty, but developing town located in one of the
countless rural backwater areas of the huge country.  On the
way she and the boy develop a profound affection for each
other, with Dora regaining the human feelings she had lost
years back after retiring from her profession.  Virtually all the
people we meet on the road are dirt poor, many deeply
religious.  In one scene designed to demonstrate Dora's
renewed feeling of romance, she and Josue meet a deeply
religious truck driver who gives them a lift and feeds the
penniless pair until he is scared off by Dora's affectionate
overtures.  Cameraman Walter Carvalho is particularly adept
at capturing a variety of sharply etched faces among Brazil's
poor: a truckload of Evangelical women who gather and sing
to a patron saint; and a succession of illiterates who compose
letters for Dora.  While the story is not likely to be acclaimed
for broad humor, Dora keeps her neighbor engrossed in tales
of her customers.  One of them writes that he had been
following the personals columns and that the recipient is the
only woman he is interested in. (He wrote the same letter to
ten women.)  One woman wants to return to her abusive
husband, but Dora refuses to send the letter because she
does not wish to have a part in the beating this customer was
in for.
   Fernanda Montenegro is a seasoned actress who turns in
an expected ardent performance.  But Vinicius de Oliveira is a
true find, an unpretentious, wholly natural young man who
does his part like a child star nurtured on years of training. 
The film does shows Brazilians as both good and bad people,
in one case portraying the senseless shooting of a youthful
thief by adults who'd as soon kill these young toughs as look
at them.  The movie does best in exploring the growing
friendship between its two disparate principals but is not as
successful in expanding the theme to demonstrate that Brazil
is a country in transition.  It is a personal story, albeit often
airless, and one likely to be seen as Brazil's entry to the 1998
Academy Awards competition.  

Author
Steve Rhodes
Dora, an ex-elementary schoolteacher, spends her time now running a scam
in Rio de Janeiro's central train station.  Poor, illiterate people in
the movie CENTRAL STATION (CENTRAL DO BRASIL) pay her to write letters
for them.  She doesn't just take dictation; she suggests just the right
words for every situation.
The only problem is that she saves the cost of the postage by not
mailing the letters.  When her customers complain that their intended
recipients have not gotten their letters, she blames it on Brazil's
notoriously unreliable postal system.  Her understanding, indigent
clients believe everything Dora tells them.
As Dora, Fernanda Montenegro gives an empathetic performance as a woman
who scrapes by in life by deceiving others.  With a double chin, large
bags under her eyes and a thousand lines on her face, Dora is the type
of person who usually looks a decade older than her actual age.  The
lonely Dora doesn't have much of a life either.  She says sadly that she
has "no children, no husband, no family, no dog."
One day, after asking that a letter be sent to her estranged husband, a
woman is killed by a bus.  The dead woman's 9-year-old son, Josue
(Vinicius de Oliveira), effectively becomes an orphan.  Dora sees this
as a financial opportunity for herself.  She sells the boy for the price
of a television set to people who either run an illegal adoption agency
or who kill children in order to traffic in their organs.  We never
learn which.
After a change of heart, Dora kidnaps the boy back, which causes the
Josue's new "owners" to chase after them.  The body of the movie is a
long road picture with Dora becoming a surrogate mother to Josue as they
travel to his father's last known address.
The opening, brief letter-writing portion of the movie, which has a
montage reminiscent of a Woody Allen film, is the movie at its best.
Once they hit the road, the story quickly bogs down.  Not much happens,
and what does goes very slowly.  Typical of their adventures is the time
they get stuck in a large group of religious pilgrims who are engaging
in a mass prayer ceremony.
The film's schmaltzy and contrived ending comes out of nowhere.  The
putative tearjerker of a conclusion left me dry-eyed.   It may not be
much of a movie, but, for the bulk of it, the strong and heartfelt
performances of the two leads do make up for the threadbare storyline.
CENTRAL STATION runs 1:55.  The film is in Portuguese with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but might be PG-13 for brief violence and
some profanity and would be fine for kids around 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
CENTRAL STATION (Central do Brazil) (Brazil-France, 1998)  *** 1/2
Directed by Walter Salles, Jr. Written by Joao Emanuel Carneiro and Marcos
Bernstein, based on an idea by Salles. Photography,  Walter Carvalho.
Editing, Isabelle Rathery, Felipe Lacerda.Poduction design, Cassio
Amarante, Carla Caffe. Music, Antonio Pinto, Jaques Morelembaum. Producers,
Arthur Cohn, Martine de Clermont-Tonnerre. Cast:  Fernanda Montenegro
(Dora), Vinicius de Oliveira  (Josue), Mariela Pera (Irene), Othon Bastos
(Cesar the truck driver), et al. A Sony Classics release. In Portuguese,
subtitled. 110 MIN. R (language)
Mix the following ingredients: Brazil's own 1960's Cinema Novo's first wave
(political, socially conscious, realistic);  the road movies genre; early
Italian neorealist films; cinema-verite; and bits of epistolary films. Take
as your subject the undying category in which a tough (or just gruff) man
or woman gets somehow stuck with a kid (generally but not always sweet like
Shirley Temple or Freddie Bartholomew) that will mellow the adult; think of
the current remake of Cassavetes' "Gloria." And what do you get in Central
Station?
A hybrid? Not at all. You get an original, un-gimmicky, un-icky,
un-cliched, attention-holding, touching film that opens your eyes on major
aspects of the human condition in Brazil and on that country's people and
life.
Obviously, the movie has been appreciated, with awards and/or applause at
several festivals, including the top prize at the Berlin Festival. It is
also a contender in the best foreign film category at the 1999 Oscars.
Rio de Janeiro's Central train station where 300,000 people move about each
day, is a microcosm of urban society. The station looks to me (but I may be
wrong) like the hub of local  trains rather than long-distance travel.
Also, the majority of the people we see are working class, low income or no
income Cariocas, cheaply clad -- a far cry from the well-dressed crowds in
North American commuter trains. (To anticipate comments, I do know that, as
I write this in cold February, it is 90 degrees in Rio, and people are in
shirt-sleeves, but shabbiness prevails at the station by any standards).
The mobs are busy rushing into the trains. Many younger men jump into the
wagons through  open windows. The place is also a hive of makeshift stores
and stands. Early into the movie there's a  horrendous scene. A man who has
lifted something from a shop is pursued. Two cops catch up with him. They
take his loot, and, without thinking twice about it, one of the lawmen puts
a bullet in the fellow's head. Nothing is made of this. Life is cheap.
Dora, in her mid-to-late 60s, and no beauty --to put it mildly--is a
retired elementary school teacher. To make ends meet, in the cavernous
station she has a table on which she writes letters that many illiterates
dictate to her and gets also paid for putting on stamps later and mailing
the envelopes. But, tough, brusque and caustic, the scribe is also a scam
artist.
When she gets to her dismal apartment by the tracks, she brings along her
daily bag of letters that she's supposed to mail, and shows them to her
friend Irene. Irene may be her roommate or her neighbor, it's not clear.
Clearly though, she is the only friend in Dora's depressing life. Irene,
younger, jolly and a still nice-looking fading beauty, is probably a
prostitute, though this is not elaborated.
At home, Dora perhaps selects a few envelops that she mails. For sure, she
tears up many of them and puts the rest in drawers,where they probably
remain forever.
Among her customers is a woman with her 9-year old boy Josue.  Her husband,
a drunkard, left her long ago. She want him back, for herself and for their
fatherless child.
That woman is killed by a bus right outside the station. The plight of the
child is even more tragic if you are aware of the horrendous problem of
millions of street-children in Brazil. Their survival is a tragedy;  many
even get killed by the police for no reason.
Soon, hard-as-nails Dora takes streetwise and sullen Josue to her place.
Her unexpected kindness is undone when she sells the boy to a shabby
"agency" which supposedly supplies children to adoptive parents abroad.
Dora returns home with a new color TV set, on which, with subtle, symbolic,
irony, we see only black-and-white programs. But an aghast Irene tells her
that the agency is a fake, that the kids will be killed for their organs.
Dora rushes back, kidnaps Josue and in fear of retaliation, flees with him
to look for the missing father.
This is where the travels begin. It's more of a road movie than an odyssey
since the "adventures"  are on a small, intimate rather than a grand scale.
The grand scale is only in the vastness of Brazil, the world's fifth
largest nation.
The woman and the rebellious Josue take a lot of busses. When hardly
solvent or broke they hitch rides in  trucks.Most of this is in the
"sertao" of the North East, Brazil's thinly populated, often barren
outback. (It's a neat reversal of the poor of those areas trudging to the
promised land of big cities).
The trip, the landscape, the places seen are harsh. Nothing is paved in
this barrenness, except for the main highways. The viewers are given a tour
which, like the entire film, is extremely well photographed and
uncompromisnly realistic. We are light years  away from the commonly
pictured touristic Brazil with its fiestas and the thong-wearing beauties
of the Copcabana Beach. Credit director Salles's  experience as a
documentarist. He is objective but has a heart.
While the protagonists gradually, as expected, draw closer to each other,
Salles, with much naturalness, avoids sentimentalizing people or places.
Yet his eyes and ears are full of quiet sympathy for what, to use Bunuel's
title, are Los Olvidados, the forgotten ones who struggle to subsist. The
people whom the woman and the child come across, by and large are decent
folks who live in squalor. An episode with a nice, warm, older trucker, an
Evangelical who, for a brief spell, stirs the woman in Dora, is
effortlessly touching. And in a long, spectacular sequence, Dora and Josue
find themselves in a throng of pilgrims that go to revere Jesus in acts of
hope and of self-consolation.
(One should not, by the way, make too much of names such as Josue (Joshua)
and Jesus, the elusive father, nor the fact that Jesus is a sort of
carpenter. Symbolism may be present , but with a light touch. Curiously, in
the other main candidate for Best Foreign Film Oscar this year ( Life is
Beautiful) the woman is called Dora and the child is Josue
The humanity of the Dora-Josue twosome has enormous appeal. She is one of
Brazil's top stage actresses -- and light years away from the looks of
Sharon Stone in Gloria!)  He was a poor shoeshine boy whom the director
discovered in an airport. Their performances  are so real that the word
"acting" never comes into your mind.
What might come to mind is the great Italian film "Stolen Children," as
well as its contrast with Central Station, whose poverty makes even the
Italian South look relatively wealthy.
The most upsetting sight for me, one that encapsulates the movie, is the
the picture of a goat in a sertao village. The animal, trying to graze in
the barren dust, walks somehow with his two broken front legs. Yet the
total movie does not stress grimness. It has its natural quota of
positiveness, even unforced humor.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
        With the exception of the Akira Kurosawa classic "Throne Of
Blood", I had never seen a foreign language film until "Central
Station". Reading subtitles while trying to watch the facial
expressions, set details, and technical aspects of a movie is not
always fun. Heck, it's downright annoying. Still, if the acting
is good and the story is compelling, you have to be willing to
let your eyes do a little walkin' around the entire screen, from
top to bottom.
        This late '98 release is an art film from Brazil about one
lonely woman's seemingly pointless struggle through life. Dora
(Fernanda Montenegro in an Oscar-nominated performance) is an
older woman who spends her time writing letters for people at the
central station. She's become incredibly cynical and doesn't even
bother to mail many of the letters she's entrusted to send to the
intended. A feisty woman named Ana (Soia Lira) and her spunky
son, Josue (Vincius de Oliveira), stop by to send some angry
words to the boy's estranged father. Shortly thereafter, Ana
returns to revise the letter and make a plea for reconciliation.
That day she is run over by a bus and killed instantly, leaving
Josue all alone.
        Dora continues on and the boy, with no place to go, camps
out at the station. He and Dora begin a volatile relationship.
For a short time, she invites the lad to move in with her until
she can handle him no longer and pawns him off on a couple who
"pay" for kids. She buys a TV with the money, which makes her
neighbourly chum, Irene (Marilla Pera), happy, but Dora soon
regrets the decision and rescues the angry kid. From here, this
film has "It Happened One Night" overtones with reversed roles.
Dora sets out on a bustrip with Josue to take him "home" to his
father in another town.
        She takes him about halfway, gets off the bus, and plans to
let him go the rest of the way by himself. Instead, he also gets
off the bus, stranding them both with no money, and forcing her
to continue on the journey. Along the little odyssey, they hitch
a ride with a friendly truck driver, steal food, and learn a
great deal about themselves and each other. When they finally get
to his father's home, they've created a bond of friendship that
transcends age and loneliness.
        This is a story about friendship and love. It's about
discovering your father (metaphorically and literally) and
finding someone to keep you safe. The pains of alcoholism are a
factor, too, since Josue's dad is rumoured to be a drunk. While
Dora is no saint and she tends to push away every man she meets
(including the trucker), she's a lonely woman who is simply
trying to survive.
        Montenegro is solid and heart-felt in this role and, while
the Academy probably won't give her the award, she's a
distinguished nominee for Best Actress. She's the main reason to
see "Central Station". In supporting roles, de Oliveira and Pera
are pretty good, too, and provide comic relief. In fact, this
movie knows when to crack a joke and when to tug at the heart.
Director Walter Salles provides good balance with those aspects
of the script and he uses the camera well.
        "Central Station" is a poetic movie, but it wouldn't be
getting much recognition if not for Fernanda Montenegro. She is
the backbone of this film chronicling the day-to-day hardships of
Brazilian life for the under-privileged and unloved. And those
darn sub-titles aren't so bad when the performances and story are
sweet and agreeable.
USELESS TRIVIA--I have no useless trivia for this film.


Author
Michael Dequina
_Central_Station_ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
By all outward appearances, this Brazilian drama is a standard road
movie--and to a certain extent, it is.  Central Station in Rio is what
brings together the film's unlikely traveling duo: Dora (Fernanda
Montenegro), former schoolteacher, now letter-writer; and Josue (Vinicius
de Olveira), an orphaned 10-year-old boy, whose mother was one of the
Dora's customers before her untimely death.  The two set off on a rough
journey across the country to find Josue's long-lost father.
_Central_Station_'s travellers follow the beaten cinematic path, but the
film is made unusually compelling by the lead characters.  This is because
they are so recognizably human; neither Dora nor Josue are the most likable
of characters.  Dora is, at times, unbearably bitter; Josue is often
unnecessarily cruel to his de facto guardian, often ridiculing her haggard
appearance.  What keeps the audience involved in the plight of this prickly
pair are the actors.  de Olveira, a shoeshine boy who was discovered by
director Walter Salles after the boy asked him for change, is a remarkable
find, exuding the right balance of toughness and vulnerability.  The same
can be said, but to a greater degree, about Montenegro (who has been named
Best Actress of the year by both the National Board of Review and the Los
Angeles Film Critics Association); she rightfully sees Dora's bitter anger
as less a weariness with the world than with herself, a desperate,
self-destructive mechanism to keep the world even more distant than it
already is.  The nuances of Montenegro's work--and the film--are too subtle
to notice along the way, but by the film's poignant yet understated
conclusion, they are powerfully felt.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Greg King
At heart, Central Station (Central do Brasil) is a road movie
in which two characters with little in common develop a strong bond of
friendship that changes them.  Central Station also has a humanity and
sense of compassion that sets it apart from a number of similarly
themed films.  The central story of an unlikely friendship that
develops between a hard hearted elderly curmudgeon and the young boy
who becomes her reluctant companion on an odyssey fondly recalls the
recent Oscar winner Kolya.  This simple, yet heart warming tale will
appeal to a similar audience.
Central Station is set in Rio De Janeiro, a sprawling and
pitiless city in which overcrowding, abject poverty and illiteracy are
rife.  Dora (played magnificently by veteran Brazilian actress
Fernanda Montenegro) is a retired school teacher who ekes out a living
as a letter writer.  Based in the heart of Brazil's sprawling Central
Station, Dora patiently writes letters for the illiterate population
at a dollar a letter.  However, every night she returns to her flat
where she and her neighbour Irene (Marilia Pera) decide which of the
letters to post.
One day she encounters Ana (Soia Lira) and her nine year old
son Josue (Vincinius de Oliviera), who wants to send a letter to her
husband, a drunkard who abandoned her years ago.  She wants to arrange
a meeting between him and the son he has never met, but Dora doesn't
post the letter, believing that Ana is better off without him.  A
couple of days later Ana is killed in an accident outside the station,
and Josue is left all alone.
Initially indifferent to the boy's fate, Dora eventually takes
pity on him and brings him home.  She then sells him to an adoption
agency for some desperately needed cash.  But when she learns that the
agency may actually be a front for an international organisation that
kills orphaned kids for the organs, she rescues Josue and sets out to
return him to his father.  It is a journey that transforms the two,
bringing them closer together.
As the odd pair travel into an increasingly remote and harsh
destination, Salles takes the audience on a parallel journey through
contemporary Brazil.  He exposes the harsh reality of this depressing
country, but he somehow finds an optimistic and hopeful streak that
augurs well for the future.  Dora is symbolic of the old, traditional
Brazil, while Josue comes to represent the future and change.  A grim
scene in which a young shoplifter is brutally executed shows the fate
that would probably have awaited young Josue.
The film benefits enormously from the two wonderful central
performances that grab the audience's sympathy.  Montenegro is superb,
and her wonderfully expressive and beautifully nuanced performance
conveys the spectacular emotional growth of her character.  She moves
from the bitter, weary and cynical old woman we meet at the start to
one who develops maternal feelings and experiences compassion for
probably the first time in her life.  It is an extraordinary
performance that makes this transformation credible.  In his debut
film role, young de Oliviera has a winning, unassuming and natural
charm that will melt hearts.  He almost steals the film away from
Montenegro.
A former documentary film maker with an interest in themes of
identity and exile, Salles brings a sense of compassion and compelling
realism to the film's political subtext.  However, he eschews the
cynical manipulation that suffuses most American movies that travel
this terrain.  Heavily influenced by legendary directors of the
calibre of John Ford, Visconti and the late Akira Kurosawa, Salles'
film explores a similar emotional and physical terrain.  This haunting
and moving film also resonates with a similar sense of epic sweep and
visual beauty.  Walter Carvalho's often breath taking cinematography
captures the harsh beauty and landscapes of Brazil and is an integral
part of the charm of this deeply affecting and moving film.
It's a pity that Central Station was nominated for an Oscar in
the same year as Roberto Benigni's wonderful Life Is Beautiful,
because it is would also have been a worthy winner.

Author
Seth Bookey
Review of Central do Brasil (1998, a/k/a Central Station; Portuguese with
English subtitles)
Seen on Christmas Eve 1998 with Linda at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas for
$8.75
Big cities are renowned for grinding down the little people, and that goes
triple for the third world. Much like the world of Bunuel's Mexico City in
Los Olvidados, Rio de Janeiro is merciless. People are out for themselves
and if you take a wrong turn, you are much more likely to be the victim of
vigilante justice than police brutality.
Dora is a retired schoolteacher who supplements her pension by writing
letters for illiterate peasants reporting home on their urban
fortunes--sometimes lying, so no one will worry. They trust her to send
the, but she often doesn't, playing God and judging which ones will reach
their destination.
One of her patrons is killed by a bus, leaving her son Josue (Vinicius de
Oliveira) to fend for himself on the streets. Dora takes pity on him and
takes him in. Thinking she can get him adopted by rich foreigners, Dora
sells him to a local thug, and she buys a new television.
Horrified to learn that he is more likely going to become an
unwilling--and deceased--organ donor, she kidnaps him, and the two go on
the run. Dora hopes to reunite him with his father in a remote rural
outpost.
Fernanda Montenegro's Dora is both hard-bitten and vulnerable. It's easy
to see the decent person underneath the her current cynical shell. De
Oliveira, a nonactor, is wonderful as not just a helpless child, but as
Dora's moral barometer. His outrage at her low ethics helps prompt her
into better behavior.
What ensues is a journey "from nowhere to nowhere," as another critic put
it; Josue's father has moved several times, and Dora pushes further into
the frontier to find him. What happens is not predictable. Dora's
metaphoric journey and inevitable decisions are selfless. Given the
hopeless nature of Rio, her decisions are almost miraculous, as she gives
back hope and faith despite crushing realities. It takes looking after a
young boy for Dora to come to a major realization: "I long for my father;
I long for everything." The letters dictated to her are more than
messages; they are prayers.
Director Walter Salles Jr. takes us through the unfamiliar landscapes of
urban and rural Brazil. Surrounded by natural splendors, we see the
emptiness of the cramped tenement projects in Rio, and the fullness of the
open valleys of the north. The further they go from Rio, the more blind
faith and religious imagery fills the vacant rural landscape. In a way,
the excesses of decadent greed and religious fervor both are seen as
crazy, spinning out of control.
The Portuguese title (Central do Brasil) suggests that what is happening
here is essentially what is happening in Brazil. Salles shows what's
possible when cynicism and greed are dropped in favor of belief

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz
CENTRAL STATION (director: Walter Salles; cast: Fernanda Montenegro
(Dora), Marilia Pera (Irene), Vinicius de Oliveira (Josue), Soia Lira
(Ana) and Othon Bastos (Cesar), 1998-Brazil)
How receptive you are to this well-told but unoriginal and very
sentimental Brazilian film about a miscreant old woman named Dora
(Fernanda), a former teacher and now a letter writer in the Central
Station of Rio; and, a 10-year-old orphaned boy, Josue (Vinicius), whose
mother has just been run over by a bus as she leaves the letter writer
after writing a letter asking her drunken husband who abandoned her and
the kid years ago to get back with them again, depends on how much you
mind being jerked around, as if  you were on a chain and could be pulled
on it at any time.
Though, I gladly admit, I enjoyed viewing the unusual road scenes in the
desolate Brazilian countryside, where the people are poor, ignorant,
superstitious, and craving for a religion that gives them some form of
hope for their dismal lives.This former documentary film director, ably
showed how religion can be as phony as the government that keeps most of
the people impoverished. In any case, this was a place where tourists
don't visit and films about this kind of Brazil are rarely seen by a
foreign audience.
Therefore, for me, the strongest point of the film is the documentary
type of cinematography that went into the parched Brazilian countryside,
making the barren land throb with life. The most exciting shots were
reserved for the religious pilgrimage the two weary travelers stumbled
into, as they were caught in the light coming from the bright torches of
the believers, as the two wanderers search for themselves in the
darkness of the night. That was pure cinematic magic.
Ultimately, this is a road film, as Dora relents from her hatred of the
kid, as she changes her mind after selling the kid to some unscrupulous
people who will sell him for adoption. An adoption that could lead to
unimaginable medical experiments done on the child. She decides to risk
her life to get him out of those unscrupulous hands, and take him to the
father who may not even be where the kid thinks he lives. A theme that
has been done before, sometimes much better, as in LANDSCAPE IN THE
MIST.
The film emphasized the built-in misery the heroine has that made life
for her to be a grind, but there seemed to be something special about
her that the actress was able to bring out from her characterization
that made her seem better than what she appeared to be. The only friend
she had for company, was her unmarried friend Irene (Pera), a much
kinder and happier person than she, who could have been a prostitute,
the film did not make that clear, it only hinted at that.
The beauty of this tale is not in the story itself, if there is a beauty
in the tale, but in the way it affected the two main characters, Dora
and Josue, as they eventually find something in themselves that they
didn't know they had, and they learn how to deal with the bitternesss in
their life. Their experience was comparable to a religious awakening.
These two rotten apples turn out to be not so bad, after all. How much
you like the film, depends on how believable you find the transformation
that is about to take place for these characters.
For me, it was too much sentimentality and an uninspiring and contrived
plot that kept me from warming up to the story. That the woman being
transformed from a spiteful person, who made fun of the letter writers
and despised children, will become transfixed from an ugly duckling, mad
at the world, to an almost angelic figure, someone capable of bringing
great joy to the world, was too much for me to accept, all at once. The
story turned out just too goody-goody for my taste. I do not trust films
that are so contrived, there is something about them that remains phony,
that good acting can only mask just so much of that phoniness. And the
acting by  Montenegro was grand, she is the film, along with the fine
cinematography, but even that, is not enough to completely overcome such
a stale story.
=A9 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Joy Wyse
Former schoolteacher, Cora Texeira [Fernanda Montenegro] earns money by
writing letters at $1.00 each for the multitude of illiterate people who
pass by her makeshift table in Central Station.  At night she and her girl
friend, Irene [Marilia Pera] entertain themselves by reading and judging
the importance of the contents.  Most end up, unsent, in the trash, while
a few are placed in a drawer for later posting.
Cora's life changes when Ava [Soia Lira] and her son, Josue [Vinisius de
Oliveira] stop by Cora's table to write a letter to the boy's father. 
When Ana is accidentally killed Cora finds a suppressed maternal instinct
emerging at times.  She helps Josue while trying at the same time, to
distance herself from him.  She sells' him to an adoption service, but
when she discovers that they intend to kill him for his organs she rescues
him and they find themselves on the lam.
The low regard for life and the hardships of the people are dramatically
shown.  When a young man steals a small item from a Central Station shop,
he is chased and caught.  Despite his pleading he is shot and killed.
The trains that service Central Station are hot and crowded.  As an empty
train pulls into the station some passengers board through the windows,
dropping into the few available seats.
But, through the desperation that is seen we get a glimpse of the hope
that lies ahead for Brazil.  When Cora and Josue reach the developing area
to the north, there are rows and rows of tract houses being built and
there is one paved street.  These meager buildings aren't much but they
are a vast improvement over the alternatives available.
Foreign films with subtitles are a bit difficult to watch but, like `Life
is Beautiful' this film is definitely worth the effort.  Ms. Montenegro
has been nominated for the Best Actress Oscar.  She deserves the
nomination.  Her portrayal will stay with you for a very long time.  I
must see this movie again.  I give it a B+.

Author
Susan Granger
The Academy Award nominee from Brazil for Best Foreign
Language film and Best Actress, Fernanda Montenegro, this superb film
transcends words and culture. It's the tale of a nasty woman and a
naive, ten year-old boy who meet at Rio's train station and,
eventually, strike out on a cross-country journey to find the boy's
estranged father. It revolves around alienation and a quest for
identity: the search for a parent whom a child has never met, the
search for feelings that an older woman thought she had lost, and the
search for a country that, perhaps, has vanished forever. Fernanda
Montenegro delivers a fearless, masterful performance as the lonely,
world-weary former schoolteacher who makes her money writing letters
for illiterate people. Only she's a scam artist. She saves on postage
by never mailing anything. Instead, she rips the letters up or stuffs
them into a drawer, mocking her customers' emotional outpourings. Her
crusty, unsentimental characterization never resorts to hardened,
cynical caricature, winning her the Best Actress nod from the National
Board of Review and Los Angeles Film Critics Association. Director
Walter Salles discovered the irrepressible child, adorable Vinicius de
Oliveira, working as a shoeshine boy at the Rio airport and, indeed,
he shines in his demanding, extraordinary role. About this quietly
optimistic fable, Salles explains: "When you come from a privileged
part of Brazilian society, as I do, you have to opt either to be part
o that culture of indifference or to understand what the country
really is." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Central Station"
is a richly moving and tender 10, reminiscent of "The Bicycle Thief."
I suspect that "Central Station" and "Life is Beautiful" will be the
two major Foreign Language contenders.

Author
Walter Frith
1998 was an extraordinary year for foreign films that made a big splash
in North America.  Roberto Benigni's 'Life is Beautiful' was the first
film in almost thirty years (since Costa-Gavras' 'Z' from Algeria in
1969) to be nominated for a Best Foreign Language Film Oscar as well as
in the mainstream Best Picture Oscar category.  'Central Station' is a
touching story also nominated for a Foreign Language Film Oscar
(Brazil).  In the mainstream categories, it is a nominee for Best
Actress for Fernanda Montenegro.  A role she makes the most of and she
carries the entire picture pretty much by herself.
Set in Brazil, she plays a clerk name Dora who works at the central
train station in Rio and has a very special occupation.  She sits at her
desk in the middle of the train station lobby and writes letters for
people who are illiterate.  People dictate want they want said and she
writes it all down by hand.  Her expertise as a retired school teacher
helps her a great deal.  She often takes the letters home where she
reads them with her man hungry friend Irene (Marilia Pera) and she
destroys many of the letters by taking it upon herself to decide which
letters are appropriate and which are not.  Sort of a motherly figure to
the young people she writes the letters for or you get the feeling she
is sort of like the mother in law from hell by the way she remarks about
some of the literature she's written for others.
One ordinary day at work, she composes a letter for a woman who wants to
send a message to the father of her young son.  The letter is full of
scorn as she fills the composition with hateful remarks by telling the
boy his father is worthless and so on and so on.  Later, after changing
her mind and having the letter altered to be a little more sincere, she
leaves the station with the boy and is killed is traffic after being hit
by a bus when the child becomes separated from her.  Dora takes the boy
in for a short while and later sends him to an agency that supposedly
finds homes in more prosperous places for the children such as the U.S.
and Europe.  Finding out the the agency is really a place where children
are killed off and their organs sold at very high prices, she steals the
boy back and has the criminals searching for her.  Having the letter in
hand that was to be sent to his father, Montenegro helps the young man
find his father by going on a cross country search for him.  Brazil is a
larger country than most people realize and their sprawling adventure is
most unusual, enjoyable and totally believable.
'Central Station' is sort of filmed like a documentary.  Ordinary but
effective camera work, simple locations, standard costumes but excellent
acting from all including that of Vincius de Oliveira who plays the
child in need.  The film is directed by Walter Salles and written by
Joao Emanuel Carneiro and Marcos Bernstein by on an original idea by
Salles.
It's one of those tear jerker films that has a meaningful ending and its
heart warming story of a woman who never married but has deep maternal
instincts is one that can and should be appreciated by anyone who hates
reading subtitles.  This film makes you forget that you're reading them
and makes you feel like you're reading the character's emotions.
Extraordinary!
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm
For browsers without java enhancement or if you experience problems with
the above link, go to:
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/mainpage.htm

Author
Bob Bloom
 A former teacher, she now earns her living writing letters for those who
cannot write.
 She works at a table at Rio de Janeiro's Central Station, where she judges
those for whom she writes.
 Sometimes she mails their letters, other times she merely tears them up
and throws them away.
 Dora has a disdain for people and is not above taking advantage of them.
 But all this changes for Dora when through circumstances she is forced to
be responsible for Josue, a young boy whose mother is killed in the street
in front of the station.
 This is the simple set up for Central Station, a heart-tugging story from
Brazil.
 Dora (Academy Award-nominee Fernanda Montenegro) at first is reluctant to
befriend Josue (Vinicius De Oliveira).
 She even tries to profit from his misfortune by selling him to a sleazy
"adoption agency," but relents and instead determines to take the child to
his father in the remote northeast section of Brazil.
 Central Station is more of a character study than a plot-driven movie. It
derives its impetus from the growing relationship between its two
characters as they travel by bus and trucks to reach their frontier
destination.
 And even though you have some sense where the film is headed, the journey
remains a pleasant one.
 For Central Station totally involves you in its characters.
 Montenegro's performance is masterful. She takes what could have been a
cliched character and gives her life and depth. She shows the conflict
within this woman who cannot even explain to herself why she is slowly
becoming a surrogate mother for a young boy whom she at first detested.
 The growing love between the woman and the child develops slowly through
argument, tears and humor.
 As Josue, young De Oliveira is a natural, seemingly unaffected by the camera.
 What truly makes Central Station a memorable experience is its heart. It
proves that there is goodness in even the most displaced and lost among us,
even if they themselves do not know it is there.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net.
Carol Bloom of Bloom Ink Publishing Professionals
3312 Indian Rock Lane  West Lafayette, IN 47906-1203
765-497-9320   fax 765-497-3112  cbloom@iquest.net
Committed to Lifelong Learning through Effective Communication 

Author
Scott Renshaw
CENTRAL STATION (CENTRAL DO BRASIL)
(Sony Classics)
Starring:  Fernanda Montenegro, Vinicius de Oliveira.
Screenplay:  Joao Emanuel Carneiro and Marcos Bernstein.
Producer:  Arthur Cohn.
Director:  Walter Salles.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  114 min.
In Portuguese with English subtitles.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Some day soon, I'm going to put together a list of the most over-used
premises in film history, the ones which describe the entire story arc in
a single sentence.  It will include such classics as "Mismatched Buddy
Cops Gradually Become Friends While Blowing a City to Shrapnel" (recently
seen in RUSH HOUR), "Workaholic Learns Through Tragedy and/or Wacky
Misadventures to Appreciate His/Her Family" (recently seen in ONE TRUE
THING).  To be fair, and to recognize that certain plots become canonical
for valid thematic reasons, I'll even try to note examples of each that
managed to add a spark of originality.
     CENTRAL STATION takes one marvelously constructed character and uses
her to put just enough of a twist on one of those well-known 
single-sentence stories:  "Jaded Older Character Learns Important Lessons
When Forced to Care for a Child."  The jaded older character is Dora
Teixera (Fernanda Montenegro), a retired schoolteacher who supplements her
meager income by writing letters for the many illiterate individuals who
pass through Rio de Janeiro's train depot.  One of Dora's customers is a
woman who writes to the absentee father of her 9-year-old son Josue
(Vinicius de Oliveira).  When the woman is hit by a bus, leaving Josue a
homeless orphan, Dora's first instinct is to sell him to an adoption
broker.  Instead, she decides to deliver both the letter and the boy in
person, setting off with Josue on a difficult journey to Brazil's rural
northeast.
     Such stories usually begin with characters that are crusty but
identifiably loveable, making the journey little more than a waiting game
until the resident adorable tyke trims off the crust.  Dora, on the other
hand, is a fairly grim piece of work.  Our initial image of her as a
kindly educated woman helping out the pobrecitos gives way to an image of
bitterness and cynicism, as we see her arbitrarily shred or hide away
letters she decides are not worth sending.  Fernanda Montenegro uses her
wonderfully weathered face to create Dora as a grandmotherly con artist,
and not the kind of devilishly adorable con artist justified in most films
by the fact that he or she steals Robin Hood-like from the rich.  Dora
steals from the poor because she feels contempt for them and for the 
foolish optimism they express in their letters and their prayers.
     What we gradually learn is that Dora's contempt is really a
manifestation of her own insecurities, her inability to maintain
relationships, and her issues with the father who abandoned her as a
child.  It's eventually obvious that CENTRAL STATION is about Dora's quest
for her own father more than it is about her quest for Josue's father, but
that's exactly what gives the familiar story more thematic weight.  The
cute bonding moments between Dora and Josue are few and far between,
allowing director Walter Salles to concentrate on the fact that the
journey changes Dora more than the child does.  Montenegro's performance
brings an edge even to moments like her clumsy attempts to show affection
to a truck driver (Othon Bastos).  For most of the film, her anti-social
personality feels completely genuine, not in the least like a device for
an uplifting conclusion.
     Inevitably, though, CENTRAL STATION has got to reach its uplifting
conclusion.  Dora will see a light of optimism, both for herself and for
Josue, and move on to live a more fulfilled life.  And it is only when
that happens that CENTRAL STATION feels false, even though the change is
necessary in order for it to be dramatically satisfying.  Montenegro is a
deft enough actress to limit the burden of schmaltz, but she can't change
the fact that the script tells her that, by God, she's going to learn
Important Lessons.  CENTRAL STATION is still a good film, satisfying for 
three-quarters of its length as a character study.  There's just no way
it can escape completely the conventions of its single-sentence story.

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
Dora (Fernanda Montenegro) sits behind a make-shift desk at Rio+s major
train station.  She, in her colorful demeanor, offers a service that is
unheard of in the States.  She writes letters for the illiterate, who
pass through, to try to find lost relatives, find love, or search after
lost debts.
She+s quirky, she+s elderly, she+s caring.  Totally trustworthy, right?
Not a chance.  Once home, she never sends these letters, saving money on
postage, and relishing in the drama contained therein with her neighbor
Irene (Marília Pęra).
One of the letters is sent by a young mother with her nine-year old son,
looking for their father.  Shortly thereafter, she gets hit by a bus,
and the son is orphaned.  Days go by, and the boy, named Josué, roams
around the station, hungry, desperate, and somewhat clueless to his
predictament.
Through a series of circumstances too precious to elaborate upon, Dora
somehow takes a responsibility in trying to find Josué+s father.  This
means leaving the security of Rio, traveling to the outskirts of Brazil,
where unpaved roads, religious devotees and the poverty-stricken become
commonplace.
Films like this remind me as to what I enjoy about some foreign films.
It is an opportunity for me to get a fresh breath in another part of the
world, so distant from my own.  It does so entertainingly, and so
heart-wrenchingly.  And yet, it+s backdrop is merely that.  The focus is
on the minute transformation of Dora, of how she learns to love this
little kid, without being cloying or sentimental.
The most interesting backdrop is the amount of religious dedication is
in the film.  Dora being an amoral scam-artist, could care less about
the amount of bickering between the candle-lighting of the Catholics
versus the bumper-sticker mentality of the Evangelicals.  But neither
side is trivialized.  She even begins to develop an affection for a
non-drinking Evangelical, who sees the problems with Dora, if not
initially.
Fernanda Montenegro surprisingly got an Oscar nomination for this very
delicate performance, but the true marvel is that of Vinicius de
Oliveira, who plays Josué.  He, like the discoveries of Jérémie Renier
(_La Promesse_) and Giorgio Cantarini (_Life is Beautiful_), prove that
the true acting discoveries may be outside of the United States.  He is
a natural, and never once grating.  Send a memo to Jonathan Taylor
Thomas.

Author
Louis Proyect
To help make ends meet, retired schoolteacher Dora (Fernanda
Montenegro) works as a letter-writer in Rio de Janeiro's Central
Station. Illiterate working people approach her table and dictate
letters to lovers and family members, which she transcribes. The irony
is that Dora's life is empty of such human relationships.
Each night she returns to her apartment and receives visits from her
next door neighbor Irene (Marilia Pęra), who is also alone in the
world. Dora spills out her bitterness at humanity, including the
clients who have put their trust in her. She goes through their
letters with Irene and makes fun of the human feelings contained in
them. Half go directly into the garbage can, because she thinks they
are not worth posting. The other half end up in a desk drawer, to be
posted when she gets around to it. While she picks apart the poor
folks whom she writes for, Irene, a few years younger and less bitter,
pleads for clemency while usually being overridden.
One day she is approached by Ana (Sôia Lira) and her nine-year old son
Josué (Vincius De Oliveira). She wants to send the boy up to the
remote northeast area of Brazil to meet his father for the first time.
She dictates the letter to Dora and gives her a photo of the boy to
send to the father along with the letter, so he will be able to
recognize him when he arrives. Dora takes the letter back to her
apartment and sticks it in her desk drawer.
The next day Ana is run down by a bus in front of the train station.
The homeless Josué has no place to go and begins spending his days and
nights in Central Station. Every so often, Dora--despite
herself--offers him a kind word or a sandwich. There is a nationwide
epidemic of homeless children in Brazil, a problem that was treated
cinematically in "Pixote." Many of these children turn to crime in
order to survive and their prospects for survival are bleak. "Central
Station" shows a teenager being gunned down on the railroad tracks by
a cop for the crime of stealing a walkman.
In a mixture of opportunism and pity, Dora takes Josué to an adoption
broker. She receives a thousand dollars and is assured that he will be
sent to a "good family" in the United States. She buys a new Sony TV
with her commission and shows it off to Irene. When she explains how
she got the money, Irene screams at her. Nobody will adopt a
nine-year-old. They will kill him and sell the organs on the open
market. Dora, who still has a tinge of affection for the boy, decides
to rescue him from the broker and personally take him to his father.
Thus begins a remarkable journey that is unlike any I have ever seen
in a film. It is a "road movie" that simultaneously takes the bitter
old woman and the child deep into Brazil's countryside, and into the
recesses of their own hearts. Through a series of mishaps, the two
find the journey much more daunting than they first expected. They
learn to rely on each other's emotional support and street smarts. In
the process, he forgives her for selling him to the broker, while she
begins to experience love for another human being for the first time
in her adult life.
What gives their odyssey additional power from a cinematic standpoint
is the on-location filming in the roadside cafes, bodegas and small
towns in Brazil's dry and mountainous northeast. The characters whom
we meet in these scenes appear to be ordinary Brazilians from the
area, whose faces are much more beautiful and appropriate to the
action than any professional actors' could be.
The casting of Dora is critical to the success of the film. In the
production notes, Director Walter Salles describes 67 year old
Fernanda Montenegro as Brazil's Gena Rowlands or Giulietta Masina. She
is an enormously intelligent actress who has starred in the leftist
film "They Don't Wear Black Tie." The choice of Marilia Pęra is also
interesting since she played the prostitute who ran with the gang of
child outlaws in "Pixote." Vincius De Oliveira was a shoeshine boy
whom Walter Salles discovered outside a small airport in downtown Rio
de Janeiro. He says, "Because it was raining and he didn't have any
clients at the moment, he asked me to help him buy a sandwich. He told
me that once I returned from the city of Sao Paulo that afternoon, he
would pay me back." In other words, the shoeshine boy who is cast as
Josué really is a Josué.
"Central Station" hearkens back to some of the greatest films of
Italian neo-realism like "The Bicycle Thief." It will also remind you
of the films of Satyajit Ray, whose affection for common folk did not
preclude a critical view of their foibles. The difference between
"Central Station" and the garbage coming out of Hollywood each week
lies in the social and economic differences between Brazil and the
United States. Countries that are living on the edge, like Ray's
India, De Sica's postwar Italy or Brazil today can foster art that
gets closer to the human condition. The desperation borne out of
economic and social dislocation can work on the sensitivity of the
sympathetic novelist or film-maker and great art often emerges.
While "Central Station" does not offer any pat answers to Brazil's
problems, there is no doubt that the obstacles that economic hardship
puts before the disadvantaged appall Walter Salles. Dora is not some
kind of political activist. Indeed, her cynicism would make her an
unlikely candidate. Instead she articulates the hopes of ordinary
Brazilians for a society in which love and happiness is the rule. We
are reminded of the title of Ken Silverstein's study of the Workers
Party: "Without Fear of Being Happy."
Yesterday, somebody sent me some email trying to figure out where I
was going with my articles on Marxism and indigenism. I tried to
explain that it was part of a life-long struggle to redefine a
socialism on the basis of freedom from want, in an environment of
human solidarity. Like the characters in "Central Station," the great
majority of the human race is looking for love and companionship on a
personal and communal basis, while not having to worry about where the
next meal is coming from. Nearly everything else is extraneous.
The director Walter Salles understands this completely. In explaining
the critical acclaim the film has received, he says:
"...I think the question of the search is very important in the film.
We're talking about the woman who searches for her lost feelings and a
boy who searches for his father. Since the Greeks, I think we've
always been concerned with the idea of getting back to the place where
we come from--to try to understand who we are. This is the boy's
plight, but what the two of them discover is not only the family at
the end of the film, but the importance of companionship, friendship
and understanding.
"In a way, these values are not really appreciated in today's very
competitive society, where efficiency is everything. These questions
of solidarity or friendship or everything that's important in the film
are not rated in the Stock Exchange. This might also be one of the
clues to why people respond to the film in such an emotional way. It
talks about things that are not perceived as important but are
extremely important for our survival."
For Marxist discussion: www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html
