Title
Review for Normal Life (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Julian Lim
With the opening scene of a young couple in a van pulling up, loading
their guns, kissing each other and uttering what sounds like "Rock and
Roll!" (actually, it's "lock and load"), you can't help thinking
Tarantino.  And of course with its storyline of a crazy girl and boy in
love who turn to violent bank robbery, the film unapologetically takes
its place alongside all those other films from BONNIE & CLYDE to
NATURAL BORN KILLERS.   But if most of those movies have their roots in
pulp fiction, exploring a modern myth of the doomed rebels on the run,
NORMAL LIFE takes a much more psychologically realistic look at the
phenomenon.  "Inspired by true events" -- we've heard that one before,
and yet in no other tale of violent couples has it seemed so solidly
demonstrated ... or so strangely poignant.  For this is a story of real
people whose lives take on a steadily unreal quality, who in their
search for a normal life find themselves increasingly unhinged.
Beginning with their final arrest, the film goes back to trace the
relationship between Chris (Luke Perry), a policeman, and Pam (Ashley
Judd), a factory worker. They fall in love and marry, but Pam's
increasingly erratic behaviour (going on spending sprees, slashing
herself with a knife after an argument) begin to trouble the solid and
stable Chris.  When Chris gets sacked, they find themselves heavily in
debt and near breaking up.  Then, Chris begins to rob banks ...
Luke Perry accomplishes the not-inconsiderable feat of making us nearly
forget that he was ever in Beverly Hills 90210 or BUFFY THE VAMPIRE
SLAYER.  Moustached, with a tough paternal look and yet a voice and
eyes that suggest sadness verging on exasperation, he is perfectly cast
as the long-suffering husband. (It's another of John McNaughton's coups
of casting-against-type, after transforming Robert de Niro into nerd
and Bill Murray into gangster in MAD DOG AND GLORY).
But it is the character of Pam who commands centrestage, and Ashley
Judd rises to the challenge with great alternating currents of ferocity
and tenderness, making Pam into a fascinating yet often infuriating
person.  If the performance falls short of greatness, however, it is
perhaps because the role of the Mad Woman has been done so often before
it is virtually a staple of cinema, whether it's in BETTY BLUE, TOM &
VIV or GEORGIA.  As in those movies, there's the danger that the
performance seems mannered, a collection of screwy tics and tantrums
designed for the Oscar presentation piece.  Judd doesn't entirely avoid
this pitfall, but Pam's 'craziness' is best and most movingly presented
in counterpoint to the more 'normal' Chris.  When Pam reacts to her
father-in-law's death by showing up at the funeral in rollerblades and
blaring headphones, Chris' face is the picture of pained restraint.
Of course, it's the question of what is 'normal' that is asked in
NORMAL LIFE.  McNaughton constantly offers up the ironies of the
aspirations for the average domestic life and its kinship with
insanity.  It is the rational Chris that loves guns ("Shooting is about
precision, control") and the 'crazy' Pam that loves astronomy and
yearns for a dog (who is then called Chaos -- "Chaos and you and me
...  we're a real family", she notes wryly).  It is Chris' methodical
mind and his knowledge of police procedure that allows him to be such a
successful bank robber (his well-planned disguise as a bearded, roaring
man of terror is another piece of Method in madness).   In the carpark
where he sets out for his first robbery, a huge sign on a shopping mall
stands out in the background :"BUY-MORE" -- the perfectly respectable
consumption-crazy American dream that has driven Pam to her extravagant
purchases, and both of them into desperate situations.
It's not a perfect film. Some of the dialogue is a touch too banal
(perhaps intentionally?).  The use of the punk hardcore soundtrack in
Pam's crazed scenes comes rather too close to making emotional
disturbance seem glamourous and sexy an image which only detracts from
the rest of the film.  Indeed, as in McNaughton's seminal film HENRY :
PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER, it is the avoidance of glamour or
sensationalism, the denial of some of the standard thrills of the
outlaw film genre, that gives this determinedly unflashy, moving film
its great strengths.
McNaughton has filmed this story with a quiet, coolly 'realistic'
method that works far better than any NBK theatrics at unsettling the
viewer.  The suburbs, with their miles of white-fenced houses and
identikit malls, take on a sense of claustrophobic blankness. In its
very different way, this makes for as haunting a backdrop as the wide
open spaces in Terence Malick's BADLANDS.  While Pam shares the
yearnings of Malick's heroes to escape from ordinary life, Chris takes
up crime precisely so that they can lead a 'normal life' - their little
house on the suburbs is financed by his violent robberies.  But these
are dreams defined by, constrained by, and even doomed by, the
limitations of the 'normal', conventional world.  Pam's final scene
takes place at the edge of the suburbs, where wild bushes grow --
symbolically the frontier, the outer limits of her society, but also
quite literally the end of the road, where there is nowhere left to go
but to the final tragic denouement.
THE FLYING INKPOT's rating system:
 * Wait for the video.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
___________________________________
This review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT
.">http://bizdir.com.sg/inkpot/>. We're inkier! We're pottier! We're
wordy! All flying bricks welcome.  Leave your penguin at the door.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Normal Life (1996) 1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Ashley Judd, Luke Perry. Written
by: Peg Haller and Bob Schneider. Directed by: John McNaughton. Running
Time: 104 minutes.
With "Normal Life", Ashley Judd has now joined Debra Eisenstadt of "Oleanna"
and Robin Wright of "Forrest Gump" as playing one of the most evil,
despicable, frustratingly ridiculous and unsympathetic female characters in
movie history. This is not a good accomplishment.
"Normal Life" is loosely based on true events. Hard to believe, but
something vaguely similar to this actually happened somewhere in the history
of mankind. Luke Perry stars as a rookie police officer who meets up with
drug and alcohol addicted Ashley Judd in a bar. Somehow, the two fall in
love and eventually get married. During this time, Perry starts to realize
that the woman he loves is completely out of her mind. How do we know she's
insane? Oh, she hides from her in-laws, argues completely irrational points
with her husband, mutilates her body, plays russian roulette for kicks, and
shows up to her father-in-law's funeral wearing roller skates.
What does Perry do to help the situation? Does he get her some counseling?
Does he leave her? No. She has one day of rehab. That's it. Meanwhile, Perry
is having confrontations with the police force because he won't go along
with certain lies another officer is telling. Because Perry is so moralistic
and ethical, he quits his job rather than betray his principles.
The couple was already experiencing financial difficulties, but now things
get worse. Perry takes on odd jobs to make ends meet, and Judd just keeps
spending more and more money on junk. Perry, completely ethical, ca

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Ashley Judd, Luke Perry
Director: John McNaughton
Producers: Richard Maynard and John Saviano
Screenplay: Peg Haller and Bob Schneider
Cinematography: Jean de Segonzac
Music: Robert McNaughton and Ken Hale
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
     During the Fall of 1996, while channel surfing late one night, I 
recall stopping on HBO when I recognized Ashley Judd.  I put down the 
remote control and tried to figure out what the film was.  The more I 
watched, the more intrigued I became.  This wasn't the usual late-night, 
direct-to-cable fare.  It was a motion picture of some intelligence and 
insight.  I didn't find out its name, NORMAL LIFE, until it was over.  
And it wasn't until weeks later, when it received a blink-and-you'll-
miss-it run in about a half-dozen markets, that I learned the story 
behind the movie.
     For some reason which even now is unclear, Fine Line Features, 
NORMAL LIFE's distributor, elected not to release the film in theaters, 
opting instead for a run on HBO.  This infuriated director John 
McNaughton (HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER), who claimed that he 
never would have directed the movie had he been aware of Fine Line's 
intentions.  So, to placate him, the company gave the film a very 
limited theatrical release.  Without publicity or advertising, it was 
dead-on-arrival, and was pulled after one week.  Few movie-goers had an 
opportunity to see it.  Now, NORMAL LIFE is out on both video cassette 
and laser disc, and its availability should generate a wider audience.
     NORMAL LIFE is a character study loosely based on a true-life crime 
spree that occurred in Chicago's western suburbs.  Since I don't live in 
or around Chicago, and don't remember any headlines about the situation, 
I can't say how closely NORMAL LIFE sticks to the facts.  Ultimately, it 
doesn't really matter.  NORMAL LIFE is compelling because of the 
characters and their twisted, co-dependent relationship, not because it 
falls into the often-sordid category of having its narrative built 
around a real criminal case.
     Those characters are the husband-and-wife team of Chris and Pam 
Anderson (Luke Perry and Ashley Judd), and NORMAL LIFE tells their story 
over a two year period.  The two meet in a bar one night when Pam has a 
fight with her boyfriend and cuts her hand on a broken glass.  Chris 
comes to the rescue, bandages the wound, then asks her to dance.  For 
their first "official" date, they go to a shooting range, where Chris, a 
police officer, teaches Pam how to fire a gun.  Soon thereafter, they 
are married, and that's when the trouble begins.
     Despite having the good looks of a cheerleader, Pam is not the 
perfect wife.  Sexually, she's frigid; emotionally, she's unstable.  Her 
self-destructive tendencies cause her to trash the apartment she shares 
with Chris, play Russian roulette, and, eventually, threaten to kill 
herself.  Yet, through all of this, her husband sticks by her, never 
flagging in his support.  There's something about Pam that holds him in 
thrall.  He's determined to be her savior, no matter what the cost.
     Chris loses his job and Pam's profligate spending traps the couple 
in an ever-widening vortex of debt.  To save them, Chris robs a bank.  
Then another.  Then another.  It's easy for him -- he's good at it.  
Soon, he and Pam have paid off their creditors and moved into an upscale 
townhouse.  Then, by chance, Pam finds out about her husband's new 
source of income.  The idea excites her.  She joins him in a robbery 
and, afterwards, experiences her first-ever orgasm during sex.  But the 
pattern of self-destruction returns, and the resolution is inevitable.
     Have I given away too much of the plot?  Not really, since the 
film's non-linear chronology begins near the end, then flashes back to 
the beginning.  NORMAL LIFE isn't really about whether Pam and Chris get 
away with their crimes -- they don't, and that point is never in doubt.  
Rather, it's about how they relate to each other, and how Pam's manic-
depressive behavior destroys not only her own life, but Chris' as well.  
     Why would someone stay with a woman like this?  Watching Ashley 
Judd's wrenching, uninhibited portrayal of Pam, it's easy to understand 
the reasons.  Buried beneath the madness, there's a sweetness and 
vulnerability that cries out for protection and nurturing.  Chris is 
drawn to that like a moth to a flame, and the outcome is just as 
gruesome.  Luke Perry, giving the most convincing performance of his 
career to date, makes it clear how desperately, hopelessly smitten Chris 
is by his wild, troubled wife.
     I have watched NORMAL LIFE twice now (well, one and three-quarters 
times, to be precise), and I don't understand Fine Line's decision 
regarding the movie's distribution.  Maybe they felt it was too intense, 
but it's this intensity that draws the audience in.  Perry and 
especially Judd do amazing jobs and McNaughton once again proves that he 
is capable of presenting an unconventional, psychologically-true picture 
of criminal behavior.  By depicting the sham of "normality", NORMAL LIFE 
reminds us how fictitious and unattainable the "American dream" can be.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
