Title
Review for Da Taijian Li Lianying (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
The story of Tzu-hsi, the Dowager Empress of China, and her relationship
with Li Lianying, her lead eunuch.  A historical drama, filled with
palace intrigue and conflict.  Very well made, the film should appeal to
fans of historical Chinese films.
China/Hong Kong (English and German subtitles), color, 1991, 110 minutes.
Director/Writer: Tian Zhuangzhuang.
     The story is told through flashbacks, as the elderly Li Lianying
recounts his adventures as the lead eunuch to the Dowager Empress.  The
stories span a period of 40 years, and include various palace intrigues,
such as Li Lianying being accused of bribery and impersonating a Prince;
Li Lianying trying to get his niece married to the Emperor; and the
romance between the Emperor and his favorite consort, Pearl Blossom.
Also dramatized is the Empress fleeing the Forbidden City just before it
is captured by "foreign devils" (the British), and her later return to
power.
     Li Lianying and the Dowager Empress are frequently portrayed in
extremely unsympathetic terms.  In particular, Li Lianying is generally
considered to have been very evil.  This film presents them in a
slightly more sympathetic light.  Li Lianying is a complex character,
somewhat scheming and cunning but not openly evil.  The evil things that
he does are on the direct orders of the Dowager Empress.  The Dowager is
portrayed as a cunning, domineering and manipulative woman, but who can
be nice, at least to Li Lianying.  Much of the emphasis in the film is
on the relationship between Li Lianying and the Empress.
     The film is well-made; lavish sets were made and portions of the
film were actually made in the Forbidden City.  The photography is
excellent, and the story is well-written.  However, the film is rather
slow-moving, and this may bother some viewers.  Some knowledge of
Chinese history during the reign of the Dowager Empress will increase
your appreciation for the film, but it is not absolutely necessary.
     Because the film is somewhat slow-moving and on a topic of limited
interest, I would not recommend it to a general audience.  However, if
you are interested in Chinese history, or enjoy Chinese "historical
films", then you will probably find it worthwhile.
Print Source: Skai Film Production Ltd.; Flat B, 10/F, Kee Shing
Commercial Bldg.; 80, Kimberly Road; Kowloon, Hong Kong.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
