Title
Review for RKO 281 (1999) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
It is suitably ironic that Orson Welles was largely ignored by Hollywood after
"Citizen Kane" and "Touch of Evil" - they wanted no part of him. Now, Welles is
afforded more unauthorized biographies and film books than probably any other
director. His film noir classic "Touch of Evil" was recently restored to the
director's original specifications and editing strategies, forty years after
the fact. His reigning "Kane" won its place in the AFI list in 1998 as the
greatest American film ever made. His rejected screenplay for "The Cradle Will
Rock" has been made into a film by director Tim Robbins. Now we have the story
of Welles' s battle over "Citizen Kane" called "RKO 281," a supremely
entertaining film with ball-of-fire performances and authentic period detail. 
This lush biography stars the well-cast Liev Schreiber as the 25-year-old boy
wonder who took Broadway by storm, and conquered the airwaves with his infamous
"War of the Worlds" broadcast. He is given the opportunity to make a film about
"War of the Worlds" but convinces a studio boss (Roy Scheider) to give him
support to make a film called "Citizen Kane." "Kane" is of course based on the
pioneering news tycoon William Randolph Hearst (grandly played by James
Cromwell), and once the insiders in Hollywood catch wind of this, all hell
breaks loose. "Kane" is of course Welles's first attempt to act and direct a
film, and this causes pressure for him and his crew, including telling his
cinematographer to make holes in the floorboards so he can get a real low-angle
shot! But once Hearst and his young wife (Melanie Griffith) hear that their
life story will be a Hollywood movie, he makes demands on all the studios to
burn all existing prints of the film. 
"RKO 281" maintains a tight focus on Welles and his battle over having complete
control over his project - this was of course his own downfall since he was
never afforded that control again in Hollywood. The film shows him to be a
genius and a manipulator, and there are the highs and lows of his relationship
with screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz (John Malkovich) - the controversy
existed about how much of Welles's input ended up in the screenplay. 
Schreiber is perfect for the role, and even looks a little bit like Welles -
his intense outbursts are particularly good. His relationship with Malkovich is
also well-presented, and through them we see that making a film, no matter how
passionate or personal it is, is an arduous chore - what collaborations aren't?
"RKO 281" has many extraordinarily shot sequences, such as Hearst's dinner
party or the behind-the-scenes filming of "Kane" - at one point, a camera falls
off a crane as it is tracking in for a close-up! I also like the moment when
Welles is inspired by Hearst's house or the puzzle pieces on the floor. If
nothing else, "RKO 281" could have been longer. There are no references to the
actors who worked on "Kane" (except for Joseph Cotten) - where's Ruth Warrick
or Agnes Moorehead or Ray Collins in all this? How about the specific lighting
design of "Kane" with all those memorable shafts of light? 
Minor carps overall, "RKO 281" is a splendid recreation of an era in Hollywood
not so different from today's - when big bucks and box-office revenues
accounted for more than artistic integrity. Thank God that Orson Welles proved
them wrong. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com 
