Title
Review for Velvet Goldmine (1998)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Velvet Goldmine (1998)
Ewan McGregor, Jonathan Rhys Meyers, Toni Collette, Christian Bale, Eddie 
Izzard, Emily Woof, Michael Feast, Janet McTeer, Maraid McKinley. Written 
by Todd Haynes, based on a story by Haynes and James Lyons. Directed by 
Todd Haynes 120 minutes.
Rated R, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Todd Haynes, acclaimed for his 1995 feature, "Safe," has pulled off quite 
a feat with "Velvet Goldmine." Incredibly, the writer-director manages to 
take the British glam-rock era, one of the most colorful, outrageous, 
fascinating periods in the history of contemporary music, and turn it 
into 120 minutes of unfocused, surrealistic crap. This overwrought 
mishmash of style without substance most closely resembles Ken Russell's 
film version of "Tommy," and it's just as annoying.
Essentially, "Velvet Goldmine" simply rips-off the story of David Bowie 
through his Ziggy Stardust days, with one crucial difference. Bowie was 
interesting and Brian Slade (Jonathan Rhys Meyers) is not. Bowie's 
breakthrough came in the '70s, when he pushed the prevailing hippie 
mentality into a more theatrical, androgynous zone. He achieved notoriety 
in England by dressing in a frock and trumpeting his bisexuality. Global 
success came when he adopted the persona of Ziggy Stardust, an orange-
haired alien without eyebrows or defined gender, slinking about the stage 
in feathered boas, inventive make-up and bizarre clothing. With his out-
of-date slang and cheesy sci-fi imagery, Bowie seemed less like a genuine 
rock singer and more like an actor playing one, but damned if he wasn't 
fun to watch. And it was easy to overlook his mannered, occassionally 
wince-inducing lyrical affectations, because the man wrote absolutely 
terrific songs.
During the Ziggy days, Bowie hit the publicity circuit with his look-a-
like wife, Angela, even as rumors circulated about him being spotted in 
the sack with Mick Jagger. When Johnny Carson asked Angela if she was 
concerned about all the girls chasing her husband, she cooed "Oh no, 
darling, it's the boys I have to worry about." Shortly before ditching 
the Ziggy persona for a white-suited soul identity, Bowie told reporters 
of his belief that, sooner or later, a rock singer would be assassinated 
onstage.
Haynes takes it from there. In his story, Brian Slade fakes his own 
onstage death, but is exposed as a fraud and falls from grace with fans. 
Ten years later, melancholy journalist Arthur Stuart (Christian Bale) is 
assigned a "whatever happened to" story, and sets out to discover the 
final fate of Brian Slade. The "Citizen Kane" framework, while 
pretentious, provides the only successful facet of the production, with 
Bale offering a strong performance as a former glam fan whose painful 
memories of trying to make the glitter scene are stirred by the 
investigation.
With subject matter like this, Todd Haynes should have been able to turn 
out one hell of a juicy film, but "Velvet Goldmine" never takes flight. 
Instead of delving into the psyches of the characters, Haynes trots out a 
series of tedious rock videos, tacked together with preening actors, 
elaborate fashion shows and periodic make-out scenes between the boys. 
Having a bad actor in the lead role doesn't help matters. As Brian Slade, 
Jonathan Rhys Meyers is woefully inadequate, projecting zero charisma as 
he pouts his way through the movie. Never for a moment do you believe 
this kid could orchestrate his own superstardom.
Ewan McGregor is better as Curt Wild, an American rocker who is the 
object of Slade's affections. Wild is supposed to be modeled after 
legendary punk-burnout and Bowie protégé Iggy Pop, though McGregor's 
performance is more reminiscent of Kurt Cobain than Iggy. Incidentally, 
this is at least the third film featuring McGregor waggling his cock 
around, making him eligible for the Harvey Keitel Penis Exposure Hall Of 
Fame. 
In a supporting role, Toni Collette does what she can as Mandy, Slade's 
wife. She makes little impression during the flashbacks, but has a 
certain Marianne Faithfull ravaged survivor quality in the latter-day 
interview scenes set in a dingy pub. As Brian Slade's manager, Eddie 
Izzard merely growls and struts. 
"Velvet Goldmine" is maddening because it takes material with great 
potential and utterly wastes it. The glam rock era was a heady time, with 
its sexual experimentation, blurred gender lines, grandiose theatrics and 
knock-out music. Instead of probing the minds behind the phenomena, Todd 
Haynes settles for a gauzy surface glance; a tarted-up tribute without 
any oomph. "Velvet Goldmine" is to glam rock what the "Beatlemania" stage 
show was to the Beatles; just a bunch of poseurs going through the 
motions. David Bowie refused to let Haynes use his name or any of his 
music for the movie. Good for him. Hopefully, Bowie will wait until a 
filmmaker comes along with the chops to really do justice to the dizzying 
saga of Ziggy Stardust. 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "We set out to change the world," laments Curt Wild (Ewan
McGregor) to New York Herald journalist Christian Bale
(Arthur Stuart), "and ended up changing only ourselves." 
"What's wrong with that?" the reporter responds
understandably.  "Nothing...if you don't look at the world."  At
that point, toward the conclusion of the strikingly colorful and
often surreal "Velvet Goldmine," cinematographer Maryse
Alberti (who has the most enviable job on the filmmaking
team) spins the camera to look at the seedy bar in which Bale
finds the wrecked, former rock star.  Staring back is a
defeated-looking band of losers surrounding by the bleak,
somber tones of the run-down establishment.  The date is
1984, and Todd Haynes--who wrote and directed the
panoramic meditation on the birth and death of a musical
era--portrays a civilization that has become an Orwellian bad
dream.  
   Using a Citizen-Kane format, Haynes deals with the
circumscribed number of years from 1969 to 1974 that
witnessed the phenomenon of glam rock, a London-based
sensation driven by the musicial artistry of personalities like
David Bowie and Iggy Pop.  His work captures the
atmosphere of the era in its days of consequence, lamenting
the passing of glam rock in far more colorful way than Whit
Stillman laid out the last days of disco in his own 1998 film.
   The story opens with the birth of Oscar Wilde in 1854, a
man who might have predicted during his lifetime that the
glittering age of rock would come to fruition.  In the season of
his youth he was asked by his teacher what he wanted to be.
Young Oscar knew even then that he was not destined to
become a truck driver or a physician like his classmates but
rather "a pop idol."  Wilde was said to have favored a society
that would kick conventionality in the butt, so it's no wonder
that Haynes chose to honor the memory of that great literary
figure by calling one of his two principals Curt Wild.  Wild,
together with glam-rock artist Brian Slade (Jonathan Rhys-
Meyers), are the stand-ins for Bowie, Iggy Pop and others
that made the early seventies one of the most exciting times
for a young person with the slightest sense of rhythm,
rebelliousness and optimism.
   Christian Bale is assigned by the editor of the New York
Herald to write a rock feature for a weekend edition of the
choosing him because Bale was a frequent member of the
glam-rock audience some ten years earlier.  He proceeds not
only to interview people who were close to Slade and Wild: he
envisages himself as an active, swinging participant in the
festivities-- in effect giving director Haynes the green light to
capture the atmosphere of the era as no filmmaker had done
before him.  (Strangely enough to this day there are no
definitive books about the period.)  We discover that the glam-
rock stars and their groupies had contempt for the music
favored by the hippies, indulging instead in extravagant
costumes and riotous makeup, while still gratifying themselves
with an excess of sex.  Bisexuality was not only tolerated; it
was the "in" thing to be, or at least to declare yourself to be. 
As Brian Slade announces that he's interested in the human
body--male or female it makes no difference--his wife Mandy
(Toni Collette) stands by him, feigning a smile, an American
who had become a London party girl and is determined to fit
into the mold of total liberation.
   As Haynes takes us through an almost predictable chain of
events--Slade is discovered by a promoter who is soon
displaced by the more media-savvy Jerry Divine (Eddie
Izzard), becomes obsessed and sexually involved with the
more flamboyant American Curt Wild (Ewan McGregor),
becomes involved with cocaine and, desiring ultimately to
drop out and renege on his contract, he falls victim of a false
assassination which is considered a publicity stunt and
disappears from the scene.  He leaves behind a broken-
spirited wife and a horde of disappointed fans.
   A movie about the nature of pop-star idol-worship,
reminiscence, and sentiment, "Velvet Goldmine" is stunningly
acted in an over-the-top fashion by the wonderful Ewan
McGregor as the more dashing Curt Wild, leading Jonathan
Rhys Meyers' performance as Slade to appear almost
restrained by contrast.  Haynes flashes back and forth from
1984 to 1974 as though to reinforce Brian's dictum that we all
have "freedom...freedom that you could allow yourself or not." 
    "Velvet Goldmine" is in a way the opposite of Haynes'
eccentric movie "Safe," about a woman who is so repressed
that she is virtually allergic to life itself, and seeks help in a
Western ashram presided over by a would-be guru.  Yet the
two films share the director's interest in extremes, in living on
the edge: "Safe" could be almost a caricature of modern,
antiseptic, contained society while "Velvet Goldmine" portrays
a world order of a wholly antithetical kind, the sort of orb that
Oscar Wilde would have imagined and loved.  "We were living
in a dream and it went away," bemoans Slade's wife, who is a
burnt-out case ten years after the end of this era.  While the
challenging "Velvet Goldmine" is not for every taste, the film--
which was the most discussed and anticipated offering at the
recent Cannes festival--is itself a dream.  See it before it goes
away.

Author
Pierce Dalton
 Velvet Goldmine works in two ways.  You can see it as either a tribute to glam
rock, or as satire.
 I saw it as both.  But, the results aren't that satisfactory.
 Set in flashbacks in the `70s, the film follows the life of legendary rocker
Brian Slade, who had himself "assassinated" as to get out of the business. 
When his fans find out it was a set-up, they go beserk and trash him.
 Told through the eyes, and memory of persons associated with Slade, of a
British reporter (Christian Bale), Velvet Goldmine reminded me of Boogie Nights
(1997).  They both feature fame, drugs, sex, careers that go down hill, and
lost love.  
 Not as good as Nights, Goldmine is a nice try at bringing back the memory of
glam rock.
 But, it just doesn't do the era justice.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Todd Haynes
Writer: Todd Haynes (story by James Lyons and Haynes)
Starring: Jonathan Rhys Meyers, Ewan McGregor, Toni Collette, Christian
Bale, Eddie Izzard, Emily Woof, Michael Feast
It may seem weird to begin a film about Glam Rock with a sequence that
includes a spaceship, a green ovular pin, and the birth of Oscar Wilde,
but if one really strains, they can see that perhaps maybe these
connections are not half off.  Wilde's philosophy was that everyone
should be true to their own human nature, and the result of his
following this philosophy was that he was imprisoned, loosing his family
and his career.  The Glam Rock movement in the early 70s in England had
a similar take and came to a similar demise.  The main difference was by
placing makeup on their face and acting out on their deepest fantasies
and inquiries about life (mostly dealing with androgony and sexuality),
they became less and less like themselves and more and more like
everyone else.  And that's why the movement seemed to end as soon as it
began.
It's been said that Todd Haynes' "Velvet Goldmine," the film that
chronicles what it was like to be a part of the movement, not only from
those who experienced it but by those who created it, steals a lot from
"Citizen Kane," and that's true.  In the film, a British journalist in
the 80s, Arthur Stuart (Christian Bale), is asked to go back and find
out what happened to 70s Glam Rock star Brian Slade, a fictitious rock
star, who faked his own death on stage, bringing the end not only to his
career but to the entire Glam Rock movement.  Structure-wise, this
totally steals from "Kane," not only from the set-up (he interviews
three people, and the story is a result of their flashbacks), but in
other things, like the beginning (death, then newsreel), and smaller
details, like the bitter ex-friend in a wheelchair and the bitter
ex-wife as a washed-up lounge singer, found in a bar after hours.
This is no "Kane," and it really doesn't aspire to be: it doesn't
attempt to be the deep outlook of something gone like "Kane" did, and it
doesn't really uncover anything poignant about humanity.  Instead, it
uses the flashbacks as a form of contrast between the magic that was the
Glam Rock era and the boredom that was life after Glam Rock for those
who were participants.  The 80s scenes are dry and deliriously
melancholy, equipped with a performance by Bale that is perhaps
appropriately dull and unengaging.
But the 70s scenes are engaging, though, not to mention addictively
campy.  They radiate with gorgeous cinematography that nicely
accentuates all the vibrant colors of the era, and a feel that's so
eerily lighthearted that when combined with the then-footage, they
become not only a symbol of decadence, but of times when everything
seemed so simple.  Instead of creating the world the way it was, Haynes
paints their own world as if it were a narcotic fairy tale: the Glam
Rock movement was full of so much freedom and liberation that after
you've experienced it, everything else seems so mundane.  There's no
outside world to speak of, secluding these people inside a protective
globe that will eventually crack.
Haynes focuses his story on the tale of Blade and the other fictitious
rock hero, Curt Wild, and their relationship that created, molded, and
then brought down the movement, reducing everyone else who contributed
to it as merely that - contributors.  Blade - played with reserve by the
pouty Jonathan Rhys Meyers - and Wild - played with anarchic wildness by
Ewan McGregor - are little more than thinly disguised recreations of
David Bowie and Iggy Pop, respectively, complete with the creation of a
Ziggy Stardust persona named Maxwell Demon and the confirmation that the
two rock stars may have very well not only have been one-time partners
in music, but also partners in bed.
Through discussions with Slade's ex-manager Cecil (Michael Feast),
ex-wife Mandy (Toni Collette, reinventing herself as an American blonde
dish who fakes a British accent when with Slade), and finally ex-partner
Wild, journalist Stuart begins to remember his own experiences in the
era, like his discovery of his rebelliousness cum conformity, including
the moment when he began questioning his own sexuality (when he opens up
his first Slade record, he finds a naked and green Slade lying on a
crimson blanket), and finally running away from home to be part of the
London scene, finally resulting in leading a boring job in America.
Haynes demonstrates that he's quite the visual auteur, molding scenes
that are like long heald breaths, such as a seemingly long sequence
juxtaposing a Slade/Wild concert of them performing a Brian Eno cover,
"Baby's on Fire," with scenes from a decadent drug party; and the film's
most wow-inspiring sequence, the first concert scene of Wild with his
band, the Ratttz, where McGregor lets loose so much anarchic steam that
his wild Iggy-esuqe movements (including stripping naked) and screams
that the film captures that perfect moment when one discovers a major
talent, and another (Slade) discovers his idle.  Even the brief music
videos, spoofs of Bowie's, have a rare visual flair that's pure camp,
and which would cause Ken Russell to drool.
The best sequence, though, may be the beginning, following the prelude,
a sequence which acts as the middle ground for both the actual being of
the movement and the post-movement era.  In it, Stuart and his mates are
going to the infamous Slade concert where he fakes his own death, where
he kills off his alter ego Maxwell Demon in what appears to be a real
assasination, which brought about the end of the era in one swift fake
bullet.  With Brian Eno's famous "Needle in the Camel's Eye" playing in
the background, the scene has a detached exhileration - the song doesn't
seem to be played in quite the same way the other songs are.  It has a
distance that's hard to put a finger on, and it seems to represent that
all this is coming to a quick and sad ending, and when one sees Slade in
the dressing room before the show, docked in a silver frock with wings
and blue hair, depressingly staring into the mirror, it comes off as a
none-too-obvious prophecy of the finale in the beginning of the film.
This movie's not so much about plot, but more about the way it is
presented, making this one of those films which is classified as being
"style over substance," a statement which prompts many critics to line
up for attack.  However, for the most part, the engaging part of this
film is not the story but rather the way in which Haynes creates this
world, by using his sets, costumes, cinematography, and especially the
music to play as characters in his film.  The music is especially
notable.  The soundtrack, which is wall to wall, consists of old school
Glam Rock tunes by the likes of Brian Eno, T-Rex, and Roxy Music, as
well as covers by Slade's band (with vocals by Thom Yorke, and
occasionally Rhys Meyers himself), and even newer music by Shudder to
Think that sounds uncannily Bowie-like.
The cast is rather impressive, but no one really walks away with the
film, and no performances are extremely good.  Although Eddie Izzard, as
Slade's manager (who challenges Slade's first manager to an
arm-wrestling match to see who gets control of his career) and Michael
Feast as the first and tragic manager come off greatly, and Collette and
McGregor have their moments, Rhys Meyers and Bale are noticably sub-par,
neither putting a lot of effort into their respective roles.  Some of it
is at fault with the actual construction of the film by Haynes.  Rhys
Meyers' Brian Slade remains merely a metaphor for the Glam Rock era,
dying when he turned into a retro-Garbo, resorting to a life of
Salinger-ism, and found in the mid-70s to be lying around, sniffing coke
off the ass of a party girl.  In fact, no one in this film is really
seen as a person, rather than just as a symbol or composite of a type
who thrived during the era.  Bale's character is an especially tough
sell: bitter and depressed by flashbacks to his young adulthood, he's
not an extremely personal character, and his cliched experiences (being
hounded by the record store guys for buying a record put out by a
"poof") never help us communicate with him.
Nevertheless, Rhys Meyers and McGregor have the excuses that their
characters are not really characters but rather the results of an era
that has left them, and others, bitter, part of which helps the film
work, since this is a major piece of eye candy.  At the prime of the
movie, they at least look the role of fashionable leaders - Slade with
his perpetually-changing, androgonys persona, and Wild with his topless
and unpredictable image, which clash and fuse into an unstable union.
Their story - of how Slade was so influenced by Wild that he adapted it
into a similar who-cares attitude crossed with camp - is engaging,
without the personal background.  The story of Stuart, though, is a
tougher sell because he's the everyman, and when you can't totally
identify with the everyman, your story's in slight trouble.
As a cultural rock piece, "Velvet Goldmine" is rather good, but it is
merely good.  It never totally takes off, although it has moments where
it absolutely flies, but then comes back down.  It's really nothing more
than a bunch of really great moments, surrounded by material that could
really be much better.  The beginning is captivating but slow, the
middle is fantastic, and the ending is not only shallow but worse than
that, it drags (the final half hour not only does it not bring the story
to any real conclusion, it could probably stop at any point).  And did
anyone really figure out what the mystery is that Arthur unearths?  It
almost seems like there was no point in the entire investigation other
than to unearth the past, which is commendable but not totally so.
Still, it does what the Oliver Stone pic "The Doors" didn't do right,
becoming very insightful to what happened, using the visual style to hit
most of the right notes of contrast between what made the era so great
to those who lived during it and why after living through such an era
that everything else seems half-assed (I suppose the message is: "Live
life, but after you've lived it, what else is the point when you'll be
forced to live with regretful memories?").  The really superb
achievement of this film is that during its flashbacks, it successfully
creates for the audience what it must have felt like to be in that era,
but with the added perk of knowing the result of all that goes down.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The pieces are familiar, but they don't quite fit together.  A
reporter tries to uncover the secrets behind a mysterious celebrity,
interviewing his ex-wife at a night club.  Extended, surrealistic,
dialogue-free musical interludes are used to advance character and set
tone.  Campy dialogue, gaudy costumes and ambiguous sexuality flourish.
Speculative romantic connections are established between roman-a-clef
versions of pop music stars, accompanied by effectively pseudo-period new
songs.  It's CITIZEN KANE meets PINK FLOYD THE WALL, THE ROCKY HORROR
PICTURE SHOW meets GRACE OF MY HEART.  And that's saying nothing of the
suggestion that Oscar Wilde, the father of flamboyance, was an alien
progeny.
     Welcome to the evocative, provocative world of writer/director Todd
Haynes, the man who used Barbie dolls to tell the story of Karen Carpenter
in the little-seen underground film SUPERSTAR, and who fashioned a
sublime, complex cautionary tale about environmental and psychological
collapse in SAFE.  In VELVET GOLDMINE, a fictionalized account of the
early 70s glam rock scene, Haynes takes a somewhat appropriate style over
substance approach.  The center of the story is the rise and fall of Ziggy
Stardust...I mean, Brian Slade (Jonathan Rhys Meyers), an androgynous
music sensation who created a musical alter-ego called Maxwell Demon and
bears no resemblance to any real music stars, living or David...I mean
dead.  Along the way Slade meets Curt Wild (Ewan McGregor), an American
proto-punk whose onstage theatrics influence Slade to transform from
singer to full-fledged performance artist.
     The relationship between Slade and Wild -- actually a romantic
triangle including Slade's wife Mandy (Toni Collette) -- is only one piece
of the collage of decadence Haynes patches together.  VELVET GOLDMINE is
less a narrative than it is a long-form music video, intriguing images 
full of manufactured outrageousness (including the bizarre Oscar Wilde
prologue).  As such, it certainly re-creates its era effectively.  The
music, the mood and the theatricality are all pure glam; Rhys Meyers looks
perfectly the part as pop creation already beginning to eat itself.  But
Haynes piles stylish surface on top of stylish surface in VELVET GOLDMINE
until it never quite gets at the heart of anything -- not the artists, not
the appeal of glam, not even whether the scene was about social change or
filthy lucre.  
     It certainly comes awfully close on occasion.  More compelling than
the actual story of Brian Slade is the film's framing story, which finds
reporter Arthur Stewart (Christian Bale) trying to track down Slade in
1984, ten years after a stunt in which Slade staged his own mid-concert
assassination.  It turns out that Arthur was in attendance at that
concert, and that Slade and Wild were key figures in his youth.  In one
wonderfully cross-cut sequence, Arthur's sexual awakening is connected to
the sexual excesses of Slade's entourage, suggesting that even in their
self-absorption the glam rockers -- often tormented as children for their
sexual individuality -- succeeded at expanding boundaries for other youth.
Yet even this storyline spins into an absurd, pointless conspiracy-mystery
which Arthur could have put together only by actually viewing footage from
the film we're watching.
     That's the kind of infatuation with his own film-making that Haynes
displays in VELVET GOLDMINE.  Because it's always visually engrossing, it
keeps holding out the hope that it's going somewhere substantial.
Instead, it offers the cinematic equivalent of hip-hop sampling, turning
into a montage of visual and musical cues from other pieces of popular
cinema; Haynes even cribs from SUPERSTAR with a romantic scene between two
dolls.  If glam was somehow about the fine line between profound and
shallow, Haynes has hit the mark dead on.  This is one deliberately
confounding spectacle.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Velvet_Goldmine_ (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
After the disco debacle that was _54_, early signs seemed to indicate that
Miramax was about to commit another cinematic crime against a 1970s music
movement, glam rock, with Todd Haynes's _Velvet_Goldmine_.  The air of
anticipation surrounding it became something decidedly mixed once the film
premiered at Cannes, leaving audiences either hot or cold and garnering the
prize for "Best Artistic Contribution"--which sounded like a (pardon my
brusqueness) bullshit consolation award if I ever heard one.  But after
seeing the film, the Cannes award doesn't seem so bogus after all;
_Velvet_Goldmine_ is a true feast for the senses, a strange but ceaselessly
fascinating barrage of music and imagery.  The problem is, that's all it
is--words, pictures, and sound, with nothing in the center to hold it all
together.
For those of you unfamiliar with it, glam rock was a Brit-centered '70s
music movement, which, ironically enough, had just about nothing to do with
music itself.  Unlike disco, there is no distinct sound to glam rock; the
term was more a description of an attitude and a mode of dress: flashy
costumes, high platform heels, glitter makeup, and a general look of
androgyny--with the ambiguous sexuality to match; in short, sort of a
"flamboyant bisexual chic."
Unlike _54_, which didn't seem to have a clue as to what disco was,
_Velvet_Goldmine_ nails the glam rock milieu.  Haynes revels in all its
gaudy, garish glory, and not just by showcasing a lot of elaborately campy,
vampy musical performances by his central character, fictional glam rock
pioneer Brian Slade (Jonathan Rhys Meyers, who does his own singing).  The
air of bold excess extends to the equally glittery visual style created by
Haynes, cinematographer Maryse Alberti, and editor James Lyons, which
employs quick edits, dreamlike imagery, and an appropriate air of
surrealism--after all, it was a time of almost surreal sexual freedom,
openness, and self-indulgence.  (One scene has Haynes reverting to his old
_Superstar:_The_Karen_Carpenter_Story_ tricks, staging one scene entirely
with dolls.)
Haynes has an obvious affection for the era, and perhaps it is that
passion for the glamour that distracted him from coming up with a
compelling story.  _Velvet_Goldmine_ traces the rise and fall of Brian,
whose life and mysterious disappearance is investigated in 1984 by reporter
Arthur Stuart (Christian Bale), who has tried to live down his days as a
glam rock groupie.  Ironically, though, the more Arthur and, in turn, the
audience learns more about Slade, the more it becomes clear that,
underneath all the makeup and sequins, he's not a very interesting
personality--that is, if he even has one.  He sings and dresses up, but it
is never clearly defined who he exactly is.  Taking much more vivid shape
are the people in his life, such as American glam rocker Curt Wild (Ewan
McGregor, also providing his own vocals), with whom Brian has a sordid
sexual relationship; Brian's greedy manager Jerry Devine (Eddie Izzard);
and especially Brian's bitter American, Brit-wannabe wife Mandy (Toni
Collette, in the film's best performance).  Another writing misstep is the
clunky, forced way Haynes directly ties Arthur's past to Brian's; it would
have been less contrived if Arthur were simply a fan on the fringes.
Haynes does achieve what he sets out to do with _Velvet_Goldmine_, which,
according to the press notes, is to make "a valentine to the sounds and
images that erupted in and around London in the early 1970s."  But he
should have also thought to make something more than an affectionate
valentine--in other words, a fully realized and developed film.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Writer and director Todd Haynes's VELVET GOLDMINE is a pseudo-
documentary about Brian Slade (Jonathan Rhys-Meyers), a fictional rock
superstar.  Full of marvelously creative and colorful images and
energetic music, the movie represents the extended rock video approach
to filmmaking.  The images are casually and confusingly assembled into a
musical montage a la MTV.
Attempting to craft a fresh approach, the movie starts surrealistically
with aliens in a flying saucer dropping an orphan on the world's
doorstep.  That orphan will become Oscar Wilde, and the story implies a
link between him and Brian Slade a hundred years later.  After this
fairy tale is sprinkled on, the story quickly shakes off the pixie dust
and moves back into a more traditional storyline.
Brian Slade, in an apparent publicity stunt in 1974 while at the height
of his popularity, fakes an assassination attempt on his life.  This
causes his career to rapidly evaporate as his fans abandon him.
The movie is set 10 years later as a British journalist at an American
newspaper is asked to look into the incident.  The movie then skips back
in time again to examine Brian's life.
Brian is an androgynous, British singer, whose wife Mandy (Toni
Collette) talks about their marriage.  Brian casually flaunts his
bisexuality at one of his press conferences, claiming that "everybody
know that most people are bisexual."  The movie makes much of his
bisexuality, with orgies of groupies being common.
One day, Brian meets his idol, American rocker Curt Wild (Ewan
McGregor), and Brian is smitten.  A complete opposite, Curt exudes raw
masculinity and likes nothing better than taking off his clothes on
stage to shock his fans.  Curt wears tight-fitting jeans without a
shirt, whereas the effeminate Brian favors long, flowing gowns and
bright, psychedelic colors.  They both share a bisexual and promiscuous
lifestyle.
The movie, which periodically takes off in search of meaning, explains
that Curt had lived through a cruel childhood.  As a youngster, he was
given electroshock therapy when he was caught "servicing" his brother.
The film periodically develops pretentious streaks as it attempts to
find meaning in its subjects.  "It doesn't matter what a man does with
his life," Brian's second promoter tells his first.  "What matters is
the legend that grows up around him."  The implication is that morals
are unimportant if his star can develop sufficient fame.  Certainly, by
that measure Brian is a huge success in life.
The energetic film is full of good music, even Mahler's 6th makes
several appearances, but comes to a grinding halt in the last half hour
as it decides to get serious.
Only as a colorful rock video does the film succeed.  The dialog and the
storyline are merely distractions.  Even with its limitations as a
motion picture, at least VELVET GOLDMINE is exceedingly picturesque.
VELVET GOLDMINE runs 2:00.  It is rated R for strong sexual content,
nudity, profanity and drug usage and would be unacceptable for most
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW: Velvet Goldmine
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
Cast: Jonathan Rhys Meyers, Ewan McGregor, Christian Bale, Toni
Collette, Eddie Izzard, Emily Woof, Michael Feast
Director: Todd Haynes
Writers: Todd Haynes, James Lyons
Australian theatrical release date: November 5, 1998
In the classic Trains Plains and Automobiles, Steve Martin gave the late
John Candy some valuable advice: "If you're going to tell a story, have
a point - it makes it so much more interesting for the listener!"  This
quote has never been truer than in Velvet Goldmine, a pointless and
apathetic examination of nothing in particular, and a lot of it.
Writer-director Todd Haynes has created a controversial and original
piece; one that doesn't rely so much on its main characters but rather
whom they might represent.  David Bowie, for example, bears a striking
resemblance to Velvet Goldmine's fictional protagonist, Brian Slade
(Jonathan Rhys Meyers), a bisexual flower power rock star. But this
isn't a character study, nor is it a study of contrasting eras and
social trends - all of which would have probably helped the film keep
its stride, had it managed to choose which one it wanted to focus on.
The complex narrative is set in two different eras: 1971-74, when Slade
fakes his own assassination during a concert, and ten years later, when
reporter Arthur Stuart (Christian Bale) is asked to investigate what
happened to the former pop icon.  Arthur has deep familiarization with
Slade and his movement, having been affected emotionally and sexually by
his radical ethics.
Jonathan Rhys Meyers looks laughable in the title role, giving Slade a
pompous and wanky presence thanks to a weak screenplay and some
extravagant 70's costumes.  "I like boysand I like girls," says the
actor, looking as stupid as the film itself. Any chance of examining
Slade's character is conveniently avoided, as Haynes seems much more
concerned with showcasing homosexual orgies rather than studying what
makes him kick.  As a result, I didn't understand or care about his
actions, as Slade comes across as a preying-on-school-boys bastard, and
nothing more.  The screenplay might have worked if Haynes had written
Slade as effectively bastardly as someone like Chad in Neil LaButes In
the Company of Men, but he reveals no level of talent that would allow
coherent writing to last for more than just a couple of minutes.
Adding insult to, well, insult, Velvet Goldmine attempts to link the
movements of its protagonist to the great Oscar Wilde, with dismal
results.  Since Todd Haynes has failed to create anything worthwhile
himself, he takes a couple of people who made successes of themselves,
and then tries to make the film successful.  If either actually cared
about this awful little film, David Bowe would sue, and Oscar Wilde
would turn in his grave.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Susan Granger
Set in the sex-and-drug London music scene of the '70s, this
surreal, sensual musical romance divided critics at the Cannes Film
Festival but won film-maker Todd Haynes a special prize from the jury
for best artistic contribution. The sheer glitter and glitz of its
energetic soundtrack may lure hip movie-goers, along with its MTV
rock-video approach to film-making. Presented in an ambitious
pseudo-documentary style, lifted from Orson Welles' "Citizen Kane,"
it's the story of a fictional glam rocker, Brian Slade (Jonathan Rhys
Meyers) who, in a publicity stunt in 1974 while at the height of his
popularity, faked an assassination attempt on his life. When the hoax
was revealed, his career evaporated as his disillusioned fans
abandoned him. Ten years later, a British journalist and former fan
(Christian Bale) goes searching for Slade and interviews his former
lover, a flamboyant star (charismatic Ewan McGregor), and former wife
(Toni Collette). Problem is: Orson Welles' classic 1941 mystery
revolving about the motivations of a wealthy publishing tycoon had
intriguing characters, while Todd Haynes' androgynous pop-idol has
little to reflect upon except a short life of promiscuous bisexuality
and decadent excess. "We set out to change the world," McGregor muses,
"and ended up changing only ourselves." The message of the movie is
simply: "It doesn't matter what a man does with his life. What matters
is the legend that grows up around him." On the other hand, the visual
presentation is colorful, splashy and splendid. So, on the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Velvet Goldmine" is a frenetic 6. Caution:
its sexual content, nudity, profanity, and drug usage make it
unacceptable for most of the young teenage audience at whom it's
directly aimed.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
I don't mind being confused by a movie.  Every once in a while, it's
fun to watch a confounding film and be forced to put the pieces together
at the end.  It's not fun, however, when the pieces don't fit together,
or when there simply aren't enough pieces.   Writer/director Todd
Haynes' Velvet Goldmine is a good example of a confusing movie that
doesn't give the viewer enough information to understand it completely. 
Perhaps I should see the film again -- there is a very good chance that
I missed something.
But it's not likely that I missed half the movie, even though I kind of
feel like I did.  Haynes' film, which partially revolves around a
British Glam rock star in the mid-70s, does a lot of things right --
mostly in production design and music -- but it's a hollow movie with no
emotional center, and almost no coherence whatsoever.  It's filled with
eclectic flashbacks and elaborate dream sequences, all of which begin
and end without the viewer knowing.   There's also very little dialogue,
and huge interludes of music without any speaking.  I'm sure someone
could make a case for this approach; it seems to me that Haynes was more
interested in capturing the look and feel of the Glam rock era rather
than telling a straightforward story about it.  The problem is that he
didn't give me a reason to care.
The film begins with a truly bizarre prologue, implying that Oscar
Wilde was a gift from aliens.  It then cuts to 1974, the year in which
Glam rock king Brian Slade (Jonathan Rhys-Meyers) fakes his own
assassination during one of his concerts.  In the audience stands Arthur
Stuart (Christian Bale), a big fan of Slade.   Ten years later, Arthur
is a journalist who is sent to find out what really happened to Brian
Slade.  He interviews many people, including Slade's wife, Mandy (Toni
Collette), former lover, Curt Wild (Ewan McGregor), and first manager
(Michael Feast).  Later, we learn that Slade was a major influence on
Arthur's life.
When the film was over, I felt like I had been sitting for days.   The
film isn't boring, but it's a chore to sit through because it's so
confusing.   You're always trying to figure out what time period your
in, or what characters you're supposed to be watching, or if the scene
is a dream sequence.  I think there's a way to evoke the Glam rock era
without perplexing viewers; I wish Haynes had tried to figure out how. 
I've got to give him credit, though:  the movie is visually and aurally
immersive.  The sets art big and colorful, the music is very loud, and
it's hard to pull your eyes away from the screen.  Haynes (whose last
feature, Safe, is far more subdued than this) has a good sense of mood,
but fails to tell a compelling story about real people.  And, as I said,
I'm pretty sure he meant to take this approach.   
It's not that there aren't any characters -- in fact, some of them are
interesting.   Rhys-Meyers is perfect as Slade, the effeminate rocker
whose face is barely visible through the makeup.  The main problem with
Slade as a character is that he's just a symbol in the film, and Haynes
never makes him into a believable human being.   McGregor is good, but
his psychotic character is not very pleasant.  Collette has a nice role,
but she's on hand mostly has a plot device.  The only actor who rises
above the material is Bale, but even Arthur's connection with Slade --
which is where the emotional grounding is supposed to come from -- isn't
well-developed.  None of this is helped by the fact that the characters
really don't talk to each other -- what little dialogue there is falls
prey to the stupefying visuals, and so the story can't emerge from the
rubble.
And so what we're left with is a flashy, vapid movie that makes no
sense.  Velvet Goldmine is an interesting film to a degree -- Haynes'
visual presentation is enough to keep anyone watching.  It's just that,
with iconic characters and an incoherent narrative, the film fails to
draw in its audience.  I don't think Velvet Goldmine needed to be a
mess, even though Haynes clearly wanted it messy.  It wouldn't have
taken much to straighten this film out -- get rid of the framing device,
make the flashbacks more obvious, and maybe add a little dialogue.   I
have no moral problem with a confusing film like this, but Haynes should
have given us enough information to figure it out.  

Author
Dennis Schwartz

VELVET GOLDMINE (director/writer:Todd Haynes; screenwriter: James Lyons;
cinematographer: Maryse Alberti; cast: Ewan McGregor (Curt Wild),
Jonathan Rhys-Meyers  (Brian Slade), Toni Collette (Mandy Slade),
Christian Bale (Arthur Stuart), Eddie Izzard (Jerry Divine), Emily Woof
(Shannon), Michael Feast (Cecil), 1998)
I'm not a fan of glam rock, my musical partialities are more in the line
for classical music or '60s rock. Glam is the kind of music that is
pretty to look at for short periods of time but when more closely
scrutinized could turn ugly. That is both the virtue and problem with
this entertaining and stylish celebration of the rock music scene by
Todd Haynes (Safe/Poison), that has the right musical feel but offers no
depth and little character development in its story. This fictionalized
story is a thin disguise for David Bowie's bio, and it was able along
the way to rip-off the Citizen Kane way of telling a biography in a
fictionalized way. And if that weren't enough of a splash in the water
of cause célčbre, Haynes throws a bit of the Oscar Wilde biography into
the fiction presented. He, of course, can be assumed to be the patron
saint for all such "rock dandies."
Glam rock star Brian Slade (Jonathan Rhys Meyers), who acts catlike as a
character named Maxwell Demon, predicts his own death onstage. The death
is found out to be a hoax and his career is ruined. It is 1984, ten
years later than that incident, and a New York newspaper editor assigns
a reporter Arthur Stuart (Christian Bale) to see if he can dig up what
happened to the rock star, sending him back to London, the reporter's
place of birth and early tribulation.
The reporter interviews his first manager, who is seen in a wheelchair
(remember Joseph Cotten in Citizen Kane!), as he tells of how he was
dastardly replaced by the flamboyant manager Jerry Divine (Brit
comedian-Izzard), and then he interviews the star's ex-wife Mandy
(Collette), now a drunken burnout, as he tries to unravel the mysteries
of the enigmatic performer. What he finds is a show biz of glitter
glamor, a musician wearing a mask so he can become who he is, the coming
out party for a bisexual revolution, the wreckage of a marriage and his
career (similar to Orson Welles's Hollywood career going down after
Citizen Kane), and the great love affair between Brian and an American
performance artist, the junkie Curt Wild (Ewan McGregor), who influences
that style of performing onto Brian, seeing dollar signs in Brian's eyes
instead of the love that was in Brian's eyes. It resulted in a ménage ŕ
trois, among Brian, Curt, and Mandy, taking place in the swinging London
of the 1970s, with a most unsentimental view of their lifestyle being
presented.
The film works best as a music video and if you like the music, you'll
probably love the film. As a film it was a colorful spectacle,
wonderfully performed, very energetic, and it had some witty dialogue;
but, it failed to tell a cohesive story and failed to capture what that
period of the 1970s was about. It was hard to tell what Haynes was
trying to expose or tell about this fictionalized Bowie-Ziggy
Stardust-like character. The film made no comment about the money angle
in the business, or the public- or- the private thoughts of the
musician. It was all vague and superficial, I suppose, just like glamor
is. Besides, I don't really know how worthwhile it is to uncover his
mystery life-like who cares! Anyway, he wasn't made into an interesting
character by Slade's characterization of him-I think David Bowie is a
much more interesting character than Brian Slade. When Mandy explains
his downfall by saying he got lost in a lie, it is hard to feel any
sympathy for him or for those he took down with him.
If you don't mind having an empty feeling after seeing a film, then this
one could be your kind of nourishment. There was some attempt to bring a
deeper storyline into focus, as the sexually inhibited reporter assigned
to the story was actually in attendance on the night of Slade's hoax,
and he was shown in flashback to be influenced by the performer's sexual
freedom, discovering his own bisexuality through the performance. The
suggestion made was that these performers are role models and influence
many teens-for good or bad. Unfortunately, the film did not pick up on
that thread of the story, as it continued on in its glitzy musical
style. The last serious thing it said, comes about in a conversation
between Arthur and Curt in a morbid neighborhood bar, where Curt
says:"We set out to change the world- but just changed ourselves."
Arthur says, "What's wrong with that?" Curt, "If you don't look at the
world." I guess something must have happened to the two performing
artists along the way, but it must have happened offscreen, because it
didn't happen onscreen.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
