Title
Review for Frankenstein (1910)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Back in 1894 Thomas Edison was a pioneer of the American film
industry and was claiming (not entirely truthfully) to have invented
the motion picture.  He did however sell a Kinetoscope and the he
had to make films to show on his Kinetoscope, much the same a Vu-
Master has to make slides for their viewer.  His was not big scale
film production, today it looks amateurish.  But he built a small
studio barely the size of a truck, and started grinding out one-
minute films.  The Black Maria was the world's first film studio and
built at Edison's West Orange laboratories where it still stands.
It was called the Black Maria because of its resemblance to a police
wagon.
     In 1910 (eight years after Georges Melies made his famous A
TRIP TO THE MOON in France) Edison made the first movie adaptation
of Mary Shelley's FRANKENSTEIN.  The film was just fourteen minutes
long and starred Charles Ogle as the monster.  When I first heard
about the film it was considered a lost film.  There were stills of
Ogle's make-up and some descriptions left--that was all.  So many
old films were lost forever, it was not surprising that this one was
also.  In the mid-1990s the claim was made that a copy had been
found.  Soon there were also stories that the man who had found it
owned the print and wanted one million dollars for the cinema relic.
And that was how things stood.  Yesterday I heard that a poor
reproduction of the film was available on the web in Realplayer
format.  It is a terrible reproduction, but it was a film that many
people had wanted to see for years and any means seemed good.
     Most Frankenstein films assume the title character built a
monster of dead bodies and animated them with electricity.  But the
films have been made in an age of science.  Mary Shelley is very
vague about how the monster is created, but the approach seems to be
more alchemy and mysticism than the rationalistic approach taken in
the films.  Shelley had the monster be more a mystical creature,
created like the medieval mystics created homunculi.  That is the
approach of the 1910 film.
     The story is told very briefly in ten or twelve sentences with
action filmed to illustrate the story.  Frankenstein goes to
college.  There within two years he discovers how to create life.
He decides he will prove himself by making a perfect man, then to
return home to claim his bride.  Mixing some volatile chemical
together, he puts them in something that looks like a cross between
a gas chamber and a kiln.  As he watches through a little porthole
the chemicals form a skeleton and meat forms on the skeleton.
     When the monster is being created it just moves its arms up and
down mechanically.  Surely a marionette artist at the time could
have given it more realistic movements.  But for that the creation
sequence is fairly effective with burning pieces of body just sort
of assembling themselves magically.  When a bony arm sticks out of
the creation chamber the film comes closest to having a genuine
scary moment.  Certainly Frankenstein is horrified by what he has
created.  He faints and the monster disappears. Frankenstein had
wanted to create a perfect man, but not all recipes work out.  What
he got was a ragged and shambling monstrosity, its features and its
very expression are horribly distorted.  It has long stringy hair
and a nondescript torso.
     Frankenstein returns home to the arms of his fiancee.  But the
monster finds him.   Frankenstein has the monster hide in a closet
so as not to frighten his bride.  The monster cooperates but then
comes out and in a fit of anger attacks Frankenstein.  Frankenstein
lives only because the monster sees his reflection in a mirror and
is frightened off.
     Frankenstein is married, but in the night the monster returns.
The bride sees the monster and faints.  But before the monster can
do anything terrible he sees himself in the mirror and apparently
realizing he is too ugly to ever win such a bride, he just
disappears.  The presence of love does to him what sunlight and
thwarted love does to Count Orlock in NOSFERATU.  It simply
dissolves him.  This seems to imply that like Dracula, the monster
is an incorporeal being and is more magical than scientific.
     The film appears to be on different film stocks to get a slight
feel of color, brown-tone for daytime and black for night.  Being
made a full eight years after the Melies A TRIP TO THE MOON yet
being so much more crude and primitive in style one has the feeling
that film would not have advanced much if Edison had controlled the
American film industry had he tried to do.
     I am not rating this film since there is no objective criteria
to rate it with modern films.  It is really just a very short
telling of the story and filmed illustrations, filmed with a
stationary camera looking at a stage.  One reason that this film
disappeared may have been the poor quality of the production.
Still, it is an amazing circumstance that the film is visible at all
and it was a great pleasure to see it after so many years.
