Title
Review for Sixteen Candles (1984)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I know I've personally experienced landmark birthdays that 
were less than ideal. My eighteenth birthday I had to get up at 6:30 to 
work in a college dining hall for three hours, followed by two hours 
of classes, three more hours in the dining hall, a couple hours reading 
three mammoth chapters on Romanesque and Gothic Architecture 
and a three hour photo shoot for a newspaper. But at least everyone 
knew it was my birthday. In SIXTEEN CANDLES, Samantha Baker 
(Molly Ringwald) goes through her sixteenth birthday without any 
of her family members remembering the big day.
        SIXTEEN CANDLES was John Hughes' debut film, the first 
of three over the next three years to star Ringwald. In this film, as in 
PRETTY IN PINK, Ringwald exemplifies those of us who get the 
short end of the stratification stick that is high school, where certain 
people are popular because of physical attributes and the rest of us 
are left behind. Ringwald is in love with Jake, the athletic senior who 
is already involved with the prom queen, who is more beautiful and 
actually has breasts. (We know this for a fsee them 
at the beginning of the movie.)
        Meanwhile, Ringwald is being lusted after by a freshman 
dork (Anthony Michael Hall) who makes a bet with his friends that 
he can bag Ringwald. The two instead have a meaningful 
conversation that night during a dance, in one of those Driver's 
Ed. simulators (and if there's anything that turns a woman on, it's 
a grainy film from the 60's produced in "Drivavision"), finding out 
they have the unrequited love thing in common, and Ringwald 
takes pity on Hall, giving him her panties to show his friends as 
evidence.
        The news of this "conquest" gets back to Jake, who -- it 
turns out -- has an attraction to Ringwald, as one of those rare 
teenage guys who long for a woman of substance rather than 
beauty. It's all so reminiscent of Hughes' later film, PRETTY IN 
PINK, in which Ringwald is attracted to rich Andrew McCarthy 
but doesn't think she has a chance with him because she doesn't 
adhere to the superficial rules of the in-crowd. Here too, things 
work out in a life-affirming way that assures us love can break 
all boundaries. I mean, shoot, Hall gets laid by the prom 
queen.
        I may be the only person to venture this opinion, but 
SIXTEEN CANDLES is a more entertaining, if not accurate film 
than the other Ringwald-Hughes collaborations (THE BREAKFAST 
CLUB, PRETTY IN PINK). It doesn't try to force drama like the other 
two, going instead for a more comedic focus in the midst of the usual 
teen movie conventions, like torturous school dances and wild 
parties. Hughes especially finds humor in the Chinese exchange 
student character Long Duk Dong, who discovers the joys of 
American life at the same dance and party that proves most other 
characters' undoing. Like most other aspects of the film, it would be 
offensive and disastrously unfunny if not handled in the proper way, 
which Hughes has actually done here, unlike the PRETTY PINK 
BREAKFAST CLUB films.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
