Title
Review for Teen Kanya (1961)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Murali Krishnan
[3.5/4.0]  (dialog in Bengali, English subtitles)
This film, with the English title "Three Daughters", was originally
composed of three segments, but only two ("The Postmaster" and
"Samapti") were screened because the third story ("Monihara") is still
in the process of restoration. Because of this, the film is sometimes
distributed under the title "Two Daughters." All the segments are
based on short stories by Rabindranath Tagore.
Nandal (Anil Chatterjee) is a postal worker, who after having lived
his entire life in the city, receives an assignment to be the
postmaster of a rural village. The back room of the tiny post office
is his living quarters, and all the household duties are tended to by
the orphan servant girl, Ratan (Chandana Banerjee). Nandal has a hard
time adjusting to village life which he finds difficult and monotonous.
Besides the lack of urban comforts, such as professional music
recitals, there is also the serious threat of malaria. Nandal becomes
attached to Ratan because of her sweetness and eagerness to please him,
so he begins to teach her to read and write.
Nandal contemplates requesting a transfer because rural life is
difficult for him and he misses the city. Ratan does not have such
options, her desires are much more simple, and although her station
in life does not offer much, it is all she requires and she does not
even consider that she could be anywhere else.
The success of the story is due to its restraint. Although Ratan is a
sympathetic character, it would have been too easy to make her pitiful.
She is unfortunate in that fate has placed her in a position of
restriction, but she is not portrayed as abused or exploited in an
attempt to force her character into a sorrowful state. Instead it is
the simplicity and purity of her spirit that make her endearing, and
the viewer cannot help but embracing her. Her innocence, dedication,
and warmth make her a bright star piercing the darkness.
The story shows that the overt events in life, while melodramatic, are
not necessarily the most significant. A loss through ignorance is often
more devastating than a loss through death. The story is moving as it
shows that the most precious things are sometimes taken for granted
because they are also not obvious. This is a story about duty,
commitment, loyalty, and attachment. These are serious topics and the
film perfectly combines its pieces into the simple story without any
wasted effort. It is not too long or too short, and it conveys its
message.
According to his mother, it is time for Amulya (Soumitra Chatterjee)
to get married. He has come home on vacation from his studies and just
wants to rest, but his mother has found a girl that she would like him
to marry. Amulya is not at all interested, but to appease his mother he
goes to see her. He has confirmed his mother's lack of judgement in such
matters, but she is persistent that he should get married. The only girl
of any interest to him is Mrinmoyee (Aparna Sen), nicknamed Puglee
("Crazy"), because she is a tomboy with no sense of feminine dignity.
She spends her time playing with boys, running around, climbing trees,
and the like. Although no one would see her as a suitable wife, Amulya
sees a fiery spirit that is increased in attractiveness in comparison
to the qualities that his mother finds desirable.
The story deals with desire and expectation, and how individuals are
laced in positions where they must evaluate their roles. What Amulya
is attracted to in the single girl is not possible to have in a wife.
When one sees the beauty of a wild animal and desires to capture that
beauty by keeping it as a pet, the creature is broken, and the beauty
of its spirit is lost by its imprisonment. In a way, Amulya is
attempting to tame the wild creature, but that may be a selfish act.
The main flaw with the film is that it runs too long. It starts well
but drags with slow progress towards the end. The cinematography has
less of the visual symbolism often used by Satyajit Ray, but is
adequate as this story has a mostly straight-forward narrative.
Highly recommended. "The Postmaster" is a perfect vignette. "Samapti"
is not as good in comparison, but still a solid effort. Satyajit Ray
superbly directs the film which is based on the powerful short stories
of Rabindranath Tagore.
--== Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/ ==--
---Share what you know. Learn what you don't.---
