Title
Review for Jane Austen's Mafia! (1998)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Parody film of mob movies, this picture basically laces the GODFATHER
storyline with that of Martin Scorsese's CASINO. A son of a big-time mobster
must take over his father's "business" after his dad's untimely death. He
does the right thing, and then whisks off to Vegas to handle the casino
business.
CRITIQUE:
Hit-and-miss comedy, scores some chuckles on certain parodies done well, but
falls flat on most of its sight gags, lame jokes and uninspired story line.
This is one of those "stupid comedies" like AIRPLANE and THE NAKED GUN
series, in which everything and everyone is used as a target for a gag or a
crack. I generally love those kinds of flicks, but this one just didn't
muster enough laughs for it to deserve a solid recommendation. And that's
besides the fact that it failed to recognize plenty of other mafia films
which could have made this movie all that more enjoyable to a wider audience
(Leaving GOODFELLAS out is just a sin). As it stands, this film might prove
itself worthy as a weak video night rental for fans of the genre, just to
enjoy a few lazy grins alongside a six-pack of beer (Another plus: It's only
83 minutes long). For everyone else, go out and rent either AIRPLANE I or
II, and prepare to double-over in idiotic laughter.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film is dedicated to actor Lloyd Bridges, who died shortly after
shooting this movie.
Originally titled JANE AUSTIN'S MAFIA!
Director Jim Abrahams also directed such stupid comedies as AIRPLANE!, TOP
SECRET! and HOT SHOTS! And HOT SHOTS! Part Deux.

Author
Joy Wyse
Mafia is touted as another in the Naked Gun/Airplane genre.  It tries, but
it doesn't quite make it.  It's a takeoff of the Godfather series, Casino,
Goodfellas, and Forrest Gump!
Jerry Mohr is the lead character, the good  son who is destined to head
the family business.   Lloyd Bridges, in his final film role, plays the
godfather.  He actually seems spryer than his stunt doubles.
The main fun in these parodies is looking for all the little things, such
as a ship named IL Pacino.  Personally, I don't see anything funny about
"Rocks 1_".  I was trying to think of some of the clever things to list
here, but the problem is, I can't remember any.  Oh, yeah, there are
references to O.J.Simpson, Lyle Menandez and other "names".  And there are
some funny sight gags, but in all it is a disappointment.  I had hoped for
more.  The only way that I'd watch this again is if it's on free TV, late
at night, and I can't sleep.

Author
James Sanford
A well-written spoof can stand on its own. You don't have to know
"Mildred Pierce" and "Gone With the Wind" by heart, for example, to find
Carol Burnett's take-offs on these classics hysterically funny.
On the other hand, you would need to be intimately acquainted with
Francis Ford Coppola's "Godfather" trilogy and Martin Scorsese's "Casino" to
even begin to appreciate most of the gags in "Mafia!" the latest entry in
the anything-for-a-laugh school of filmmaking. Even if you knew the Coppola
and Scorsese works inside out, you still might find this attempted send-up
more curious than it is funny; if you have only a passing familiarity with
the films "Mafia!" tries to satirize, you'll be snoozing instead of
snickering.
The only thing that sets "Mafia!" (still identified in the opening
credits by its pre-release title, "Jane Austen's Mafia!") apart from most of
the other pictures like it is the absence of Leslie Nielsen from the cast.
Otherwise, the picture is business as usual for director Jim Abrahams, one
of the original members of the teams behind "Airplane!" and "Naked Gun." But
doing too many of these joke-athons apparently has drained Abrahams of the
boundless energy that is his usual trademark. "Mafia!" lopes along
aimlessly, squandering most of its best ideas in its first half-hour.
Though he's up to the challenge of alternately parodying Al Pacino and
Robert DeNiro, Jay Mohr doesn't quite have the comic chops to pull it off.
An uproariously funny stand-up comedian, Mohr hasn't yet found a big-screen
role to match his talents. At least Mohr escapes "Mafia!" without undue
shame. Lloyd Bridges, in his last role, is not so fortunate.
Mohr and Bridges play the heads of the Cartino crime family, which
operates Las Vegas' shady Peppermill Casino, an establishment notable for
its high-stakes games of Candy Land and Chutes and Ladders. A brush with
death causes amoral Anthony (Mohr) to reflect back on his people's checkered
history, which includes an escape from the Sicilian town of Salmonella, a
long climb to the top of the olive oil trade, and a move into New York's
seedy underworld.
Typical of the level of "Mafia!'s" humor is a scene on Ellis Island
with American Indians protesting being made to wait because "we had
reservations" and numerous gags about the flatulence of the family matriarch
(Olympia Dukakis, what were you thinking?).
Every so often there's a genuinely clever bit or a bright non
sequitur - Anthony introduces his friends to his new bride Diane (Christina
Applegate) by explaining "we went to Vassar together" - although much of the
material is as dated as those "Evening At the Improv" repeats that turn up
on A&E late at night. Jokes about movies like "Cocktail" and "Child's Play"
might have gone over big in the early days of the Bush administration, but a
decade later they're a solid indicator of "Mafia!'s" humor recession.
James Sanford

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Jim Abrahams
Writers: Jim Abrahams, Greg Norberg, and Michael McCamus
Starring: Jay Mohr, Lloyd Bridges, Christina Applegate, Billy Burke,
Olympia Dukakis, Pamela Gidley
"Mafia!" comes from one third of the creators of "Airplane!," a film that
defined the gag-a-minute form of comedy, and did it with such sheer surreal
delight that it's even more of a classic than the film it was parodying,
"Airport."  That person is Jim Abrahams, who is also one of the creators of
"The Naked Gun" and "Hot Shots!" movies, which were also hilarious films. 
Why were they hilaroius?  Because a good percentile of the millions of
jokes told were funny.  A film like this can never really fail as long as
there are funny jokes, and it only works incredibly well if the jokes are
not only funnier but frequent.  The longer the space between the good
jokes, the worse the film gets.
Such a film is "Mafia!," a gag-induced treatment of three mafia pics - "The
Godfather," "The Godfather: Part II," and "Casino" - as well as assorted
other flicks, everything from "Forrest Gump" to "The Gold Rush" to "Il
Postino."  I did laugh during this film, but there are two differences
between this film and the other earlier greater films: 1) when I laughed,
it was more of a chuckle then a whole-hearted laugh, and 2) these laughs
were widely spaced between jokes that just fell completely on their ass and
got more of a "nice try" reaction than anything else.
Take one early scene in the movie: Lloyd Bridges, in his final role, plays
the Brando part in the first "Godfather" movie, and during his daughter's
wedding, a tall henchman dressed as a priest walks up to him and says, "Say
hello to my little friend."  Instead of wipping out a gun like Pacino did
in "Scarface" when he said this line, he opens the crease in his pants, and
a little dwarf comes out with a gun and shoots Bridges.  I laughed
(although I laughed harder when I saw it for the first time in the
previews).  Then the dwarf continues to shoot Bridges over and over and
over and over and over again, and as he's being shot, he starts doing what
looks like dances, and the band plays whatever dance they think he's doing,
everything from Swing to the Macarena.  Just not funny.  Nice try, though.
I'm not sure why the jokes aren't that funny.  Abrahams is very adept at
creating gags-a-second on his own, gags that are for the most part pretty
hilarious.  And he has some good performers on hand, like Jay Mohr, who was
killer during his brief stint on "Saturday Night Live" and awesome as a
scene stealer in "Jerry Maguire."  He even has Bridges, bringing comic
grace a la an older Leslie Nielsen, and giving it the right note of
sentimentality since we loved him and he's gone.  My god, he even somehow
got Olympia Dukakis to show up in an all-too-brief performance as Bridges's
aging, hunch-backed mother who at one point drinks prune juice during a
parody of a famous scene in the first "Godfather."
Maybe it's not that funny because basically the plot of the parody, if you
can call it that, it extremely sloppy.  Even "Airplane!" had a coherent
plot, sorta, one that you could say was well-laid out.  The jokes in that
movie came out of the scene itself, which were milked for all its comic
worth.  Here, the story moves primarily because of the plot.  When a scene
is over, it's because the writers ran out of jokes, and the parodies of the
three chief movies just don't work together.  The film opens with a parody
of the opening scene of "Casino," with Jay Mohr playing the DeNiro
character being blown up in his car, and then goes back to his father's
childhood and early adulthood a la "The Godfather: Part II," then goes to
the opening of the first "Godfather."  These films don't it together as
well, though, and even though I probably shouldn't be complaning that a
plot is sloppy in a film like this, it may be part of the reason why it's
just not that funny.
But the main problem with this film is the jokes aren't that funny.  The
best parts are the ones in the casino, where there are games like "Chutes
and Ladders," "Candyland," as well as games like "Guess the Number" and
"You Can't Possibly Win This Game."  The worst parts are things in between
the good jokes, the fillers, like how everyone runs into things and knocks
them over.  Maybe the biggest travesty is they do next to nothing with
Lloyd Bridges.  It's not that I'm sad he didn't get more screen time
because it was his final performance - he was a great comic actor and he
deserves more than a scene where he just falls down and closes venitan
blinds on his head.  They don't even allow him to do a Brando
impersonation, the key to any joke made at the "Godfather" films.
But really, who wanted to see a parody of these films anyway.  They're so
intensely serious that any joke that had been made at them has probably
been made already.  Brando's performance is a laugh in itself - show me one
person who can't at least try to do a Brando imitation?  I said a film like
this couldn't entirely fail, but this one comes pretty damn close.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Touchstone Pictures/ Tapestry Films
 Director:  Jim Abrahams
 Writer: Jim Abrahams & Greg Norberg
 Cast: Jay Mohr, Lloyd Bridges, Olympia Dukakis, Christina
Applegate, Billy Burke
   The New Vulgarity is here to stay, or at least until Cameron
Diaz decides to wash that man right out of her hair.  With
"BASEketball" coming up on screens just one week after
"Mafia," the studios are catering to movie demographics just
as sure as Italians are catering cappellini.   Danny Boyle, who
directed the Scottish "Trainspotting," has nothing on Jim
Abrahams, famous for such spoofs as "Airplane" when it
comes to scenes of retching and bathroom humor. 
Abrahams's send-up of organized crime is on the money
more times than not.  "Mafia!" will be appreciated by less
inhibited adults as surely as it will be a big hit with the
younger fry.  Featuring sight gags, verbal repartee, and
references to past films that aficionadoes will be delighted to
catch, "Mafia!" will keep the fans laughing and groaning in
equal portions with its pratfalls and parodies alike.  It also
features a career-reinforcing vehicle for its star, Jay Mohr,
whose background as a standup comic serves him well.
  Switching back and forth in time, the movie gets started
early on by pointing out the one-sided nature of Las Vegas: 
the house never loses.  Considering the odds against winning
(about zero chances in a hundred), it's to the credit of the
Peppermill Hotel Casino in Reno that its managers allowed
the crew to film the gruesome sequences.  Anthony Cortino
(Jay Mohr), the son of godfather Vincenzo (Lloyd Bridges),
overlooks the action as his employees rake the money in by
the cartload, a new sight gag appearing every seven seconds
or so. One of the games allows gamblers to guess the
number which the dealer is thinking about.  "Two," says one
hopeful. "No, I'm thinking of three, I'm sorry," replies the
croupier as he shovel yet another pile of bills into the box. 
Another game highlights the sign "You can't possibly win," as
customers simply put their bills on the table while the house
promptly shovels them into the chest.  There's only one way
to limit your losses, and that's simply to mail the money to the
casino.  "The smart ones just send us the money and save on
the plane fare," the house reports as it blithely opens
envelopes and stashes the loot.
   One of the charming benefits of this movie is that it
introduces the young people in the audience to subtitles. 
Who knows what Antonionis and Bergmanns and Fellinis will
soon be seen by this crowd of sophomores?  When Pierre
Letarte's camera pans to the Sicilian town of Salmonella in
the early years of the century, we see godfather-to-be
Vincenzo Cortino (Jason Fuchs) delivering packs of cocaine
to mobsters against a background of posters such as one that
says, "Got vino?"  (You have to be fast to catch these gags:
Abrahams does not linger over much.)  Yet another poster
warns of "guard sheep," and as Vincenzo escapes from the
island one step ahead of a man determined to kill him, he
takes the boat "Il Pacino" all the way to Ellis Island, brushing
up on the handbook "English with an Italian accent."
   Think fast and you'll see visual references to movies like
"The Godfather," "Casino," Jaws," "Forrest Gump" and even
"The English Patient," (the last one a scene that has the
entire Cortino family including its horse throwing up). 
Christina Applegate, the nymphet from the TV series
"Married..with Children," has blossomed from a ribald
adolescent into a charming lady of southern charm as she
goes through the motions of a WASP girl friend of Joey trying
to fit into a family of Sicilian-Americans.  "Oh, Italian food,"
she murmurs with suprise as she prepares to sit down with
the gangsters and, when shocked that the shot-up Vincenzo's
bed-ridden form lies unattended by doctors and nurses,
Anthony explains, "Diane, Dad belongs to an HMO." 
   If you have a taste for this type of ribaldly--and every red-
blooded American should--you'll enjoy the fun, which at
eighty-six minutes does not go on for one unnecessary
moment.  "We used to kill and dismember people; now it's all
drugs...where's the honor?" laments the godfather.  As the
chief honcho, the late Lloyd Bridges furnishes an honorable
end to his long career with this, his last film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The Nevada casino in JANE AUSTEN'S MAFIA, the new film by
AIRPLANE!'s writer and director Jim Abrahams, has some unusual gambling
tables.  Besides "Candyland" and "Chutes and Ladders," players can try
their hand at "Guess the Number".  After all of the bets are placed, the
operator reveals the number he was thinking of, and - surprise - the
players never seem to guess it.
     JANE AUSTEN'S MAFIA, sometimes marketed more simply as MAFIA!, is a
comedic retelling of the GODFATHER saga.  With many of the sets made to
look identical to the movie series it spoofs, the film has jokes that
work best for those familiar with the GODFATHER movies, but the humor is
so broadly written that people who have forgotten the Coppola films will
still get it.
     Jay Mohr, in the Al Pacino role, plays Anthony Cortino, and
Christina Applegate, in the Diane Keaton part, is Anthony's new wife,
Diane.  Jay's straight man approach to comedy is partially successful,
but Christina brings nothing to her part.  Lloyd Bridges, in the Marlon
Brando role, plays the godfather, Don Vincenzo Cortino.  In his last
film role before his death, Bridges looks tired and miscast.  To be
fair, the gags he is given, like getting stuck in the venetian blinds,
are not much to work with.
     The script uses a series of sight gags that work at first, but the
movie, heavy on the flatulence jokes, soon runs out of its own gas.
During the first thirty minutes, the writers, Jim Abrahams, Greg Norberg
and Michael McManus, use one ridiculous gag after another to send the
audience reeling.  As the story gets longer, the jokes get staler and
the writers fall back on gross-out humor like the world's biggest
vomiting scene.
     Most of the movie, however, is silly fun.  When one joke, like
spaghetti on a stick, doesn't work, the writers toss the audience a
barrage of other gags in the hopes that something will strike the
viewers' fancy.  (The filmmakers even had fun with the press by sending
out two press kits.  The first one had a cover in English, but the text
was in Italian.  A few days later, as if to correct the "mistake," the
real English language version arrived.)
     Some of the best jokes are funny partly because they are so crude
that you are embarrassed to be laughing.  When the young Vincenzo
Cortino (Jason Fuchs) has to hide, they push his whole body up the rear
of an ass.  Sounds ridiculous and is, but the director stages it with so
much outlandish panache that the scene generated guffaws from the whole
theater.  Others like the one about an obese Italian family who flavors
their food from large pitchers of cholesterol got only small chuckles
from our audience.  And still others, as the guy who threw craps at the
dice table by throwing a pair of, well, you guessed it, left our
audience just staring.
     Most of the dialog is not up to the physical humor but there are
some funny lines.  Pamela Gidley, as an exotic dancer named Pepper, does
a high energy take off of the dance routine from FLASHDANCE.  "I wanted
to be a research chemist," she tells Anthony.  "But my legs were too
long."
     The godfather laments the passing of the mob's golden age.  "We
used to just kill and dismember people," he sighs.  "Now it's all drugs.
Where is the honor in that?"
     Even if you hate the movie, stay through all of the crazy credits,
where you get "fun facts" and a horoscope interspersed with the more
traditional credits.  Even the creator of the baby salad greens gets
mentioned.
     JANE AUSTEN'S MAFIA runs just 1:33.  It is rated PG-13 for crude
jokes and comic violence and would be fine for kids around 11 and up.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The Nevada casino in JANE AUSTEN'S MAFIA, the new film by
AIRPLANE!'s writer and director Jim Abrahams, has some unusual gambling
tables.  Besides "Candyland" and "Chutes and Ladders," players can try
their hand at "Guess the Number".  After all of the bets are placed, the
operator reveals the number he was thinking of, and - surprise - the
players never seem to guess it.
     JANE AUSTEN'S MAFIA, sometimes marketed more simply as MAFIA!, is a
comedic retelling of the GODFATHER saga.  With many of the sets made to
look identical to the movie series it spoofs, the film has jokes that
work best for those familiar with the GODFATHER movies, but the humor is
so broadly written that people who have forgotten the Coppola films will
     Jay Mohr, in the Al Pacino role, plays Anthony Cortino, and
Christina Applegate, in the Diane Keaton part, is Anthony's new wife,
Diane.  Jay's straight man approach to comedy is partially successful,
but Christina brings nothing to her part.  Lloyd Bridges, in the Marlon
Brando role, plays the godfather, Don Vincenzo Cortino.  In his last
film role before his death, Bridges looks tired and miscast.  To be
fair, the gags he is given, like getting stuck in the venetian blinds,
are not much to work with.
     The script uses a series of sight gags that work at first, but the
movie, heavy on the flatulence jokes, soon runs out of its own gas.
During the first thirty minutes, the writers, Jim Abrahams, Greg Norberg
and Michael McManus, use one ridiculous gag after another to send the
audience reeling.  As the story gets longer, the jokes get staler and
the writers fall back on gross-out humor like the world's biggest
vomiting scene.
     Most of the movie, however, is silly fun.  When one joke, like
spaghetti on a stick, doesn't work, the writers toss the audience a
barrage of other gags in the hopes that something will strike the
viewers' fancy.  (The filmmakers even had fun with the press by sending
out two press kits.  The first one had a cover in English, but the text
was in Italian.  A few days later, as if to correct the "mistake," the
real English language version arrived.)
     Some of the best jokes are funny partly because they are so crude
that you are embarrassed to be laughing.  When the young Vincenzo
Cortino (Jason Fuchs) has to hide, they push his whole body up the rear
of an ass.  Sounds ridiculous and is, but the director stages it with so
much outlandish panache that the scene generated guffaws from the whole
theater.  Others like the one about an obese Italian family who flavors
their food from large pitchers of cholesterol got only small chuckles
from our audience.  And still others, as the guy who threw craps at the
dice table by throwing a pair of, well, you guessed it, left our
audience just staring.
     Most of the dialog is not up to the physical humor but there are
some funny lines.  Pamela Gidley, as an exotic dancer named Pepper, does
a high energy take off of the dance routine from FLASHDANCE.  "I wanted
to be a research chemist," she tells Anthony.  "But my legs were too
long."
     The godfather laments the passing of the mob's golden age.  "We
used to just kill and dismember people," he sighs.  "Now it's all drugs.
     Even if you hate the movie, stay through all of the crazy credits,
where you get "fun facts" and a horoscope interspersed with the more
traditional credits.  Even the creator of the baby salad greens gets
mentioned.
     JANE AUSTEN'S MAFIA runs just 1:33.  It is rated PG-13 for crude
jokes and comic violence and would be fine for kids around 11 and up.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Jim Abrahams
Cast:  Jay Mohr, Lloyd Bridges, Christina Applegate, Billy Burke,
Olympia Dukakis, Pamela Gidley
Screenplay:  Jim Abrahams, Greg Norberg, Michael McManus
Producers:  Bill Badalto
Runtime:  88 min.
US Distribution:  Buena Vista Pictures/Touchstone
Rated PG-13:  profanity, sex, flatulence, mock violence 
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        In my review of There's Something About Mary, I said something to the
effect of "laughter isn't everything."  I now need to make a brief
addendum to my postulate:  Laughter isn't everything, unless I'm
watching a Jim Abrahams film.  See, spoofs are easy with me.  I love
movies, and I love movies that make fun of movies that I love. 
Sometimes I'm the only one in the theater laughing.  Sometimes I laugh
so hard that I embarass myself because my laugh is so high-pitched in
comparison to my speaking voice (it cuts right through everyone else's
laughter).  Sometimes I laugh so much that my cheekbones are sore by the
end of the film.
        Abraham's latest film, Mafia!, induced this kind of hysteria upon me. 
It's gotten some mediocre reviews, but, hey, I'm the guy who laughs at
everything.  There may be a lot of jokes that flop in this film, but
there are far more that work, and I laughed so frequently that the
failed jokes usually occurred as I was recovering from the previous bout
of giddy madness.  I enjoy films like this because not one second of it
is serious or thought-provoking.  Most lighweight films that pose as
comedies try to do other things, like develop characters, shape stories,
and other such nonsense.  Mafia! has no pretentions about characters or
story, and it exists for no other reason than to make people laugh.  
        The film begins on the perfect high note, with a mockery of the opening
of Casino.  Our hero (Jay Mohr) is seen walking from a casino and
getting into his car, which subsequently explodes and sends him flying
through the air against a backdrop of flowing fire.  To describe the
story of Mafia! is absurd and pointless, but I will mention that it
basically follows the framework of the Godfather films, with a lot of
Casino references inserted throughout.  Along the way, the parodies seem
arbitrary, and rarely victimize mob films:  pictures like The English
Patient, Forrest Gump, and Jaws undergo severe and hilarious bashing.
        Movies like this rely on just a few things, but the most important
element is direction.  Abrahams has been down this path many times
before (Hot Shots!, Top Secret!, Airplane!, and any other film with an
exclamation point in the title), and so I hold most of the success of
Mafia! to his experience.  He takes just the right attitude in each
scene, and manages to wring at least a bit laughter out of even the most
oddly placed references (one inexplicable moment seems like it wants to
make fun of Titanic, but it never develops).  
        The actors are all energetic, which helps a lot with the tone of the
film.  Mohr (Suicide Kings, Paulie), who is quickly becoming one of my
favorite actors, is so good here.  He looks like he's having so much fun
that he's containing his laughter in every scene (watch his face in the
sequence by the swimming pool).  He's probably the only performer in the
cast who manages to urge laughter without the help of the material. 
Lloyd Bridges does a decent imitation of Brando's Godfather, while
Pamela Gidley is dead-on in a full-blown mockery of Sharon Stone.
        The hard thing about writing reviews for comedies is that I'm supposed
to give examples of things and be specific.  Unfortunately, I was so
constantly blindsided by laughter during Mafia! that I can't remember a
lot of what made me laugh.  But that's a good sign:  Mafia! is so funny
that I wasn't even given time to apply any of the scenes to memory.  I
laughed so hard that it shut off my brain.  I know that doesn't sound
particularly complimentary, but when watching a dumb comedy like this,
the first thing I want to do is shut off my brain.  Finally, a film that
does this for me. 

Author
James Sanford
        A well-written spoof can stand on its own. You don't have to
know ``Mildred Pierce'' and ``Gone With the Wind'' by heart, for
example, to find Carol Burnett's take-offs on these classics
hysterically funny.
  On the other hand, you would need to be intimately
acquainted with Francis Ford Coppola's ``Godfather'' trilogy and
Martin Scorsese's ``Casino'' to even begin to appreciate most of the
gags in ``Mafia!''  the latest entry in the anything-for-a-laugh
school of filmmaking. Even if you knew the Coppola and Scorsese works
inside out, you still might find this attempted send-up more curious
than it is funny; if you have only a passing familiarity with the
films ``Mafia!'' tries to satirize, you'll be snoozing instead of
snickering.
  The only thing that sets ``Mafia!'' (still identified in the
opening credits by its pre-release title, ``Jane Austen's Mafia!'')
apart from most of the other pictures like it is the absence of Leslie
Nielsen from the cast. Otherwise, the picture is business as usual for
director Jim Abrahams, one of the original members of the teams behind
``Airplane!''  and ``Naked Gun.'' But doing too many of these
joke-athons apparently has drained Abrahams of the boundless energy
that is his usual trademark.  ``Mafia!'' lopes along aimlessly,
squandering most of its best ideas in its first half-hour.
  Though he's up to the challenge of alternately parodying Al
Pacino and Robert DeNiro, Jay Mohr doesn't quite have the comic chops
to pull it off.  An uproariously funny stand-up comedian, Mohr hasn't
yet found a big-screen role to match his talents. At least Mohr
escapes ``Mafia!'' without undue shame. Lloyd Bridges, in his last
role, is not so fortunate.
  Mohr and Bridges play the heads of the Cartino crime family,
which operates Las Vegas' shady Peppermill Casino, an establishment
notable for its high-stakes games of Candy Land and Chutes and
Ladders. A brush with death causes amoral Anthony (Mohr) to reflect
back on his people's checkered history, which includes an escape from
the Sicilian town of Salmonella, a long climb to the top of the olive
oil trade, and a move into New York's seedy underworld.
  Typical of the level of ``Mafia!'s'' humor is a scene on
Ellis Island with American Indians protesting being made to wait
because ``we had reservations'' and numerous gags about the flatulence
of the family matriarch (Olympia Dukakis, what were you thinking?).
  Every so often there's a genuinely clever bit or a bright
non sequitur, but much of the material is dated. Jokes about movies
like ``Cocktail'' and ``Child's Play'' might have gone over big in the
early days of the Bush administration, but a decade later they're a
solid indicator of ``Mafia!'s'' humor recession.

Author
Matt Williams
Director Jim Abrahams was one of the original trio who ushered in the
nonstop-joke spoof genre with their seminal film Airplane!  However
after eighteen years and countless clones, the genre has lost its
luster.  Abrahams latest film, MAFIA!, isn't the worst, but doesn't add
any shine to a genre which should be put to rest.
The action mostly parallels the Godfather: Parts I and II.  From his
humble beginnings in Salmonella, Italy, Vincenzo Cortino (Lloyd Bridges)
rises to become an all-powerful (but still klutzy) mafia don.  He has
two sons to whom he could bequeath his empire of crime: psychopath Joey
(Billy Burke), and college-boy Anthony (Jay Mohr).
Following his good guy, bad guy double life, Anthony has two
girlfriends. There's Diane (Christina Applegate), a play on Diane Keaton
from The Godfather, and Pepper (Pamela Giley), based on Sharon Stone
from Casino.
If you can't tell already...most of the jokes in the movie are as
horribly dated as the genre itself.  There are a few nods to semi-recent
movies (Forrest Gump, Casino and The English Patient), but most of the
film is devoted to such fresh entrees as The Godfather, A Christmas
Carol, and Jaws.
The movie isn't as joke-free as several of Leslie Nielsen's latest
attempts. However, the chuckles are sparsely scattered.  This type of
film works best with out-of-the-blue rapid fire jokes, but MAFIA!
continues to bog itself down with lame jokes whose meager payoff isn't
worth the tedious setup.
Jay Mohr gives his role a valiant try, but it is the jokes which carry
(or drop) this type of movie.  And MAFIA! is a definite fumble.  It is
somewhat sad that this has to be Lloyd Bridges' last performance...it
won't be one he's remembered for.
If you're in a mood for a wacky comedy this summer that's genuinely
funny, go see There's Something About Mary.  Or, you could stay home and
watch Airplane! or The Naked Gun.  MAFIA! is just too little, too late.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Homer Yen
Stephen, please post if appropriate.
On a particular night when I found myself having some free time, I had a
chance to either go to sleep early or to see "Mafia!", a spoof of Mafia
and crime films such as "The Godfather," "Goodfellas" and "Casino".  At
84 minutes in length, I thought that I could enjoy a few laughs before
getting a good nights sleep.  But by my account, I think that my
laff-o-meter only registered a few grins, one giggle, and maybe one
chortle.
I suppose that you could justify your time as homage to the venerable
Hollywood star, Lloyd Bridges, who just recently passed away and whose
last performance was in this film.  "Mafia!" chronicles Vincenzo
Cortino's (Lloyd Bridges) life.  Separated from his family when he was
young, he escapes to America and tries to live an honest life.  But as
fate would have it, Vincenzo grows up to be a powerful and klutzy crime
lord.  Following in his footsteps are his two sons, Joey (Billy Burke)
and Anthony (Jay Mohr).  Like all siblings in powerful crime families,
they squabble over power, the future of the family, fortune, and women.
"Mafia!" is co-written by Jim Abrahams, who also contributed to some
gut-busting funny spoofs such as "Airplane" and "The Naked Gun."  But
these previous movies were funny because the jokes seemed more
universally understood and there was more of a manic silliness at work.
As I write this, I also wonder how many people have actually seen the
movies on which this spoof is based.  Crime movies in general contain a
lot of profanity and violence.  It's a tough genre to parody.  I was
kind of hoping that they could somehow spoof the profanity used in all
of those crime movies, maybe by having all of the tough crime lords say
"please" as they decide which sector to take over, but this opportunity
was never explored.   There were one or two moments that made me smile
such as the scene where Vincenzo is dancing with his newly wed
daughter-in-law.  A gunman shoots him several times.  The impact of the
bullets cause him to make these wild contortions that force the wedding
band to change music styles to keep up with him, from the samba to disco
to the macarena.  I think that I just gave away the best part of the
film.  Oh well, that just means that you can go to sleep a little
earlier.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     MAFIA!, like its predecessors AIRPLANE!, THE NAKED GUN and HOT
SHOTS!, is a scorecard comedy.  Their goal has always been to throw as
many puns, sight gags, movie parodies and bodily function gags onto the
screen as 90 minutes could hold, operating on the premise that you gotta
keep swinging if you wanna get hits.  At the end of the film, a viewer's
reaction is likely to be a subconscious evaluation of the jokes' batting
average.  If hits exceed whiffs, everybody wins; if whiffs exceed hits,
not so much.
     At the risk of strangling the life out of this particular metaphor,
Jim Abrahams' MAFIA! has two strikes against it before it even shows up at
the ballpark, the first and most obvious being its satiric target.  MAFIA!
is a parody of gangster films, particularly the GODFATHER films, with Jay
Mohr starring in the Michael Corleone-esque role of Anthony Cortino, a war
hero who returns home to join up with the crime family headed by his
father Vincenzo (Lloyd Bridges).  Most of the situations and characters
are pure GODFATHER -- Anthony's hot-headed older brother Joey (Billy
Burke), his WASP girlfriend Diane (Christina Applegate), flashbacks to the
Cortinos' arrival and rise to power in America -- which seems like a ripe
enough source for parody until you realize that the films in question came
out when the average 1998 movie-goer was just a pair of gametes and a
dream.  Entrenched though the films and their situations may be in the
cinematic canon, MAFIA! just feels stale, as topical as a Joey Buttafuoco
joke or a reference to Bella Abzug's hats.
     At least the GODFATHER films will be well-known to most average
viewers, though.  The other major reference points are Martin Scorsese's
mob-themed films GOODFELLAS and CASINO.  The number of gags baed on the
latter film, including the opening credits sequence and the character of
Pepper (Pamela Gidley, a dead ringer for Sharon Stone), is utterly
baffling given CASINO's less-than-spectacular box office performance.
References to more recent, more familiar films like FORREST GUMP and THE
ENGLISH PATIENT draw big chuckles, while the CASINO references draw mostly
blank stares. Touchstone was obviously concerned about being too obscure
when they changed the title from JANE AUSTEN'S MAFIA! (though curiously
that title still appears on-screen), but no one gave nearly as much
thought to the actual content of the film.
     The second strike is the "trailer factor," which is always a danger
with a broad comedy like MAFIA!  Since virtually none of the jokes are
contextual, and 90% of them can be conveyed in a matter of moments, the
people who put together theatrical trailers and television spots are free
to plunder the film for all the best laughs.  It's easy to pull 120 
seconds worth of "A" material from MAFIA!, sight gags like a shattering
poodle and an overweight ersatz River-dancer, but you're sadly mistaken if
you think that's a representative sample.  If you've seen that theatrical
trailer for MAFIA!, with its two-minute barrage of great bits, you've
probably laughed about as hard as you're going to laugh at the whole 85
minues of the film.
     Comedies like MAFIA! are usually entertaining just for forcing you to
pay attention.  Dozens of decent laughs hover around the perimeter of the
frame, while several of the best moments come during the closing credits,
including a great riff on the standard "no animals were harmed during the
making of this film" disclaimer.  It's the jokes Abrahams places front and
center which drop with a thud just a bit too often.  As just one example
of the lackluster writing, the "Guess What Number I'm Thinking Of" table
in one casino scene is a joke swiped from VEGAS VACATION...and VEGAS
VACATION did it better.  Abrahams offers plenty of moments worth a snicker
or a grin, but ultimately that laugh scorecard just doesn't come out in
his favor.  He came to the plate with a 25-year-old bat, and showed all
his best swings in batting practice.  For those of you scoring at home,
that doesn't add up to winning offense.

Author
Jamie Peck
MAFIA!
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The joke is on mob movies this time, specifically "The Godfather" 
trilogy, as the all-powerful Don Vincenzo Cortino (the late Lloyd 
Bridges) comes to a realization that his crime empire must be handed 
down to one of his two sons -- noble war hero Anthony (Jay Mohr in the 
Al Pacino role) or coke-addicted psychopath Joey (Billy Burke in the 
James Caan role). There's even a Diane Keaton-esque girlfriend 
(Christina Applegate, nicely deadpan) for the former, appropriately 
named Diane. Some of "Casino" is rolled into the story as well, as 
Anthony starts business in Las Vegas and courts a sassy showgirl (Pamela 
Gidley, a dead ringer for Sharon Stone) who does a pole routine that 
could get her into the Olympics. This surreal physical display is one of 
the film's funniest moments. 
For those who've never seen "The Godfather" -- get thee to a video 
store! -- or fear that the genre is too dated to milk for laughs, 
"Mafia!" also pokes fun at everything from "Striptease" to Barney to 
"The Lost World" to Riverdance to "Forrest Gump." (The best riff on 
"Gump," by the way, is not the "Run, florist, run!" bit showcased 
prominently on the previews, but rather a verbal exchange that ends with 
the line, "I have a son?") A great deal of these jokes work, though 
"Mafia!" sometimes pushes a visual too far, like the scene at a wedding 
reception where the band mistakenly believes a dancer is doing the 
Macarena, when, in fact, he's being jerked around by the hail of 
gunfire. It's funny to begin with, but the length of the sight gag 
sledgehammers away its effectiveness. 
Most of the time, however, the over-the-top approach is played just 
right, piling gag on gag until the comedy bases are loaded and a home 
run is scored; a prime example would be a send-up of "The English 
Patient" that segues into a free-for-all puke party a la "Stand by Me." 
The closing credits hide subliminal jokes ranging from mock-throwaway 
trivia about the cast ("Fun fact: Actress Christina Applegate invented 
radar") to a great rewrite of the American Humane Association 
disclaimer. Even the press kit gets in on the silliness -- the movie 
production information is written completely in Italian, while Abrahams' 
bio states that "in addition to [the his films, he] has also attended 
screenings of ‘Gandhi,' ‘Wall Street,' ‘Dances With Wolves' and ‘The 
Silence of the Lambs.'" 
Not much else can be said about "Mafia!" To criticize the indifferent 
plot or thin characters would be a pretty pointless task since their 
sole function is to provide something to hang all of the funny business 
on, and, in this case, the funny business is worthwhile for those of us 
who like this sort of thing. The genre that "Mafia!" belongs to is a 
difficult one to review because of its subjectivity -- either you find 
this sort of thing amusing or you don't. I did, and enough that I can 
recommend it as an enjoyable summer diversion, though it's nowhere near 
as enjoyable as many of its ancestors. Speaking of lineage, frequent 
Abrahams collaborators David Zucker and Pat Proft have similar fare due 
in the coming weeks with "BASEketball" and "Wrongfully Accused," 
respectively. Here's to hoping they're at least on par with "Mafia!"
