Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
Number of Reviews
28

Author
Bryant Frazer
     Give Warner Brothers credit.  With Joel Schumacher in charge of
BATMAN FOREVER, the company has finally made its biggest asset truly
safe for mass consumption.
     Yes, yes, everybody knows that Tim Burton is brilliant and all,
but wasn't BATMAN RETURNS just a little on the weird side?  Weren't the
movies a little too bleak for wholesome entertainment?  And hasn't it
become common wisdom that those first two Batman adventures were long
on style and short on *story*?
     Well, maybe.  While Tim Burton has built a cult reputation on the
strength of his idiosyncratic filmmaking, it seemed a little odd that
this would be the fellow chosen to finesse a blockbuster out of the
Batman franchise.  Studio execs must have been overly charmed by his
colorful production of BEETLEJUICE, and no doubt pawed eagerly through
copies of Frank Miller comics when Burton suggested a "darker" version
of Batman.  Michael Keaton and Jack Nicholson signed on, guaranteeing a
big fat hit.  When sequel time rolled around, Burton's vision became
even more surreal, riddled with non sequiturs and fetishistic visuals
that raked in less dough even as, one suspects, it alienated a good
portion of its audience.
     Mind you, Batman put me to sleep.  Twice.  The second movie was a
marked improvement, mainly because it so eloquently demonstrated that
Burton was a man who loved and understood cinema, even if he couldn't
quite get it to do what he wanted it to.  But I'd love it if someone
could explain to me exactly why the guy who directed THE CLIENT,
FALLING DOWN, and FLATLINERS was tapped to take over a wild, surreal
series of action movies.
     "Biff, pow," Batman.  Schumacher directs the whole thing up
close, like he's doing some kind of TV movie.  When individual body
parts are filling the screen, and the cuts are so quick that one motion
is indistinguishable from another and nearly every shot has been
spliced into the next before we can even focus, I suppose we're
supposed to rub our eyes and just say 'gosh.' I wouldn't be surprised
if this plays better on video, but that's not really the point.
     It's not all bad.  The story, for instance is actually an
improvement on the original films.  From the first introductory
sequence, the movie moves like a greased pig.  We get to see Robin,
whose character is woven into Batman's life.  At last, something more
than lip service is paid to the twisted psychology of Batman, and it
actually affects how the movie turns out.  And who would have expected
Nicole Kidman as Chase Meridian to do anything besides stand around and
drip sex?  More than just window dressing, the love interest catalyzes
Batman's examination of the two sides of himself.  In fact, this movie
goes all the way back to the beginning -- we have to see Bruce Wayne's
parents get killed again, we watch the kid fall into the bat cave, we
get the same old spiel about his obsessions.  It's a little trite, but
it keeps the far more colorful super-villains from stealing the show
completely (as they did in the Burton films) and cements our
identification with the hero, which is crucial to our enjoyment of this
one.
     Chris O'Donnell is well-cast in a role that plays against Val
Kilmer's too-cool crusader.  Maybe the reason we never saw much of what
made Michael Keaton's character tick was that he had no one besides
blank wall Kim Basinger to explain himself to.  Kilmer is better at
playing the part, even if he hardly seems old enough to be any kind of
mentor to O'Donnell.  And if Jim Carrey's histrionics are welcome
anywhere, they're welcome here.  For the first time, a comic book
character has been translated absolutely intact to the silver screen.
     The visual design is hit and miss.  The costumes are terrific,
and the retooled Batmobile is still very much the Batmobile.  But the
new Gotham City is less a locale for the movie than it is simply a
backdrop for the proceedings.  And the special effects, on the whole,
have the unfortunate effect of defusing some of the more spectacular
sequences by reminding us that we're simply watching some well-executed
but obviously computer-generated special effects.  And while the sound
is excellent, the orchestral score (ersatz Elfman) is not.
     But there's nothing sublime or even subtle about any of this.
No surprises, no mysteries, no moments out of time that fill us with
awe or wonder.  The best that can be said is that the movie does what
it sets out to do very well.  In contrast, Burton's reach seems always
to exceed his grasp (the notable exception is his most perfect movie,
EDWARD SCISSORHANDS).  When Burton was directing the films, you knew
that the pictures on-screen were the stuff of legend, even if the sum of
the parts was actually greater than the whole.  But with Schumacher at
the helm, the adventurousness of the filmmaking itself has
disappeared.  It's hard to pinpoint what's missing, but Batman has
suddenly become completely safe, a cuddly part of the corporate
culture.  He may be packing them in at the multiplex like no one else,
but when I start checking the Gotham City skyline for McDonald's arches
(you've seen the commercials, haven't you?), I know the magic is gone.

Author
Christopher Null
     Batman's reins have been turned over from director Tim Burton (now
producing) to Joel Schumacher, from lead Michael Keaton to Val Kilmer, and
from an old, baroque Gotham to a heavily stylized, kiddie-pop city.
     A lot can be said for the idea that the setting of a picture
thoroughly controls its tone.  What we have in BATMAN FOREVER is an
attempt to make Gotham more like Los Angeles, full of neon, black lights,
and people sporting primary-color wigs.  Unfortunately, something has been
lost in translation.
     What we lose is the idea of Batman as The Dark Knight.  Instead, he
spends a large bit of celluloid pontificating about the morality of
killing people, telling us like a public service announcement that it
won't make things better.  Okay, I buy that, but why is Batman telling me
this?  Batman is supposed to be a kick-ass-and-take-names type of guy, not
some lousy pacifist.  I don't need to got to the movies for that.  The
message is entirely out of place.  Also lost is a *real*
villain ... instead, we get Jim Carrey's over-the-top interpretation of The
Riddler, who was always a wuss on the TV show, and Tommy Lee Jones's
Harvey Two-Face, who I don't think I've even heard of.
     On the subject of villains, Carrey plays Carrey--what more can you
say?  He's hilarious, obviously made for the role, but the part isn't
written well enough to carry the picture alone.  Jones is downright awful
as Two-Face, mumbling his lines in every scene and trying desperately to
live up to the actors with much better parts who refuse to give him even a
little piece of the show.
     At any rate, here's what the new Batman brings to the table.  First
and foremost is Chris O'Donnell as Bruce Wayne's young ward, Dick Grayson,
a.k.a. Robin.  O'Donnell saves the film more often than he saves Batman,
proving what a spectacular actor he is, even with a bare-bones role.  Also
good is Nicole Kidman as Batman's love interest, Dr. Chase Meridian, who
ends up psychoanalyzing him out of his costume.  It's too bad the love
story wasn't written very well.
     And that's not all that's poorly written.  The plot has enough holes
to drive the Batmobile, the Batplane, *and* the Batboat through. 
Everything is homage to the first two films:  the obligatory car chase,
workmanlike fight scenes, people discovering Batman's true
identity ... yawn.  When you see the film, try to guess what will happen
next:  you'll be right.
     Overall, there's very little originality on the screen ... not that
you could see it, thanks to a nonexistent first act, some dismal
photography (Stephen Goldblatt, out of his element), even worse editing
(Dennis Virkler, surprising considering his two Oscar nominations), and
some dull, unrealistic digital effects.
     Thank God for the self-deprecating humor in the film, with Batman and
Robin poking fun at their small screen past.  If you watched the series at
all, the jokes make the movie worthwhile.  Kilmer is good, as usual, as
the man behind the mask, and there are a few good action sequences.  If
you see the film, try to ignore the preaching, pinch yourself awake after
the first half hour, and pray that Tim Burton makes a really good movie
next to make up for this one.

Author
Chuck Dowling
     I went with a group of friends to see the new Batman movie, and
when we left, I was scared.  I was scared to mention to my friends that
the movie I just witnessed was horrible.  Finally in the car, I said,
"Would anyone be truly offended if I say that was an awful movie?"
They felt relieved.  All four of us hated it.  Ok, you probably want to
know why.  I liked Batman Returns.  Everyone else in the world didn't,
but it remains my favorite of the three.  BATMAN FOREVER was just
ridiculously stupid.  From frame one, I realized that movie was truly
awful.  Lets get the good point out first, this is an extremely well
made film.  The stunts, the special effects, and just the overall look
of the film were all top-notch.  That's it for the good.
     First, in the first two films, Batman was not an idiot.  How many
times in this movie did Batman get caught in some situation and only
luck saved him?  So, if the bank guard in the vault at the beginning
didn't wear a hearing aid, Batman would be dead?  Come on.
     Second, Batman doesn't need to be cracking jokes.  When Michael
Keaton played the character, the humor came out of Bruce Wayne.  Batman
was the dark one.  It reversed in this one.
     Third, THE BATMOBILE DOES NOT NEED TO BE DRIVING UP WALLS!  I
wanted to leave at this point.
     Fourth, there was no satisfactory explanation for Two-Face's
origin.  Some guy at a trial somehow manages to get A VAT OF ACID to
the stand and throws it in Harvey Dent's face (by the way, Billy Dee
Williams must be mad as hell) while Batman looks on.  Yes, Batman, not
Bruce Wayne attended this trial, comfortably seated in the front row.
     Fifth, did anyone else find it stupid when Robin had a fight WITH
HIS LAUNDRY??? Was this supposed to be a cool moment?  Once again, I
wanted to walk out.
     Sixth, did the Riddler's riddles have anything to do with
anything?  So eventually they decoded to spell The Riddler's name.
Oooooo.  Big help for Batman and company.
     Seventh, the cliches.  When Grayson got into that street fight, I
said to myself, "Watch, these 200 punks are going to attack him one at
a time." They did.  And why would Robin want to save Two-Face?  "Yeah,
I'm going to beat you to a bloody pulp and throw you off this cliff,
but when you start to fall, I'll save you."  Come on.
     There are MANY other things that I had a problem with in this
film, but they will probably be considered as nit-picking, so I'll end
my review by saying that I hope this Batman doesn't last forever.

Author
Matthew Beckwith
     BATMAN FOREVER is fabulous.  It's light years better than either
of the first two.
     This is an intelligent person's film.  Each scene contains many
brain ticklers.  It's the kind of film that you'll want to rent or buy
on video and view over and over.
     A great deal of time and energy was obviously spent on set
design.  The sets are quite intricate, and not as dark as those in the
first two films.
     A curious, and unexpected, factor in this movie was Jim Carrey's
effeminate posturings.  I found myself wondering whether it was that
the actor is gay, or that the character is gay.  At one point, The
Riddler and Two Face actually embrace and kiss.  Certainly the gay
lobby will not be offended by this film!
     The special effects of this version of Batman are comparable to
those of the better science fiction films of our time.  Batman's
frequent flights through the air are quite convincing and
awe-inspiring.  When The Riddler and Two Face are sucking up the energy
from the minds of the populace, it is quite spooky.  And when the
various bat-vehicles are on the move, it's like being in a roller
coaster.
     The screenplay and acting are quite good in this film.  The plot
lines are interesting, some of them deep.  Val Kilmer's soul searchings
as Bruce Wayne/Batman, with the seductive coaching of Nicole Kidman's
Dr. Chase Meridian, are psychologically intriguing, and not overdone.
Chris O'Donnell does an excellent job as Robin.  Perhaps the only fault
with the film is the lack of depth of the two villains.  Jim Carrey is
campy but not much else; and Tommy Lee Jones is one-dimensional (which
is ironic, considering his character).
     I highly recommend BATMAN FOREVER.  Even if your reaction to the
first two was lukewarm, you'll love this one.
--
>From the Desk of Matt Beckwith, Jacksonville, Florida, beckwith@jaxnet.com

Author
Dragan Antulov
Among film geeks today it is quite fashionable to despise
Joel Schumacher, especially because of his magnum crimen -
ruining of Batman movie franchise. However, six years ago it
was completely different story - Schumacher was seen as a
saviour of Batman films. First two instalments in the
series, directed by Tim Burton, were often seen as too dark,
too "artsy" and under too much influence from Frank Miller's
DARK NIGHT graphic novel. Many Batman fans desired more
light-hearted and humorous approach, more in line with
popular television series from 1960s. In BATMAN FOREVER
Schumacher managed to deliver the goods and thus paved the
way for the disaster known as BATMAN AND ROBIN.
The protagonist of this film - multimillionaire and
crime-fighting superhero Bruce Wayne a.k.a. Batman (played
by Val Kilmer) - this time has to fight not one but two
supervillains that threaten Gotham City. First of them is
Harvey Dent a.k.a. Two-Face (played by Tommy Lee Jones),
former district attorney who went insane after having his
face scarred by acid. His criminal hordes are going to be
employed by another villain -Edward Nygma a.k.a. Riddler
(played by Jim Carey), scientist and former employee of
Bruce Wayne's business empire who managed to invent the
device that sucks up human brain and increases the IQ of
recipient. While Riddler and Two-Face join forces against
Batman, Bruce Wayne has to deal with some romantic problems
- he is in love with beautiful criminal psychiatrist dr.
Chase Meridian (played by Nicole Kidman), while good doctor
has hots for his charismatic alter ago. In the meantime,
Dick Grayson (played by Chris O'Donnell), young acrobat who
had his parents murdered by Two-Face, becomes Batman's
partner Robin the Boy Wonder.
Weak plot, complete lack of character development and at
least some actors who didn't look particularly interested in
their roles (this is especially the case with Val Kilmer who
wasn't able to fill Michael Keaton's shoes from two previous
films) or went over the top (this is definitely the case
with Tommy Lee Jones and Jim Carey) - all that could have
burried BATMAN FOREVER. But Schumacher somehow manages to
keep the film together, mostly by putting plenty of
spectacular action scenes which display nice special effects
and interesting production design by Barbara Ling, so
different from dark and often not so attractive Gotham
setting in two previous films. There is also much more
humour in this film, and also plenty of references to 1960s
TV show. Some of the actors are very good too - Michael
Gough is always reliable as Wayne's trusted servant Alfred,
while Nicole Kidman with her looks and undeniable charm
manages to transcend script limitations of her character.
Although Elliott Goldenthal couldn't compete with Danny
Elfman, his musical score, as well as the rest of rather
impressive soundtrack, is as pleasing to the ears as the
look of the film is pleasing to the audience's eyes.
Although hardly something that would stay long in viewers'
memory, BATMAN FOREVER is entertaining summer blockbuster,
which shows that even someone with Joel Schumacher's
reputation can make a decent film under proper conditions.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Matthew Turner
     Okay, so what if the newest Batman movie doesn't follow the
path/look/spirit of its angsty, semi-nihilistic comic counterpart?  I
hope no one takes this as shallow as it may seem, but I do not go to
movies about superheroes to see regular people.  I go to see the
superheroes, the supervillains, the larger-than-life conflict, an
episode in the never-ending battle between Good and Evil, between Law
and Chaos.  What if we sacrifice a little character-depth for it all?
So what? I didn't go into BATMAN FOREVER on its opening night looking
for an angsty, self-indulgent overanalysis of character that would bore
Sigmund Freud to tears.  I went to see The Batman go up against
Two-Face and The Riddler.  I was only slightly let down.
     It didn't make lots of difference for me that Val Kilmer was
playing Batman.  He contributed a certain slickness that Michael Keaton
lacked, but Keaton was older and seemed a tad more complex of an
individual, more of a grown-up.  I was happy that Tim Burton *wasn't*
directing this installment.  I disliked BATMAN RETURNS, and I disliked
it a lot.  It wasn't just dark.  It was pitch.  It's probably just me,
but that kind of movie I can do without... unless it's just flat-out
done better.  Joel Schumacher did an excellent job of bringing a comic
book feel to the movie.  It reminds most people of the ones they read
as kids, bright, flashy, quick, slick and filled with some cool
one-liners.  In the older comics (ones of the late 70s and early 80s)
we didn't have these superheroes with tortured souls.  It was the BAD
GUYS with the tortured souls.  That's why they were BAD in the first
place!
     Jim Carrey pulled off The Riddler like Frank Gorshin with a twist,
a meaner twist. (For those who *don't* know, Frank Gorshin was the best
Riddler from the original Batman series.) It was a terrific job for
Carrey.  He was made for it.  Enough said.  I was disappointed with
Two-Face, though.  I thought Tommy Lee Jones was fantastic ... when I
saw him.  In the opening, the surrounding noise was so loud I couldn't
understand what he was saying a lot of the time.  What I saw of
Two-Face I liked, and I kept wishing for more.  I was also let
waaaaaaaaaay down by the way in which Two-Face was defeated.  I don't
know what, but I thought it should've been a different end to
Two-Face.  It seemed like only an afterthought, like they said, "Oops.
Gotta kill Two-Face.  Oh!  I know...."
     .... and Robin.  Robin.  Robin.  Robin.  I always HATED Robin.
In the TV show I always hoped that one of the villains' traps or
torture devices or murder machines would've chopped him into a billion
billion pieces and hurled them into the Sun.  But Chris O'Donnell did
pretty good.  I actually didn't want him to die.  It was cool.  As for
Nicole Kidman.  She was okay.  She looked nice in a bedsheet, I
suppose.  And Michael Gough *rules* as Alfred.
     The special effects were niff-neato, though I thought "The Box"
should've been either a box or called something else.  The City of
Gotham (computer-generated), I thought, was really good.
     In all, BATMAN FOREVER is better than the comics-junkies might
believe.  After all, I spend much of my time in movies and less time in
comics.  I may not be as good a judge of comics as movies, but BATMAN
FOREVER *isn't* a comic.  It's a movie.  Remember that, and you'll
probably like it.

Author
Cyrus Chen
     BATMAN FOREVER is a film made for my age group (14) and I can tell
you that this film really sucks!  The acting was horrible.  It seemed
to me that the producers used more special effects than acting.  Val
Kilmer was pretty bad.  He cannot act.  Michael Keaton, who appeared in
the previous two Batman movies, was a much better actor.  Tommy Lee
Jones, one of the better actors who played in other films such as THE
FUGITIVE and THE CLIENT did not act so well in this movie.  In this
movie, he was just another wannabe Jack Nicolson because the notorious
Two-Face was acting very much like the Joker in BATMAN.  The only good
feature to this film was the human cartoon Jim Carrey.  This man can
just amaze you with his changeable face.  It's like, "How the hell did
you do that?"
     Another thing was the script.  Hated it.  There wasn't too much
dialogue.  Most of the script was the "Spectacular Special Effects"
(albeit the special effects weren't that hot). Tim Burton who directed
the previous two Batman films should have definitely directed this
film.  He could have probably made this dull and crummy movie into a
spectacular film.  If the first two movies were a hit, why didn't he
direct this one?
     They also didn't show the origin of Two-Face; he was sort of just
there.  In the previous two movies, the script at least showed where
the main evil bad guy came from. How about a little explanation?  Where
did this guy come from?  You shouldn't have to read the comics to know
where Two-Face came from!
     Most people think this film is hot because of all the promotion it
has had.  Every time you turn on the television you see that Batman
Forever commercial and that famous 99c cup from Mcdonald's.  The
commercial really fooled me.  It got me all excited and I couldn't wait
for that movie to come out, sort of thing.  Once you see it, though,
it's a big disappointment.
     I am sorry, but this was just a terrible movie.  If you are a big
Batman fan and one of those people who just can't miss a Batman flick,
then it's worth a shot, after all it's only four bucks at the matinee!
But if you care about good movies, save your money!  BATMAN FOREVER, a
movie to be missed.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I am sorry to report that Tim Burton has decided to make a third
Batman movie, BATMAN FOREVER.  This is the first one that he did not
direct although he did produce it.  For director he tapped Joel
Schumacher, whose only halfway decent film was THE CLIENT.
     BATMAN FOREVER has nothing new to say.  As usual, there are a set
of villains: D.  A.  Harvey "Two-Face" Dent (Tommy Lee Jones) and
Edward Nygma - The Riddler (Jim Carrey) and good guys: Dr.  Chase
Meridian (Nicole Kidman) and Commissioner Gordon (Pat Hingle).  This
time we have Chris O'Donnell playing Dick Grayson - Robin.  The biggest
difference of all is Val Kilmer as Bruce Wayne - Batman rather than
Michael Keaton.
     The plot, you ask?  Why do you ask?  If you have seen one Batman,
you have seen them all.  I will not cover the plot as its existence is
irrelevant.  One sees Batman to sneer at the villains and watch all of
the gadgetry and stunts.  Almost every scene requires the suspension of
disbelief in order to watch it.
     The script is full of one liners that end in "ha ha ha" just to
make sure that you know it is supposed to be a joke.  Moreover, the
director has the actors get all wild eyed to make absolutely sure you
know it is a joke.  Perhaps, Batman has always been this way, but the
style has outlined ability to charm or interest an audience.  The
audience in the theater I was at had about as much interest in the
movie as Val Kilmer did, which is almost none.  He sleepwalked through
most of the movie.  Even at that, his performance was much better than
Kidman's who was unable to demonstrate she could act at all, and based
on her previous movies, I would say the jury is still out on that
question anyway.
     The sets by Barbara Ling and the cinematography by Stephen
Goldblatt were in the usual dark and foreboding Batman style.  Granted
they were not as sinister as in BATMAN or BATMAN RETURNS, nevertheless,
they were pretty depressing.
     I understand that Robin Williams was offered the role of The
Riddler, but Tim Burton got frustrated when Williams would not make up
his mind if he wanted to take the part or not and gave it to Carrey
instead out of frustration.  Frankly, I think Williams's style of humor
would have enlivened the show some, and I am sorry he did not agree to
do the part.
     BATMAN FOREVER seemed liked it ran forever.  The editing by Dennis
Virkler was fast paced, but had too much material at 2:00.  I was bored
from the beginning.  It is correctly rated PG-13 for comic violence and
sexual references.  I would not let kids under 13 see it, but there
were a fair number of 8 year olds and above in the audience when I saw
it.  I do not recommend the movie, and I award it a single star solely
for the gadgets.  I hope Tim Burton realizes that the Batman formula is
tired, and it is time to bury it.  I do hope that next year we do not
have BATMAN AD NAUSEAM as yet another blockbuster attempt.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Andrew Hicks
     There were two things I was looking forward to in June of 1995
(besides graduating from high school, of course): the Michael Jackson
HIStory album and BATMAN FOREVER, both of which turned out to be less
than ideal.  Everyone's saying this new Batman movie is a definite
improvement over the doom and gloom of the Tim Burton movies, which I
both liked, but there's really no way to compare the two because
they're so completely different.  In fact, it seems to me that great
measures were taken to ensure this movie was distanced as far from the
first two Batman movies as possible. Instead of calling it BATMAN 3, as
if to actually admit the Burton films exist, they called it BATMAN
FOREVER, which makes it seem more like a household cleaning product
than a movie ("Want to remove tough stains fast?  Use BATMAN
FOREVER.").
     Michael Keaton, who put on the cape and cowl in the other Batman
movies (and did an unexpectedly good job of it), has been replaced by
Val Kilmer, who makes Adam West seem almost Shakespearean. Kilmer's
portrayal of Batman is one-dimensional and wooden, and the manner in
which he delivers most of his serious lines borders on self-parody
("Are you trying to get under my cape, doctor?").
     Then there's The Riddler, played by a man you know I don't
like--Jim Carrey, who pretty much plays himself in a green
question-mark suit. I know there is a substantial percentage of people
out there who actually think Jim Carrey is funny, but then there are
also a lot of people who think they've been abducted by aliens and
stalked by Elvis. Most intelligent people see right through the strange
facial configurations and recycled soundbites (The only thing missing
is an "Al-l-l-l-l-righty then.") and realize there's nothing funny
underneath, particularly when you realize the Riddler character is
meant to be crazy but not a comedian, kind of like The Joker from the
first Batman, played masterfully by Jack Nicholson. Of course,
comparing Nicholson and Carrey is an exercise in futility, like
comparing The Beatles and Weezer.
     Tommy Lee Jones plays the other villain, Two-Face, the epitome of
duality. One side is normal, upright, law-abiding, and the other is
ruthlessly evil, as a result of a face-scarring acid accident. You have
to give credit to Jones for at least trying to stay in character (more
than I can say for Carrey), but his performance, while notable, still
comes off as second-banana to scene-stealing (the ultimate crime)
Carrey, or did you notice they devoted thirty minutes to The Riddler's
origin and a ten-second passing reference to Two-Face?
     The movie's best performance is delivered by Chris O'Donnell
(Pacino's lackey in Scent of a Woman), who plays Dick Grayson, a
tormented acrobat teen whose family has been killed by Two-Face. He is
taken in as millionaire Bruce Wayne's youthful ward and, upon learning
Bruce's identity, insists on avenging his parents' murder as Batman's
sidekick. For a "light-hearted" movie, this aspect of O'Donnell's
character, along with Kilmer's flashback dreams of his parents' murders
and the realization that revenge has become his life, is definitely as
dark and moody as anything Burton did.
     Rounding out the cast (with a stand-out performance) is Nicole
Kidman as Dr. Chase Meridian, who is obsessed with Batman but soon
finds herself drawn to Bruce Wayne as well. Gee, that's a tough
choice.  And what if Batman ever found out she has having an affair
with Bruce Wayne? That's a fight I'd like to see. Kidman is as sexy as
ever (especially since I don't remember her ever being particularly
sexy in the first place) and is as good a replacement for Kim
Basinger's Vicki Vale as anyone. Another example of the disowning of
the Burton Batman films by Batman Forever comes when Kilmer tells
Kidman no one has ever found out about his secret identity before, even
though Vicki Vale, Catwoman and Max Shreck (evil businessman
Christopher Walken) all stumbled upon his identity in the first two
movies.
     Then there are the supporting players. Two-Face's duality is
brought out further in his two girlfriends--nice-girl Sugar (Drew
Barrymore, in the stretch of her career) and naughty dominatrix (I've
always wanted to use that word in a review) Spice (No One I've Ever
Heard Of). And the only two returning actors from Batman and Batman
Returns, Michael Gough as Alfred, Bruce's butler and confidant, and Pat
Hingle as Commissioner Gordon.
     The BATMAN FOREVER director, Joel Schumacher, has abandoned the
dark, Gothic style sets of BATMAN and BATMAN RETURNS in favor of a more
surreal, psychedelic comic book which helps create a mood that's
lighter and more trippy. It's blatantly obvious, though, that the
Gotham buildings are computer-generated, whereas the Burton skyline
consisted of tediously constructed miniatures, but again, comparing the
styles of Burton and Schumacher is like comparing apples and nipples
(whatever that means).
     The Batcostumes in BATMAN FOREVER are even more sleek and
streamlined than the Keaton costume, though for some odd reason,
Robin's costume includes fake nipples on the chest (so now it is like
comparing apples and nipples). Even the Batmobile is a different car.
This one shoots fire out the back all the time (fueled by Mexican food
apparently) and sports a strange-looking fin running the length of the
back of the car. Maybe Batman bought it used from Sharkman. One thing I
do know--the old Batmobile was a lot better.
     The plot this time has mad scientist Edward Nigma becoming The
Riddler after Bruce Wayne turns down funding for his invention "The
Box" (Isn't that a music video channel?), which makes interactive TV
possible, and also extracts knowledge from the minds of the viewers,
transporting it telepathically to the mind of The Riddler. It is
through this invention that The Riddler promises Two-Face knowledge of
Batman's true identity (which, according to Kilmer, has never before
been revealed--deliberate inconsistencies are the worst). In between,
the Chase Meridian/Batman and Robin story lines are developed and a few
death traps are thrown in to boot.
     All in all, BATMAN FOREVER is a good movie, but not as good as
it could have been with a few minor changes (drop Kilmer and Carrey,
tone down the set psychedelia, stick with the original costumes and
Batmobile, etc.). Still, I'm looking forward to that fourth Batman
movie in 1998.

Author
Joan Ellis
     If circumstances force you to see BATMAN FOREVER, buy some malted
milk balls, slip into your seat, and prepare to plan your taxes or your
summer vacation.  This is a movie that will leave you there, uninvolved,
while it screams forth an explosion of noise and image that has nothing
much to do with anything.
     It would be charitable to dwell on the special effects, like the
surreal rendering of Gotham as a city of glossy stainless steel
cylinders and shafts.  It could also be said that the grotesque makeup
on Two-Face (Tommy Lee Jones) and the Riddler (Jim Carrey) is a
technical achievement and that the cast makes merry with its parts.
But any of that would be an excessive stretch.
     The truth is that this movie is interminably dull and inexcusably
bad.  Just as television news gives viewers mere snippets of events
shown behind the blow-dried hair and taut faces of its anchors, so
"Batman" assaults the audience with empty images.  The invitation,
implicit in the purchase of a movie ticket, to step out of your world
and into someone else's has escaped producer Tim Burton and his staff
completely.  Theirs is a lifeless party.
     See that ball rolling?  See the plunging cylinder?  Where are they
going?  Where did they come from?  You will never know, because the
movie is filmed in such extreme closeup that you can't tell what is
happening.  It's enough, the filmmakers think, to give us a jazzy
montage of fireballs, helicopters, and geometric shapes.  They didn't
waste a minute on building the suspense essential to an action film.
     A two-hour dose of computerized images is intolerably insulting to
an audience waiting to be invited into the fun.  Even if the
determination of the Riddler and Two-Face to unmask Batman is enough of
a premise, we want to be captured.  Scare us, surprise us, make us
laugh!  We want to be horrified at the plunging elevator, intimidated
by a height, frightened by the sea.  Instead we sit, bored and annoyed,
until we, the offended audience, finally shuffle out into the lobby,
angry at a lost night.
     Of the actors, only Michael Gough as Alfred brings a bit of polish
to the mess.  Val Kilmer is adequate as Batman, with metal nipples, but
the poor guy is given not one line or situation that he might infuse
with panache.  A comic strip without a sophisticated light touch is a
dead fish.
     Tommy Lee Jones is game as the psychotic Two-Face, but his part,
without lines or style, is merely a wheel-spinner.  Chris O'Donnell
brings a little dash to Robin, the all-American sidekick, and Jim
Carrey continues to build a career on looking ridiculous in variations
of hair styles and hats.
     Nicole Kidman looks her best, if that helps.  And she delivers the
movie's best line:  "I could write a hell of a paper on a grown man who
dresses like a rodent."   Precisely.  But no one did.


Author
Jeff Pidgeon
It's Not "Batman Forever"--It Just Feels That Way
     I wholeheartedly admit up front that I didn't like either of the
first two "Batman" movies very much.  This sequel, on the other hand,
was created by an entirely new team--nobody (except the fellow who
plays Alfred the butler) was carrying over from the other two.  Tim
Burton's executive production credit didn't worry me much as I had
heard initially that he wasn't very interested in doing the third
installment, so I figured his involvement would be limited at best.
I've since heard that Warners actually didn't want Burton to direct
again, because BATMAN RETURNS was too dark for the huge mainstream
audience Waners was aiming for.  Possibly, but I have trouble believing
they shooed away the director of one their most successful films of the
decade, not to mention of all time.  At any rate, I was curious to see
what fresh perspective Joel (FLATLINERS) Schumacher would bring to THE
FRANCHISE.  I've never liked any of his films either, but FALLING DOWN
showed promise, and like the saying goes, "Nobody Knows Anything."
     After the first fifteen minutes had passed, I wanted to leave.
Usually, if I'm not into it after thirty minutes, it's not gonna
happen.  There are exceptions, but that sort of thing is pretty
rare.  Basically, it's a mess--a loud, confused, ugly heap of color
and noise that occasionally draws into focus only to rend itself apart
with the next action sequence.  The editing is so rapid fire I found
myself longing for a sequence with the love interest (and those are
generally the worst things about the "Batman" series--if I hear one
more speech about 'duality' or 'darkness and light'...!) to give my
eyes a rest.  Val Kilmer is generally a better Batman--he's more
physical than Keaton, which I think is more appropriate.  They even
attempt to make him more of a detective by giving him The Riddler's
puzzles to solve.  That would work if solving the puzzles had a bearing
on the plot, but by and large, they don't really seem to.  The Riddler
and Two-Face keep such a high profile in the film that they never seem
particularly difficult to track down.  The majority of the time, they
seem to be throwing themselves in Batman's face.
     Nicole Kidman is attractive and generates more screen heat than
Kim Basinger, but how difficult is that, really?  Generally, her time
is spent mooning after Batman/Bruce Wayne, or hiding the fact with that
swordplay-type banter that's all the rage in romantic comedies.  Both
Kidman and Kilmer are given more to do than Keaton, Basinger and
Pfeiffer had, but that's not saying a lot.  Their portrayals don't
bring any dimension or empathy to the characters, so it's mostly two
hours of quipping between them.  Tommy Lee Jones has worked with Oliver
Stone, so he knows what it's like to be acting over the art direction.
Sadly, the script focuses more on The Riddler, so his role is lost in
the din--we find out how he became Two-Face later in the picture, on
that Exposition News Network Bruce always seems to be watching.  Carrey
has his moments as The Riddler--he's a gifted comedian, maybe the best
physical performer since Steve Martin--but he has to shriek most of his
lines just to make his presence known.  His sense of timing and
delivery carry him through the wake of the film without getting pulled
under.  Chris O'Donnell and Michael Gough are the two, as Dick Grayson
and Alfred, who come out of this the best.  Neither are given much in
the way of script (as opposed to screen time), but they were the only
two who created believable, empathetic characters out of virtually thin
air.  Although most of their scenes together are the same, they work,
both (to a degree) as performances and as a respite from the action.
     The script is a tangle of flashbacks, one-liners, clues that
ultimately seem pointless, a smeared xerox of the
does-she-love-the-hero-or-the-man conflict from SUPERMAN, another
take-over-Gotham plot, the origin of the Riddler, the origin of Robin,
and the Batman-Robin conflict, the most interesting fragment but mostly
a case of too-late-in-the-picture-to-care-anymore.  We've heard all of
it before, and it wasn't too robust in the first place.  The climax
seems lifted straight from the TV show, only amplified beyond all
comprehension.  It's not something that's built up to as much as
wandered upon.  Much like the previous installments, all the props and
vehicles are destroyed in order that new ones may be designed (and a
new toy line prepared) for the successor.
     The art direction consists mainly of 'put searchlights and neon on
it'.  The main problem with comic books being turned into live-action
movies is that the director seems to feel that since it's a comic book,
he/she can *play* *it* *up* visually, which usually results in clutter
(like THE FLINTSTONES).  It's sad to say, but as time goes on, FLASH
GORDON looks better and better.  The huge sets and CG models are
covered with so much crap in BATMAN FOREVER that it still feels cramped
in spite of the scale.  I've never seen so many lasers and black light
in my entire life.  The new Batwing looked spiffy for its brief stint
on screen (I especially like how it was stored in the Batcave), but
overall, it's the worst looking film of the series.
     I don't remember hearing many of Danny Elfman's themes in Eliot
(ALIEN 3) Goldenthal's score, so he gets credit for striking out on his
own and not coasting (like SUPERMAN II), but to be honest, I hardly
remember music at all.  Most of the score was totally lost in the
onslaught.  I remember hearing brief patches that reminded me of ALIEN
3, but that's all.  Granted, the sound system in the theater I was in
was poor to say the least, so I think the only thing left to do is to
hear it on its own, or see the film in a better theater.  For me at
least, the latter isn't really a desirable option.  So far, CRUMB is
the best film I've seen this summer, and I have this feeling APOLLO 13
and WATERWORLD aren't going to change that.

Author
Andy Jacob
S: Val Kilmer, Tommy Lee Jones, Jim Carrey, Nicole Kidman, Chris O'Donnell
D: Joel Schumacher
        I've been putting off watching this movie for a long time. 
When it was in the theater I opted to watch Apollo 13 instead. One reason 
was that many reivews said the film stunk, so I stayed away from it. But 
having watched it, I realized that I had missed a pretty good movie.
The latest Batman flick differs quite a bit from the other Batman movies. 
For one thing, the role of Batman has been passed along from Michael 
Keaton to Val Kilmer. Gothem City has changed from a dark and dreary town 
to a hip, modern town. And once again, Batman's foes have changed. Some 
of the changes were good, but there were some minuses to the movie, too.
On the plus side, Val Kilmer. I think that he made a much better Batman 
than Michael Keaton. But the way he spoke in the film was almost comical; 
he always had a deep, almost fake superhero voice. 
Also a big plus was Tommy Lee Jones (who plays Twoface, Batman's main 
enemy in the film). He was probably the best actor in 
the film. I've seen him in many other films, and this just proves once 
again how diverse of an actor he can be. The way he plays the "bad guy" 
is just right: He acts just right when trying to catch Batman and acts 
just right when he fails. He also (to my surprise) added a lot of humor 
to the film. 
Nicole Kidman (who played Dr. Chase Meridian) was absolutely gorgeous,
as she usually is. Definately a plus on that level. However, she really
didn't serve much of a purpose in the movie other than to drag out a
soap opera of sorts (the saga of herself and Bruce Wayne). She's a very
good actress in addition to her good looks, but she really wasn't given
a very good part to work with. So she was both a plus and a minus.
Jim Carrey (who played The Riddler)  was good, but was a disappointment to 
me. He was given a perfect "Jim Carrey" part and he pretty much blew it. 
There were certainly some funny parts, like the scene where he and 
Two-Face are trying to blow up the Batboat by playing a game of 
"Battleship" that triggers bombs in the water. When Two-Face got a hit 
that destroyed the boat, The Riddler exclaims in a dorky kind of voice 
like the commercial for the game Battleship: "YOU SUNK MY BATTLESHIP!" 
Overall, he wasn't as funny as he could have been.
Chris O'Donnell was the biggest disappointment. He played Robin, Batman's 
sidekick. His acting was terrible, and the plot of his parents getting 
killed by Two-Face was also very corny. There is one good scene were he 
pokes fun at the earlier T.V. series of Batman. He's walking along and he 
says "Holey rusted metal, Batman!", meaning that literally (He was 
standing on rusted metal full of holes, thus "holey").
The plot was different enough from the other movies to be interesting. 
Batman is trying to destroy Two-Face, the Riddler joins Two-Face as 
another enemy to Batman, meanwhile Chase dumps Batman for Bruce Wayne and 
soon finds out that Bruce Wayne is Batman. The bad guys discover this at 
the same time, though, and capture Chase and Robin. Then Batman has to 
save them. Personally, I liked the little bits of humor in the movie the 
best. In addition to the things I've already mentioned, I like the part 
at the beginning when Alfred, the butler of sorts for Bruce Wayne, asks 
him as he's about to leave as Batman to fight a crime: "Could I persuade 
you to take a sandwich with you, sir?" To this, Batman responds: "I'll 
get drive-through.
The special effects both added a lot to the movie and took away from the 
movie. The effects were excellent, but they were used too often. When 
this happens, the whole movie becomes boring because you have Batman 
kicking and punching bad guys and things blowing up as a result every ten 
minutes.
Despite all it's minuses, this movie was pretty good. The little things 
made it ok. It adds yet another chapter onto the Batman story, and there 
will no doubt be another one in a couple years. This is a pretty good 
movie that had the potential to be a great movie but blew it. 
Nevertheless, it's always nice to watch a good old fashioned good guys 
versus bad guys movie. And even after all the changes to Batman, the 
good guys still won.
Rating Scale:
* - Terrible. Don't see it; it's a waste of time
** - Not very good at all, probably not worth seeing
*** - Average. Plusses and Minusses
**** - A very good movie. Worth seeing.
***** - Excellent. Don't miss it!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     In the supremely entertaining BATMAN FOREVER, director Joel
Schumacher serves up *story*.  Five stories, actually, as if he's
anxious to dispel the myth/truth that a BATMAN movie can only be about
atmosphere.  Working from a strong script that emphasizes the *humor*
of Gotham City, the veteran director presents a colorful grab bag of
"scarred psychoses."
     There's the Riddler (Jim Carrey), a nerdy scientist who's invented
a device to "read men's minds."  He's in cahoots with Two-Face (Tommy
Lee Jones), the scarred ex-District Attorney who is Gotham's villain du
jour.  Back at Stately Wayne Manor, the Big Guy (Val Kilmer, replacing
Michael Keaton) is thinking about retiring the cape, while his ward,
Dick Greyson (Chris O'Donnell), is itching to play dress-up.  And,
chasing everyone listed above, is a pin-up psychologist (Nicole Kidman)
who's on hand to diagnose dreams and reaffirm the lead character's
heterosexuality.
     Each character in BATMAN FOREVER gets their own story, which is
fair enough.  Unfortunately, only two of those stories really work.
The Riddler's is the most fun, with Jim Carrey in fine form as the
disgruntled Wayne Enterprises employee who wants his *own* revenge.
His Riddler is the life of the party, though we could stand to see more
of what his invention does.  The other fun one is Chris O'Donnell as
Robin.  He's the human side of BATMAN FOREVER, and he brings a fresh
vitality to a series that's always in danger of taking itself too
seriously.  He even gets to joyride in the Batmobile, though no one
bothers to explains why said vehicle has *two* tail fins in certain
scenes, instead of one.
     Val Kilmer makes an intriguing Caped Crusader, but he plays his
part too straight.  There's no edge to his character--nothing to
distinguish the fact that *he's* Batman.  He may be sturdier than his
predecessor, but, frankly, he's a bit of a bore as he spends the entire
film brooding over whether or not to be Batman.  To cowl, or not to
cowl?  (Here is where huge chunks of the story seem to be missing.
Bruce Wayne seeks help for his dreams, but we're never shown the scene
where he's supposedly "cured."  We see him *after* the fact, but the
scripted explanation involving a diary and a giant bat (!) has been
dropped.  Why?)
     There's enough energy around Kilmer to compensate for his flat
Bat, though, even if said superhero functions more like James Bond in a
cape than the Dark Knight detective of the comic books.  Case in point:
the unnecessary romance between Kilmer and Kidman.  They barely have
any screen time together!  Like most of the story, their "love
triangle" isn't given enough room to breathe.  For super-battles, quick
quick is fine; for romance it's a bust.
     Academy Award winner Tommy Lee Jones plays the other villain,
Harvey "Two-Face" Dent.  He's obsessed with justice, but he raves too
much for us to believe him.  The actor also gets quite a few good
lines, though much of his dialogue is muted, as if someone decided that
the audience would only laugh at Jim Carrey.  The jokes on
them--however broadly he's played, Two Face is still more amusing than
the one-dimensional Riddler.
     If this second villain seems to get lost in the shuffle, it's
because Two-Face is introduced immediately, with no background or
context for the audience.  The director must be counting on the
viewer's presold knowledge of the characters; something that isn't true
if you haven't been reading your Happy Meal.  The credits are rolled
over his bank robbery sequence, and it's a lousy to way to start a
movie.  It's too abrupt. They should've kept the originally scripted
opening scene of Two-Face's escape from Arkham Asylum.
     In fact, there are several places in BATMAN FOREVER where footage
seems to be missing.  Was Schumacher under pressure from Warner to
bring the film in under two hours?  The movie is missing about ten to
fifteen minutes of extra footage--small (or not so small) pieces that
could go a long way to explaining some of the action.  What exactly
does Batman's "sonar suit" do, for example?  The order of some scenes
could also be questioned.  For example, the director interrupts a
montage of Riddler robberies to show young Master Dick drying his
clothes like Jackie Chan.  It's a great a bit, but out of place at that
point in the film.
     BATMAN FOREVER is certainly more fun than the first films, due in
no small part to the numerous nods to the TV series.  The characters
spend more time joking than fighting, while the director lightens
nearly every scene with a skewered camera angle or two.  Holy homage!
There's also a ton of clever details, ranging from a beefcake shot of
the Bat Butt to a creatively coifed character affectionately titled
"Dr. Burton."  Catch some of these on the third and fourth viewing.
     The technical credits are all very good.  The art direction is
impeccable, with superb sets, costumes, and makeup.  The special
effects are good to very good--and rely a little too heavily on
the computer-generated sort, if you ask me.  The music is by Elliott
Goldenthal, who replaces Danny Elfman.  He's written a fine, loud score
that never once breaks into the familiar refrain of "na na na na na na
na na, BATMAN!"

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995 
U.S. Availability: wide release 6/16/95 
Running Length: 2:01 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Violence, cartoonish garishness) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Cast: Val Kilmer, Tommy Lee Jones, Jim Carrey, Nicole Kidman, Chris 
      O'Donnell, Michael Gough, Pat Hingle, Drew Barrymore, Debbie Mazar 
Director: Joel Schumacher 
Producers: Tim Burton and Peter MacGregor-Scott 
Screenplay: Lee Batchler, Janet Scott Batchler, and Akiva Goldsman based 
            on characters created by Bob Kane 
Cinematography: Stephen Goldblatt 
Music: Elliot Goldenthal 
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers 
     It's lighter, brighter, funnier, faster-paced, and a whole lot more 
colorful than before.  There's a new actor underneath the cape, a new 
girlfriend on his arm, and a new partner by his side.  The director is 
different and the composer has changed.  The villains -- Jim Carrey 
decked out in a neon question-mark jacket and Tommy Lee Jones with a 
face out of THE ELEPHANT MAN -- are making their debuts.  Yet somehow, 
perhaps because of the costume, it still feels like the same BATMAN 
we've gotten to know in two previous films.  The same, yet different -- 
and much better. 
     Considering all the attendant hype and long box office lines for 
BATMAN FOREVER, a review is almost superfluous.  Regardless, I still 
have an opinion, and since this is my usual method of getting it into 
the open, I see no reason to change now.  So, here goes... 
     This time around, the Caped Crusader (Val Kilmer) is faced with a 
new pair of dastardly bad guys:  the Riddler (Carrey) and Harvey Two-
Face (Jones).  The Riddler, aka Edward Nigma, is a scientist working in 
Bruce Wayne's electronics factory.  When he invents a device to beam 
television waves directly into the brain, then tries it on himself, he 
becomes unhinged ("wacko" is the "technical" term used).  Now, he's out 
to control all of Gotham City and humiliate his former boss in the 
process.  To that end, he joins up with Two Face, who has a more modest 
goal:  kill Batman, whom he blames for his disfigurement.  Meanwhile, 
Bruce Wayne is falling for his third woman in three films.  This time, 
it's a lady doctor with a name that sounds like two merged banks (Chase 
Meridian, played by Nicole Kidman).  She's a psychiatrist who 
specializes in split personalities (something that afflicts just about 
everyone in this movie).  And, in the person of Dick Grayson (Chris 
O'Donnell), who takes on the appellation Robin, Batman gets a sidekick 
to help use all his bat-gadgets and pilot his batmobiles, bat boats, bat 
planes, and bat subs. 
     There's a lot going on in BATMAN FOREVER -- probably much more than 
in either BATMAN or BATMAN RETURNS -- yet Joel Schumacher keeps things 
on an even keel, moving swiftly without creating such a strong undertow 
that the viewer loses his or her footing.  The film is a blast and, 
ultimately, a very quick two hours.  In a relatively short time, we get 
a solid action/adventure story, an odd romantic triangle (Chase is 
attracted to Batman; Bruce Wayne is attracted to Chase -- it kind of 
recalls the old Lois Lane/Clark Kent/Superman thing from the first two 
movies about that superhero), and the most detailed exploration of 
Batman's character to date.  All-in-all, this is a very full motion 
picture. 
     Schumacher's vision of Gotham is similar to, yet different from, 
Tim Burton's.  The same bizarre, larger-than-life architecture is 
evident, but BATMAN FOREVER's city is bigger and brighter.  This is a 
jaunty, multi-hued place that reflects a lightening in the movie's tone.  
Burton's efforts were lugubrious and occasionally borderline demented; 
Schumacher acts like a grown-up having fun in a toy store.  How else to 
explain calling his hero "a grown man who dresses like a flying rodent" 
or making sly references to Superman and the old, campy BATMAN TV 
series? 
     As the pop icon du jour, Jim Carrey gets the lion's share of screen 
time.  Schumacher lets him go pretty much unchecked, which leads to a 
great deal of over-the-top zaniness.  Carrey fans will lap it up.  
Personally, however, I prefer the comedian diluted -- there are times 
when his Riddler gets a bit unbearable.  By comparison, Tommy Lee Jones' 
equally (and wonderfully) overacted Two-Face appears subdued.  Nicole 
Kidman is smart and sassy -- perhaps not as appealing as the leather-
clad Michelle Pfeiffer, but certainly an improvement over BATMAN's Kim 
Basinger.  As Robin, Chris O'Donnell is a hip and charismatic choice.  
And for those who want an anchor to the previous films, we have Michael 
Gough's reliable Alfred. 
     Then there's the new Batman himself.  Admittedly, under the suit, 
there isn't a whole lot of difference between Michael Keaton's version 
of the Caped Crusader and the one brought to the screen by Val Kilmer.  
After all, it's just a matter of how well their lips act.  As Bruce 
Wayne, however, the change is evident, and it's an improvement.  
Keaton's Wayne seemed stuffy, standoffish, and one-dimensional.  
Kilmer's personae brings the billionaire down-to-earth and gives him 
elements of passion and insecurity.  I certainly didn't spend more than 
thirty seconds mourning the change in lead actors. 
     Given Hollywood's poor track record with second sequels -- take the 
third installments of SUPERMAN, STAR WARS, ALIEN, LETHAL WEAPON, and DIE 
HARD as examples -- it's understandable if a viewer approaches BATMAN 
FOREVER with a measure of skepticism.  In this case, however, the 
trepidation can be put aside.  The latest BATMAN proves it's entirely 
possible for a big-budget, overcommercialized blockbuster sequel to 
offer even the most cynical viewer a wholly enjoyable time at the 
movies. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Nizam Ahmed

Author
Bryant Frazer
     Give Warner Brothers credit.  With Joel Schumacher in charge of
BATMAN FOREVER, the company has finally made its biggest asset truly
safe for mass consumption.
     Yes, yes, everybody knows that Tim Burton is brilliant and all,
but wasn't BATMAN RETURNS just a little on the weird side?  Weren't the
movies a little too bleak for wholesome entertainment?  And hasn't it
become common wisdom that those first two Batman adventures were long
on style and short on *story*?
     Well, maybe.  While Tim Burton has built a cult reputation on the
strength of his idiosyncratic filmmaking, it seemed a little odd that
this would be the fellow chosen to finesse a blockbuster out of the
Batman franchise.  Studio execs must have been overly charmed by his
colorful production of BEETLEJUICE, and no doubt pawed eagerly through
copies of Frank Miller comics when Burton suggested a "darker" version
of Batman.  Michael Keaton and Jack Nicholson signed on, guaranteeing a
big fat hit.  When sequel time rolled around, Burton's vision became
even more surreal, riddled with non sequiters and fetishistic visuals
that raked in less dough even as, one suspects, it alienated a good
portion of its audience.
     Mind you, Batman put me to sleep.  Twice.  The second movie was
a marked improvement, mainly because it so eloquently demonstrated that
Burton was a man who loved and understood cinema, even if he couldn't
quite get it to do what he wanted it to.  But I'd love it if someone
could explain to me exactly why the guy who directed THE CLIENT,
FALLING DOWN, and FLATLINERS was tapped to take over a wild, surreal
series of action movies.
     'Biff, pow,' Batman.  Schumacher directs the whole thing up
close, like he's doing some kind of TV movie.  When individual body
parts are filling the screen, and the cuts are so quick that one motion
is indistinguishable from another and nearly every shot has been
spliced into the next before we can even focus, I suppose we're
supposed to rub our eyes and just say 'gosh.' I wouldn't be surprised
if this plays better on video, but that's not really the point.
     It's not all bad.  The story, for instance is actually an
improvement on the original films.  From the first introductory
sequence, the movie moves like a greased pig.  We get to see Robin,
whose character is woven into Batman's life.  At last, something more
than lip service is paid to the twisted psychology of Batman, and it
actually affects how the movie turns out.  And who would have expected
Nicole Kidman as Chase Meridian to do anything besides stand around and
drip sex? More than just window dressing, the love interest catalyzes
Batman's examination of the two sides of himself.  In fact, this movie
goes all the way back to the beginning -- we have to see Bruce Wayne's
parents get killed again, we watch the kid fall into the bat cave, we
get the same old spiel about his obsessions.  It's a little trite, but
it keeps the far more colorful supervillians from stealing the show
completely (as they did in the Burton films) and cements our
identification with the hero, which is crucial to our enjoyment of this
one.
     Chris O'Donnell is well-cast in a role that plays against Val
Kilmer's too-cool crusader.  Maybe the reason we never saw much of what
made Michael Keaton's character tick was that he had no one besides
blank wall Kim Basinger to explain himself to.  Kilmer is better at
playing the part, even if he hardly seems old enough to be any kind of
mentor to O'Donnell.  And if Jim Carrey's histrionics are welcome
anywhere, they're welcome here.  For the first time, a comic book
character has been translated absolutely intact to the silver screen.
     The visual design is hit and miss.  The costumes are terrific,
and the retooled Batmobile is still very much the Batmobile.  But the
new Gotham City is less a locale for the movie than it is simply a
backdrop for the proceedings.  And the special effects, on the whole,
have the unfortunate effect of defusing some of the more spectacular
sequences by reminding us that we're simply watching some well-executed
but obviously computer-generated special effects.  And while the sound
is excellent, the orchestral score (ersatz Elfman) is not.
     But there's nothing sublime or even subtle about any of this.
No surprises, no mysteries, no moments out of time that fill us with
awe or wonder.  The best that can be said is that the movie does what
it sets out to do very well.  In contrast, Burton's reach seems always
to exceed his grasp (the notable exception is his most perfect movie,
EDWARD SCISSORHANDS).  When Burton was directing the films, you knew
that the pictures on-screen were the stuff of legend, even if the sum of
the parts was actually greater than the whole.  But with Schumacher at
the helm, the adventurousness of the filmmaking itself has
disappeared.  It's hard to pinpoint what's missing, but Batman has
suddenly become completely safe, a cuddly part of the corporate
culture.  He may be packing them in at the multiplex like no one else,
but when I start checking the Gotham City skyline for McDonald's arches
(you've seen the commercials, haven't you?) I know the magic is gone.

Author
Brian Koller
Why do people go to the theater in droves to see Batman movies?
None of them are particularly good, and no one expects them
to be.  Perhaps they go in order to tell their friends,
relatives and co-workers that they saw the movie.  Or maybe
they go to see the car.  As Batman himself says, chicks dig
the car.
In case the reader is a martian who is unfamiliar with
American pop culture, Batman (Val Kilmer, this time around)
is a super-hero who dresses in black leather at night to fight 
bad guys.  During the day he is Bruce Wayne, head of a 
conglomerate, and all-around good guy.
Two Face (Tommy Lee Jones, in what certainly is a change of pace
for him) is obsessed with killing Batman.  Two Face was once
a respectable man, but after exactly half his face was disfigured
with acid, somehow this made him go criminally insane.  Two Face
sets up a trap for Batman, locking him and a hapless security
guard in a metal box that fills with boiling acid and that is
attached to a helicopter flown by Two Face that crashes into
the Statue of Liberty.  Both Batman and Two Face survive.
I forget what happened to the security guard.  The Statue of
Liberty needs serious repairs.
Edward Enigma (James Carrey) works at Wayne Enterprises as
a techno-nerd engineer.  Carrey is a truly silly mad scientist
who has invented a device that steals brain waves.  Bruce Wayne
is not impressed and refuses to fund the project.
Carrey isn't happy about this.  After hours, he ties up his
unpleasant boss and puts the contraption on his head, sucking
the brain waves out of his head and into Carrey's.  The unlucky
boss is then pushed out a skyscraper window, no doubt to
the cheers of oppressed workers everywhere.
Like Two Face, Carrey is obsessed with Kilmer.  But while
Two Face wants to kill Batman, Carrey just wants to stump Wayne
with riddles.  But he is foiled, as Kilmer always figures 
them out.  This frustrates Carrey so much that he begins
to act like a fairy, dress in a green jumpsuit and call
himself the Riddler.
Every Batman film provides a new blonde girlfriend for Wayne
and/or Batman.  This time around it is Nicole Kidman's turn.
She is a psychologist who turns Wayne on with sultry looks
and psycho-babble.
Wayne takes her to the circus.  The Flying Graysons, a family
of acrobats, are performing.  Two Face steals the show, and
threatens to kill everyone unless Batman appears.  But he
only gets around to killing the acrobats, sparing on the
youngest, Dick (Chris O'Donnell).
For some reason, O'Donnell is invited to stay at the Wayne 
mansion.  He wants to split until he checks out Wayne's 
motorcycle collection.  Later, he discovers the Batmobile,
takes it for a spin, but gets into trouble fighting bad guys
decked in day-glo.  Fortunately for him, Batman arrives to
save him, and gives him a Parent-Child lecture about borrowing
the car without permission.
The Riddler and Two Face decide to team up to rule Gotham
City.  Their plan is to steal everyone's brain waves using
Carrey's contraption.  This scheme actually works, and now
Carrey is a bigger celebrity than Bruce Wayne.
Two Face again nearly succeeds in killing Batman, but this
time it is Batman's turn to be saved by O'Donnell.  This
makes O'Donnell so cocky that he decides to wear a
costume as well and call himself Robin.
Batman is about to score with Kidman when Two Face and
the Riddler break into his mansion, trashing it.  They
decide not to kill Kilmer because Carrey wants to
leave another riddle for him.  They take Kidman hostage.
Batman and Robin learn where Two Face's secret hideout
is and go there to rescue Kidman.  Robin ends up cornering
Two Face on a cliff, but is tricked and also becomes
a captive.  Now Batman must save both Kidman and Robin,
but his biggest challenge is keeping a straight face
when confronted with Carrey's hammy Riddler schtick.
Batman Forever is not that good of a movie.  It is often
implausible and unintentionally laughable.  But it is a
guilty pleasure.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Lewis Butler
     The most remarkable difference in BATMAN RETURNS is the lack of a
good director.  Schumacher creates a movie that is choppy, hard to
follow, and has some of the worst directed action sequences in recent
memory.  The movie has some neat gizmos and gadgets, too bad we don't
get to see how they work, or even exactly what the are doing.  There is
one scene in particular where Batman manages to escape certain death by
doing something involving his feet and fire.  I have no idea what
happened in this segment, and neither did anyone else in the audience.
     The casting is good.  Carey delivers a wonderfully wacky psycho
portrayal of The Riddler, and Tommy Lee Jones is passable as Two-Face,
although his character doesn't get the development that Carey's does.
     Nicole Kidman is as bad as Kim Bassinger was in the first movie.
A completely unbelievable female character, again.  Too bad, I like
Nicole Kidman (ever since FLIRTING).  I will say, all traces of her
accent are gone; she has a perfect American accent throughout the
film.  But she's not believable in any way, and there is no depth to
her character.
     Val Kilmer was not particularly impressive either.  Somehow his
Bruce Wayne lacked that edge of craziness that was the one thing
Michael Keaton did well.  Kilmer's Wayne is stoic and dull. There's
none of the interesting little quirks that were evident as far back as
TOP SECRET! and REAL GENIUS.
     Chris O'Donnell manages to make Robin an actually interesting
character.  Not that he's given a lot of opportunities.  He does manage
to make Robin a believable character Something the comic books never
did.  I did like the inclusion of "Nightwing" among the possible
nicknames, though.  Nice touch.
     The sets are quite poor, often involving shots that scream
"MATTE!" in large capitals.  There are also some strange instances
where one feels as if the director is setting off beacons and showing
off how he too can be clever.  All the uneasy mood of Tim Burton is
exchanged for cheap flash and poor editting.
     If one rates BATMAN at a +3, BATMAN RETURNS was a nice +2.  BATMAN
FOREVER drops the stakes considerably, weighing in at a mere +0.0 on
the -4 to +4 scale (where 0 indicates an average movie)

Author
Stimpy
     This latest adventure with the Dark Knight is an excellent sequel,
much better than the last one.  Depending on your tastes, you might
like this one better than the original.  However, comic book fans will
be disappointed as usual.  But get real, you just can't put 50+ years
of plotlines and character development into two hours.
     Even though it seems they tried for some character development.
Character development is all this film has.  Plot, "Oops, we forgot the
plot!" is very thin.  Disgruntled employee tries to take over the
world.  No that's never been done before.  Characters have *lots* of
motivation.  Good method acting, bad writing.
     Sequel fans will dislike the continued trend in these films,
namely, the major characters keep getting killed off.  I guess if you
are a big enough star, you have it in your mind to do just *one* film,
you get the writers to kill your character off at the end of the film.
So they killed the Joker, *the* quintessential Batman foe.  And they
killed that *travesty* of a Penguin, no big loss.  Oh, since we can
only sign a female co-star for a film, let's reveal Bruce's identity to
each *one* yeah that's the ticket; we know how people can keep a big
secret like that.  Whatever the producers think they are producing,
they aren't concerned about story.  Nope just entertainment.
     Entertaining, BATMAN FOREVER *is*.  Worth the $5.  Probably worth
the $9, you silly price-inflated coastal people.  Go see it.  Have
fun.  You could *even* bring the kids.  Heck there's more violence in
the Mighty Dwarfin' Flower Strangers than in this cute film.
Psychology students would love this film.  Also people with multiple
personalities.  "Like it?  I liked it, but I did not."
    Here's a cool game you can play, see how many references to "two"
you can get in the film.
     Okay, enough commentary, here's the dirt.
     Val Kilmer is an excellent Bats.  "Mr. Wayne, nice facial
reconstruction you had there."  "Yes, Alfred is quite the plastic
surgeon."
     What's his name is back as Alfred, *the* best actor in the lot, in
my opinion.
     What's his name is back as Commissioner Gordon.  Nice, easy no-
dimensional character there.
     Nicole Kidman is Dr. Chase Meridian.  A lovely  1/2-dimensional
shrink specializing in Abnormal Psychology.  Who can't keep her pants
on.  Kidman looks much better as a redhead, but I guess they couldn't
have her competing with Carrey's dye-job.  Check it: for all you who
did not get it, "meridian" means divider, or halfway.  Like, she goes
for both Wayne and Bats.
     Tommy Lee Jones.  Poor guy plays Two-Face.  "Hey, the acid scaring
half my face and body, I could handle.  But the other half becoming a
WHITE MAN, that drove me nuts!"  Why waste a perfectly good actor such
as Jones on a one-dimensional (at least he has one, dimension)
basically angry character.  Should have signed Billy Dee Williams (see
three names, still looks good on the marquee) for the part.  I think
it's much better to have a Very Good Looking Actor play the part of the
hideously-half-scared Two- Face, instead of the "Attractive but not
Beautiful" Jones.  Who *is* his tailor?
     Chris What's-his-brush-cut-head plays Dick Grason, recently
orphaned acrobat.  Guess where he gets the silly orange costume.
Flimsy "Robin" name origin.  "'Shot in like a Sparrow.'.. nah...  'Shot
in like a Hawk.' ... nope....  I know 'Shot in like a ROBIN.'  Yeah!
that's it." Give me a break.  Girls will swoon, he plays a good
straight man to Kilmer's gag man.  "Holy
angst-filled-directionless-twentysomething idol Batman!"
     Okay, here's the scene stealer: Jim Carrey.  You could see this
coming.  First upstaged by Nickolson, then bored to death by Walken,
DeVito, and Pfeiffer, and now to be "Out classed, out coifed and out
*done*" by Carrey in this film.  Interesting use of question mark
motif; not quite enough riddles to put our frontal lobes in gear; and a
silly and dubious "big city-wide conspiracy--evil-techno-fear" plot
twist.  "Hey, I know, let's have 'em build a giant capacitor to steal
the city's power.    Oh, did we do that before?"  "I got it, let's take
a consumer product and make it unsafe to use!  ...  Oh, did we do that
before?"  "Hey, here's one, lets make a bunch of evil *blenders*."
     Rene' Auberjonois even has a cameo as Arkham Asylum's "Dr. Burton"
     If I had to use one word to sum up the costuming and props:
Marketing.  Can you say *lots* of action figures?  "Holy wardrobe,
Batman!  That Riddler sure is a snappy dresser!!"
     Speaking of art direction, in this movie Gotham City seemed
somehow, I don't know *cheery*.  What's this?  No, don't worry, there
still are plenty of cool statues and big, megalopolis-city scapes.  But
the whole place looks cleaner, almost hospitable.  I guess old Bats
sure has cleaned up the town since the first movie.
     Well now that they have killed off or otherwise eliminated five
count 'em five Batman Villains/anti-Villains who can they do next?
     Poison Ivy?  The Scarecrow?  Some silly corporate bad-guy? Oops,
done that.  Nah, just wrap up the Batman stuff and pick some other
character for the next superhero movie from the comics, say Aquaman or
the Green Lantern.  I can hear the producers now:  "Yeah, that's the
ticket!  Aquaman could be this cool water guy with an eco-twist!  Or,
better yet, go with this Lantern guy.  With all the computer stuff now,
those silly giant can-openers and mouse-traps would look really *cool*
on the big screen...."

Author
Terri S Buchman
     It's rutting season in Gotham and everybody is feeling the heat.
BATMAN FOREVER seems to be as much about desire as it is about which
criminals are battling which superheroes.  Nicole Kidman plays a
criminal psychologist with a thing for men in "black rubber."  Tommy
Lee Jones plays schizophrenic Harvey Two-Face whose darkest desires is
to consummate his relationship with Batman by killing the Dark Knight.
And Jim Carrey plays Edward Nygma, who really wants to be Bruce Wayne,
but will settle for humiliating and destroying Wayne and his alter ego
Batman.
     This third installment in the Batman series is easily the most
fast moving and colorful of the series so far.  Instead of the dark
painterly settings of the first two Tim Burton directed films, this
movie is all slam, bam action.  Which is a good thing, since the
character building doesn't really seem to be director Joel
Schumacher's strong suit.  He is very good with the action sequences
and has some marvelously inventive dilemmas for the heroes to escape
from.  But a lot of the inner turmoil that the script alludes to just
isn't up there on the screen.  The result is a film that is popcorn
light, but still lots of fun.
     Val Kilmer takes over the reins of Batman and does an adequate job
in a difficult role.  His Batman is gorgeous to look at, fills out the
Batman costume rather well and moves gracefully.  I had no problem
believing in Kilmer as Batman.  I did have some trouble with Kilmer's
portrayal of Bruce Wayne.  His way of showing inner turmoil involves
slowing down his voice and gazing unfocused off into the distance.  I
thought that Michael Keaton handled the moody melancholy of the
character better.  Still, Kilmer does have wonderful lips and that is
definitely a plus in a role in which he has to wear a mask for half the
movie.
     Tommy Lee Jones' Two-Face is the most flat and one-dimensional
character in the movie.  Two-Face starts off completely bonkers and
degenerates from there.  Jones' character is given very little support
from the script.  There is a 30-second scene that reveals how Two-Face
came to be and after that it's all homicidal mania and cocktails.
Still, Tommy Lee Jones is a great actor and it is still fun to watch
him emote his heart out while intoning such great lines as "Let's start
this party with a bang!" while blowing up banks vaults and such.
     Nicole Kidman lacks screen presence.  Her character is written as
another blond bimbo.  About the only thing holding her character up is
her wonderbra.  It's hard to imagine what Batman/Bruce Wayne sees in
her.  It is sort of interesting though to see a character on screen
whose sole motivation is lust.  Edward Nygma riddles, Two-Face fiddles,
and Dr. Meridien wants to be diddled.
     Jim Carrey is very good as Nygma, the nerdy scientist/social
misfit turned criminal genius.  His Riddler is sort of a cover for
insanity's greatest hits and he generates wonderful wacko energy
on-screen.  But there's more to the the nuttiness than just
scene-stealing.  Carrey's Riddler contains more than a hint of lust and
desire directed towards both Bruce Wayne and Batman.  Carrey is quite
good at playing the loser with a heart of ice.  His best scene involves
a stolen moment in the Batcave and revolves around the undeniable joy
to be found in blowing shit up. "Joygasm"  He makes disassociative
personality disorder look like more fun than a trip to Disneyland.
     Chris O'Donnell is absolutely hunky as Robin.  He is sweet and
innocent as the young Dick Grayson and wonderfully forceful and meaty
as Robin, the no-longer-a-boy Wonder.  Drew Barrymore and Debi Mazur
fill out their teddies nicely as Sugar and Spice, Two-Faces' love
interests.  And Michael Gough returns as Alfred, the Wayne family butler,
and does a nice job of holding the ensemble of O'Donnell and Kilmer
together.
     All-in-all, a good summer movie.  See it for the action, the
amazing bat-toys, the hunky, form fitting bat-outfits, the wonderful
special effects, and for the sheer joy that comes from watching shit
blowing up.  Quite a nice ride.

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: Val Kilmer (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Jim Carrey (Edward Nygma/The
Riddler), Tommy Lee Jones (Harvey Dent/Two-Face), Chris O'Donnell (Dick
Grayson/Robin), Nicole Kidman (Dr. Chase Meridian), Michael Gough
(Alfred Pennyworth), Pat Hingle (Commissioner Gordon), Drew Barrymore
(Sugar), Debi Mazar (Spice)
Directed by: Joel Schumacher, Written by: Lee Batchler & Janet Scott
Batchler and Akiva Goldsman, based on characters created by Bob Kane
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, strong language, and a sexual
implication or two
This is where Joel Schumacher takes over.  Luckily for us, at this
point, Warner Bros. and producer Tim Burton keep Schumacher's crazy
vision of Batman on a leash, and we end up with a movie that's not
half-bad, even if it can't compare to Tim Burton's first two
installments.  
This is where it becomes obvious that the Batman series could be the
next James Bond franchise.  This series could go on forever, just think
about it.  There's endless stories to tell.  There's gadgets, girls, a
cool, actor-changing hero (as the reviewer who calls himself "Stimpy"
pointed out, yes, aside from being one hell of a tailor, cook, and
mechanic, Alfred is quite the plastic surgeon).  As long as they don't
kill off all of the villians, it's the perfect eternal franchise.  It
doesn't even have to repeat itself like Bond often does!  They just need
to make sure that the installments don't end up being all crap, and then
Batman can truly go on forever.  But I digress.
Well, Two-Face, the villian with two sides to his personality, half a
face scarred by acid, and who makes his good-or-evil decisions based on
whether his trusty two-headed (two faces... amazing, huh?) coin comes up
with the clean "good heads" side or the beat-up "bad heads" side...
damn, this is a run-on sentence... is on the loose.  Of course, Batman
is chasing him, and, as we see in the well-done opening sequence, is
on-and-off in terms of his luck in the pursuit.  
Meanwhile, an employee of Wayne Enterprises (wondering how Bruce keeps
his fortune going, were you, non-Batman afficionados?), Edward Nygma,
has created a device which will make television viewers "feel like
they're inside the show" - a "3-D TV" invention, if you will.  Wayne is
reluctant to fund such a project, since it deals with brain
manipulation, and his fears are well-founded - Nygma soon discovers that
his machine has the interesting side effect of allowing him to utilize
the brain power of anyone using his 3-D TV to grow smarter.  Naturally,
he wants to use this discovery to aid him in his revenge against Wayne. 
Confused yet?  It gets worse...
The circus is in town!  No, not the Red Triangle Circus, you ninny. 
This is a kinder, gentler show, featuring the trapeeze artists known as
"The Flying Graysons," a family... what?  Yes I said "Graysons."  Yup,
that's right.  This is the Grayson family, one of which includes... Dick
Grayson.  If you know anything about Batman, then you know what THAT
means... it means that circumstances will lead to Dick needing to move
in with Bruce and Alfred, which will in turn lead to... oh hell, you
KNOW where this is going.
Did I mention Chase yet?  No?  Oh, goodie!  Well, Dr. Chase Meridian is
consulting with Commisioner Gordon on the Two-Face case, since she's an
expert on multiple personalities.  Multiple personalities, hmm... nope,
don't have any of those in Gotham.  Well anyway, Chase is attracted to
"the wrong kind of man," so of course she ends up having a thing for a
certain hero-in-black-rubber.  And Bruce Wayne ends up having a thing
for her.  But when Wayne likes Chase, and Chase likes Batman but not so
much Wayne, well gee, kinda like the old Lois/Superman problem, isn't
it?
After a list like that, you're probably looking for the kitchen sink. 
Well, here it is: Drew Barrymore shows up in a small role as one of
Two-Face's girlfriends (she plays the girlfriend to his good side, which
is exactly the opposite of what you'd expect from Drew, isn't it?). 
Just thought you'd like to know.
Schumacher is filling in for Burton, and his direction is a little...
off-kilter.  A few of the fight scenes are confusing due to his flying,
zooming, wacked-out camera work.  But most of the time, he does a fine
job keeping things from getting too odd.  His vision of Batman's world,
on the other hand, leaves something to be desired...
Gone are the dark, dreary streets of Gotham that we knew and loved, as
Schumacher, with the aid of production designer Barbara Ling, has made
Gotham into a land of, yes, some dark streets, but also of neon lights
that appear for no apparent reason, gangs that are lit up by
black-lights - again for for no apparent reason - and buildings that,
instead of being detailed, beautiful models, are basic, CGI-created
rectangular-style skyscrapers.  It's passable, but not anywhere near as
gorgeous as the vision of Gotham that fit so well with Batman in the
first two films.  Even the Bat-vehicles like the Batmobile are
redesigned, and, though they look quite nice, Burton's versions remain
the ideal - perhaps in part because they came first, and also because
they weren't neon-lit.  As for the nipples on the Bat-and-Robin-suits,
gratuitous codpieces, and shots of rubbers rears, I only have to say -
why?? 
Elliot Goldenthal is filling in for Danny Elfman, and, though he writes
a good and memorable score, it's not as majestic as Elfman's beautiful
work.  Still, it fits in with Batman just fine.
Now to the actors.  Okay, Val Kilmer... um... well, he's a good Batman. 
He speaks with gravel on his voice, as he should, like Keaton did.  But,
you know how theh thing you see most clearly in the Batsuit is the
chin?  Well, Kilmer's chin just doesn't fit in with the image as well as
Keaton's or even Clooney's.  I know that sounds odd, so I'll just blow
that off.  It's no big deal.  Kilmer also looks more like one might
expect Bruce Wayne or Batman to look than Keaton did - he's just a more
imposing figure.  But as Wayne, he always wears black, which is just
wrong - Batman is the morbid one, and Bruce Wayne is supposed to be the
facade of a light-hearted bachelor.  Oh well.  He still does alright in
the Batsuit, even if he does play Bruce in too wooden a manner.  Kilmer
isn't as good as Keaton, but still does alright.  At least it's nice to
learn more about Batman's origin, and spend a little more time with the
hero of this picture than we did in BATMAN RETURNS (1992).
Carrey acts like Carrey, leaping around and doing his best to steal
scenes, and he does get his fair share.  He's appropriately psycho as
the Riddler (do you capitalize the "t" in names like "The Joker," "The
Penguin," or "The Riddler?"  Just curious... I suppose it doesn't
matter.), but even though, at times, he plays a fine disturbed villian,
he also ends up playing what basically amounts to himself at other
times, leaping around, cracking jokes, stretching his face.  But in the
end, it's hard to imagine that anyone else could live up to this vision
of the Riddler.  He does nicely.
It's Tommy Lee Jones who gets the movie's most interesting character -
Two-Face.  The duality of this villian makes him one of the most
intriguing in the Batman mythos - but, on a few occasions in BATMAN
FOREVER, Two-Face is played a little too one-note, as just another
wisecracking, over-the-top enemy.  Still, on all those times when he
shows off his dual nature, he's easily the most fascinating person to
watch, and that's when Jones chews plenty scenery of his own.  He and
Carrey seem to battle for who can steal the most scenes, and in the end,
they both have come out about even as far as I'm concerned.  
Nicole Kidman plays Chase Meridian well enough, but, like Vicki Vale in
the first film, this is another love interest/damsel in distress that is
often thankless.  Even so, she has scenes where she shines, and she's
certainly not the same character as Vicki or Selena were.    
And what of Chris O'Donnell?  Of the more understated performances in
this movie, the actual truth is, his is probably the best, believe it or
not.  Dick Grayson/Robin (who, in another no-apparent-reason touch,
wears an earring for most of the picture) turns out to be an interesting
character, and he and Kilmer do have a brotherly chemistry that comes
across to the viewer.  His reasoning for wanting to become a vigilante
partner to Batman is well-acted and believable, and his eager teenage
side that pops up on occasion is likable, too.  Yes, for this film,
O'Donnell and Robin are likable guys.  Don't expect it to last into the
next one, though... although that's not entirely his fault.  But I'm
getting ahead of myself... I can talk about that in the BATMAN & ROBIN
review.
In the end, despite not being as good as the first two movies, BATMAN
FOREVER is actually not bad.  Some of the little touches are especially
nice - Alfred calling Bruce "Master Bruce," Two-Face's henchmen calling
him "Face," Two-Face referring to himself as "we" or "us." Still, the
warning signs of Schumacher start to creep in here, and act of portents
of the downhill slide to come.  Michael Gough, by the way, is and always
remains a great Alfred, and a fine actor.  Pat Hingle seems miscast as
Gordon, but that may just be because he hasn't had a big enough role
yet.  In the end, even though Batman may ignore some laws of physics
here, he does okay for himself.

Author
Eric Grossman
     Batfans, I have some good news and some bad news for you.  The
good news is that the new Batman film, BATMAN FOREVER, is definitely
better than the previous installment, BATMAN RETURNS.  The bad news is
that isn't saying much.
     In this latest outing, Batman is pitted against two arch-criminals
who are attempting to take over Gotham City and then the world by way
using television to manipulate people's brains.  In addition, he gains
a partner, Robin, and also finds a new girlfriend, Dr. Chase Meridian.
     In an attempt to freshen and lighten things up, director Joel
Schumacher and his band of filmmakers have made a number of changes.
Cinematographer Stephen Goldblatt and production designer Barbara Ling
make Gotham city a much more open, colorful place.  Costume designer
Ingrid Ferrin and her crew have created a new Batsuit (complete with
nipples) and composer Elliot Goldenthal has written a brighter, less
moody (and less interesting than Danny Elfman's compositions for the
first two films) score.
     The biggest change however is in the cast.  Val Kilmer, replacing
Michael Keaton, lightens up Batman, almost too much, to match the
film's new tone.  For the first time in the Batman series the Caped
Crusader is not overshadowed by the villains.  To Kilmer's credit this
was no easy task since his adversaries, Harvey Two-Face and the
Riddler, are played by Tommy Lee Jones and Jim Carrey respectively.
O'Donnell also holds his own against these sometimes overbearing actors
with his energetic portrayal as the Boy Wonder.  Finally, Nicole Kidman
manages to pump up her one dimensional role by making the most of her
goofy dialogue and by, well, by just looking damn good.
     Unlike the original film where Jack Nicholson's The Joker blew
everyone and everything in the movie away and in the second one where
Michelle Pfeiffer's Catwoman stole the show, the villains this time out
are pretty much duds.  Tommy Lee Jones is a superb actor but his
Two-Face character feels unnecessary and weighs down the film.  It
seems more like a marketing and merchandising decision to have him than
an artistic one (thin or frightening and of course a Batman villain has
to be both.
     BATMAN FOREVER delivers some laughs and a few thrills but
ultimately, like the other two films, it boils down to a great deal of
hype for a great deal of nothing.  The cinematic condiments (the
effects, the sound, the lightning) may make you feel as if you have
seen something special, but its all smoke and mirrors.

Author
Rob Furr
     You know, it's a darn good thing that BATMAN FOREVER isn't dull.
We'd be suffering through eight million reviews, all using the same "It
certainly *felt* like forever..." gag, and if that happened, I'd be
forced to flee the country and watch no movies younger than thirty
years.
     That's the best place to start a review of BATMAN
FOREVER--whatever else you can say about it, it certainly isn't
dull.  If anything, at times, a little dullness would be a good
thing, just so that the audience would have time to grasp the latest
complication.  I mean, THE DRAUGHTSMAN'S CONTRACT this ain't, but it
has more stuff actually happening in it than any three other summer
movies I can name (So far, anyway.) There's the Riddler's origin,
there's Two-Face's story, there's Robin's origin, there's the
obligatory Batman/Blonde In A Black Outfit love story, there's action,
there's street combat, there's chase sequences, ritzy parties, Jim
Carrey's stand-up routine, and, amazingly enough, a giant blender with
fins (we'll get to that later).  There is, to be blunt, so much stuff
happening that, even at an approximately two-hour running length, the
movie bulges at the seams, to the point where aspects of the plot, such
as it is, whiz past unnoticed because something else is already shoving
its way forward for its second-and-a-half of screen time.
     Not only is there a lot happening in the plot, there's a lot
happening visually.  I'll be frank--the original BATMAN is a hard act
to beat, in terms of production style--it is, as far as I'm concerned,
the only movie Tim Burton's ever done where his Gothic obsessions work
(they certainly didn't in BATMAN RETURNS)--and BATMAN FOREVER doesn't
beat it.  It doesn't even try to do so.  Burton chose to model his
Gotham on Gothic elements, on shades of gray, on noir and
Piranesi--this more recent Gotham is full of strong primary colors, and
more humanistic design.  It's still recognizably the same city as
Burton's, but the Gotham we see in BATMAN FOREVER looks like it's
actually been lived in, like it *could* be lived in.  There's no space
for humanity in Burton's Gotham, but there is in this one.
Furthermore, BATMAN FOREVER succeeds at doing what DICK TRACY only
dreamed of doing.  Not only is BATMAN FOREVER's Gotham more colorful
than Burton's, it's more faithful to the Gotham of the comic books--it
*looks* like what comics look like after they've been projected in the
theatre of our imagination.  The camera often swoops around buildings,
it falls down, it moves as fast and as smoothly as the comic reader's
eye seems to (yes, eye movements are actually rather jerky and
sudden--but it doesn't seem that way to the person behind the organic
camera...).  The production design in BATMAN FOREVER seems designed to
have something on the screen at all times that captures the eye, or
leads it, or draws the viewer's attention in or moves it aside.  Just
as it seems at times to be overplotted, it may even be overdesigned.
At the very least, it demands a second viewing, for the simple reason
that familiarity with the most obvious objects on screen will allow the
observer to see everything else crammed into a single frame.  There
are, of course, occasional false notes in the production design, the
most obvious of which is, er, the giant blender with fins.  I can't
really explain why there's a giant blender with fins, not without
spoiling the climax of the movie (although I think it's not exactly a
spoiler to mention that, not only is it a giant blender with fins, it
eventually becomes a giant *exploding* blender with fins.)
     I'm now forced to divide my critical response, which is
appropriate, considering that Two-Face is in this movie.  I can respond
to BATMAN FOREVER on its own terms, and I can respond to it based on
the fact that I've been reading BATMAN and DETECTIVE for decades.  Own
terms first, I suppose.
     This is a very funny movie at times.  There are the gags and lines
that we've all seen and heard in the promos and trailers--but those
are, amazingly enough, neither the funniest of the gags nor all of the
lines.  Jim Carrey, furthermore, is not the funniest actor in the film,
either.  This should come as no surprise to those of us (all, what,
three?) who saw Val Kilmer in TOP SECRET!, but for those who haven't:
Val Kilmer can be very funny when he wants to be, and, quite often in
this film, he wants to be.  Carrey, on the other hand, does his
standard schtick.  Okay, it was funny at times on IN LIVING COLOR, it
was funny in ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE, and it was even funny in THE
MASK, but honest to Pete, we've *seen* him posture, we've *seen* him
twist that rubber face of his around, and, okay, yes, he's moderately
amusing in BATMAN FOREVER, but the novelty's worn off.  Tommy Lee Jones
is also ... less interesting than he should be.  Apparently someone
handed him a copy of all the scenes from BATMAN with Jack Nicholson in
them and said "See this? That's your role.  Oh, but you only have to
put makeup on half your face.  Ciao." As a villain, he's okay.  Which
is, sadly, not enough (fortunately, the movie doesn't rest on his
shoulders.)
     Which brings us to the really unique point of BATMAN FOREVER.
This is the first Batman movie (of the recent three) where Batman/Bruce
Wayne is more interesting than the villain(s).  I was shocked.  A
Batman movie where BRUCE WAYNE gets screen time? And it's a
*believable* Bruce Wayne? Holy smokes, wake the kids, call the
neighbors.  After the disastrous (and misnamed) BATMAN RETURNS (Batman
didn't return--he didn't even get any screen time) I fully expected
this to be another villain-based outing, where Bruce Wayne and his
blonde-in-black would be relegated to about fifth in order of
importance.  Fortunately, I was wrong.  The protagonist is really the
protagonist for once.  Wow.
     (And now, my reaction based on the fact that I've been a Batman
fan since before Batman was cool again:)
     This is Two-Face?  Huh?  Since when was Two-Face like *this*?
Threw *me* for a loop, I can tell you.
     On the plus side, though, BATMAN FOREVER is more aware of the rest
of the Batman phenomenon than any previous film.  Concepts and scenes
are taken directly from BATMAN: THE DARK KNIGHT RETURNS, references are
made to, for instance, Metropolis and other parts of the DC Universe,
it occasionally slyly pokes fun at itself and its predecessors. (I will
bet you *any* amount of money that you will *not* expect (unless
someone tells you) what Robin says as the two heroes first encounter
the Riddler's base at close hand.  Whee!)
     (This concludes my fan-based reaction.  Thank you.)
     At any rate, since any plot summary would take too long, and,
besides, you already know the important bits, I'll skip the
play-by-play and go straight to the box scores:
     BATMAN FOREVER was a surprise.  Not only did it have, amazingly
enough, a real, live plot, not only did it have mostly original
production design, not only did it have decent acting all around
(except for, sadly, the two villains,) it had more fun with itself than
Burton ever allowed his films to have.  On the Furr Scale (I rate films
based on ambition as well as quality: you can't rate a film like EVIL
DEAD II on the same scale as LAWRENCE OF ARABIA without acknowledging
the fact that the two movies were trying to do different things.  EVIL
DEAD II was a four-star one-star film:  a very, very good movie that
didn't aim very high, while LAWRENCE OF ARABIA is a four-star four-star
movie: a very, very good movie that aimed very high.  ROBOCOP is a
three-star three star movie (pretty good, aimed pretty high,) and
HEAVEN'S GATE is a one-star four star movie (a rotten movie that aimed
high.)) I'll call BATMAN FOREVER a three-star three star movie.  As
long as you don't expect the bad guys to carry the film, and as long as
you can keep up with the film's rapid and diffuse plotting, you should
have a blast.

Author
Brian Lehr (Brian Lehr)
     Riddle me this ... which film which is already one of the biggest
hits of the year made just about as much money on it's third weekend as
POCAHONTAS did on its first?  Holy Big Bucks Batman!  But was this film
as good as it's marketing?  Yours truly went on the opening weekend
(and had to buy tickets two hours early, then arrive at the theater
half an hour before the movie began to get a decent seat) to find
out....
     I have to say that I was pleasantly surprised when I saw this
movie.  From the very start, with the WB logo morphing into the bat
shape and the credits flying all over the screen, you knew this was
definitely different.  And after the McDonalds intro with the "new"
Batmobile zipping off to get drive-through on its way to stop Two-Face
...  I blinked when I saw Gotham.  It had been transformed from
Burton's gothic, mysterious town into Tokyo, with neon lights flashing
in every corner.  But let me be one of the first (or not) to say I
didn't give a rip.  The movie certainly doesn't wait for you, it zips
right to the action, maybe a little too quickly, but after awhile the
audience gets used to it.
     As for the *big* change in Batmen, all you can see are the lips
when they're in those suits, so who cares?  I felt Val Kilmer did fine
in his role as the Dark Knight, though the Knight wasn't so dark
anymore, along with the rest of Gotham.  He even cracked a few jokes,
while Keaton's Batman just kept his mouth shut and stayed off the
screen for as long as possible.  Possibly Keaton did a better Bruce
Wayne, but the movie's called BATMAN, right? :-)  Tommy Lee Jones did
pretty well as Two-Face, screaming out his lines with a flourish that
he doesn't get to as lawyers or police officers (THE CLIENT and THE
FUGITIVE, both good).  A little more history about him would have been
nice, instead of another of those news clips that Bruce Wayne watches
all the time to give us plot points.  Jim Carrey certainly got his
background stuck in there as the Riddler, and more.  He played very
nicely off of Jones, every once in a while stealing the stow entirely
with his charisma.  Chris O'Donnell did pretty well for the role he
was cast for, as a 20-something teen idol for the girls in the audience
to ooo and aah over (when they weren't showing off the Bat Buns).
Nicole Kidman was just *there*.  She wasn't all that bad, she just
lacked Michelle Pfieffer's oomph ;-) (possibly the only good thing about
Batman Returns).  She has lost some of her own oomph from great flicks
like MALICE; and along with it, she has lost all of her Australian
accent in this film.  I mean, when you don't get your own McDonalds
collectible glass, you know something's gone wrong (Holy Licensing
Agreement Batman!).  Returning from the first two "Batman" movies are
Michael Gough as Alfred (who is superb!) and Pat Hingle as Commissioner
Gordon (who is as okay as his 7-8 lines and static character let him
be).
     Joel Schumacher does job directing this, with new, interesting,
and strange shots of things from every angle, along with decent special
effects.  The score is great, so great I bought it ... well worth the
US$17.99.  Elfman's theme from the first two movies isn't in here, but
Elliot Goldenthal makes up for that nicely by making his own recurring
themes heard throughout the movie.
     All in all, I'd say this is a movie worth seeing, even though the
first two films might scare you away.  Let me tell you this if you
haven't figured it out: This is nothing at all like them.  The plot is
light as fluff and has no "deeper underlying purpose or story" like
Burton tried to convey in his films, but that's the beauty of it.  It's
not made for the meaning, it's made for the ride!  It reminds me
distinctly of another movie with dinosaurs I saw awhile back ...

Author
Stephen Rafferty
Produced by Tim Burton & Peter MacGregor-Scott
Written by  Lee Batchler, Janet Scott Batchler, and Akiva Goldsman
Cinematography by Stephen Goldblatt
     Yes, the third installment of the caped crusader series is more
colorful and has probably more action than the other two.  It has two
red hot actors in Jim Carrey and Tommy Lee Jones.  It has a new,
younger, more popular hero in Val Kilmer. Above all this it even has
another red hot young actor portraying Batman's lovable side-kick
Robin; Chris O'Donnell, and a new love interest in Nicole Kidman's
shrink Chase Meridian.  However, what the film doesn't have is a strong
central character, any decent dialogue, or much of a reason to care
about any of the aforementioned characters.
     Val Kilmer, in surprisingly stiff portrayal, plays Bruce Wayne and
his alter-ego Batman.  Again we are involved in depiction's of Wayne's
unfortunate childhood experience and his reason for donning the the
black, rubber suit.  Without any back story at all, we are plunged into
Batman's personal and on-going struggle with former District Attorney
Harvey Dent, now known as "Two-Face."  Jones, simply copying his
character from NATURAL BORN KILLERS, sleeps his way through this film.
>From the first second we see him to the last, he maintains a one note
performance with nothing memorable to mention.  Kilmer, who we first
see as Wayne, is shockingly dry and bland.  When Kilmer was announced
as the new Batman many thought he would bring a flare to the character
that he has to many other performances.  Unfortunately, I am here to
say he doesn't.  In fact, he made Michael Keaton look like a virtual
glowing barrel of fun in comparison.  Batman has still not entered the
building.
     The rest of the film takes on the cliched by now Batman theme:
someone feels burned by our hero and then decides to seek revenge.
Along with Two-Face now is the Riddler played by Carrey.  At the start
of the film he is simply an electronics geek working at Wayne's
factory, but after his idea is shot down by Wayne, he is now a madman
who is after his old boss.  Teaming up with Two-Face, Carrey's Riddler
wreaks havoc on Batman with his new mind probing invention along with
hypnotizing the entire city.  On top of this of-course is Batman's love
interest, this time played by  Nicole Kidman as Dr. Chase Meridian.  A
shrink who seems less interested in Batman's psyche than his cod-piece,
Kidman's character is less than a card-board cut out.  Kidman does okay,
but with what she was given I doubt many actresses could ignite a match
let alone the screen.  The only twist to this second sequel is the
addition of Dick Grayson played by O'Donnell.  Grayson's family are
taken care of by Two-Face and leaves Dick with a burning desire to
himself achieve revenge.  Grayson therefore becomes Robin, Batman's
trusted side-kick.  In all of this, someone forgot to write a good
character.  Carrey plays the same schtick he's been doing for years,
and O'Donnell like Kidman simply is given very little to mold.  He is
out for revenge and a young acrobatic kid- that's it!  Flashy and more
colorful than anything in all three films, the climax somehow leaves
you wondering when something is going to happen that will make you
really care about anyone.  Too late, the final credits are rolling!
     Technically there are some nice moments in the film, with great
visuals.  Stephen Goldblatt's cinematography is very eye catching, and
in obvious contrast to the other two films makes great use of color.
     What is most disappointing about this film is it again is written
for the villain, and not the hero.  Sure the first BATMAN was great in
that respect, but that was because of intelligent writing and well,
Jack Nicholson.  But here, as with the abominable first sequel, the
nemeses are so bland and repetitive that we have no emotion involved
with them.  If the Riddler decides to kill everyone or become a bank
teller, you don't really care.   When will someone write a film for
Batman!  The character is full of so many possibilities, to waste on
"I'll get drive-thru" is absurd and simply a let down.  Along with some
juicier writing, is going to have to be a director who can make Batman
come alive.  I don't mean he has to be a goof-ball, but a director who
can tell the difference between the lighter moments and the darker
ones.  Kilmer may be able to do it with a better director, but if this
film is anything to go by, we'll be waiting a long time.

Author
Maria Vitale
            -----------------------------------------------------
     Never have I seen so much Day-Glo colors, iridescent neon lights
and campy behaviour in my life! That aside this was the most
anticipated and over-hyped summer movie in recent memory.  And while
much has been made of the new cast, director, Robin, batsuits, nipples,
etc. my main concern was would I be able to hold down my lunch while
watching this extravaganza? In a word ...  YES!
     Joel Schumacher, director of such diverse films as THE LOST BOYS,
FALLING DOWN, DYING YOUNG and last year's CLIENT, manages not only to
create a world totally different in feel and style from his
predecessor, Tim Burton, but he brings a sense of fun and silliness not
usually associated with The Dark Knight You can't help but smile at the
humor, the costumes and yes, even the horrid makeup which were able to
transform even actor Tommy Lee Jones to a level of excess not before
seen on the screen.
     Confession time: I have never been a fan of comics, whether it was
Batman, Superman ... what have you.  The genre certainly has its loyal
fans and in deference to them I will say that I can sympathize with
their outrage for the departure from Tim Burton's vision of the Bat of
old.  Frankly I always found it too dark and ominous to be enjoyable.
So?  What did I think of its latest incarnation?  Here goes:
     I had a blast!! The cast blended well together.  They seemed like a
bunch of kids let loose on a playground at recess who had been told
that school was out for the day.  Just give a bunch of talented people
enough money to make some dreams come true, lots of crazy outfits and
makeup galore and put it in the hands of someone like Schumacher and
watch what happens!
     As for the cast: Val Kilmer, the new Batman! While yes I did like
Michael Keaton, Kilmer is a refreshing change.  He's just as sexy,
certainly good-looking and those buns!! Warner couldn't resist filling
the screen with them for a not-so-brief view in his new Batsuit. :)
Can't say I blame them!
     I do have one gripe with WB.  Well ... considerably more than just
one but this is neither the time nor the forum for that.  WB did all
they could to keep the production closely under wraps for fear of too
much information getting out and possibly ruining the suspense and
anticipation, not to mention its vast merchandizing schemes in
connection with the movie.  Well maybe they ought to have re-examined
the trailers and movie clips they release since they nearly covered the
entire film with them and left little to be discovered by sitting in
the movie theater.
     But what they did leave out was just as exciting and dazzling as
the rest and more than kept my group of fellow movie-goers
entertained.  Jim Carrey's Riddler was sure to be as Over-The-Top as he
could make it but it was fabulous to watch.  As was Tommy Lee Jones'
Two-Face.  I'd heard much of their supposed competition for Top Dog (no
Red Dog pun intended) but I really saw none of it on the screen.  Each
found a way to bring pure hokum to their roles.
     I'd always been against comic book adaptations to the big screen
because I'd thought the cross-over did not work.  Certainly I'd never
seen anything worthy of the effort ... until now.  BF is as good as it
gets.  You find yourself anxiously wanting to turn the page to see what
comes next.  I know I did whenever Nicole Kidman (Dr. Chase Meridian)
was alone with Batman/Bruce.  I'm all for romance but I found myself
giggling along with the rest of the audience the three times they
kissed.
     Overall impressions: Kilmer's got the job for as long as he wants
it.  Chris O'Donnell's Robin is here to stay too.  The rumors abound
about the sure-to-follow sequel.  Will Carrey's Riddler escape from
Arkham Asylum? Yeah, I'd say so... and unless he demands $50 million I
can't see Warner refusing him anything.  Does Two-Face survive? Given
his final shot, outstretched hand catching his favorite dual-sided
good/evil coin as he sinks beneath the water, head (good) side up --
yeah, I think we'll see TLJ come back again.  Schumacher?? Are you
kidding? The man has created a blockbuster by seeking inspiration from
such films as Tron and Raiders of the Lost Ark, among other films,
finished the movie ahead of schedule and under the budget!! Of course
he'll be back!
     The story?  Well, no one ever said that revenge wasn't a good story
now did they? Duality is omnipresent as well.  Everyone has two sides to
them and each is explored throughout the film.  The music is fine
although I found myself thinking of John Williams from time to time and
I couldn't help shaking the feeling that the main theme sounded a heck
of a lot like "Begin the Beguine."  The sets are spectacular and large!
The largest I've seen in quite a while.  You'd think the actors would
get lost in such a setting but Schumacher brings them out and makes
Entertainment the catch-phrase for the viewers.  You leave the theater
feeling that you not only got your money's worth but that you'll gladly
go into debt to see this one several times.
     Well ... this hasn't been a typical review by any means but then
again this was no ordinary movie.  To have seen the highly controversial
Batsuits with their nipples and the brand-spanking new Batmobile,
Batwing which conveniently transforms into a new Batsub, Batboat and
assorted new gadgets, even E. Nygma's RES Box which is nothing more
than a souped-up blender, I must say that it was all great fun.
     Jim Carrey continues to prove that he does indeed have a lot of
talent and under the careful guidance and I presume restraint of
Schumacher, brought to life The Riddler with all of his insanity,
god-complexes and all.  Tommy Lee Jones' turn as former DA Harvey Dent
was loud, gravel-voiced and as campy as his makeup but it worked.  It
played perfectly opposite Carrey's antics and bag of tricks.  Filling
out the rest of the screen and essentially acting as window dressing
were Two-Face's girlfriends, Drew Barrymore and Debi Mazar as Sugar and
Spice, yin and yang to Harvey's dual personalities.  Michael Gough, the
only hold-over from the Tim Burton days, was as irresistible as ever
as Alfred.
     Not much left to be said except that I plan on seeing this one
again for sure! Recommendation: Not to be missed on the big screen by
anyone who loves action, Batman, romance, and just plain good ol' fun.

Author
Burton and Rachel
     The special effects were okay, but as with past Batman movies, it
was filmed without sufficient light for them to be appreciated (or for
much else to be appreciated at that!).  Most of them were actually
quite poor, the best one is the one in the Adverts--helicopter through
the explosion.   There was tremendous emphasis on the sound effects
during the fight scenes, it was almost like the original TV version
with the POW, and BAM, words written on the screen--they were *that*
noticeable.  The movie was fairly long (two or so hours) and some parts
were VERY slow (I even looked at my watch once!).
     Val Kilmer just didn't work for me as the main man. He didn't have
(or show) enough inner turmoil, the conflict between Bruce and Bat was
really lost. Although my soon-to-be wife like Val better than Michael
Keaton. She thought Keaton spent too much time *morbidly* pondering the
turmoil and hence Val was better (and cuter--go figure).
     Jim Carrey was *superb* as the Riddler, didn't overplay as much as
I was expecting which was refreshing.
     Tommy Lee Jones was well-cast as Two-Face, but also seemed to
lose the split personality this character traditionally had.
     Robin (Chris O'Donnell) was--well--probably unnecessary.  He didn't
do a bad job, I just think the movie wasn't made better with the
character, and wouldn't be worse without it.  My fiancee liked him and
thought the character specifically and significantly contributed to the
plot--and yes, also thinks he's hot.
     Nicole Kidman, the blond love interest, was very good.  She had
guts, personality, good lipstick and good hair--this according to my
blond love interest.  I found her character tawdry and much too
predictable.  Her lines were stilted--not the delivery--the actual
lines.  And yes, she is hot.
     I think it will do well in term of $$, but wont be the summer
SMASH everyone is expecting.  But as with most movies, it is a matter
of expectations going in to see it--mine were high and Im
disappointed.
[My fiancee and I apologize to those easily offended by political 
INcorrectness :-) ]

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     You can tell that a series is transforming to a product when the
original creative people start having less and less to do with the new
chapters.  You get substitute directors and maybe there are substitute
actors trying to look like the originals.  For BATMAN FOREVER Tim
Burton still produces but Joel Schumacher (FLATLINERS) directs and
Michael Keaton is replaced by Val Kilmer in the title role.  Now don't
get me wrong.  I am not going to hold up the previous "Batman" films as
being anything admirable.  The second film did achieve a Fellini-esque
bizarreness at times, but neither is really good cinema in any sense.
BATMAN FOREVER has a new director and a new star and a new, even
thinner feel.  The new MTV-generation priorities say that the image on
the screen is everything.  Intelligence behind that image is as useless
as the new rubber nipples on the Batman suit.
     As long as something looks good on the screen it doesn't matter
any more how much sense it makes or in this case doesn't make.  We have
two totally nonsensical villains.  The slightly better-motivated
villain is The Riddler (played by Jim Carrey).  His grudge against
Bruce Wayne/Batman seems to be that Wayne Industries was not
sufficiently interested in his new broadcast entertainment system.  I
suppose he doesn't like the idea of getting rich all by himself.
Harvey Dent (played by Tommy Lee Jones) turned into the villain Two-
Face because a baddie threw acid in his face.  Batman tried to save him
but his bat-reflexes were just instants too slow to protect Dent.  The
grudge against Batman makes absolutely no sense in either case, but the
writers are apparently afraid that better motivation would slow the
action.  Another new character is Dr. Chase Meridian (Nicole Kidman),
supposedly a respected psychologist.  Do real psychologists actually
call people "wacko?"   Do they really psychoanalyze people on the basis
of two or three sentences?  I doubt it, somehow.  As if these three
people aren't enough to complicate Batman's life, Bruce Wayne also gets
a ward, Dick Grayson (Chris O'Donnell) soon to be Robin, he whom he
comics call the "boy wonder."  Now Robin may be a wonder of sorts, but
he is a bit beyond the "boy" stage.  He rides a motorcycle and
occasionally needs a shave.  Just why someone his age needs a court-
appointed guardian is not clear, particularly because the guardian
looks to be only about five years his senior.  Robin, as comic readers
expect, becomes Batman's partner, hiding his identity by choosing a
costume that is almost exactly like the one that thousands of people
saw him wear as Dick Grayson, circus acrobat.  However Robin seems a
perfect match in some ways and instantly knows how to operate all the
Bat-gear.
     The problem with the script is that there is so much that happens
with little explanation.  This is a film that seems to have been shot
from the first draft of a script.  Meridian makes a date with Batman,
then has second thoughts about dating him and on the date tells him
that she is does not want to date him.  The message would have been
less confusing if she had not waited for Batman in bed and had not met
Batman wearing only a sheet.  Meeting a man dressed in only a sheet
sends signals that are likely to be misinterpreted.  While the police
and Batman are combing the city for Harvey Dent, the Riddler decides to
team up with him and instantly finds him.  How?  Don't ask questions
like "how."  One plot situation after another happens with no logic.
Even the old 1940s Batman serials had more thought about the logic of
their scenes.
     Val Kilmer as Bruce Wayne and the Batman seems younger than
Michael Keaton.  He seems too young for the role, in fact.  And he is
not the most effective actor one could wish in the role.  Admitted
neither was Keaton and Kilmer at least has a prominent jawline.  Jim
Carrey is his usual weird self which makes him much more convincing
once he dons the Riddler suit than he was as a mere mortal.  His
Riddler is a reasonable facsimile of the comic book villain, but his
E. Nygma is a bit too much of a Jim Carrey comedy act.  Tommy Lee Jones
does adequately by Two-Face, but never manages to bring the additional
flamboyance to his role that would be needed to stand out from all the
noise and the weirdness that is going on.
     Visually the style has taken over the film.  There just isn't
enough cathedral here for all the gargoyles.  The skyline of Gotham
City, which had an interesting baroque look in BATMAN now has just too
many statues and building decorations to be credible--art nouveau ad
nauseum.  But the worst mistake is to have too many spectacular but
incoherent action scenes.  Burton's fight scenes have been accused of
being unexciting, but at least the viewer knows what Burton is trying
to say.  Too often you are seeing big objects crashing into other huge
thingamabobs and falling into big holes without enough of an idea of
why or what is supposed to be happening.  Think about it too long and
you miss the next big crash.  Scenes are choreographed for things to
work out too perfectly too much of the time.  Objects swing from cables
that are just exactly the right length for something else to happen.
Even an incredible story needs credible underpinnings and there are
just not enough.  The real super-villain is The Director who breaks
more laws of physics than The Riddler can break laws of Gotham.
Visually the effects are generally more believable than the action,
though there are some exceptions.  The new Batplane looks like a toy,
but overall the effects are quite good.
     There are certainly times during the endless sequences of
senseless action that the film does achieve the feel of the title.  Or
maybe it is more like BATMAN INTERMINABLE.  But I think for me that a
better title would be BATMAN NEVER AGAIN.  This film gets a -1 on the
-4 to +4 scale.
