Title
Review for Nightmare on Elm Street 4: The Dream Master, A (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael C. De Masi
     As an avid Freddy fan, I was a little concerned about whether the folks at
New Line could keep up with their own image.  Would it be possible for the
makers of some of the best (and only) horror in the last few years to once
again treat us to a night with Freddy, the psycho we all love to love?
     Definitely.  Freddy's back once again, and more lovable than ever in A
NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET, PART IV: THE DREAM MASTER, which in my humble opinion
is easily the best episode since the original.  Along with a large group of the
faithful, I saw the film on its opening night.
     There's very little more difficult for a movie maker to do than please a
jaded audience, especially in the realm of horror.  Sure, it's easy to make a
movie or two with enough gimmicks and surprises (and nude co-eds getting hacked
right after sex) to pull in the teenage  crowd, but when your audience has come
to expect good writing, primo special effects and real suspense, all blended
with a dose of good old black humor, it gets a little more difficult.  This is
what we expected, this is what we got.
     It's hard to make me jump, but jump I did a few times in the course of
this little horror fest.  The story, much as one would expect, is much the same
as ever.  Freddy Kreuger, "Bastard son of a hundred maniacs," despite the best
efforts of the folks of his home town, once again decides to come back and show
a few neighborhood kids around his place.  As always, some of the kids realize
what's going on and band together to bring Freddy to the hideous end he must
always face.  In the mean time, a lot of people get whacked in a lot of
different and interesting ways.  So what's so great about all that?  Why of
course, the man himself.
     Once again, Robert Englund (who is in reality the world's most harmless-
looking soul) plays Freddy to perfection.  Unlike some other horror stars I
could mention, Freddy is a real character.  He doesn't just act out of some
brainless and impersonal lust for gore, he kills because he *loves* it.  In
return, his victims don't just fear him, they loath him with the hatred of old
enemies reunited.  This is the payoff for a true Freddy-phile.
     High points?  Apparently, Freddy has decided to expand his horizons and
not rely on the old glove as much as before.  The "high tech" horror fans among
us will not be disappointed at some of the best F/X I've seen in quite a while.
Another aspect I much appreciated was that the "cutesy" aspect of the kids from
DREAM WARRIORS [A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET PART IV] was gone and replaced with a
sort of hip, world-weariness which I find a great deal more appropriate.
     And for those who like Freddy's sense of humor, the man is at his
sarcastic best.  What a wise ass!  Obviously a comic genius.

Author
Jerry Saravia
The Freddy Krueger craze in the late 80's grew and grew, and "Nightmare on Elm Street 4" proved to be no exception in proving the popularity. It was, and still is, the biggest hit of the series. There were more spectacular deaths, more Freddy one-liners, and there was the hit song "Put Your Mouth on Me". 
The film starts with the three surviving Elm Street kids brought together into a nightmare thanks to Kristen (played this time, with less conviction than Patricia Arquette, by singer Tuesday Knight). Ken Sagoes (reprising his role from Part 3) inadvertently resurrects Freddy in a car lot with the help of his dog Jason and some flaming urine (!). Now Freddy kills the remaining Elm Street kids and is after some fresh blood, or else the movie would be over. Enter the Carrie-like Alice (Lisa Wilcox) who has premonitions and walks around in a trance. She's the only one who can destroy Freddy, and since he kills most of her friends, she acquires their strengths and becomes a formidable opponent for the big showdown in an abandoned church.
It is obvious that the series began to have less and less of the dark atmosphere of the Wes Craven original, and more of Freddy's demented criminal acting as a jokester. Still, this one is creatively designed and imaginatively directed by Renny Harlin ("Die Hard 2"). Check out the best scene in the film: Alice walks into a theatre showing "Reefer Madness" and dreams that she floats into the movie-within-the-movie, "Purple Rose of Cairo"-style. There she finds a nearly-abandoned diner where Freddy serves "Soul Pizza". 
The movie is strictly by-the-numbers and, although not as good as Part 3, it is still the most visually enthralling of the entire series. After the silliness of "Wes Craven's New Nightmare," I hear that "Freddy vs. Jason" may possibly bring back Alice. We can only hope. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com
