Title
Review for Hua yang nian hua (2000)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Edwin Jahiel
IN THE MOOD FOR LOVE (China, 2000)  *** Written, produced and 
directed by Wong Kar-wei. Photography, Christopher Doyle and Mark Li 
Ping-bin. Editing, William Chang Suk-ping. Production design, Chang 
Suk-ping. Music, Mike Galasso, Umebayashi Shigeru. Cast: Lai Chin 
(Mr. Ho), Maggie Cheung (Su Li-zhen), Tony Leung (Chow Mo-wan), 
Rebecca Pan (Mrs. Suen), Siu Ping-lam (Ah Ping),  Chin Tsi-ang (The 
Amah). A USA Films release. In Cantonese and Shanghainese, with 
English subtitles. 97 minutes. PG. A the New Art Theater.
"I'm in the mood for love/ simply because you're near me/ funny, but 
when you're near me/ I'm in the mood for love."
Earlier generations certainly know this famous Dorothy Fields/ Jimmy 
McHugh song,  launched when Frances Langford sang it in her feature 
debut "Every Night at Eight" (1935) --which is about a musical trio ( 
Alice Faye, Patsy Kelly and Langford) singing at a radio station. It 
became a staple in World War II when diminutive Frances, a major 
fixture of Bob Hope's USO show, warbled it to the military all over 
the map.
Cleverly, while the movie has many tunes, it uses only the title and 
not the song itself. It was chosen late in the film's development. 
 From its initial idea to the end of production, In the Mood for Love 
underwent many metamorphoses and its making was interrupted several 
times (with a gap of almost a year).  Among the reasons for this: the 
Asian financial crisis; the almost simultaneous filming of another 
feature (the futuristic "2046"); the fact that the two pictures had 
some mutually influencing elements which resulted in a kind of ping 
pong of changes; director Wong Kar-wei's constant re-thinking the 
film; and last but not least, his working without a script.
  In 1962 the British crown colony of Hong Kong was 35 years away from 
reverting to China. Around that time there was a major influx of 
people from mainland China, notably Shanghai. It put a huge strain on 
housing the newcomers.
The movie opens with Mr.Chow renting a room for himself and his wife 
in a cheerful, crowded and dilapidated house. At the same time, 
Mrs.Su does the same for herself and her husband. The new tenants 
have adjoining rooms. We do not see their spouses, who both 
incessantly take business trips. The movie spells out few facts, so 
that the audience has to be on its toes and infer a great deal.
The beautiful Mrs. Su wears a succession of gorgeous dresses, 
craftily color-coded. Handsome Mr. Chow is elegant in his many 
changes of impeccable suits. When I first saw the movie there were 
raised eyebrows about the contrast between chic apparel and shabby 
dwellings, but this is explained by Hong Kong's huge housing shortage 
in the early 60s.
It is inevitable that during the absence of their peripatetic mates, 
Su and Chow will meet, chat in restaurants or noodle  shops 
(noodlerias?), feel mutual attraction. Su works in the office of 
businessman Mr. Ho as his secretary as well as  something like a 
general manager. (We only see briefly just one other employee, an 
errand boy). I repeat, the movie skimps on traditional orientations 
and explanations in favor of its overwhelming subject, "A Man and a 
Woman."
Mr. Ho has a wife and a mistress. Su is not only aware of this but 
imperturbably sets up appointments for Ho and the younger woman, 
covers for him, and has her husband bring back from his trips abroad 
duplicate gifts for Ho's two ladies.
Chow is a journalist. The film's minimal information and parsimonious 
clues reveal this to us slowly. Only much later do we learn that Chow 
is a newspaper's editor.
Over a restaurant the new twosome realize that his wife and her 
husband are lovers. In most scenarios this would give our couple 
carte blanche for carnal knowledge, but here neither the man nor the 
woman "wants to be like them." So the movie intensifies its ballet of 
hesitancies. That's the film's core. It is done with sympathy, 
exemplary delicacy and discretion and underplayed micro-changes. The 
principals meet and meet and meet while repeating "we should not be 
seen together."
This unusual love story goes hand in hand with the acute estheticism 
of its director and its ace cinematographers. Comings and goings, in 
contrast to the protagonists' sartorial elegance, are set in often 
chiaroscuro interiors, in narrow streets with picturesque rain, with 
a stress on walls that have the beauty of decay. The cautious 
symbolism here is reinforced by the soundtrack. Nat King Cole is 
heard doing a number of Latin versions of familiar love songs. (His 
Spanish is fine, a tad Argentinean.  Clue: he says Jo for Yo). There 
are other songs, as well as a too repetitious theme for meowing 
strings.
The terms "Mood" and "Love" are in this work's bloodstream. They are 
expressed without the need for running dialogue. Understatement is 
the order of the day along with major pauses and silences. The 
director made many cuts in the original footage shot, so as to weed 
out and "purify" the movie. This is minimalism as well as an unusual 
form of film asceticism that recalls the strategies of some great 
filmmakers, such as Ozu and Robert Bresson.
At age 5,  Wong Kar-wei had moved with his parents from Shanghai to 
Hong-Kong. The recreation of the times is both economical and 
precise. As the old houses exist no longer, the shooting was mostly 
done in Bangkok.
The director says that he was influenced by Jean-Luc Godard and the 
French New Wave of the 60s. (But certainly not by the anything goes, 
hippie 60s in the USA as well as Europe). Among his Godardian 
techniques is the avoidance of shot -reverse shot in conversations; 
not always showing one of the interlocutors; platitudes spoken by 
some older people; the absence of a script. But contrary to Godard, 
this bittersweet story never ventures outside its one and only 
subject, does not go from the inner self to the outside, but instead 
keeps the camera rock-steady to lead us from out to in, from the 
images to the soul of the characters.
Is this an Asian "Brief Encounter?"  Is there closure? I won't let 
the cat out of the bag.
The actors are perfect. Maggie Chung's and Tony Leung's careers began 
in the early 1980s. They are mega-stars in Asia, and have made a huge 
number of films. (Ms. Chung did 12 features in 1988!) "In the Mood" 
is their fifth feature directed  by  Wong Kar-wei.
At the Cannes Film Festival (2000) Tony Leung won for Best Actor. The 
two cinematographers and the production designer were awarded the 
Grand Technical Prize.
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 

Author
Steve Rhodes
IN THE MOOD FOR LOVE is a beautifully shot, romantic drama that is 
unrelentingly sad but touchingly honest.  Like THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, the 
picture which it most resembles, the story tells of two circumspect 
lovers who have the bad luck to be in love and married, but not to each 
other.  A movie which is perhaps more remarkable for what it doesn't 
show than what it does, it draws us into its slow rhythms from the first 
scene.  Among things left to our imagination are what their 
much-discussed-but-never-seen spouses are like and what, if any, 
physical intimacy, other than brief hand caresses, ever takes place 
between the two lovers. 
The story begins in Hong Kong in 1962 when Mrs. Chan (Maggie Cheung) 
moves into the apartment next door to Mr. Chow (Tony Leung).  Leung won 
the award for Best Actor at Cannes for his work as the show's troubled 
lover.  Both performances are delicately nuanced and emotionally 
involving.  In one long sequence we witness Mrs. Chan contemplating her 
sorrow.  She is so frozen than she looks like life itself has knocked 
the breath out of her.  
Writer and director Kar-wai Wong's last film was HAPPY TOGETHER, which I 
hated.  This time, however, he comes up with a brilliant script and gets 
stunning performances out of his stars.  A keenly observant film, it has 
us witnessing much of the action from a distance or from an adjoining 
room.  Sometimes, we see one character but not the other in a 
conversation that takes place across rooms.  And, sometimes, the actors 
leave us in the hallway as they carry on their discussions within our 
ear range but not within view.
The actions -- maybe activities would be a more apt term -- take place 
in offices as well as apartments, streets and restaurants.  This is 
particularly refreshing since films tend to ignore office locales even 
though real human beings spend substantial portions of their lives 
there.
With both spouses out of town for an extended period -- Mrs. Chow has 
left for a while because of a marital spat, and Mr. Chan is abroad on a 
long business trip -- Mr. Chow and Mrs. Chan go to a restaurant 
together.  Nominally, he has invited her out in order to find out where 
he could buy a handbag like hers as a birthday present for his wife.  
Mrs. Chan awkwardly points out that his wife probably wouldn't want the 
same purse as the woman next door.  Her attempt at polite small talk 
fails as well.  When she compliments his tie, he admits that all credit 
should go to his wife, since she chooses his clothes.  Speaking of 
clothes, women really won the fashion race in 1960's Hong Kong.  Mrs. 
Chan's tight-fitting, flowered-print dresses are uniformly alluring and 
beautiful, whereas Mr. Chow's thin ties and starched white shirts are 
unappealingly bland.
Slowly their relationship builds.  How far it actually goes is up to the 
viewer's interpretation.  Almost the only time that we see more than 
their hands touch is when Mr. Chow provides a shoulder for Mrs. Chan to 
cry on.  But the signs of increasing intimacy are unmistakable, even if 
modest.  He, for example, puts a dollop of hot mustard on her plate 
without asking permission.  She smiles and takes his unspoken advice to 
sample it.  It's a small moment, but quite a telling one.
"I'm just an average guy," an avuncular friend of Mr. Chow's tells him.  
"I don't keep secrets like you.  I don't bottle things up."  We can 
never be quite sure what relationship Mr. Chow has with Mrs. Chan, but 
we can tell that its necessary secrecy eats away at Mr. Chow like a 
cancer.
As the story advances, it becomes increasingly clear that our Mr. Chow 
and Mrs. Chan have never thought through the end game of their affair.  
The movie, on the other hand, seems to have thought of nothing but, 
containing, as it does, four endings.  Surprisingly, these aborted 
attempts to stop are just as engrossing as the body of the story.  IN 
THE MOOD FOR LOVE is a hauntingly beautiful tale that will stay with you 
long after the last of these many endings.
IN THE MOOD FOR LOVE runs 1:37.  The film is in Cantonese with English 
subtitles.  It is rated PG for thematic elements and brief language and 
would be acceptable for anyone old enough to be interested in the 
story's themes.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When married couples go out together, double-dating if you
will excuse the adolescent term, it it not altogether
uncommon to find each of the men attracted to the other's
wife and vice versa. Usually the men and women do not act
on their fantasies since, after all, what are friends for? 
Arguably the most romantic American film more or less on
the theme, David Lean's "Brief Encounter," makes excellent
use of Rachmaninoff's ardent Second Piano Concerto
to pump up the desire felt between two strangers, both
married, who meet at a train station and find themselves
drawn into a poignant romance.  In Wong Kar-Wai's current
version of the motif, a pair of next-door neighbors, Chow Mo-
Wan (Tony Leung), and Su Li-zhen (Maggie Cheung),
imperceptibly discover that their spouses are having an affair. 
They find they are drawn to each other What do they do
about it?  If this were an American film, particularly one shot
against the background of the sexually free 1970s, we know
what would result, whether out of revenge for the marital
partners' indiscretions or in the heat of the moment.  But
Wong's film takes place in the Far East during the early
sixties, particularly in and around the damp streets of Hong
Kong, with Mark Li Ping-bin's camera showing groups of
Chinese residents possessing a fair amount of prosperity
moving to and fro, while in the buildomg inhabited by the two
principals, the neighbors often play mah-jongg throughout the
day.  
   Su is the secretary in a shipping company and works side
by side with her boss, who is subtly shown to be having an
affair with a younger woman.  Lonely for the absent man
while her neighbor, Chow, is missing his own bed partner,
they would expect to get together for more than a string of
dinners in informal coffee houses and chats in Chow's
apartment.  But even during a period in which Su, tired from
having to hide out for hours in Chow's flat rather than risk
being caught exiting the room by her neighbors, is able to
recline stiffly on his bed without messing a strand of her
mummified coiffure. 
   Wong Kar-Wei, whose faster-paced "Chungking Express"
featured Tony Leung in a pair of related stoires of
lovesickness, obsession and the peccadilloes of relationships,
beats a different drum this time around.  Where "Chungking"
is light, frothy and delightfully offbeat, "In the Mood" is
more straightward, meditative, and concerned to show its
audience a palette of colors in scenes of Hong Kong,
Singapore, and Cambodia.  While the conversation between
the two shy neighbors is relatively free of Pinteresque
pauses, Wong allows us to form impressions of the
relationship through the gaps in the story, forcing us to
imagine the connection between Su's and Chow's spouses,
to absorb the bonds that take place within the housing
complex, to take an armchair journey in portions of the world
which are distant from the West and yet share in the
Occident's cultural values.  
   Wong is almost obsessed with showing consumption of
food, usually noodles which the two people share at Chow's
place and even, surprisingly, a steak that the two indulge in
with forks and knives in a barebones but pleasant little
restaurant.  Food and love are closely connected, of course,
and in one scene that's far from a sybaritic representation of
the randy gluttony in Tony Richardson's "Tom Jones," Chow
places a dollop of spicy mustard next to his partner's steak,
asking her whether she likes her sustenance hot.  
   As the very title suggests, this is a picture to be enjoyed for
mood rather than literal essence, using a soundtrack of Nat
King Cole favorites in place of Rachmaninoff's Second in the
sound track. Notwithstanding an overlong coda that take us to
Kampuchean sites to represent the increasing distance of the
two, "In the Mood for Love" is a fine, but muted showcase for the 
talents of its two prolific stars.
Rated PG.  Running time: 90 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
"We Put the SIN in Cinema"
 ŠCopyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Wong Kar-wai's In the Mood For Love is kind of like the Harrison
Ford/Kristin Scott Thomas debacle Random Hearts, except there isn't a
plane crash and it's not nearly as sucky. The film is about two married
neighbors who forge a relationship and then learn their respective
spouses have been having an affair. In the Mood, which snagged the
Technical Grand Prize and Best Actor trophies at Cannes, as well as the
prestigious Five Award from the European equivalent of the Oscars, is
intricately paced and was largely improvised by Wong (Happy Together)
and his actors on the set.
The film is set in 1962, where fate brings two strangers together in a
cramped Hong Kong apartment building. Chow Mo-Wan (Tony Leung, Happy
Together) is a newspaper editor who dreams of writing pulpy martial arts
serials, and Su Li-zhen (Maggie Cheung, Chinese Box) is the assistant to
an executive of a large shipping company. The two characters meet when
they rent rooms from families who just happen to live next door to each
other.
Su's husband frequently travels to Japan for business, accompanied by
Chow's wife, who tells her husband she's working late, or spending time
with her sick mother. But neither Chow nor Su have a clue their partners
are being disloyal - that is, until they begin to develop their own
relationship. It begins with a glance as they cross paths both in the
tiny hallway leading to their apartments and on a dark stairway leading
to a noodle cart where the characters get lunch. It isn't until their
romance blossoms that Chow and Su learn of the irony of the relationship
shared by their spouses.
Their resolution to the situation is simultaneously anguished and
exquisite. The fact that these two characters are so likeable, coupled
with Wong's decision to never show them sharing a physical moment (he
shot a sex scene, but wisely left it on the cutting room floor) makes
the outcome of In the Mood as heartbreaking as anything you'll see on
the screen this year. Wong keeps thing subtly erotic by occasionally
having Chow and Su's hands brush together as they pass, trying to avoid
raising suspicion from their nosy, gossiping landlords, who have epic
Mahjong tournaments that last for days at a time.
Chow and Su's adulterous spouses are barely in the film, and when they
are, Wong opts to keep these characters hidden from viewers through
careful location of his camera. In fact, the writer/director gives In
the Mood more of a voyeuristic, fly-on-the-wall feel than any
reality-based television programming. Like Steven Soderbergh, Wong often
blocks off part of his shots with a door jam or some other inanimate
object, which, in addition to placing his camera at just the right angle
in a hallway or doorway, gives the film a cramped, cluttered look that
ads to the claustrophobic feeling that the two main characters must also
share. Actingwise, Leung and Cheung have never been better.
In the Mood is one of the most beautiful films I've ever had the
pleasure of seeing. Wong's previous pictures have all been gorgeous in
their own way, but never as elegant as here. His city is so dark and so
moody (hence the title), you'll think the sun has never risen in Hong
Kong. Wong's right-hand men - cinematographer Christopher Doyle (Liberty
Heights) and editor and costume/production designer William Chang, do an
unbelievably incredible job at making the film seem like the most
colorful, romantic dream you've ever had. If the shots of Cheung
gracefully swishing her lavish silk dresses through various surroundings
don't hypnotize you, then the repetitive use of a Spanish version of a
Nat King Cole song (and other period pop songs from the West) will be
sure to do the trick.
1:38  PG for thematic elements and brief language

Author
Laura Clifford
In 1962 Hong Kong, Mr. Chow (Tony Leung Chiu-wai, "Happy Together") finds
out from Mrs. Suen (Rebecca Pan, "Flowers of Shanghai") that the room she
had for rent was just taken by Mrs. Chan (Maggie Cheung Man-yuk, "Irma Vep")
and directs him just down the hall, where another room is available.
Within these crowded quarters, Mr. Chow and Mrs. Chan frequently cross each
others paths, alone.  When they gradually realize their spouses are engaged
in an affair, the two begin a friendship, vowing to be 'nothing like them'
in director Wong Kar-wai's Cannes Prix du Technique (editing, cinematography
and production design) winner "In the Mood for Love."
Writer/director Wong Kar-wai, known for his hip, visually stylized,
modern films like "Chungking Express," steps back in time not only for his
story but for his presentation.
His Hong Kong of 1962 is a memory of a golden age where neighbors formed
mini-communities in close quarters, observing bourgeois proprieties.
The elegant beauty Mrs. Chan is married to a man usually away on business 
trips to Japan (he, like Mrs. Chow, is never really seen, just heard).  He
brings back foreign goods such as pocketbooks and rice cookers to the
delight of all, although the uniqueness of his gifts betrays his affair.
(In a beautiful foreshadowing scene, Mrs. Chan asks her husband to bring
back two pocketbooks for her boss, Mr. Ho (Lai Chin).  When her husband
inquires as to why he needs two, she wearily replies, 'you know,' referring
to the general ways of men rather than personal experience.)  Handsome Mr. 
Chow's wife is a modern woman working as a hotel receptionist who frequently 
calls her husband with stories of having to work late that eventually give way 
to visits to a sick mother.
The lonely two cross each others' paths on rain slicked streets fetching
dinners-for-one at a local noodle stall.  Their hesitant relationship
begins as they compare notes before confirming what they each already knew.
They practice what they will say to their spouses with each other, then
begin spending more time together collaberating on writing the martial arts 
serials they both love.  Soon neighbors begin to talk and the emotionally
restrained Li-zhen withdraws forcing Chow to declare his love and ask her
to leave with him for Singapore.
This heartbreaking tale of unrequited (or is it?) love is an elegant romance
for the ages and a masterpiece of its genre.  Kar-wai's cinematographers
Christopher Doyle ("Days of Being Wild," "Ashes of Time," "Fallen Angels")
and Mark Li Ping-bin ("Flowers of Shanghai") brilliantly set their camera 
as an interloper viewing his subjects on the sly, creeping along halls and 
from behind objects.  Slow motion is used several times to underline the 
melancholy aspects of the moment.  The cheating spouses are shown in shadow,
from behind, or via obstructed view.
Hyphenate William Chang Suk-ping, (production design, costume, editing)
who's worked on all of Kar-wai's films, is a maestro here, from his 
recreations of 1962 offices, apartments and restaurants to the stunning
dresses worn by Cheung (all of the same design, all boasting different
shades of personality in their fabric, always consumately elegant).
Western musical choices, such as Nat King Cole's Spanish version of 
'Perhaps, Perhaps, Perhaps' and other Latin music strongly aid in rushing
us back to another era while setting the stage for love.
Tony Leung, who won Best Actor at Cannes for this role, is an
honorable man of the time whose romantic nature is engaged by Mrs. Chan's
natural beauty, quiet nature and companionship.  Maggie Cheung evokes
the pathos of a splendid woman who, unjustly treated by her husband,
continues to cling to respectability even as her emotions are being
pulled to the surface for what may be the first and only time.  Never
has a more elegant creature (Cheung cites the costumes as a great aid
to her physical interpretation of the character) graced the screen.
The two have enormous chemistry without needing any histrionics to
convey their depth of feeling.
Wong Kar-wai has created a classic of the genre with "In the Mood for
Love" that can stand alongside David Lean's "Brief Encounter."  He's
capable of moving your emotions with a shot of a woman's embroidered slippers 
left abandoned on the floor.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 IN THE MOOD FOR LOVE (director/writer: Wong Kar-Wai; cinematographer:
 Christopher Doyle; editor: William Chang; cast: Tony Leung (Chow
 Mo-wan), Maggie Cheung (Su Li-zhen Chan), Lai Chin (Mr. Ho), Rebecca
 Pan (Mrs. Suen), Siu Ping-Lam (Ah-Ping), Chin Tsi-ang (The Amah);
 Runtime: 97; USA Films/Block 2 Pictures/Paradis Films; 2000-Hong Kong)
This moody minimalist told piece is seen through the lush eyes of the
camera rather than told as a narrative. It is about repressed desires
and a love affair that never really happens. It is set in a crowded
building in Hong Kong in 1962. The film centers on two young couples who
rent adjacent rooms in the cramped tenement. They also share the
embarrassment of being married to adulterous spouses who are not seen,
but their voices can be heard offscreen. Their spouses travel on
business quite frequently and the two are left alone to dwell in their
loneliness, as they cross paths in the halls of their building and
quietly yearn for the other without one of them making the first move.
Chow (Leung) is the handsome and reserved newspaper journalist, who
rented the apartment from Mrs. Koo; Li-zhen (Cheung) is the extremely
attractive, polite, and well-dressed chief executive secretary in a
shipping firm, who rented a room from Mrs. Suen. They realize they are
the victims in this marriage but can't act out their repressed feelings,
they are too worried about what others might say and do not want to be
thought of like their spouses. Nevertheless, they come to enjoy each
other's company. They seem satisfied to eat out together, almost touch
each other, and to just sit together while talking. They wish to avoid
gossip in this city where privacy is hardly possible, so they keep their
meetings a secret.
Chow begins to suspect that his wife is unfaithful when he stops in
unannounced at her office to discover that she is not there. Ping, a
colleague, tells him that he saw his wife with another man. Then he
notices that Li-zhen's handbag is identical to his wife's, while
Li-zhen discovers that Chow is wearing a tie that she gave her husband.
The couple become close but can't have an affair, there is something
that can't be put into words that is stopping them. The film goes back
and forth between both their workplaces and their apartment dwelling. It
shows how well-thought of they both are in their environments, which
means so much to them. Ms. Cheung wears a new elegant dress every time
they meet, dresses with tailored shoulder pads and long covered
necklines. Mr. Leung smartly wears a charcoal silk suit with a different
chic tie each time. The film is a visual fashion show of beauty and
taste. Every shot is stylishly accomplished in a ritualised way. Nat
"King" Cole sings a host of soft ballads that reflect the film's steamy
mood, while the couple often get caught walking in a rainstorm, or
riding in a cab together, or nearly touching hands, or brushing past
each other on the stairs, or expressing through their facial gestures
their feelings of love. They even rehearse what she will ask her wayward
husband when she confronts him: she asks Chow, who is playing the part
of her husband. "Do you have a mistress?" Even in this play-acting, his
response that he is having an affair hurts so much that she begins to
sob. But before we realize it the couple will part, as Chow can't stand
the anguish anymore and volunteers to transfer to his newspaper's
Singapore office. She can't get up enough nerve to leave her husband and
go with him. It then becomes a question of whose fault it is that they
can't get together when they are both so polite and passive, as it is
implied they are both responsible for their inability to come together.
Yet the film suddenly ends by the subtitle writing stating: "That era
has passed. Nothing that belongs to it exists anymore."
Wong Kar-wai (Days of Being Wild/Chungking Express/Fallen Angels) has
created a film about sexual frustration that leaves you hanging on every
gesture for a resolution, but this very delicate romance ends without a
fulfilling resolution. The coy lovers never manage to act out their
desire to sleep with each other, instead their burning love for each
other becomes ennobled into an ideal love. It is a film that is hard to
put out of your mind; and, a lot of the credit for that should go to the
two big stars of Hong Kong cinema, Leung and Cheung, who are simply
mesmerizing.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
