Title
Review for Tigerland (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 20th Century Fox/Regency Enterprise
 Director: Joel Schumacher
 Writer:  Ross Klavan, Michael McGruther
 Cast: Colin Farrell, Matthew Davis, Clifton Collins Jr.,
Thomas Guiry, Shea Whigham, Russell Richardson, Cole
Hauser
   Someday we'll get a movie written by a North Vietnamese
or Viet Cong fighter giving a truthful account of the
training program set up by the people of that beleaguered
Southeast Asian nation who fought for their independence
against the Chinese, the French and the Americans.  We
already know that there are some cultural differences that
separate the northerners from their compatriots in the south,
but for the most part they are of the same cultural
background.  Not so the American fighting units.  Not only did
the U.S. servicemen generally have no passionate reason to
fight 12,000 miles away since, after all, they were not
defending their country; nor did they feel they had the support
of a sizable majority of the countrymen back home; but in
addition, since the U.S. embraces a large landscape with
different sectional, cultural, ethnic and religious differences,
there was bound to be considerable friction within their own
squadron.  That chafing is the subject of Joel Schumacher's
movie.
   "Tigerland," is semiautobiographical, dealing with director
Joel Schumacher's own period of training in a Louisiana
camp known as Tigerland--a camp which simulated actual
fighting conditions in the jungles of the 'Nam and which was
preceded by a rigorous training program in yet another
Louisiana location.  Filmed largely with hand held cameras
and natural lighting in accordance with the Danish-style
Dogme 95 movement, "Tigerland" often looks like some
documentary coverage of a typical barracks.  We get the
impression that the Louisiana program was the American
approach writ small.  A washed-out olive green aura
encompasses many sections of this fictionalized bit of history
giving the feeling of immediacy.  We witness what was going
down in 1971, to some extent a microcosm of American
society today.
   Schumacher lucks out with a largely unknown cast of
awesome performers, particularly the lead character, Roland
Bozz, played by the Irish actor Colin Farrell--a handsome,
charismatic man who can probably look forward to some big
Hollywood contracts.  Emulating the ambiance of
such films as Oliver Stone's "Platoon" and Stanley Kubrick's
"Full Metal Jacket," "Tigerland" takes us into the bivouac and
the mindset of a group of grunts, most of whom were drafted
and who had educations well short of college.  At no point in
the story does anyone discuss his opinions of the war--which
was the case with most soldiers throughout the nation who
were concerned more about survival than political theory as
they prepared to be shipped out to the hellhole of the the Far
East.
   The story is narrated by Private Jim Paxton (Matthew
Davis), a man who enlisted with the quixotic notion that he
would be the Ernest Hemingway of the 1970's, sitting
with notebook in hand recording the blow-by-blow action of
the fighting to capture the zeitgeist of the grunts with whom
he would share a unique camaraderie.  By contrast, Wilson
(Shea Whigham) is the sort of person you'd think the
army would want, a guy with a natural killer instinct who
couldn't give a fig about the reasons for the war but who
simply wanted to bag himself some trophies of "gooks" and
"dinks"--as the Asians were commonly referred to by the
fighting units.
   Colin Farrell runs away with the show.  As Roland Bozz, he
has some college, has been in trouble with the law, and
defies army rules and regulations.  In one case he runs
across a fellow in his platoon who is married with a kid. 
"What are you doing here?" he wonders aloud.  Informing the
grunt with barely a six-grade education of his rights, Bozz
succeeds in getting the man a discharge. 
   The blaring orders of the sergeants who are running the
show and who at times see nothing wrong with pushing their
men down in the dirt, stepping on their heads when they get
out of line, produce in Bozz a barely suppressed hostility. 
He expresses his defiance with a smirk, as though to say
"this is all a game, fellas...have a few laughs while you're
doing push-ups and being awakened at 4:30 each morning by
morons who get their jollies from kicking around their own
people."
   Shot by Matthew Libatique, whose resume includes such
surreal films as Darren Aronofsky's current "Requiem for a
Dream" and the even more experimental "Pi," "Tigerland"
affords by contrast a realistic look at an actual training
program.  If the Vietnamese enemy ever got a look at what
went on inthis training camp, it would be emboldened at least
a much as it was upon hearing of the massive protests in the
U.S. against the war.  Blacks are fighting whites, sergeants
battling G.I.'s, psycho killers going after wise guys with an
education...all serve to give "Tigerland" the sort of dramatic
force enjoyed by the audience for Robert Altman's 1983
adaptation of David Rabe's play, "Streamers"--a couple of
days in an army barracks at the dawn of America's
involvement in Vietnam which turned into a parable about
manhood and death.
Rated R.  Running time: 109 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Christopher Null
     Joel Schumacher, director of some of the worst films in a
generation (8MM, Batman & Robin, Batman Forever), redeems himself with
his first really good flick since Falling Down in 1993.  A tale of army
recruits in their final days of training before heading to Vietnam in
1971, Tigerland is an original and modestly powerful anti-war film that
never even goes "in country."
     The film revolves around a recruit named Bozz (Colin Farrell,
Croupier) who is trying everything in his power to get out before he's
shipped out.  He refuses to participate in basic training, talks back to
his superiors, and undermines his fellow recruits' gung ho attitudes
with his sly, pacifist talk.  Notably, Bozz's closest friend Paxton
(Matthew Davis, Urban Legends: Final Cut) is looking forward to "the
experience" of serving in 'Nam, unafraid and ready for duty, and while
Paxton's resolve starts to crumble, Bozz finds his inexplicably coming
back around.
     Eschewing the theatrics of his Batman sagas, Schumacher relies on
an understated documentary style, largely using handheld cameras and
seemingly improvised scenarios.  To some extent, this works well,
putting the viewer in the action, headed to Tigerland (the very last
training stop before Vietnam) on the bus along with the platoon.  But on
another level, the whole film feels a little cheap, like Schumacher went
into the woods behind his house with a machete and a Handicam and
figured he could make a movie right there as a weekend project.  As a
result, the picture doesn't look or feel overwhelmingly authentic, and
the connection with the viewer is broken.  (In the end, it's apparent
the film has been shot the way it was simply for budget considerations,
which was reportedly less than $10 million.)
     Farrell in particular is a standout among the virtually all-male
cast, though he doesn't shine bright enough to outdo some of 2000's
virtuoso performances like Tom Hanks in Cast Away.  The ensemble as a
whole is smashing, and the story as written by Ross Klavan and Michael
McGruther is a standout among this year's lackluster scripts.  Too bad
the film couldn't have kept the energy level on an even keel throughout
the production, but hey, wars -- and movies -- are hell.
Director: Joel Schumacher
Producer: Beau Flynn, Steven Haft, Ted Kurdyla
Writer: Ross Klavan, Michael McGruther
Starring: Colin Farrell, Matthew Davis, Clifton Collins Jr., Tom Guiry,
Shea Whigham, Russell Richardson, Nick Searcy, Afemo Omilami, James
MacDonald, Keith Ewell, Matt Gerald, Stephen Fulton, Tyler Cravens,
Michael Edmiston, Arian Waring Ash, Haven Gaston, Michael Shannon, Roger
Floyd, Ronnie Schafer, Frances Taylor, Matt White, Christy McKee, James
Lessick Jr., Daniel Martin, Marc Macaulay, Cole Hauser
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Robin Clifford
The Vietnam War is in its dying throes but that doesn't mean that fresh
meat isn't needed to feed the grinder of war. Draftees make up the bulk of
the Army whose job it is to push these boys-turned-men through basic and
advanced infantry training into a place that is "as close to the war as we
can make it" in "Tigerland."
Joel Schumacher's latest opus is an old-fashioned, coming of age film, set
on a southern Army base as the war in Vietnam winds down. Even with the war
drawing to a close, the military machine keeps cranking out soldiers from
its camps and sending them off to battle. For the conscripts it is a
frightening journey that they know will end half way around the world. Into
this scary world of violence and, to some, near-torture comes another
draftee, Roland Bozz (Colin Farrell).
There is one thing that differs Bozz from the rest of the inductees. He
doesn't care and he doesn't mind letting his superiors know it. He is a
rebel with a cause as he makes it known that having him court-martialed for
his insubordination will give him what he wants - to be as far away from
the war as possible. Since he has nothing to lose, his superiors leave him
alone and Bozz attains an odd kind of freedom in the constricting confines
of the Army. He befriends a hardship case, Cantwell (Thomas Guiry), whose
child bride is very ill and needs his care. The unit captain (Nick Searcy)
has refused to even consider Cantwell's pleas, until Bozz intercedes and
tells his friend just what to do and say. When Cantwell confronts his
captain again, he is armed with military chapter and verse. The kid gets
out.
>From here, the story becomes a series of quests by Bozz to save his friends
from the meatgrinder of the war. He is a tragic figure from the start,
destined to a fate that will bring him to the place he denied for so long -
Vietnam. But this is all conjecture as the story really follows
conventional lines as the soldiers are bullied and beaten by Sgt. Thomas
(James McDonald) in preparation for their journey to Tigerland, the place
that will make or break them. Not all the noncoms are bad guys, though, as
the film shows how it takes all kinds to make an army, good and bad. Some
of the men training the boys are compassionate and caring. One Tigerland
NCO (Cole Hauser) admonishes his wards "to listen and to learn" because
what he has to teach them may save their lives in combat.
The ensemble acting effort by those surrounding Bozz is well played. Thomas
Guiry garners sympathy as the not-too-bright Cantwell. Clifton Collins,
Jr., as the mentally ailing Miter, is another one of Bozz's missions. Bozz
also saves his friend Paxton (Matthew Davis), the only enlistee in the
outfit, from the war whether the volunteer wants his life saved or not.
Shea Whigham, as Bozz's main adversary among the draftees, Wilson, is a
two-dimensional bad guy whose comeuppance is assured. The rest of the cast
is played as two-dimensional figures, simply filling in the background.
The production has the appropriate look and feel of a place where men
prepare for war. When the troops finally ship out to Tigerland for their
last week of on-the-job training, they make a journey that is a cross
between "Apocalypse Now" and the entry into "Jurassic Park." At one point
one of the soldiers even says, "It's a war theme park." I half expected to
see T-Rex poke his head out of the jungle. But for all of the cliché,
"Tigerland" is a well-crafted, though predictable, parable about a man so
bent on saving others that he may not be able to save himself. The myths
that spring up among the soldiers about our hero, Bozz, in the end are
handled as a coda that ends the film with a positive note of hope. I give
it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
Long considered synonymous with empty Hollywood razzle dazzle, director
Joel Schumacher seems increasingly determined to prove his artistic
worth.  After getting down-and-dirty with last year's lurid (and little
else) _8MM_, Schumacher returns with an even more unlikely--and blatantly
"different"--project: the Dogme 95-inspired (!) Vietnam War (!!) film
_Tigerland_.  The resulting film isn't as disastrous as one would expect,
but it's likely not going to reverse any negative opinions of the
filmmaker.
In fact, _Tigerland_ will only reinforce one of the biggest complaints
regarding Schumacher's work: that it's all about the look, not the
material.  The herky-jerky handheld camera work, grainy images, and
all-natural lighting borrowed from the Danish manifesto of cinematic
"chastity" plus the cast of largely unrecognizable faces lends the film
an air of authenticity, but only that--an "air," as inert and superficial
as the term suggests.  The same can also be said about Ross Klavan and
Michael McGruther's screenplay.
Although in essence a Vietnam War story, the film ends right as its
focal group of soldiers is shipped off to 'Nam, focusing instead on the
stateside training of a bunch of young grunts, whose grueling experience
culminates at the Louisiana-based simulated combat zone of Tigerland. 
Klavan, an Army veteran, used his real-life Tigerland training experience
as a foundation for the script, and the day-to-day grind of the training
as depicted rings true: the harsh verbal and physical abuse inflicted by
the superiors; the petty tensions that arise between soldiers.  But this
is nothing that hasn't already been shown in countless other war films,
and after a while these scenes blend into each other, and one is forced
to look deeper to maintain interest--and what one finds is a trite,
hollow center.
_Tigerland_ is pretty much the story of Privates Bozz (Colin Farrell)
and Paxton (Matthew Davis), who bond and become best friends during
training at Fort Polk, Louisiana sometime in 1971.  Paxton is a wannabe
writer who wants to go to war for the mere experience of it.  Bozz, on
the other hand, wants out of the army, and his frequent acts of
disobedience increasingly run him afoul of his superiors and some fellow
trainees, namely Private Wilson (Shea Whigham).  And... that's about it. 
Paxton is continually exposed to the brutal reality of war; Bozz
continually rebels by cooking up excuses for others to get discharged and
making smartass remarks to anyone within earshot--which prompts angry
looks from the likes of Wilson.  Drama?  I think not.
But there is a diamond in the rough of _Tigerland_, and that is Farrell.
 A talented newcomer with genuine presence, Farrell is able to suggest
some complexity in a character that is written without any (which is the
case with just about every single role).   He is a true find whose
promise should be more fully realized in films far better than
_Tigerland_.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Dennis Schwartz
  TIGERLAND (director: Joel Schumacher; screenwriters: Ross Klavan/Michael
McGruther; cinematographer: Matthew J. Libatique; editor: Mark Stevens; cast:
Colin Farrell (Bozz), Matthew Davis (Paxton), Clifton Collins Jr. (Miter),
Thomas Guiry (Cantwell), Shea Whigham (Wilson), Russell Richardson (Johnson),
Nick Searcy (Captain Saunders); Runtime: 109; 20th Century Fox; 2000) 
A war film set inside a Southern boot-camp during the Vietnam War era. Joel
Schumacher's modestly budgeted, gritty looking war melodrama had nothing
relevant to say, only saying things that have been said in countless other
Vietnam war films. The clichéd hero and the formulaic story never caught my
fancy, no matter how much the director tried to make things happen. It's in the
style of the first half of Full Metal Jacket, but without the same impact. 
It's the tale of a soldier who won't conform to the Army and by the film's end
proves he's not a bad guy and can also be an excellent soldier if he wants to.
In his stance as a rebellious leader, he helps many of the recruits in ways the
hypocritical Army trainers can't. There were just no surprises forthcoming, as
the film seemed to be marking time until it shows him as a leader and proves
himself heroic. 
I think that Schumacher thinks because he has no stars and shot this one in a
grainy 16-millimeter with a jumpy hand-held camera and with mostly natural light
in Dogme style, that he caught something cinema vérité. What goes with
Schumacher wherever, is a lot of corn. This film is just as weak in storyline as
was his big commercial flick Batman. 
What this film has going for it, is some good shots of the swampland in Fort
Polk, Louisiana, and some good performances. The star is Colin Farrell, a young
Irish actor who is able to speak convincingly with a Texas twang and be
charismatic as the rebel soldier with the attitude problem. 
The movie tracks a Vietnam-bound platoon as its members progress from their
eight-week basic training course to their ninth week of training at a stopover
site called Tigerland; after that week they will ship out to 'Nam. Tigerland is
a hellhole that comes with a swamp replica of 'Nam, and is known by the Army men
as "the second worst place on earth." The officers refer to it as "the stateside
province of Vietnam." 
Raymond Bozz (Farrell) is a cocky, troublemaking private not conforming to the
strict 
discipline his drill instructors expect of him in 1971. He and his fellow
recruits are all heading for Vietnam after they complete their training and are
tired of being constantly reminded that this training will save their life. 
The movie seems phony almost immediately, as Bozz and Paxton (Matthew Davis) -
an opponent of the war who enlisted for the experience - pick up a couple of
gals in a topless bar and take them to a cheap hotel for some quick sex. As soon
as they're done with the sex, the G.I.'s start to philosophize man to man and
the idealistic Paxton tells of his desire to write a great war novel. The women
split as soon as the men start chatting and the two are soon back in camp to
face their dauntless company commander, Captain Saunders, and all their drill
instructors who go through the gruff routines of preparing the men to kill. 
Bozz knows all the angles in the Army base' bureaucratic procedures and uses his
knowledge to help his fellow soldiers beat the system, as he advises some on how
to get out of the service. The cadre can't wait to graduate this smart-ass from
boot camp and get his ass into Vietnam. 
The movie moves along as if it were on a forced march to Hanoi. There's also
some liberal claptrap thrown into the storyline, which is unconvincingly done
about a racist sociopath. In a Deep South boot-camp, strangely enough, he's the
only racist to be found and the only coward. 
The film heads toward its less than 'Big Bang' finale in Tigerland with the same
forced messages about war that could not only chase sluts out of a hotel room
but drive film critics to the theater's popcorn vender rather than sit through
this torture in its entirety. It's a movie all about male-bonding, how the
hipster white dude Bozz can rap with the black dudes who are naturally hip and
sure know how to sing, and of how beautiful all the men look when they have a
splatch of dirt on their faces. The director must receive credit for at least
getting together a good cast, though I would have loved to see this one with a
Ed Wood Jr. cast. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
