Title
Review for Together Alone (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Max Hoffmann
     Although I loved this film when I recently saw it in Australia, my
initial reaction was that maybe it only spoke to gay men.  However, I
took two straight girl friends to see it this weekend, and they both
said "this is *my* life!"--so I'm recommending it to a wider audience.
     Amazingly, with only a $7,000 budget,  P. J. Castellaneta has
pulled together a credible and compelling B/W 35mm film about 2 guys
dialoguing "the morning after."  There's nothing to compare it to, but
one might be tempted to label it MY DINNER WITH ANDRE meets A MAN AND A
WOMAN ... with an all-male cast!
     It becomes clear within the first few minutes that (a) after a
one-night stand these two guys had sex and (b) they didn't use a condom.
The film transcends the expected "ABC Afterschool Special" heavy hitting
morality approach, and deals believably with trust, self-delusion, and
accepting the consequences of our choices.  In terms of addressing
issues of safe sex, and the "new/new" morality, the film effectively
deals with just about every self-deluding argument you might personally
encounter OR manufacture.
     Terry Curry, as the heart throb hunk who turns out to be a "Married
with Children" bisexual, will strike a chord with many a wronged
straight gal, and may cause a few straight guys to fidget in their seats
from unwelcomed self-recognition.  Todd Stites is fairly believable as
the more "out" and usually "responsible" gay man.  Unfortunately he
inherits the lion's share of dreary political pronouncements, though
there are some delicious quotes (e.g., "Believe you me, there was
many a press-on nail and high heel that was broken to preserve our
rights" and "I don't think a drowning man is equipped to save the
whales.")
     Through both actor's gifted performances and the deft direction,
the unexpected result is that the characters are ultimately identical to
just about any straight guy that you might know, from the workplace to
the gym.  (Unexpected, that is for an *American* film to achieve such an
amazing revelation.)  The film should be viewed in the same spirit as
SOUNDER, which broke ground back in the 70's portraying a Black family
with few of the then prevailing stereotypes.  If you go to see it,
overlook the fact that the background music will occasionally remind you
of one of those early Sunday morning shows put on by the Brothers of
St. Paul, and that in the opening scenes the director got a little
over-fascinated with the effect of headlights through the patterned
curtains on the slumbering duo.  All of the "action" takes place on a
checkered bed spread (obviously a chess board) and the actors appear to
be lit only by a gooseneck lamp, (but amazingly they are well lit enough
to allow every nuance of expression show through, even when shadows
create "racoon eyes.")  There are some elements that over stretch
credibility (like them both having the same dream--are they aspects
of the same person?)
     If this were a major studio effort, I'd give it a 7, but making
allowances for the fact that only 4 people were in involved, (2 actors,
1 director/writer/caterer and 1 cameraman) it warrants an 8.
     The film also breaks new ground in that, despite it's "adult"
theme, there is *no* nudity, (the heater's broken so they put on their
sweats) *no* sex, *no* violence and *scant* profanity.  You don't even
see these guys kiss on the lips!  The magic of story telling and seeing
off screen characters in your own mind's eye holds this film together...
something that hasn't been done for a long, long time.  In terms of
criteria for content rating towards an NC-17 this film could be
shown on the Disney channel.   (Don't hold your breath, though!)
     Currently at San Francisco's Castro through Thurs 1/7; expect it at
San Jose's Camera 3, and possibly the Varsity in Palo Alto.  If it comes
out on Video, it'll be tough to locate.  At best, it might show up on
three or four PBS stations next Gay Pride week in June before it goes
into oblivion.

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
     Well, this year I finally made it to the Toronto Festival of
Festivals, which bills itself as the second largest film festival
(second to Cannes).  It certainly was big, though not having been to
Cannes or whatever's the third largest, I can't really say how it
compares.  I really had a good time, and recommend it highly.  It was
well-organized and had a lot of variety.  Their categories included
Contemporary World Cinema (big names, somewhat commercial), Galas (even
more commercial, though not all Hollywood) and Special Presentations,
Perspective Canada, The Edge (cutting edge, avant-garde, experimental),
Open Vault (classics), Midnight Madness ("The weirdest and most bizzare
programme in The Festival," though ERASERHEAD was stuck in the Special
Presentations category for some unfathomable reason), Latin American
Panorama, First Cinema (first-time feature film directors), Asian
Horizons, Que Viva Mexico, and Spotlight on Ken Loach.  Unfortunately,
since I was only there Saturday and Sunday, I was only able to see seven
movies (hah! beat your six/Labor Day Weekend record, John!), and was
not able to sample every category.  Since at any given time about eight
movies were showing at the different Festival theaters in downtown
(Yonge and Bloor district) Toronto, I just picked the ones which sounded
promising that I could fit into a schedule and had a hope of getting
into (unlike, say, BLACK ROBE or THE FISHER KING, both of which I do
want to see).  Out of the seven, three were worth seeing, and one was
*very* good and has already been added to my "Favorites" file.  The
other three ranged from pretty decent to annoying.
SAM AND ME: (Perspective Canada, Director Deepa Mehta, 94 minutes)
Plot kickoff: A young man, Nikhil, arrives in Toronto from India.  His
uncle tries to get him a job at Cohen Medical Supplies where he works,
but instead Nik is hired to play nursemaid to cranky old Sam Cohen, who
just wants to go back to Israel to die.
Characters/acting: Sam Cohen is played by Peter Boretski; the actor who
played Nikhil was not listed; both of them deserve Genies (Canadian
Oscars).  All of the acting was good.  The characters all seemed like
real people, not stereotypes or throwaway cardboard cutouts.
Cinematography/FX: There are some good visuals which would lose a
little on the small screen.  Fortunately I saw this one at the Showcase,
as opposed to the big-screen television-type screens at the Cumberland.
Still worth seeing on any size screen.
Score: I liked the score.  Some Indian, some traditional and
non-traditional Jewish (Yiddish?), some pop, miscellaneous.
Violence/language: A couple of short fights/hits, probably some
language I didn't notice.
Skin/situations: Skin/situations are a very minor part of this movie,
this is just FYI.  Back view of Sam singing and dancing naked in the
rain.  Exotic dancer (pasties).  Foreplay.  Indications of homosexual
activity, and an Indian cross-dresser.
Analysis: Two outstanding movies from Canada in two years (BYE BYE
BLUES in 1989)!; of course there may well be other great ones that I
simply missed.  This movie has moments of joy and hilarity, anguish and
bitterness.  The culture clash between Nik's crowd and the Cohens leads
to wicked humor and poignant moments.  I hope this shows up at the
Little Theater in Rochester.  It is not completely flawless (some
muttered dialogue, I'm not sure about one of Nikhil's reactions), but I
would encourage anyone to see this movie; I'll see it again if I get the
chance.  I hope Mehta makes another movie about Nikhil, or at any rate I
hope I get to see some of his other movies.
A LITTLE STIFF: (First Cinema, Dir.  Greg Watkins, Caveh Zahedi, USA,
85 min., black and white, made for $10,000, Zahedi at the Q&A
afterwards)
Plot: Neurotic UCLA film student attempts to woo standoffish art
student
Characters/acting: Zahedi plays himself in a semi-biographical role.
Greg plays his buddy.  I don't know who played the art student, except
that she used to be Zahedi's girlfriend.
Cinematography/FX: For $10,000 it looks pretty good.  I don't think big
or little screen would make much difference.
Score: Not much score, except when Zahedi was dancing around alone in
his headphones.  He told us during the Q&A it was the Smiths, but you
couldn't hear it through his headphones.  Also a dreadful song about
falling which was a part of one of his (the character's and the
person's) two-minute film student project about death and horror.
Violence/language: None I can remember.
Analysis: Very sharp, very funny.  One of the best lines: After the art
student tells Zahedi how she wants to take toad hallucinogen at the same
time her cat's on catnip, he asks, "Would that be as a performance
piece?"  But maybe you had to be there; his delivery was perfect.
Zahedi's deadpan delivery and kamikaze approach to love make this movie
a treat.
TOGETHER ALONE: (FC, Dir. P. J. Castellaneta, USA, 87 min., black and
white, made for $7,000, Castellaneta at the Q&A afterwards)
Plot: Two gay males sit around and talk after a one-night stand
Characters/acting: I really liked the characters in this movie, not
that I thought they were great guys (it seems like half the movies I saw
at the festival featured neurotic or manipulative people), but they were
very well drawn and acted.  Castellaneta told us that they rehearsed for
a month before shooting to keep the costs down.  I hardly knew who to
sympathize with because both of them said things that made sense at
different times, but also neither of them was perfect by any means.
Both of them had some great monologues.  The MBA had a long dialogue
which I was very drawn into and it was a little shock when it was over.
Cinematography/FX: B/W, no great shots for big screen.
Violence/language: Wrestling bout, a couple of profanities.
Skin/situations: Pretty frank discussion about AIDS and preventing it,
and about homosexual sex.  Some caresses, mostly pretty tame.
Analysis: I would recommend this movie, but not as a must-see.  I
thought the discussions about commitment and how to build love were
relevant to anyone.  I particularly was impressed by the naturalness of
the actors.  One the other hand, there's not much action in this film.
The director stayed away from the infamous "talking heads" syndrome, but
there's only so much you can do with a conversational movie like this.
I also liked much of the humor and wisecracks between the two
characters, though at times they were using it to avoid dialog.
