Title
Review for Spank (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
Set against the colourful background of the cappuccino culture
of Adelaide's fashionable Rundle Street, the low budget comedy Spank!
is both an embarrassment and a disappointment.  The main problem lies
with the underdeveloped script from first time writer David Farrell,
and the lack of control over the material displayed by first time
director Ernie Clark, making an inauspicious debut.
          Nick (Mario Gamma) and his friend Vinny (Checc Musolino)
decide that they want to go into business together and open their own
cafe.  They enter into a partnership with wannabe local wheeler and
dealer Rocky Pisoni (Vince Poletto, recently seen in Jackie Chan's Mr
Nice Guy), who agrees to bankroll the enterprise.  Rocky has power of
attorney over his ailing father's business.  Although he dresses
sharply he has few clues about successfully running a business.  He
uses bully boy tactics to oversee his father's vast investments, but
he is largely ineffectual.
The dubious deal quickly comes unstuck as the characters' egos
and personalities take over.  Nick is lazy and obnoxious, and thinks
he's a real charmer with the ladies.  Vinny lacks money, and turns to
his girl friend Tina (Lucia Mastrantone) for financial help.  She
initially advises him against becoming involved in any dealing with
Nick and Rocky.  Before long there is competition between the various
players to open their own establishments.
Intended as a satire with something constructive to say about
the rich diversity of ethnic culture and experiences in contemporary
Australia, Spank! misfires badly.  Clark has completely misjudged the
tone and mood of the material, and this comedy actually has very
little genuine humour.  Wogs Out Of Work and Head On explored similar
issues and characters in far more emphatic and compelling fashion.
Clark, a former cinematographer, makes good use of locations
to provide the film with atmosphere and character.  But his lack of
experience shows in the quality of performances he draws from his
cast.  The performances are pitched at a hysterically overwrought
level in which stereotypes are reduced to the level of caricature.
Any nuances are bludgeoned into submission.
Poletto gives a completely unbelievable and outrageous
performance as Rocky, and his grating and unbearable character wears
out his welcome even before the film is half over.  Gamma captures
Nick's overbearing personality beautifully with an energetic but
unsubtle performance.  Robert Mammone (Heaven's Burning, etc) plays
Paulie, the film's conscience, although his thoughtful and restrained
performance almost seems to belong in another film.
Jo (Victoria Dixon-Whittle) is a thankless cliché, a woman
who dumps her narcissistic but wealthy lover, who treats her with
contempt, for another man who treats her with respect.  Only theatre
veteran Mastrantone gives a more positive portrayal of a strong,
modern woman with her performance as the independent, assertive and
confident Tina.
For a first feature Spank! lacks spark, polish and spunk.  It
is a huge disappointment, especially when compared to the recent
achievements of Gregor Jordan with his superb debut Two Hands.  Even
the local distributors seem to have recognised its overall lack of
quality and audience appeal, and have decided to release Spank!
straight to video in Melbourne and Sydney.
