Title
Review for Solas (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
Like father, like daughter.   35-year-old María (Ana Fernández) is a 
bitter and angry single woman.  When we meet her father (Paco De Osca), 
he is a mean-spirited grouch who is stuck in the hospital.  He wants 
out, he informs his doctor, so that "I can look after what's mine."  
María's saintly mother (María Galiana), whom María barely tolerates, has 
come to stay with her while her father is in the hospital.
SOLAS, by writer/director Benito Zambrano, would have been more 
appropriately released in the United States under its translated title, 
ALONE, which perfectly captures the message and the mood of this slender 
but touching tale that feels like a short story brought to the screen.
María resents everything, especially her job as a cleaning woman and 
people with more money than her.  Her mother points out that she was a 
cleaning woman and was proud of it.  This only serves to further 
infuriate María.  
A proud woman, María refuses to take money from others but isn't above 
stealing it from her friends.  It is a twisted set of morals that she 
learned from her father.  And like her father, she too is an alcoholic.   
As unlikable as María tries to be, she wins our hearts since you can 
tell that she is a sad product of her environment.  Her father thinks 
that he was a good man because there was always food on the table.  If 
he beat his wife "some," well, so be it.  
The mother, who would only change one unmentioned thing if she had to do 
it all over again (you can guess what that would be), is befriended by a 
sweet widower (Carlos Álvarez-Novoa) who lives in the same apartment 
building as María.  He is the man that the mother deserves but has no 
chance of ever getting.  Nevertheless, they do share a few precious, if 
brief, times together.
If there is a quibble to be made about such a heart-warming tale, it is 
that María dresses and acts a bit too middle-class for all of her 
professed poverty.  But there are no complaints possible about the 
performances, which are all heart-felt and moving.  María's arc in the 
story, while predictable, is nonetheless poignant and honest.  Correctly 
guessing her transformation does not diminish its impact.
"It's dawn," the widower says to his loyal German Shepherd Achilles, as 
they both look out the window.  "God's given us one more day."  He is 
truly thankful for each of his blessings.  And you'll be thankful if you 
are fortunate enough to catch this lovely little story.
SOLAS runs 1:38.  The film is in Spanish with English subtitles.  It is 
not rated but would be an R for mature themes and brief sexuality.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Samuel Goldwyn Films/ Fireworks Pictures
 Director: Benito Zambrano
 Writer:  Benito Zambrano
 Cast: Paco De Osca, Antonio Dechent, Ana Fernandez,
Juan Fernandez, Maria Galiana, Carlos Alvarez-Novoa
   One of the most memorable cartoons in The New Yorker
magazine shows a young American woman with the Eiffel
Tower in the background telling a local, "But I don't WANT to
see the real Paris...I want to see the TOURIST's Paris!"  Who
can blame her?  The real anything is not what would interest
anyone out on a fun holiday, nor would the real people have
much use for the typical American tourist.  If you go to Spain,
say, to the particularly romantic city of Seville, do you want to
see how the ordinary people--who, compared to Americans,
would be considered poor--live, or do you want to take in the
flamenco joints, feast on the paella mariscada at the Meson
Sevilla, and take a horse and buggy ride along the banks of
the Guadalquivir?  I rest my case.
   But there's still a chance for you to see the authentic
Andalucians without leaving the comfort of a theater seat by
taking in Benito Zambrano's thoughtful film "Solas," winner of
11 nominations for the Goya (Spain's Oscars), and a well-
traveled movie that has hit the filmfest circuit from Berlin to
Toronto and then some.  "Solas," which means "alone,"
sounds like a downer from its title, and to a fan of fast-
moving, commercial, and highly financed pictures it would
seem to be just that.  Yet if you patiently take on the sincere
dialogue expressed by people you won't see on the glossy
pages of the Spanish Tourist Board's brochures, you will see
at least three of the characters redeemed from lives of abuse,
solitude and desperation.  Even more than in the dialogue,
you will feel every fleeting and lingering emotion alike simply
by studying the faces of the skilled performers, particularly
that of Maria Galina as the elderly mother of a troubled
woman who drinks, smokes, steals and is given to outbreaks
of tempestuous emotion and a kaleidoscope of grimaces.
   At the story's center is Maria (Ana Fernandez) who should
have received the Goya simply for her ability to run through a
performance for at least an hour before cracking even the
dawn of a smile.  She's in bad shape.  She drinks and
smokes and, being without a job, she runs up a tab with a
friendly bartender whom she calls simply Fat Man.  This is
one angry piece of work.  Why?  We learn (but never
observe) that she and her mother were hit from time to time
by Maria's father (Paco De Osca), now recovering from an
operation in an unnamed city in Southern Spain where
Maria's mother, a village person, is invited to share a musty,
mildewed flat rented by Maria.  Nothing world-shaking
happens.  Director Benito Zambrano is more interested in
conveying the inner turmoil of his principals, and so while
Maria (who refuses to visit her father) gets into a fracas with
her offensive boy friend and her mother wiles away the days
crocheting and cooking and visiting her sick and disparaging
old husband in the hospital, hope arises only by the presence
of a neighbor (Carlos Alvarez-Novoa) who is old and has no
family and no one to talk to except his loyal German
Shepherd Achilles.
   While Maria buys the occasional lottery ticket from the blind
seller outside the bar, nothing dramatic is to come her way
through the sort of contrivance you might expect in a
Hollywood movie.  Instead, the elderly neighbor is to offer
three people a chance at a modicum of pleasure--Maria, her
mother, and himself.
   Zambrano states in the notes: "Film must be more than a
sad story.  We propose solidarity, love and tenderness as the
weapons to win love  over loneliness, misery and
dehumanization.  We urge others to always look for
happiness, because it is our right.  Even if it seems there is
no way out, there always exists somewhere to escape from
unhappiness."
   We all know that what the world needs now is love, sweet
love, but Zambrano ups the ante by suggesting solidarity and
tenderness as key ingredients as well.  "Solas," a downer on
the most obvious level, turns out to be its converse.  Rich or
poor, it's nice to have money.  But if you can't get the cash,
trust in your capacity to find gratification in the enjoyment of
others.  Maria does, as does he neighbor.  We should all be
as fortunate.  "Solas" is targeted to a specialized audience of
those who see cinema not as an escape but as a chance to
confront the reality of our lives.  Zambrano's film is deeply
humanistic, blessed with a few performances that approach
the astonishing.
Not Rated.  Running time: 98 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
