Title
Review for Mexican, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Every tour book in the Barnes and Noble travel section
insists that the country covered between its page is the real
find, but truth-to-tell, Mexico is the quintessential destination
for its variety of landscapes.  That exotic and erotic place has
mountains, jungles, cosmopolitan cities, Mayan ruins,
beaches, quaint villages, an ethnic cornupcopia, a cuisine
that has risen to enormous popularity in the U.S., and
wondrous animals--appealing to college kids on spring break,
middle-aged romantics, retireds looking for a cheap, sunny
place to spend their golden years, and more.  The Mexico
that director Gore Verbinski ("Mouse Hunt") chooses to
capture is off the beaten track except to those with a genuine
interest in history, the village of Real de Catorce in the north
central region of San Luis Potosi.  By contrasting the earthy
brown shades of this former silver mining town) with the
gaudy neon of Las Vegas and the commercial look of all
areas photographed in the the environs of that gambling
mecca, lenser Dariusz Wolski creates for the armchair
moviegoer the stark contrast that hits travelers from 
highly-developed U.S. cities when they cross the border and
proceed south.  The divergence between the two cultures is a
significant aspect of the movie appropriately entitled "The
Mexican," mirroring the dissimilarities between its two
principal characters, Jerry (Brad Pitt) and Samantha (Julia
Roberts).
   The key question raised by this contemporary, off-beat,
romantic Western (the best way to label its genre) is:
When two people love each other but can't get it together,
when do they call it quits?  The lovers in this story are two of
Hollywood's most appealing performers, a box office draw
that should bring truckloads of the 20-40-year-olds to the
theaters.  Whether that particular audience will like what they
see will depend on their appreciation for subtleties that were
absent from predictable recent Hollywood fare like "What
Woman Want" and the even more embarrassing "Miss
Congeniality."  In his original screenplay, J.H. Wyman puts
twists and surprises into the two-hour picture that will keep
you off balance, though one particular curve involving the
character of a hit man, Leroy (played by "Soprano" star
James Gandolfini) would have drawn titters a couple of
decades ago but which seems pretty cornball today.
   Driven by character and plot in equal measures, "The
Mexican" is framed by a gorgeous couple, Jerry Welbach and
Samantha Barzel, who appear in the opening and closing
scenes but ply their separate lives during its extended imddle
section.  Jerry and Samantha are engaged but Sam has
made clear that the espousal is off if Jerry insists on going on
yet another underworld job.  When he is given a choice by
gangland big-shot Nayman (Bob Balaban)--who is working for
the currently incarcerated big boss Arnold Margoles (played
by a surprise uncredited actor)--of flying to Mexico to retrieve
a priceless antique gun which is named The Mexican or of
sitting in the trunk of a car while Nayman blows it up, he
chooses survival over his girl friend and takes off for the
cobblestone streets near the Toluca airport.  Easily securing
the pistol from Margoles's grandson, Beck (David
Krumholtz), he finds his troubles only beginning: to insure the
delivery of the pistol, Leroy has seized his ex-fiance.  Leroy is
a hit man whose real identity is unexpected one and whose
personal life is not what you'd anticipate from someone in his
profession.
   Verbinski seems to have good time both sending up
and paying homage to Sam Peckinpah, who was himself an
undisciplined macho youth known for love poems to the
American West such as "Ride the High Country" and
massively bloody violent horse operas like "The Wild Bunch." 
Portraying the Mexicans in broad caricature, Verbinski hones
in at one point on such local scenery as the tough bartender
who issues the obvious, golden haired gringo a bottle of
tequila for twenty bucks and then silently demands a tip for
leading him to the guy who holds the valuable revolver.  In a
tribute as well to the early days of cinema, Verbinski from
time to time stops the flow of the story to flash back to a 19th
Century scene transmitted with a photographic bleach-out
technique involving various interpretations to the legend of
the gun, on which a curse has been placed by a disappointed
suitor whose troth has been handed instead to the town
nobleman.
   Julia Roberts turns out the typical role that has reliably
drawn crowds time after time.  As in "Erin Brockovich," her
emotions are perpetually on her sleeve as she flashes her
eyes, rants and raves against a man she cannot stop loving
but whom she considers too selfish to share a down-to-earth
relationship, and acts in a particularly seductive way to the hit
man who uncharacteristically reveals secrets about a
deficiency of luck in his own love life.  The revelations made
by Leroy and the actions taken by this assassin on the advice
of his hostage give this Western its claim to uniqueness
within the genre.  The chemistry between two of Hollywood's
most attractive personalities is as solid as what you might
feel from the posters advertising the movie.  Pitt and Roberts
appear genuinely to like each other and convincing in
communicating the difficulties they face that keep them
emotionally apart.  In a way "The Mexican" reminded me of
Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt's long-running off-Broadway
play "The Fantasticks"--which had a disastrous transfer by
Michael Ritchie to the screen last year--in which the smoke-
and-mirrors trip that one Luisa receives from a Spanish
bandit named El Gallo teaches her that the world outside is
not so nice, allowing her to see her lover Matt as a true hero
and not as the loser she sometimes considered him to be.
Brad Pitt scores in a role that pits him (as well as James
Gandolfini) against type as a loser who until the conclusion of
the tale has been unable to succeed in his job or in his love
life.  For all its comedy, though, "The Mexican" is not the
usual, slick Hollywood movie you might have expected but
off-beat, often surprising, and even demanding.
Rated R.  Running time: 123 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 MEXICAN, THE (director: Gore Verbinski; screenwriter: J.H. Wyman;
 cinematographer: Dariusz Wolski; editor: Craig Wood; cast: Brad Pitt
 (Jerry Welbach), Julia Roberts (Samantha Barzel), James Gandolfini
 (Leroy), David Krumholtz (Beck), Gene Hackman (Arnold
 Margolese-unbilled cameo), Luis Felipe Tovar (Luis), J.K. Simmons
 (Ted), Bob Balaban (Nayman), Richard Coca (Car Thief), Michael
 Cerveris (Frank), Sherman Augustus (Black Assassin); Runtime: 123;
 DreamWorks Picture; 2001)
This is a slight film as far as subject matter but it is richly
endearing as a road movie that is a comedy-drama-romance-thriller rolled
into one film, boasting big-time star power in Brad Pitt and Julia
Roberts. It mostly roams between being a silly roughhouse crime caper
and a film with some intimate moments shared through conversation.
The well-crafted story is about a special 19th century pistol called
"The Mexican." It has a rich history attached to it that includes a
curse. Screw up gofer, Jerry Welbach (Brad Pitt), is ordered by his
milksop crime boss Nayman (Balaban) to bring the pistol back from
Mexico, on orders from the big boss Arnold Margolese (Gene Hackman), who
is currently in jail but expects to be released soon. He was captured
when Jerry crashed into him in a minor traffic accident and Jerry has
owed the mob favors ever since. Margolese makes it clear that he must
possess this valuable item or else.
Jerry's girlfriend Samantha (Julia Roberts) has just told him that if he
doesn't leave LA and go to Las Vegas with her they're through, as she
has ambitions of being a croupier, but Jerry deems his life is worth
more to him when alive, so he opts to go to the small town in Mexico to
bring back the pistol and has been promised if he succeeds this will be
his last job for the gang. The quarreling couple, who attend group
counseling sessions posing as a married couple, have this intense
love-hate relationship, where they are all-loving one moment yet in the
next moment are arguing over any little thing. Jerry goes to Mexico as
his clothes come streaming down to him in the street, thrown by Samantha
from their 2nd floor balcony.
The biggest surprise in this offbeat, not quite Hollywoodish film, is
that Pitt and Roberts will be separated for so long onscreen, being
together briefly only in the first and last reels, but separated for the
entire middle part, as the camera veers back and forth on their separate
adventures in Mexico and Las Vegas. This long separation didn't
disappoint me, but it might disappoint some who expected to see a more
romantic story develop between the two stars.
In the more desolate spots in Mexico, Jerry finds the pistol easily
enough in the hands of a drunken Beck (David Krumholtz), who quickly
turns it over to him and willingly accompanies him back to LA. But the
villagers are celebrating Independence Day, and an accidental shot kills
him before he can get into the car. While Jerry is distracted, someone
steals his rental car, with all his money, identification, and the
pistol.
The film cuts back to Samantha driving to Las Vegas and while stopping
off in a rest spot a black gunman assaults Samantha in the ladies' room,
but he is shot by another gunman who kidnaps her and tells her his name
is Leroy (James Gandolfini, of The Sopranos) and that he is holding her
hostage until Jerry returns with the pistol. The chemistry between the
soft-spoken but violent thug Leroy and the profane speaking but
communicative Samantha, is a comic delight, as they share their love
woes, with Samantha so proud of herself that she figured out that Leroy
is gay. They further bond as they sympathize over their love woes: of
him being a loser in love, with all his previous lovers leaving him,
still surprised that anyone would like him, while she confesses she
loves Jerry, but can't answer Leroy's question about when enough is
enough in a love affair if you love the guy. Leroy will fall in love
with a postal worker (Cerveris) on holiday and begins an intense romance
that ends tragically.
Meanwhile, back in Mexico, Jerry finds himself looking everywhere for
the pistol but he is having difficulty getting around because he can't
speak Spanish. He finally recovers the pistol from the car thief and his
gang, then loses it again to a corrupt cop, then gets it back again with
help from Ted (J.K. Simmons), one of Nayman's dullish agents, whom Jerry
considers his best friend in the gang, who talks of retirement soon and
thinks like a government worker who has a secure job and will do nothing
to mess up his impending retirement plans, willing to follow orders even
if he finds them distasteful. Jerry becomes suspicious of why he is down
here when he overhears a conversation between him and Nayman.
After the madcap chase through northern Mexico, the unbilled Gene
Hackman as the criminal kingpin, explains the true legend of the
hand-crafted pistol, which has previously had a number of false stories
told about it, and he also puts an exclamation point on why he wants the
pistol and why he asked for a bumbler like Jerry to go on this wild
chase. The story got a little out of hand and Hackman does his best to
clear things up, as he ties up all the loose ends.
Director Gore Verbinski (Mouse Hunt) does a nice job tightening up this
rambling story when it needed it and keeping the action flowing, though
a few of the comedy scenes, such as the one that opens the film, seemed
contrived. Brad Pitt is as loose as a goose playing the part of a jerky
small time hood with enough smarts to keep alive through all this
adventure and series of betrayals. He successfully plays his part
strictly for the comedy. Julia Roberts plays a familiar part to her by
now, of someone who doesn't have all her smarts, who is very likable
when sticking to her work-type characterization of someone trying to get
in touch with her feelings through reading self-help books and having
conversations about sensitive topics. Her chemistry is very good with
Pitt, but is sensational with Gandolfini, as they provide the film with
its main stimulus of comedy, rauchiness, violence, and good
conversation. All these characters were well-defined and screenwriter
J.H. Wyman deserves much of the credit for that, as he also embellished
the story with excellent dialogue and enough plot twists and surprises
to keep crime film buffs guessing at what happens next. While
cinematographer Dariusz Wolski's location shots of the beautiful
mountain town of Real de Catorce were spectacular and made this a very
pleasing mainstream film to view.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Homer Yen
The good news is that for two hours, "The Mexican"
brings together actors who are currently at the
pinnacle of their careers and popularity.  Though
longevity in Hollywood is frequently ephemeral,
heartthrob Brad Pitt is still the recipient of much
adoration from moviegoers.  Effervescent Julia Roberts
is the hands-down favorite to walk away with her first
Oscar as Best Actress for her recent work as the sassy
"Erin Brokovich."  And burly James Gandolfini is known
as everyone's favorite Mob boss in HBO's incredibly
edgy drama, "The Soprano's."   The 'star-studded'
wattage generated by these three could solve
California's utility crisis.  
The bad news is that for most of the film, this quirky
romantic comedy separates Pitt and Roberts, who play
Jerry and Samantha, two star-crossed lovers with their
own agendas.  In fact, they each go their own way
about 15 minutes into the film.  It's a move that,
unfortunately, hinders the film's romantic cuteness
from really taking off. 
In one of the first scenes, for example, Pitt and
Roberts are discussing their divergent priorities. 
He's an accident-prone bagman for a crime boss and has
promised Samantha that he won't take any more jobs. 
Samantha wants to go to Vegas to become a croupier. 
But when he is forced to take one more job or face
death by fire, Samantha becomes furious.  There's zest
in their emotions and these two make an adorable
couple.
Samantha leaves for Vegas while Jerry heads to Mexico.
 Well, maybe these two stars are so big that they just
couldn't fit on the screen at the same time.  But it
does give an opportunity for both of these stars to
flex their comedic muscles. 
Jerry's final job takes him to some pallid village so
that he can pick up "The Mexican," a fabled antique
gun.  All he has to do is collect the antique and then
go home.  This fabulous weapon has quite a bit of
interesting lore, which is told through sepia-toned
flashbacks interspersed throughout the film.  This is
actually a nicely presented sequence, which tells a
tale that is fantastical and preternatural. 
Poor Jerry.  Our hapless gringo is mired with bad
luck.  His rental car gets stolen, he gets arrested,
while allies become enemies.  He can only raise his
arms in disbelief.  We may raise our arms in disbelief
too.  This portion never has few precious funny
moments; and the bizarre violence isn't consistent
enough to add pep.  Jerry is probably just as annoyed
with his lack of luck as we are with the accompanying
harmonica and banjo soundtrack that makes it feel like
a bad Spaghetti Western.
Samantha represents the better half of this
relationship as well as the more enjoyable portion of
the story.  On her way to Vegas, she is intercepted by
a hitman (Gandolfini) who uses her as a hostage to
make sure that Jerry succeeds.  During the course of
her ordeal, they establish a connection with each
other.  She talks about Jerry; he talks about his love
woes.  Their dialogue scenes add a needed sense of
character dimension.  It's actually the most
entertaining element of this film.
Pitt, Roberts, and Gandolfini give fine performances. 
But it's a bit hard for us to stay in synch as the
momentum shifts between the two stories.  Overall,
"The Mexican" is sometimes cute, sometimes funny, and
offers a few neat surprises.  But its offbeat
qualities are uneven.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Gore Verbinski's THE MEXICAN, Brad Pitt, as major screwup Jerry 
Welbachan, has been sent on assignment to Mexico to bring back an 
ancient pistol called The Mexican. A would-be ex-criminal, who was 
supposed to have already done his last job, he's forced to do one more 
since he botched what should have been his last.
In order to make sure that nothing "funky" happens, Jerry's employer 
hires a baby sitter for his girlfriend, Samantha 'Sam' Barzel (Julia 
Roberts). A psychotic hired killer named Leroy (James Gandolfini) 
accompanies Sam on her preplanned trip to Vegas. Along the way, Sam, who 
talks like a new age relationships author, complains about Jerry, with 
whom she had broken up just before being kidnapped by Leroy. As she gets 
to know Leroy better, she shifts her pop psychological analysis from 
Jerry to Leroy, telling him, "I'm sensing that you have trust issues," 
after he is reluctant to let her go to the bathroom alone. Not 
surprisingly, Leroy turns out to have a sensitive side, which Sam loves 
nurturing.
Meanwhile, down in Mexico, Jerry is having a hellacious time as he tools 
around in his rented El Camino pickup -- he's asked the rental car 
agency for something more Mexican than the Chrysler that he was supposed 
to get. He is shot at, thrown in jail, ... you name it. Accompanying him 
on his travails is a mangy mutt that is part loyal dog and part Cujo.
Perhaps the best part of this quirky tale is the old, sepia-tone, 
speeded-up footage showing us the history behind the gun. The 
elaborately crafted gun was made long ago for the hand of a nobleman. We 
learn not one version of his legendary story but many. Jerry, however, 
doesn't have time to appreciate the weapon's background. He's way too 
busy trying to stay alive. The actors, on the other hand, all appear to 
be having a great time. And if you were worried, as I was, that the 
director wouldn't be able to make the transition from his first film, 
MOUSE HUNT, a dark kids' comedy, to a second one aimed squarely at a 
more adult audience, don't. This film is much better than MOUSE HUNT. 
And, let's face it, THE MEXICAN is an explosive movie -- exploding with 
star power. Pitt, Roberts and Gandolfini prove to be a thoroughly 
enjoyable, crowd pleasing combination.
THE MEXICAN runs 2:03. It is rated R for violence and language and would 
be acceptable for most teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A bumbling criminal has to do "one more job" before he can kiss his life in
the Bad Guys Corp. goodbye. When he tells his girlfriend about his
unenviable position (do or die), she tells him to take a hike, and he must
then complete his mission in Mexico alone. Unfortunately, he goofs up a lot
so the bad guys kidnap his now ex-girlfriend, to put more pressure on our
boy to perform. Got all that?
CRITIQUE:
A so-so movie that could've been a lot better if they hadn't taken such a
good thing and beaten it to death. First of all, how bad can any movie
starring Brad Pitt and Julia Roberts be, right? I mean, c'mon...seriously! I
could watch these two planting seeds for two hours and still come out with a
pretty decent-sized smile on my face. But I suppose that has more to do with
their inherent good looks and zesty personalities than anything else, so
obsessions aside, let me get back to the story. To be honest, I was actually
quite surprised by this movie, since the trailers have been making it look
like a very light, fluffy romantic comedy starring the two sweethearts of
Hollywood, but the reality of the film is actually quite grimmer. In fact,
the movie's stocked with profanities, contains scenes of violence and offers
plenty of frank conversations about that little thing called "love", from
both the hetero and homo perspectives. Basically...my kind of movie!!
Hehehe. Unfortunately for the audience, the film just doesn't know when to
let up and just goes on and on and on. I honestly thought that it was over
two and a half hours long, but it was really only two bucks or so, I
believe. What that tells me is that the film sorta "lost me" at some point
around the midway mark, and even though the movie still managed to get some
laughs from me here and there, it ultimately just ran out of gas (no pun
intended).
In fact, the first half of the film comes out a-blazin' with a very nifty
soundtrack, an infectious score, plenty of laughs via Pitt's adventures in
the land of Me-hico, and some decent tete-a-tetes between Roberts and
Pittski. And yeah, the directing was also top-notch. But once they split,
the two stories seemed to take different emotional routes and kept me
somewhat off-guard. In fact, I wasn't all that interested in the Roberts end
of the story as much as Pitt's end for the most part, and didn't
particularly see reason to get so much into Gandolfini's background either
(we find out more about him than the two leads together!). It was as if they
didn't want him to simply play this "thug" again, and they tried to develop
his character somewhat, but it was all too much, for this type of movie. I
would've preferred that the film stuck to its original fast-pace, hardy
chuckles and fun-time chemistry. But the length of the movie and the second
half's more "serious" tone, ultimately left me entertained, but not as much
as I anticipated early on (one specific somber event felt particularly out
of place). In fact, note to all filmmakers who decide to slap two very hot,
pretty stars together for another movie in the future...uhmm, give them more
scenes together, dammit!! That's what I'm paying my umpteen pesos for,
buddy, I want to see Julia and Brad interact!! Granted, the story also has
to be very good, but if you've got the stars to sign on the line that is
dotted, why not use them in more scenes together? Just a thought.
In fact, since the film only superficially touches upon their relationship
early on, you don't really feel all that much for the couple as they try to
get back together throughout the movie. But all in all, the film did still
manage to entertain me with its general fun vibe, its charismatic stars, its
somewhat diverting story and upbeat soundtrack. Not a mucho nachos
recommendation but a recommendation nonetheless.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
3,000 Miles to Graceland (7/10) - A Life Less Ordinary (5/10) - Fools Rush
In (5/10) - Forces of Nature (7/10) - Payback (8/10) - True Romance
(10/10) - Very Bad Things (8/10) - Way of the Gun (6/10) - The Wedding
Planner (3/10) - You've Got Mail (4/10)

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Gore Verbinski.
Cast: Brad Pitt, Julia Roberts, James Gandolfini, J.K. Simmons, Bob Balaban, 
Gene Hackman, David Krumholtz, Sherman Augustus, Michael Cerveris, Richard 
Coca. 
2001 - 123 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, brief nudity, and gore).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 2, 2001.
The on-screen pairing of Hollywood A-listers Brad Pitt and Julia Roberts has 
been much publicized in the press, as well as the major selling point for 
"The Mexican," a romantic comedy-action-drama directed by Gore Verbinski 
(1997's "Mouse Hunt"). Those viewers expecting them to appear in every scene 
together will be sorely disappointed, as they are a whole country away from 
each other for at least ninety minutes of its running time. If they take this 
initial letdown in stride, however, and view the movie for what it is, they 
will find a quirky, smart gem of a movie that is not only fun to watch, but 
has quite a few meaningful things to say about life, love, and death.
Jerry Welbach (Brad Pitt) is having a lot of bad luck. A relative simpleton 
whose strong-willed, long-time girlfriend, Samantha (Julia Roberts), has just 
broken up with him after discovering he hasn't yet broken off his ties with a 
powerful crime lord, Jerry is now in Mexico to retrieve a prized, mystical 
pistol known as "the mexican." Things turn complicated when he witnesses a 
murder, has his rental car stolen, and gets into more and more high water 
with the people connected to his snatching the pistol.
Meanwhile, Samantha has hit the road to Las Vegas. While stopping at a 
shopping mall en route, she is kidnapped by Leroy (James Gandolfini), a 
sweet-natured hitman who plans to hold her hostage until he gets hold of the 
gun. At first, Samantha is angered at Jerry, whom she truly, unadulteratedly 
loves, for getting her into such a mess, but she begins to talk with Leroy, 
and starts up an offbeat, trusting friendship with him as she aids in helping 
him to discover his true self.
It is the one-of-a-kind, burgeoning relationship between Samantha and Leroy 
that forms the heart and soul of "The Mexican," as it gives the movie an 
amount of depth that it would have otherwise not had. With Jerry off in 
Mexico having dangerous misadventures of his own, the film alternates between 
the two star-crossed characters and their eclectic locations. While Jerry's 
portion is plot-heavy and relatively jokey, Sam and Leroy's steal the whole 
show, thanks to the bright writing, from a screenplay by J.H. Wyman, and the 
lovely camaraderie and chemistry that stars Julia Roberts (2000's "Erin 
Brockovich") and James Gandolfini (TV's "The Sopranos") have together. Their 
relationship is a strictly platonic one (Sam quickly zeroes in on the fact 
that Leroy is gay, but has several problems with connecting to others), but 
the way it builds and strengthens as the story progresses makes for a 
wonderfully human, good-natured piece of entertainment. 
As her Oscar-nominated turn in "Erin Brockovich" confirmed, once and for all, 
Julia Roberts is not only the biggest actress in the world, but also one of 
the most assured and talented. Taking on a part that has little in common 
with most of her previous big-screen ventures, Roberts sparkles as Samantha, 
a beautiful, ambitious woman who can't help loving Jerry, despite their 
seemingly never-ending problems. And James Gandolfini is a standout, creating 
and developing Leroy into one of the most memorable supporting characters in 
recent years. Leroy's progression in being able to start a relationship with 
a guy he meets in a coffee shop is understated and realistic, and the fear he 
has in having people find out his illegal profession is believably palpable. 
Gandolifini is on target throughout, and there could have, and almost should 
have, been an entire movie revolving solely around his character and Roberts'.
The Jerry section, while paling in comparison, is still involving enough to 
work, although the intentionally over-the-top spaghetti western-like music 
score, by Alan Silvestri, that plays consistently through much of his screen 
time quickly grows tedious. Brad Pitt (2001's "Snatch") holds up his own end 
of the picture as the occasionally dimwitted Jerry, and gets to show off his 
loose comedic skills in a way that he rarely gets to.
Appearing together for the opening five minutes, and not again until the 
final half-hour, Roberts and Pitt manage to create a romantic chemistry, 
nonetheless. We truly feel like they are in love with each other (after all, 
you only argue the way they do in this movie when you love someone this way), 
even when the Mexican border is keeping them apart. 
For all of its strong points, "The Mexican" makes a minor misstep in the 
final act, with a climax that doesn't seem all that necessary and is 
needlessly drawn out. The last twenty minutes could have been almost 
completely cut out, and it would have made little difference, aside from the 
action not flagging the way it does in this final product. Still, its 
overlong nature does not tarnish the powerful lasting impressions that "The 
Mexican" makes on you. It's a fine film, both funny and poignant, violent and 
biting, charming and purposeful. In other words, yet another completely 
respectable career choice for both Julia Roberts and Brad Pitt, as well as a 
star-making one for James Gandolfini.
 http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.young-hollywood.com
http://www.geocities.com/halloweenfan2k/moviereviewcentral.html

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     Major motion picture studios may be dumb, but they're not stupid.  
When you get a movie starring a couple of golden kids like Julia Roberts 
and Brad Pitt opening on March 2nd, chances are there were a few 
bomb-sniffing dogs on the prowl somewhere up in the Perrier-stocked 
suites of the front office. 
     Do Julia and Brad have chemistry?  It's hard to tell.  For most of 
this two-hours-but-feels-longer movie, they're in different countries.  
She's heading for Las Vegas, where she hopes to get a job as a waitress 
with an option to move up to casino dealer.  He's in Mexico trying to 
get possession of a gold-plated antique gun (the eponymous "Mexican") 
for his mob bosses.  Instead, she gets kidnapped by hitman James (The 
Sopranos) Gandolfini (does anybody ever consider casting Gandolfini as 
an ambassador or an art dealer?), who's been sent by mob types to make 
sure Brad delivers the gun.  Brad, meanwhile, is having problems of his 
own south of the border with corpses and dogs and larcenous types.  We 
see them together at the very beginning, when she throws his clothes out 
of the window (and couldn't we have lived without ever seeing that 
cliche again), and at the end, with a few telephone tirades strung 
into the middle. 
     There is some rewarding chemistry, but it comes from the 
Roberts-Gandolfini tandem, which may explain why Julia and Brad get so 
little face time.  She experiences a bit of Stockholm Syndrome, becoming 
emotionally involved with her captor.  Not romantically - A) because he 
resembles Yogi Berra, and B) because he's gay.  Instead, he gets to be 
the Gay Friend, and in some of the movie's best scenes, they perform 
couple counseling on each other.  In a moment of questionable taste, she 
admits she was initially offended when she asked if he was going to rape 
her and he said "Not very likely," but feels much better when she finds 
out his sexual orientation.
     It's a comedy-adventure.  You know it's comedy because of the 
clothes-defenestration scene - that happens seldom in real life and 
never in drama - and from Brad saying lines like : "When you told me to 
pick up the thing at the thing, well, Samantha, she wanted the car to 
pick up some things."  Periodically it forgets that it's 
comedy-adventure, and then people get killed in messy and unamusing 
ways.
     "The Mexican", the gun for possession of which the denizens of this 
movie (and we) go through so much, turns out to be cursed.  Unless it's 
in the right hands, it backfires. 
     There's a cheap quip there, but I wouldn't touch it for a free 
weekend in Cab San Lucas.

Author
Robin Clifford
Jerry Welbach is a hapless bagman forced to do the bidding of a prominent
mob boss. His years of indenture are just about over and he has one last
job - head south of the border and acquire a legendary pistol called the
Mexican. The only problem is his girlfriend Samantha (Julia Roberts). She
wants him to move to Las Vegas with her, now!, or get out of her life
forever in "The Mexican."
This much anticipated partnering of Julia Roberts and Brad Pitt has come
under some criticism because, for most of "The Mexican," they aren't even
together. And, when they are, much of the dialogue consists of Samantha
badgering Jerry in a shrew-like and shrill manner, making me wonder why
they are even together. Things change for the better when they go their
separate ways, but the film then suffers from its real problem - it's too
darn long for a light romantic comedy.
This is a problem that is not the fault of the two mega-stars. Roberts and
Pitt (along with a fine perf by James Gandolfini) do well enough, but this
major star power almost forces the filmmakers, led by director Gore
Verbinski, to create a two plus hour tome. As such, there is much padding
involved to stretch things out to the detriment of a tight, well-paced
story. In Hollywood, it is believed that the people want stars, not a
tightly told story, and that's what we get here.
When Jerry heads to Mexico for his one last job to locate the coveted
pistol, he is a real fish out of water. The unlucky mob courier sees his
little mission as a hit and run, where he does the deed and can get back to
Samantha to beg forgiveness. Once he lands, though, things could not go
more wrong as he gets the gun, loses it, gets it again, but loses his
passport, keeping him in country with no way out. His puppet master back in
the States, mob accountant Bernie Nayman (Bob Balaban), for insurance, sets
one of his thugs to find Samantha and put her on ice until the gun is
delivered. Unknown to Jerry, Bernie is planning his own scam to wrest the
gun from his boss, Arnold Margolese (Gene Hackman in an uncredited cameo),
the man that Jerry caused to go to prison.
Paralleling Jerry's plight is the strong-willed Samantha's undertaking to
move to Las Vegas, get a job as a waitress and become a croupier at a
casino. When she hits the road, she finds herself in the clutches of a
vicious hit man named Leroy (Gandolfini). This becomes one of the movie's
brightest moment as the bad guy and his victim begin to bond, becoming fast
friends and confiding their deepest secrets. The chemistry between Roberts
and Gandolfini is palpable, sweet and entertaining.
Brad Pitt's Jerry is left to his own simple devices as he makes a journey
of both confusion and enlightenment. Pitt has always had a comic flair
(check his funny stoner perf in "True Romance") and is up to the task of
carrying better than half of the movie alone - well, he does have a bonding
relation, himself, with a big, scruffy dog whose favorite toy is a beat up,
deflated football. When he finally locates the prized pistol, in the hands
of Margolese's grandson, Beck (David Krumholtz), things go bad when the kid
is killed in a bizarre shooting accident. They get worse when Jerry's El
Camino, the body and the Mexican are stolen.
When Bernie learns of Jerry's dilemma, he thinks he is trying to pull a
fast one and sends a hit man, Jerry's friend Ted (J.K. Simmons), to bag the
bagman. The two stories - Jerry's plight and Samantha and Leroy's own
journey - start to cross paths, frequently, as poor Jerry struggles to get
himself and the gun back to the US while trying to save Sam from the
mobster. Jerry, it turns out, smells a rat in Leroy. There's a lot more
going on leading to the requisite happy ending.
As one expects with a big star vehicle like "The Mexican." No expense is
denied in the making. The production team essentially renovated the small
Mexican town of Real de Catorce to fit the film's needs and the look and
feel put you right with Jerry, south of the border. Stylish lenser Dariusz
Wolski ("The Crow") gives a separate color palate to each of the sequences,
with the flashback scenes to the making of the legend of the Mexican
handled particularly well. They have a look that gives the sequence a nice
period feel. The rest of the production equals the photography.
"The Mexican" is another case where the star power overwhelms the story,
making more not necessarily better. There is a logical ending at the
96-minute mark that would have, with a little work, tightened up things
considerably and made a better movie. As it is, the stars are entertaining,
Gandolfini is terrific and there is some good fun along the way. I give it
a B.
For more Reeing reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Whether you're going to get a pre-Ocean's Eleven look at Brad Pitt and Julia
Roberts (they're both in Steven Soderbergh's remake), to see a film with
stylish violence in hopes of cleansing your pallet from the stupid 3000
Miles to Graceland, or to see two gorgeous, larger-than-life Hollywood
superstars interact with each other on the big screen, The Mexican will
likely be a real crowd-pleaser.  Actually, those folks in the last group
might be a bit disappointed that Brad and Julia aren't in too many scenes
together, but the rest of the film is enjoyable enough to make you forget,
or, at least not realize until you're on the way home.
The film opens with the toothy duo in the bedroom of their Los Angeles
apartment.  Sam (Roberts, Erin Brockovich) is all smiley because Jerry
(Pitt, Snatch) is talking her to Las Vegas for vacation later that day.
Jerry, on the other hand, is gnawing on his fingernails because a prior
engagement is going to postpone their trip, and he hasn't had the heart to
tell the high-strung Sam.  It seems that Jerry is in hot water with a local
mobster (Bob Balaban, Best in Show) and needs to perform one last service to
work off the debt.  While it's not immediately clear what Jerry did to end
up in this pickle, we do know his task involves flying to Mexico, picking up
a firearm and delivering it back to the L.A. gangster, who is apparently the
operative for an even bigger fish currently serving time.
When Jerry finally breaks the bad news to Sam, she flips out, tosses his
shit to the curb and takes off, screaming psychobabble about his emotional
shortcomings, while he has no choice but to hop the plane and take care of
his other obligation.  They each have their own adventures and don't meet up
again until the end of the film.  Jerry runs into all kinds of trouble in
Mexico, learning the pistol (it's called The Mexican) he's supposed to
transport is cursed.  In the meantime, wisecracking Sam is taken hostage by
a burly man named Leroy (James Gandolfini, The Sopranos), who uses her to
ensure Jerry doesn't run off (or R-U-N-O-F-F-T, if you've just seen O
Brother) with the valuable gun.
Jerry's character reminded me of Paul Hackett in After Hours.  He's clumsy,
unlucky and now finds himself (sporadically) in possession of a gun with bad
mojo.  All he wants is to get back to Sam and fix their relationship.  Sam
and Leroy, on the other hand, made me think of - don't laugh - The Silence
of the Lambs.  Like Lambs, The Mexican is full of really tight close-ups,
and the relationship between Sam and Leroy is like a lightweight version of
Clarice and Hannibal.  They grow close and dish about their relationships
and childhoods, but you know he could kill her in an instant if necessary.
The Mexican is a high-octane flick on par with True Romance in terms of
romantic and violent content (which is kind of ironic if you remember
Gandolfini sharing an unforgettable hotel scene with the female protagonist
in that film).  It's got the three Ds that make a film like this work -
double-crossing, deceit and dark humor.  There are also several great
flashback scenes where we learn the origin of The Mexican (one features
Julia's brother, Eric).
The drawbacks for The Mexican are pretty minor.  The ending drags a bit, but
it's worth it for the payoff.  The country of Mexico is portrayed as a small
village with eight people.  And if you pay too much time thinking about who
each gangster is working for, your head may explode.  Just sit back and
enjoy the nice photography and good acting by two huge stars (and one pretty
big star).
The Mexican was directed by Gore Verbinski (Mouse Hunt), whose visual style
is greatly enhanced by cinematographer Dariusz Wolski (The Crow, Dark City).
The story was written by J.H. Wyman, who penned the truly awful festival hit
Mr. Rice's Secret.  If the film reminds you a little bit of a Quentin
Tarantino movie, you won't be surprised to learn The Mexican was produced by
Tarantino's right-hand man, Lawrence Bender.

Author
Ross Anthony
Tone down the "Snatch"-like incompetent-thugs-botch-the-crime comedy 
genre and add a love story (with Julia Roberts no less) and you've got 
"The Mexican." An attempt to give a so-called guy-flick a sex change? Or 
at least make it unisex? Though both genres are compromised, don't let 
that stop you - this is still a pretty darned good film! 
Brad and Julia love each other, but only seem to be able to express 
themselves by yelling, occasionally borrowing lingo from their group 
therapist or self-help books, "Oh, now your blame-shifting!" 
Bad luck follows Brad like a rabid dog. His thug boss loses his patience 
at the start of the picture, "'I can explain' is something you say once 
in a blue moon, not every time you're given a task." Handling the 
proverbial "last job," Brad flies down to Mexico to retrieve a 
highly-valued legendary pistol named (Latin horns please ...) "The 
Mexican." Julia also loses her patience and takes off for Las Vegas upon 
Brad's departure where she is kidnapped by an intermediate thug 
(Gandolfini) whose job it is to "regulate funkiness." (That is, a 
hostaged Julia equals collateral against Brad's funky behavior.) 
Roberts and Pitt shine, but the script never shows us any on-screen love 
between them. Roberts and Gandolfini, however, now there's some sweet 
subtle romance. Gandolfini is such a strong actor, Roberts has to work 
overtime just to share the screen with him (And I think she's a 
sensational actor!). "You are a very sensitive person for a cold blooded 
killer." They polish a superb diner scene at the beginning of the second 
act. Btw, it was Julia who brought Gandolfini to the film. 
Sharply timed emotional music sparks the mood and prompts audio/visual 
irony - nicely done. Also, the varying legends of the aforementioned 
hand-carved weapon are told marvelously tongue and cheek with just a 
pinch of gunpowder. They flicker in 16mm sepia. Of smaller note, I loved 
a slow-mo shot of Pitt play-shooting a small group of kids pretending to 
be shooting him ... all in good fun. 
In addition to the lack of chemistry between Pitt and Roberts (which 
doesn't effect the film since they seldom share screentime), "The 
Mexican" slows in a few spots. One other blemish, the climax sequence, 
though tying a tight knot, is dulled by an implausibility (sorry, can't 
discuss that without spoiling). 
Overall, I had a good time. A very strong B+. 
The Mexican. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Brad Pitt, Julia Roberts, James Gandolfini, J.K. Simmons, 
Bob Balaban, Sherman Augustus, Michael Cerveris, Richard Coca, Castulo 
Guerra. 
*  Directed by Gore Verbinski. 
*  Written by J.H. Wyman. 
*  Produced by Lawrence Bender and John Baldecchi at 
Dreamworks/Newmarket. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Laura Clifford
Samantha Barzel (Julia Roberts) throws a fit when she discovers that long-time
boyfriend Jerry Welbach (Brad Pitt) is delaying their plans for a Las Vegas
weekend in order to do a job for big boss Margolese (an uncreditted Gene
Hackman).  Sam makes good on her threat to head for Vegas on her own as Jerry 
heads south in search of a prized but cursed pistol known as "The Mexican."
Jerry begins a cycle of dumb luck followed by freakish fate by immediately
locating Beck (David Krumholtz, "Slums of Beverly Hills"), holder of the
infamous antique, in a Mexican dive, then losing him to a reveller's stray
bullet.  When Jerry checks in with Nayman (Bob Balaban), he finds out that
he's holding the dead body of Margolese' grandson.
Meanwhile Sam heads for Vegas and ends up in the crossfire between an elegant
Black stranger (Sherman Augustus, "Virus") who takes her hostage in a ladies'
room and Leroy (James Gandolfini, "The Sopranos"), a psychotic hit man sent
by Margolese to use Sam as Jerry's completion bond.  Leroy plugs the stranger
and begins a road trip with the feisty Sam - 'I'm just here to regulate 
funkiness' he tells her.
Director Gore Verbinski ("Mouse Hunt") seesaws back and forth between the
Mexican and US action as Jerry's travails resemble a human Wile E. Coyote's
while Sam and Leroy bond.  Verbinski struck pay dirt with his superstar
threesome, all better than the script warrants.  Roberts continues her
appealing, movie star, streak here and has loads of chemistry with her
costar Gandolfini.  Quite unlike the hit man he played in "True Romance," 
Leroy is a gay man (which Sam discovers fairly early on) dejected
by the lack of love in his life until Sam encourages a roadside flirtation.
Brad Pitt once again proves a real flair for comedy, able to elicit howls
of laughter with a simple 'Oh no!'  He has loads of chemistry with the
Mexican mutt who becomes his sidekick.  Roberts and Pitt have one of those 
'can't live with them, can't live without them' relationships which flare up 
into screaming matches every 5 minutes.  Roberts is the screamer, hurling such 
self helpisms as 'now you're blame shifting!' at laid back screamee Jerry.
(Too) much has been made of their lack of screentime together.
Technically the film looks (cinematography by Dariusz Wolski of "Dark City" and 
"The Crow") and sounds (original score by Alan Silvestri, "Cast Away") good.
The script, by J.H. Wyman, is problematic however.  While individual bits
play well enough, the film begins to drag.  Wyman gives his MacGuffin its own 
superfluous subplot (several different takes on the history of the pistol are 
shown in bleached out home-movie segments), which could have been jettisoned
entirely. The film comes to a natural conclusion point about thirty minutes 
before it has the good graces to end.  Then Verbinski and screenwriter Wyman 
positively betray the audience with their third act treatment of Gandolfini's 
character.  Any buoyancy and good will are lost at that point as "The Mexican" 
stumbles towards its finish.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Brandon Herring
When I first heard of the pairing of mega-stars Brad Pitt and Julia Roberts, 
I thought wow...that really is a terrible decision. Then the trailer came on, 
and I was shocked, the film actually looked good! So now that I've watched it 
what can I say? Great entertainment, memorable characters, very funny, main 
flaw: 20 minutes overlong.
Jerry Walbach (Brad Pitt) has a problem, he is told to go to Mexico to get a 
prized antique gun known as The Mexican if he wants to live, for a dirty 
crimelord he once worked for. His beautiful if sometimes bitchy girlfriend 
Samantha Barzel (Julia Roberts) has just broken up with him, and is on her 
way to Vegas. Jerry however doesn't have it we good, in Mexico he finds the 
kid who has The Mexican gun, but once the kid is shot accidentally in the 
head Jerry is a target, with many many people knowing what he has. Meanwhile 
in Las Vegas Samantha isn't having the best time as well, she's slightly 
depressed and after she relieves herself in the bathroom she is greeted by a 
bad guy who is then greeted by another man. After this man shoots him several 
times, he takes Samantha and drives off with her in her car.
Leroy (James Gandolfini off "The Sopranos" fame) is the kidnapper, and has 
taken Samantha due to her relationship (she once) had with her (ex) boyfriend 
Jerry. He wants to know where Jerry is, and where that gun is as well. Back 
in Mexico, Jerry's car is stolen as well as the gun that was inside the glove 
box, not having the best of luck he calls up his friend (J.K. Simmons) to 
come down and give him a hand. As Jerry and Samantha are both having their 
problems, we get to see how they resolve them, and in the end who really gets 
The Mexican.
Gore Verbinski director of the the 1997 hit "Mouse Hunt" which was a somewhat 
clever and funny film, he has a lot of talent running around this film. Brad 
Pitt (whose best performance to me is still 1999's "Fight Club) is set in 
goofy mode, and is very funny and engaging. Along with him is the always 
great Julia Roberts who looks different with her short, shagged hair make a 
great pair. The best pairing in the film however is Julia and Tony Soprano 
himself James Gandolfini. Even as a bad guy, Leroy is a sweet and funny 
character. What seems as a movie that is supposed to be a pairing of Julia 
and James, the movie takes a quick 180 and throughout an hour and a half, 
they aren't even on screen together!
The cleverly written script by J.H. Wyman is foul-mouthed, fast and furious. 
What surprised me was the comedy in the film, I knew it'd be funny but where 
were times when I was laughing pretty hard! I had just one major problem with 
"The Mexican" and that is the overlong 2 hour 3 minute running time, about 
110 minutes into the film, I got squirmy in my chair. 
So far in 2001, its been a good year and "The Mexican" I can add to that. 
It's a fun, rollicking, clever ride that is great from start to finish. For 
all those fans of Julia and Brad I definitely recommend this, and hope they 
do more movies together.

Author
SSG Syndicate
 Not only is vibrant Julia Roberts America's Sweetheart but
she's also this year's Golden Globe winner with a lock on the Best
Actress Oscar for "Erin Brockovich." Brad Pitt's been voted People
magazine's "Sexiest Man in the World."  They possess two of the
screen's most photogenic faces, so teaming them, along with "The
Sopranos" Joe Gandolfini, was a stroke of marketing genius. Based on a
fateful screenplay by J.H. Wyman, directed by Gore Verbinski ("Mouse
Hunt"), the story follows a reluctant bagman (Pitt) who is sent to
Mexico to retrieve a legendary pistol, known as The
Mexican. Supposedly, it was crafted as a wedding present for a
nobleman if he'd marry the gunsmith's daughter who, in turn, loved her
father's apprentice who rigged the gun to misfire if it fell into the
wrong hands. He figures this errand should end his indentured
servitude to an underworld crime boss for past misdeeds.
  While Pitt, a lovable dork, has a serious problem with
moving vehicles, he's got even more of a problem with his group
therapy-addicted girl-friend (Roberts) who spouts psycho-babble and
demands that he join her in Las Vegas. ("When do you get to that point
if enough is enough?" she muses.) Finding the cursed pistol is easy
but getting it back is complicated, particularly when she's taken
hostage by a hitman (Gandolfini). This divergent plot is important
because the stars actually have few scenes together - which is a
mistake. Both exude charm and handle the comedy well but the pacing is
uneven and the pairing unsatisfying. The soundtrack's fun,
particularly Nancy Sinatra's "These Boots Were Made for Walkin'". On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Mexican" is a visually
stylish 7. It's a quirky caper movie about destiny.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Mexican (2001)
Brad Pitt, Julia Roberts, James Gandolfini, J.K. Simmons, Bob Balaban,
Sherman Augustus, Michael Cerveris, Richard Coca, David Krumholtz,
Castulo Guerra, Gene Hackman (uncredited). Written by J.H. Wyman.
Directed by Gore Verbinski. 123 minutes.
Rated R, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"The Mexican" opens with a whale of a battle between Samantha (Julia
Roberts) and Jerry (Brad Pitt). After promising to stop working as a
gofer for criminal big shots, Jerry is about to leave for the proverbial
"one last job." He stands on the sidewalk pleading his case while
Samantha pelts him from their second story apartment with his own
balled-up clothing. That the couple has attended numerous counseling
sessions becomes obvious when Samantha, outraged by one of Jerry's
statements, shifts into therapy speak, shouting "Did you just
blame-shift? Are you blame-shifting?!"
When Samantha and Jerry part company, you know they will be reunited by
the end of the film. Happily, that's about the only thing that is
certain in this wonderfully quirky
comedy-drama-adventure-romance-thriller-western-road movie. The
convoluted storyline is overwritten and occasionally confusing, but "The
Mexican" more than makes up for its problem areas, thanks to strong
contrasts in atmosphere, bold use of music, terrific dialogue and an
extraordinary ensemble cast.
After their confrontation, Samantha and Jerry head off in different
directions. Given the choice of cooperation or death, reluctant bagman
Jerry flies to Mexico to retrieve a gorgeous hand-made pistol called the
Mexican for a mob boss. Meanwhile, Samantha starts a long drive to Las
Vegas to begin a new career.
But nothing goes as planned. In a picturesque village, Jerry gets the
gun with relative ease, but has a hell of a time keeping hold of it. The
Mexican is cursed (we see three versions of the pivotal moment when the
pistol became a legend) and so, it seems, is Jerry. After several
disastrous attempts to complete the mission, his best friend and
colleague, Ted (J.K. Simmons) arrives to help. Ah, but who is he really
working for?
Things are just as bad on the domestic front. To ensure that the Mexican
reaches its intended destination, a notorious hit man named Leroy (James
Gandolfini) takes Samantha hostage. If Jerry accomplishes his task,
Samantha will go free, but if he fails...
The film hops back and forth between the respective adventures of
Samantha and Jerry, with the neon lights of Las Vegas offering a sharp
contrast to the weathered village of Real de Catorce, located in the
northern central highlands of Mexico. Director Gore Verbinski ("Mouse
Hunt") gets the most out of both locations. To his credit, he navigates
the color wheel of Las Vegas without ever doing the standard montage of
twinkling casino signs. The scenes in Real de Catorce are even more
visually rich. Located 8,000 feet up in the mountains, the city is
accessible only via a 15.5-mile cobblestone road that goes to the 1.5
mile Ogarrio Tunnel, a one-lane former mine shaft that leads into the
city. The town is a perfect movie locale  while it would likely be
insufferably hot and dusty in real life, it has an otherworldly allure
on-screen.
The contrasts between the journeys of Samantha and Jerry are just as
distinct. For Jerry, miscommunication is the operative word, as he deals
with the language barrier while trying to determine who is telling him
the truth and who is lying. Brad Pitt does wonderful work defining his
character, a well-intentioned goof who is dense, but not stupid. He uses
his whole body, drawing slapstick laughs with his flailing limbs without
ever going over the top. After a series of fine turns in grim roles,
what a delight it is to see Pitt using his great skills for comedic
effect. J.K. Simmons  best known as uber-villain Vern Shillinger in the
HBO prison drama, "Oz"  deftly plays off the anxiety of Pitt's
character by keeping Ted casual, from his low-key demeanor to his
just-off-the-tourist-rack clothing.
For Samantha, communication is everything. The hostage-captor dynamic
changes as she and Leroy bond, discussing relationship issues in a
manner that would make Oprah proud. Julia Roberts delivers a strong
performance as a person that expresses every emotion she feels, for
better or worse. James Gandolfini, who achieved leading man status as
the patriarch in the smash HBO series, "The Sopranos," tempers his
menacing frame with silky sensitivity as Leroy, a mobster who fears he
will never find true love. The evolution of the two characters is
credible and the exchanges between Samantha and Leroy are both funny and
sweet.
While the supporting cast is quite colorful, Pitt, Roberts, Gandolfini
and Simmons own "The Mexican." The often violent storyline, which nods
to both Quentin Tarantino and Sam Peckinpah, tries a little too hard
and, in the latter minutes of the film, frays at the edges, but it
doesn't matter. The four actors and their well-defined characters are so
likable that plot becomes irrelevant. Watching them interact is pleasure
enough. Placing them in a clever story accented with great looking
surroundings and bang-up music simply adds icing to the cake.

Author
Christopher Null
Or not.  The Mexican has the distinction of being a romance that manages
to keep its lovey-dovey costars further apart than any film since
Sleepless in Seattle.  Not that there was any way around it.  Brad
Pitt's Jerry is a completely hapless bagman for a shifty mob boss (Bob
Balaban), sent from L.A. to Mexico to retrieve the titular objet d'art
-- an antique pistol.
This doesn't sit well with his difficult yet practically-a-wife
girlfriend Samantha (Julia Roberts), who swears she'll move to Las Vegas
if he goes on the job.  Bound by honor and/or the threat of death, he
goes.  And so does Julia.
In a convoluted tale of double-crosses, stolen identities, Mexican
curses, language barriers, and closeted homosexuality, The Mexican romps
through more genres (romance, comedy, adventure, drama, Western) than it
does miles of Mexican roadway.  Jerry finds the gun, and its deliverer
gets killed.  Sam heads off to Vegas and gets herself kidnapped. 
Twice.  People come back from the dead.  Characters get killed off
unexpectedly.  A dog barks.  Tequila is consumed.
Indeed, much of The Mexican plays out like highfalutin nonsense, with
Jerry the most ridiculously incapable courier ever put on this earth. 
He's endlessly losing the gun while inexplicably retrieving it again and
again.  He never learns a lesson about hiding valuables while managing
to figure out the complex plot against him.  Meanwhile, Sam is content
to simply nag nag nag.  If she can't bitch out Jerry on the phone, she's
happy to bend the ear of her kidnapper to wax on the topic of love in
the zeroes, thus screwing up his life, too.
Much to everyone's relief, a lot of this banter manages to come across
as the witty humor it's intended to be.  Even in one of her most grating
roles on film, it's hard not to like the overpowering Julia.  And Brad,
well, Brad's dunderhead comes across as the good-natured pendejo that he
really is.  Pitt amuses, and while Gore Verbinski hasn't come far as a
director since Mouse Hunt, the jokes pay off more often than not, and
the unexpected twists in J.H. Wyman's script liven up the picture
considerably.  That's good, because at two hours in running time, the
movie is much too long to support its ultimately frivolous guts as a
harmless road trip picture.
Altogether the film is likable enough and perfect for young, moviegoing
couples during an early spring.  But sadly, I'm already starting to
loathe The Mexican's influence.  Case in point: On the way home in the
car, my wife just wouldn't get off my back about the VCR.  Julia, what
hast thou wrought?
Director: Gore Verbinski
Producer: John Baldecchi, Lawrence Bender
Writer: J.H. Wyman
Starring: Brad Pitt, Julia Roberts, James Gandolfini, David Krumholtz,
Gene Hackman, Luis Felipe Tovar, Bob Balaban, J.K. Simmons, Michael
Cerveris
http://www.amazon.com/themexican
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
