Title
Review for Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner, The (1962)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner (1962)
British writer Alan Silltoe achieved critical
success with "Saturday Night and Sunday Morning",
a novel about a troubled young man from a working
class family.  After writing the screenplay as
well, his next effort was "The Loneliness of the
Long Distance Runner", which he also adapted for
the screen.  As in his earlier film, the anti-hero
youth, his romances, and his confrontations with
(and submissions to) authority are the dominant
themes.
Producer/Director Tony Richardson would have his
greatest success the following year with "Tom Jones"
(which starred Albert Finney, who also was the
lead in "Saturday Night and Sunday Morning").
But while "Tom Jones" was a boisterous comedy,
"The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner"
is a grim drama.
Tom Courtenay makes his screen debut as Colin
Smith, a young man who is sentenced to a juvenile
prison after committing a burglary.  Although his
attitude remains antisocial, he becomes a favorite
of the governor (the prison administrator, played
by Michael Redgrave) due to his athletic ability.
Colin is trained as a cross country runner, in
the hopes that he win a cup when in competition
with athletes from a well-to-do boarding school.
But Courtenay still resents the system, and has
revenge on his mind.
Silltoe places the blame for Colin's behavioral
problems on his family life.  Colin's day laborer
father (Peter Madden) recently died after a
grueling illness, and Colin was the first to
see him dead.  His mother (Avis Bunnage) is
relieved, and is prompt to take a lover (Raymond
Dyer) who views Colin as a good-for-nothing.
Colin gets a girlfriend (Topsy Jane) who presses
him to get a job.  But Colin is too much the
rebel to work for the man, turning to robbery
instead.
Richardson makes heavy use of flashback, especially
when Colin is running miles by himself in the woods.
Richardson and Silltoe clearly sympathize with
Colin, and not with the governor, whose eagerness
to win the cup has overcome his common sense.
Courtenay, who was several years older than his
teenaged character, is effective in the lead role.
Bunnage is also very good.  She gives her character
a practical, hard edge appropriate for surviving
the hard knocks of life.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
