Title
Review for Ambush, The (1969)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
In Serbia, just after World War II, an idealistic young man joins the
Young Communists.  He works with the secret police, in their campaign to
exterminate all anti-revolutionary elements.  A gritty, realistic and
compelling drama that exposes Communism as a completely corrupt and
murderous system.  It's not surprising that this film was banned by the
Yugoslavian government!
Yugoslavia (English subtitles), black-and-white, 1969, banned by
Yugoslavian government censors, released 1990, 80 minutes.
Director: Zivojin Pavlovic.
     The story centers on Ive, an idealistic and naive young man who
firmly believes in the Communist Party and its ideology.  His initial
association with the Party is as a musician at various functions.
However, his involvement grows, particularly when his friends criticize
him for his girlfriend, whose father is a known bourgeois.
     Ive neglects his schooling to work with the secret police in their
campaign to exterminate the anti-revolutionary elements, the Chetniks,
who are the remnants of the previous ruling class.  He helps set up
ambushes, where the Chetniks can be killed or captured.
     This film was made in 1969, and banned by the Yugoslavian
government after its initial screening.  The film, by portraying
Communism in a very realistic light, severely criticizes it.  In this
film, you clearly see the Communist ideals of social justice.  The
Father of Ive's girlfriend is condemned as a bourgeouis in a kangaroo
trial.  Their "logic" is that you are rich; this proves you stole the
property you now have; therefore it is morally correct for us to throw
you out of your house.  This they do, then descend on his house like a
gang of thieves and vandals, ransacking it.
     The secret police are shown engaging in deplorable behavior in
their campaign of political "justice."  They kill people who are found
with UNNRA food packages (UNNRA = U.N. Refugee Relief Agency), then
trade the food for sex.  They stop people they suspect of anti-
revolutionary activity, and execute them on the spot.  They
"requisition" grain from mills by stealing it at gunpoint.  They try to
ambush the Chetniks, and kill them without giving them a chance to
surrender.  Also, when they return to the village, they lie about their
exploits, portraying themselves as heroes.
     Further, the film also states, clearly but by implication, that
Stalin and Tito are murderers and liars.  Given the mass murder of their
regimes, that is an accurate characterization.  The clear message of the
film is that Communism is rotten to the core, and Communists are either
naive (like Ive), or evil (liars, thieves, murderers).  Simply by
presenting a realistic portrait of the revolution, the film harshly
condemns it.  Given the film's message, it's not surprising that it was
banned by the Yugoslavian government after its initial screenings in
1969.
     The film is in black-and-white and there are no "stars" in it.
However, I strongly recommend seeing it if you have the opportunity.  It
superbly tells a chilling and compelling story, about a corrupt and
murderous social and political system.
Print Source: Centar Film; Borisa Kidrica 71; Belgrade 11000;
Yugoslavia.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
