Title
Review for Mr. Jones (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     First, let me be clear.  Director Mike Figgis's MR. JONES (1993),
staring Richard Gere as Mr.  Jones, is an extremely hard show to watch.
Think of it as paying $7 for a virtual reality game where you too can
be a manic depressive and for two solid hours no less!
     Second, the ending is awful.  Third, the script writers (Michael
Cristofer and Eric Roth) felt like they had to introduce an
unbelievable love affair with the patient Mr. Jones and the
psychiatrist Dr. Libbie Bowen (Lena Olin).  Actually, for this bit of
ridiculousness, I do thank them somewhat.  Without it, the show was so
intense it might have been totally unbearable.  Finally, the title is
terrible.  Mr.  Jones sounds like a love story or a light comedy.
     Now, why in my right mind (no pun intended), would I recommend
this show and give it a high rating (*** 1/2)?  Two reasons.  First,
Gere performance, especially in his manic states, was pure academy
award winning stuff.  Second, it forces you, albeit very painfully, to
come to grips with what depression is and even more so what manic
depression is.  Every time Gere got into his manic state, you felt like
you had just popped a bottle of speed.  This is one of those show you
think about again and again for years.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Richard Gere is a really great actor, but sometimes his
presence of the screen can be really annoying. It usually
happens because of his tendency to torpedo many promising
roles with his overacting, often inappropriate for the
occasion. However, while many conventional roles are simply
too conventional for Gere, there are roles that look like a
perfect fit for his usual screen personality. Many of those
roles deal with some forms of mental illness or deficiency -
fertile ground for Academy Awards, judging by the last few
decades.
Of all mental illnesses, manic-depressive psychosis (or
"bipolar disorder", as refered in modern American medical
literature) is probably the most suitable for actors who
want to push their limits. While the intellectual abilities
of the patients are untouched, that illness is characterised
with sometimes sudden, sometimes gradual mood swings that
vary between manic euphoria and almost catatonic depression.
In this film Richard Gere plays Mr. Jones, one of the people
who are suffering from that illness. But when we are
introduced to Mr. Jones, we see that he doesn't suffer at
all - we are exposed to his manic side, his "highs", and he
look like someone who enjoys life more than most of us.
Problem is that his euphoric outbursts often lead him to
trouble, like when he tries to fly off the construction
site, or conduct philharmonic concerto by himself. As an
aftermath of those incidents, he is always brought back to
psychiatric ward, and medical staff tries to control his
condition with various drugs. Doctor Libbie Bowen (Lena
Olin) is trying to treat him, but soon she finds that she
has more than professional interests in her patient.
British director Mike Figgis has already made reputation by
often dark and depressing dramas and thrillers like STORMY
MONDAY or INTERNAL AFFAIRS. In MR. JONES, his tendency
towards depressive subject was watered down due to the
script by Eric Roth and Michael Christopher. Two writers
decided to make this film light, despite its serious and
potentially very depressive subject. As a result, the
audience finds very little about the main character - at
least when he has his "bad" days. We also find very little
about the nature of the illness itself, and the dilemmas
psychiatrists must make when they deal with patients.
Finally, in order to make this film as formulaic as
possible, we are given unecessary and quite disappointing
romantic subplot.
But, it actually doesn't matter much in the end. Richard
Gere in this role behaves like a fish in the water and
literally chewes the screen with his acting. Of course, his
personality overshadowed anyone else, including his partner
Lena Olin, but we are still able to notice more than good
supporting roles, most notable of them being one played by
Delroy Lindo. In the end, film ends predictably, but for
most of its 114 minutes, audience isn't bored, mostly thanks
to Figgis' capable directing and good production values.
Hardly a masterpiece, and nothing more than a solid piece of
formulaic Hollywood entertainment, MR. JONES is still the
film to be recommended, and not just to Richard Gere fans or
those who like melodramas.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     There was a point during MR. JONES when it occurred to me that if
it had been made in French, someone might have championed it as an
understated bit of high culture.  It's well-directed, generally
well-acted, and includes several meaningful closeups and a few piano
performances.  It also features a story which goes absolutely nowhere.
If any film this year can be said to demonstrate a visual monotone,
it's MR. JONES.
     Richard Gere is Mr. Jones, a manic-depressive pianist turned
construction worker.  Jones is given to grand theatrics, such as
poising himself on the edge of a roof and claiming he's going to fly,
or jumping onstage at a symphony to conduct the orchestra.  After such
incidents, he is brought to a hospital where he is treated by Dr. Libby
Bowen (Lena Olin), a jittery psychiatrist recently separated from her
husband.  Dr. Bowen wants to have Mr.  Jones involuntarily committed,
but he convinces a judge that he's merely a grandiose personality.
However, he soon bottoms out of his euphoria, and voluntarily enters
the hospital to be treated.  Dr.  Bowen becomes attracted to Mr. Jones'
sense of living life on the edge and tries to help him exorcise his
demons, getting closer and closer to crossing the line between
therapist and patient.
     A film like MR. JONES has to walk its own very fine line, being
careful not to romanticize mental illness.  Unfortunately, MR. JONES is
doomed from the start because it's about a romance with a mentally ill
man.  Dr. Bowen is introduced as a compulsively late emotional wreck,
and we are expected to see her become more serene and appreciative of
life as she sees it through his eyes.  Is the idea that one can only
truly live while on the manic side of manic depression?  Or that Dr.
Bowen develops a protective love for this shattered man?  Both concepts
are fairly distasteful, and it makes it awfully hard for the love story
to generate any resonance.  It also hurts that Dr. Bowen's character is
terribly underdeveloped.  She is supposed to be the dynamic character
in this piece, like Tom Cruise to Dustin Hoffman in RAIN MAN, but
there's not a clear enough sense of where she's coming from to make
where she's going compelling.  MR. JONES is just a case of a poorly
developed basic premise.
     This basic premise is also undercut by a performance from Richard
Gere which is excellent, but toned totally wrong for the film.  It's a
daring portrayal, never kooky just for the sake of being kooky (like
Mary Stuart Masterson directing traffic with ping pong paddles in BENNY
& JOON), and willing to dig into the darker corners of this disturbed
man's psyche.  The problem is that Gere is so good at conveying Jones'
dark side that Dr. Bowen's attraction just doesn't make any sense.
Lena Olin spends most of the film sporting a look of bewildered
concern, and exactly where or why her attraction is supposed to begin
is never clear.  These two people seem to have been thrown into bed
together simply for the expendience of the story, and not because of
any character motivation.
     Where MR. JONES is likely to lose most viewers, however, is a tone
so muted that it's virtually inaudible.  Everything is slowly,
painstakingly framed, even those moments which are supposed to
represent Mr. Jones' mania.  There is virtually no underscore, causing
far too many scenes to come off cold and clinical.  Where some films
beat you over the head with big emotions, MR. JONES seems to dare you
to find any emotional attachment.  It doesn't help that some scenes are
poorly lit, and that in others Lena Olin's dialogue is almost
completely incomprehensible.  I want to admire MR. JONES for not
leaning towards the sentimental, but it's no virtue to opt instead for
comatose.
     MR. JONES has been sitting on the shelf for a year or so, and it's
easy to see why.  It's a love story without much love, and a character
study low on character.  I was impressed by Richard Gere, but he alone
isn't reason enough to spend two hours with Mr. Jones ... whose first
name Dr. Bowen never bothers to ask.

Author
James Berardinelli
Motion pictures about mental illness can take many different forms.  They 
can be "feel good" experiences like AWAKENINGS, powerful dramas like ONE 
FLEW OVER THE CUCKOOS NEST, blood-curdling thrillers like THE SHINING, 
moronic comedies like CRAZY PEOPLE, or stories lacking any foundation in 
reality like BENNY AND JOON.  Unfortunately MR. JONES, the latest in a 
long line of these movies, falls decisively in the final category.  The 
plot actually might have been kind of sweet if it wasn't so completely 
unbelievable.
Mr. Jones (Richard Gere) is, in his own words, a man with a "grandiose" 
personality - a child in a grown-up's body.  However, by the definition 
of his psychiatrist (Lena Olin as Dr. Libbie Bowen), he's a "bipolar 
manic depressive", which means that his mood swings tilt wildly from 
exuberance to dejection.  Unfortunately for Mr. Jones, Libbie is right, 
and he soon finds himself in a mental hospital fighting to cope with his 
problem so that he doesn't throw himself off a rooftop in a futile 
attempt to fly.  During the course of his treatment, however, an amazing 
thing happens:  Libbie and Mr. Jones fall in love, save each other's 
lives, and sleep together - and she never finds out his first name.
It's never difficult to be cynical about run-of-the-mill love stories - 
most of them lend themselves easily to flippant remarks - but MR. JONES 
is so littered with implausibilities that it's a classic example of 
something awaiting a skewering.  Nevertheless, I'll start out with a few 
kind words:  this picture isn't boring and it succeeded in retaining my 
attention for the unnecessarily-long running time of one-hundred fourteen 
minutes.  Those who swoon at the mere mention of a weepy romance will 
probably enjoy this no matter what I say, as will fans of Richard Gere.
One of the primary rules of psychiatry is not to get involved with the 
patient.  So why is it that in movies, this rule is so often broken?  It 
happens again here, and for no good reason (other than that the story 
would have no place to go without this development).  Libbie has plenty 
of opportunities to keep things from going too far, but she doesn't act 
until it's too late.  Some people have no concern for ethics or 
propriety.
While there's something admittedly compelling about the character of Mr. 
Jones, very little about the man makes any sense, and the argument that 
he has a mental disorder is not a valid excuse for this inconsistent 
characterization.  He's Hollywood's cliche-riddled vision of the manic 
depressive, and he's stuck wandering around in a story that consistently 
veers towards the preposterous.  The central element of the movie, the 
love story, is something that never should have happened.  As a result, 
its presence creates a dissonance that permeates the film.
In far too many movies (such as PRETTY WOMAN and FINAL ANALYSIS), Richard 
Gere has marched through his roles zombie-like, with hardly a change in 
expression and little attempt at passion.  In MR. JONES, he goes to the 
other extreme, overacting is a way that is actually enjoyable to watch.  
Sure, this isn't a great performance, but Gere is undeniably charming 
when he emotes this much.  
Lena Olin, who was so playfully sensual in THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF 
BEING, seems to have caught the stoic bug from Gere.  Frankly, she's 
incredibly dull, and it becomes a chore trying to sympathize with her 
character.  It's difficult to accept that even Mr. Jones' white-hot flame 
could melt through Libbie's icy exterior.  Added to that is the doctor's 
Swedish accent which occasionally renders a line or two incomprehensible 
(including a crucial plea to Mr. Jones in the middle of a rain storm).
Anne Bancroft has little more screen time than Libbie's cat, and probably 
doesn't turn in as impressive a performance.  What she's doing in this 
movie is something of a mystery.  Also turning up are Bill Pullman and 
Sheryl Lee (the infamous Laura Palmer from TV's Twin Peaks), neither of 
whose names appear in the final credits.  The only actor in this 
production who can legitimately be proud of his work is Delroy Lindo (as 
Jones' friend Howard), but he's not on screen nearly enough.
I often have problems with movies that go for the too-easy, fairy tale 
ending.  MR. JONES has all the subtlety of a Greek tragedy, and the 
screenwriters should have treated the concluding scenes appropriately.  
What do we get, however?  I won't explicitly reveal what happens, but 
suffice it to say that this is a Richard Gere executive-produced 
Hollywood concoction.  That just about says all that needs to be said.
It has always seemed insensitive to use mental illness as a form of comic 
relief, and that's exactly what MR. JONES does on several occasions.  To 
the film's credit, it tries to balance its presentation of the hospital's 
residents, but there's something that still smacks of exploitation.  
After all, when you get to the core of the matter, Mr. Jones' manic 
depressive problems are nothing more than a plot device to complicate the 
romance between the two main characters.
See MR. JONES at your own risk.  Those who enjoy such excruciatingly 
manipulative experiences like Untamed Heart will probably come out of 
this movie spouting words of praise.  Those who could do without that 
sort of melodrama would do better looking elsewhere.  There's not much of 
substance in MR. JONES.  Worse movies can be found in abundance, but this 
one's a little too empty for my taste.   
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
