Title
Review for Virtual Sexuality (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Paul Moloney
The term "bad" is often thrown at movies, but very few really deserve 
the term. I mean, a lot are dull, repetitive, unoriginal, but very few 
actually make you squirm in your seat, groan, or eye the exit with
longing and, afterwards, leave a nasty taste in your mouth. "Virtual 
Sexuality" is one of them.
Based on a book by Chloe Rayban, and adapted for the screen by 
the film critic of the Sun (now there's a scary ending to a sentence), 
it's the heart-warming tale of a girl who wants to lose her virginity.  
The films opens to find Justine (17, played by Laura Fraser, 23) 
philosophising about losing her cherry; a sequence excruciatingly 
embarrassing to anyone over the age of 15. A rip-off of "Ferris
Bueller", from the talking-at-the-camera bit down to the on-screen 
graphics, this sequence, with her bubbly girlishness and the cloying 
"hip" attitude of the film, is irritating beyond belief.. It takes a 
lot for a woman as cute as Justine to annoy me, but she manages.
We're introduced to her nerdy friend Chas (played by Luke de Lacy, aged
28). There's no reason why someone like Justine would be friends with 
someone like Chas, and indeed, they never act as friends in the film;
in one scene, Justine is particularly nasty to him, is never sorry
about it, but Chase nevertheless, puppy dog like, continues to follow
her around. But hey, he's needed first as a plot device, since 
someone has to being her to a computer fair where an explosion during 
the use of a "virtual reality" machine turns her into a man. Or rather, 
creates a male alter-ego of  her, called Jake. Don't look at me like 
that; I'm just relating it the
way it was shown.
After this the film is thankfully amusing for a while; amongst all the
drama-school mugging, only Rupert Penry-Jones brings a real comic touch 
to his woman-trapped-in-a-man's-body role of Jake. There's some funny 
scenes with Jake dealing with his new body, and new feelings; nothing 
you haven't seen before, but then in this film you'll clutch at 
anything that's entertaining.
Unfortunately Justine pops up again, and hilarious antics ensue (I
wish), involving the owners of the virtuality machine who want to 
kidnap Jake in order to have sex with him, or examine him, or 
something. Anyway, it's just an excuse to fill an extra half 
hour with some explosions and car chases; for such a cheap looking 
movie, the explosions come often and loud, suggesting the money 
was spent in all the wrong places.
Justine ends up deciding against losing her virginity with her
alter-ego, which would have at least been an interesting twist on 
Woody Allen's observation about masturbation. Before you think that 
somehow she has gone through a major life change, has realised the 
true meaning of love, etc, and that there was actually a point to 
this film, well, she pops up to cheerily announce she lost her 
cherry to Chas the nerd in a one-night stand. End of film, roll 
credits.
This presumably is what is meant to pass for a happy ending in 
the 90s. But this only happens after Chas removes his glasses and 
puts some hair gel and a leather jacket on ("Why, Ms. Jones, you're
_beautiful_!"). I mean, god forbid Justine actually have sex with 
someone who _looks_ like a nerd - she still has some shallowness 
to maintain. Of course, this is a bit subversive - in these days of 
PC movies which tell you to be yourself, and that everyone is special 
in their own way, it's refreshingly reactionary to have a film which 
screams "CONFORM!" at you, and treats virgins and nerds with the 
contempt they deserve. It'd be interesting to see the director's cut, 
where Chas, who's obviously had a torch for Justine for years, has to 
deal with the fact he sold himself out so that Justine could use him 
like a piece of tissue.
It's hard to tell who this film is aimed at; the characterisation and
style smacks of a "Children's ITV" series crossed with an Aussie soap 
opera, yet the nudity, and language seems to be aimed at an older 
audience.  The characterisation is simple dire; the nerd is very nerdy 
(room full of computers, thick glasses, social retardism, virginity, no
leather jacket), there's a slut, she's very slutty (blonde, tight 
dresses, orange tan, vampy  accompanying music), there's a jock, he's 
very... well,  you get the picture. 
You could get away with this kind of characterisation in a broad 
comedy, but "Virtual Sexuality" isn't funny, and at times seems to 
think it's a drama dealing with real problems. It's mildly amusing 
in very few places, and excruciatingly embarrassing in the rest. 
The heroine comes across as shallow, bitchy, and unlikeable, and the 
male lead is a tiresome nerd who ends up comforming and gets used 
for his pains. I hope Justine at least paid for his hairgel.
Don't be fooled by the title; there's absolutely nothing erotic about
the film, and it doesn't deal with the topics of how the new 
communications technologies are changing the way we view and acquire 
relationships (unless you actually think there _is_ a chance your 
PlayStation might blow up and change your sex). An absolute waste of 
celluloid.
