Title
Review for Flirting with Disaster (1996)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: David O. Russel
Starring: Ben Stiller, Patricia Arquette, Tea Leoni, Mary Tyler Moore,
George Segal, Alan Alda, Lily Tomlin, Josh Brolin, Richard Jenkins
David O. Russel's debut film, "Spanking the Monkey" (no jokes about the
title, guys, it's old), devastated my emotionally, and I'm still not
over it.  It was the most intense character study I've ever seen and
depressed me beyond belief.  His sophomore film, however, made me laugh
so hard that I'm still not over the physical damage I did to my gut
while watching this.  Okay, I'm exaggerating, but this film is a
screwball film that just gets funnier and funnier as it goes on, and
ends on an even funnier note.
The seemingly standard screwball plot deals with a grown man (Ben
Stiller) searching for his real parents, since he was adopted.  His
parents (Mary Tyler Moore and George Segal, who were so funny together,
that they were forced to appear on several episodes of co-star Tea
Leoni's sitcom, "The Naked Truth") are outraged when he announces this,
and introduces them to his slim, slightly neurotic adoption agency
helper or whatever she is (Tea).  The thing that caused him to bring
this up is the birth of their son (his wife is Patricia Arquette, by the
way), and is inability to name him for that anal reason.
So he embarks on a trek with his wife and Tea to find his parents and
rejoin them, but finds out that the agency screwed up and sends them to
the wrong people twice before winding them up with his real parents
(Alan Alda and Lily Tomlin).  What's great about this is that everyone
you meet is nothing like they first seem.  They run into Patricia's old
male pal from high school (Josh Brolin) who's a U.S. Marshall, and turns
out to be married to his male partner who suffers from hysterically high
amounts of hypertension (wonderfully and memorably played by Richard
Jenkins).  And, of course, his real parents turn out to be drug addicts
who brew LSD in their basement but are still tight about their
"non-smoking household."
There's also a lot of partner swapping, as Brolin and Arquette begin to
go at it, but in Brolin's fetish way (wait till you find out what his
favorite part of the female body is, which spurns one of the funniest
scenes in 90s cinema).  And Tea and Ben go at it, although neither is
really sure if they should.  One scene they just give eachother little
pecks, then jump on eachother simultaneously.
Then there's the direction and writing by Russel, who certainly has a
knack for breaking taboos (like incest and masturbation in "Spanking the
Monkey" - title doesn't say it all), shocks the audience and causes them
to laugh hysterically, a great feat if you've seen his first film since
he drained all emotions from his audience till they were silently
depressed for months afterwards.  Here, he shows us many big taboos:
like the Brolin fetish; the Brolin/Jenkins gay relationship; openly
talking about felatio; the truth about B&Bs; and we even get to see Mary
Tyler Moore pull up her shirt and show us her bra, as she brags about
how perfect her breasts are.  This film isn't flirting with disaster,
much less crashing into it.
But Russel holds it all together, and by the ending where a hundred
things are going on, and you can't decide which one is funnier, he still
manages to hold a tight grasp on things, and even ends on a note of
semi-sentimentalism, which isn't even cringe-inducing.  And, of course,
he shows some more shocking moments during the end credits, where we get
to see all the end couples in bed in their numerous ways, and all with
that lovely prop: the baby.
This film is a lovely companion piece to "Spanking the Monkey": brings
you down from your depression, by showing you some of the same taboos
but in a different sense.  So, if you ever go ahead and rent "Monkey,"
make sure you couple it with this one.  You'll laugh your ass off.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jesus Garcia Wong
Directed by: David O. Russell
Written by: David O. Russell
Cast : Ben Stiller, Patricia Arquette, Tea Leoni, Alan Alda, Lily
Tomlin, Richard Jenkins, Josh Brolin, Mary Tyler Moore, George Segal.
Produced by : Miramax Films
Rating : **** out of *****
Theatres: Capitol, Lido, Jurong, Changi.
OF CIRCUMCISION, PSYCHIC WOUNDS AND THE FAMILY SITCOM
The opening segment is something of a foretaste of this film. There's
a guy's voice telling us how he tries to imagine what his biological
parents look like, and on the screen we see images of a variety of
oldish men and women. As his imagination plays o n, he (and we)
picture these motley characters in a mix-and-match shuffle of unlikely
marriages, businesswomen with bums, matrons with paint salesmen, the
images coming on in a faster and faster frenzy. It's not just a witty,
funny summing up of the film 's themes - you might not guess it yet,
but it sets the pattern for the way the story goes on. What starts out
as a step in a fairly sensible direction, gets taken on a road trip,
put through a detour or two and finds itself freewheeling towards an
immin ent crash.
That may not sound so different from the average family
sitcom, and the general idea of the film doesn't, at first, seem so
wildly distant from standard-issue Hollywood comedy : man who was
adopted as a child (Ben Still er) sets out on a journey to meet his
real parents, along with his wife (Patricia Arquette), his baby, and a
pretty psychology-researcher (Tea Leoni) in tow. Various mix-ups,
shenanigans, oddball characters and, yup, disasters follow.
But if you think you've been here before, the dialogue and the
direction (by David O. Russell, who made SPANKING THE MONKEY) take it
into another dimension. The dreaded T-name seems an inevitable
reference point (what with a drug overdose scene and the casting of
Arquette from TRUE ROMANCE) but really the point is that the
foot-massage master hasn't got a monopoly on plot twists and fast,
funny, irreverent lines, or on the absurdities of ordinary speech.
Whether it's about circumcision, psychic wounds, oral sex, carjacking,
the beauties of the armpit area, or Ronald Reagan, the script never
seems to run out of hilarious invention. The best thing is how these
words aren't just there for the punchlines, but are great precisely
because they're said in character, like Tea Leoni's
neurotically-charged psychobabbler who's able to say under assault,
"It's understandable if you find this threatening".
The cast is excellent throughout, and, rather than singling out
anybody, kudos are due to the fine ensemble acting, with the sometimes
frenetically overlapping dialogue and the sense of a dozen different
reagents colliding to the point of fission. There are some elements of
a Woody Allen film in this (not to mention the hand-held camera and
loose, improvisational feel of some scenes). Like Allen, Russell's
interests are in the volatile sexual politics of couples and the
neurotic obsessions in both pare nts and children (and everybody,
really) .
Still, if you're expecting a privileged moment of revelation and
emotional outpouring a la "Murphy Brown" / "Frasier"/
fill-in-the-blank-American-comedy, well, it won't happen. The film
sets up expectations like these, with the lead character's search f or
his origins and his hopes of self-healing, only to knock them down. If
the conventional sitcom structure is to put a slightly loopy family in
catastrophic conditions only to rediscover their essential lovey
one-ness, FLIRTING WITH DISASTER's charact ers embark on a journey to
seek that essential state but find themselves only plunging into more
weirdness and dysfunctional chaos the further they go. And that, the
film suggests, IS the essential family state - and you better learn to
love it. Somehow , this is perversely feelgood cinema, right up to its
manic end.


Author
Christopher Null
     You know, I was in a real downer of a mood when I went to see
FLIRTING WITH DISASTER, but, incredibly, the raw comedy of this film could
only cheer me up.  And I thought I was a cynic....
     The sophomore effort of writer/director David O. Russell (whose first
film, SPANKING THE MONKEY, was a real jaw-dropper by virtue of its title
alone) is a comedy/romance that somehow captures the feel of both a home
movie and an acid trip together.  On the surface, the story of Mel Coplin
(Ben Stiller) and his search for his birth parents is a tried-and-true
tale.  In reality, FLIRTING WITH DISASTER has more twists than a French
braid and as much comedy as, well, as much brash and uncompromising comedy
as anything else has given us this year.
     Stiller is his typically wacky self but is not as overbearing as he's
been in films like IF LUCY FELL and REALITY BITES.  Instead, Stiller's
presence is deftly underplayed as he balances the performances of his
supporting stars, which include wife Patricia Arquette, Mary Tyler Moore &
George Segal as his brash adoptive parents, Richard Jenkins as a staunch
yet progressive ATF bureau employee, Alan Alda & Lily Tomlin as Mel's real
folks, and Glenn Fitzgerald as Mel's psychotic real brother.  The writing
and dialogue here are fantastic, and after a somewhat slow start,
Russell's film quickly speeds into overdrive and never lets up.
     And how can I go without mentioning co-star Ta Leoni as a
drool-inducing homewrecker/adoption agency employee who all but steals the
show?  I can't!  Leoni is nothing short of fantastic here, and I'm so
enthralled with her graces that I'd probably watch two hours of her doing
her laundry.
     Russell's greatest achievement with FLIRTING WITH DISASTER is his
ability to draw us into the tale he is weaving, to make a fresh and
outrageous film that is completely believable and, incredibly, ethically
upstanding by its end.  It's also a pleasant reminder that, hey, no matter
how miserable you are, it really could be a lot worse...and it could turn
out for the best.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter  /  Novelist  /  Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Most novels and most scripts are written first with an overall
plan of what the story is that is going to be told and where is it
going to go.  FLIRTING WITH DISASTER seems to have been written instead
one scene at a time in the faith that when the time comes to write the
next scene that the inspiration will come as to what to put into that
scene and how it should unfold.  To the film's credit, a story did
result without writer (and director) David O. Russell writing himself
into a corner.  And this style of writing has the advantage of keeping
the viewer guessing what is going to happen next, since the author may
very well not know either.  But after the film is over it also leaves
the audience with the uneasy feeling that they do not know where they
have been.  When all is said and done we have seen eggshell-thin
portrayals of a lot of different kinds of characters from many
different walks of life, but nothing to touch the audience and no
reason to care about any of the characters, making a film that is just
vaguely dissatisfying.
     Mel Coplin (played by Ben Stiller) is off on an odyssey to find
his real parents.  Like the original Odyssey it seems at the start like
it should be an easy trip, but Mel finds that it is more arduous than
he expects.  And along the way he travels through whole worlds he never
expected to see close up.  Along on the trip is his fleshy wife Nancy
(Patricia Arquette) and his new-born son, whom Mel hopes to be able to
name after a member of his real family.  Also along is Tina Kalb, a
willowy psychologist (Tea Leoni) sent by the adoption agency  to record
and study the experience.  The first problem: Mel's parents (Mary Tyler
Moore and George Segal) are dead-set against him making the trip and
try every manipulative trick in the parent book to get Mel to give up
the idea.  The traveling companions soon find relations strained with a
temperamental Nancy jealous of the attention that Mel and Tina give
each other.  Relations are further strained when the trip goes weirdly
awry.  The company get to see a lot more of the country than they
bargained for and as more people join the party there are even stranger
relationships to be strained.
     This is the kind of story that Albert Brooks does extremely well.
In fact there are parts of this film that are strongly reminiscent of
Brooks's REAL LIFE and LOST IN AMERICA.  Unfortunately, Russell has a
long way to go before he can match Brooks's wit and his
characterizations.  It is in the characterizations, in fact, that
Russell fails the worst.  Brooks can make his characters likable at the
same time that they are strange and there is often a feeling of
recognition in his people.  Russell has real problems humanizing his
characters.  His people are just a little bit too bizarre and
exaggerated; his humor is just too leaden-handed.  For example, Brooks
would not be likely to have a character rip open her blouse to try to
show her family the benefits of a support bra.  Under Russell's
direction none of the characters has any real human appeal.  They seem
more like dolls getting into funny situations.  The editing by
Christopher Tellefsen is often confusing or just crude, like in an
amateur film.  There also seems to be a very noticeable continuity
error involving a wheel of brie.
     In spite of many bits that were funny, FLIRTING WITH DISASTER just
does not hang together as a film and, in spite of positive critical
comment it has received, rates a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FLIRTING WITH DISASTER (1996) ** 1/2 Written and directed by David O.
Russell. Photography, Eric Edwards. Editing Christopher Tellefsen.
Production design, Kevin Thompson. Music, Stephen Endelman. Cast: Ben
Stiller (Mel Coplin), Patricia Arquette (Nancy Coplin), Tea Leoni (Tina
Kalb), Mary Tyler Moore (Mrs. Coplin), George Segal (Coplin), Alan Alda
(Richard Schlicting), Lily Tomlin (Mary Schlicting), Josh Brolin (Tony),
Richard Jenkins (Paul), CeliaWeston (Valerie) , et al. A Miramax release.
91 minutes. Rated R (language, sexual situations, substance use)
The first feature by David O. Russell, the low budget "Spanking the
Monkey," was daringly original. It made the writer-director more than just
promising, which is something that new filmmakers have to live up to,
especially as there is generally a kind of curse attached to second
features.
In Russell's case, the funny "Flirting With Disaster" is no comedown, even
though the film is neither daring nor a minor landmark. It is clever
without brilliance or depth, it is inventive without originality.
"FLT" is a road movie of sorts. Not quite an odyssey as it has only three
way-stations. Following a zippy montage, we meet Mel Coplin (Stiller),
about 30, in an adoption agency. Entomologist Mel, the beloved and loving
adopted son of a New York Jewish couple (Moore and Segal), is married to
sweet Nancy (Arquette). They have a first baby who remains unnamed for an
outlandish time, partly because Mel is in the throes of a pre-midlife
crisis.
Has this been brewing for some time or is it sudden? The film, not exactly
a profound study of characters, tells us nothing. We are simply shown a
confused Mel who feels that his identity will never be complete so long as
he does not learn who and what his natural parents are.
Working in an adoption agency, Tina Kalb (Leoni), a beautiful long-legged
ex-dancer now on the brink of divorce and, perhaps, a Ph.D. in psychology,
delivers the goods. "Your mother lives in San Diego. Let's go." Tina wants
to include herself and her camcorder as part of her academic research.
The quartet drives west, is reunited with a caricatural, multi-wedded
Southern belle. She looks nothing like Mel, is a devout Reaganite ("he was
a great friend") and the mother of gorgeously vacuous beach bimbo twins.
Through a mixup in Tina's files, the lady turns out to be the wrong person.
I give away nothing as the audience had guessed this all along.
The episode is amusing, has good farce, almost hilarious dialogue and
changes of behavior. Contrite Tina, whom Mel is attracted to, is now sure
she has located the right parents. From the San Diegan sun, the foursome
treks to snow and slush, Gerald Ford-loving Michigan. The new candidate is
an improbable father, a low-life type. Diagnosing Mel's "Jew nose," he
forwards him to New Mexico, but not before a fracas that involves a couple
(in both senses) of Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms officers.
Paul is gay with some neuroses. Tony is bisexual. As movie luck would have
it he had gone to school with Nancy, now desires her and also feels the
need to have a baby. The quartet grows to a sextet as the two men, none too
credibly, go with the Coplins -- as vacationers, not professional sleuths.
Episode Three leads to Antelope Springs, N.M. and the real McCoys, the
Schlictings (Tomlin and Alda) and their sullen, weirdo son. This, the
journey's decisive leg, turns out to be an acid trip for some.
The Schlictings are unreconstructed old acidheads, anachronistic hippies
who in the Sixties were jailed for making LSD. They are are now "artists"
who live from their awful work, "with supplements from other things." In a
film that keeps announcing its moves, you can guess that what they
fabricate in their basement is not Christmas seals. (Major laughter is
produced when Tina lights up and Alan Alda stops her with "This is a
non-smoking house.")
There is some lust in the film (Mel and Tina, Tony and Nancy) but this
pales before the catalogue of references to body parts. It begins as
Patricia Arquette primps most intimately for her husband; then Mary Tyler
Moore briefly shows her bra-clad breasts (actually nothing risque); it
continues with legs, calves, noses, male organs, more breasts...
It's rather systematic, as is the movie's development. The plumbing of
characters is sacrificed to broad gags. You laugh allright but the movie's
creatures are not really attaching, likable or interesting. Eventually they
get a bit  tiresome, along with the plot's cliched mixups of humans, cars,
keys and other objects.
Writer-director Russsell is no Preston Sturges or Woody Allen, although,
vaguely like Woody, he tries to exploit Jewishness vs. Goyishness.  The
Coplins (especially Mary Tyler Moore), Tina, the two lawmen are more
neurotic than dysfunctional, while the Schlictings (except the son) are in
harmony with their kookiness. All actors deliver OK performances in their
limited-scale roles.
Do not look for ambitious thoughts, not even the old notion that the blue
bird of happiness is found at home or next door. This is first and last a
machinery for screwball farce. It's a pleasant enough work, with the added
bonus of deserving inclusion in the BBNMM Society's roster (that's Bring
Back the Ninety Minute Movie).
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Ben Stiller, Patricia Arquette, Tea Leoni, Mary Tyler Moore, 
      George Segal, Alan Alda, Lily Tomlin, Richard Jenkins, 
      Josh Brolin, Celia Weston
Director: David O. Russell
Producer: Dean Silvers
Screenplay: David O. Russell
Cinematography: Eric Edwards
Music: Stephen Endleman
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     Different parts of the female anatomy fascinate various men.  Some 
are drawn to legs, others to breasts, and others to hips.  But Tony, one 
of the many characters to join the bizarre cross-country trek chronicled 
in FLIRTING WITH DISASTER, is an arm-pit man, and that says something 
about writer/director David O. Russell's flamboyant, irreverent sense of 
humor.  This is one director who has not been afflicted with the 
infamous "sophomore jinx."  In fact, although FLIRTING WITH DISASTER is 
not as corrosive as Russell's debut feature, SPANKING THE MONKEY, it's 
just as wild, just as strange, and even funnier.
     Ben Stiller, who has been looking for a worthy comic outlet (it 
certainly wasn't his last feature, IF LUCY FELL), finally found a 
suitable role.  His neurotic Mel Copland is going through a mid-life 
crisis long before mid-life.  A control freak no longer in control, Mel, 
who was adopted as a baby, is on a quest for his biological parents.  In 
fact, he's so hung up on the issue of his "true identity" that he hasn't 
been able to name his 4-month old son.
     Mel's long-suffering wife, Nancy (Patricia Arquette), is trying to 
be supportive, but, as Mel's obsession deepens, it becomes more 
difficult.  Finally, one day, the adoption agency locates Mel's mother:  
a middle-aged woman living in San Diego.  With Tina Kalb (Tia Leoni), a 
leggy counselor-in-training from the agency, in tow, Mel and Nancy head 
west.  And that's where the disasters, which start with a mistaken 
identity and end with a flight across the border into Mexico, begin.  
Before it's all over, Mel will have become acquainted with four parents, 
two gay federal officers, and a brother who tries to send him on a bad 
acid trip.  All the while, he'll be trying to figure out who he is, 
whether he wants Tina or Nancy, and why he bothered searching for his 
roots in the first place.
     David O. Russell takes the traditional road picture and does some 
really strange things with it.  With a view of middle America that David 
Lynch would applaud, Russell peels back the layers of normalcy to reveal 
the twisted and absurd things that go on underneath.  However, where 
Lynch makes his case through violence and mysticism, Russell uses 
outrageous humor and parody.  The results are no less telling, however.
     FLIRTING WITH DISASTER is populated with a band of deliciously 
offbeat characters.  In addition to the main trio, we meet Mel's adopted 
parents, played by a low-key George Segal and a high-strung Mary Tyler 
Moore, Mel's real parents (Alan Alda and Lily Tomlin), and the two Feds 
(Josh Brolin as Tony and Richard Jenkins as Paul) who join the entourage 
midway through their trek from New York to California to Michigan to New 
Mexico.
     Each new port of call offers a surprise.  If it's not a false lead, 
it likely involves some time in handcuffs.  Russell delights in 
stringing us along with Mel as his search becomes increasingly more 
surreal.  Like the main character in SPANKING THE MONKEY, Mel is trapped 
by circumstances beyond his control.  But if there's one lesson he 
learns, it's that sometimes it's better to appreciate what you have 
instead of yearning for what you don't.  To be sure, Mel grows from his 
experience, but if he had it to do over again, he'd probably stay home.
     Russell has paced his film perfectly, gradually building from the 
relatively normal to the extremely strange, and heightening the humor 
with each new twist.  FLIRTING WITH DISASTER has its tongue firmly 
planted in its cheek the entire way; there's no opportunity for serious 
introspection.  By the time the ninety-minute film has expired, you'll 
be glad you joined Mel and company on this hilariously eccentric 
journey.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Ben Stiller, Patricia Arquette, Tea Leoni, Mary Tyler Moore, 
      George Segal, Alan Alda, Lily Tomlin, Richard Jenkins, 
      Josh Brolin, Celia Weston
Director: David O. Russell
Producer: Dean Silvers
Screenplay: David O. Russell
Cinematography: Eric Edwards
Music: Stephen Endleman
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     Different parts of the female anatomy fascinate various men.  Some 
are drawn to legs, others to breasts, and others to hips.  But Tony, one 
of the many characters to join the bizarre cross-country trek chronicled 
in FLIRTING WITH DISASTER, is an arm-pit man, and that says something 
about writer/director David O. Russell's flamboyant, irreverent sense of 
humor.  This is one director who has not been afflicted with the 
infamous "sophomore jinx."  In fact, although FLIRTING WITH DISASTER is 
not as corrosive as Russell's debut feature, SPANKING THE MONKEY, it's 
just as wild, just as strange, and even funnier.
     Ben Stiller, who has been looking for a worthy comic outlet (it 
certainly wasn't his last feature, IF LUCY FELL), finally found a 
suitable role.  His neurotic Mel Copland is going through a mid-life 
crisis long before mid-life.  A control freak no longer in control, Mel, 
who was adopted as a baby, is on a quest for his biological parents.  In 
fact, he's so hung up on the issue of his "true identity" that he hasn't 
been able to name his 4-month old son.
     Mel's long-suffering wife, Nancy (Patricia Arquette), is trying to 
be supportive, but, as Mel's obsession deepens, it becomes more 
difficult.  Finally, one day, the adoption agency locates Mel's mother:  
a middle-aged woman living in San Diego.  With Tina Kalb (Tia Leoni), a 
leggy counselor-in-training from the agency, in tow, Mel and Nancy head 
west.  And that's where the disasters, which start with a mistaken 
identity and end with a flight across the border into Mexico, begin.  
Before it's all over, Mel will have become acquainted with four parents, 
two gay federal officers, and a brother who tries to send him on a bad 
acid trip.  All the while, he'll be trying to figure out who he is, 
whether he wants Tina or Nancy, and why he bothered searching for his 
roots in the first place.
     David O. Russell takes the traditional road picture and does some 
really strange things with it.  With a view of middle America that David 
Lynch would applaud, Russell peels back the layers of normalcy to reveal 
the twisted and absurd things that go on underneath.  However, where 
Lynch makes his case through violence and mysticism, Russell uses 
outrageous humor and parody.  The results are no less telling, however.
     FLIRTING WITH DISASTER is populated with a band of deliciously 
offbeat characters.  In addition to the main trio, we meet Mel's adopted 
parents, played by a low-key George Segal and a high-strung Mary Tyler 
Moore, Mel's real parents (Alan Alda and Lily Tomlin), and the two Feds 
(Josh Brolin as Tony and Richard Jenkins as Paul) who join the entourage 
midway through their trek from New York to California to Michigan to New 
Mexico.
     Each new port of call offers a surprise.  If it's not a false lead, 
it likely involves some time in handcuffs.  Russell delights in 
stringing us along with Mel as his search becomes increasingly more 
surreal.  Like the main character in SPANKING THE MONKEY, Mel is trapped 
by circumstances beyond his control.  But if there's one lesson he 
learns, it's that sometimes it's better to appreciate what you have 
instead of yearning for what you don't.  To be sure, Mel grows from his 
experience, but if he had it to do over again, he'd probably stay home.
     Russell has paced his film perfectly, gradually building from the 
relatively normal to the extremely strange, and heightening the humor 
with each new twist.  FLIRTING WITH DISASTER has its tongue firmly 
planted in its cheek the entire way; there's no opportunity for serious 
introspection.  By the time the ninety-minute film has expired, you'll 
be glad you joined Mel and company on this hilariously eccentric 
journey.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin (or) http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FLIRTING WITH DISASTER ** 1/2 Written and directed by David O. 
Russell. Photography, Eric Edwards. Editing Christopher 
Tellefsen. Production design, Kevin Thompson. Music, Stephen 
Endelman. Cast: Ben Stiller (Mel Coplin), Patricia Arquette 
(Nancy Coplin), Tea Leoni (Tina Kalb), Mary Tyler Moore (Mrs. 
Coplin), George Segal (Coplin), Alan Alda (Richard 
Schlicting), Lily Tomlin (Mary Schlicting), Josh Brolin 
(Tony), Richard Jenkins (Paul), CeliaWeston (Valerie) , et al. 
A Miramax release. 91 minutes. Rated R (language, sexual 
situations, substance use) 
The first feature by David O. Russell, the low budget 
"Spanking the Monkey," was daringly original. It made the 
writer-director more than just promising, which is something 
that new filmmakers have to live up to, especially as there is 
generally a kind of curse attached to second features. 
In Russell's case, the funny "Flirting With Disaster" is no 
comedown,even though the film is neither daring nor a minor 
landmark.It is clever without brilliance or depth, it is 
inventive without originality.  
"FLT" is a road movie of sorts. Not quite an odyssey as it has 
only three way-stations. Following a zippy montage, we meet 
Mel Coplin (Stiller), about 30, in an adoption agency. 
Entomologist Mel, the beloved and loving adopted son of a New 
York Jewish couple (Moore and Segal), is married to sweet 
Nancy (Arquette). They have a first baby who remains unnamed 
for an outlandish time, partly because Mel is in the throes of 
a pre-midlife crisis. 
Has this been brewing for some time or is it sudden? The film, 
not exactly a profound study of characters, tells us nothing. 
We are simply shown a confused Mel who feels that his identity 
will never be complete so long as he does not learn who and 
what his natural parents are.  
Working in an adoption agency, Tina Kalb (Leoni), a beautiful 
long-legged ex-dancer now on the brink of divorce and, 
perhaps, a Ph.D. in psychology, delivers the goods. "Your 
mother lives in San Diego. Let's go." Tina wants to include 
herself and her camcorder as part of her academic research.  
The quartet drives west, is reunited with a caricatural, 
multi-wedded Southern belle. She looks nothing like Mel, is a 
devout Reaganite ("he was a great friend") and the mother of 
gorgeously vacuous beach bimbo twins. Through a mixup in 
Tina's files, the lady turns out to be the wrong person. I 
give away nothing as the audience had guessed this all along. 
The episode is amusing, has good farce, almost hilarious 
dialogue and changes of behavior. Contrite Tina, whom Mel is 
attracted to, is now sure she has located the right parents. 
>From the San Diegan sun, the foursome treks to snow and slush, 
Gerald Ford-loving Michigan. The new candidate is an 
improbable father, a low-life type. Diagnosing Mel's "Jew 
nose," he forwards him to New Mexico, but not before a fracas 
that involves a couple (in both senses) of Alcohol, Tobacco & 
Firearms officers. 
Paul is gay with some neuroses. Tony is bisexual. As movie 
luck would have it he had gone to school with Nancy, now 
desires her and also feels the need to have a baby. The 
quartet grows to a sextet as the two men, none too credibly, 
go with the Coplins -- as vacationers, not professional 
sleuths.
Episode Three leads to Antelope Springs, N.M. and the real 
McCoys, the Schlictings (Tomlin and Alda) and their sullen, 
weirdo son. This, the journey's decisive leg, turns out to be 
an acid trip for some. 
The Schlictings are unreconstructed old acidheads, 
anachronistic hippies who in the Sixties were jailed for 
making LSD. They are are now "artists" who live from their 
awful work, "with supplements from other things." In a film 
that keeps announcing its moves, you can guess that what they 
fabricate in their basement is not Christmas seals. (Major 
laughter is produced when Tina lights up and Alan Alda stops 
her with "This is a non-smoking house.")
There is some lust in the film (Mel and Tina, Tony and Nancy) 
but this pales before the catalogue of references to body 
parts. It begins as Patricia Arquette primps most intimately 
for her husband; then Mary Tyler Moore briefly shows her 
bra-clad breasts (actually nothing risque); it continues with 
legs, calves, noses, male organs, more breasts...
It's rather systematic, as is the movie's development. The 
plumbing of characters is sacrificed to broad gags. You laugh 
allright but the movie's creatures are not really attaching, 
likable or interesting. Eventually they get a bit  tiresome, 
along with the plot's cliched mixups of humans, cars, keys and 
other objects.
Writer-director Russsell is no Preston Sturges or Woody Allen, 
although,  vaguely like Woody, he tries to exploit Jewishness 
vs. Goyishness.  The Coplins (especially Mary Tyler Moore), 
Tina, the two lawmen are more neurotic than dysfunctional, 
while the Schlictings (except the son) are in harmony with 
their kookiness. All actors deliver OK performances in their 
limited-scale roles. 
Do not look for ambitious thoughts, not even the old notion 
that the blue bird of happiness is found at home or next door. 
This is first and last a machinery for screwball farce. It's a 
pleasant enough work, with the added bonus of deserving 
inclusion in the BBNMM Society's roster (that's Bring Back the 
Ninety Minute Movie).  

Author
Michael Redman
>From the commercials, this looks like a mild-mannered Neil Simonesque tale
with Mary Tyler Moore baring her bra touted as the highlight. Instead it turns
out to be a hilarious film running in high gear from beginning to end.
The concept is deceptively pedestrian. An adult adopted son is looking for his
biological parents and encounters eccentric characters along the way. The
movie demonstrates just how far a good script and actors can take a mundane idea.
The son and his wife take off on the search accompanied by a woman from the
agency who located his parents. Following one dead end lead after another,
each funnier than the previous, they eventually end up in New Mexico with his
real biological parents: Alan Alda and Lily Tomlin.
It's difficult to condense the mile-a-minute plot. Seemingly hundreds of
scenes jump on top of each other without giving you a chance to recover from
the last one.
Without giving too much away, one of the better episodes involves a gay
federal Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms agent attempting an arrest while
tripping on LSD as his bi-sexual partner is upstairs licking the armpit of a
woman while her husband is in the next room seducing their traveling
companion. And it's all done in a fairly clean, almost (well, maybe not
exactly) family fare manner.
A grand cast (Tomlin, Alda, Moore, Ben Stiller, Patricia Arquette, Tea Leoni,
George Segal) interacts in a seamless parade of laughs. Drawing from a more
hyper Woody Allen style, the film succeeds beyond expectations.
[This appeared in the 4/18/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Is forced hilarity hilarious?  That's the question to ponder while
watching (enduring?) this edgy romantic comedy from SPANKING THE MONKEY
director David O. Russell.  Nothing is particularly relaxed (or sacred)
about this story of a young married man (Ben Stiller) who drags his wife
(Patricia Arquette), his baby, and his adoption- agency contact (Tea
Leoni) on a cross-country search for his biological parents.  The
dialogue, the characters, even the camera work itself is frantic.  Too
frantic.  The humor, like everything else about the movie, ends up
feeling forced.  Sure, the presence of such seasoned supporting players
as Mary Tyler Moore and George Segal (and Lily Tomlin and Alan Alda) is
nice.  As is the film's very frank sense of sexuality.  (The subject of
fellatio is, ah, a running gag.) Most of it, though, just isn't very
funny.  FLIRTING WITH DISASTER, *indeed*. 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Jane Taylor
This review is also posted at 
http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/disaster.html
When the cast of a movie includes names like George Segal, Mary
Tyler Moore, Alan Alda and Lily Tomlin, I get the uncomfortable
feeling that I'm headed out for a trip on The Love Boat.  But,
when it also includes the edgy Tea Leoni, Patricia Arquette and
especially the chameleon-like Ben Stiller, I'll give it a
shot.
This time I'm very glad I did.   "Flirting With
Disaster" was a hoot from the beginning video montage all
the way through it's just right 86 minutes.
Stiller plays a young man, adopted as a baby and now in search
of his biological parents.  Leoni is the social worker from the
adoption agency, who tries hard to help him, but manages to
misuse her computer and send him in a couple of very wrong
directions.  He gamely goes along with her, determined to not
only find his parents, but to bond with them, no matter what
kind of gene pools they swim in. 
I laughed myself into a headache when attempt number two turns
up a low life truck driver in Battle Creek, Michigan and the New
York Jewish entomologist Stiller eagerly embraces the chance to
learn to drive a semi.  He's so eager to please this macho new
father figure that you're surprised when his feet actually touch
the pedals.
I've now made the decision that I'll see anything that Ben
Stiller is in.  My last experience with him was as the
dreadlocked artist Bwick in "If Lucy Fell", which he
carried off with authentic, childlike innocence.  In
"Flirting With Disaster", his character is an earnest,
angst ridden equally sincere yuppie scientist.  He's a handsome
man, but one who's not afraid to use his body to great physical
comedy effect.  He knows how to hike up the waist of his pants
and look just as schleppish as his famous father, Jerry Stiller
(George Costanza's father on "Seinfeld").
Leoni is wonderful as the social worker, miserably coming out of
a divorce and hilariously trying to make up her mind whether to
seduce Stiller or go on and have a life of her own.
Arquette adds just the right touch of sanity as Stiller's earth
mother wife.  In scenes where she seduces her reluctant husband,
she refreshingly shows the body of a woman who hasn't entirely
regained her pre-pregnancy figure.   There's a touching
vulnerability in her voluptuousness and the wistfulness that
she's lost the part of her that made men take a second look. 
Mary Tyler Moore is a stitch as his neurotic adopted mother, in
a role as manipulative, unpleasant and un-Laura-Petrie-like as
you could imagine her playing.  Rounding out the supporting
cast, Segal, Alda and Tomlin are a bit wasted.  But there are
gems to be found among the non-star talent, especially the
unnamed actor who plays the Michigan truck driver and two other
anonymous guys as the bi-sexual couple of FBI agents who bust
him, then decide to go on vacation and follow the Stiller
entourage to New Mexico.  
Dorothy was right - there is no place like home.  But
"Flirting With Disaster" is a side trip worth taking, on
the way to figuring out why you can't just be happy with what
you have.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     FLIRTING WITH DISASTER is a movie that constants flirts with
disaster.  It plays like a low budget experimental comedy where
screenwriter and director David O. Russell throws everything he can
into the script as if this is his only chance ever to make a comedy.
You may remember him from his only other film, SPANKING THE MONKEY,
which he wrote and directed.  That film is a serious, moving, and
shockingly frank look at incest, and is also a much better movie.  
Some people incorrectly labelled that picture as a comedy.  It wasn't.
     All of the above notwithstanding, FLIRTING WITH DISASTER had
enough big laughs that I did like it.  When people ask me how I manage
to take such great photographs, I tell them my secret is composition
and quantity.  Russell used my later technique.  If you put enough
jokes in and you are raunchy and experimental enough, some are bound to
hit the mark.  A lot of the movie is in bad taste; some jokes fall like
a stone; but, the ones that work are great.
     The movie is about Mel Coplin (Ben Stiller) embarking on a journey
to find his real parents since he feels he can not name his four month
old son until he meets his real parents.  He is accompanied on the trip
by his beautiful wife Nancy (Patricia Arquette) and an even more
beautiful doctor-in-training from his adoption agency, Tina Kalb (Tea
Leoni).  His adoptive parents are played by Mary Tyler Moore and George
Segal.
     As an example of the crudeness of the script, the movie starts
with Nancy having sex with Mel while he protests since he is holding
their baby.  In an embarrassing scene, Mary Tyler Moore raises her
blouse to show a living room full of people how a strong bra is her
trick to keeping a good figure.  There are other examples that are hard
to describe in a G rated review of an R rated movie.
     The mother can not understand Mel's motivation so she asks, "Why
does he have to do the Roots thing?  Aren't we good enough parents?"
The running joke in the movie is that they go on a series of wild goose
chases where they find people who turn out not to be Mel's real parents
afterall.  The first jaunt is to take them to San Diego, but they are
warned by Mel's adoptive father that, "San Diego has a big carjacking
problem.  They bump you, and when you stop, they mutilate you."  His
first "real" mom, Valerie Swaney, is sweet but strange and full of
strange little homilies.  She tells Mel when he breaks her prized
possession that, "All children break things.  All children are
forgiven.  It's a gift from God."
     His first "real" dad tries to teach him how to drive a big rig.
Mel manages to smash a small post office with the truck.  Two gay
agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms show up.  Agent
Tony (Josh Brolin) is bisexual and an old high school boyfriend of
Nancy's.  The sterner Agent Paul (Richard Jenkins) tells Mel, "You do
know it is a federal offense to destroy a United States Post Office?"
     Most of the show has the five of them, Mel, Nancy, Tina, Paul, and
Tony on a road trip to find Mel's actual real parents played by Lily
Tomlin and Alan Alda along with his brother played by Glenn Fitzgerald.
At the start they rent two cars and as they try to find their cars in a
sea of identical Budget rental cars, Nancy reflects, "Does anybody
actually own a white Taurus or are they all rentals?"  My favorite
scene in the movie is an indescribable sight gag that happens after Mel
and Tina almost get it on at a B & B where they are all staying.
     Poor Mary Tyler Moore is pathetic in the film and looks like she
is suffering from extreme sleep depravation.  George Seagal is not much
better, and they are both embarrassments.  The other actors and
actresses do fine, but nothing special.  The relative success of the
picture rises and falls with the undulations of the script.  With lines
like Lily Tomlin's, "We love you very much.  If you were Jeffrey
Dahlmer, we would still love you" or Tony's, "Do you mind if I take a
look at your armpits?  I think armpits are the prettiest part of a
woman's body," the audience is in stitches.  I am sad to report that a
lot of the movie had me with my mouth hanging open going "huh?" as many
attempts were duds.
     FLIRTING WITH DISASTER runs a fast 1:30.  It is rated R for
frequent sex, constant and very explicit sexual language, and an LSD
drug usage scene.  There is no nudity or violence.  I think the film
would be okay for most teenagers, but no one younger.  I hate to say
it, but many parents in my audience brought kids from ages 4-10 years
old.  This bizarre show is not for everyone, but I liked it and am glad
I saw it.  If you like quirky sexual comedies, I recommend this film;
otherwise, don't waste your time.  If you do go, stay through all of
the credits and watch the even more bizarre outtakes.  I give this
funny, but highly uneven film ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
