Title
Review for Blacula (1972)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mr. Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
THE CLASSICS: BLACULA and SCREAM BLACULA SCREAM
  I've always wanted to see BLACULA. In high school, I had a mild interest in
blaxploitation films, so I saw a few of the seminal works from the genre, as
well as a few obscurities like Rudy Ray Moore's AVENGING DISCO GODFATHER. I was
obsessed with funk music, so I enjoyed the soundtracks and the campy urban
swagger of the protagonists. But horror movies were more my thing, and
absurdist humor. When I heard the title BLACULA I thought it was hilarious. But
I just never got around to tracking the film down. Years later, I still
remember an episode of Whoopi Goldberg's short lived late night talk show,
where Stephen King for some reason mentioned that he too had always wanted to
see BLACULA. Whoopi said that it was a fascinating movie because Blacula was
played exquisitely by a tremendous Shakespearean actor, but she said that the
movie itself was really bad.
  Well, Whoopi was half right, as I discovered when I finally got around to
renting the movie and promptly fell in love. BLACULA is a surprisingly
effective little b-movie, with a unique cultural perspective and a sense of
humor that still works today. Like a black Vincent Price, William Marshall (who
I know primarily as the King of Cartoons on PEE WEE'S PLAYHOUSE) brings great
dignity to his performance as the title character. Unique among blaxploitation
films, BLACULA puts an afrocentric spin on the vampire myth and manages to make
a cape-wearing bloodsucker seem right at home among afro-sporting urban
hipsters.
  The film opens with a nicely crafted, Hammer style prologue between the
African prince Mamuwalde and the eurocentric Count Dracula. Mamuwalde and his
wife Lyuka (played by Vonetta McGee) have come as diplomats, imploring the
Count to stop participating in the slave trade. But the white supremacist
Dracula is insulted by the request and attacks his guests. Mamuwalde attempts
some '70s cop show style fisticuffs - the first sign that this film will not
continue in an entirely classical vein - but ends up bitten, locked in a
coffin, and cursed with the epithet "Blacula".
  Suddenly, we are thrust into stark black and white animated credits and a
predictably funky theme song. Voila - the tone has been set for a tremendously
entertaining, uniquely appealing cult masterpiece. And when the real story
begins, with the undead Mamuwalde stalking a black neighborhood in the '70s, it
never lets up. 
  Mamuwalde comes to the US via gay antique dealers who transport Count
Dracula's belongings to their gallery in New York. Soon the antique dealers are
dead and the prince is revived. Mingling with humans as Mamuwalde, he discovers
a neighborhood beauty who he believes is the reincarnation of his wife. The
story unfolds pretty much as you'd expect, with Mamuwalde trying to reunite
with his soul mate, leaving a trail of bodies that end up disappearing from
their coffins, and being tracked by cops who feel silly for believing in
vampires. What's surprising about BLACULA is the tone and the masterful
execution. I expected to laugh at this movie, not with it. But I really liked
Mamuwalde, despite his wicked deeds, and believed in the film's consistent
horror atmosphere. When I laughed, it was at the film's mercy. There are some
very funny, out of the blue jokes that keep you on your toes. 
  I enjoyed BLACULA so much that I literally ran out and rented the sequel,
SCREAM BLACULA SCREAM. The details of my sweaty two and a half mile journey to
Hollywood Video shall be chronicled in a later writing. (Okay, I made that up,
I didn't really run. But I did go back and rent the sequel before even
returning the original.) 
  I knew that this followup wasn't supposed to be as good as its predecessor,
but I was clamoring for some more of that Mamuwalde magic, and I figured having
Pam Grier in it was a good sign. To my delight, the sequel is every bit as good
a film as the original. I have a feeling that critics at the time enjoyed
BLACULA, but had grown tired of that style of filmmaking by the time the sequel
was released. Therefore, they remembered their enjoyment of the original and
assumed the sequel just wasn't as good.
  Seeing them for the first time side by side, though, they're of one piece.
The sequel shares the strong atmosphere and the unexpected humor of the
original. It throws in a new setting, among an American voodoo cult, and an
added dimension of tragedy to Mamuwalde. 
  The afrocentric themes are better developed this time around. Mamuwalde
admires African-Americans who are interested in their heritage, and shares his
knowledge with them. He dislikes ignorant young people who waste away their
days partying, so he often chooses these people to transform into his vampire
minions. In one memorable scene, Mamuwalde is enraged by two pimps who try to
mug him. Before beating them to death, he lectures them from the point of view
of an African prince who fought against slavery. He angrily accuses them of
enslaving their sisters and imitating their slavemasters. William Marshall
completely sells these lines, bringing to them an overwhelming righteousness.
You want to apologize to him, even if you're not a pimp.
  Like the first film, SCREAM BLACULA SCREAM has a charismatic black cop who
leads the investigation of Mamuwalde's killing spree. And again, there is a
skeptical white cop who almost impedes the investigation. The two have a great
chemistry here, teasing each other, making you understand their friendship even
though the white guy's not the one you're rooting for.
  Things get really good when Mamuwalde enlists the voodoo priestess played by
Pam Grier to reverse Dracula's curse. He is fiercely protective of Grier,
because he knows she's the only one with the ability to stop the madness and
return him to his old self. When the monumental voodoo ritual is interrupted
before completion, Mamuwalde goes over the edge. He wastes his last chance for
redemption on an insane rampage where he, for the first time in the series,
identifies himself as "Blacula."
  Marshall seems to have contributed a lot more to the BLACULA films than his
great performances. In the book _What It Is What It Was_ (a beautiful
collection of poster art from black films of the '70s) he reveals that in the
original script, Mamuwalde was named "Andrew Brown", the same name as Andy in
Amos 'n Andy. Marshall says that he wanted to remove the story "from the
stereotype of ignorant, conniving stupidity that evolved in the United States
to justify slavery." Instead, he suggested the "African hero who had never been
subjected to slavery" who ultimately became the subject of the film. 
  It is largely this challenging of stereotypes and respect for African
heritage that makes the series so unique. Other blaxploitation films have
presented strong, African-American heroes and heroines, but few have
incorporated cultural issues so successfully into pulpy b-movie theatrics.
These are movies that make you regret that you can't go out and rent more like
them.
Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
http://www.bucketheadland.com/visitorcenter/
"Shit, I'm the *reverse* of jiggy." --Chuck D
