Title
Review for Bullfighter (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     And here I was, expecting a movie about bullfighting.
     This cryptic little indie starts out with the story of a Frenchman
(Olivier Martinez) in Mexico, fascinated with bullfighting, indeed.
When his cute little girlfriend unleashes a bull on him for some unknown
reason, she ends up getting gored.  That's bad enough, but her dad turns
out to be a major crime boss, and he proceeds to go on a rampage against
our poor Frenchman.
     Hooking up with Mary (Star Trek: TNG's Michelle Forbes), the duo
begin a "fantasy adventure" that transcends any sense of reality,
culminating in the birth of a new messiah who is dubbed "Pumpkin."
     BULLFIGHTER is ultimately a blatant ripoff of Robert Rodriguez's EL
MARIACHI, made for obviously no money by indie vet L.M. Kit Carson and
his crew.  Strangely enough, Rodriguez actually has a cameo in this
movie, which says to me he's paying off Carson for all his support of
indie filmmaking.
     And while EL MARIACHI is a truly great film, BULLFIGHTER is
anything but.  The story is supposed to be farcical (I think), but it
just comes off as stupid and tiresome.  The camerawork is bad, the
editing is atrocious (each scene transition uses a grating
jump-back-and-forth-five-times method which makes you want to kill
yourself after 10 minutes of it).  The special effects typically involve
a strobe light.  This is not a good thing.
     What is mildly good is Forbes (the only real actor in the picture),
and Martinez makes for a curiously understated action hero.  If only he
didn't mutter all his lines beneath his breath, thus rendering the
picture even less comprehensible.
Director: Rune Bendixen
Producer: L.M. Kit Carson, Majken Gilmartin, Cynthia Hargrave
Writer: Rune Bendixen, Hunter Carson, L.M. Kit Carson
Starring: Michelle Forbes, Olivier Martinez, Michael Parks, Jared
Harris, Willem Dafoe
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
