Title
Review for ffolkes (1980)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Extortionists plant bombs on an oil production platform, a drilling rig, 
and a ship they have hijacked in the North Sea.  The British government 
sends gruff, eccentric troubleshooter ffolkes (Roger Moore) to 
counterattack.  Film looks like a TV-movie at the beginning (the flabby 
musical score doesn't help) but gets into gear once the head 
extortionist (Anthony Perkins) picks up a phone and makes his demands.  
Otherwise routine story has a few things going for it:  shipboard 
location work on heaving seas inject some atmosphere, and Perkins has 
snappy dialogue, but the main point of interest is seeing Roger Moore 
playing against his James Bond role.  In fact FFOLKES appears in the 
middle of Moore's run of Bond films, and you have to wonder how strongly 
he was attracted to the part just to escape that image.  It's a little 
jarring because while at first we see differences (ffolkes is bearded, 
reclusive, lives in an Aberdeen castle) we very quickly begin to draw 
parallels (like Bond, ffolkes is ex-navy, overconfident, and patriotic).  
And there is also Moore's plummy voice, which sounds very much like Bond 
underneath ffolkes' whiskers.
The most dramatic difference would appear to be ffolkes' attitude 
towards women - he is postively misogynistic.  But for those filmgoers 
who have known that Bond's own treatment of women reveals suppressed 
disdain for them, this is not so much of a departure after all, and 
makes FFOLKES even more interesting, in that it is Moore's own criticism 
of his more famous 007 role.  Veteran comedy screenwriter Jack Davies 
even throws in a pat 'explanation' of ffolkes' behavior (it was all to 
do with his childhood, of course).  That this is offered in a throwaway, 
comedic moment shows just how silly these supposedly enlightening scenes 
are.  It's obviously ironic that ffolkes is helped out by a girl in the 
end, but I think that it's just as perverse that the whole film finds a 
misogynist devoted to protecting installations that are referred to 
exclusively by their female names: Ruth, Esther, and Jennifer.  Film's 
businesslike approach to action sequences makes it more believable than 
the blockbuster excesses that would become the standard a few years 
later.  Similarly, Moore isn't required to be some kind of superhero - 
for most of the film he is surprisingly inactive.

