Title
Review for Jui kuen II (1994)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Legend_of_Drunken_Master_ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
At long last, the American masses will get a glimpse of what Jackie Chan
can really do with the long-overdue wide release of his classic 1994 Hong
Kong production _Drunken_Master_II_, rechristened by Miramax as
_The_Legend_of_Drunken_Master_.  Considered by many Chan fans (including
myself) as the star's crowning achievement, _Drunken_Master_ compensates
for what it lacks in plot with hearty laughs and truly spectacular action
sequences--which still pack the same punch in this re-edited edition.
_Drunken_Master_, like all of Chan's Hong Kong efforts, has a plot that
is functional at best.  Chan plays Wong Fei-Hung (a character popularized
by the other HK martial arts superstar, Jet Li, in the
_Once_Upon_a_Time_in_China_ series), son of a doctor (Ti Lung) in
early-1900s China.  A master of the self-explanatory "drunken boxing"
style of martial arts, his skills come in handy when he inadvertently
stumbles upon a British scheme to steal Chinese artifacts.
A Chan film wouldn't be complete without comedy, and while he does some
great physical gags that emerge from the action scenes, the best comic
moments do not come from Chan but co-star Anita Mui.  A movie and music
sensation in Hong Kong--not to mention frequent Chan co-star--Mui is an
absolute riot as Fei-Hung's stepmother (a most welcome revision from the
original version, in which the visibly younger Mui played Chan's
biological parent).  As adept at tossing off verbal barbs as she is
selling broad slapstick that in lesser hands would be simply
preposterous, Mui has expert timing and darn near walks away with the
picture.  Thankfully, the surprisingly passable dubbing job does no
disservice to her work; likewise, neither does Miramax's subtle retooling
desecrate the Hong Kong cut: simple main titles as opposed to the lavish
credit sequences that are usually tacked on; a new score that actually
retains a strong Asian flavor; the wise excising of the original's
ludicrous coda.
Keeping Chan in full command of the film, however, is his amazing
fighting skill, which has never been showcased quite as well as it is
here.  Chan's Hollywood productions and his HK reissues tend to have a
big showpiece stunt, like the big fall he takes at the end of
_Rush_Hour_.  _Drunken_Master_, on the other hand, is a pure showcase for
his raw martial arts ability, which proves more dazzling than any huge
death-defying stunt could ever be (though, of course, said fighting is
dangerous in its own right).  From the exciting first fight--a
sword/spear battle that starts under a train--to the awesomely
choreographed, expertly staged final confrontation with a baddie played
by Ken Lo (Chan's real-life bodyguard), _Drunken_Master_ delivers action
goods that are sure to leave everyone absolutely breathless.
That is, everyone who shows up at the theatre--which, sadly, will likely
be a small group.  Thanks to some curious release choices
(_Twin_Dragons_?), reissues of Chan's HK work have suffered a steady
decline at the box office.  It's utterly baffling that Miramax waited so
long to release _Drunken_Master_; if released four years earlier to
capitalize on the heat of his spring 1996 breakthrough,
_Rumble_in_the_Bronx_, it would have surely sent Chan's stateside status
skyrocketing beyond the mid-level stardom he currently enjoys.   But if
there's any justice, the ever-dazzling _Drunken_Master_ should reverse
the trend of diminishing returns--if even for just this one film.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Christopher E. Meadows
Directed by Carina Lau; starring Jackie Chan, Anita Mui, Ti Lung
In the wake of the smashing success of "Rumble in the Bronx," it's
looking more and more likely that more Jackie Chan films will see
American release.  Rumor has it that one of these films will be
Drunken Master II.
The version I have is a copy from the laserdisc; it's widescreen and
bilingually-subtitled, as are most Hong Kong films these days.
Availability over here in the United States is very limited; these
films must either be purchased via pirates or sought out from Asian
distributors such as Tai Seng.  The subtitling on the copy I have is
slightly hard to read; the letters are white and a bit small.
Although the American release will almost certainly be dubbed, this
review is of the subtitled version, so please keep that in mind if
you're reading this review to help you decide whether to go out and
see it.
To be fair, I must admit that I've never been very fond of
"period-piece" martial arts movies--the ones set in some nebulous
China of the distant or not so distant past.  Perhaps it's because
most of those I've seen were filmed on inferior stock, with either
butchered dubbing or all-but-illegible subtitling, or perhaps it's
because their plots all tend to be very similar to each other and, in
many cases, all but nonexistant.  In fact, many of them get so wrapped
up in their subplots that they seem to forget their main plot entirely
until only a few minutes before the end.
Or, for that matter, it might be because the Jackie Chan films with
more modern settings (Armour of God, Rumble in the Bronx, etc.) tend
to have more spectacular stunts, often involving large motor vehicles
and large explosions, whereas period pieces simply have the martial
arts.
Having said that, I must now turn right around and say that Drunken
Master II is a remarkable exception to all or most of the above, is
one of the better martial arts films I've seen, and I quite enjoyed
it.  Surprised?  Well, so was I.
Drunken Master II is about a young man named Wong Fei-Hong (played by
Jackie Chan) who is a master of the Drunken Boxing style of Kung Fu.
Where he learned this style is uncertain, as his father, Wong Kei-Ying
(Ti Lung) is steadfast in his opposition to Fei-Hong's practicing it
rather than some more normal style of kung fu.
Apparently, Fei-Hong is some sort of figure from Chinese folklore,
rather like Paul Bunyan is for Americans, but I've heard very little
about this, and could quite well be wrong, so I'll leave analysis of
that to the people who know it better.  One of my friends points out
that the character of Wong Fei-Hong is also featured in the "Once Upon
a Time In China" movies, but I have not yet seen those.
The plot of Drunken Master II is somewhat hazy, as are the plots to
many such films, but if you're watching a Jackie Chan film, odds are
you aren't expecting something on the order of "War and Peace".  The
story seems to revolve around Those Evil Foreigners who are spiriting
away ancient Chinese relics (and hence, China's cultural heritage)
while overworking, underpaying, and beating up Chinese workers in a
nearby steel mill.
However, this plot merely serves as a framework for the other main
story of the film--Fei-Hong's perpetual struggle to win his
girlfriend, supplicate his father, keep his (pregnant) mother (played
by Anita Mui) from fighting, and keep from getting beaten up by Evil
Foreigner thugs.
The MacGuffin that drives the plot(s) is a precious antique jade
imperial seal which is being taken away by the Evil Foreigners.  In
the beginning, Fei-Hong accidentally steals it while trying to recover
an identically-wrapped box containing the medicinal ginseng his father
was bringing back for a customer.  In the process, he clashes with
another thief, who is himself trying for the seal but ends up instead
with the ginseng.
After Fei-Hong narrowly avoids getting caught with the seal by the
Evil Foreigners' lackies, thanks to some timely intervention by a
general's son (a cameo appearance by Andy Lau, who would later take on
the starring role in Drunken Master III!), comedic chaos ensues back
at the Wong household when Fei-Hong and his mother attempt to come up
with a replacement for the missing ginseng.  And so it goes.
And the plot thickens later on, such as when Fei-Hong's girlfriend
maneuvers him into a kung fu match with a rival, or when Fei-Hong and
the thief, now revealed to be a loyalist Manchu officer trying to
recover the seal and stop the Evil Foreigners, are attacked en masse
(another grand kung-fu movie tradition), but I think I've already
spent more time on the plot than it really deserves.  Let's move on to
the real draw of Jackie Chan movies...the action.
There's plenty of martial arts action to be found in this movie...of
course, in a kung fu film, that's to be expected.  However, this isn't
just another kung fu movie; this one has Jackie Chan doing the fight
and stunt choreography, and Jackie Chan is a genius.
The primary martial arts "style" featured in the film is Drunken
Boxing, a form of Kung Fu which attempts to draw the adversary off his
guard by making it seem like the fellow using it is drunk.  Further,
for the purposes of this film at least, Drunken Boxers fight better
when they actually _are_ intoxicated...but there's a fine line between
just drunk enough and drunk into a stupor.
Under normal circumstances, the idea of someone staggering around
looking sloshed but managing to fight effectively and even incredibly
might seem rather stupid, but Jackie pulls it off with flair.  The
kung fu sequences are so intricate in their staging and execution that
it is pointless to try to describe it on paper, so I'll just say that
the fights--especially the big climactic fight at the end--in
themselves make the movie worth watching.
Another thing Drunken Master II has going for it is the stunt work.
Even without motor vehicles (well, not counting a train), there are
some remarkable stunts in this film.  Among other things, Jackie dives
off a balcony into a table and crawls across hot coals (not once, but
at _least_ twice, if you count the outtake shown during the credits).
(Quicktime movies of these stunts can be found through the WWW movie
database.)  Unlike in American films, these stunts are _not_ faked.
Drunken Master II stars several veteran actors of the Hong Kong movie
scene, including Jackie, Ti Lung ("A Better Tomorrow" 1 & 2), and
Anita Mui (the "Heroic Trio" series, "Rumble in the Bronx").  The
performances are first-rate, especially when it comes to the comedy
parts of the film.  The scene where Fei-Hong and his mother conspire
literally behind Fei-Hong's father's back to cover up for the missing
ginseng root is hilarious, as is the scene where Fei-Hong's mother,
having just revealed that she is pregnant, is threatening to hurt
herself (in order to draw her husband's anger away from Fei-Hong).
Jackie has developed his knack for physical comedy into a sort of
mastery over the years, and he's in fine form all through Drunken
Master II.
As far as cinematography is concerned, it certainly works for this
film.  It's nothing spectacular, but is at least a dozen times better
than all those old kung fu movies of the 70s.  The picture is crisp
and clear.  One thing I find particularly worthy of mention is that,
at least in the copy I have, the screen was wider than any film I've
ever seen on videotape before--almost a whole 1/3 of the screen was
blocked out above and below.  (Watch this on a bigscreen TV or movie
theater if you can.)  It will be an utter shame if this film is
eventually pan-and-scanned for American video release.
Drunken Master II shows the full potential of "period piece" kung fu
movies, and it's good enough to overcome even my usual distaste for
such movies.  The plot does meander a bit, but that's to be expected
in this type of film.  If you like this kind of movie, you'll love
this movie, and if not, well, give it a chance anyway.  If nothing
else, the martial arts and stunt sequences are by themselves worth the
price of admission or rental.
This review is copyright 1996 by Christopher E. Meadows; permission
granted for distribution and archival via rec.arts.movies.reviews, the
World Wide Web Movie Database, and associated databases; permission
granted for free electronic dissemination as long as the text of this
review is not changed, this notice remains attached, and no money is
charged for it.  All other rights reserved to the author.
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | **TAKE NOTE!**  My homepage has changed to
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Author
Steve Kong
A good thing about Jackie Chan films is that they are all the same. This
makes it easy for the audience to overlook the flimsy plot and enjoy the
spectacular stunts. In all of the recent US re-releases of Chan's films,
they have been set in current time. In Drunken Master II it's different,
this film takes place in the past and all fights are hand to hand (and
since it is a Jackie Chan film, it also takes place while improvising with
many different common objects). 
The plot in Drunken Master II is short: A group of Chinese are helping the
British ship valuable Chinese artifacts out of China. Jackie Chan's
character, Wong Fei-Hong, accidentally stumbles upon this plot and it is
now up to him to stop this. Wong Fei-Hong is skilled in a special fighting
style called Drunken Boxing.
The fighting scenes in Drunken Master II are, to say the least, incredible.
They definitely out do most of the fight scenes in US re-releases,
including those in First Strike. The end-fighting scene is most impressive.
The times between fighting scenes are sometimes long, but they are still
entertaining, and very funny.
Drunken Master II has not been redone for re-release in the US, yet. I hope
it will be soon though, it is a great show case film for Jackie Chan's
fighting and entertainment abilities. If you have a laserdisc player, you
can find the laserdisc for Drunken Master II out now. The version that I
saw was the laserdisc version, it is presented in Cantonese and the English
subtitles are hard to read. Find a copy to watch, or if you don't have a
laserdisc player, find a friend with one and have them rent this for you to
see. This is a definite must-see movie.

Author
Jon Popick
I'm not the kind of person that tries to push films that I enjoy on
people who don't have any interest in that particular cinematic genre.
Even though I loved it, I won't insist that a friend who hates tedious
science fiction films see 2001.  If you're a homophobe who hates foreign
cinema, I'm not going to needle you until you see Water Drops on Burning
Rocks.
The Legend of Drunken Master is a rare exception to my rule. Everybody
should see this film, even if you hate martial arts pictures. Master is
often referred to as the Citizen Kane of its genre, and its intoxicating
fight sequences are second to none  including The Matrix and the
upcoming Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon.
Jackie Chan (Shanghai Noon) stars as Wong Fei-hong, the rebellious son
of an important doctor during some nameless Chinese period.  As the film
opens, Fei-hong accidentally switches a package with somebody else on a
crowded train.  Instead of coming home with ginseng root for one of his
father's patients, he ends up with an ancient jade seal (a macguffin?).
The missing ginseng root becomes the source for many of the film's
laughs, while the seal lands Fei-hong and his whole family in a world of
trouble.
It turns out that the seal was supposed to be delivered to a devious
group of baddies who are helping a moustache-twirling Brit steal ancient
Chinese artifacts (read: cultural robbery).  Fei-hong becomes wrapped up
in their Machiavellian plot and finds himself on the receiving end of a
very large beating.
But Fei-hong is no slouch when it comes to fighting.  He embraces a
style of combat called `drunken boxing,' in which you stumble around
like you've just done a dozen shots of Jager and then, theoretically,
beat the snot out of your enemies.  In Master, drunken boxing works
better when you've actually consumed a bunch of alcohol.  Supposedly,
this style makes the body more relaxed and flexible, while it also
increases the body's pain threshold.  Unfortunately, his father (Lung
Ti, A Better Tomorrow) forbids both fighting and drinking, and Fei-hong
finds himself cast out after one particular binge of drunken battle.
Chan does a great job of pounding down alcohol like a Conehead and then
shouting out the names of each of his drunken moves as he performs
them.  The physical role is an obvious nod to Chan's hero, Buster
Keaton.  Like his other films, Chan performs all of his own stunts,
including a couple of amazing fight sequences in very tight quarters
(under a train and under a table).  One scene has him fending off an
entire army of ax-wielding henchmen, and the twenty-minute finale (which
took four months to film) is an incredible blend of Chan's unmatched
martial arts skills and fearless stunt work.
Master was released in Asia in 1994, and it has, unfortunately, been
dubbed into English for its American release.  Originally titled Drunken
Master 2, the film is actually a sequel to one of Chan's earlier films
released in 1979.  The character of Fei-hong is somewhat of a Paul
Bunyan-like legend in China, and the character has been portrayed in a
five film series called Once Upon a Time in China (Jet Li played the
role in the fourth film).
Another highlight is the performance of Anita Mui (Rumble in the Bronx),
who plays Fei-hong's hysterical stepmother (Chan appears to be older
than both actors portraying his parents).  Master is the fourth release
this month to have the main character(s) sing a song at some point
during the narrative (following Ladies Man, Remember the Titans and
Dancer in the Dark).
Master was directed by Chia-Liang Liu, who won the prestigious trophy
for Best Choreography at the Hong Kong Film Awards.  The film was
written by Kai-Chi Yun (A Chinese Ghost Story) and first-timer King-Sang
Tseng.  Like most of Chan's films, the closing credits contain outtakes
of stunts gone bad, which is a reminder of how amazing and effortless
they appear in the film.
1:42 - R for violence and lots of binge drinking

Author
Steve Rhodes
This is the first time that I've ever started off a review by telling 
you what film I'm not reviewing.  This is not a review of THE LEGEND OF 
DRUNKEN MASTER (1994), starring the lovable Jackie Chan.  The 1994 
version was in the original Chinese and came with English subtitles.  I 
have a critic-friend well versed in Hong Kong cinema, who claims the 
1994 version is a classic martial arts picture of the comedic action 
genre.  I came late to the Jackie Chan admiration society.  Although I'm 
a fan now, with my favorite being his recent SHANGHAI NOON, I haven't 
seen any of his early films such as this movie.
In order to capitalize on the Chan phenomenon and knowing that American 
audiences are generally too lazy to read, the studio has released a poor 
and awkwardly dubbed reissue of the original.  This review is strictly 
for the dubbed version.  How these thoughts would apply to the original, 
I have no idea.  I absolutely shudder to think what my second favorite 
film of last year, RUN LOLA RUN, would sound like dubbed into English.
Chan stars in a picture with a remarkably thin plot.  As usual he does 
everything himself from getting beaten up to falling on burning coals.  
Is there no limit to the pain he has to endure for his craft?  In his 
normal outtakes shown during the closing credits, he proves to us yet 
again that he does do all of his own stunts, risking his life and limb.  
His schtick this time is that he is a master of the art of drunken 
fighting.  Tanked up with lots of booze, which he guzzles during the 
bouts, he bobs and weaves so that hitting him is like trying to strike 
blowing grass in a strong wind.  As almost an afterthought, the story 
lets us know that even a drunken master can over imbibe, rendering him 
more of a fool than a master.
The beauty of Chan's films is due as much to the ballet-quality 
choreography that he brings to kung fu as to the humor that permeates 
everything that he does.  In a nutshell, the problem with THE LEGEND OF 
DRUNKEN MASTER is that there is too much fighting gymnastics and too 
little of the story development.  This means that the story dissolves 
into little more than slapstick and highly repetitive fight sequences.  
I wanted more than this and left the theater feeling cheated.  This was 
one of the unusual Chan movies in which I didn't have much fun.  Maybe 
you will.  Or maybe you'll avoid this theatrical version entirely and go 
rent the subtitled one instead.
THE LEGEND OF DRUNKEN MASTER runs 1:42.  It is rated R for violent 
content and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Homer Yen
There's a great show that has arrived in the DC area,
and I can hardly wait to see it.  That production is
called "Dralion", performed by the world-famous Cirque
Du Soleil troupe.  Its theme is Chinese acrobatics and
it promises to be a spectacular show.  Most
performances have sold-out, although I was lucky
enough to have already purchased my ticket, which cost
me in excess of $60.  But if you can't buy any tickets
or can't justify its price, a great alternative for
only a fraction of the cost is this wild martial-arts
flick, featuring Jackie Chan, who is at his very best.
In this film, a movie originally released in Hong Kong
back in 1994, Chan plays Wong Fei-hong, a prankish son
of a respected herb doctor circa the 1920s.  The story
begins at a train station where Wong Fei-hong wants to
carry some medicine onto a train without paying the
tariff.  To sneak it aboard, he hides it in a
diplomat's suitcase.  Once the trip commences, he'll
just simply recover the medicine and be on his way. 
However, upon retrieval, he takes the wrong bag, and
subsequently becomes entangled in a plot that involves
an ambassador and an antiquities smuggling operation.
As with most of Chan's Hong Kong made films
re-released for the American audience, you'll find the
usual peculiarities.  These include awkward dubbing,
zany plots, screwy slapstick, and absurd
characterizations (a Counter Intelligence Officer that
appears early on seems to have an important role, but
disappears 20 minutes into the film; meanwhile, other
characters seemingly appear out of nowhere).  And the
story is usually just an excuse to see Chan in action.
However, this is a performance that will not
disappoint.  In fact, of the 70+ martial arts films
that Chan has made, most aficionados have ranked this
film as one his three best.  Indeed, Chan is in top
form and these fighting sequences have to be seen in
order to be believed.  The first sequence is
incredible.  Chan, with a short sword, goes against a
spear-wielding Manchu officer.  They fight in such
close quarters that just to maneuver those weapons at
the speed in which they fight is an incredible feat in
itself.  You may notice that in many fighting
sequences from other movies, the film speed increases
to try to make the fighters appear more awesome. 
Here, Chan and his opponent are moving so quickly that
you wished that the film speed could have actually
slowed down!
What makes Chan a true exhibitionist is his Drunken
Boxing style (an actual kung fu style).  By ingesting
large amounts of liquor, it loosens up the body while
allowing it to withstand higher thresholds of pain. 
Let him increase his blood alcohol level, and it's
like Popeye taking his spinach.  Here, he staggers, he
sways, and he kicks butt, mesmerizing the audience
with his acrobatic abilities while in the character of
a drunk.  There are a bevy of incredibly choreographed
fight sequences, culminating towards a terrific
showdown pitting him against an enemy who uses his
lightning quick legs to fight in ways that I had never
seen.  This stuff is truly amazing.  What a fun
matinee this is!

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
THE LEGEND OF DRUNKEN MASTER (1994; dubbed in English in 2000)
Rated R; running time 102 minutes
Genre: Comedy/Action
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0111512
Official site: http://www.legendofdrunkenmaster.com/
Written by: Edward Tang, Tong Man Ming, Yuen Chieh Chi
Directed by: Lau Ka Leung
Cast: Jackie Chan, Ti Lung, Anita Mui, Lau Ka Leung, Wing-Fong Ho,
Chin Kar Lok, Ken Lo, Ho Sung Pak, Felix Wong
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsdrunken.html
There comes a time in every Chick's life when she has an epiphany so
mind-blowing, it forever alters her life, causing her to grow up far
quicker than she expected to, and making well-done hamburger patties out
of her Sacred Cows.
My time came Sunday, with the realization that Bruce Lee isn't the
greatest martial artist the movie world has ever seen.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
THE LEGEND OF DRUNKEN MASTER humorously tells the story of Chinese folk
legend Wong Fei-Hung (Jackie Chan), young master of the "Drunken Boxing"
kung fu style of martial arts.
In this almost plot-overloaded movie, Wong Fei-Hung and his hapless
brother Cho (Lau Ka Leung), travel by train with their father, Dr. Wong
Kei-Ying (Ti Lung), bringing medical supplies back to their home.  Part
of their supplies - some medicinal ginseng - gets mixed up in the
baggage of the Ambassador (Ken Lo), leading to a struggle between
Fei-Hung and a mysterious old man, Tsan (Felix Wong) over the package.
The struggle gets especially interesting when Fei-Hung tries to impress
Tsan with his Drunken Boxing style of kung fu (which he doesn't do
nearly as well when he's *not* drunk).
Wong also has comical misunderstandings with his father, who doesn't
want Fei-Hung to either fight *or* drink - both of which, of course,
Fei-Hung does in abundance; with his mother, Madame Wong (Anita "Lucy
Ricardo, reincarnated" Mui); and with friendly rival Ching Ho Sang (Chin
Kar Lok), who spars with Fei-Hung for the attention of the lovely Fong
(Wing-Fong Ho).  Fei-Hung and his Folks face epic battles with the
Ambassador (who has the fastest kicks I've ever seen), his minion Henry
(Ho Sung Pak), and a rather hot bed of coals.
Sober, Fei-Hung is good; but to do Drunken Boxing the way it needs to be
done, he has to get good and toasted, which he does on more than one
occasion.  And what commences are some of the outright funniest skits
and amazing martial arts scenes I've ever seen in one movie.
The Upshot:
Ok, so maybe I exaggerated a wee bit; maybe Chan didn't exactly Rock My
World, but he did shake the foundations a bit.  It really was quite
eye-opening to see just how Bad the man is - and in a relatively
unpolished, six-year-old movie, no less!
To some, the plot of a martial arts movie is like the plot of a porn
flick: most people don't bother paying attention to the words; they just
want to get to the Action [the same has been said about Black "booty
call" comedies, so don't Trip over the analogy].  Which goes to show you
how warped we westerners can be sometimes - because the plot was
well-developed in "Legend".  Still, I won't lie; I got lost in the
backstory with the English Overlord (I think that's what he was supposed
to be), to the point where I totally dismissed him whenever he came
on-screen.  I imagine part of my confusion comes from the fact that I
haven't seen the film "Legend" is a sequel to - 1978's DRUNKEN MASTER -
and thus don't fully know who's who within Fei-Hung's circle of friends
and enemies.  I'm fairly sure that I got some of the names mixed up in
"The Story" above, unfortunately.
But the point remains: this movie was a lot more than the "chop socky"
so often dismissed when we see a "Karate Flick".  Sure, the kung fu was
there at base, and rightly so (I'd pay to see those scenes by
themselves, especially the final battle; it was that good).  But the
humor was *strong* - especially with Anita Mui; I swear I cracked a rib
on her account! - and I even found myself crying with sadness when
Fei-Hung got chewed out by his father.  Add some interesting cultural
references on top of that, and you have yourself a well-rounded movie.
Granted, it's no CITIZEN KANE; but could Kane drink like a fish and then
kick serious butt?   Thought not!
It's funny: I was just telling some friends about how much I enjoyed the
DVD release of SHANGHAI NOON, a Jackie Chan east-meets-west flick I
reviewed earlier this year.  Besides the great DVD features available in
this cut, Chan's trademark outtakes and behind-the-scenes bits show the
true measure of his technical and cinematic skills.  But who knew it
would take a six-year-old flick like "Legends" to finally make me bow to
the master?
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I have never, ever, laughed harder, or damn near cried my eyes out, at
"just a karate flick", the way I did during "Legend".  Bruce Lee was
baaad, no doubt; but Jackie Chan is The Man.  Chan has stood the test of
time, and *still* comes out swinging.  Sit down, Steven Segal; take a
hike, Jean Claude Van Damme.  Check out this older Jackie Chan flick,
and see what Legends truly are made of.
THE LEGEND OF DRUNKEN MASTER (rating: greenlight):
I still love me some Bruce Lee, and I always will.  But the king is
dead: long live King Jackie.

Author
Eric Tend
     One of the most impressive and entertaining "realistic" martial
arts films to grace our shores in recent years is Jackie Chan's DRUNKEN
MASTER 2.  It marks his triumphant return to the roots that made him
famous: a period costume drama featuring ultra complex adrenaline
filled fight and stunt choreography (where the "Ooohh, aaahh, and
oowwchh" factor is *very high*!), likable characters, simple plot, and
trademark Chan humor sprinkled throughout.
     The story, which has no continuity nor relation to its 1978
predecessor DRUNKEN MASTER, follows the further exploits of the Wong
Fei-Hong family.  Chan plays a more vulnerable and modern Fei-Hong,
contrasting Jet Li's slightly older, wiser, and almost invincible
incarnation.  Ti Lung (doesn't this guy ever age?) and Anita Mui
(wildly over-the-top) play his parents.  This time out, Fei-Hong gets
caught up in another conspiracy involving foreigners stealing and
smuggling China's artistic treasures out of the country.
     While trying to avoid a train tax for some Ginsing purchased by
his father, Fei-Hong hides it among some foreign dignitary's luggage.
When he retrieves it, he has a run in with an apparent thief who is
stealing another item wrapped identically to Fei-Hong's Ginsing box.
While they both exit the boxcar to avoid capture, a fight insures
between them underneath a train station (showcasing tight-courters
spear vs. sword ... a long weapon is usually very ineffective if you
don't have a lot of room to use it, but not in this case).  After a
hasty resolution, Fei-Hong returns to the train with the wrong box ...
containing the stolen Emperor's Jade Seal Stamp.
     Most of the comedy relief revolves around a complex cover up for
the missing Ginsing and its aftermath when they return home with
classic comedic interaction between Fei-Hong and his parents which
eventually threatens the family honor and name.
     The foreigners set up shop at the British Conselate and take over
the local town steel mill as a front for their smuggling operations.
They also want to extend their power by expanding to town ownership.
As the film progresses, secondary characters as well as villains are
introduced as the catalyst to showcase Fei-Hong's amazing drunken fist
style of martial arts.  This style combines flexibility and acrobatics
with the appearance of looking drunk and off balance to throw an
opponent off and draw them in closer.
     During one confrontation, Fei-Hong learns that alcohol increases
his drunken style power by taking away feeling and he easily dispatches
five opponents at the same time.  He learns the hard way from his
father that if not used in moderation, it can cloud one's judgement and
control.
     The theft and smuggling conspiracy is brought into the open when
the thief from the train shows up to correct the box mixup.  The thief
turns out to be a high-ranking and decorated Manchu officer who is
trying prevent the lost of China'a treasures.  The foreigners enlist
aid of some corrupt Chinese counterparts to retrieve the Jade Seal and
kill the Manchu officer in the process.  As a result, Fei-Hong vows to
go after them and shut down their operation.
     Jackie shines in fine form and proves to the world once again that
he still has it.  DRUNKEN MASTER 2 easily outshines his last four film
efforts and combines the best qualities of all of his previous period
dramas (DRUNKEN MASTER, FEARLESS HYENA, YOUNG MASTER, etc.) with
elements from both PROJECT "A"s and POLICE STORY 2.  Since this is a
pure martial arts film, he pulls out all the stops and creates a roller
coaster ride jaw-dropping stunts and vintage trademark Jackie Chan
weapons and hand-to-hand sparing choreography that will leave the
average viewer numb and jaded.  In addition to his physical acrobatic
hand forms, Jackie also shows his skill in weapons including the
single-edge sword, fan, double sawhorse stools (at the same time!),
staff pole, and an improvised weapon that has to be seen to be
believed.  Jackie's opponents are always equally skilled and provide a
contrast to his unique drunken style.  The final confrontation in the
steel mill was a burning experience ... literally.
     This film is more modern than most Wong Fei-Hong's produced so
far.  No one in the film has a ponytail or shaved head hair-style.  The
Wong Fei-Hong character, who was traditionally a Hung Gar stylist is
showcased as using a completely different style ... but ... who
cares ... it was awfully entertaining !!!  What a welcome change from
the overabundance of flying-by-wires stuff proliferating traditional
martial arts films lately.

Author
Eric Brochu
Starring: Jackie Chan, Anita Mui, Ti Lung, Felix Wong
Directed by: Lau Ka-Leung
        General Introduction:  Well, Jackie Chan has just 
made his big North American debut (again), this time with 
the high-energy Asian hit Rumble in the Bronx.  Not one 
to miss an opportunity to sing the praises of one of my 
favorite film stars, I am writing this series of reviews, 
each about one of Jackie Chan's Hong Kong movies, all 
highly recommended to both fans of Jackie Chan and those 
who are simply curious about the man currently being 
billed as "the world's most popular action star."  The 
only real problem might be finding them.  While they is 
not available at the local Blockbuster, pretty much any 
city of any size is likely to have at least one video 
store catering to an Asian audience.  Find it and rent 
them.  I promise you won't be disappointed.
        I confess: I'm not much of a fan of martial arts 
films.  Bruce Lee never impressed me with his macho down-
with-one-punch fighting; I have trouble taking Jet Li's 
wire stunts with the seriousness I'm supposed to; and, 
like many people, I tend to think of the generally 
interchangeable chop sockey films on the shelves of my 
local video store as tripe-wannabe.  
        But I love Jackie Chan, and Drunken Master II, one 
of Jackie's most martial arts-heavy films of the last few 
years, is a major cause of my admiration.
        In Drunken Master II (I haven't seen Drunken Master 
I, and I didn't get the impression I was missing anything 
in this film) a lavish (by Hong Kong standards) period 
piece, Jackie Chan plays Chinese folk hero Wong Fei-hong, 
whom he presents here as a kind of turn-of-the-century 
Chinese generation Xer, who spends his time hanging out 
in the market with his friends and goofing off with the 
family servant.  Fei-hong is a good-but-not-great martial 
artist regularly, but he is a master of "drunken boxing," 
which means that when he's drunk, he becomes a 
staggering, unpredictable dynamo.  Early in the film, 
Fei-hong fights with a mysterious stranger he finds 
acting suspiciously while on board a train waiting to 
cross the border.  The fight is just one of the film's 
many stunning set pieces, starting under a train in 
quarters so cramped you're amazed the actors can move, 
let alone fight, and it continues under a boardwalk and 
into a barn.  During the fight, Fei-hong's box of ginseng 
is mixed up with the stranger's box, which, to Fei-hong's 
surprise and distress, contains an Imperial Jade seal.  
Naturally both the good guys and the bad guys want it 
back, and Fei-hong finds himself in the midst of a plot 
of the British Consulate to steal Chinese artifacts and 
ship them off to England.  It all comes to a head in the 
film's stunning climax in an iron foundry, which features 
some of Jackie Chan's very best stunt-work, including a 
scene where he crawls backwards over a bed of hot coals!
        Unlike most Jackie Chan films, the plot here holds 
together relatively well.  Sure there are a few holes 
(and a couple of big ones), and no one will mistake it 
for The Godfather, but it serves its purpose: it connects 
the fights and jokes, and it manages to work in real 
character development, pathos and a sociopolitical 
subtext about the relationship between a colony and the 
mother-state.  
        This film gives Jackie a chance to really show off 
what he can do physically.  The fights are thrilling, 
breathtaking pieces of imaginative and complex 
choreography, easily the best I've ever seen.  They do a 
great job of showing off Jackie Chan's incredible grace, 
skill and timing, and to top it off, he has a great 
screen presence and a real comic sensibility: Jackie 
Chan's fights come across looking like all the best parts 
of Fred Astaire, Gene Kelly, Buster Keaton and Charlie 
Chaplin movies.  His trademark use of props is readily 
apparent, and he deftly swings and tosses around chairs, 
benches, tables, fans, flowerpots and wine bottles with 
remarkable regularity.  At one point he tosses a purse 
into the air, ducks a blow, catches the purse and places 
it on top of his opponent's head, punches him several 
times, and catches the purse as his foe falls, all in one 
fluid motion over the space of a single shot mere seconds 
long.  The scenes where Fei-hong fights while intoxicated 
in order to use his "drunken boxing" are particularly 
impressive; these scenes give Jackie an opportunity to 
make faces and stagger from punch to punch, dodge kicks 
while falling against walls or guzzling wine, toss 
bottles into the air to keep them from being knocked out 
of his hand, and generally clown around.
        Jackie Chan is as warm and charming as ever, and 
looks good enough at forty that he is not too 
unbelievable in the role of an aimless but well-
intentioned twenty-something living with his parents.  
However charismatic and watchable Jackie is, though, he 
is not a good enough actor or strong enough personality 
to hold a film on his own.  It's fortunate, then, that 
this film has such a great supporting cast, especially 
Fei-hong's parents.  Ti Lung plays Fei-hong's strict 
father, Wong Kei-ying, as a man of wisdom and strong 
emotion.  In the movie's most heart-wrenching scene, Kei-
ying throws Fei-hong out of the house after he drinks so 
much he accidently strikes him.  You can see on his face 
the conflict between his rage at what he sees as a lack 
of proper respect and his love for his son: surprisingly 
human emotions for a martial arts film.
        Anita Mui, who is woefully underused as the shop 
owner in Rumble in the Bronx, also shines here as Fei-
hong's pregnant, adoring stepmother, who is a little too 
eager to use her own kung fu in her delicate condition.  
It's a great role, and she plays it for all it's worth, 
camping it up with an infectious enthusiasm.
        The direction and editing are superb.  The pacing, 
in particular is very good.  The fight scenes never get 
to be boring or exhausting.  They always leave you 
wanting to see just a little more, to watch Jackie just a 
little longer, a technique which works well in this film, 
which can actually deliver on the promise of more and 
better things to come later while still impressing you at 
the time.  And the rest of the film isn't just filler: it 
is very funny, sometimes moving, and always engaging.  
The opening scenes, where a train pulls into a station 
and is mobbed by vendors selling food to the passengers 
through the windows, while Fei-hong and the family's 
servant wander the train have such a great energy that 
the first fight feels like icing on the cake, rather than 
the start of the action.  As a footnote, the man that 
Jackie fights under the train in that first fight scene 
is the film's director, Lau Ka-Leung, who is rumoured to 
have been replaced during the shooting, with the 
director's job given to Jackie Chan.  Regardless of who 
did the job, though, it's excellent work.
        The film's weakest point is the villains, whom we 
never really get to know outside Jackie Chan's fights 
with them.  The character who should be the main villain, 
the sadistic British politician in charge of the art 
treasure smuggling, is only on-screen to boss around his 
henchmen, and eventually just disappears, without facing 
any sort of punishment.  The henchmen are appropriately 
despicable, especially after one strips Fei-hong and ties 
him up in the town square after he fails to provide a 
good fight, but they are not particularly memorable.
        This weakness is just a nitpicking point, however.  
On the whole, Drunken Master II is an excellent film, and 
first class entertainment.  I personally feel that New 
Line made a big mistake in releasing the comparatively 
lackluster Rumble in the Bronx instead of Drunken Master 
II as North America's reintroduction to Jackie Chan.  
This film has far superior fights, stunts, acting, 
writing and direction, and showcases Jackie Chan's 
talents far better, and I LIKED Rumble.  I give this 
movie my highest recommendation.  Fortunately, it is 
slated to be released in North America late in 1997, 
provided Rumble in the Bronx is a hit, but there is no 
reason to wait that long: do yourself a favour, make the 
extra effort and rent this movie, even (or perhaps 
especially) if you didn't like Rumble in the Bronx or, 
like me, you don't like martial arts movies in general.  
Even if it doesn't make a hard core Chan fan out of you, 
it is still more exciting, entertaining and generally FUN 
than any of the sterile megabudget Hollywood action 
blockbusters of the last five years.

Author
John Beachem
You know, I'm still trying to figure out what exactly the plot to Drunken 
Master 2 was, but I'm going to attempt a plot summary anyway. Wong 
Fei-Hong (Jackie Chan) is a master of drunken boxing. This apparently means 
that while he's a great martial artist to begin with, when he has a little 
alcohol he becomes just about invincible. Wong was on a trip with his 
father, Wong Kei-ying (Ti Lung), when a parcel he was carrying is stolen by 
an old soldier (Lau Kar Leung). Wong believes he has recovered the parcel 
after a long (and simply amazing) fight, but he has grabbed the wrong 
package on accident. Wong and his father go back to their home, where his 
father teaches martial arts and is a respected physician. Soon the old 
soldier comes calling and Wong finds himself embroiled in a plot involving a 
business man's (Ken Lo Houi-Kang) theft of Chinese art. Wong must try to 
stop the plot, but he has a few other things to worry about as well. He has 
to reconcile with his father after the two have a fierce falling out, and he 
must try to keep his pregnant step-mother (Anita Mui) from fighting.
For those of you who don't know, The Legend of Drunken Master is 
actually a re-release of Drunken Master 2 from 1994. Why would 
Dimension choose to take such an old Chan flick and release it again with a 
new title and a massive publicity campaign? It's simply because Drunken 
Master 2 is Chan's best flick. Forget everything you've seen in Jackie 
Chan movies before, and prepare yourself for fight scenes like you've never 
experienced. The really amazing part about the movie isn't that the fight 
scenes are so spectacular, it's that during the lulls between fights it is 
so funny you shouldn't be bored. In particular, Anita Mui (who plays Chan's 
step-mother but is actually younger than him) is an absolute hoot as a woman 
who just might be the epitome of "strong willed". Her scene where she is 
trying to distract Wong's father's wrath is simply too funny for words. Yet 
the film's best comic moments come from Chan himself when he gets a few 
drinks under his belt and starts babbling about things like monkeys stealing 
the wine. For those of you who saw Shanghai Noon, remember the scene 
in the bordello? When Chan gets drunk and thinks his horse is dead? Well 
imagine a movie packed with scenes like that.
Alright, let's face facts here. The acting in a Jackie Chan movie is about 
as important as the acting in your average Friday the 13th sequel. 
The fact that the film contains some of the most horrendous dubbing in 
history makes the acting even more unimportant, but I'm going to give a 
critique a shot anyway. Chan is hilarious, showing some of his great comic 
timing in two scenes. One is where he fights five men at once while trying 
to get drunk, the other is the aftermath of this fight where he must deal 
with his furious father. Veteran martial-arts actor Lung Ti does an 
admirable job as the father. It's strange, but while Lung fights very little 
in the film we always get the impression that he could beat just about 
anyone black and blue with his eyes close. Anita Mui is an absolute riot as 
Chan's mother, though I wish she'd had just one chance to fight. Finally we 
have Ken Lo Houri-Kang, who may not be much of an actor (I don't speak 
Chinese, but I could tell his line delivery was more than a little off), but 
this man has moves like you've never seen before.
Speaking of moves, whoah boy, you want to talk about some astounding action 
scenes? Drunken Master 2 is overflowing with them. The opening fight 
scene, in which Chan and Lau Kar Leung battle it out under a train is 
excellent, filled with moves so fast I couldn't follow the action half the 
time (that's not an insult, it was amazing). Then, just as I was getting 
over this fight and a few similar duels that followed, we're hit by Chan and 
Lau Kar Leung fighting an army of axe-wielding warriors. This one scene must 
have required more choreography than nearly every other scene in the film 
combined. So, as I was reeling from that battle, this vastly entertaining 
movie hits us with yet ANOTHER battle scene at the end, between Chan and his 
real life bodyguard, the amazing Ken Lo Houi-Kang. Houi-Kang has the most 
amazing balance I've ever seen, being able to attack repeatedly with one 
foot kicking from every different angle. In one truly amazing shot he stands 
on one leg, holds the other leg up in the air till they form one straight 
line, and doesn't falter at all. Yeesh, I'm lucky if I can kick straight out 
without falling over.
I do have one small complaint with Drunken Master 2, and it's the way 
characters are wasted. I'm referring specifically to a young lady seen near 
the film's mid-point, who seems to have a romantic interest in Jackie. We 
don't see her again till close to the film's conclusion, and at that point 
she seems to have no interest at all in Jackie. A friend of Chan's who knows 
a different form of martial arts (the two have a heated argument over which 
is better) is also sadly underused. All that aside, let's it. Anyone who 
complains that this movie doesn't have enough plot or character development 
doesn't know what they're talking about. I'm not trying to be rude, but it's 
the truth. People going to see this movie want great action. They shouldn't 
care about plot and character development, and if they do they've obviously 
never heard of Jackie Chan before (in which case they've been living in a 
cave for the past ten years). Drunken Master 2 runs what could have 
been a long 102 minutes, but it didn't feel half that long to me. I'd 
recommend the to any Jackie Chan fans out there and give it four out of five 
stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Chad Polenz
How much martial arts fighting can you take? How much kung fu fighting can a 
movie have and still have a story? How many men can the world's greatest 
combatant take on? How many impossible situations can a hero survive through 
before your suspension of disbelief is gone? Those are the questions "The 
Legend of Drunken Master" poses - and your answer to the last question is how 
much you will like or dislike this movie. 
A lot of critics who have reviewed this film don't discuss much of the story 
since this a Jackie Chan movie and the choreography of the stunts and 
fighting are the focus of the movie. Still, I think it's worth mentioning 
because as far as cheesy martial arts movies go, this one has a pretty 
intricate story that is both antagonistic of the action as well as reflective 
of it. For a movie that is about 2/3rds fighting there's enough background 
detail to fit into one normal movie. 
The setting is a Chinese city in the 1930's or so. Jackie Chan plays the 
eldest son of a doctor and as the film opens he figures out a way to smuggle 
ginseng onto a train so that they don't have to pay taxes on it. Chan's 
character is a mischievous lil' devil and his ideas tend to do more harm than 
good. Soon he finds himself fighting with an old man he doesn't know and when 
he returns home he has to find a substitute for the ginseng because he lost 
it to the old man. His father is a pretty over-bearing, strict conservative 
guy who never seems to be in a good mood. Chan's best known for his physical 
action but the script here puts him in many situations where he must run all 
over the place in order to not get in trouble. It's lowbrow and slapstick, 
but it's in good humor so it's passable. 
The story itself is kind of fuzzy. It has something to do with British 
Ambassadors smuggling out ancient Chinese artifacts with the help of some 
crooked executives at an iron mill. There's an entire story running virtually 
simultaneously as Chan's story about workers in the mill who are treated like 
slaves by these nasty guys. You know they're going to get their cumuppence in 
the end. 
But how does the movie breakdown this process? Only average at best I'd say. 
The screenplay seems to be written backwards with the story existing as the 
glue between the fight scenes. It's exhausting after a while because the 
action keeps going and going. There's no breaks for some drama or character 
development - all this crops up as things roll along. It's like someone 
telling you a story while you're walking to your car and once you start to 
drive away they run alongside to finish the story. By the time the third act 
rolls around the plausible story seems to have been long forgotten about but 
the action continues to build and build. The last act is all fight scenes 
that look like background visuals in a video game and not the exciting 
showdowns you're expecting. 
The final 20 minutes are made up of one fight sequence between Chan and the 
head honcho of the evil executives. It's probably the most physically 
demanding fight and carefully choreographed action you can expect out of 
human beings. Chan and his nemesis pretty much get their clock cleaned by 
each other (including being thrown into a pit of hot coals and breathing fire 
on each other). It's almost disturbing and far too serious for what had 
started out as such a high spirited movie. 
So how much kung fu fighting CAN you handle? "The Legend of Drunken Master" 
shows that even those not easily amused by martial arts can still appreciate 
the work and dedication Chan and his cronies have to their craft. They just 
need to find a way to make a really good movie out of it. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-2FB-30625B16-3A15EADA-prod3 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.
