Title
Review for Faithful (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 4/3/96 (wide)
Running Length: 1:31 
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, sexual situations, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Cher, Chazz Palminteri, Ryan O'Neal
Director: Paul Mazursky
Producers: Jane Rosenthal and Robert De Niro
Screenplay: Chazz Palminteri based on his play
Cinematography: Fred Murphy
Music: Phillip Johnston
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema/Savoy Pictures
     Despite what the advertisements imply, FAITHFUL is less of a black 
comedy than a disquieting drama laced with wit.  Adapted by Chazz 
Palminteri from his off-Broadway play, the film, as directed by Paul 
Mazursky (DOWN AND OUT IN BEVERLY HILLS), unfolds like a three-act 
theatrical piece:  lots of dialogue and not much action.  Only three 
actors have significant roles, and there are a limited number of sets. 
     Cher plays Maggie, an unhappy housewife who, on the twentieth 
anniversary of her marriage to an unfaithful husband, Jack (Ryan 
O'Neal), decides to kill herself.  But, before she can down the bottle 
of pills, she receives a visitor.  Tony (Chazz Palminteri), a trash-
talking, borderline-manic mafia hit man ostensibly hired by Jack, breaks 
into her palatial home, ties her up, then tells her he's going to murder 
her.  Unfortunately, he has to wait for Jack's go-ahead signal, and, to 
pass the time, he and Maggie converse about everything from the CLERKS-
like question of what really constitutes sex to why couples stay 
together when a marriage is dead.  
     At one point, Tony confesses that he has "problems like everyone 
else."  In fact, however, his trauma runs much deeper than the average 
person's.  Both he and Maggie are in therapy (in fact, Tony calls his 
shrink from the scene of the hit), and Jack should probably join them.  
These are three very disturbed individuals, none of whom is satisfied 
with the status quo.  Maggie sees her marriage, and, by extension, her 
life, as a failure.  Tony is saddled by guilt at the part he played in 
his beloved sister's death.  And Jack is looking for a way to pacify his 
young, impatient girlfriend.  For over an hour, FAITHFUL allows this 
trio of characters to work through their problems.  They argue, shout, 
plead, cajole, and, at long last, understand and accept.
     The script attempts to incorporate a mystery element into the 
drama:  who actually hired Tony?  Was it really Jack, or did Maggie, 
lacking the courage to end her own life, put out a contract on herself?  
(Remember BULLETPROOF HEART, where Mimi Rogers paid Anthony LaPaglia to 
eliminate her?)  Was it a third party, perhaps Jack's girlfriend?  Or 
does Tony have the wrong address?  Answering that question, however, is 
far less compelling than watching these characters confront their inner 
demons by railing against each other.
     Cher, who hasn't done much since 1990's MERMAIDS, is effectively 
subdued as Maggie.  She's as believable when her character is in the 
depths of despair as when she decides that she doesn't want to die, 
after all.  Chazz Palminteri, who has done some very good (A BRONX TALE) 
and very bad (JADE) work in the past, is in top form here.  He doesn't 
have the most screen time, but he gets all the best lines.  Ryan O'Neal 
is adequate as the philandering husband, although FAITHFUL demands less 
from him than from the other two.
     At times, FAITHFUL is amusing, although most of the humor is of the 
gallows variety (such as Tony's objection to Maggie's having a last 
cigarette because of the danger to him from secondary smoke).  More 
importantly, the unique perspectives created by the unusual situation 
allow the film to offer insight into the issues of fidelity, love, and 
marriage.  FAITHFUL has a tendency to be too talky, and each of the last 
two acts runs on a little too long, but this isn't an unreasonable price 
to pay for a movie that poses several thought-provoking questions.  And, 
although Palminteri doesn't write with the verve of David Mamet, he 
employs enough crisp dialogue in the service of an interesting premise 
to keep the audience involved for most of the ninety-minute running 
length.

Author
Scott Marcus
First question: why does anyone let Ryan O'Neal act in their movies
anymore? And, not only let him in, but give him a starring role. He's
at best a has-been, though many would consider him a never-was.
Anyway, he ruined any chance this movie might have had in my mind.
The setup is about the most interesting thing the film has going for
it. A couple, Margaret O'Donnell (Cher) and her husband Jack (Ryan
O'Neal) are celebrating their 20th anniversary. They've each got a
little surprise for the other, though. The movie is based on
Palminteri's play, where it may have worked better than on the big
screen.
Tony (Chazz Palminteri) shows up at the couple's mansion, claiming
that someone - he believes it's the husband, Jack - has hired him to
kill Maggie. Tony has problems: he constantly has to stop and talk to
his psychiatrist - played adequately by director Paul Mazursky - over
the phone. It's no surprise that the emotionally confused hit-man is
the strongest character: Mr. Palminteri wrote the film, after all,
and saves the juiciest lines for himself.
There are some very good moments, reminiscent of the film SLEUTH, when
the audience doesn't know which way things are going to go, or if
everyone is really who they claim to be. These moments, however, are
not enough to save the film. There are numerous plot holes, and quite
a few developments that make little or no sense, once the denouement
comes. For instance, why are there no servants? This really bothered
me. The O'Donnell's live in a huge mansion, own a Ferrari and a Rolls
Royce, and yet he makes his own breakfast, and she does her own
shopping.
It also bothered me that the characters would switch between being
clever and being stupid from scene to scene. I just didn't see any
consistent characterizations; transformations came at will, with no
justification. Contrast this with SLEUTH. In that film, Michael
Caine and Laurence Olivier are both extremely clever, and continually
outmaneuver each other. Here, the characters mostly seem to fumble
over one another, except for a few times when they act intelligently.
The bright spots of the film - Mr. Palminteri's performance, some of
the dialogue, and the set-up - are not enough, ultimately, to save the
film. I grade it a mediocre C.
Review written: Thursday, 4 April 1996

Author
Clarissa Oon
'TILL DEATH DO US PART' COMEDY MISSES ITS MARK
There's something extremely unsatisfying about a movie that keeps its
fingers on your pulse, but fails to push the right buttons. And FAITHFUL is
a one of those movies that has its moments, but never quite takes off as a
whole.
Actor Chazz Palminteri's comic thriller is an inspired tale of a wife who
discovers that her husband has hired a hitman to dispose of her on their
twentieth wedding anniversary. From its tantaliser of an opening, FAITHFUL
throws up witty one-liners, sexual tension between repressed housewife
Margaret and broodingly neurotic gunman Tony, as well as a potentially
compelling debate on whether it's possible to remain faithful to the same
person all your life.
For example, Margaret asks Tony, in the desperate curiosity of one about to
die, whether he's ever slept with a whore. He replies, haughtily, "I only
sleep with whores."
The key to Palminteri's script is the dialogue between Margaret and Tony,
which deftly juggles that fine line between irreverent and seriousness. And
director Paul Mazursky (ENEMIES, A LOVE STORY) gives the dialogue
considerable attention, producing some classy moments. Cher turns in an
excellent performance as Margaret, bringing to it inimitable comic timing
and an unexpected poignance. Palminteri reprises his familiar hitman role,
though with less panache than as the memorable Cheech in BULLETS OVER
BROADWAY. And both play up the sexual tension to the hilt.
But the movie tries to be a bit too clever. The numerous flashbacks and
cuts to Margaret's husband Jack are distracting and often ineffectual; Ryan
O'Neal does nothing for the role of Jack with his wooden, humourless mug,
and the flashbacks only serve to draw us away from the immediacy of the
Margaret-Tony interplay.  Worse of the lot are the cheesy slow-mo shots of
Jack's mistress sashaying about.
The biggest culprit of the 'trying-too-hard' syndrome is the movie's
attempt to moralize, it's insistence on Making A Point. Like the
wide-angled shots of Jack and Margaret's opulent mansion; read: money can't
buy happiness. Or the constant rehashing of the 'faithfulness' theme--why
can't men be faithful, why women shouldn't bother to be faithful--which
gets to be about as annoying as a fly buzzing about your head.
Like the intense, tough-talking Tony who can't bring himself to pull a
trigger on any woman, FAITHFUL has a lot behind it, but manages to shoot
itself in the foot. Which is why, despite its potential, despite actors the
calibre of Cher and Palminteri, FAITHFUL won't win any critical acclaim. A
pity.
Clarissa Oon has no qualms about being faithful--to her dog.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
____________________________________________________________ 
This movie review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT, the 
Singaporean zine that dares to say "Bok." For a spanking 
good time, visit THE FLYING INKPOT at 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(New Line)
Directed by     Paul Mazursky
Written by      Chazz Palminteri, based on his play
Cast            Cher, Chazz Palminteri, Ryan O'Neal
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language and sexual content)
Running Time    91 minutes
Reviewed at     Six Forks Station Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (5APR96)
     I really really really wanted to walk out of this terrible movie,
but I didn't.  Instead, I stayed and endured, in spite of the sheer
awfulness that erupts when a hit man (Chazz Palminteri) breaks into a
housewife's (Cher) expensive home, only to begin sprouting monologues
about fidelity and faithfulness.  Paul Mazursky directs from Chazz's
play, which also stars a pudgy Ryan O'Neal as the husband who hires the
"contract artist." The plans go afoul when the neurotic hit man-- he
calls his shrink while "on duty"-- begins to fall for the wife.  (He's
obviously moved by her unnatural beauty and a voice that sounds like a
perpetual head cold.) The laughs in this movie number, oh, about ten.
The dialogue is probably racy enough to keep you awake, if that be your
type of torture.  Or, just pass the time by imagining David Letterman as
the host of next year's Oscar ceremony:  Chazz, Cher; Cher, Chazz.
[ Video note:  For a *real* intimately hilarious hostage comedy, go       
  rent THE REF (1993).  Kevin Spacey, Judy Davis, and Denis Leary.    
  You'll laugh. ]
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>
