Title
Review for Bande des quatre, La (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena

FILM TITLE:       La Bandes de Quatre
DIRECTOR:      Jacques Rivette
COUNTRY:        France 1988
CINEMATOGRAPHY:  Caroline Champetier
MUSIC:              Claudio Monteverdi
CAST:                Laurence Cote, Fejria Deliba, Bernadette Giraud, Bulle
Ogier, Nathalie Richard, Benoit Regent, Ines de Medeiros
SUPER FEATURES:  The filming style is excellent.
The great thing is getting a chance to see this film maker's work. The sad
thing is that seeing his work means that one has to put up with people
complaining about another director who does not care about his reputation as
a commercial film maker, and only does what he pleases and wishes to see and
learn about.
As one gentleman in the bathroom said, "the French don't make movies, they
make talkies ...". I never felt that "talkies" were a condition that made a
film bad, but it is by some standards where the "action" content tends to
take down the quality of the words and their meanings, into quick ditties
and idiotic lines, in lieu of CONTENT. Unfortunately for American audiences,
Jacques Rivette is totally CONTENT.
La Bande des Quatre, is not so much a "film" per se, as it is a real
advanced acting exercise, for any actors in training and learning. The
advanced side of acting is very explosive, and tends to tap into one's
personal life, something that various acting teachers, do not think should
be mixed with life itself, as it tends to confuse things, rather than help.
And in this story, most of the ladies are affected and they tend to copy
their experience first, and create another idea for the staging, second. We
do the same thing in life, don't we ... we take the easy way, rather than
think through to something else.
And during the 2 and three quarter hours, of what is a slow film, a story is
created, since the girls mostly are friends and live in the same house,
regarding one of their mates who is involved in what appears to be a rather
serious affair that is hitting the French news casts. This adds to the
ladies' ability to inter act on stage, but the teacher Constance ( Bulle
Ogier ) makes sure that the girls do it right, rather than fall into their
everyday mentality, which is not what acting in theatre is about at all.
This fine line, is difficult for anyone, audiences specially, as it is a
subtlety that is rarely seen, more often than not mis-understood, and
vilified by most commercial pundits. It forces a director to maintain the
focus on the actor and person, and this is something that audiences are not
ready for, and never have been ... PATIENCE. It is too easy to criticize
something special, and specific, which 99.9% of film is not about. The other
percent, are the ones that create the new styles, invent new things that
push the envelopes in the creative form of the arts, and in this case, film.
Mike Leigh, with "Naked" and "Secrets & Lies" does a similar thing, although
he ties it to a story a lot more. Rivette's style is a bit of the film noir
style, and the story may even take second place here, and not be important,
compared to what is really happening, another tough thing for film watchers
and their seriousness, to accept and follow up on.
Much of the subtleties in this film are lost in the translations. Horrible
sub-title goofs, eat away at the fabric of the sensitivity of what Constance
is discussing in a rehearsal scene, and this is tough on the film. The
points come off jaded, and pushy, rather than serious and meaningful, which
as an acting and directing major, I can tell you, is MOST important, in
helping direct a person into a spot where they are creative and free, with
the association with their character. Still, a lot of it makes it through,
and the girls, one by one, are seen improving their delivery of the lines
into a more cohesive set of moments, in their rehearsing whichever work they
are doing. Underlying much of this was the actor's ability to stay with
their lines, and know them ( memorize them ), which is something that
Constance hammers on the actresses. We do not often do our homework in life.
Other than that, the film has some unusual touches, many of which I believe
tend to detract from the real meat of the product. Various scenes of the
city from various places, mostly the moving metro train, seem to indicate
that life moves on, a slight lesson to the actresses in this film, but a
rather un-needed point to make. I tend to think that this diminishes the
quality of the film, but perhaps at the time, one may have felt the need to
justify one's movements, so that an audience can see what one is doing. I do
not believe this is necessary, and later, in LA BELLE NOISEUSSE, Rivette did
not compromise one inch of film at all to make his opus. In this respect, La
Bande des Quatre, displays a nice foretelling of this director's ability and
body of work.
Magnificent film, with Bulle Ogier's style of acting really neat and well
defined, and often showing the girls how one can really deliver a line.
Calm, cool and collected is the word, in the face of "action, lights,
camera", something which the acting students are trying to learn.
