Title
Review for Notorious (1946)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Brian Koller
The setting is in Florida, during the second world war.
Ingrid Bergman, a drunkard socialite whose German father has 
just been imprisoned for espionage, is hosting another
party, where she meets and takes a liking to Cary Grant.
He actually agrees to go for a spin, with the drunk Bergman
swerving wildly at high speeds.  A policeman stops them;
she is likely to face jail.  But Grant shows his badge to
the cop, and the cop nods and leaves.  Bergman realizes
Grant is an agent, and detest him.  After a night's sleep,
however, she agrees to go to Argentina with him to work as a
spy against the Germans.
With the exception of Grant, the American agents have
low regard for Bergman's character and an indifference
to her fate.
Bergman and Grant have a Rio romance.  Bergman says her
character is reformed, Grant is skeptical.  The unknown
assignment turns out to be Bergman winning and spying on 
a former rejected paramour, Claude Rains.  Bergman takes
the assignment, although it means a break-up with Grant,
sharing company and bed with creepy Rains, and putting
her life at risk.  Rains pounces on the bait (Bergman is 
very lovely) and they soon are engaged and married.
The German agents are ruthless and murder an associate
who is prone to mistakes.  There is something secretive
about their champagne bottles, and Bergman cannot get
access to the wine cellar.  Grant suggests Bergman throw
a big party, so Grant can check out the cellar.  Common sense
would have Bergman draw up a floor plan for Grant prior
to the party, and Grant would bring a date to watch the
cellar door while Grant checks it out.  But for dramatic
purposes, Bergman must lead Grant to the cellar and guard
it.  Grant accidentally busts a bottle.  It is filled with
"vintage sand" that is later found to be uranium ore.
Grant hastily cleans up his mess, but unluckily Rains
shows up.  Grant kisses Bergman to make it look like
a romantic encounter rather than espionage.
But Rains is no dummy, and he later investigates the
cellar.  Hitchcock deserves his "master of suspense"
title, as he prolongs the tension in these scenes.
We learn why Rains still lives his with domineering 
mother: he needs her advice.  He knows his now hated
wife is a spy, but his life is in jeopardy from his
compatriots if she is discovered.  Sinister mother
comes up with a plan to slowly poison Bergman, first to
sicken her, later to kill her.
Bergman is sick and looks it on a rendezvous with
Grant.  He is suspicious, but buys her story of a
drunken binge.  Bergman eventually realizes her fate
(in another well-directed sequence involving her
coffee) but is too late.  She is bedridden and
isolated.  Lucky for her, Grant comes to the house
to investigate, and carries her downstairs.  Of
course he soon meets Rains and his mother, with a
group of German compatriots suspiciously viewing
the scene.  Rains cannot stop Grant without causing
a disturbance that could lead to his death.
Grant flees with Bergman to the hospital, refusing to 
take Rains along, who is begging for a ride.  Now
Rains must face the German agents, who have many
questions to ask of him.
Notorious has an excellent script and cast, and many
extremely well-directed scenes.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz
NOTORIOUS (director: Alfred Hitchcock; screenwriter: Ben Hecht; cinematographer:
Ted Tetzlaff; editor: Theron Warth; cast: Cary Grant (Devlin), Ingrid Bergman
(Alicia Huberman), Claude Rains (Alex Sebastian), Louis Calhern (Capt.
Prescott), Leopoldine Konstantin (Madame Sebastian), Reinhold Schunzel (Dr.
Anderson), Ivan Triesault (Eric Mathis ), Moroni Olsen (Beardsley), Alex Minotis
(Joseph), Eberhard Krumschmidt (Emil); Runtime: 102; RKO; 1946) 
A top-rate film noir from the master, Alfred Hitchcock, that is more or less a
twisted tale about love. It's also more erotic than the usual Hitchcock ones, as
long kissing scenes are duly noted. In fact, one scene was supposedly "the
longest kiss onscreen in the history of films,'' taking three minutes in all. It
was not, however, a single kiss, but broken up in three second intervals as
censors observed. 
Alicia Huberman (Ingrid Bergman) is living in Miami in 1946, just after WW11, as
a society playgirl, while her father has just been convicted of treason as a
Nazi spy and has been sentenced to twenty years in a trial she didn't attend. 
Devlin (Cary Grant) is a federal agent whose assignment is to get her to spy on
some Nazi activity going on in Rio de Janeiro, as he knows from tapped phone
conversations she had with her father that she's against what he did. He tries
to appeal to her sense of patriotism and for her need to redeem her family name,
but she falls in love with him and probably does it for that reason. He is
attracted to her, but can't swallow that she was such a loose woman with a
notorious reputation for sex and drinking. 
In Rio, his boss, Captain Prescott (Calhern), tells him her assignment is to
become romantically linked with Alex Sebastian (Rains), who was a friend of her
father's. He's a wealthy old-time Nazi now living in Rio, with contacts to the
I. G. Farben chemical firm. There are many Nazi activities going on in his
house, and she's asked to find out what they are and who are his visitors. The
advantage she has in this contact, is that he knew her before and loved her. 
The twist in the plot comes when Sebastian asks her to marry him, and Devlin
can't overcome his concern about her past reputation to tell her that he loves
her and to stop the marriage. So to please him, thinking that's what he wants--
for her to be a spy for the U.S., she goes through with this sham marriage. 
Sebastian's mother (Konstantin) is overbearing; she thinks Alicia's a gold
hunter and never stops being suspicious of her. Their mansion is filled with
many Nazi spies holding secret business meetings and one of them, who goes by
the alias of Dr. Anderson (Schunzel), has been involved with smuggling uranium
ore in wine bottles which are kept locked in the wine cellar. Devlin gets that
info while an invited guest to a party being held there and brings back that
valuable info to his bosses, but Alex now realizes his wife is an American agent
as he notices the key to the wine cellar is missing on his key ring. He can't
kill her right away without arousing suspicion or tell his fellow Nazis. They
would only kill him for his goof. So he and mom plan to slowly poison her to
death and make it look like she died from a sickness. 
Devlin now has a chance to redeem himself as he boldly comes to her house and
forces Alex, by outmanuevering him, to let him take her to the hospital. He does
this in front of all the dangerous Nazi spies watching, as he carries her down
the stairs and doesn't let Alex come to the hospital with him. It was a powerful
scene, with a marvelous crane-shot following them down the stairs and sweeping
the entire hallway as it caught the tension on all the Nazis and the reunited
lovers. This memorable scene is in a class with the final one in Casablanca. 
Hitchcock's homage to film noir is loaded with brilliant shadowy and dark
visuals that add to the suspense; such as, a main character who trusted his
wrong emotion but did not trust the woman he loved, and had the woman he loved
not only marry the wrong man but nearly get killed because of him. At least
Sebastian loves her without questioning her past is the point Hitchcock makes,
as he has more respect for the sophisticated Sebastian in this matter than he
does for the sexually troubled Devlin who can't act on his desires of love. That
is something that the repressed Devlin can't do until she's nearly dead in his
arms. It comes out that Alicia is not such a bad woman, but was promiscuous
because of reasons she couldn't come to terms with; such as, a father who was a
traitor and the shame that caused her. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alfred Hitchcock
Writer: Ben Hecht
Starring: Cary Grant, Ingrid Bergman, Claude Rains, Louis Calhern,
Leopoldine Konstantin, Reinhold Schünzel, Alex Minotis, Ivan Triesault,
Moroni Olsen
If "Rear Window" was brilliant because of how deep it was, and "Vertigo"
was brilliant for how existential it was, "Notorious" is brilliant
because of how simple it is.  It's nothing more than an almost-typical
Hichtcock plot, with lots of tension, espionnage, and attractive stars,
but that's what's so amazing about it.  It is one of the best examples
of Hitchcock making a simple story into a gem.
"Notorious" came out around the time of Nazism, so it has a modern (for
'46) feel to it, as the chief "villain" is none other than a Nazi in
hiding.  The story revolves around a love triangle which takes place
during the wave of nazism, involving a secret agent, a notorious
daughter of a recently deceased nazi, and a living nazi.  With this,
Hithcock tells a simple yet amazing tale, which shows off a lot of his
camerawork, all while telling a story which never stops being
interesting.
The story takes place following the death of a nazi, and then introduces
us to his infamous daughter, Alicia Huberman (Ingrid Bergman), a
promiscious drunkard of a woman.  At a party, she meets a man named T.R.
Devlin (Cary Grant), who turns out to be a secret agent, luring her to
work for the government to expose a nazi hiding in Brazil: Alexander
Sebastian (Claude Rain, rejoining Bergman to get that cool "Casablanca"
feel to it).  The two share a brief non-sexual affair (this is 40s
cinema, after all), and eventually and reluctantly agrees to get the
government closer to Alex by flirting with him.
Soon, Alicia and Alex are a hot item, all while Devlin is still lurking
around, and sneaking around with Alicia.  Despite the fact that Alicia
and Alex are together, she still has a tiny thing for Devlin, and vice
versa.  What results is a fascinating and creepy film, resulting in one
of the best endings to a Hitchcock film ever.
The strength of this film is really in the characterizations and
writing.  The relationship between Grant and Bergman is a touching one,
and one that is always interesting.  Because the writers have made these
two out to have a rocky relationship, the two of them are never boring. 
And with chemistry between Grant and Bergman filling in some answers to
unanswered questions in the script, the two work as a couple.  And, of
course, the two are both brilliant in their roles.
But the best achievement, character-wise, is that of Alex.  Instead of
him being a flat villain, he's more of a semi-villain.  He has a heart
and feelings...I mean, just because he's a nazi doesn't mean he's
totally evil.  He is a man who is trapped in a lifestyle which will
ultimately destroy him: he's a notorious nazi, and seems to be equipped
with a massive oedipus complex, as his mother (Leopoldine Konstantin)
seems to rule his life, much like Norman's mother did in "Psycho."  As
played by Claude Rains, he's almost sympathetic at times.  Rains gives
the best performance of the film.
The film is also a show-off for the talents of Hitchcock.  "The Master
of Suspense" never has any action sequences or anything, but instead
creates several moments of pure tension, and usually in the most bizarre
places.  One sequence which is notable (which we watched in film class
once) is a party scene where Grant and Bergman have to get into the
locked wine cellar of Rains's house to find some clues.  With wonderful
camera movement, tense parallel action, and some truly ingenius set-ups,
it's a classic of American cinema.
Also standing out are a sequence where Bergman finds out that she's
being poisoned by Alex and his mother (complete with some pre-60s
psychedelic pioneering), and the ending, which is nothing short of
flawless.  The latter is perfect because it shows us how truly trapped
Alex is in his life, and uses an ingenius idea and never throws that
particular punch.  The final shot is classic too; a creepy,
grin-inducing finale which remains stuck in memory for eternity.
Many people claim that a film which is simplistic is not extraordinary. 
Not so.  "Notorious" is proof that a director can tell a simple story,
and still make a film which can stand the test of time.  Sure, it's not
"Psycho," "Strangers on a Train," or "North by Northwest," but it's
still one of the director's best because it shows how truly great he was
by showcasing him in unambiguous mode.  I loved every second of it.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jerry Saravia
Of all of Alfred Hitchcock's love stories, "Notorious" is one of the most
romantic and truly illuminating. Illumination is the key to the film's success.
With a plot centering on Nazis and uranium, the heart of the film is really the
electric chemistry between Cary Grant and Ingrid Bergman, and a suspenseful
final act that will leave you breathless with excitement. 
"Notorious" begins with a fabulous shot of Ingrid Bergman as Alicia Huberman,
who is having a party after learning of her father's conviction for Nazi
spying. She tries to forget, and we notice the back of a stranger's head seated
at the party but we don't who he is except perhaps Alicia's possible suitor.
Later, she is drunk and recklessly drives with the man (Cary Grant), who turns
out to be a CIA agent named Devlin. Devlin has a job for her, and she is
reluctant to participate and is annoyed she did not get a speeding ticket. The
job entails Alicia getting intimate with a former lover of hers, Sebastian
(Claude Rains), who runs a spy ring and may be involved with hiding uranium in
wine bottles (a substance used in making bombs). Eventually, Sebastian deeply
falls in love with her and marries her. Devlin grows jealous, realizing he
loves her. Unfortunately, Sebastian watches Alicia like a hawk, and Hitchcock
is brilliant at showing that subjective sense of looks and stares as he does in
the party sequence.. 
"Notorious" has a special degree of illumination provided by its lighting
schemes, and by Bergman's iridescent beauty. Along with Catherine Denueve,
Bergman is indeed one of the most beautiful women in film history and Hitchcock
exploits that beauty to great effect. Whether she is seated at a cafe or in bed
writhing with pain due to the effect of arsenic in her tea, she never looks
less than glamorous. 
Cary Grant is the straight man, and more subtle than in his other films - he is
passive and grows jealous but it is his dialogue that speak great truths of his
emotions. At one point, while hearing about the CIA's plans, he refers to
another agent's bridge-playing wife as boring in contrast to Alicia's looseness
and promiscuity. Devlin holds his emotions in check, acting stern and
disapproving of Alicia and her immediate marriage. 
Claude Rains is one of the finest most astute actors ever, and here he is also
restrained - his looks and glances suggest everything. There is also the sense
that he does care for Alicia...and perhaps is more trustworthy than Devlin even
after learning her secret. 
Hitchcock has a tremendous number of tricks up his sleeve, and some shots are
astounding in their impact - they greatly help build tension and suspense. The
three-minute kissing scene between Grant and Bergman is as sensual and sexually
charged as any scene from today's steamy thrillers - what makes it so luscious
is the interruption of the kisses and the embraces. At that time, the Hollywood
Production Code would not allow for kisses to last longer than three seconds.
This scene foreshadows the final moments from the bedroom to the staircase
where Grant descends while helping the sickly Bergman - the spy ring and
Sebastian watch. There is also a superb zoom-in shot from the top of the
staircase to a close-up shot of Bergman's hand holding the key to the wine
cellar where the uranium is hidden. The wine cellar sequence is also bewitching
- Grant carefully removing bottles that obstruct the view of a wine schedule
while one slips away and breaks revealing uranium particles - and it also
builds to a great kissing scene. This film is definitely one of Hitchcock's
prime examples of visual elegance.
"Notorious" is not as densely complex as "Vertigo" or "North By Northwest," but
it is packed with suspense and thrills galore. And its emotionally romantic
love story shows the Master knew how to deal with human relationships. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail with concerns, questions or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or
jerry@movieluver.com
