Title
Review for Million Dollar Hotel, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jerry Saravia
"The Million Dollar Hotel" is the kind of film that is suffused with 
fantastic imagery, splendid cinematography, offbeat atmosphere and frankly, 
little else. it's a film to feast the eyes but not the heart. Plainly put, 
Wim Wenders' new film flies off of the handle so often you wonder if it will 
ever sit to ponder. It never does. 
Based on a story idea by good old Bono, "The Million Dollar Hotel" is set in 
the year 2001 in L.A., focusing on a fleabag hotel called The Million Dollar 
Hotel (the site of Bono's music video "Where The Streets Have No Name.") 
Apparently, a peculiar hotel guest named Izzy Goldkiss (Tim Roth) jumped off 
the roof of the hotel, but could he have been murdered or did he commit 
suicide? That is what an unlikable FBI agent (Mel Gibson) is out to discover, 
and not with the help of these hotel misfits. The most notable is a 
slow-witted, naive punk (Jeremy Davies) who is in love with a woman (Milla 
Jovovich) who claims she is not real - she is fiction, a nobody. 
And that may be the problem with "Million Dollar Hotel" overall. These 
characters are shallow misfits with no interesting personalities or 
remarkable insights. Actors such as Jimmy Smits, Gloria Stuart and Peter 
Stormare (as a supposedly fifth Beatle) run through the screen without making 
much of an impression. It is like watching a wax museum of fuzzy, anonymous 
portraits with no pulse. However, it is nice to see Stuart cussing up a storm 
with the film's one memorable line: "We are all f***ed up!" 
What saves the film somewhat is the tender love story between Davies and 
Jovovich, though it does become tedious after a while. I also liked Mad Mel 
who is far more restrained than usual, resembling the Frankenstein monster 
with scars in his back and a neck brace. The slow pacing and long takes are 
often breathtaking (sometimes recalling Wenders' own "Wings of Desire.") The 
songs by Bono are pointed and haunting, and the film does fascinate. It just 
doesn't involve us.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, complaints or general comments at 
faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Australian Mel Gibson has a small but important role in this picture shot by
German director Wim Wenders, from a story by the lead singer of the Irish
band U2, starring Mila Jovovich, the Ukrainian-born actress who was married
French director Luc Besson for about a year, and American Jeremy Davies. And
as much as you may think that those people are diverse...you ain't seen
nothing yet!
PLOT:
A billionaire media mogul's son is purported to have killed himself by
jumping off the roof of the Million Dollar Hotel, a downtrodden shelter
which houses insane people abandoned by the health care system. The kid's
father sends a FBI agent in to find the killer of his son, not willing to
accept that his son would ever commit suicide.
CRITIQUE:
This was a difficult movie to rate. If I had to rate it on its story alone,
I would give it a 3/10. It starts off as an interesting murder mystery but
slowly disintegrates into an uninteresting melange of TWIN PEAKS meeting the
good folks from the CUCKOO'S NEST, and ultimately falls flat in most
categories except that of arty pretension. If I were to rate the soundtrack
of this film, I would give it a 9/10. The music and sounds filled in this
picture seem perfect for its environment of symbolic poetic chaos, and even
manage to liven things up during the film's many dull moments. Now if I were
to rate this movie on its acting alone, I would have no problem in handing
it a 7/10, with Mel Gibson pulling off one of his weirdest, coolest and best
roles ever. I wish they had made a movie about his one very peculiar FBI
agent alone. The guy is as crazy or even crazier than all the real loonies
in the building, and Gibson obviously made the most of his unfamiliar
secondary role. Jeremy Davies also played a perfect nutjob, although I am
starting to get a little tired of seeing Jovovich always playing her weirdo
roles...I think a "normal" role for her would be "different" at this point.
Peter Stormare is also unrecognizable and brilliantly funny as the insane
man who talks with a Liverpool accent and truly believes that he wrote all
of the Beatles' songs.
The rest of the cast is not as brilliant or original, with many of them just
rounding out the cast for kicks sakes. Of course, as a black dramatic
comedy, which I am assuming it is, the film did manage a few decent
one-liners, but ultimately it is the so-called drama that was just too
boring, existential and long-winded. The film also outstayed its welcome by
about half and hour, and ultimately solved the mystery of the murder, only
to leave me feeling emptier and less inclined to care than when I came in.
Is this movie about egos, love and suicide, or is it just a convoluted
script made to look like it's about those very subjects when really it's
about a bunch of crazy people acting nuts and talking shit for over two
hours? For me, it was more of the latter, and when you consider that the
story is generally the most important part of a movie, I can't truly
recommend this film to anyone out in the common audience. Of course, if you
love U2, want to see Mel Gibson in a great, gritty, indie role or enjoy neat
camera tricks every now and again, well, by all means, check into the hotel.
For everyone else who doesn't really appreciate art-house fare, don't really
like stories that pretend to go somewhere but ultimately end up going
nowhere, and have just about had enough of movies featuring the insane
passing off as "interesting eccentrics", well, buy the soundtrack and save
yourself the grief.
Pay me a million bucks and I wouldn't see this movie again...okay, okay, I'm
just kidding, but you get my drift.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Jeremy Davies birth name was Jeremy Boring. Wow. I wonder why he changed it?
He  was born in Iowa.
This movie is based on a story by the lead singer of the Irish band U2,
Bono, and Nicholas Klein, the same man behind the screenplay of this movie.
The film was originally titled THE BILLION DOLLAR HOTEL and based on a
real-life L.A. hotel called "The Rosalyn Million Dollar Hotel" which was one
of the great hotels during the Golden Age of Hollywood in the 30s, but which
now stands as a halfway house where a lot of outpatients from mental
hospitals live. Needless to say, good ol' Boner (pronounced Bono) himself
makes a two-second cameo appearance in this flick as a dude with sunglasses
in the lobby.
Tim Roth also has an uncredited cameo role in this movie which lasts a
little less than a minute.
Actor Sean Penn was originally cast as the lead in this picture, a role
which eventually went to Jeremy Davies.
Some of you might recognize one of the loonies in this film as none other
than Ellen Cleghorne from TV's "Saturday Night Live" (1991-1995).
This movie won director Wim Wenders a Silver Berlin Bear Jury Prize for
directing at the 2000 Berlin Film Festival.
This film was produced by Icon Productions, Mel Gibson's production company,
the same people behind PAYBACK and BRAVEHEART.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Icon on April 28, 2000; certificate 15; 122 minutes; 
countries of origin Germany/USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Wim Wenders; produced by Bono, Nicholas Klein, Deepak Nayar, Wim 
Wenders.
Written by Nicholas Klein; based on a story by Bono and Nicholas Klein.
Photographed by Phedon Papamichael; edited by Tatiana S. Rigel.
The people behind the scenes of "The Million Dollar Hotel" probably thought 
they were making a great movie. It's so far out there, odd on such a grand 
scale, with such emotional sounds and warped visuals, that there must have 
been a lot of risk and passion put into it. Nobody wants to do that in 
service of a big disaster. But they have.
To give you an idea of what the movie is like, I must describe some of the 
characters, because they dominate the film. They reside in the hotel of the 
title, a large but decrepit old hole that is a perfectly apt place for the 
grubby bunch of freaks, addicts, losers and nutcases who fill its rooms. At 
the forefront is Tom Tom (Jeremy Davies), a skinny, fidgety young 
skateboarder who everyone seems to agree is retarded. He's in love with 
Eloise (Milla Jovovich), a quiet but self-destructive prostitute who likes to 
read.
Geronimo (Jimmy Smits), another friend of Tom Tom, wears a cape, paints tar 
over stolen goods and communicates through shouting. Dixie (Peter Stormare), 
who has not left the hotel since 1980, still awaits a visit from his dentist, 
and is convinced that he was the real songwriter for The Beatles. Vivien 
(Amanda Plummer) shoots heroin and is engaged to a dead man. Shorty (Bud 
Cort) is a pretty standard drunk. Jessica (Gloria Stuart) is a sweet old lady 
who swears a lot -- and if there's a comic device I'm really getting tired of 
in the movies, it's that one.
The story begins with an FBI agent played by Mel Gibson coming to investigate 
the death of a guy called Izzy, a former inhabitant of the Million Dollar 
Hotel who fell from the roof. It seems like suicide, but Izzy's rich father 
is convinced that his boy was murdered, and Gibson determines to find a 
culprit, aggressively interrogating the hotel's weirdoes and secretly 
enlisting Tom Tom's help.
We soon learn that the Gibson character, who wears a neck brace and moves in 
a robotic fashion, did himself grow up among 'freaks', after being born a 
deformed child with a third arm growing out of his back. As his investigation 
goes on, he develops an affinity for the hotel occupants, an emotional 
involvement that threatens to get in the way of his professionalism.
This should be poignant, but never is, because Gibson's body language is 
risible and distracting, and his dilemma never strikes us as being 
particularly meaningful. The rest of the movie doesn't work because we have 
to spend time with a plethora of wretched cretins, who get to be annoying 
very quickly. "Being John Malkovich" is a recent example of how entertaining 
eccentricity can be; "The Million Dollar Hotel" is filled with grating noise 
and murky sets, and most of it is about as fun as a bad trip.
Some of the music is fantastic -- U2's Bono wrote the film's story, and stuck 
around to create tracks for the soundtrack. There are moments of rich 
photography, and the editing is often hypnotic, with its fascinating use of 
shot repetition and emphasis on slow, seductive camera moves. It's even 
possible to get wrapped up in the plot, simply because we have no way of 
predicting what's going to happen. Then again, the eventual answer to the 
murder mystery is lacklustre, and it takes too long to get there. And the 
bottom line: "The Million Dollar Hotel" is far too ugly and strange for my 
tastes, and hey, I'm the guy who enjoyed "12 Monkeys".
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   During the sixties a popular notion among acolytes of the
student left was that so-called insane people are not insane
at all: that the society which in the Twentieth Century brought
us two world wars, a holocaust, genocidal "cleansings" of
Armenians and Bosnians and Serbs and Rwandans among
others, and assorted cruelties on a more intimate, family
level, is the party which is guilty of being thoroughly
demented.  On a less dramatic note, psychologists like
Wilhelm Reich and perhaps most others in that field even
today stress the concept that in a defensive world in which
people guard their emotions as tightly as do nations in their
paranoia, love is difficult to find.  Wim Wenders, known to
American audiences most notably for his surreal, lyric fairy
tale "Wings of Desire," is down to earth this time around and
has hooked up with an ensemble of performers you'd not
expect to find in a small, character-driven work like this.  By
focussing the action in and around a Los Angeles hotel that
was the trendy place during the 1920s but has since become
an occupant of skid row, he contrasts a bizarre bunch of
tenants--uninsured mental cases all--with an FBI agent so
uptight that he metaphorically displays his stiffness by
wearing a brace that extends from his neck down to his lower
back.  While juxtaposing the story of an unconventional
romance with an investigation into the possible murder of one
of the hotel's residents, Wenders attempts to demonstrate an
array of themes from the age-old difficulty of our species to
communicate, the view that lunacy is simply a product of
society's beliefs that fluctuates according to time and place,
and that the Great Truths come from the mouths of so-called
disturbed people whose defenses are weak and who are
therefore able to spot verities that "sane" people cannot. 
That Wenders does not succeed in his mission should take
no credit away from the noteworthy director. We are regularly
inundated with formulaic, banal films churned out by
Hollywood committees and need the challenges that Wenders
and others of his ilk provides for us.  His willingness to take
risks and fail--as he does in this case because of a
threadbare plot and irritating characters unable to support the
weight of his arguments--makes him a better man than the
box-office driven suits who play their cards straight and
thereby guarantee by-the-numbers hokum.
   The hotel of the title is inhabited by a cross-section of
down-and-out Americans in much the style of Lanford
Wilson's Hot L Baltimore, each with a specific idiosyncracy
that makes him or her lovable or annoying.  The most
amusing of all, Dixie (Peter Stormare), looks and attempts to
sing like John Lennon and claims to have been the Beatles'
songwriter: if you listen closely to his gibberish you might find
some kernels of insight.  While he rarely if ever leaves his
room, Geronimo (Jimmy Smits) by contrast is an American
Indian who is look to make a killing by selling some paintings
allegedly completed by one Izzy (Tim Roth), the victim of
murder or suicide, a rich man's (Harris Yulin) son who was
either pushed or fell from the roof of the hotel.  With FBI
Special Agent Skinner (Mel Gibson) patronizing the tenants to
discover the truth behind the presumed crime, a romance
unfolds between the retarded Tom Tom (Jeremy Davies) and
the introspective intellectual, Eloise (Milla Jovovich), who
hides behind a book because she thinks she is nothing.  
   The hotel's derelicts at times prove not so different from
the respectable folks in the "sane" world.  They meet in the
hotel lobby to exploit the death of the painter and evoke the
interest of the media in the paintings which the dead man had
produced--tar pictures, actually, huge smudges of black which
have suddenly become trendy and have brought fame,
media, and beautiful people to the now celebrated lodging.
   Two turnabouts are striking.  In one situation FBI Agent
Skinner, whose naked back displays a gruesome series of
stitches as though the man had been taken apart like a
character in a David Cronenberg film, realizes that he is as
much a freak as the tenants of the hotel.  This leads him to
make a startling decision: to protect the person who later
confesses to the crime rather than add a notch to his resume
by making the arrest.  At about the same time Eloise has
made a sharp recovery, tossing aside her books and
behaving like a thoroughly standard woman open to love.
   The film, unfortunately, is unconvincing in cementing its
argument that 'tis folly to be sane if the whole world is
insane.  Wenders gives the impression that when the
pressure is on, these loony tunes can meet and vote
democratically on how they will deal with the death of one of
their own and the investigation that the tragedy evokes.  This
is a "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest" that is unable
successfully to dramatize the triumph of the human spirit as
did Milos Forman in his adaptation of Ken Kesey's
masterwork.  Listening to these people prattle on and
watching the St. Vitus-Dance antics of Jeremy Davies in the
role of Tom-Tom is an exericise in tedium.
Rated R.  Running time: 124 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
