Title
Review for Palmetto (1998)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Talk about false advertising.  The trailer for Palmetto tries to sell it
as a sexy thriller.  Strange, because there wasn't any sex and it wasn't
very thrilling.
Woody Harrelson stars as Harry Barber (insert dick joke here), a
ex-journalist currently serving a four years for exposing some sort of
corruption in the sleepy Florida town of Palmetto.  Harry is freed two
years into his sentence after someone turns state's evidence.  Bitter
and resentful of his incarceration, Harry plans to head as far away from
Palmetto as possible.
He sticks to his plan for all of two minutes, when ex-girlfriend Nina
(Gina Gershon) meets Harry just after his prison release.  The romance
is quickly rekindled, but strangely not shown to the viewers.  He starts
to look for work the next day, but finds nothing suitable until he falls
into the insipid plot line.  The plot-line with no sex.
While sitting in a bar and ordering bourbon that he smells but never
drinks, Harry eyes a curvy stranger using the phone.  The dame is Rhea
Malroux (Elisabeth Shue, The Saint), wife of the richest old guy with
terminal lung cancer in town and she offers Harry a mysterious one-time
high-paying job.  They agree to meet at a bungalow on the outskirts of
town to discuss the position further.
At the bungalow, Rhea reveals a plan to extort money from her rich
husband.  Her stepdaughter Odette (Chloe Sevigny, Gummo) will pretend to
be the victim of a kidnapping with the $500,000 ransom payable them
both.  Harry would clear ten percent for simply writing the ransom note
and collecting the cash.  Using the popular `Are you wearing a wire?
Let me frisk you to be good and sure' ploy to cop a feel, Harry seals
the deal with some steamy, but again unshown sex.
Predictably, once the plan is in place, things fall apart for Harry.  He
has fallen right into somebody's trap, but has no idea whom.  Leaving a
laughably unmistakable trail of clues that makes the Brown-Goldman
murder scene seem sterile, Harry tries to right each wrong that he
finds, but only manages to fall deeper and deeper into the scam.  How
this guy was smart enough to unmask corruption as a reporter, I will
never know.
There are some pretty cool twists in the last twenty minutes or so, but
I was so bored by that point that it hardly seemed to matter.  Director
Volker Schlondorff (The Handmaid's Tale) presents the story with all of
the emotion of a cold heartless German.  As a side note, Volker
Schlondorff was going to be my stage name if I ever decided to go into
porn.
Harrelson plays the slow-witted Harry not unlike each of his previous
film characters.  The unique casting of Shue as the naughty seductive
bombshell and Gershon as the steady vulnerable girlfriend seems reversed
from their norm, which is not necessarily a good thing.  Sevigny and the
oddly subdued Michael Rapaport stand out in supporting roles.  Did I
mention that there was no sex?
I wasn't going to bring this up, but if I had just gotten released from
prison and had Gina Gershon as an eager girlfriend, I would not have had
time to get wrapped up in a bad mystery like this.  I'd be too busy
getting what this move promised, but never delivered.

Author
Scott Renshaw
PALMETTO
(Columbia/Castle Rock)
Starring:  Woody Harrelson, Elisabeth Shue, Gina Gershon, Chloe Sevigny,
Michael Rapaport.
Screenplay:  E. Max Frye, based on the novel "Just Another Sucker" by
James Hadley Chase.
Producers:  Matthais Wendlandt and Al Corley.
Director:  Volker Schlondorff.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  112 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A wronged man.  A femme fatale.  A body.  A deception.  Avarice 
and alcohol.  Sweat, sex, cigarettes and shadows.  These are the little
things of which the contemporary film noir mystery is made, so predictably
that the genre has descended into the kind of ridiculous self-parody of
which direct-to-video Mickey Rourke vehicles are made.  With too many
film-makers content to keep re-making DOUBLE INDEMNITY and BODY HEAT,
there doesn't seem to be anywhere to go but subversion.
     For a while, that looks like where PALMETTO is headed.  The
obligatory sucker is a former reporter named Harry Barber (Woody
Harrelson) who has learned the hard way that honesty is not necessarily
the best policy.  After threatening to expose corrupt government
officials and refusing to accept hush money, Harry found himself framed,
convicted and sitting in jail for two years.  Now released and
understandably bitter, Harry becomes the perfect target for Rhea Malroux
(Elisabeth Shue), the trophy wife of an ailing millionaire.  Rhea invites
Harry to participate in a scam to fake the kidnapping of Malroux's teenage
daughter Odette (Chloe Sevigny) and share in a $500,000 ransom.  Harry
finds the offer too tempting to pass up, but the deal begins to sour when
bodies start turning up at inconvenient times, with a trail that keeps
pointing directly at Harry.
     Standard noir stuff, to be sure, tag-teaming with a sultry South
Florida setting to create some major deja vu.  Then screenwriter E. Max
Frye (working from James Hadley Chase's novel "Just Another Sucker") pulls
out some of the expectation-twisting tricks he showed off in his script
for Jonathan Demme's SOMETHING WILD.  The oddball touches start popping up
with regularity:  Harry lighting a cigarette which flares up in his face;
Harry running face first into a post; Harry fumbing with a tape recorder
as he tries to catch his accomplices scheming; Harry "seducing" Rhea with 
all the romantic subtlety of a stud horse.  Suddenly PALMETTO seems to be
coming from a slightly different place, one where the protagonist isn't
just an ordinary guy led into a bad situation by his zipper.  Harry
appears to be hopelessly inept, portrayed by Harrelson with his impressive
gift for convincing ineptitude.
     Sadly, PALMETTO soon veers from goofiness to predictable
over-complexity to twisty-turny absurdity.  The plot twists become ever
more elaborate and ever more unnecessary, burying a few sturdy sequences
like Harry's efforts to keep a cop from spotting a body in his car's
trunk.  Since there's never any real attempt to establish the
relationships, it's hard to care much about how Harry will explain his
actions to his artist girlfriend Nina (Gina Gershon), or what exactly
Harry might learn from his ordeal.  Finally, the whole film goes
completely mental in a finale which finds Harrelson suspended over a vat
of acid, Gershon tied to a chair and Shue vamping around in a black
pixie-cut wig.  I half expected the story to be concluded next week, same
Bat-time, same Bat-channel.
     I suppose at the very least PALMETTO succeeds at avoiding the film
noir rut where only the names change from one film to the next.  It's just
bizarre enough that it might have been entertaining, if only it made an
ounce of sense.  Credit Harrelson and Frye with providing a brief, faint
hope that noir might have a few more miles left in it, provided somebody
remembers to bring along a steering wheel.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
In French, the phrase "film noir" literally means "black film." Webster 
defines it as "a type of crime film featuring cynical malevolent 
characters in a sleazy setting and an ominous atmosphere that is conveyed 
by shadowy photography and foreboding background music." Classic film 
noir, including such memorable fare as "The Big Sleep," the original 
"Cape Fear," and Orson Welles' striking "A Touch Of Evil," employed black 
and white photography to emphasize the long shadows associated with the 
genre. Color came into play with neo-noir films like "Chinatown" and 
"Blade Runner." "L.A. Confidential," easily the best film of 1997, is a 
wonderful piece of contemporary neo-noir filmmaking. For a textbook 
example of how to take all the elements of neo-noir and create an 
absolute mess, there's "Palmetto." 
Based on "Just Another Sucker," a short story written by British author 
Rene Raymond under the pseudonym James Hadley Chase, "Palmetto" shows 
what happens when a filmmaker puts style ahead of substance. Director 
Volker Schlondorff ("Tin Drum, "The Handmaid's Tale") stated "We weren't 
even sure for a long time if it was going to be a thriller or a comedy." 
It shows. "Palmetto" is too preposterous too be taken seriously as a 
thriller and too ponderous to work as a comedy.  
The story begins when journalist Harry Barber (Woody Harrelson) is 
released from prison. Someone turned state's witness and revealed that 
Harry was framed, a "reward" for blowing the lid on corruption in the 
small Florida town of Palmetto. Bitter and broke, Harry plans to 
hitchhike to Miami and start his life over, but ex-girlfriend Nina (Gina 
Gershon) appears to return him to Palmetto. While hanging out at a bar, 
he notices that a beautiful woman has left her purse in a phone booth. 
Harry pockets her cash, only to have the woman reappear and catch him 
with her money in his pocket. No problem, though. The radiant blonde is 
Rhea Malroux (Elisabeth Shue,) the young wife of a very rich older man 
with heart problems, and she has a proposition for Harry. Rhea needs "a 
threatening voice and someone to collect the ransom" for the staged 
kidnapping of her teenage stepdaughter Odette (Chloe Sevigny.) The girls 
want to bilk a half-million dollar "ransom" from the old man and will 
happily give Harry $50,000 for helping with the scam. 
Things go wrong, of course. Odette is found dead, leaving Harry 
frantically trying to dispose of the corpse and cover his tracks. In an 
ironic twist, Harry is asked to work for the local D.A.'s office. They 
need a press liaison to field questions about Odette's kidnapping and 
feel that Harry is the perfect man for the job.
Not a bad set-up for a noir film, if only Schlondorff knew how to handle 
the material, but he never settles on a consistent tone. The actors don't 
know what to do with their characters either, muddling the proceedings 
even further. As if that wasn't enough, the story suffers from major 
problems in logic.
Woody Harrelson is a talented actor with an admirable willingness to take 
on risky parts, but he's lost here. Presented as a crusading journalist 
who was horribly wronged, it makes no sense that Harry would be stupid 
and dishonest enough to get caught up in this scheme. Harrelson clearly 
doesn't know what to do with Harry's character, so he spends most of the 
film glowering, sweating and generally acting miserable. Meanwhile, 
Elisabeth Shue gives a goofy performance, behaving like a vamp on nitrous 
oxide. As the stepdaughter, Chloe Sevigny lays on so many slurpy quirks 
that she comes off like Juliette Lewis Jr. Despite a number of steamy 
scenes, there's no chemistry between Harrelson and the women. To make 
matters worse, Schlondorff badly dubs in dialogue while the character's 
lips are running over each others bodies.
Two particularly bad scenes highlight the film's problems. While driving 
with a body in his trunk, Harry has a minor car wreck and a cop shows up. 
The officer wants to help change Harry's flat tire and asks him to open 
the trunk. Harry's pathetic attempts to keep the trunk closed might have 
worked if played as comedy, but under Schlondorff's grim direction, the 
scene is just embarrassing. 
The film's nadir comes when a bad guy prepares to kill Harry and Nina. 
We're supposed to be horrified watching our hero dangling over a bathtub 
filled with acid, but by this point the film has foundered so badly that 
the scene is merely reminiscent of when Jessica and Roger Rabbit were 
suspended over a vat of dip. 
Had "Palmetto" been played with tongue firmly in cheek, it might have 
been an entertaining shaggy dog story. But under the harsh direction of 
Schlondorff, the film is just a sluggish paint-by-numbers exercise in neo-
noir cluelessness. Avoid this nonsense and go see "L.A. Confidential" 
instead.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As writer, newspaper man, and recently freed ex-con Harry Barber,
Woody Harrelson is in a heap of trouble.  All hell is breaking loose,
and he's long sense lost control of the situation.
     It all started when an incredibly sexy, married woman named Rhea
Malroux, played by a perfectly cast Elisabeth Shue from LEAVING LAS
VEGAS, started coming on to him in a bar.  She wanted him to meet her
to discuss a job with a certain element of risk involved.  And she
didn't just say it, she almost panted it.  Wearing a tight, low-cut
pastel sweater, she was not a woman you'd want to refuse.  ("I'm just a
girl with a little ambition," she tells him later.  Watch out for
people with such false modesty.)
     When Rhea met him at his rented bungalow by the beach, she
explained her foolproof plan.  Her stepdaughter Odette, played by Chloe
Sevigny from KIDS, was to be kidnapped.  Well not exactly.  They were
just going to say she was being kidnapped.  All they needed Harry to do
was type a note, make a threatening phone call to her sick husband, and
collect the $500,000 ransom.  Harry would get a $50,000 cut.  Her
husband would never involve the police so there was no element of risk.
But, as the press notes aptly say, "nothing is 'that' easy."
     Set in the bright Florida sun, PALMETTO may not look like a film
noir, but it is firmly routed in that genre.
     Frequent thunder without rain means the characters sweat profusely
in the thick humidity.  And as in BODY HEAT, the mixture of humidity
and tensions causes sex to break out on the set.  When Rhea meets Harry
in his cabin, he doesn't trust her, so he frisks her to see if this is
a setup and whether she is wearing a wire.  They both get so involved
in the examination that it turns into a very hot sex scene.  Similarly
when her stepdaughter drops by another day, she's like a cat in heat as
well.
     The story asks the traditional questions of "Who is conning whom?"
and "Who is for real?"  Although several of the plot elements are easy
to predict, many aren't.  One of the best small twists occurs when
Harry is first brought in by the police after they find out about the
kidnapping.  This confrontation does not go at all as Harry or the
audience suspects.
     The excellent actor Woody Harrelson gives a surprisingly
self-controlled and almost pensive performance.  His vulnerable
character increasing loses it, and every time he thinks he's ahead of
the game, he isn't.  ("I was in it right up to my ears, and no idea how
I was going to get myself out.")  Woody takes a more subtle approach to
the role that he typically has to others.  The result is a character
who seems quite genuine.  Further grounding the story in reality, Gina
Gershon gives a rock solid performance as his blowtorch wielding,
sculptor girlfriend with whom he lives.
     "I tried writing but nothing comes out," Harry tells us in
voice-over.  "There's nothing worse than a writer who has nothing to
say."  Well screenwriter E. Max Frye's adaptation of James Hadley
Chase's novel, "Just Another Sucker," has a lot to say.  Although
little of it breaks any new ground, the movie by German director Volker
Schlondorff thoroughly entertains.  You won't feel cheated like Harry.
And you'll get your money's worth as the twists and surprises
accelerate as the movie races to its conclusion.
     PALMETTO runs 1:52.  It is rated R for sex, violence and profanity
and would be fine for mature teenagers.

Author
Evan S. Beach
    I was really looking forward to seeing "Palmetto".  I grew up in 
Bradenton, across the Manatee River from the real Palmetto, and was there 
until I came to Pittsburgh, and I remember them filming bits of the movie 
around town while I was there.  Palmetto is an utterly boring, ugly town, 
so I didn't really think any movie set there would amount to much, but 
figured that with talent like Volker Schlondorff, Woody Harrelson, and 
Elisabeth Shue, Hollywood might be able to do something decent.  If not, I 
thought I might still enjoy seeing some familiar scenery.  I was wrong.  
It was a waste of $6.50.
    I actually enjoyed the humor in the first half of the movie; it made 
Harrelson's character a lot more human and realistic.   Scenes like the 
one where goes down the wrong way in the hallway of the courthouse, or the 
one where he has trouble getting rid of the typewriter make his character 
more believable.  I think the movie would have worked much better if it 
had stuck to comedy instead of bogging down in trying to squeeze film noir 
out of a noir-less setting.  Florida in places like Palmetto is more 
laughable than it is mysterious.  It's full of old people on tricycles, 
everything's tacky and garish, there are condos all over the place, and IQ 
is painfully low.  Suspense?  No way.
    Most of the movie's problems lie in its screenplay.  Not only is the 
setting unbelievable, but the plot is so contrived that it becomes 
increasingly disappointing as it unfolds, finally reaching its nadir at 
the completely unsatisfying conclusion.  As the plot sinks, so does the 
dialogue and characterization.  The characters become increasingly 
cartoonish.  One, in what I thought was the most confusing sequence in the 
movie, is shot by a police officer while running along a beach.  In the 
next scene he's still running, through something like a swamp (how the 
hell he got from the beach to a swamp, I don't know), then he's driven to 
the courthouse, then somehow makes his way out to someone's estate, where 
he gets the crap beat out of him, but keeps bouncing up, ready for more.  
It was like something out of a Wile E. Coyote cartoon.  Reviewers' 
comparisons to Who Framed Roger Rabbit? are well-founded.  There are also 
numerous things that didn't make sense, for example, how did whoever 
dragged the typewriter out of the river know where it was?  Why was there 
seaweed in it?  Why didn't Harrelson's character just tell the cop that 
there wasn't a spare tire?  Why didn't he copy the tapes?  Why did he let 
his girlfriend listen to the sex on them? and so on...  I can believe that 
an investigative reporter can have trouble lighting a match, but some of 
his blunders are just too much- things that anyone with common sense 
wouldn't do.
    Finally, I didn't enjoy seeing the footage shot in my town- it 
bothered me too much that Hollywood was just making stuff up.  I'm sure 
most people don't care, but I at least have to point out that there aren't 
any beaches in Palmetto.  Just lots of marsh.  What was totally believable 
is that Harrelson's character took so many risks in order to get money to 
leave town.  I know exactly how he felt.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Woody Harrelson typically stars in films that I detest.  More
importantly, perhaps, is the fact that Woody Harrelson typically plays
as characters that I detest.  Natural Born Killers, which is one of the
worst films of all time, features Harrelson as one of the most
deplorable excuses for a human being I've ever seen.  Kingpin, one of
the worst comedies of all time, features Harrelson in an unsympathetic
role as another terrible guy.  And other films in which he has a
significant part, such as Indecent Proposal (which I hate) and recently
Wag the Dog, all show Harrelson playing scum.  In Palmetto, Harrelson
plays more scum, but this time he's good-natured scum (but, regrettably,
very stupid scum).  
Harry Barber is his name.  He lives in the small town of Palmetto,
Florida.  Upon his release from jail in the opening scenes, he is
courted by his old girlfriend, Nina (Gina Gershon), and goes to live
with her.  Not long after this, Harry finds himself sitting in a bar, at
which point he accidentally meets Rhea Malroux (Elisabeth Shue), who has
a business proposition for him.  She wants him to be a voice on a
telephone, telling her rich husband that he has his daughter, and that
he wants $500,000 for the kid.
Of course, everyone will be in on the joke, Rhea tells Harry.  There
won't be any kidnapping, because the daughter, Odette (Chloe Sevigny),
wants some of the money, so she is doing it willingly.  And everything
goes as planned for about five seconds, until Harry makes various
revelations at even intervals throughout the film, until suddenly what
has been clear to the audience since they all saw the preview is finally
clear to Harry, as well.
Palmetto is okay.  I enjoyed it for what it is, which is a low-key,
absurd film highlighted by some terrific acting and a bunch of plot
twists that seem to be present only because plot twists are pretty fun. 
These are the kinds of plot twists you can't predict (they all caught me
by surprise), but the interesting thing is that, looking back on the
film, there are hints towards all of them.  I like it when films do
this, because it's clear that at least they didn't come out of nowhere.
I love Elisabeth Shue.  She is luminous and wonderful.  I can watch her
for hours.  She's great in Palmetto, although she is the kind of
character that I would imagine most actors probably wouldn't want to
play:  Rhea is all superficial gloss, and there is no substance beneath
that which we can see.  Without giving away too much of the plot (I fear
I already have...), let me just say that in order to understand the
things she does, we would need a psychologist analyzing her every word
and action.  I don't doubt that there are people like this in the world,
but if I were to meet them, I'd like to know what makes them act this
way.  
I like Gina Gershon, too, but she seems more suited to play the role of
the lustful wench that Shue has.  And Michael Rapport is one of those
actors that I dislike immensely.  I can not think of an actor that
irritates me more than this man.  I think back to Copland and cringe.  I
reflect on my experience watching Metro, and the thought of him annoys
me.  He's obnoxious, and full of himself, and overflowing with
testosterone and machismo.  I don't like him at all.  And for those of
you who have seen this film, there is a scene towards the end featuring
chemicals.  I like this scene very much.
The tone of the film, provided by director Volker Schlondorff, is
fairly well-established.  Palmetto has a lot of atmosphere, and the damp
and scummy setting of this small Florida town is rich in texture.  As I
watched, I was somewhat reminded of the far-superior Body Heat, of which
Palmetto often seems like a remake.  
Unfortunately, the film disintegrates into pure ridiculousness by the
final scene.  Most of the film isn't even remotely plausible, but I was
adequately sidetracked through most of its running time.  It's only at
the final twist that I finally gave up.  I liked the way Palmetto
unravels, but absurdity can do in even the most interesting pictures.  I
did get something new out of Palmetto, however--I can now be confident
that Woody Harrelson isn't bound by playing awful people.    
>From 0-10:  6
Grade:  C+

Author
Jerry Saravia
Film noir has lately seeped in many corners of the film industry. We've seen
examples of deadpan noir (an Ebert term applicable to "Destiny Turns on the
Radio"), farce noir ("Clay Pigeons," "Fargo"), revisionist noir ("Pulp
Fiction," and a slew of rip-offs), old-fashioned, hard-boiled detective noir
("L.A. Confidential"), time-bending, surreal, neo-noir ("Lost Highway," an ode
to "Detour") and, finally, daylight, Florida noir. As far as current noir, I am
most impressed by "Lost Highway" because it is so unconventional and a sign of
the new cinema to come where there are no boundaries with structure or logic. I
am less excited with Florida noir, a hark back to Elmore Leonard's shenanigans
in the ordinary "Stick." Not that Florida is a flat setting (it was ideal for
1991's "Cape Fear"), but it doesn't build for the kind of atmosphere that noir
needs - that air of desperation. That desperation is well-handled in
"Palmetto," but it fails miserably in "Wild Things" - two of the newest
additions to noir. 
"Palmetto" stars Woody Harrelson as a rambunctious former reporter just out of
prison for a crime he didn't commit - he was apparently framed in a police
cover-up. Now he starts life over with his sexy girlfriend (Gina Gershon), an
artist, and is offered a job with the police department! He resists the offer,
and finds himself neck deep in trouble with a flirtatious blonde siren
(Elisabeth Shue). After stealing money from her purse, she asks him to
participate in a scheme involving the kidnapping of her sister. Before you can
say murder, corruption, conspiracy, double indemnity, Woody gets in a jam he
can't get out of. The desperation begins. In an ironic twist, he's hired by the
police department to cover his own story, which involves him as a possible
murder suspect. 
"Palmetto" is breezy fun for a while, but it takes much too long for it to go
anywhere. An inordinate amount of time is spent on Woody's couplings with Ms.
Shue before the plot kicks in gear. The problem here is that Harrelson and Shue
have no believable sultry sparks between them - Shue's best leading man has
been Nicolas Cage by far, and he played a drunk! The film has the perfect
sweltering atmosphere to convey hidden passions and desires, but its tone is
too uneven. It goes from completely deadpan, to wildly over-the-top, rainy
climaxes, to deadly serious innuendoes of the "Gingerbread Man" variety -
witness the gory shenanigans of the Michael Rappaport character that belongs in
a different movie. 
At least "Palmetto" floats with Woody's charisma and comic timing (not to
mention the more lustrous Chloe Sevigny), but "Wild Things" has no one
dependable to keep things interesting. The story has Matt Dillon (wildly
miscast) as Lombardo, a respected high-school teacher who is convicted of
raping two local teenage beauties of the "Scream" variety, the rich blonde
Kelly Van Ryan (Denise Richards), and the girl from the alligator nests' living
in a trailer, Suzie (Neve Campbell). And that's about as far as I can go in
describing the plot except to say that Kevin Bacon shows up as a clean-cut cop,
and Bill Murray hilariously plays a shyster. 
Although "Wild Things" is sleazy, exploitative to an extent, and often cheesy,
the film's twists and turns are much too apparent. Perhaps, I've seen too many
film noir thrillers but I could anticipate its every move, excluding Kevin
Bacon's stunning reversal of roles that I'll keep mum about. The other flaw is
that the complex weaving of twists reveals little about the characters or their
humanity. In the best tradition of film noir with classics that range from
"Double Indemnity" to "Chinatown," there was always an identification with the
protagonists and an understanding of their motives for their actions, no matter
how depraved. Here, there is no one to identify with on any level, possibly
because no effort was made to make the characters' personalities real or
consistent - they appear to be cartoon characters out of a Vogue fashion
spread. The only character worth caring about is Neve Campbell's Suzie, but
then we learn she's not quite what she seems either.
"Palmetto" is the better film to see, but I miss the old days of film noir
when the dialogue sparkled and cut the air like stabbing someone's back. The
atmosphere was always there, but it served as an existential backdrop for the
sins of mortal men and women. Desperation hung like an endlessly dripping wet
blanket - it was omnipresent. "L.A. Confidential" and "Lost Highway" are the
best recent examples of that type of noir. The rest is disorganized, silly and
counterproductive. 
More reviews can be found at JERRY AT THE MOVIES
 

Author
David Sunga
Written by: E. Max Frye (based on the James Hadley Chase novel JUST
ANOTHER SUCKER) 
Starring: Woody Harrelson, Elisabeth Shue, Gina Gershon, Chloe Sevigny
Synopsis: 
Two con artists find the perfect patsy in Harry (Woody Harrelson) - - an
inept former journalist who trips and bumps his head into a post, tries
to slap a girl and gets poked in the eye, has ill-timed fits of
coughing, and fails at everything he does. 
The story is told from Harry's point of view. Harry always carries
around a shot of whiskey although he swears he doesn't drink. One day
Harry is approached by the con girl Rhea (Elisabeth Shue), who is
similar to Harry in that she carries around a cigarette but swears she
doesn't smoke. Seduced, Harry agrees to participate in a money-making
scheme involving faking the kidnapping of Odette (Chloe Sevigny), the
teenage daughter of a rich man. Turns out, it's all part of a needless,
very puzzling, extremely elaborate and convoluted scheme (it involves
hiring special impersonators) by two cons in order to fool Harry, a hero
who barely has the intellectual capacity of a wooden post.  
When the 'kidnapped' Odette is found dead, the clues point to Harry as
the kidnapper/murderer, and the police are hot on Harry's trail. Harry
suddenly realizes he has been framed while others have taken the ransom
money. Can he get out of this mess?
Opinion:
PALMETTO is a long, uninteresting film with all the wrong feel. Hero
Harry is an inept bungler who trips up often and consistently
overestimates his own intelligence. This farcical kind of character
works best in an entertaining NAKED GUN action comedy or DRAGNET spoof.
But PALMETTO is played like a dark, serious, detective noir drama, and
watching Harry's bumbling confidence amounts to an irritating
distraction.
There's a lapse in concentration in the middle of the movie as the
camera goes wild on breasts, buttocks, short skirts, colored painted
nails, and women's legs. Even when the focus is supposedly on Harry and
his dilema, you can always notice the side of Elizabeth Shue's breast
forming a prominent foreground. 
Towards the end, PALMETTO re-focuses on plot for the grand finale - - a
confusing explanation involving impersonators, with Woody Harrelson
handcuffed and suspended over a tub of acid as he hears the criminals'
confession. 
If you can imagine 'Shemp' from the THREE STOOGES playing the detective
hero of an HBO 'lingerie suspense' thriller, that's how out of synch
this movie feels.

Author
Christian Pyle
You know the plot:  a dimwit with a shady past is seduced into committing a
crime only to be double-crossed by a fatal femme.  In "Palmetto," the dimwit is
Harry Barber (Woody Harrelson), a reporter who's just been released from prison
(he was framed by the gangsters and corrupt officials he was investigating). 
Enter la femme:  Rhea Malroux (Elisabeth Shue), the sexy young wife of the
richest man in Palmetto, Florida (Rolf Hoppe).  She and her stepdaughter Odette
(Chloë Sevigny) have a plot to extort 500K from the old man:  Harry will
"kidnap" Odette.  After groping both women, Harry agrees.  As everyone except
Harry can see, he's being set up as a fall guy.  Sure enough, before long,
Harry has a dead body in his trunk and the cops on his tail.  His
brother-in-law (Tom Wright), an assistant DA, has hired Harry to be the press
liaison for the case, so Harry gets a front row seat for his own manhunt (and
we get to watch him sweat-literally).  There are several plot twists, of
course-a couple of them even took me by surprise.
Apparently every woman in Palmetto is a raving horndog, and they're on Harry
like he's the only bone in the kennel.  Shue vamps so broadly that I expected
Tex Avery's wolf to show up.  Her incredible performance in "Leaving Las Vegas"
seems to have been a fluke.  Here, she could easily be mistaken for Melanie
Griffith.  Shue's character is supposed to be a savvy schemer but she comes off
as a brainless bimbo.  In addition to Shue and Sevigny, the kennel includes
Gina Gershon (who filled the dimwit-with-a-shady-past role in "Bound") as
Harry's girlfriend Nina; when Harry gets out of jail, she licks his face (now
there's a horndog).  The parts are so overplayed that with a little push
"Palmetto" could have been an over-the-top parody of film noir a la "Romeo is
Bleeding."  As it is, it's best watched at  2am on Showtime (the love scenes
seem to have been written for one of that channel's soft porn programs anyway).
"Palmetto" has a well-known director, Volker Schlöndorff, who's best known for
his adaptations of major literary works, especially "The Tin Drum."  I suppose
he must have been drawn to this plot-by-numbers script by the same admiration
for classic film noir that led Scorsese to remake "Cape Fear."  Schlöndorff
tries hard-he makes an interesting motif out of the ubiquitous palmetto
bugs-but nothing can freshen up this stale script.
Read Chris' movie reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Christian+Pyle
Check out our auctions at
http://cgi3.ebay.com/aw-cgi/eBayISAPI.dll?ViewListedItems&userid=pyles

Author
Andy Wright
Grade: B- (Nothing spectacular, but worth a look on a rainy day)
    After the embarrassingly inept obscenity charge leveled against his 
1979 masterpiece The Tin Drum last year in Oklahoma City, Director 
Volker Schlondorff understandably has some mixed feelings about all 
things Americana, and this at times hilariously smutty flick, in which 
an entire town is seemingly populated by nothing but opportunistic 
sex-crazed weasels, lets him exploit that to the max. (Virtually every 
character in this film has an aura of 30-weight Valvoline). Woody 
Harrelson headlines as a none-too-bright journalist just released from 
prison who gets immediately drawn into an ill-fated kidnapping scheme. 
It's a plot that's been done countless times before, but 
Schlondorff's sardonic affection for the cliches and a game cast 
(particularly Chloe Sevigny who, as the Lolitaish center of the plot, 
more than fulfills the promise she showed in Kids and Trees Lounge) 
makes it all seem relatively fresh. The true ace in the hole here proves 
to be Something Wild scripter E. Max Fry, whose screenplay contains 
enough unpredictably weird elements to keep even the most jaded noirist 
interested.
    Palmetto is nowhere near great - it's a little too hamstrung by 
the iron-clad conventions of the genre that it's riffing on - but 
it's not half-bad, either. I have a feeling Jim Thompson would 
grudgingly approve.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Author
Jamie Peck
PALMETTO
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Harry Barber (Woody Harrelson) is fresh out of prison, where he's served a 
couple of years for a crime he didn't commit. Even though he harbors animosity 
towards the obtuse local officials, Harry's first order of business is to return 
to his home town of Palmetto to be with his sculptor girlfriend Nina (Gina 
Gershon). While searching for work, he catches the eye of Rhea Malroux 
(Elisabeth Shue), the mysterious sexbomb wife of a Palmetto millionaire. Rhea 
proposes a scheme that'll get Harry $50,000 easy -- to play a small part in the 
staged kidnaping of her jailbait stepdaughter Odette (Chloe Sevigny). "You do 
like risks, don't you, Mr. Barber?" Rhea alluringly coos. Boys, form a line 
behind me. 
Part of "Palmetto"'s success can be attributed to the performance of Elisabeth 
Shue, who demonstrates here that her Oscar-nominated turn in "Leaving Las Vegas" 
might merely be foreshadowing great things to come. Shue's a seductive, campy 
delight, and pulls off a Barbara Stanwyck-Gloria Swanson combo with admirable 
relish. The other actors form a solid ensemble around her, including Sevigny 
("Kids"), tantalizingly slutty as a teen tease, as well as the ever-likeable 
Gershon, cast a far cry from her extreme roles in "Bound" and "Showgirls." 
Harrelson is still doing fine follow-up work to "The People vs. Larry Flynt."
"Palmetto" does have its share of grievances. Harrelson's narration is needless, 
I suppose, and Gershon's Nina cries to be meatier than she ultimately is. One of 
the plot's unexpected angles -- that Harry is asked by the police to become the 
press liaison for the very crime in which he's involved -- could have been 
played a little better. There are moments when you question the tone, but it's 
never so unstable that it deserves the reproach it's been receiving from most 
other critics. If "Palmetto" didn't want to be laughed at, would it really have 
tacked on a climax that plays like a live-action "Who Framed Roger Rabbit"? 
Although a few elements can be questioned, the movie works well on its own 
terms. Thanks to a juicy cast -- especially Shue -- and the nifty material 
approach from director Volker Schlondorff (you remember him from last summer's 
suddenly re-popular "The Tin Drum," right?), everything runs smoothly. And for 
fans of revelation-heavy endings, this film's got a few shocks in store that I 
won't even dream of revealing. "Palmetto" is a generous amount of fun to watch, 
and that's all you need to know. 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Woody Harrelson, Gina Gershon, Elisabeth Shue, Chloe Sevigny, 
      Tom Wright, Michael Rapaport, Rolfe Hoppe
Director: Volker Schlondorff
Producers: Matthias Wendlandt, Al Corley
Screenplay: E. Max Frye based on JUST ANOTHER SUCKER by James Hadley 
      Chase
Cinematography: Thomas Kloss
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     From time-to-time, as I'm sitting in a theater watching a movie, I 
experience a profound sense of deja vu.  In the case of something like 
PALMETTO, which isn't a sequel or a remake, and is based on a novel I 
know I haven't read, it can be a disturbing feeling.  Upon reflection, 
however, the reason is obvious:  there's not a moment of originality in 
the entire motion picture.  Everything -- characters, situations, 
settings -- is culled from other sources.  This is the kind of movie 
I've seen on a cable movie channel late at night, although it usually 
shows a lot more skin and features names like Andrew Stevens and Shannon 
Tweed rather than Woody Harrelson and Elisabeth Shue.  
     The intent of director Volker Schlondorff (THE HANDMAID'S TALE) is 
to create the newest entry to the burgeoning genre of '90s film noir.  
However, despite an impressive cast and a talented cinematographer who 
knows how to play with light and shadow, he's stuck with a B-movie 
script.  Instead of making PALMETTO tongue-in-cheek, which is the tone 
it cries out for, he plays everything straight.  The result is a stale 
and tedious mystery that surprises viewers with some of its twists only 
because they're so contrived that they make little sense.
     Harry Barber (Harrelson) is a hard-luck case.  After falling victim 
to a well-orchestrated frame-up and spending the last two years in 
prison for something he didn't do, he is suddenly sprung when the 
testimony of an ex-cop reveals the truth.  Even as he reunites with his 
loving, supportive girlfriend, Nina (Gina Gershon), Harry continues to 
harbor bitterness against the officials of the town of Palmetto, 
Florida.  Then, seemingly out of the blue, he meets the rich and sexy 
Rhea Malroux (Elisabeth Shue) at a local bar.  After sizing Harry up 
over a drink, she offers him a job.  "The money's good but, in exchange, 
there's an element of risk," she informs him.  After contemplating the 
dried-up employment market, Harry agrees to consider her offer.  The 
work sounds simple.  Rhea and her step-daughter, Odette (Chloe Sevigny), 
are planning to con Rhea's rich, dying husband out of $500,000 by 
staging Odette's (fake) kidnapping.  The money would then be split 50/50 
between the two women, with Harry getting $50,000.  It sounds like a 
reasonably straightforward scheme, but, in movies like this, nothing 
ever goes as planned.
     The acting is one of the reasons PALMETTO doesn't work.  Woody 
Harrelson, Gina Gershon, and Michael Rapaport (as Rhea's bodyguard) give 
grim, humorless performances.  They put on their serious faces and treat 
the script like it's Dostoevsky.  Elisabeth Shue, on the other hand, 
goes 180 degrees in the opposite direction, vamping it up and generally 
acting silly.  The only one to turn in a good job is Chloe Sevigny 
(KIDS, TREES LOUNGE), who manages the perfect mix of ripe sexuality and 
innocence.  In fact, Sevigny's Odette is the lone character who's even a 
little interesting, and her screen time is sadly restricted.  Meanwhile, 
as the straight-shooting Assistant D.A., actor Tom Wright stands around 
for most of the picture looking constipated.
     It's hard to feel much sympathy for Harry Barber.  First of all, he 
insists on bothering us with a useless voice-over narrative.  Secondly, 
the guy is as dumb as a wooden post.  When it comes to doing things that 
are blatantly stupid, he's like teenagers who go skinny-dipping in 
horror movies.  He's courting disaster, and, of course, it's more than 
happy to welcome him in.  For a plot like this one to work, audiences 
not only have to buy into Harry's lack of intelligence, but must become 
party to it.  In that way, the screenplay is insulting.  There are a lot 
of twists and turns in PALMETTO, but most are so hard-to-swallow that 
they don't have any impact.  And, when the truth finally emerges, it 
isn't likely to cause more than a momentary shrug.  Ultimately, that 
shrug is about all this movie deserves.  If you really have a burning 
desire to see it, wait for its appearance on Cinemax some night at 2 AM, 
between ILLICIT DREAMS and BODY CHEMISTRY IV.  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Matt Williams
An attempt at Florida film noir, Palmetto fails at the most fundamental
levels. It's slow moving, uninvolving, and plain just uninteresting.
Harry Barber (Woody Harrelson) is an ex-newspaper man, just out of jail
after being framed for a crime.  His luck hasn't been the best, but
things are looking up when a mysterious woman, Rhea Malroux (Elisabeth
Shue), approaches him with a proposition.  She wants Harry to help her
and her stepdaughter, Odette (Chloe Sevigny), pull off a fake kidnapping
scheme to get $500,000 out of her stingy, but rich, husband Felix (Rolf
Hoppe).
At first, all Harry is expected to do is provide a threatening voice on
the phone, and to collect the money (of which he gets to keep 10%).
But, as the deed is carried out, things are not what they seem, and
Harry gets caught in the ensuing storm.
Palmetto pulls out all the stops to achieve a film noir film, but the
effect never quite comes together.  It's got the sultry Florida heat,
seductive women, and even curvier plot twists, but the whole thing
smells of paint-by-numbers. Sure, the right ingredients are there, but
the end result is much too artificial.
A lot of the problems lie with the script, which, though providing some
genuine surprises, is packed full of leaden dialogue and bland
situations. Even the plot twists don't seem to flow well with the rest
of the story. Some of them, for example, come from so far afield that
they seemingly only make sense because the writer needed a twist (for
example: Harry's spontaneous job offer, or the whole typewriter
situation).
The characters are mostly lifeless, played to type, but not much more.
Woody Harrelson plays Harry with such imbecilic thick-headedness that
it's hard to even picture him as an ex-journalist.  Elisabeth Shue vamps
it up, but doesn't add anything special to the role.  Chloe Sevigny
gives a terrible performance, trying to be a sexy 17-year old, but she
just leaves a bad taste in your mouth.  Some of the supporting cast
(notably Gina Gershon and Michael Rapaport) give stronger, but, in the
end, meaningless performances.
And to top it off, the pacing of the film is much too slow.  As the
movie grinds to a halt, you're given too much time to wonder why you're
wasting it watching Palmetto. If you're in the mood for this type of
movie, you'd be much better off going out and renting some classic film
noir.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the INTERNET MOVIE CRITIC'S ASSOCIATION at:
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
The talent that Woody Harrelson has in entertaining movie audience's is
that he has an endless amount of daffy charm and exuberant personality
that it makes him one of the few actors that has made a successful
transition from the small screen to the big screen.  After an Oscar
nomination for 1996's 'The People vs. Larry Flynt', Harrelson has earned
the respect of his peers and is well on his way to a great career.  When
I saw him in 1992's 'White Men Can't Jump', I was taken by his penchant
for playing losers and 'Palmetto' is a great role for Harrelson to strut
his stuff.
'Fargo'.  A movie about a man who hires two thugs to kidnap his wife and
things go wrong.  Do things ever go right in a crime movie?
'Palmetto'.  Cleverly disguised as a 'Fargo' wannabe.  Set in an
opposite climate ('Fargo' was set primarily in upstate Minnesota in the
dead of winter) and this movie is set in the steamy town of Palmetto,
Florida and the movie is different from 'Fargo' but strangely, for some
sub-conscious reason, I thought of 'Fargo' as I was watching this movie.
Woody Harrelson stars as a former convict whose conviction is over
turned after two years in the slammer and he is released.  He's a
journalist who was framed for an article he wrote exposing political
corruption at the municipal level and he returns to his female companion
(Gina Gershon) and tries to re-capture his former life before jail.
Upon his release, he meets up with a sultry woman in a bar (Elisabeth
Shue) who propositions him to play a part in a kidnapping scam for which
he will receive 10% of $500,000.00.  At first he turns down the proposal
but later finds it to be an irresistible way to pay "the system" back
for the two years of his life stolen by the justice system that kept him
in prison.
The plan calls for Harrelson to act as the bag man in the kidnapping of
Shue's stepdaughter.  Harrelson is supposed to act as the threatening
voice on the phone and will pick up the ransom money.  There are many
plot twists and turns that will tease and tantalize the audience in its
running time of nearly two hours and the film has a solid plot, doesn't
suffer from over length and is unpredictable.  Its underlining strength
comes from the fact that the film isn't over done and has basically only
two or three characters at the most on-screen at one time with a couple
of exceptions.
Shades of 1981's 'Body Heat' and 1990's 'The Hot Spot' shine through but
director Volker Schlondorff's sure-footed direction is on-target and the
film is based on the book 'Just Another Sucker' by James Hadley Chase.
Gina Gershon's character is somewhat sedated and perhaps unnecessary but
the real surprise in this film is Elisabeth Shue who puts her best foot
forward since her Oscar nominated role in 1995's 'Leaving Las Vegas' and
her character is that of an evil woman with a slightly psychotic twist
combined with a feeling of superiority and lack of conscience.
Not a great film but a rigorously solid one, 'Palmetto' is a film about
white trash at its sleaziest.  A good example of immorality played up
with little violence and a lot of sexual innuendo.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
