Title
Review for Wrong Man, The (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Judging by the majority of Hollywood films, criminals on the
run and other less fortunate Americans envision Mexico as
the country of milk and honey, where all their problems
would become thing of the past. Protagonist of THE WRONG
MAN, 1993 drama directed by Jim McBride, is going to
experience rude awakening from such pipe dreams. Alex Walker
(played by Kevin Anderson) is US merchant sailor left
stranded and penniless in Mexico. To make things even worse,
he comes at the wrong place in the wrong time and thus
becomes suspect in the murder case. In order to evade the
authorities he meets unusual couple - aged con man Mills
(played by John Lithgow) and his young, sexy wife Missy
(played by Rosanna Arquette). He befriends them hoping that
the three of them might leave the country. But as police,
led by Captain Diaz (played by Jorge Cervera Jr.) and
Detective Ortega (played by Ernesto Laguardia) is closing
in, so is Alex torn between the friendship towards Mills and
obvious lust he feels towards Missy.
Director Jim McBride, whose previous career includes
interesting U.S. remake of Goddard's BREATHLESS, could have
turned Michael Thoma's script into thriller or comedy.
Instead he decided to film THE WRONG MAN as drama,
concentrating at the characters at the expense of plot and
film's pace. The temptation was great, since John Lithgow
didn't fail to deliver great performance in his role of
Mills. Kevin Anderson, on the other hand, was rather
uninspiring while Rosanna Arquette, although giving a fine
acting job, catches our eye more because of scenes featuring
her bare breasts. Interesting opportunity to use Mexican
detectives as comic relief or some kind of Greek chorus was
also wasted. When this overlong film ends, the viewers would
be disappointed, less because of the film's bad quality, and
more because of many missed opportunities.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
