Title
Review for Fearless (1993)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FEARLESS  (1993) ** 3/4  Directed by Peter Weir. Screenplay by Rafael
Yglesias, based on his novel. Photography, Allen Daviau. Production design,
John Stoddart. Editing, William Anderson. Music, Maurice Jarre. Cast: Jeff
Bridges, Isabella Rossellini, Rosie Perez, Tom Hulce, John Turturro, et al.
A Warner Bros. release. 121 minutes. Rated R (Language, violent accidents).
"Fear no more the heat o' th' sun,/ Nor the furious winter rages;/Thou thy
wordly task has done,/Home art gone, and ta'en thy wages./Golden lads and
girls all must,/As chimney-sweepers, come to dust."
Did that song from Shakespeare's "Cymbeline" lurk in the mind of  Rafael
Yglesias when he wrote the novel "Fearless" and later the movie's script
(his first)?
Max Klein (Jeff Bridges), the protagonist (and literally, hero) of
Yglesias, undergoes a  sea-change in the air. In a plane that is about to
crash, Max who normally suffers from fear of flying, suddenly thinks of his
death, becomes strangely detached, and in a state of quasi-Nirvana helps a
young boy.
This is shown later in the film, as one of its flashbacks. "Fearless"
actually begins with the wrecked plane on the ground, rescue operations and
Max calmly saving a number of passengers. One of the desperate victims is
Carla (Rosie Perez) whose baby was killed.
Mission accomplished, Max walks away and rents a car. Experiencing euphoria
he finds joie de vivre in the machine, the road, the flamenco music on the
radio, the fresh air.
He stops by the house of a friend not seen for 20 years. He takes her to a
pancake restaurant, bites with rapture and impunity into strawberries, a
fruit deadly to his allergies but now a blissful symbol of Max's rebirth. .
The tone shifts to shrewd irony when the vanished Max is tracked down by
the F.B.I. A lady from the airline, using euphemisms that avoid the C-word
("crash") nervously offers Max a train ticket to his home in San Francisco.
But the smiling man wants to fly back, first class.
Up to this point all the sequences are brilliantly conceived and conducted.
But when Max "The Good Samaritan" returns to his city, the tone becomes
increasingly solemn and soulful. Max, having in his mind gone through
death, has acquired a sense of immortality and invulnerability.  As in
Shakespeare's song he fears nothing any more. But unlike it, he has not
come to dust.
As played by Jeff Bridges, Max is both a strong physical presence and
someone who isn't there. In a sort of trance that new to the movies, he is
weirdly detached from his wife Laura (Isabella Rossellini), his son and
from life as he, Max, once knew it.  Yet now he knows "the taste, the joy,
the feeling of life."
Is he crazy? Is he like one of those medieval "illuminati"? Is he a holy
innocent? Is he in a state of grace?
Max will pay no heed to the airline psychiatrist (the oddly cast John
Turturro) who wants to help him get well, or to an ambulance-chasing lawyer
(the amusing Tom Hulce) who wants to help him get rich through lawsuits.
Yet when three months later Turturro tries novel therapy by bringing
together Max and near-catatonic Carla, it works.
Charismatic Max slowly overcomes Carla's resistance to consolation. There
is powerful love between this overly disparate duo, he a chic architect,
she lower-class with a vengeance. But this love is not as in "to fall in
love" --which is how Laura interprets it. It is love in an ineffable,
mystical sense.
There's a great deal more, which I will not attempt to describe. And which,
for me,  does not live up to the great expectations of the start, or to the
hope that director Peter Weir would recapture the magic, mystery and
mysticism of his early Australian films "Picnic At Hanging Rock" and "The
Last Wave."
What bothers me in "Fearless" is that rather than form following  function,
too often form seems to mold function, By form I mean the performances and
the visuals, and by function, the meaning of Bridges's peculiar behavior.
This strategy leads to conceits, preciosity and mannerisms. It leads to
some silliness which we are supposed to read as "existential" depth, as in
the Christmas shopping sequence and later the speeding Volvo. It also leads
to our getting nudged by an oversupply of symbols.
Max's being an architect is a cliche for building and rebuilding anything
from souls to societies. The symbol can be used delicately (Eiji Okada in
"Hiroshima, Mon Amour") or heavily (Gary Cooper in the pretentious "The
Fountainhead").  The very name Max Klein pointedly combines "maximum" and
"small" ("klein" in German). Max comes out of the wreck unscathed save for
a Christ-on-the-Cross wound, which matches some Christ-like declarations.
The name-tag on the waitress who serves him strawberries says "Faith."
Laura teaches ballet to children, welcomes visiting Turturro as the kids
dance around "flying." And on and on.
One twist of the movie is to present us with the sad and familiar
survivor's guilt (Carla) and its counterforce, survivor's non-guilt (Max).
But this is murkily developed, as is the oversimplified rapport between
Carla and Max.
Rosie Perez also grates while her speech is often incomprehensible . As for
Max's state of grace, it cannot hold a candle to the classic "A Condemned
Man Escaped" the utterly simple gem by "transcendental" Catholic director
Robert Bresson, a film that ends with an immensely moving "All is Grace."
"Fearless" stays too much on the same level. There are striking parts in
it, but the whole did not involve me emotionally or intellectually. The
film works well pictorially. It has the best shot and edited plane crash
since   1992's "Hero," a movie which curiously enough, used another Good
Samaritan, but to satirical ends. Even more impressive, because it is so
subtle, is the image of Max on a roof-terrace photographed like an Edward
Hopper painting.

Author
Jon A Webb
     Jeff Bridges survives a plane accident and saves a bunch of
people's lives; in the process, he discovers he does not fear death.
He becomes transfigured, spiritual, angel-like.  He continues on this
path for a while, but eventually reality begins to intrude.
     This is an interesting film from a psychological point of view.  I
found it compelling and engaging for about the first two-thirds, but
the ending is a little too pat and down to earth for my taste.  This
film, directed by Peter Weir, sells itself out to conventional mores in
the end, like WITNESS.  Just as we shouldn't expect an Amish woman to
abandon herself to Harrison Ford in WITNESS we should not expect Jeff
Bridges to find such a neat path out of the maze he has constructed in
his mind here.
     I really liked the spiritual theme in the beginning of the film.
You really don't know if Bridges is crazy, or anointed.  Bridges's
natural devil-may-care style meshes well with this role.
     This film has some remarkably good points.  The plane crash scene
is incredible, perfectly believable; it looks just like all those
pictures we've seen on the news.  Rosie Perez is great as the spiritual
partner to Jeff Bridges. There is a scene or two where just her
expression tells a complete story (I have in mind the scene with
Isabella Rosselini). Jeff Bridges is also good, but not as good, I
thought, as Perez. Isabella Rosselini is acceptable, but she clearly
does not have her mother's presence, or ability to project her beauty
into a role and thus add depth to a movie.
     I found the script a little weak.  There is this obvious ploy
concerning strawberries that is just a little too obvious.  As I said,
the pat return to hearth and home at the end is a little too neat and
Hollywood-esque.  And an early scene where Bridges encounters an old
lover seems pointless.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Date Released:  10/29/93 (General)
     Running Length:  2:04
     Rated:  R (Mature themes, language, charred bodies)
While standing on a station platform waiting for an oncoming train, have 
you ever wondered what would happen if you threw yourself on the tracks?  
Or, while atop a high building, have you ever been teased by an impulse - 
regardless of how brief and irrational - to throw yourself off the edge?  
FEARLESS presents a compelling - and sometimes unnerving - account of a 
man who lives every moment of his life like that because he has, in his 
opinion, passed beyond the normal bounds of what we consider as "living", 
in effect cheating death.
The film opens with Max Klein (Jeff Bridges) striding purposefully 
through a head-high field of corn, a baby in his arms and a young boy by 
his side.  These three are among the survivors of a brutal plane wreck 
which has strewn death and debris all over a southern California corn 
field.  After delivering the boy to the authorities and the baby to its 
tearfully-joyful mother, Max walks away from the scene of the accident 
and heads to Los Angeles, where he holes up in a motel, not even calling 
his wife Laura (Isabella Rossellini) to let her know that he's alive.  
Eventually, he is forcibly brought back to his San Francisco home, opting 
to fly instead of taking the proffered train ticket.  His family finds 
him a changed man, and the airline therapist (John Turturro) can't reach 
him.  Eventually, Max is introduced to another survivor - Carla Rodrigo 
(Rosie Perez), a young woman who lost her son in the crash.  Perhaps not 
unexpectedly, the two embark upon a deeply-emotional and highly-unusual 
friendship.
FEARLESS is much like a masterful, but incomplete, painting.  At the 
center of the canvas, where the primary focus lies, the colors are 
brilliant and the image fully-realized.  But moving towards the edges, 
the grays begin to dominate and the coherence of the picture fragments.  
This movie knows and develops its main theme with undeniable accuracy and 
power, but many of the subplots and lesser ideas are left untold or 
vaguely fleshed out.
This is one of those rare films that gets the audience to think while 
still telling a gripping story.  The issues it presents are not easy to 
grapple with, nor are there pat solutions held ready for mass 
consumption.  During the course of two hours, we are made to consider the 
nature (and fragility) of life and death, and the relationship between 
God and man.  As Max puts it, "People don't so much believe in God as 
they choose not to believe in nothing."  That one line says as much about 
his character as it does the intentions of this motion picture.
Max isn't particularly likable, but we feel for him nonetheless.  His 
trauma has distanced him from the rest of humanity and we sympathize with 
his wife's frustration when she can't get through to the man he used to 
be.  He thinks he's invulnerable - that since the crash didn't kill him, 
nothing can.  To prove his point, he defies death at every opportunity:  
walking across a street filled with speeding cars, balancing along a 
precarious ledge hundreds of feet above the ground, and pushing his car 
as fast as it will go.  We may realize that Max is no superman, but he 
doesn't.
Jeff Bridges, who tends to play his roles with more stoicism than 
emotion, finds the right balance.  He gives us a Max that we aren't 
likely to identify with, but who doesn't promote audience apathy, either.  
Isabella Rossellini is not as effective as Laura - she doesn't always 
have the best grip on her character - but her part doesn't demand the 
same level of intensity.
Best of the three principles is Rosie Perez, whose portrayal of a grief-
stricken mother unable to deal with the death of her son, comes across 
with stark believability.  For the most part, Perez's acting is 
understated, which makes sudden bursts of emotion all the more forceful.
Tom Hulce's role as a conniving, money-grubbing lawyer could have been 
left out altogether.  Not only in Hulce totally unconvincing, but this 
particular element of the story is pointless and distracting.  John 
Turturro doesn't fare much better.  I never accepted him as a therapist, 
and his presence adds little to FEARLESS.  Once his character disappears, 
we never miss him.
The theatrical trailers for this movie would lead you to believe that 
it's an uplifting experience.  Nothing could be further from the truth.  
While there are a few moments of emotional exultation, most of the movie 
explores darker elements of human nature.  The tangible presence of the 
Grim Reaper hangs above FEARLESS from start to finish.
The right composer was chosen for the job.  The score, by Maurice Jarre, 
is suitably eerie at all the right times.  There is no grand fanfare or 
devastating crescendo during the crash sequences.  Instead, we get an 
unearthly, almost-silent theme that seems to slow down the action, 
lending added impact to the tragedy.
While the relationship between Max and Carla is developed to perfection, 
there are a few offshoots of the main story that are never plumbed 
satisfactorily.  Great care is taken to show the hero worship exhibited 
by the boy who followed Max out of the plane, but beyond the setup, 
little is done.  There are indications of the stress that this places on 
Max's relationship with his own son, but the situation is given 
perfunctory treatment.
One of the most emotionally-wrenching scenes in FEARLESS is a group 
therapy session where survivors relate their memories of the crash.  
There is so much untapped potential here that it seems a crime for 
director Peter Weir to give it such cursory treatment.  
FEARLESS is an impressive film even considering the untapped potential.  
The interactions of the three main characters are potent without being 
shocking or sensationalistic (especially those between Max and Carla), 
and the import of the questions raised isn't diminished because of the 
lack of firm answers.  The final scene is a fitting, if highly-symbolic, 
conclusion to all that goes before it, and should provide fodder for 
post-movie conversations and/or reflections.  FEARLESS is not a film that 
you walk away from and immediately forget.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
Peter Weir has been on a roll for a long time.  His characters are always in
a very careful high wire act, on the verge of falling either way into an
emotional pit.  It is no real suroeise, to see that this film follows that
same pattern.  At least, this film has a feeling that the person who wrote
it knows a little more about the whole subject than not, and
it may be just because the screenplay writer, was also the person who wrote
the novel.
FEARLESS is not a difficult story, but it is one of those "event" type of
stories that require a little time to "heal" itself, and to work itself out.
The story is a one liner.  A plane crashes, and a few people survive.  And
those who do can remember the details in, do so in a sort of guilty style,
like they should apologize for being alive and not having died.  Max has
been in an invincible form since, not needing to solve his own problems.
And while he is in this form, and capable of helping others ( as it turns
out ), his own body is resistant to a few events, like the fact that he is
allergic to  strawberries.  Carla has been feeling awful, because her own
child died, just seconds
after she let go of him from her hands.  Various others are also in a
disarray of an emotional stress.
And the film is really about Max, and his ability to help out a few of the
plane survivors, specially Carla.
With some very nice performances by Jeff Bridges and Rosie Perez, this film
is rather nice to watch, and never crosses the line of bad taste, or into
the realm of horror. It is about those people's fears, and lack of
understanding, since the accident.  A tough subject... a tougher story,
requiring a tough director to lead it.  There are similarities
here to the film THE HERO, where Dustin Hoffman has a similar role. Here
things are better defined.  There a supreme acting job made the film.

Author
David Wong Shee
CREDITS  
Director: Peter Weir (PICNIC AT HANGING ROCK, GREENCARD)
Screenwriter: Rafael Yglesias (author of the novel).
Composer: Maurice Jarre.
Actors: Jeff Bridges (THE FISHER KING), Rosie Perez, Isabella Rossellini,
        John Turturro (BARTON FINK), Tom Hulce.
     A domestic American airliner crash lands after a complete
hydraulic failure.  Most of the passengers and crew are killed but
miraculously about a score of people survive.  One of them is Max (Jeff
Bridges) who experiences the complete disappearance of fear several
minutes before the crash.  Following his survival he is filled with
messianic feelings of exaltation and invulnerability.  These are
further reinforced by the fact that many of the other survivors
attribute their survival to him, and he is acclaimed as a hero in the
popular media.  He returns home to his wife and son changed in some
profound but incommunicable way.  This produces enormous strain on his
relationship with his family which is compounded by a special bond he
develops with another survivor, Carla Rodrigo (Rosie Perez), who is
stricken by the loss her infant son in the accident.  The story follows
his journey back to the world of ordinary mortals.
     I am not sure whether this is a film to be assiduously avoided by
those phobic about air travel, or paradoxically whether it is an ideal
thriller for such people.  There is no accounting for taste, I guess.
     From a psychological point of view Max seems to enter an altered
state of consciousness in the face of extreme stress.  The examples of
traumatic bereavement and cathartic resolution were, I thought, well
executed being both convincing and affecting.  The portrayal of the
psychiatrist Dr Perlman (John Turturro) employed by the airline to
assist the survivors was also a balanced and overall sympathetic one.
At one point Max clips the Dr Perlman across the chin in retaliation
for an invasion of his personal space.
     As a follow-on to this, I spent the rest of the film hoping he
would punch the lawyer, Brillstein (Tom Hulce) who admirably filled the
role of the villain of the piece.  Brillstein was one of those lawyers
who display the phenomenal proclivity of American's for litigation in
its worst possible light.  He pressures the potential litigants to
perjure themselves for financial gain out of some sense of entitlement
and blame on someone else for tragic misfortune.  It is fortunate, or
perhaps unfortunate, depending upon your outlook, that God cannot be
sued for such things.
     From a spiritual perspective there are certainly mystical aspects
to the film.  As in Weir's earlier PICNIC AT HANGING ROCK, disaster is
accompanied by some unaccountable event.  In PICNIC there is the eerie
unexplained disappearance of several schoolgirls, while in FEARLESS,
Max undergoes some strange transformation at, or near the point of
death.  He has a "near near death" experience, so to speak.  These
mystical elements are effectively enhanced by Maurice Jarre's
soundtrack which fosters a transcendent atmosphere throughout.

Author
Ralf Benner
     Jeff Bridges moves right into the front ranks of American actors
with his performance as Max in Peter Weir's FEARLESS.  Because the
movie takes us deep into one of our worst fears--knowing that we could
die in a plane crash--Bridges's work here is a balancing act; he has to
make us believe in him as plane crash survivor, a savior and that he's
so full of bliss as a result of the crash that he's temporarily without
fear.  This series of character shifts would drive any really good actor
to boozing, because so much of what Max does is conveyed by thoughts
behind the eyes, behind the silences.  Movie actors rarely get into this
kind of cerebral communication, and maybe the only ones who'd dare to
try are those unafraid of the unrelenting, magnifying camera.  Bridges's
emotional marvel of an achievement is all the more singular in that
Weir puts the camera right on top of him.  Close-ups are perilous in
that they can distort as well as expose a lack of technique; when the
camera is practically breathing on them, most actors fall back on handy
poses and stares and audiences can sense that sometimes there's nothing
behind the masks.  This happens a lot to Robert Redford and Clint
Eastwood, occasionally to Robert Duvall.  Not here: as the camera moves
in, Bridges keeps right on going, holding back nothing; the close-in
camera accelerates his rapport with us, soothing our qualms. (In the
opposite direction, Michael Douglas's crowd-pleasing male bitchery gets
cheerfully speeded up when the camera gets in his face and we see the
flaws and nearly feel the fire breath coming out of him, but he's
safe--he's always playacting.) What makes unsafe Bridges a
revelation--and how good Weir is as director--is that while we can feel
the fears of the passengers and the haunted doubts and troubles of the
survivors, we're able to feel Max's sudden freedom from mortality as
our own anxieties are ever-increasing.  In that FEARLESS plays havoc
with our gloom-filled anticipations about what we know is coming, there
are times when we hate Weir for putting us through what would otherwise
seem like a depressing chronology of events from a TV
disaster-of-the-week film (in fact, Charlton Heston played in one, from
the pilot's perspective)--and some of us hated the movie company for
having the insensitivity to release this picture at a time when
millions of us would be flying over the holidays--but when the movie
climaxes and goes to black, we're absolutely wiped out yet strangely
exhilarated.  Some in the audience were crying, others sobbing, most of
us for a moment or two unable to move at all.  The impact rests on
Bridges's failure-proof hydraulics.  Has there ever been a more
reassuring face in a plane cabin, in life or on screen?
     Jeff Bridges has usually been an outsider looking in, big-time
success having eluded him despite appearing in more than twenty movies,
including THE LAST PICTURE SHOW, THE ICEMAN COMETH, KING KONG, WINTER
KILLS, BAD COMPANY, FAT CITY, SOMEBODY KILLED HER HUSBAND, CUTTER'S
WAY, THE MORNING AFTER, NADINE, the neglected TUCKER: THE MAN AND HIS
DREAM, THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS.  And in spite of scoring a mild success
with JAGGED EDGE, in which he pulled a Tommy Lee Jones from THE EYES OF
LAURA MARS: we're allowed to invest feelings in him, only to get
suckered.  His first Oscar nomination came for THE LAST PICTURE SHOW,
but it was his second Oscar-nominated performance, in THUNDERBOLT AND
LIGHTFOOt, that audiences perceived within him a loner's stir: he was
onto something unexpressed in his relationshp with Eastwood.  (And it's
what's not defined that has made the movie a cult favorite.)  I never
could get into STARMAN, for which he received his third nom, because it
committed very early on one of those entertainment no-nos by having
something called Karen Allen as a romantic co-star.  (Hiring her for any
movie is like breaking the unspoken law about having babies and kids in
soap operas: that is, no Allen, no babies and only kids who are bad
seeds.)  AGAINST ALL ODDS was a totally unnecessary remake of the
classic film noir OUT OF THE PAST, but certainly watchable: with
bronzy flesh, muscular chest, closely-cropped beard and sun-bleached
hair, Bridges's blue eyes stand out more than usual; they have the
deepest blue center and this blue bleeds to the outer perimeters in
lighter and lighter shades.  Faked? Maybe, yet he's never looked this
attractive before or since and I can't begin to tell you how much this
helps the movie, which is filled with a ton of ludicrous moments, the
most hilarious not the banging at the counterfeit Chichen Itza ruins
but the nipple bit at Rachel Ward's Cozumel hideaway.  Propped against
Bridges' chest, the gaunt, masochistic Ward flicks her fingers across
his nipples and instead of being aroused, he lays on some pro-football
gibberish, totally oblivious to his own erogenous zones.  (Some okay
touristy shots of Cozumel, the real Chichen Itza, a spectacular one or
two of Tulum, one of the most breathtaking spots in the Yucatan
peninsula, and an hysterical but hysterically good theme "Take A Look
At Me Now" by Phil Collins.)  In THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS, Bridges
didn't get the acclaim that his co-star Michelle Pfeiffer did but in
his blurry-eyed, greasy-haired seediness, he was its sick-soul center,
something like a Bukowski boozer on reduced intake maintenance, though
not quite the "cold razor-blade" Pfeiffer accuses him of being because,
after all, a cold blade wouldn't have insisted on his dog staying in a
swanky hotel room.  (Animal lovers surrendered to him no matter the
misgivings of his character once they saw Eddie the dog on couches,
beds and on that hotel ballroom stage, laying at the piano.) Before the
chance to show his magnum force in FEARLESS, Bridges came within
reasonable striking distance in Terry Gilliam's "The Fisher King,"
which is rather like the antithesis of his Max.  As a wrecked boozer
D.J. whose favorite pastime was pouncing on yuppies for advocating
"yuppie inbreeding" and for negotiating sex as "love moments," Bridges
got robbed of a full due because his character's transition happened
off screen, his drunk moments were fairly weak, and though he got
sturdier as the movie plodded along, most of our attention went to
Mercedes Ruehl, who, tramped to the max in red lipstick, red
fingernails, red bra and slip and off-the-shoulder blouse and dangling
"fuck me" earrings, never stopped acting, reacting, gesturing.  (When
the camera captured cigarette smoke blowing from her nostrils, she's a
magnificent retrograde dragon with that old time religion--a heart of
softened gold.)  She also blew Bridges away, though perhaps he let her.
But there's a connection between THE FISHER KING and FEARLESS.  In
the former, Bridges is one of the "janitors of God," called upon to
clean up the mess he's made of things, and to help clean up the mess of
his new best friend Williams.  The latter has him as one of the angels
of heroism, almost rapturously saving others and, finally, having to
save himself.
     If Bridges' dive into temporary decay and manginess in THE FISHER
KING doesn't altogether grab us because we're fixated on Ruehl,
Williams and, in her best screen performance to date, Amanda Plummer,
he certainly puts sleazer Mickey Rourke on notice in AMERICAN HEART.
Looking like too many bums walking the streets here in Houston (or the
cons who appear via satellite on Geraldo), in long hair pulled back in
a ponytail and unsightly mustache, with cigarette smoke clouding a
hardened-by-prison-life face, Bridges is one constant amazement: is
there any other American actor right now who can so physically give
himself over to scroungy characters and still keep us watching?  (Rourke
so immerses himself, as he does in BARFLY, that he becomes repulsive,
an audience turnoff.)  Unfortunately, as directed by Martin Bell and
written by Peter Silverman, AMERICAN HEART is overly depressing and,
sadly, boring: it's like a Bukowski story told from a
fifteen-year-old's point of view.  What we come away with is that crime
never pays--for the lower class.
     One of the crash survivors in FEARLESS, Rosie Perez, who's
somewhat like a dwarf Lena Olin, takes no back seat for acting honors;
she's prodigious in her mother's pain and guilt in believing she's
responsible for the death of her two-year-old Bubble, who was thrown
out of her protective arms when the plane impacted.  And when Bridges
forces her into recognizing that she's not at fault, you come close to
believing that the red tool box she holds in her arms is her baby; she
pulls from us primal instincts about our children in ways we've rarely,
perhaps never felt before from movies.  And though Weir gives her a
first scene of closure, setting to rest her agony and her appreciation
for all that Bridges has done for her, he gives her a second one that
makes it less of a neat sum-up; we can see in her eyes a whole litany
of regrets.  There are two scenes that don't quite satisfy.  When Perez
enters group therapy, her pent up anger is released, and while it's
logical,  she reaches such levels of piercing shrill that you can't
help but question why Weir didn't ask that she reduce the octaval tones
a bit.  The other is more a technical error:  Perez goes to see Bridges
in the hospital and she gives him a box of Whitman's Sampler.  Only
there's no plastic wrapping on the box.  Did the cast munch on the
goodies between takes?
     Playing Bridges' wife is the beautiful, crooked tooth Isabella
Rossellini.  Watching her here, or in one of my favorite movies
COUSINS, we're aware of a spiritual linkage between her and her
mother:we could swear that Ingrid is with us again, her presence so
strong and supportive.  It's too early to tell if Rossellini will be as
good an actress, but right now, she bests Ingrid in being natural,
at-home, without the little actressey tricks to fall back on, which
have sometimes marred Ingrid's performances.  With Bergman, there was
frequently an unwillingness to be exposed; she hid behind an aura of
cool stateliness that she actually fought against but often lost to.
Rossellini, maybe because she has her mother as object lesson, perhaps
because she's been a sought-after model, is the reverse:  she's artless
as vulnerability, which is what makes her so right and glowingly alive
in COUSINS; when Ted Danson, in his best screen role thus far, risks
all and asks her to dance at his father's wedding, the rush of love and
warmth is limitless.  The lack of self-centeredness helped her
enormously in BLUE VELVET, about which she was the only thing I found
worth watching.  (I know this will pique the Lynch fans, who can't seem
to get enough of his gory silliness.)  Here in FEARLESS, as a dance
instructor, she shows a maturity--and a thick neck--not seen
previously, and though she's been straight-forward about martial
problems (as with William Peterson in COUSINS), she hasn't before
played the troubled wife as a 911-er.  And she doesn't play the wife as
the Madonna of our dreams; her patience has its limits.
     Peter Weir may be the most talented director of the middle class's
contretemps and vicissitudes, showing us our own foibles, how we lock
ourselves into situations that we really deep down inside know are
hopeless or wrongheaded, no matter how meritorious the intent.  Those
who worship the director above all else might call Weir's mc
introspections his "auteur": the waste of young lives being needlessly
sacrificed in GALLIPOLI; Mel Gibson's reckless Australian journalist
in THE YEAR OF LIVING DANGEROUSLY barely escaping from the slaughter
as he runs to the last plane jetting out of an Indonesia dissolving
into chaos after years of corruption and apathy; Harrison Ford in THE
MOSQUITO COAST as the bespectacled, immersed in deglamorization Allie
Fox, novelist Paul Theroux's slowly-turning-mad adventurer-inventor
who, with his family, departs an America he believes will be destroyed
in an apocalyptic war and settles in a Central American country.
(Ford's a Robinson Crusoe with a "Lord of the Flies" cap on; he
pioneers his new world ingeniously, but the encroachment of
self-fulfilling doom, generated by his own paranoia, is always
festering within him.  That it's a fable is, I think, one of the
reasons Ford succeeds here: his legendary-like movie heroes give him
credence; he's been out of the real world for so long that it seems
natural for him to go mad.  It's not a pleasant character, and by the
end, knowing that he has destroyed himself and has come close to
destroying his family, he's thoroughly dislikable.  This is, of course,
why the public rejected the movie--it didn't want to see a hero
self-destruct.)  And there's the gooey WITNESS, filled with such
heavenly-blessed family values that to fault it might suggest to some
that I'm against family, against "goodness."  Weir dismisses the very
realities he uses to set the plot in motion--a young Amish boy
witnesses a murder and can identify the murderer--and we're never
allowed to see how what the boy witnessed affects him.  The real
witnessing is Harrison Ford's in how the Amish live so admirably their
humble lives--and how he's affected by it.  But the goodness in the
family life fails to reward the audience with what it wanted most: Ford
carrying off that Amish amazon (Kelly McGillis) at the end.
Intractable upper middle class values get the Weir once-over in DEAD
POETS SOCIETY which is rather like a catalyst to action against the
constrictions of humdrum education, and while it's not a mistake to put
a vibrant Robin Williams at the center, it is, I think, a mistake on
Weir's part to allow Williams his impromptu standup routines.  Harming
the movie even more is the destiny of one of the pupils; his fate is de
rigueur.
     The lack of box office for FEARLESS, considering its subject
matter and that its visual dinginess and claustrophobia intensify what
is a vivisection of pain, seems predictably bad movienomics--this is,
after all, a February or March kind of picture, when most of us are
safely away from airplanes.  But I'm fully prepared to defend Jeff
Bridges' performance as the most unfairly neglected in the 1993 awards
from critics' associations.  Nothing I've seen throughout that year
compares to what he does here, and that includes Hopkins in that
megabore THE REMAINS OF THE DAY.  And politics, not acting, won Tom
Hanks his awards.  One certainty:  FEARLESS won't show up as any
in-flight entertainment.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Peter Weir is a director whose best work has ventured into the
darker corners (PICNIC AT HANGING ROCK, THE LAST WAVE); Jeff Bridges is
an actor whose best work has involved loners or characters on the
fringe (THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS, THE FISHER KING).  The collaboration
of these two individuals, along with one of the fall's most compelling
trailers, gave me high hopes for FEARLESS.  It only delivered halfway.
FEARLESS contains a handful of gripping moments and one outstanding
performance by Bridges, but it also has some hollow interpersonal
moments and a lack of focus that holds it back from real greatness.
     Bridges is Max Klein, a San Francisco architect who walks a way
from a devastating plane crash with a single scratch, and having saved
several other passengers.  Afterwards, Max finds himself possessed of a
surreal peace, a sense that he has triumphed over death.  His reaction
baffles disaster psychologist Bill Perlman (John Turturro), as well as
Max's wife Laura (Isabella Rossellini), who finds herself unable to
relate to him.  Dr. Perlman tries introducing Max to fellow survivor
Carla Rodrigo (Rosie Perez), a devoutly religious woman thrown into a
severe depression by the death of her infant son in the crash.  While
Max begins to draw Carla out, he remains unable to connect with anyone
else, leaving his friends and family to wonder whether he'll ever
return.
     FEARLESS begins and ends, quite literally, with a bang.  Max's
emergence from the smoking wreckage of the crash, holding a baby and
followed by other survivors, is a haunting and marvelously crafted
scene.  Indeed, FEARLESS maintains an intense, hypnotic energy for the
first fifteen minutes, as Max's odd new persona takes hold.  Then,
rather abruptly and much to the worse, it shifts gears into fairly
run-of-the-mill family drama.  Max alienates his wife and son; wife
Laura clings with a tenacious optimism that eventually he'll snap out
of it.  This tangent of the story doesn't work for two basic reasons.
One, Laura isn't all that interesting, and Rossellini doesn't succeed
in projecting any warmth or concern.  Second, Max is such a jerk that I
felt everyone would have been better off if he had just left.  He's a
man who has turned his trauma into carte blanche to treat everyone
around him with a divine condescension, a palpable impression that
their experience of life can't be as pure as his.  Screenwriter Rafael
Yglesias, adapting his novel, doesn't have the guts to really attack
Max's arrogance, and Weir lets his Christ imagery (Max probing a wound
in his side; Max making mud from his saliva) just sit there without any
irony.
     The story picks up steam again once Max and Carla link up.  Their
relationship is handled delicately, and avoids the too obvious step
into romance.  Bridges and Perez convey a kind of unspoken
communication which punches home how stranded these survivors feel in a
world of people who can't possibly understand.  But again there are
swings into scenes without a note of truth, like an awkwardly acted
group therapy session.  There's also a distracting and obvious swing at
ambulance-chasing lawyers personified by Max's attorney (Tom Hulce).
By the time FEARLESS hits its wrenching climax, a flashback to the
moment of the crash wonderfully scored by Maurice Jarre, I felt as
though I had been through a ride as bumpy as the passengers on that
plane had.
     While Max Klein's character may not have endeared itself to me,
Bridges' performance did.  Like he did in STARMAN, Bridges carries
himself like an alien among us, but this time an alien with some
smugness.  It is he who takes an unlikable character and invests him
with some caring.  Max really believes he can save people, but he
doesn't understand that he's obsessed with his new self- identification
as a savior.  It is only when he tries to take Carla with him--rather
dramatically--that he comes to a certain understanding.  This
performance shores up my judgment of Bridges as the best American
leading actor around, and it almost holds FEARLESS together on its
own.  However, FEARLESS takes its metaphysics too seriously, and
doesn't keep its eye on what works best:  the reactions of two
survivors to a world now seen with different eyes.

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the things that make psychology so fascinating is the
fact that the same events create different reactions to
different people. This is case even with the worst possible
traumas, when the most experienced psychologists have
difficulties dealing with psychological aftermath. FEARLESS,
1993 drama directed by Peter Weir, represents the study of
one of such characters permanently altered with such
experience.
The movie is based on the novel by Rafael Yglesias, who
wrote the script. Max Klein (played by Jeff Bridges) has
just survived the terrible plane crash, which left many of
his co-passengers dead. Klein helps other survivors to leave
the burning plane and afterwards simply wonders off, not
even bothering to tell his wife Laura (played by Isabella
Rosselini) that he is alive. Afterwards he is found, brought
back to his family, but his wife can't fail to notice that
her husband is a totally changed man. Max escaped certain
death and now he thinks of himself as invulnerable and
godlike. Airline-appointed psychologist Bill Perlman (played
by John Turturro) can't reach him, but Klein, who became
totally alienated from his family, finds spiritual
connection with Carla Rodrigo (played by Rosie Perez),
grief-stricken mother whose child died in the same plane
crash.
FEARLESS, same as many other movies by Peter Weir, is hardly
experience which could leave viewers with smiles on their
faces. It is grim, uncompromising drama that deals with
death and makes the audience think about arbitrary nature of
that unavoidable fact of life. This is achieved through the
sharp contrast between two characters who are differently
affected with the same event, both in their soul and in the
ways they communicate with outside world. Max, who is
excellently played by Jeff Bridges, might see himself as a
person who cheated death, but since he can't connect with
the outside world anymore, his freedom is only superficial -
for all the loved ones he might be dead, nothing more than a
stranger dwelling in his body. Rosie Perez is also very good
as survivor whose guilt and grief make her not only very
alive, but the only person able to bring back emotionally
dead Max to the world of living. Unfortunately, Weir has
some problems in pacing of the film, and the large segments
on the film being wasted on unnecessary subplots or
characters, like John Turturro's therapist or money-grabbing
attorney played by Tom Hulce. The hallucinatory ending
doesn't answer questions about the nature of Max's
experience, and although some films might benefit from
leaving some questions opened, FEARLESS is not one of them.
But it could still be recommended as one of those rare
Hollywood examples of thought-provoking cinema.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
