Title
Review for Radioland Murders (1994)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Mary Stuart Masterson, Brian Benben, Ned Beatty, Michael Lerner,
       Scott Michael Campbell, Christopher Lloyd, Stephen Tobolowsky,
       Michael McKean, Corbin Bernsen, Brion James, Harvey Korman 
Director: Mel Smith 
Producers: Rick McCallum and Fred Roos 
Screenplay: Willard Huyck & Gloria Katz and Jeff Reno & Ron Osborne 
            based on a story by George Lucas 
Cinematography: David Tattersall 
Music: Joel McNeely 
Released by Universal Pictures 
     In the '70s and '80s, George Lucas had the Midas touch.  Combining
the STAR WARS saga with the adventures of Indiana Jones, Lucas amassed
a great deal of prestige for himself as well as a lot of money for his
distributors.  Thus, with Lucas' name featured so prominently in the
credits for RADIOLAND MURDERS (executive producer and story), it's
reasonable to have high expectations for the film (especially if you
haven't seen the dreadful previews).  Unfortunately, in this case,
instead of gold, we've been given dross.
     RADIOLAND MURDERS is like some horrible concoction synthesizing
elements of THE HUDSUCKER PROXY and BRAIN DONORS, and setting them in
the world of David Lynch's ON THE AIR.  This film has more gags in it
than anything this side of a Zucker/Abrahams/Zucker production, too few
of which work.  Admittedly, slapstick (like almost all comedy) is
extremely subjective, but you have to have a rather low laughter
threshold to find much of the sit-com style humor in RADIOLAND MURDERS
to be more funny than tedious.
     The first twenty minutes of the film are actually relatively
promising, with lots of fast cuts and snappy dialogue.  With an
inventive script, this sort of pace could have made for a wonderfully
wild ride.  Unfortunately, RADIOLAND MURDERS' screenplay is empty,
resulting in a movie whose frantic style makes it more tiresome and
chaotic than fast-paced.
     The story takes place in radio's heyday during the inaugural
on-air night for the new fourth network, WBN.  Based in Chicago, WBN
has been set up as a rival to NBC, CBS, and ABC.  It has an impressive
list of programs, including such nightly favorites as "The Black Whip,"
"Home Is Where the Heart Is," "Gork:  Son of Fire," and (my personal
favorite) "Johnny Ace: Hard-Boiled Dick."
     As the night's festivities get underway, Penny Henderson (Mary
Stuart Masterson), the station's General Secretary, is running around
trying to get everyone in position while fending off the apologetic
advances of a husband (Brian Benben) she believes to be unfaithful.
Disorder rules, and things really start to get messy when an
unauthorized voice makes an menacing pronouncement over an open mike.
Shortly thereafter, the first of many deaths occurs.  Even the arrival
of Lt. Cross (Michael Lerner) of the Chicago Police Department can't
stop the killings--and the prime suspect turns out to be Penny's
husband, Roger.
     I won't claim that there are no laughs in this film, although most
of my chuckles came from witty one-liners rather than the endless
attempts at slapstick.  However, the movie's limited comic success
doesn't justify one-hundred seven minutes of idiotic plotting and
pointless zaniness.  Silly motion pictures are often enjoyable, but
only when there's a modicum of creativity and inventiveness behind
them.  RADIOLAND MURDERS lacks those qualities.
     Of course, with ILM involved in the production, the visual and
audio effects are expected to be top-notch, which they are.  The cast
is also impressive, although, other than Mary Stuart Masterson, Brian
Benben, and Scott Michael Campbell, few of them get much screen time,
and no one is given an opportunity to really shine.  RADIOLAND MURDERS
is a movie of gimmicks, not actors.
     As a pioneering picture for the "future wave of special effects,"
RADIOLAND MURDERS makes an effective proving ground.  As a piece of
entertainment, its value is somewhat more dubious.  Lucas, his four
screenwriters, and director Mel Smith try hard to make us laugh but, as
was the case in John Turturro's four-cylinder misfire BRAIN DONORS,
this motion picture reinforces the simple truth that jokes don't
necessarily equate to humor.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Mary Stuart Masterson, Brian Benben, Ned Beatty, Michael
Lerner, Jeffrey Tambor, Anita Morris, Stephen Tobolowsky.
Screenplay:  Willard Huyck & Gloria Katz and Jeff Reno & Ron Osborn.
Director:  Mel Smith.
     A couple of years ago, director Barry Levinson made a movie based
on a twenty-year-old idea.  This pet project was loud, heavy-handed
and self-indulgent, and clearly showed why it hadn't been made twenty
years earlier:  it wasn't a very good idea.  However, Levinson had
acquired the cachet to make any movie he wanted to make, so he made
TOYS.  George Lucas has even more cachet, and he also decided to
produce a twenty-year-old idea.  The result, unfortunately, is similar
to TOYS.  RADIOLAND MURDERS is an attempt at farce that is simply
chaotic and grating, and its frantic pace can't disguise the fact that
it just isn't funny.
     RADIOLAND MURDERS is set in 1939 at WBN, a Chicago radio station
that is planning to launch a fourth national network.  On this evening,
the station owner (Ned Beatty) is entertaining potential affiliates and
a live studio audience with a sampling of the shows the network will
offer.  However, there is a lot more going on backstage than onstage.
Writer Roger Henderson (Brian Benben) is desperately trying to convince
his wife Penny (Mary Stuart Masterson), the station's do-everything
assistant, that he hasn't been unfaithful; the writing staff is
desperately working against the clock to make the changes ordered by
the chief sponsor (Brion James).  And someone is killing off members of
the station staff, with Roger becoming the chief suspect.
     For nearly its entire first hour, RADIOLAND MURDERS succeeded
primarily in giving me a terrible headache.  The story rockets from
character to character, lingering just long enough to let us see that
each one is defined almost exclusively by a single annoying character
trait.  The incompetent director (Jeffrey Tambor) has a bad toupee; the
station manager (Larry Miller) has a German accent; the head writer
(Harvey Korman) is a mush-mouthed drunk; another writer (Bobcat
Goldthwait) is...well, Bobcat Goldthwait.  Subtle nuance in
characterization may be too much to expect from a broad comedy like
RADIOLAND MURDERS, but it's still a problem when virtually the entire
cast is so irritatingly one-note that you begin hoping various
characters will be the next to die.  They are also stuck with dialogue
that must have had whiskers on it in 1939, like the ever-uproarious
"You may think you know what I know, but I don't think you know what
you think you know" bit.  The slapstick is better, but it too is simply
too stale to sustain the energy.
     The second half is a significant improvement, focusing on Roger's
attempts to stay one step ahead of the police and solve the murders
before he himself is arrested for them.  Brian Benben (of HBO's "Dream
On") is a charming comic actor, and his gifts with physical comedy make
a perilous descent down the side of the station building and dressing
in a Carmen Miranda get-up far funnier than they have any right to be.
But director Mel Smith (THE TALL GUY) makes the horrendous decision to
keep cutting away to the performers on stage.  Every time he does so,
RADIOLAND MURDERS just stops dead, and it's not worth the jerky ride
simply to see cameos by Billy Barty, Rosemary Clooney and George
Burns.  Benben is the best thing RADIOLAND MURDERS has going for it,
but Smith doesn't seem to realize it.
     Ultimately, that decision is indicative of what is most wrong with
RADIOLAND MURDERS:  no one seems clear exactly what it is supposed to
be.  An homage to the days of live radio?  A backstage farce a la
NOISES OFF?  A murder mystery?  A romantic comedy?  Lucas and his team
of screenwriters seem to want it all, and as a result they end up
without much of anything.  RADIOLAND MURDERS is one of those
unfortunate films which equates loud and fast with entertaining, when
in reality it's simply noisy and busy.

Author
Raymond Johnston
Director: Mel Smith
Starring: Mary Stuart Masterson, Brian Benben, Ned Beatty,
          Scott Michael Campbell, Michael Lerner, Michael McKean,
          Jeffrey Tambor, Christopher Lloyd, Bobcat Goldthwait
Story by George Lucas, Executive Producer- George Lucas
     Another long awaited comeback from George Lucas is another dismal
disappointment.  This attempt to recapture the spirit of thirties B-film
mystery thrillers quickly crumbles into a series of unfunny jokes and
unwelcome cameos.  It is only for a few minutes near the very end that
any sense of plot is developed, and those few minutes are not enough to
erase the tedium of the hour and a half that preceded them.
    The film is set in 1939 on the opening day of a new radio network.
The old big studios used to like the Big Broadcast plot because it gave
them an excuse to parade their comic and musical talent.  Much of the
material the talent used was their own, so the cost of developing a
script was greatly reduced.  A flimsy plot could be structured around
the jokes and songs, and a B-film was halfway home.  A few art deco
sets, and a crowd pleaser was guaranteed.
    This film certainly assembles a lot of talent, but then quickly
fails to give them anything to do.  Harvey Korman is passed out under a
desk for most of the film.  Christopher Lloyd and Robert Klein don't
even have any lines.  Bobcat Goldthwait, much to the detriment of the
film does.  One hopes in vain that he will be the first victim in a
string of humorous station murders.  He is not.  His endless drone
serves to underscore the complete lack of humor in the comedy.  The
basic level of comedy in the film is having somebody run down the hall
with last minute script changes, only to be hit in the nose with a door
and drop the pages, get tripped and drop the pages again.  This pale
ghost of slapstick occurs repeatedly.
     The two leads, Masterson and Benben play a bickering husband and
wife who both work at the station.  Their lack of chemistry and comic
timing makes one long for Abbott and Costello in WHO DONE IT?, the
film this is clearly trying to be.  While there are stand-up comics
everywhere in the film, from the elevator operator to the torch
singer's husband; Masterson and Benben are not a comic team.  That is
what the film sorely needs.
    Even a great comic team, though would have had to struggle to wring
the laughs out of this script.  In the opening scene, station owner Ned
Beatty throws the radio show's script back at the writers and says that
it isn't funny.  Advice that the makers of this film could have taken to
heart as well
     If the backstage scenes fail, the onstage scenes work a little
better.  Spinal Tap's Michael McKean portrays a Spike Jones band leader
and manages to do for big band music what he has done before for rock
and roll.  George Burns and Rosemary Cluney, veterans of the original
radio show films, make brief appearances.  A few talented actors do soap
opera, science fiction, and thriller stories for the live audience.
Just when these stories get good, the films leaves them and returns to
the less amusing back stage antics.  Even the Andrews Sisters
impersonators are a relief from the ingratiating Bobcat Goldthwait.
     Set and costume design are the film's main plusses.  Just like the
recent SHADOW, this film recreates the look of the thirties very
successfully.  As with THE SHADOW, one is left puzzled why the film
makers bothered to try to recreate obscure thirties cultural relics
without making the films at least as interesting as the originals.It
seems in both cases, and DICK TRACY as well, the main concern was the
visual , and not the narrative element.
      Woody Allen's new film, BULLETS OVER BROADWAY is a much funnier
attempt at a backstage comedy set in the art deco period.  Allen's
RADIO DAYS also recaptures the era with more feeling and wit.  Three
classical era Hollywood films that are much better are THE BIG CLOCK
with Ray Milland and Charles Laughton, INTERNATIONAL HOUSE with Burns
and Allen, and WHO DONE IT? with Abbott and Costello.

Author
Martin Wendelborg
"Radioland Murders" was a long time pet project for Excecutive Producer
George Lucas, who first thought it up after finishing "American Graffiti"
in 1973. He had his friends, who also helped him write "American Graffiti",
Gloria Katz and Willard Huyck (also responsible for films like "Howard the
Duck" and "Best Defense") write a screenplay, which was subsequently
rewritten by sitcom writers Osborn and Reno before the movie finally went
into production in 1993.
The movie takes place in 1939 and concerns a struggling radio station, WBN
in Chicago, that plans to take on the three major radio networks in
America. It is opening night, and the cast of zany characters have to cope
with last-minute script changes, hostile sponsors and MURDER. Brian Benben
plays Roger Henderson, one of the writers for the radio station. He is dead
set on winning back his soon-to-be ex-wife, Peggy Henderson (Mary Stuart
Masterson), secretary to the station manager (Ned Beatty). Peggy is
convinced that he has been unfaithful with the sex-crazed Claudette
Katzenback, the "va-va-va-voom" girl (Anita Morris), who is married to the
station's owner (Larry Miller, with a terrible german accent). In reality,
Claudette has been getting it on with everyone at the station except for
Roger, especially the director (Jeffrey Tambor), who is being blackmailed
by the trumpet player. When the trumpet player is killed, things start
going to hell...
The premise holds some promise for great comedy, but the writers seem to
have confused "frantic action" with "humor" too much of the time. During
the too-long 112 minutes you are hit over the had with gag after gag, too
many of which fall flat. The cast contains many familiar faces, so many in
fact, that you fail to make an emotional connection with any of them. Some,
like Bobcat Goldthwait, Cristopher Lloyd, Harvey Korman, George Burns and
many others, play so small and pointless characters that you wonder why
they are even there.
Nevertheless, there are many things about "Radioland Murders" that actually
work. Brian Benben (from the TV series "Dream On") is quite a good leading
man, and manages to evoke smiles and laugter from time to time, as do
Michael Lerner and Dylan Baker as a pair of detectives. The production
design and overall look of the film is excellent, and you'd never know the
movie was shot with a budget of only $10 Million. After all, with George
Lucas, the owner of the THX programme and Industrial Light & Magic, on
board you can excpect top-notch a Audio- and Visual experience.
However, the hyperactive pace of the film and the inscessant cross-cutting
between events, on stage and off, detracts from the overall enjoyment of
the film. If the filmmakers had only taken it easier (and allowed some more
re-writes) it might have been better. Still, if you are rested and prepared
for 112 minutes of mayhem and craziness and you manage to overlook the 50%
of jokes that don't work, you will find that Radioland Murders is a movie
quite unlike any other, frantic and flat in places, but still amusing and
interesting to watch.


Author
Jeff Pidgeon
     RADIOLAND MURDERS is the only film I've ever walked out of
and asked for my money back.  I only paid four bucks to begin with, so
this strikes me as a serious failure.  The high concept review would
be, "1941 meets RADIO DAYS".  The twenty minutes that I saw proceeded
to dump a truckload of characters on me, none of whom I cared about.
They all began running around in circles as fast as possible, usually
hitting each other in the face as they went through doors again and
again.  It seems that this is the opening night of a fledgling radio
station that's going national, and surprisingly nothing's going right
on the night of the big debut. I only made it to one of the murders
before I left, and the killer broke into the broadcast twice,
presumably to let the live audience(?) know that he/she was going to
kill someone else soon.  I couldn't understand what the voice said in
any event.  There's some stars here, but what this really needed was
first rate stand-up comedians to deliver this shit and give it some
timing and the illusion of wit.  The only ones to be seen were Harvey
Korman and fat-to-the-point-of-unrecognizable Bobcat G.  Why go
on--this is a mess of the first order, the worst I've seen this year.
     LOVE AFFAIR is an outsized disappointment, an inflated remake of
AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER the weepie all-but-advertised in SLEEPLESS IN
SEATTLE.  Beatty seems uninterested in playing anybody but himself
these days (or at least a media-hounded celeb), which automatically
puts the film out of the range of experience of most people.  Annette
Bening fares better, but she also suffers from the
Michelle-Feiffer-as-waitress-believability-syndrome.  The verbal
swordplay setup is sprinkled with romantic jazz standards, and you wind
up feeling a little like you're in a Woody Allen film.  There aren't
many sparks flying (much less heat) until they visit Beatty's aunt (a
decent cameo by Katherine Hepburn), and the combination of the gorgeous
island scenery and Kate's salty charm start winning Annette over
(Beatty seems to have little to do with it).  They're on an island in
the first place because their plane had to make an emergency landing,
so the two of them transferred to a beautiful ocean liner (man, the
hassles that rich people have to put up with), and they boated to the
island from the liner to see how Kate was doing.  Everything in the
film is like this ... it's as if love is impossible if it isn't in the
most stunning backdrop imaginable.  When Beatty loses Annette and goes
to a charity show with his ex-lover, Ray Charles is playing.  There are
sweet moments, but most of them are throttled by this incessant
upscaling.  About the time of the island visit, the pop ballads shut
off (like someone turning a tap), and Morricone's score takes over.
What limited emotional effect the film had, I credit the instrumental
score for at least half, if not more.  Morricone's score is sweet and
sad, and does more for the film than a score should have to.  A
leftover from the original plot--Annette's unwilling ness to reveal her
injury--seems odd and unmotivated.  It does make for some nice
say-the-opposite-of-what-you-mean dialogue from Robert Towne, though.
Garry Shandling gets all the laughs, and the photography/art direction
are fine, but overall it's pretty forgettable.  Still, more than one
member of the crowd I was with broke down and wept, so what do I know?
Not Recommended.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     Despite his immense popularity and acclaim, George Lucas has never
been a particularly prolific filmmaker.  His projects often seem to
remain in various stages of development for many years.  Once they do
go before the cameras, he puts a lot of love and care into the films
usually paying an exceptional amount of attention to detail.  Still,
his films don't always seem to work.  At his best, he creates films
like AMERICAN GRAFITTI and the STAR WARS and Indiana Jones trilogies.
Other times, he can end up making a MORE AMERICAN GRAFITTI or even a
HOWARD THE DUCK.  The slow rate with which Lucas makes films and the
incredible care that go into them always make these failures feel
particularly disappointing.  Unfortunately, RADIOLAND MURDERS, Lucas'
first film in 5 years, joins this group of carefully crafted, lovingly
created disappointments.
     The film is a frantically paced farce set in 1929 during the
premiere broadcast of a brand new Chicago-based radio network.  The
standard opening night problems are largely overshadowed by a series of
mysterious murders that keep occurring during the broadcast. Penny
Henderson (Mary Stuart Masterson), the network's "general secretary",
desperately struggles to keep the broadcast going while her estranged
husband Roger (Brian Benben), the network's head writer, searches for
the real killer after becoming the prime suspect.  This plot is
virtually lost in a constant barrage of sight gags and breathlessly
delivered one-liners.
     Lucas first expressed his intention to eventually make this film
shortly after making AMERICAN GRAFITTI in the early 1970s.  The film
has occasionally appeared on Universal and Lucasfilm's production
schedule many times over those years.  The script is credited to
GRAFITTI authors Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz (who also worked with
Lucas on INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM and HOWARD THE DUCK)
along with TV writers Jeff Reno and Ron Osborn.  The story is credited
to Lucas himself.  The result was a script that tries to do *far* too
much in too little time.  It seems like all of these writers
contributed a whole bunch of ideas and gags, all of which were left
in.
     The potentially interesting plot and characters seem to be
entirely lost in the shuffle.  Since the gags aren't involving
characters that we care (or even *know*) anything about or a plot that
is particularly well developed, there is very little about it that is
actually funny.  The murder mystery aspect is also ineffective since we
never learn anything about the killer's motivations until the standard
confession that comes *after* we learn the identity.  It is hard to
care about a mystery when you can't even think of who might be a
suspect.  When we do learn the killer's motivations, it is easy to see
that there were some interesting ideas at the core of Lucas' story, but
that they seemed to be lost somewhere along the way.  Even after the
killer's identity is revealed, the film goes on to an elaborate action
climax that starts off somewhat cliched but eventually turns downright
weird and inexplicable.
     The movie also has some major problems with pacing.  For farce to
really work, the troubles need to slowly escalate over the course of
the story.  This movie maintains a breakneck pace from the very first
scene, never slowing down.  The movie is played like a series of
punchlines without any setups.  Slapstick always works best if it comes
suddenly and as something of a surprise.  Someone being knocked over by
a swinging door can be funny if it is unexpected.  It quickly ceases to
be funny when pretty much every character is *repeatedly* knocked over
by every door they encounter.  Director Mel Smith sticks almost
entirely to *very* brief takes with constant cuts.  The result is often
confusing with most of the gags off-screen before they even have a
chance to register.
     The cast includes many fine comedic actors, but most are given
absolutely nothing to do.  Such varied performers as Christopher Lloyd,
Michael McKean, George Burns, Ned Beatty, Jeffrey Tambor, Rosemary
Clooney and Anita Morris (in her final film role) drift through various
scenes without ever really doing much.  The actors playing the radio
network's writing staff include talented comic actors Harvey Korman,
Robert Klein, and Peter MacNichol, but none of them are even given much
in the way of dialog.  Only Bobcat Goldthwait is given much screen time
in this group and he does generate a few laughs even though he is
strictly playing his standard character.
     Masterson and Benben do the very best they can given the limited
opportunities.  Benben is essentially playing a variation on his
character from the HBO sitcom "Dream On", but he does manage to be
likable and convincing.  Even better is Masterson who manages to
maintain a strong aire of dignity throughout all of this.  In a few
scenes, we actually see some interesting chemistry between Masterson
and Benben and it is a shame that the film doesn't spend more time on
their relationship.  The movie resolves the main conflict in their
relationship far too early, eventually resulting in the two characters
snapping at each other for no apparent reason.
     Easily the best performance in the film is given by Michael Lerner
as the police detective who is investigating the murders.  He
constantly rises above the material to create the one character that
seems to actually have a little bit of depth.  He is often playing the
straight man here, but that allows him to stay out of the way of some
of the insanity.
     As is expected in a George Lucas movie, the technical aspects of
this film are very strong.  The film was reportedly made on a very low
budget, but it looks much more expensive.  There are a couple of
elaborate action sequences (mostly involving Benben climbing around
outside the studios) that are very convincing and inventively
photographed (mainly thanks to the folks at ILM). Like all of Lucas'
movies, this one is handsomely photographed in scope.
     The film also does a very good job at creating an appropriate
period look and feel.  The sets, costumes, production design, and Joel
McNeely's music all seem to fit in perfectly.  A little suspension of
disbelief is required to get past the fact that some of the programs
shown seem a little overly visual for radio, but that is pretty easily
accepted because they are being performed for a live audience.  I wish
they film would have spent more time showing the actual radio
broadcasts.  These created most of the film's most enjoyable moments.
     It is probably appropriate to comment a little bit about the
audience's reaction to the movie.  Much to my surprise, the other
people in the audience seemed to be laughing a lot more than I was.  At
times, other people in the theater were rather loudly laughing at
points when I didn't notice that anything was particularly funny.  I
don't know if I am starting to become somewhat over-critical or if it
was simply a case of comedy being highly subjective, but the rest of
the audience did seem to enjoy the movie a lot more than I did.
     I went into this movie *really* wanting to like it as I am a huge
George Lucas fan and the subject matter and cast are all very appealing
to me.  Unfortunately, it just didn't work for me and I was left
extrmely disappointed.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Back in the days when George Lucas had a perfect instinct for what
did and did not work on the screen, Steven Spielberg was hitting a bad
patch with films like 1941, a frenetic comedy with contrived scenes
that looked too much like clockwork in need of a tune-up.  1941 was
full of jokes that could have worked but their timing was off or they
just seemed too contrived.  Now it is Spielberg who seems to have the
feel for what works on the screen and Lucas has produced his own comedy
with all the faults of 1941.
     The year is not 1941 but 1939, and it is the first night of new
radio network, WBN.  That is the name of both the network and of the
Chicago station where the broadcasts originate.  Just minutes before
show time the new owner throws out half the scripts for the evening's
programs.  This is all it takes to turn chaos at the station into
pandemonium.  And most of the pressure falls on Roger, the chief writer
of the station.  Roger thought his life was already hectic.  Besides
writing for the new network he is in the midst of a campaign to win
back Penny, his estranged wife who also happens to be the personal
assistant to the owner of the station.  As bad as things are, they are
about to get a lot worse.  A phantom voice seems to be going out over
the broadcast waves and each time it speaks, somebody at the station is
murdered.  And who do the police suspect but head writer Roger?
     The plot of RADIOLAND MURDERS is straight out of a 1940s comedy--
perhaps with Bob Hope or Cary Grant--but the pacing and rhythms seem
tailored more to the music video generation with little short choppy
scenes to keep the action moving at a breakneck pace.  There is some
fun in spotting 40s radio programs being created for this supposed
fourth radio network.  The shows are mostly imitations of real radio
programs from the same time.  Though they are not called by the same
names we see recreations of "Spike Jones and his City Slickers," "Sam
Spade," "The Shadow," and "One Man's Family," as well as shows that
never played on the radio, but were in the same spirit.  One show
called "The Black Whip" is based on Zorro.  (The title may be inspired
by the movie serial ZORRO'S BLACK WHIP.)  Still this is not a very good
representation of what radio was like.  All shows seem here to be done
live with absurdly ornate costumes--an odd expense for radio.  Clearly
somebody confused radio with early television.  Why would anybody puta
tap dancer in a large cigarette pack on the radio?  Time and again this
film sacrifices logic for a piece of spectacle or a gag.  In one scene
Roger sits on a ledge typing a script, but later when it suits the plot
we are told that he is terrified of heights.  Also it is absurd that a
station owner would wait until the last moment and then throw out all
the scripts for the evening just minutes before the evening's
programming starts.  The fact is that it is the script by Willard
Huyck, Gloria Katz, Jeff Reno, and Ron Osborn that needed re-write
most.  Their imitations of radio drama really fail to catch the spirit
of the originals.  Admittedly for every good radio drama like "Broadway
Is My Beat," there were five silly melodramatic shows like "The
Whisperer" or "I Love a Mystery."  But even the bad shows on the radio
were a lot better than most of the lampoons in this film.
     Mel Smith, who directed RADIOLAND MURDERS, is a familiar figure
from British comedy television, but he probably never experienced the
Golden Age of Radio in America and so is a bad choice to direct.  His
humor, in the Benny Hill mold, is to throw in lots of gags but not to
create any characters on the screen.  Roger is played by Brian Benben,
who has moments but just is not the talent to carry the film.  Benben
plays a character similar to Roger but a very different type of humor
in his "Dream On" series on HBO.  He is the only actor in the film who
might have done something with is role, but even he doesn't do much but
dress in funny costumes.  Mary Stuart Masterson as second lead is on
the screen far less and does not have much opportunity to raise her
role above a stereotyped Girl Friday.
     This is a film that was made because it could look like a lot more
than its $10 million price tag.  Lucas demonstrates that clever special
effects can make an inexpensive film look like it cost a lot more than
it did--even for a film that is not science fiction.  But in his
headlong rush to make this a good-looking film, he neglected the final
re-write or two that this script would have needed.  And Lucas did not
get the right director.  The majority of the gags in the dialog just
fall flat.  Comic scenes go off like clockwork, but lack spontaneity
and are just not funny.  Admittedly that may not be true of the whole
film, there are many very funny scenes that do work.  This certainly is
a comedy with more laughs than, say, ONLY YOU.  But with such paper-
thin characters, the look of the film and the gags that do work are
just not enough.
     For a nostalgic look at pre-war radio, there are better choices
for films.  There is more authentic period feel in RADIO DAYS or for
that matter in THE SHADOW.  With a bit more work this could have beena
much better film but as it stands I give this one a high 0 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Director Mel Smith has the top-rated TV comedy show in Great
Britain but if this frantic comedy is to be taken as an indication of
his directorial abilities, he had better stick to comedic acting.
     Given a superb cast with which to work he failed to utilize their
abilities, instead employing what appears to be a scatter shot approach
with hysterical non-stop running around in circles to the point where
it leaves the audience exhausted; somewhere in the film you have to
slow down for a moment so when the pace picks up again it is noted and
appreciated.  This just becomes tiresome, seeming longer than its 112
minutes running time.
     To see what could have been accomplished, let us just list the
cast: Mary Stuart Masterson, Brian Benben, Ned Beatty, George Burns,
Scott Michael Campbell, Brion James, Michael Lerner, Michael McKean,
Jeffrey Tambor, Stephen Tobolowsky and Christopher Lloyd.  With few
exceptions, it was a waste of talent.
     Smaller roles included Harvey Korman, Robert Klein, Bo Hoskins,
Billy Barty, Bobcat Goldthwait, Corbin Bernsen and Rosemary Clooney,
among others.
     The story, in brief:  In the olden days of pre-TV, millions of
people tuned in their radios each night to comedy, mystery and
romance.  In addition to the three major radio networks, a fourth one
is making its debut.  While out in the studio's audience the show is
going on, the dancers are dancing, the singers are singing, the
comedians are being comedic and the orchestra with its genial, smiling
conductor is waving his baton.  Backstage, all is bedlam.
     There are murders, there are the producers and directors trying to
keep the show going so the studio audience is unaware of what is
happening behind the curtains. And there is even a love story. This
hodgepodge is flung at us to the point that we do not care who or why
anyone is murdered; rather the concentration is on when is this thing
going to end?
Story by George Lucas.  You never can tell.

Author
Kevin Kibelstis
Rated:  PG
Running Time:  112 minutes
Starring: Brian Benben, Mary Stuart Masterson, Corbin Bernsen,
          Michael McKean and several other familiar faces.
     I don't know what movie the critics saw, but it wasn't this one.
The popular consensus among newspaper critics was that this movie is
unfunny and dreadfully boring.  In my personal opinion, they couldn't
be more wrong.  If you were expecting AIRPLANE!-like laughs and Agatha
Christie-intense mystery, then yes, this movie would be a
disappointment.  However, If you're just looking for an enjoyable movie
and a good time, this is one to see.  Honest, it is.
     This story is about a 4th network, WBN, taking to America's
airwaves in 1939.  Penny Henderson (Mary Stuart Masterson), the station
owner's secretary, must deal with her overbearing boss, an unimpressed
sponsor and writers ready to quite on a moment's notice, partly due to
the fact that they haven't been paid in weeks.  Among the mayhem, she
must also deal with her soon-to-be ex-husband, Roger (Brian Benben) who
desperately wants her back.  Unfortunately, her problems only get worse
as the night goes on and the body count rises without explanation.
     While trying to woo Penny back, Roger must deal with the police
and try to find the killer that lurks at WBN.
     Mary Stuart Masterson does well in her role as Penny (I'm trying
to be unbiased so I won't tell you how amazing she looked), although
Brian Benben gets most of the screen time.  Along with the two leads,
are several recognizable faces, including Corbin Bernsen (L.A. Law),
Michael McKean (Laverne & Shirley) and Bobcat Goldthwait.
     The special effects are amazing, and fooled me (which some may
argue isn't very difficult to do) in many scenes.  Although the movie
sometimes goes overboard with the physical comedy, it more than makes
up for those mistakes throughout the movie.
    Some comments collected from friends:
Kevin Kibelstis
Kibble@vm.temple.edu Rifleman@astro.ocis.temple.edu
