Title
Review for Drop Zone (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
While watching DROP ZONE, I kept thinking about those ski films Warren
Miller has been making for years.  You know the ones--they're
basically a bunch of impressive stunts and nice photography.  Well,
DROP ZONE looks like a skydiving version of one of those films, to
which someone has attempted to add a plot.  I emphasize the word
"attempted," and it's an extremely lackluster attempt at that.  There
is some great aerial footage in DROP ZONE, but the story is a complete
bore, and Wesley Snipes continues to bury himself in Z-grade action
films.
     Snipes plays Pete Nessip, a Federal marshall assigned with his
brother (Malcolm-Jamal Warner) to escort a mob computer whiz (Michael
Jeter) on a prison transfer.  While the plane is in mid-air, a group of
terrorists hijack it, and when there is an explosion during the attack,
Nessip's brother is killed, with Nessip himself blamed for contributing
to the disaster.  But Nessip doubts that it was a simple hijacking, and
he is right:  a team of expert skydivers led by Ty Moncrief (Gary
Busey) intends to use the computer whiz to break into government
records and provide drug dealers with the identity of undercover
agents.  With the aid of sometimes-reckless skydiving instructor Jessie
Crossman (Yancy Butler), Nessip sets out to infiltrate the skydiving
fraternity and thwart Moncrief's plan.
     We've already had one skydiving movie this year (TERMINAL
VELOCITY), and it wasn't a particularly good one.  However, TERMINAL
VELOCITY did have one very important thing going for it--no one
involved seemed to be taking themselves at all seriously.  It was
light-hearted, and occasionally quite funny.  DROP ZONE, on the other
hand, is best taken with meals as a mild sedative.  In lieu of creating
their own set-up, screenwriters Pete Barsocchini and John Bishop appear
to have given Snipes the opportunity to do PASSENGER 57 again (I
suppose to get it right this time).  They also wrack their brains to
come up with such cinematic innovations as a bar fight and a dead
relative to avenge.  It's not stretching the point to say that the plot
between skydiving sequences in DROP ZONE is somewhere on the order of
the plot between sex scenes in your standard X-rated film.
     Of course, as with that example, most viewers probably aren't
coming to DROP ZONE for riveting plot turns and crackling dialogue.
The skydiving sequences are fantastic, perhaps the best I've ever
seen.  They are creatively shot, and include some impressive
synchronized stunts.  As long as DROP ZONE is in the air, it is
something quite exciting.
     Then it hits ground again, and it burns in hard.  After beginning
as a rip-off of PASSENGER 57, DROP ZONE ends like a rip-off of DIE
HARD, and a really bad one at that.  Gary Busey delivers a performance
that has stamps on it, practically sighing audibly as he wanders
through a half-hearted version of his UNDER SIEGE psycho act.  It is
inexcusable in an action thriller to have a boring villain, and Busey
has not an ounce of charisma in this role.  Director John Badham has
made exciting films in the past, but even he appears to be slumming
here.  While the action in the air (which was not his to shoot) is
great, the action on the ground is often ineptly staged and badly
edited.
     What is genuinely depressing is watching the direction Wesley
Snipes' career is taking.  Snipes is a fine actor with a tremendous
range, but for a few years now he has appeared almost exclusively in
bad action films.  It is fine that he has carved out a niche for
himself, and heaven knows it's not easy being an African-American
leading man in Hollywood.  But Snipes should really think about taking
a few character parts that force producers to take him seriously as an
actor, and for him to have a chance at the kind of roles Samuel L.
Jackson and Laurence Fishburne are given a shot at.  His performance in
DROP ZONE is thoroughly competent, but that's all it has to be.  If he
contines to appear in films like DROP ZONE, he might as well take his
career and jump out of a plane with it.  Without a parachute.

Author
Dragan Antulov
John Badham was never considered to be among the best
American film directors, but his work in 1990s represents
huge disappointment to those who are familiar with his
achievements in previous decades. One of the reasons for the
decline in his career is the lack of inspiration. On too
many occasions Badham tried to find that inspiration from
the past triumphs, whether other people's (like in his 1992
American remake of Besson's NIKITA) or his own (like in his
sequel to STAKEOUT one year later). In 1994 he probably
remembered his past success with BLUE THUNDER, one of the
best action films of 1980s, and thought that the success had
something to do with spectacular helicopter stunts. The
result was DROP ZONE, action film that dealt with another
kind of flying objects.
The protagonist of this film is U.S. Marshall Pete Nessip
(played by Wesley Snipes). Federal prisoner and former
computer wizard Earl Leedy (played by Kevin Jeter) is to be
transferred by commercial flight, and Nessip and his brother
and partner Terry (played by Malcolm Jamal-Warner) escort
him. Routine task gets turns into nightmare when the plane
gets taken by the group of hijackers, led by Ty Moncrief
(played by Gary Busey). They snatch Leedy from Nessip's
hand, blow a hole in plane and jump out with parachutes
leaving Nessip's brother dead. Nessip is blamed for the
disaster, disgraced and suspended, but he decides to pursue
his own private investigation, although everyone tells him
that nobody could survive skydiving from such altitude and
with such speed. The trail leads him to Florida skydiving
circles, so he enrols in skydiving school led by tough
instructor Jessie Crossman (played by Yancy Butler). In the
meantime, Ty Moncrief plans to parachute himself and his
gang on the top of DEA headquarters, use Leedy's hacking
abilities to penetrate computer databases, gather top secret
data about informants and undercover agents and sell them to
top drug dealers afterwards. The raid is about to take place
on July 4th, where the airspace over Washington D.C. is open
for the annual skydiving event, which is going to be
attended by Crossman and Nessip.
Badham still knows how to shoot action films, judging by the
series of spectacular scenes in this film, as well as the
way he handles skydiving stunts. Some of those stunts with a
passage of time get somewhat monotonous (at least for those
who aren't enthusiastic about extreme sports), but the pace
of the film is rapid. Unfortunately, even with plenty of
"cool" scenes and fast tempo, audience still has time to
notice gaping plot holes, preposterous premise and series of
implausabilities in the screenplay by John Bishop and Peter
Barscochini. Many of them (two brothers working as partners
in federal agency, parachute landings in the middle of town
being mistaken for covert action etc.) seem to insult
viewer's intelligence. The actors also seem discouraged by
the lack of plot or credible characters, so their
performance is either bellow expectations (Wesley Snipes in
many instances hyperventilates), uninspired (like in the
case of Yancy Butler) or routine (Gary Busey again playing
his trademark blonde psychopath). Although some elements of
the film make it barely watchable, DROP ZONE in many ways is
quite suitable title for the movie that deserved to bomb.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
James Berardinelli
     Despite its enormously entertaining action sequences and generally
high level of energy, DROP ZONE has a major draw back:  it doesn't make
sense.  This is a classic example of a script apparently constructed as
an afterthought to accommodate the skydiving, fight, and chase scenes.
The plot, to put it frankly, is complete rubbish, with far too much
time devoted to fruitless attempts at explaining and developing it.
     Most recently, skydiving was used to drive TERMINAL VELOCITY, and,
while no one is going to nominate DROP ZONE for an award, it's a more
enjoyable way to spend ninety-plus minutes--assuming you're for some
reason forced to choose between the two.  Then again, no matter what
the arena, Wesley Snipes can act rings around Charlie Sheen, and John
Badham (WARGAMES) is a somewhat more accomplished director than
VELOCITY's Deran Sarafian.
     One rather unique--not to mention refreshing--element of this film
is that the male protagonist, Pete Nessip (Snipes), and the female
lead, Jessie Crossman (Yancy Butler), never become romantically
involved.  As the so-called story moves along, you keep expecting this
to happen, but it never does.  Then again, perhaps the script pages
developing the relationship got lost along with the half screenplay
that never made it into the movie.  Talk about disjointed....
     For a moment, shortly into DROP ZONE, it's possible to wonder if
you've somehow stumbled into PASSENGER 57.  There's Snipes on a plane
again, and something involving bullets and blood is about to happen.
This time, however, he's not alone.  His brother Terry (Malcolm Jamal-
Warner, looking absolutely nothing like he did on TV) is with him.  The
pair are federal marshals transporting a computer super hacker from one
prison to another.  Enter Ty Moncrieff (Gary Busey) and his gang of
38,000-feet jailbreakers, who grab the Nessips' prisoner and parachute
out a hole blown into the side of the plane.  Terry ends up dead, and a
bitter Pete, forced to hand over his gun and badge, must pursue revenge
on his own--with the first stop on the trail leading him to skydiving
instructor Crossman.
     There's nothing original or interesting about Gary Busey's
character--this is the kind of role he's done so often that he could
probably sleepwalk his way through it, chomping on scenery all the
way.  Snipes isn't exactly breaking new ground, either, but he at least
seems to be putting a little more effort into the part--and he's got a
flashier wardrobe.
     Just because DROP ZONE won't put you to sleep doesn't mean that
it's worth seeing.  Even as a pure popcorn picture, it lacks a certain
minimum level of coherence.  In a year featuring such high-voltage
nail-biters as SPEED and TRUE LIES, DROP ZONE arrives with an audible
"thud."
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily those of
Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 
