Title
Review for Saving Silverman (2001)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
SAVING SILVERMAN, by Dennis Dugan, the director of BIG DADDY, has a 
poster with a giant-sized thumbs down.  Consider it a giant-sized omen, 
for this movie has more stale leftovers than a refrigerator two weeks 
after Christmas.  There isn't a fresh joke to be found anywhere in the 
script.  
Your reaction watching the movie's grown-up teenagers is more likely to 
be yawns than laughs.  No matter how many times the characters fall down 
-- I think the count runs into the hundreds -- it is never funny, not 
even once.  When people aren't falling down, they do other "original" 
stuff like having food fights and making jokes about farts and 
masturbation.   
The story concerns a guy, Darren Silverman (Jason Biggs), who is 
perpetually unlucky in love, and a woman, Judith (Amanda Peet), who has 
him under her thumb, hence the intended meaning of the movie's poster.  
Biggs, of course, is the actor who was once lucky to have an infamous 
rendezvous with a pie, which catapulted him into undeserved fame.  
Peet's claim to fame is her body and her sassy attitude.  Neither of the 
two leads are the least bit good in SAVING SILVERMAN.  This might be 
expected, but the awful performances by Steve Zahn and Jack Black, as 
Darren's buddies Wayne and J.D., are a surprise.  Both have previously 
been brilliantly on the comedic mark, Zahn in HAPPY, TEXAS and Black in 
HIGH FIDELITY.
Judith calls Wayne and J.D. "pigs," and truer words were never spoken.  
The script, by Hank Nelken and Greg DePauls, revolves around Wayne and 
J.D. trying to get their buddy Darren back from Judith's clutches.  This 
scheme eventually involves kidnapping Judith, while trying to reinterest 
Darren in his old flame, Sandy (Amanda Detmer).
The movie, which is crude without ever being funny, features such 
gross-out gags as a butt implant scene.  There's also an attacking 
raccoon and a high school football coach (R. Lee Ermey) who literally 
kills a referee for making a bad call.  Stop me when you've finished 
laughing.
To be fair, there are two mildly diverting parts to the picture.  Amanda 
Peet's slit-down-the-middle, revealing blouses do add an undeniable eye 
candy factor to the film.  And Neil Diamond, whom the three guys 
worship, shows up for an extended cameo.
As soon as Judith first lays her eyes on Darren's buddies, she burns 
rubber with her car's tires, getting away from the guys as fast as she 
can.  Watching the movie produces a similar desire.
SAVING SILVERMAN runs 1:31.  It is rated PG-13 for crude sexual humor, 
language and thematic material and would be acceptable for teenagers.
My son Jeffrey, almost 12, gave the movie * as well.  He complained that 
it was utterly predictable and that he didn't laugh once.  He said the 
characters were all dumb and stupid but not the least bit funny.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>

Author
Bob Bloom
Saving Silverman (2001) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Jason Biggs, Steven
Zahn, Jack Black, Amanda Peet, Amanda Detmer, R. Lee Ermey and Neil
Diamond. Written by Greg DePaul and Hank Nelken. Directed by Dennis
Dugan. 91 minutes. PG-13.
 Saving Silverman is a winning combination of slapstick and sweetness
propelled by the antics of two fine young character actors ó Steven Zahn
and Jack Black.
 This low-brow, sometimes crude comedy is nonetheless rather charming.
After all, any movie in which Neil Diamond is characterized as a
cultural icon who can save the day canít be bad.
 Silverman is a story of friendship and the lengths some people will go
to to preserve that bond.
 Darren (Jason Biggs), Wayne (Steve Zahn) and J.D. (Jack Black) have
been best friends since grade school, sticking together into adulthood
where they rock together in Diamonds in the Rough, a Neil Diamond cover
band.
 The trio, especially Darren, always have been unlucky in love.
 Then along comes Judith (Amanda Peet), a stunning, cold-hearted,
manipulative psychiatrist who grabs the sweet Darren away from his
friends. ěHe is my puppet and I am his puppet master,î she brazenly
tells Wayne and J.D. when they try to reclaim their pal.
 Judithís stranglehold is so great on Darren that he even refuses a
chance to be reunited Sandy (Amanda Detmer) with his ěone and only true
loveî from high school.
 Wayne and J.D. then take extreme action to separate Darren from Judith,
thus giving their friend a chance to realize his true feelings for
Sandy.
 Zahn (That Thing You Do and Happy Texas) and Black (High Fidelity) are
wonderfully funny, physical and bumbling as the inept pair endlessly
scheming to rescue sweet Darren. That they are no intellectual match for
Judith is part of the fun, as she uses her brain while they try to use
brawn.
 Much of the humor is coarse, involving punishment to unmentionable body
parts, but the overall tone of the movie is so cheery and light-hearted
that you are not offended or ache with the punishment Wayne and J.D.
endure for the sake of friendship.
 Peet is hilarious, playing her Ice Queen part with a minimum of
tongue-in-cheek.
 Biggs adds another sweet characterization to his roster of parts
following American Pie and Loser, while Detmer brings a wholesomeness to
her role as the girl of Darrenís dreams.
 Veteran F. Lee Ermey spoofs his tough-guy image, first honed as the
sadistic drill sergeant in Stanley Kubrickís Full Metal Jacket ó with
several variations since ó as the win-at-any-cost football coach and
mentor to Wayne and J.D.
 And then thereís Neil Diamond. Saving Silverman can be appreciated as
one sweet, long love song to the singer. He only appears briefly and his
acting hasnít improved since The Jazz Singer, but so what. Heís Neil
Diamond and he has some fun spoofing himself.
 Saving Silverman is rather short, running only about 90 minutes. It is
not a classic comedy, but it is an entertaining vehicle that will leave
you smiling.
 It is witty, a bit naughty, but most of all, warm.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Robin Clifford
Darren (Jason Biggs), Wayne (Steve Zahn), and J.D. (Jack Black) have been 
best friends since the fifth grade. Like the Three Musketeers, they've been 
together through thick and thin. But, when Darren meets an attractive, but 
cold-blooded and manipulative, psychiatrist, Judith (Amanda Peet), the long 
time friendship is placed in danger. It's up to Wayne and J.D. to rescue 
their best friend in "Saving Silverman." 
"Silverman" has its heart in the right place, but the story, by newcomers 
Hank Nelken and Greg DePaul, is too lightweight to sustain the tale of the 
battle for Darren's soul. Based on their experience of a friend making a 
major marital mistake, the story is centered on the three, life long 
amigos. When Wayne introduces Darren to Judith, he doesn't realize that he 
has opened a Pandora's box of disaster for himself and J.D. Judith was once 
in a relationship where her boyfriend was the dominant figure until he died 
in a kick boxing match. Since then, she has sought a new mate - someone she 
can boss around and mold into her own vision. Enter Darren Silverman. 
Once they realize the magnitude of their error in judgement, Wayne and J.D. 
try everything they can, including threats and bribery, to get Judith to 
free Darren. Nothing works until the duo come up with a plan - kidnap 
Judith and get Darren back together with the girl he called his one and 
only, pretty Sandy Perkus (Amanda Detmer). The only problem here is that 
Sandy is about to take her vows to become a nun. Things spiral out of 
control as Judith repeatedly attempts to escape while Wayne and J.D. play 
cupid. The boys even bring their idol, Neil Diamond, into the picture to 
help resolve things. 
Thinking about it, this is a real mishmash of contrivance and coincidence 
that is held together solely by the comedic efforts of Steve Zahn and Jack 
Black. The pair is able to elicit the film's only laughs with their goofy 
antics and child-like behavior. They are relegated to providing slapstick 
guy humor and the two are more than equal to the task. Steve Zahn has been 
steadily honing his comedic acting skills and gives some complexity to 
Wayne, the "brains" of the gang. Jack Black has the big-guy moves of a 
Chris Farley, giving J.D. an amusing physical presence. The neat thing is 
that the two actors are able to get fresh laughs from stale material. 
The rest of the cast doesn't fare as well, though. Jason Biggs is the 
straight man of the Musketeers and gets very little to do; though having 
watched his previous films ("American Pie" and "Loser") I'm not sure what 
attraction Biggs actually has. Amanda Peet is caustic as the manipulative 
Judith. There is no humanity at all to her character as she single-mindedly 
strives to recreate Darren into her mind's image. She's a monster that 
Wayne and J.D. must defeat to save their friend. Unfortunately, there is no 
dimension to her character. Amanda Detmer brings nothing (or gets nothing) 
as Darren's one and only. R. Lee Ermey, as the psychotic Coach, made a bad 
decision taking this role. Tune-meister Neil Diamond gives a good-natured 
cameo perf as the boys' idol and savior. 
Production values are on par with the rest of the film - lackluster and 
non-involving. Director Dennis Dugan has a track record for broad comedy 
with films like "Big Daddy" and "Beverly Hills Ninja," but falls flat with 
"Saving Silverman." 
The 2001 movie year has yet to provide us with a "good" film to sink our 
teeth into. At least, with "Saving Silverman," we get a couple of funny 
perfs from Zahn and Black. Too bad that the rest of the film lacks their 
level of humor. Kick boxing deaths and conflicted nuns are not the makings 
of a good comedy. I give it a C-. 
For more Reeling reviews visit reelingreviews.com 

Author
Brandon Herring
"Saving Silverman" is a good example of a good comedy gone bad. As a love 
story it is good, however as a comedy it falls flat on it's face. I think 
throughout the short 90 minutes I laughed a total of seven times...and those 
were just chuckles at the most! The movie doesn't have the oomph to make it a 
great movie, and doesn't have the script to make it a funny movie.
Wayne Lefessier (Steven Zahn), J.D. McNugent (Jack Black), and Darren 
Silverman (Jason Biggs) have grown up all their lives together, they have 
been best friends forever and vow to stay close till the end. While in a bar 
after doing a show with their band, based on their love of Neil Diamond, 
Darren meets a young woman named Judith (Amanda Peet) whom he instantly falls 
for. Wayne and J.D. however think differently and when Judith tells Darren 
that he can never see his friends again, it's up to Wayne and J.D. to try and 
begin Saving Silverman.
The performances are topnotch and surprisingly, they are what keep the movie 
afloat. Jason Biggs right off the flop "Loser" does an OK job playing 
Silverman, but he is stale and flat at times. Steve Zahn is perfect in the 
role of Wayne Lefessier, and even though the movie is about Silverman, 
Lefessier is really the main character and the narrator of the movie itself. 
Jack Black is well Jack Black, and he does an all right job as J.D. but he 
isn't as funny as he has been in the past. Amanda Peet plays the ultimate 
bitch as Judith, and Neil Diamond plays Neil Diamond (he's better at singing 
than acting). Anyway the performances in the film are good, but it's too bad 
the script isn't.
Speaking of script, Hank Nelkan's choppy script is not only badly written, 
but not funny enough even for an episode of Sesame Street. The trailer for 
the movie, as with most movies gives away everything that happens in the 
movie, especially the funniest parts. Somewhere "Saving Silverman" was meant 
to be a good movie, and it could have been, but alas in the end it wasn't.
Dennis Dugan's direction is all right, he adds a few directorial touches here 
and there, nothing special being a simple comedy. "Saving Silverman" is a 
perfectly bad movie in more ways than one. It has a great cast, a good 
director and a sweet story...it's just too bad it has a bad script and is all 
together a bad movie. 
Reviewed by Brandon Herring 3-11-00.

Author
Laura Clifford
Long time buddies and Neil Diamond tribute band members Wayne (Steve Zahn,
"Happy, Texas") and J.D. (Jack Black, "High Fidelity") watch in horror
as third mate Darren Silverman (Jason Biggs, "American Pie") disappears under 
the thumb of his new fiance Judith, (Amanda Peet, "The Whole Nine Yards") a
controlling psychiatrist.  They're doubly troubled when the return of Darren's 
'one and only love' Sandy Perkins (Amanda Detmer, "Final Destination") returns 
to their home town but doesn't cause a ripple in Darren's devotion to Judith.
There's only one thing Wayne and J.D. can think of doing - they kidnap
Judith and fake her death in "Saving Silverman."
Written by Hank Nelken and Greg DePaul after seeing a friend engaged to
the wrong woman, "Saving Silverman" is directed by 'hit comedy director'
Dennis Dugan of such films as "Big Daddy," " Brain Donors" and "Problem
Child."  It's a dismal, third-rate Farrelly Brothers rip off that
attempts to milk humor from such inspired bits of whimsy as having Darren's
love interest come from a family of circus freaks AND be about to become
a nun.  Gross out gags include a visualization of Darren getting butt cheek
implants.
"Saving Silverman" is almost saved by stars Zahn and Black.  These two are so
comically talented they can take bad material and still deliver the goods.
They're in "Animal House" mode while the rest of the film trawls along and
comes up empty.  Jason Biggs can attribute his entire career to the luck of
having been cast in the smash hit "American Pie."  Peet shows some physical
moves but no flair for comedy here while Detmer slaps a brave, sweet smile
onto her face and soldiers through.  R. Lee Ermey ("Full Metal Jacket") is
one note in an embarrassing performance as a psychopathic ex-football coach.
Neil Diamond appears at the film's climax as himself and miraculously enlivens
the proceedings by belting out some of his old standards.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
There are many talented actors and actresses who remain relatively unknown
despite logging one memorable, scene-stealing performance after another.
Even though they may have more talent than household names like Kevin
Costner and Sandra Bullock, these fine performers remain nameless to most
moviegoers, who instead know them only by outrageous things their characters
have done.
Take Jason Biggs. He's not recognized as being an up-and-coming comedic
actor - he's the kid who fucked the pastry in American Pie. Mention the name
Amanda Peet, and people shrug their shoulders. But if you say "the girl who
took off her top in The Whole Nine Yards," everybody knows who you're
talking about. Ditto for Jack Black - the fat guy who worked in the record
store in High Fidelity. Steve Zahn doesn't even have a memorable moment, but
has had roles in a bunch of terrific films, like Out of Sight, Happy, Texas
and Hamlet.
Toss these actors into the same weakly written film, and you get Saving
Silverman, a sporadically entertaining picture that will appeal to the Adam
Sandler crowd. It's no coincidence, since director Dennis Dugan also helmed
Sandler's Big Daddy and Happy Gilmore. The film's formula will seem familiar
to viewers who have seen any comedy that the uptight crowd refers to as
"appealing to the lowest common denominator." It goes a little something
like this - sight gag, pratfall, dick joke, double-take, cleavage shot,
repeat as (un)necessary.
Silverman's story focuses on three lifelong Seattle friends who, as shown in
the first few minutes of the film, have gone from being nerdy kids to nerdy
adults with kooky jobs. Darren Silverman (Biggs) is the entertainment
director at a local nursing home. Buddies Wayne (Zahn) and J.D. (Black) are,
respectively, a rodent exterminator and a Subway employee. The trio also
perform in a Neil Diamond cover band, so it goes without saying that none of
 them are exactly chick magnets.
But that all changes when Darren meets Judith (Peet), a beautiful
psychologist hell-bent on finding a naďve man who can be molded into her
idea of perfection. She's a controlling bitch-on-wheels who forbids Darren
from seeing his pals, and, to make matters worse, she doesn't put out. Wayne
and J.D. know they need to do something drastic to save Darren from the
devious dish, and hatch a plan to kidnap Judith, stage her death and fix
Darren up with his old flame (Amanda Detmer), a shapely, soon-to-be-nun from
a family of circus performers. Seriously.
There are a lot of legitimately funny moments in Silverman, but, as usual,
you can see most of them in trailer. There are also appearances by Neil
Diamond and Kyle Gass, the latter of whom is half of Black's acoustic heavy
metal duo, Tenacious D. Also worth noting is the name of Zahn's character
(he played Wayne Wayne Wayne, Jr. in Happy Texas) and the fact that the film
mentions Hannibal Lecter (Silverman opens the same weekend as Hannibal).
As far as the acting performances go, you'd think these stars would be above
this kind of baloney (you'd never see Philip Seymour Hoffman making a film
like this). They're all very likeable actors, and they probably add much
more life to their characters than what was written in the silly script
(written by Hank Nelken and Greg DePaul). While their talent is largely
wasted here, it's scary to think about how bad Silverman would have been
without them.
1:40 - PG-13 for crude and sexual humor, language, and thematic material
