Title
Review for Gamera 2: Region shurai (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
R.L. Strong
Directed by - Shusuke Kaneko
Writing credits - Kazunori Itô
Staring: Akiji Kobayashi, Ayako Fujitani, Miki Mizuno and Toshiyuki
Nagashima
Produced by Miyuki Nanri, Naoki Sato, Tsutomu Tsuchikawa
Cinematography by Junichi Tozawa  Film Editing by Shizuo Arakawa
Production Design by Hajime Oikawa
It stands fifty meters tall! It can fly up to speed of mach 3, and can
expel bursts of flaming plasma from its mouth. It is also.. a turtle.
That seemingly absurd description belays the marvelous construction of
the creature known in Japan as Gamera. Originally conceived by
Director Noriaki Yuasa back in 1965, Gamera was a protector of
children, defending his young fans from all sorts of ridiculous
creatures from space. One has only to envision a Ginsu knife walking
on four legs to appreciate (or deride) the silly concept on display in
these early films.
But that is not the case here. While those films made during the
1960's had budgets equal to a Roger Corman production, this new film
has much more generous bearing. While far from being a Special Effects
extravaganza, "Gamera 3: The Advent of Legion", is a remarkably
exciting and deft exercise in fantasy film making. One that both
hearkens back to a form of simplicity and extends and redefines those
techniques into something wholly new and wondrous.
A sequel to 1994's "Gamera, Guardian of the Universe", 'Gamera 2'
starts off with a unique approach in that Gamera is viewed by Japan as
a hazard that must be countered against. While varying political and
scientific groups grouse and argue amongst themselves, other events
transpire to bring about even more destruction to Japan and to Earth
itself.
A meteor shower occurs over Hokkaido. Yusuke Watase and Mr. Hanatani
from the Japan SDF science team are sent to investigate. They are met
by Midori Honami of the Youth Science Museum who finds the area bathed
in a strange blue light. Also discovered is an increases in oxygen in
the area (discovered when one soldier tries to light his cigarette).
Finding no sign of the meteor, the team is dumbfounded. Midori
exclaims, half jokingly that it seems as if the isotope has been
moved.
Situations develop. In Sapporo, communications are interrupted, the
fiber optics cables are being destroyed. A bottling company is robbed
of all of its bottles. Finally, the reason is discovered when the
underground subway system is attacked by a swarm of strange insects,
each over seven feet in length. The creatures consume the glass
windows, and lights, finally attacking the passengers. As the military
starts to devise an attack on the creatures, a huge plant erupts from
underground. Buildings crumble and crash as the plant sprouts up
growing in seconds to a height of 150 feet. The military starts to
destroy the plant as it starts to flower. It is found that the oxygen
levels in the city have increased to a level that any military attack
could level the city.
Suddenly, Gamera appears. The huge turtle topples the plant, crushing
it before it can eject its seeds. Gamera is attacked by a swarm of
insects which engulf the creature. Unable to defend itself, Gamera
collapses. The giant turtle is able to retreat when the insects
disengage from the leviathan to attack a nearby electrical plant.
Gamera takes flight, spinning like a flying saucer, it's blood
splashing against the buildings as it retreats.
It is discovered by the JSDF (Japanese Self Defense Force), that the
insects, now identified as Legion (named by a soldier in Sapporo based
on a biblical scripture), has a symbiotic relationship with the plant.
The plant can only live off of the waste product created by the
insects, and the insects can only survive in an oxygen rich
atmosphere. The insects are also a silicon based life form, their
basic diet consisting of silica and carbon. Identified as a threat to
life on the planet, the Japanese government enlists the aid of the
United Nations Defense Force in helping to find a defense against the
creatures.
This first act of the film (as well as the remainder) is marvelously
constructed. The suspense and tension of the film is enthralling. U.S.
film goers haven't seen a film like this in quite a while and it is
refreshing to see this kind of depth of story telling on the screen.
This may seem like a misnomer, coming in a review for a Japanese
monster film. But, believe me. While the film is fanciful and far
fetched, it is engrossing and very enjoyable. There is a nostalgic
quality here that is not lost on the audience. We can all remember
watching those beloved sci-fi thrillers from the 1950's with their
quaint effects and plotting. Some of those films are rightly
considered classics, and it's is those films that "Gamera 2" reflects
on. While far from being a classic itself, "Gamera 2" is a masterly
made and deftly plotted film.
The performances are all on the money here. Ayako Fujitani returns
from 'Gamera: Guardian of the Universe' as Asagi Kusanagi, the young
girl with the psychic link with Gamera. While only appearing in what
amounts to a cameo, Ms. Fujitani gives a nice performance as Asagi.
Also returning in a cameo is Yukijiro Hotaru as Osaka, former police
inspector from the previous Gamera film, now working as a security
guard for Kirin Beer. His inclusion adds the right touch of nostalgic
comedy to the film, it's a shame that his part is over so soon.
Miki Mizuno as Midori Honami is charming in her portrayal of the young
scientist who comes to identify the threat of Legion. Akiji Kobayashi
as Colonel Watarase is appropriately stern in his performance. It's a
shame that the other credits in this film are not translated from
their Japanese characters, as it makes identifying the many performers
difficult. Suffice to say, that the film is well performed and that
nothing is played for camp. This is an earnest thriller, comedy is
only a sporadic commodity here, and never used to detrimental effect.
The plotting and story construction of the film plays like a modern
day disaster film. The most immediate example that comes to mind would
be (unfortunately) "Armageddon", in that both films deal less with
their characters individual conflicts than with the larger, more
global problems in the plot. A better (and more nostalgic) template
would be the 1965 film "Crack in the World" (a fun programmer in it's
time). "Gamera 2" moves at a fast clip, not leaving the audience time
to question it's plot holes (of which there are a few but minor ones).
The tension and suspense are on the level of a national disaster,
almost documentarian in its approach. Emotionally, the film is
weightless, but on the level of escapism, the film shines above
anything done stateside in the past 10 years.
The special effects of  'Gamera 2'  are it's reason 'd aire. And to
say that they are impressive is to give too light of an image. While
the monsters are performed by men in intricately designed suits, the
method of the photography and miniature work is so marvelous as to
help one suspend their disbelief for a moment.. enough to become
absorbed into the film. The inclusion of computer effects is a welcome
change for the genre and bodes well for the future of Japanese Kaiju
(strange beast) films. With 'Gamera 2', one can truly witness a
wonderful amalgamation of both past and present effects techniques
that combine to create an enchanting, exciting and fresh look.
In conclusion, if giant monsters are your bent, or if your just
curious enough to try it out, 'Gamera 2: The Advent of Legion' is a
fine modern day introduction to the fantasy world of Japan. While a
little too light on character (human) involvement, the film more that
delivers in the action and monster quotient. An enjoyable film with
enough action to keep those explosive addicts placated until the next
Michael Bey extravaganza.
