Title
Review for Dr. T & the Women (2000)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Ross Anthony
Did you like Diane Keaton's "Hanging Up?" If so, you'll probably equally 
enjoy this rich (as in wealthy) women farce. Dressed in furs, wild hats 
and jewelry, these well-to-do women bumble around Dr. T (Richard Gere) 
like bees with cell phones. 
Though adored by his entourage of gynecological patients, daughters, 
sisters and even his screwy wife, Dr. T tries to keep his life from 
bursting apart at the seams. It's one thing after another until the roof 
blows off. 
The film opens between the legs of one of Dr. T's gynecological 
patients. Circus appropriate, Dixieland music comprises the soundtrack. 
But somehow, everyone thinks the gentle and sincere Dr. T has it all 
together. Even Dr. T's hunting pals envy his seemingly perfect life and 
perfect wife. "You're a lucky man, hang on to her," they advise him of 
his mentally ill spouse. "I'm trying," he replies with a heartfelt 
anxiety not picked up by the camouflaged buds. 
With wife (Farrah) institutionalized, daughters feuding over a wedding, 
woman lined up outside the office door for a check up; Dr. T finds a new 
refuge and a new set of problems. 
Gere is compelling and charming as always, the women perform admirably. 
Though the dialogue is strongly real, it's seldom sparkling. Sporting 
some fairly well paced direction, it's the story that seems to have a 
point missing. 
Coupled with the oft times annoying cell chat, the film hardly leaves 
the goer with any sense of satisfaction. Though the climax is 
interesting ... it isn't fulfilling, and you'll leave the theater 
feeling like you've just witnessed the work of a great conversationalist 
who didn't have much to say. 
Dr. T and the Women. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R. 
*  Starring Richard Gere, Helen Hunt, Farrah Fawcett, Laura Dern, 
Shelley Long, Tara Reid, Kate Hudson, Liv Tyler, Robert Hays. 
*  Directed by Robert Altman. 
*  Written by Anne Rapp. 
*  Produced by Robert Altman, James McLindon at Artisan/Sandcastle 5. 
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Jerry Saravia
The last half-hour of "Dr. T and the Women," Robert Altman's latest film, is 
so cheery, funny and unexpected that it is a temptation to recommend the film 
based solely on its bright finish. Unfortunately, the backbone of the film is 
so pedestrian and thin that you are left wondering if Altman has lost his 
sense of pacing and, dare I say, motivation. 
Dr. T is Dr. "Sully" Travis (Richard Gere), a gynecologist who runs a busy 
office full of patients who stem from the upper-class regions of Dallas. In 
fact, all women in this film are upper-class, as are the men. Dr. T's 
personal life is in complete disarray, which perfectly complements his active 
office life. His wife, Kate (Farrah Fawcet), has been institutionalized as a 
result of dancing naked on a water fountain at the local mall! Her disease is 
a rare ailment known as "Hetsian" disorder, where an upper-class woman blacks 
out from too much love (I wonder if such an ailment exists named after a 
Greek Goddess). Too add insult to injury, Dr. T's cheerleading daughter, Dee 
Dee (Kate Hudson), is about to get married yet she may also have a secret 
admirer. Dr. T discovers this secret through his other daughter, the 
conspiracy nut and tour guide Connie (Tara Reid) who uses her cell phone as 
if it was attached to her ear. 
Wait, there is more. Dr. T's alcoholic sister-in-law, Peggy (Laura Dern), has 
moved in to his house with her three daughters, and also adorns a cell phone. 
At Dr. T's golf club, a golf pro, Bree (Helen Hunt), romances him and teaches 
him a golf swing or two in the process. And finally, there is nurse Carolyn 
(Shelley Long), who wants the good doctor for herself and senses she can 
provide what he is missing in his own life, particularly sex. 
It is clear from the onset that Dr. T loves and cares for women, and he may 
love some of them too much, such as his troubling wife. Altman, however, 
suggests that his wife, Kate, may be unhappy or unfulfilled in her life or 
seeking attention - dancing nude in a public area doesn't necessarily mean 
that you are loved too much. But T is oblivious to all women beyond what he 
thinks they need, namely love and compassion. In the end, he finds that with 
Bree, love and compassion are only temporary. 
There is a potentially winning character study in Dr. T but it is buried, and 
thus burdened, by endless scenes of champage drinking, chats on cell phones, 
anxious women in the waiting room of Dr. T's office, and so on. There is 
little evidence here of Altman's strong character types from films such as 
"Short Cuts" or the recent "Cookie's Fortune" - the upper-class women here 
are depicted as mostly hollow Southern caricatures. Fawcet is mostly left on 
the cutting-room floor, barely alive in any scene she is in - I know she is 
supposed to be disoriented but that is not enough for a robotic performance. 
Laura Dern merely embarrases herself, acting clumsy and disoriented as well. 
At least, Kate Hudson and Tara Reid rise above their thin portrayals with 
some gusto.   
The best performance in the film is Richard Gere's - his effortless charisma 
and good looks do not mask his portrayal of Dr. T as a modest, winsome man, 
trying his best not to be overwhelmed by his family and overzealous patients, 
who demand his attention. Gere's scenes with Helen Hunt are among the most 
alive in the entire film - a winning movie star combo that recalls Hunt's 
radiance when paired with Jack Nicholson in "As Good as it Gets." 
Still, "Dr. T and the Women" starts off with a whimper and never quite 
recovers until the last thirty minutes with a midly comical tone that 
manifests in a truly strange whirlwind of events. It is offputting, however, 
how Altman stages his scenes in the first half of the film without any 
pizzazz or wit to speak of - even his vintage overlapping dialogue grows 
wearisome. "Dr. T and the Women" is bereft of humor, emotion or drama - only 
Gere brings some pathos but for strict Altman fans, that may not be enough.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
    DR. T & THE WOMEN kicks off with one of those trademarked Robert
Altman sequences of choreographed cacophany. We're in the waiting room of
Dallas OB/GYN Dr. Sullivan "Sully" Travis (Richard Gere) -- known to all
simpy as Dr. T -- where head nurse Carolyn (Shelley Long) tries to
maintain order despite a swarm of patients waiting long past their spot on
the doctor's overbooked schedule. It's a brilliantly economical way to set
up a potentially fascinating protagonist. Dr. T loves women so much (in a
purely spiritual, madonna-half of the whole madonna/whore thing sort of
way) that he just can't say no to any of them. The women love Dr. T so
much that they're willing to endure tremendous inconvenience for his
personalized stirrup-side manner. What a great character to study: a man
who idealizes women in a cultural setting -- upper-class Southerners --
where plenty of the women are just fine with being idealized.
     Only two things from that waiting room sequence forward keep DR. T &
THE WOMEN from being a provocative movie experience: Richard Gere, and
just about everything else. Altman's film itself is as tumultuous and
unfocused as Dr. T's life in the film, which starts getting complicated
when his wife Kate (Farrah Fawcett) has a mental breakdown and is placed
in a psychiatric hospital. Kate's illness coincides with preparations for
the wedding of the Travis's oldest daughter Dee Dee (Kate Hudson), as well
as an extended stay by Kate's sister Peggy (Laura Dern) and her three
little girls. And to make matters even more unstable, there's the new
country club golf pro named Bree (Helen Hunt), who turns Dr. T's head with
her unique independent streak.
     Altman and screenwriter Anne Rapp make a huge mistake early on when
they define Kate's rare condition, and along with it Dr. T's own character
flaw. He's a man who loves too much, we learn, giving the women in his
life absolutely everything because he delights in being their guardian,
and scarcely even sees them as flesh and bone. This Act One diagnosis
underlines every action Dr. T makes for the viewer's benefit: ah, note is
instinctively sexist-gallant attempts to do everything for Bree! And note
further how he seems smitten by her insistence on taking charge!
     You'd think it might underline things a bit for Dr. T himself,
especially since he gets the dialogue explaining his wife's condition.
Instead, he spends the next several days of story time in a
well-intentioned fog, manifested in Gere's beatifically squinting
countenance. Gere has never been one of our more subtle actors, but here
he simply refuses to give Dr. T's pathological sanctification of women any
edge. Altman and Rapp let him off the hook by implicitly suggesting he's
just a man tossed about by the forces of estrogen rathern than an example
of a particularly unhealthy attitude. And it doesn't help that almost
every one of the film's dozen or so female characters is written as a
cartoon -- Dern as the champagne-swilling, unhappily married belle; 
Janine Turner as a pushy hypochondriac; Tara Reid as Dr. T's conspiracy
buff younger daughter -- making it even easier to see the befuddled Dr. T
as the victim rather than part of the problem.
     This misguided characterization reaches its peak during a late
revelation about the personal life of one of Dr. T's family members. It
should have been an opportunity to let Dr. T's true colors emerge, to show
him rocked by the notion that women aren't all what he believes them to
be. Instead, it's a cheap opportunity to make him almost absurdly
sensitive and understanding, when understanding is so clearly what he
lacks. DR. T & THE WOMEN flirts with the kind of symbolism and narrative
complexity that can make it seem deep -- be sure to bring an abacus to
count the number of connections between water and female sexuality -- but
it's actually terribly shallow where it counts. Without an actor willing
to make Dr. T a sexist anachronism in need of some self-awareness, the
film is reduced to a two-hour exhibition of limp farce. How depressing to
see that wonderfully evocative waiting room turned into the place where
the big payoff is someone getting tripped and banging her head on a coffee
table.

Author
Christopher Null
     What has Mr. T been doing for all these years since The A-Team? 
Well, he's been hard at work in medical school, obviously, and now he's
Dallas's most sought-after OB/GYN!
     We were admonished by a studio rep at the beginning of Dr. T and
the Women not to spoil the plot twists in our review.  Well, I'm going
to spoil one right now by telling you this:  Mr. T does not appear in
this movie!
     Dr. T and the Woman is the relatively harmless tale of the
aforementioned Texas gynecologist (Gere) and the women who surround
him.  His wife (Farrah Fawcett) is a nut job with a psychiatric illness
so rare and strange (it makes her act childish) that it can only be
fictional.  His sister-in-law (Laura Dern, barely recognizable) is a
high-society drunk.  His head nurse (and he has about a dozen of them),
played by Shelley Long, secretly has a crush on him.  The local golf pro
(Helen Hunt) is a dangerous temptation against his wedding vows.  His
daughter Connie (Tara Reid) is a JFK conspiracy theorist.  And his other
daughter Dee Dee (the square-jawed Kate Hudson) is a Dallas Cowboy
cheerleader wannabe who's about to get married in one of the most
seamless weddings ever planned, especially considering every member of
her family is either drunk, crazy, or poring over uteruses all day.
     Dee Dee's wedding drives much of the action in the film, and the
place settings would have been required in order to follow the who's-who
of Dr. T, if not for the fact that every character is a shallow
stereotype that merits little more description than given above.  From
the moment we see a naked Farrah (and there's an awful lot of nudity in
Dr. T for what is, essentially, a women's picture) frolicking in a
public fountain, we know we're going to be calling most of the action
before it happens.  Ultimately, Dr. T and the Women is a messy tangle of
estrogen and errant plotlines.  And let's just say that you'd better
prepare yourself in advance to witness a graphically real childbirth. 
Real enough, anyway.
     What Dr. T lacks in character development and story line it makes
up to some degree in charm.  Most notably, the film pegs Southern Gaudy
to a T (no pun intended), and ironically, the frequent and kitschy
scenes with Dr. T's (male) hunting buddies are the best part of the
movie.  An intrusive score doesn't help matters, though, and Anne Rapp's
screenplay (Rapp had better luck with last year's Cookie's Fortune, also
for Altman) isn't likely to win any awards.  One also has to question
Altman's casting judgment:  Will Dr. T be the film that revives Shelley
Long's long-deceased career?  And Farrah Fawcett?  Um, no.
     In the end, Dr. T's observations about life and love amount to the
rather plain insight that a bunch of chicks can drive you nuts.  Believe
me, this I already know.
Director: Robert Altman
Producer: Robert Altman, James McLindon
Writer: Anne Rapp
Starring: Richard Gere, Jani Vorwerk, Helen Hunt, Farrah Fawcett, Laura
Dern, Shelley Long, Tara Reid, Kate Hudson, Liv Tyler, Robert Hays, Matt
Malloy, Andy Richter, Lee Grant, Janine Turner, Gail Cronauer
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     DR. T AND THE WOMEN is about a fabulously handsome and
successful gynecologist living and working in the Dallas area.  Dr.
Sullivan Travis, (played by Richard Gere) lives the good life.  He
has a beautiful wife Karen (Farrah Fawcett) and two nice children.
In his practice he treats many attractive women, yet he remains
totally faithful to his wife and family.  In typical Altman fashion
we follow several strands of plot in the lives of T's family, his
patients, and T's relationship with an intriguing woman golf
professional at T's country club.  Problems start to creep into T's
world as Karen Travis childishly takes off her clothes and takes a
swim in the fountain in from of a Godiva chocolate shop in an
upscale mall.  Her doctor diagnoses her case as something called a
Hestia Complex, a mental disease of the wealthy.  Meanwhile as one
daughter plans her upcoming wedding, another seems intent on
disrupting the wedding plans.  And several other plot strands work
themselves out.
     Director Robert Altman is a surprisingly erratic filmmaker even
after all these years and after having made several classics.  There
is a great deal of similarity in all his films--each will have a
large number of familiar actors and a lot of plot strands that all
make a sort of mosaic of life in some part of the country.  Yet each
film will be trying to make some point and the quality of the film
tends to hang on that point and sort of people he is portraying.
Last year this gave us the charming COOKIE'S FORTUNE.  Considerably
less charming and in the final analysis more than a little fatuous
is this film.  What we get is a not very flattering portrait of the
nouveau riche, with women going through women's pursuits of spending
large sums of money, planning weddings, and turning visits to the
gynecologist into one more popular form of entertainment.  It is
hard to imagine women so excited about getting an intimate
examination that they cluster like pigeons turning the doctor's
office into real chaos just for the excitement of being examined.
Somehow even with someone with Richard Gere's looks doing the
examining, this really stretches the imagination.  Meanwhile the
receptionist snorts like a horse and patients plan accidents for
other patients.  While the women are doing this, the guys are doing
really masculine and only marginally more believable pursuits like
shooting skeets (well, golf balls) and going duck hunting.
     Altman has done more interesting work. This film only really
engages the viewer if one is fascinated with this sector of society.
The film generally hovers no further than arm's length from being
sexually titillating.  We see locker room scenes, and gynecological
examinations.  People take off their clothing out behind desks.  We
see Farrah Fawcett nude in a fountain once it is clear she is not
mentally competent.  Altman can do better things than tantalize the
audience.  Most of these patients are treated in a superficial and
not very sympathetic manner.  Many we never see outside the chaos of
the waiting room.  Like MAGNOLIA the story builds to a sort of a
strange climax, though what happens here is much less likely than
what happens in MAGNOLIA.  This is all in service to making a point
that has been made many times before in film.  Altman is no more
intelligent about making that point in this film.  Nor do his
characters have the interest value they had in COOKIE'S FORTUNE.  If
one neither enjoys the theme nor the characters, there is not much
left.
     Altman probably cannot make a film that is totally bad.  His
famous relaxed style of shooting a film attracts too many good
people.  But with a really mediocre script he can waste talent on a
film worth only a 4 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low 0 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Robert Altman's DR. T AND THE WOMEN is an excessively cute type of story 
in which much is made of the sales clerk at Tiffany's having the name 
Tiffany, and in which one of the characters named Bree (Helen Hunt) 
keeps pointing out that her name isn't like the cheese but like "breed" 
without the "d."
In a sea of women patients as raucously noisy as Grand Central Station 
at rush hour, their Ob-Gyn, Dr. T (Richard Gere), reigns supreme.  A 
dozen noisy "fillies" wait for him while gabbing a mile-a-minute.  Most 
are ostentatiously wealthy women with long blonde hair.  It's the sort 
of office in which a patient, after getting the good doctor's wise 
advice, runs through it shouting, "I'm going to be the best damn 
menopause patient you've ever had!"  This is greeted by boisterous 
applause from the staff and patients.  
As God's gift to women, Dr. T proudly spouts his rules, worthy of pillow 
embroidery ("Never take a good woman for granted" and "Women by their 
nature are saints and must be treated as such.").  The doctor drives a 
big, old, cream-yellow Cadillac convertible with "DR T" vanity tags.  
His favorite past-time is hunting with his buddies.
The state of Texas (the setting of the story), especially it's place 
names and famous women, are so prominently featured that one wonders if 
the state had to fork over a large product placement fee.  The doctor's 
examination rooms are all named for well-known Texas women including Ann 
Richards, Belle Starr and Phyllis George.  The story even flaunts the 
great apartment rental prices offered in the Dallas area.
The movie's large and talented cast swarms around Gere likes he's the 
queen bee.  His performance, wise and soothing, is the best of the 
bunch.  It's too bad that the flitting and unconvincing script and 
direction gets in the way of our enjoying the acting.
Dr. T's wife, Kate (Farrah Fawcett), is losing her mind due to a disease 
that afflicts, we are told, only "women who are loved too much."  This 
causes her to strip completely naked in an exclusive shopping mall and 
dance in the indoor fountain.  This is first of many hard to buy 
episodes from Anne Rapp's script.  Notice how people just walk right by 
with few noticing a crazy, naked blonde, dancing and singing away.  Kate 
is the type of wife who notifies her husband that there will be no more 
sex, ever, since "it's not nice."
But don't worry about the good doctor, he'll still get his.  Although 
she knows he's married, Bree asks him over to her place.  After dinner 
she gives him a come-hither look and strips naked so that he can get 
from her what he's not getting at home.  This casual approach to 
infidelity should give viewers pause.
Other unbelievable parts of the narrative include the patient who 
insists on smoking like a chimney during her entire examination.  And 
another who wears a hat with a large feather during hers.
The story is way too cluttered.  One of the doctor's grown daughters, 
Connie (Tara Reid, BODY SHOTS), works as a guide at The Conspiracy 
Museum in Dallas.  This plot device allows Altman to take us to the 
infamous Texas School Book Depository.  Connie, pointing to the literal 
"X" in the road in front of it, enthusiastically tells her tour group, 
"That's where JFK's head exploded."
Kate Hudson (ALMOST FAMOUS) gets a small part as the doctor's other 
daughter, who is about to get married.  As her Maid of Honor, Liv Tyler 
is a woman with a secret in yet another of the many subplots.  Laura 
Dern is a mother who is a bulimic lush.  And Shelley Long is the 
doctor's unflappable office manager.  
The script's quirky charm does sometimes manage to shine through the 
clutter.  But the ending, reminiscent of MAGNOLIA's raining frogs, 
reminds us again of everything wrong with the movie.  For my money, the 
only Dr. T movie worth seeing is the 1953 movie, THE 5,000 FINGERS OF 
DR. T., based on a Dr. Seuss story and starring Hans Conried as Dr. T.
DR. T AND THE WOMEN runs a long 2:01.  It is rated R for graphic nudity 
and some sexuality and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Chad Polenz
As a film critic you're sometimes faced with the dilemma of giving a movie a 
good review even when you know you could fault it for many things. I'm in 
such a situation right now with this review of "Dr. T And The Women," a 
dramedy by veteran filmmaker Robert Altman. It's one of those films you enjoy 
watching at the time but afterwards you realize it might not have been as 
good as you thought. 
Normally I'd elaborate on what I mean when I use these amateur critic's 
phrases of mine, but I don't think it's necessary this time. Wouldn't you 
rather like to know what the film is about and what makes it good instead of 
another rhetorical rambling that sounds like something between a cross of a 
collegiate thesis and an excerpt from "Entertainment Weekly?" 
Here's the deal, Richard Gere stars as Dr. Sully Travis, or "Dr. T" as he's 
known among his patients and friends. He's a wealthy gynecologist in Dallas 
who runs his own practice that's so popular the women in the waiting room 
argue over who gets to go next. Dr. T has a beautiful wife, two cute 
daughters and a nice house in the suburbs. He plays golf and goes hunting 
with his three buddies whenever he can. He's got it all doesn't he? Or he 
would at least if odd things didn't keep happening to him. 
The first such incident comes early on in the film when we see his wife, 
daughters and their aunt shopping at a mall for daughter Dee Dee's wedding. 
Kate Hudson plays the bride-to-be, a Dallas Cowboy cheerleading-in-training 
who probably has gotten everything she's ever wanted. Tara Reid plays Connie, 
the younger sister who isn't such a snob and cares the most about her family. 
Laura Dern plays their passively alcoholic Aunt Peggy who has three little 
girls of her own and spoils all of them. Then there's Farrah Fawcett as Mrs. 
Katie Travis. She suffers a mental breakdown during the mall scene which 
lands her in a mental hospital for a rare mental disorder. 
Okay go ahead and make your jokes about how it must have been a stretch for 
Fawcett to play a headcase. But she's actually quite good in this role as a 
woman who reverts to the mindset of a three-year-old. She doesn't have much 
dialogue but she gives a good performance, especially in a scene later in the 
film when Sully comes to visit her and you don't know whether to laugh or 
cry. 
The movie mostly involves the women in Dr. T's life and there are A LOT of 
them. Besides his family there's also his patients, his staff and a woman 
named Bree (Hunt) who fascinates him for reasons he can't fully understand. 
Dr. T spends most of his time around women, in a very personal matter at 
that, the only thing he's seemed to learn is that they're all unique in their 
own way. 
If I was going to give this film a bad review this would be the part I 
criticize it for a semi-dramatic scene in which Gere delivers a line like 
that to Hunt while they're playing golf. But for some reason I can't hold Dr. 
T's naivety of the fairer sex against him.  After all, he's a doctor of the 
body, not of the mind. 
There isn't really a definite plot (this is an Altman movie we're talking 
about), it's mostly just an overlapping character study and Dr. T is the 
filter all of the characters go through. Looking at the movie poster you know 
it boasts some really big-name actresses and they all have their fair share 
of screen time and each character has importance in the big scheme of things. 
In an Altman film you sometimes wonder why he's spending so much time on 
characters just being themselves instead of working towards some goal or 
overcoming a conflict. I wondered this myself as the film reached the third 
act but was pleased with the results. Dee Dee's wedding serves as the boiling 
point where a lot of truths are revealed in a pretty funny way. That's when 
you think "Oh, okay, now I see where he was going with that."
However, what I DIDN'T understand was the actual ending sequence which has 
nothing to do with the wedding or any of the characters or stories that had 
come before. It's all about Dr. T but it's just so out of place it's rid
iculous. This is one of those endings that kind of freaks you out, not 
because it's a twist of the story but because it's so bizarre you know it 
must be some kind of brilliant allegory and you can't figure it out. 
For the most part "Dr. T And The Women" succeeds as an interesting and 
sometimes funny character study if nothing else. There's quite a few things 
that make you raise an eyebrow and if you're not easily amused you won't like 
the film as a whole (or at least not as much). Still, I enjoyed watching it 
and was genuinely curious about where it was going. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-7DA9-1FD5BB3D-39EB8D43-prod3 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
"Women are incapable of being bad luck by themselves. It's men who make them
that way. Women, by nature, are saints. They're sacred and should be treated
that way." This is the philosophy of Dr. T, the man whose name graces this
film's title. After having read that first passage, I bet that most women
believe that to be a positive philosophy, right? Well, sometimes "too much
love" is just...well, too much!
PLOT:
Gynecologist Sully Travis, better known to most as Dr. T, is surrounded by
women at work, women at home and women in his relationships. This film
follows the good doctor as his wife loses her senses, his daughter is
preparing to marry and a new woman enters his life. Can the doctor handle
all of these things happening at the same time? Can he handle all of these
women? Let's see.
CRITIQUE:
A fluffy, meandering, overlong tale which barely manages to stay afloat
thanks to its many kooky characters, interesting premise about a controlling
man who finally loses all control and a pretty neat ending. Not a great
movie by any stretch of the imagination, this film had me wondering about
its purpose during several scenes, but ultimately won most of me over with
some really fun performances. Shelley Long was surprisingly good as the
doctor's right-hand woman at the office. Funny, quirky and always
understanding of the doctor's issues, Long actually had me forgetting her
Diane character from TV's "Cheers". Another major kudo goes out to Laura
Dern in an excellent comedic turn as the ultimate rich, clumsy, alcoholic
sister-in-law from out of town, stealing every scene that she was in.
Unfortunately, as in usual Altman style, the film is filled with many stars,
actors and characters, without any real time dedicated to any of them.
Dern's character sadly falls into this latter group. But much of the rest of
the cast is good also. Gere and Hunt worked well off one another, although
someone should really tell Dick to stay away from characters sporting
accents, or at least to try and maintain the same accent through the entire
picture.
Plug all that on to Farrah Fawcett, in what can only be described as a
"perfect casting choice", Kate Hudson looking great, Tara Reid putting teen
flicks behind her and Janine Turner in an almost unrecognizable role as the
ultimate pain in the butt, and most anyone seeing this film should have at
least one favorite character. But with so many characters and so little
"real plot", the film ultimately gets bogged down in many moments where you
are left wondering why you're watching any of it in the first place. I
wasn't sure about what any of it meant until the near end of the film when
the doctor finally came to grips with the journey that he had taken. I
especially liked the final scene which was quite MAGNOLIA-esque. A fine line
between fantasy and reality. This ambiguous last scene also contains one of
the memorable shots ever shown in a commercial movie. The film is also laced
with many symbolic touches, with water literally co-starring in most every
outdoor scene, and quite a few beautiful scenery shots, all of which sort of
made up for the lack of "real" story. I would recommend this film to people
who like any of its principals, enjoy watching a large cast of characters
interact on film and don't mind a lack of solid narrative. Also, please note
that despite this film being labeled as a "comedy", it's really much more of
a drama than anything else. One thing that it did manage to do convincingly
was to skewer the women of the Dallas elite social scene. Yipes...and you
thought Minnesotans were pissed after FARGO?
PS: The nudity factor in this film includes Helen Hunt sans top and Farrah
Fawcett hopping around a water fountain in her birthday suit. Richard Gere,
on the other hand, shows no ass.

Author
Laura Clifford
Robert Altman is one of the great American film directors.  He's developed
a unique style, creating slices of life with large ensemble casts whose
stories interweave and bustling scenes where one can follow several strands
of overlapping dialogue.
With "Dr. T and the Women," Altman, again collaberating with screenwriter
Anne Rapp ("Cookie's Forturn") gives us one of his more middling creations.
The film opens in Dr. T's office, which is in a state of chaos.  Office
manager Carolyn (Shelley Long) is almost winning a losing battle, keeping
Houston society's elite ladies moving through three wittily named
examining rooms.  Dr. T's home life is also coming undone as his beloved
but mentally unbalanced wife Kate (Farrah Fawcett) jumps nude into shopping
mall fountains while his eldest daughter Dee Dee (Kate Hudson, "Almost
Famous") plans her wedding.  His alcoholic sister-in-law Peggy (Laura
Dern) has also moved into his manse with her three young daughters.
Dr. T relaxes on hunting and golfing trips with three male buddies, but
even the country club is invaded when a new golf pro, Bree (Helen Hunt), 
arrives and sets her cap for him.
Anne Rapp's fantastical script drips with female symbolism, from Kate's
diagnosed Hestia complex to the constant water references which culminate
in a fateful storm.  However, only a few of the characters manage to 
make themselves stand out admist the throng.
Gere is fine as the sympathetic gynecologist being trampled by life and
hordes of females.  He's softer than usual here and it befits his character
nicely.  Fawcett is quite good reverting to a childlike state.  Laura
Dern is a real standout as the champagne guzzling whirlwind who plays
at motherhood (Dr. T's maid Maria (Irene Cortez) is the one who really
keeps Peggy's girls in control).  Shelley Long gives a wonderful comic
performance as Dr. T's right hand woman who's maybe too happy to hear about
his marital woes.  Janine Turner (TV's "Northern Exposure," "Cliffhanger")
makes a welcome return to the screen as Dorothy, a serial patient who makes 
appointments only to get the reassurance she doesn't get from her husband 
(one of Dr. T's hunting pals).
Neither Kate Hudson nor Tara Reid make much of an impression as Dr. T's
daughters, although Altman vet Liv Tyler fares a bit better as a suspect
maid of honor.  Helen Hunt makes a convincing golf pro and down to earth
romantic foil for Gere.
However, why would the faithful Dr. T allow himself to be so quickly seduced 
after we learn that Kate's Hestia complex is suffered by 'women who are loved 
too much?'  An amusing sideline is developed between Dorothy and an elderly
woman in Dr. T's waiting room, but when the woman trips Dorothy with her
cane, Dorothy blames the incident on Dr. T - nonsensical.  The finale,
which could be viewed as either a return to the womb or homage to "The
Wizard of Oz," is pretty bizarre.  The film could even be seen as misogynistic.
The women are constantly presented as babbling hens (none of Altman's 
overlapping dialog here - instead we get a maelstrom of cackle!) whether
in the waiting room, getting dress fittings or at a wedding shower.
Altman also makes a couple of visual puns using store signs (he pans up
to the Godiva sign as Kate frolicks nude), but they seem out of place
when the device isn't carried through.  Big kudos to costume designer
Dona Granata ("Cookie's Fortune"), however, whose work really helps define 
the characters and adds comic touches.  Altman's son Stephen's production
design nails the lifestyle of a wealthy Houston doctor and his pampered
clients.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        So it's better than "Ready to Wear" ("Pręt-ŕ-Porter"), but that's
about the kindest thing one can say about "Dr. T and the Women," the latest
film by director Robert Altman, an over-cast and overextended project which
meanders and sallies for near-on two unfocused hours without really getting
anywhere.  Richard Gere stars as Dr. Sullivan Travis aka Dr. T, a
successful Texan gynecologist whose waiting room runneth over with the
finest fillies Dallas has to offer, lots of hot flushed gals with big
bouffants and lots of lacquer jostling for position in his fur-lined
stirrups.  In an all-time male fantasy quickly done in by an 80-year-old
with a yeast infection, the good doctor prods, probes, and pap smears his
way from nine to five yet remains strangely unfulfilled.  His cheerleading
daughter Dee Dee ("Almost Famous"' Kate Hudson) is about to check in to the
honorable estate of marriage while his loopy wife Kate (Farrah Fawcett)
checks into the local sanitarium.  Dr. T needs something new in his life;
something fresh.  Enter Bree, a golf pro played by Helen Hunt.  "You're not
like any woman I've ever met," he tells her to her face.  And if a
gynecologist tells you there are no two alike then you have to believe
there are no two alike.  With a screenplay by Anne Rapp (who penned
Altman's previous film, the over-cast and overextended "Cookie's Fortune"),
"Dr. T and the Women" follows pretty much the same path--a lot of talent
drowning under Lyle Lovett's Texas twangs.  Any film which opens with an
implicit pelvic exam and closes with an explicit live birth is trying to
say something, but the stuff in the middle, alas, doesn't amount to much of
anything.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 DR. T AND THE WOMEN (director: Robert Altman; screenwriter: Anne Rapp;
 cinematographer: Jan Kiesser; editor: Geraldine Peroni; cast: Richard
 Gere (Dr. T), Helen Hunt (Bree), Farrah Fawcett (Kate), Laura Dern
 (Peggy), Shelley Long (Carolyn), Tara Reid (Connie), Kate Hudson (Dee
 Dee), Liv Tyler (Marilyn), Robert Hays (Harlan), Matt Malloy (Bill),
 Andy Richter (Eli), Lee Grant (Dr. Harper), Janine Turner (Dorothy),
 Gail Cronauer (Patient ); Runtime: 121; Artisan Entertainment; 2000)
An amusingly rich and stimulating tale about a successful Dallas-based
gynecologist, Dr. T (Gere), who thinks he understands women better than
anyone else in town. He has been faithful despite all the temptations
around him to his gorgeous wife Kate (Farrah Fawcett). They have two
lovely, independent-minded, college-aged daughters, Dee Dee (Kate
Hudson) and Connie (Tara Reid), and he has all the family love and
material comforts he desires, living an upper-class bourgeois lifestyle.
But in Robert Altman's gentle and perceptive comedy, this is not enough.
The film becomes a satirical study of the doctor and the upper-crust
society folks he comes into contact with. The good doctor will get his
needed come-uppance about thinking he knows so much about women, as all
the ideals and fantasies he builds around them will come crashing down
upon him. Appropriately enough, this is a film set in the fall, and the
mood and the color of the film reflects that time of year, in all its
beauty and in its surprisingly stormy weather.
The film moves at its own gracefully slow speed, showing the trivial
things in Sully Travis' life that make him think like he does, as the
charming, handsome, popular doctor, who is as smooth in his bedside
conversations as he is when he examines a woman's insides with his
speculum, whose waiting room is a maddening cluster of idle chatter and
angst from all the female patients waiting to be examined by him, where
even his daffy, loyal office manager Carolyn (Long), vies for his
undivided attention among all the other woman, as she has a longstanding
crush on him.
As an added touch to feminine sensitivity, he has examining rooms named
after local female celebrities  - Belle Starr, Phyllis George and Gov.
Ann Richards.
The gynecologist's philosophical musings about his knowledge of women is
given freely to his bird hunting buddies, as he pontificates, "Women are
by nature sacred and should be treated as saints."
But Sully's wife has a psychological breakdown, as she dances in the
upscale mall water display fountain while nude and is sent by him to a
private mental hospital rest home, to be treated by Dr. Harper (Lee
Grant). She is baffled by her problem, but surmises it's a rare
mythological complex that she suffers from, that affects only
upper-class women who are loved too much and come to reject this love,
retreating into a childlike state.
Into Sully's life comes an attractive new golf pro teacher at his
country club, Bree Davis (Hunt), and the two soon start an affair, with
the doctor smugly telling her that every woman is unique. She concurs
that if anyone would know, it's him. She is seen as being different than
the other women in his life: she's an athlete, wearing casual clothes
such as chinos and is not impressed by his acts of gentlemanly chivalry,
as she has made up her mind that she wants to have sex with him and he
doesn't have to play any games to have her. But the most important
difference, is that she's a take charge woman, and this is really a turn
on to the already smitten Dr. T.
With his wife's rejection of him, Sully's life begins to dramatically
change. His recently divorced, alcoholic sister-in-law, dressed
ostentaciously in feathery outfits, Peggy (Laura Dern), comes to stay
with him bringing along her three toddler daughters. His conspiracy buff
daughter Connie, who is a tour guide, shocks him by telling him that his
Dallas Cowboy cheerleader daughter Dee Dee, who will shortly be getting
married, had a lesbian affair with the maid of honor Marilyn (Tyler),
and shouldn't be getting married because she's still in love with
Marilyn.
At last, after many recent bombs, Gere has found a film that goes hand
in hand with his laconic style and intelligent grace, as he plays a
sympathetic character, someone who seems very comfortable with this
dazzling role around so many women and comes across as a good doctor and
a generous person who is trying his best to be the Man around a sea of
women. There doesn't seem to be much tragedy here, it seems that script
writer Anne Rapp and the 75-year-old Altman are only gently chiding the
doctor for thinking he can ever understand women, and the film plays
more like a big joke on him than anything else. What unravels for him,
are all things he can easily rebound from, as the film ends with the
song "Ain't It Something The Way Things Go" being played as the credits
roll by, after an unpredictable ending to a sweetly bizarre film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Artisan Entertainment/Sandcastle 5 
 Director: Robert Altman
 Writer:  Anne Rapp
 Cast: Richard Gere, Helen Hunt, Laura Dern, Farrah
Fawcett, Kate Hudson, Tara Reid, Liv Tyler, Shelley Long,
Janine Turner, Andy Richter, Lee Grant, Matt Malloy, Robert
Hays
   I once corresponded by e-mail with a rich woman, the wife
of a successful doctor.  She regularly said, only half-jokingly,
that he is a lucky man.  Why?  Because "he gets to see
women in their panties."  Are male doctors really fortunate in
that respect?  This is doubtful since they get to see a large
number of women each day and I suspect they take a purely
professional interest in the panties.  Then again: could the
converse be true?  Could a gynecologist, who sees women in
the most intimate way, become so anesthetized that he would
no longer appreciate his wife or girl friend as a woman?  This
is not the case with Dr. Sullivan Travis (Richard Gere) who,
in Robert Altman's new, intermittently comic and lovingly
satiric "Dr. T and the Women," portrays a busy man who has
the highest respect for the opposite sex.  "They're saints," he
believes, and he is very much attracted to his wife, Kate
(Farrah Fawcett).  But when Kate falls victim to a
psychological ailment described, perhaps tongue-in-cheek by
psychiatrist Dr. Harper (Lee Grant), as a reversion to
childishness and virginity, Dr. T finds that notwithstanding all
the women he sees in his examining room and the seductive
moves by his nurse Carolyn (Shelley Long), he is missing the
tenderness he craves.
   In his usual style, Robert Altman has created yet another
quirky, multilayered film that casts his impudent eye on an
aspect of American culture.  This time around, he does not
complicate his tale as he did with the movie for which he is
most known, "Nashville," which is a mosaic of the American
experience created by interweaving 24 characters into a
loosely structured plot.  His target is women who lunch,
described as the upper reaches of Dallas, Texas society but
who appear more like members of the haute bourgeois than
the genuine aristocracy.  Women of various ages are looked
at with Altman's cocky gaze, though none is differentiated
from the other by level of wealth.  These matrons patronize
Dr. T's medical office in droves, often showing up without
medical reason weekly, ostensibly to be touched by the
gentle and expert hands of this handsome and charming
physician.
   In a series of comical takes, Altman--taking full advantage
of Anne Rapp's knowing script--throws a series of episodes
our way even while focusing on his principal story, that of the
travails of Dr. Travis.  No sooner have the opening credits
disappeared than we find ourselves in the presence of one
patient who smokes while being examined and is told by the
doctor that she is the only person allowed to do this
anywhere in the suite.  Except for age differences, the
women are alike in that all have blond hair, all dress in high
heels even when leisurely visiting the mall.  As for the mall
itself, this Dallas creation is nothing like the Wendy's, Pizza
Hut and McDonalds emporium  so cleverly parodied in Paul
Giamatti's "Duets" monologue but consists rather of shops
like Godiva, Tiffany's and Guess.
   While Altman spends the first half of the movie with his
overview of the chattering, clucking, women, seen during the
opening credits as nothing less than a human imitation of a
chicken coop, he gets down to business some time after his
wife Kate reverts to a virgin childishness and warns him that
his advances are "not nice."  Though Travis is surrounded by
women day and night--his home houses two college-age
daughters, Connie (Tara Reid) and Dee Dee (Kate Hudson)
and even his sister-in-law Peggy (Laura Dern) and her three
kids--he is a one-woman man and finds love in the arms of
an independent, athletic spirit, assistant golf pro Bree (Helen
Hunt).  Burnt out by an accumulation of dilemmas including
his wife's psychosis, his daughter's wedding plans, his
perpetually overbooked practice and his attraction for the
elusive Bree, Dr. T undergoes a psychological, and later
physical, breakdown that allows him to reassess his life.
   While Altman is obviously sending up these chattering and
yet need rich women, he is sympathetic to all his characters
and, we suspect, under his satiric tone he too believes that
the gentle sex harbors an unlimited number of candidates for
sainthood.  Even Richard Gere, traditionally wrapped up in
himself and in several films more concerned about his flowing
mane than about the people who surround him, is likeable. 
Helen Hunt is particularly good as the one woman about his
age who is different from the rest.  Her character is not
society, she rents a house for just $750 a month, and is the
happiest and most centered individual in the picture.  On the
whole, "Dr. T and the Women" does for Texas what Nashville
did for Tennessee except that this time Altman more
decisively casts himself in the image of a Truffaut in his
affection for women.  The movie is a charmer.
Rated R.  Running time: 122 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Robert Altman.
Cast: Richard Gere, Helen Hunt, Kate Hudson, Tara Reid, Laura Dern, Shelley 
Long, Farrah Fawcett, Liv Tyler, Robert Hays, Matt Malloy, Andy Richter, 
Janine Turner.
2000 - 122 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 14, 2000.
After several years of making less-successful motion pictures (1999's 
"Cookie's Fortune," 1996's "Kansas City") that lacked the memorable nature of 
his earlier work, it was with a slight sense of pause that made me question 
if director Robert Altman was possibly losing his surefire touch. Although 
never losing his loose stylishness and quirkily realistic characters, 
Altman's last great film was 1993's "Short Cuts," which, in fact, beared a 
close resemblance to his most masterful achievement, 1975's "Nashville," a 
multi-layered expose of a week in the lives of twenty-four characters in the 
title city of country music. 
With the aid of Anne Rapp's precise, accurately drawn screenplay, Altman's 
latest film, "Dr. T and the Women," is not only a thoroughly enjoyable and 
satisfying piece of work, but one of the better, more thought-provoking 
movies he has made. Richard Gere exquisitely stars as princely Dallas 
gynecologist Sullivan Travis ("Dr. T"), who, for as long as he can remember, 
has dedicated himself to the many, many females in his life. Women to him, 
you see, are all alluring and unique in their own special ways, and feels as 
if they should be treated like such. Because of his studly looks, intermixed 
with his kind, purely professional demeanor, Dr. T's office is constantly 
swarming each day with patients, primarily wealthy debutantes from Dallas' 
upper crust of society.
Tragedy hits close to home when his beloved wife, Kate (Farrah Fawcett), 
somehow snaps and acquires a rare mental disorder known as the Hestia 
Complex, in which the sufferer resorts to a virginal, child-like state. Also 
on his already full plate is the upcoming wedding of his cheerleader daughter 
Dee Dee (Kate Hudson), who may or may not be hiding her true feelings for old 
college friend and maid-of-honor Marilyn (Liv Tyler), much to the concern of 
Dee Dee's conspiracy buff sister Connie (Tara Reid). Also in Dr. T's life is 
daffy sister-in-law Peggy (Laura Dern), who can't go much longer than a 
minute without a swig of booze, and who has just moved back into his mansion 
with her three little daughters; sprightly office assistant Carolyn (Shelley 
Long), who secretly pines for Dr. T from afar; and Bree (Helen Hunt), the new 
golf pro in town who proves to not only be sexually-charged, but also a good 
listener, and whose very independence deeply attracts Dr. T to her.
"Dr. T and the Women" is an extraordinarily assured comedy-drama about a man 
whose very love for women has made him want to spend his entire life 
satisfying and making them happy. While many of his patients are overly 
materialistic, Dr. T's very nature is to be non-critical of each and every 
one of them, and to really listen to what they have to say. Additionally, his 
extended family, composed solely of the opposite sex, all love, trust, and 
rely on him, and this very fact makes him utterly satisfied. One of the best 
things about the writing, by Anne Rapp, is not only the way she truthfully 
portrays the female characters, but, like Dr. T, holds no preconceived 
judgments of the people that comprise the title character's entire being.
In what has become a token trademark of his, Altman paints his story and 
characters with enough shading and layers that something is almost always 
going on in the background, as well as the foreground, whether it be a subtle 
character idiosyncrasy, or an uneventful, superfluous string of dialogue that 
permeates through everyday interactions. Whatever it may be, this distinct 
filmmaking choice helps to develop and get the viewer to somehow come to know 
the characters better, even when they aren't given too much to work with on 
the scripted page.
The cast in "Dr. T and the Women" couldn't possibly get any better. Aside 
from veteran Richard Gere's star-making (yes, you heard that right) 
performance that makes you feel as if you are glimpsing him as an actor for 
the first time, the rest of the actors are no less impressive. In standout 
turns, Laura Dern (1996's "Citizen Ruth") is exceptionally funny and 
entertaining as joyful alcoholic Peggy; Helen Hunt (1997's "As Good As It 
Gets) thoughtfully underplays her complicated role as the idealistic woman 
Dr. T falls for; and Tara Reid (1999's "American Pie") is extremely likable 
and brightly cast as Dr. T's faithful daughter Connie. It should be quickly 
added that singling out the best performances in the picture is almost a 
pointless task, since everyone fits right into the proceedings, including 
Kate Hudson (2000's "Almost Famous"), touching as confused bride-to-be Dee 
Dee, Shelley Long (1995's The Brady Bunch Movie"), and Liv Tyler (1999's 
"Plunkett and McLeane").
Nearly flawless until its final minutes, in which Altman weaves a highly 
ambiguous surprise conclusion that could be interpreted any number of ways, 
but feels mildly disappointing in relation to everything that has come 
before, "Dr. T and the Women" is the best type of comedy--one that not only 
makes you laugh, but that makes you deeply care, too. Above everything else, 
this is a one-of-a-kind motion picture that treats all of its characters with 
respect and dignity, whether they fully deserve it or not, and never once 
attempts to pick sides. Too often, female roles in Hollywood are underwritten 
or unfairly looked over, but director Altman has always fondly treated them 
as intelligent individuals with thoughts, ideas, and a whole lot of heart. 
With "Dr. T and the Women," he has adoringly created a love letter especially 
for them, and in the process, made one of the very best films of the year. 
Way to go, Bob. Way to go.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
DR. T AND THE WOMEN *** (2000) Directed by Robert Altman. Written by 
Anne Rapp. Photography, Jan Kiesser. Editing, Geraldine Peroni. 
Production design, Stephen Altman. Costume design, Dona Granata. 
Music, Lyle Lovet. Produced by Robert Altman and James McLindon. 
Cast: Richard Gere (Dr. T), Helen Hunt (Bree), Farrah Fawcett (Kate), 
Laura Dern (Peggy), Shelley Long (Carolyn), Tara Reid (Connie), Kate 
Hudson (Dee Dee), Liv Tyler (Marilyn), Robert Hays (Harlan), Matt 
Malloy (Bill), Andy Richter (Eli), Lee Grant (Dr. Harper), Janine 
Turner (Dorothy).  An  Artisan Entertainment release. 122 minutes. 
This film is rated R. (sex, nudity)
In recent times, I cannot remember a film by a first-rank maker 
creating as much controversy as "Dr. T." Its reception runs from 
admiration to vilification. The title's doctor is a Dallas, Texas 
gynecologist whose clientele are chic, wealthy, idle,  upper-class 
ladies. They all love him, as does his large staff. His popularity is 
immense --for good reasons.
He is clearly a very good OB-GYN.. His interest in his patients is 
extraordinary,  personal, sincere as well as intelligent. Though 
overworked he is also patient with the patients. And if the women 
love him, he loves them back.  And he looks like Richard Gere.
The ladies, from young to old, mostly know one another or are 
friends, practice air kissing on occasion, fill his waiting room to 
capacity, chat and gossip among themselves, request Dr. T  with 
persistance, keep him non-stop busy. The women are all nice looking, 
some even beautiful, .Janine Turner is spectacular. But, cleverly, 
none of those ladies is shown as a vamp.
The place is like a women's club. It's also bedlam where T and his 
fantastically good staff manage to keep their heads above water, 
their cool, their genuine smiles, and their humanity.
The whole scene is as Altmanesque as can be. The director juggles 
characters, dialogue (overlapping, synchronized, credible), images 
and action with his usual, impressive skill. The viewer may be kept 
busy following things and people, but there's clarity and method in 
this madness.
One might normally suspect that within this framework are affairs 
between T and "his" women. But the catch is that Dr.T worships and 
deifies women, calls them saints, respects them even at their 
nuttiest, and is crazy about his own wife Kate (Farrah Fawcett) whom 
he has always pampered.
In such films the overall atmosphere and numerous characters can be 
more important and interesting than the main story line. Here the 
start has a magnificently roving camera that  follows Dallas ladies 
through an upscale Dallas mall -- ironically, critically but not 
cattily. It's an A-plus sequence in which a Tiffany's and other 
elegant sites are like a fine orchestral score.
At the mall Kate behaves oddly, takes off her clothes and dances in a 
pool.  Back in the Travis home, she refuses her husband's sexual 
advances.  "We can't do this any more. It's not nice."  She is 
diagnosed as suffering from a Hestia Complex. In ancient Greece, 
Hestia, goddess of the hearth, pursued by Apollo and Poseidon decided 
to be a virgin forever. The complex--assuming it exists -- is caused 
by too much male love and attention and results in a retreat to a 
child-like state. The subject despises, then rejects love.
That's the kernel of the plot. With Kate apparently not quickly 
curable, Dr.T  distracts himself a bit by continuing to meet his 
buddies for golf and hunting. He meets the new assistant golf coach 
Bree (Helen Hunt). Writ as large as a sky-writing plane's message is 
an affair, predictable yet handled with some originality.
The film, orchestrated as well a choreographed, thickens with the 
themes of T's grown-up daughters, one a guide for a Conspiracy Museum 
(on JFK's assassination), the other a pretty-by-the-numbers 
cheerleader who is about to be married.
Other ingredients are thrown into the sauce gradually. Kate;  wedding 
preparations; T's head-nurse (Shelly Long) who is in love with him; 
weird patients; lesbianism; an outdoor wedding ceremony attended by a 
20 to 1 ratio of women to men--in stormy weather; much else. I will 
not disclose the film's progress, surprises, its peculiar last parts, 
and the shocking (to some) ending which is upbeat and a kind of 
epiphany for Dr. T.  I can't say more.
All this has fine, precise acting by all. Gere who bears the main 
load, plays quietly and discreetly. The movie also has originality, 
imagination, creativity and a host of clever bits. In one, a 
chain-smoking patient  whom T allows exceptionally to smoke during 
her examination. Then he's had enough and hands the ashtray to a 
nurse... who disposes of it but not before taking one puff behind T's 
back.
There is also a plethora of filmic and non-filmic in-jokes and 
references, gratuitous, often elusive, but amusing.  Dr. T's name is 
Sullivan Travis, which recalls the great 1941 comedy by Preston 
Sturges, "Sullivan's Travels."  Behind the pool where Kate dances 
nude is a Godiva store. The storm in the last part of the film seems 
to wink at the Helen Hunt-starring "Twister" (1996). Hunt's name Bree 
is like Jane Fonda's in "Klute" (1971). Jokes are made about Brie the 
cheese, though this movie is not cheesy. And much else.
The main objection to this work is Robert Altman's alleged misogyny. 
It is true that hardly any women look really intelligent here but the 
few men don't either, and that's not unusual in movies today. True, 
few of the women are not charmers, but in the small roles of T's 
assistants and especially Shelley Long's, they are. . (Hunt has 
charms for Gere but  there's a twist )  Yes, the ladies are from 
Dallas (though few sound like Texans) as are the girls in the 
discreetly ludicrous cheerleading class, but they could have been in 
many other wealthy cities.
All this reminds me of an interview with Clint Eastwood who said that 
he did not expect his "Unforgiven" to be a hit. "It's too 
intelligent." .

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Robert Altman.
Cast: Richard Gere, Helen Hunt, Kate Hudson, Tara Reid, Laura Dern, Shelley 
Long, Farrah Fawcett, Liv Tyler, Robert Hays, Matt Malloy, Andy Richter, 
Janine Turner.
2000 - 122 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 14, 2000.
After several years of making less-successful motion pictures (1999's 
"Cookie's Fortune," 1996's "Kansas City") that lacked the memorable nature of 
his earlier work, it was with a slight sense of pause that made me question 
if director Robert Altman was possibly losing his surefire touch. Although 
never losing his loose stylishness and quirkily realistic characters, 
Altman's last great film was 1993's "Short Cuts," which, in fact, beared a 
close resemblance to his most masterful achievement, 1975's "Nashville," a 
multi-layered expose of a week in the lives of twenty-four characters in the 
title city of country music. 
With the aid of Anne Rapp's precise, accurately drawn screenplay, Altman's 
latest film, "Dr. T and the Women," is not only a thoroughly enjoyable and 
satisfying piece of work, but one of the better, more thought-provoking 
movies he has made. Richard Gere exquisitely stars as princely Dallas 
gynecologist Sullivan Travis ("Dr. T"), who, for as long as he can remember, 
has dedicated himself to the many, many females in his life. Women to him, 
you see, are all alluring and unique in their own special ways, and feels as 
if they should be treated like such. Because of his studly looks, intermixed 
with his kind, purely professional demeanor, Dr. T's office is constantly 
swarming each day with patients, primarily wealthy debutantes from Dallas' 
upper crust of society.
Tragedy hits close to home when his beloved wife, Kate (Farrah Fawcett), 
somehow snaps and acquires a rare mental disorder known as the Hestia 
Complex, in which the sufferer resorts to a virginal, child-like state. Also 
on his already full plate is the upcoming wedding of his cheerleader daughter 
Dee Dee (Kate Hudson), who may or may not be hiding her true feelings for old 
college friend and maid-of-honor Marilyn (Liv Tyler), much to the concern of 
Dee Dee's conspiracy buff sister Connie (Tara Reid). Also in Dr. T's life is 
daffy sister-in-law Peggy (Laura Dern), who can't go much longer than a 
minute without a swig of booze, and who has just moved back into his mansion 
with her three little daughters; sprightly office assistant Carolyn (Shelley 
Long), who secretly pines for Dr. T from afar; and Bree (Helen Hunt), the new 
golf pro in town who proves to not only be sexually-charged, but also a good 
listener, and whose very independence deeply attracts Dr. T to her.
"Dr. T and the Women" is an extraordinarily assured comedy-drama about a man 
whose very love for women has made him want to spend his entire life 
satisfying and making them happy. While many of his patients are overly 
materialistic, Dr. T's very nature is to be non-critical of each and every 
one of them, and to really listen to what they have to say. Additionally, his 
extended family, composed solely of the opposite sex, all love, trust, and 
rely on him, and this very fact makes him utterly satisfied. One of the best 
things about the writing, by Anne Rapp, is not only the way she truthfully 
portrays the female characters, but, like Dr. T, holds no preconceived 
judgments of the people that comprise the title character's entire being.
In what has become a token trademark of his, Altman paints his story and 
characters with enough shading and layers that something is almost always 
going on in the background, as well as the foreground, whether it be a subtle 
character idiosyncrasy, or an uneventful, superfluous string of dialogue that 
permeates through everyday interactions. Whatever it may be, this distinct 
filmmaking choice helps to develop and get the viewer to somehow come to know 
the characters better, even when they aren't given too much to work with on 
the scripted page.
The cast in "Dr. T and the Women" couldn't possibly get any better. Aside 
from veteran Richard Gere's star-making (yes, you heard that right) 
performance that makes you feel as if you are glimpsing him as an actor for 
the first time, the rest of the actors are no less impressive. In standout 
turns, Laura Dern (1996's "Citizen Ruth") is exceptionally funny and 
entertaining as joyful alcoholic Peggy; Helen Hunt (1997's "As Good As It 
Gets) thoughtfully underplays her complicated role as the idealistic woman 
Dr. T falls for; and Tara Reid (1999's "American Pie") is extremely likable 
and brightly cast as Dr. T's faithful daughter Connie. It should be quickly 
added that singling out the best performances in the picture is almost a 
pointless task, since everyone fits right into the proceedings, including 
Kate Hudson (2000's "Almost Famous"), touching as confused bride-to-be Dee 
Dee, Shelley Long (1995's The Brady Bunch Movie"), and Liv Tyler (1999's 
"Plunkett and McLeane").
Nearly flawless until its final minutes, in which Altman weaves a highly 
ambiguous surprise conclusion that could be interpreted any number of ways, 
but feels mildly disappointing in relation to everything that has come 
before, "Dr. T and the Women" is the best type of comedy--one that not only 
makes you laugh, but that makes you deeply care, too. Above everything else, 
this is a one-of-a-kind motion picture that treats all of its characters with 
respect and dignity, whether they fully deserve it or not, and never once 
attempts to pick sides. Too often, female roles in Hollywood are underwritten 
or unfairly looked over, but director Altman has always fondly treated them 
as intelligent individuals with thoughts, ideas, and a whole lot of heart. 
With "Dr. T and the Women," he has adoringly created a love letter especially 
for them, and in the process, made one of the very best films of the year. 
Way to go, Bob. Way to go.

Author
Susan Granger

Susan Granger's review of "DR. T AND THE WOMEN" (Artisan Entertainment)
Dr. Sullivan Travis (Richard Gere) is an outrageously
successful Dallas gynecologist who genuinely cares for his patients
and dotes on his wife and daughters. His problem: he worships women,
referring to them as "saints. " He's a genuinely nice man, surrounded
by a kaleidoscope of neurotic, mostly unpleasant females. After she's
arrested for cavorting nude in a public fountain, it's obvious that
his wife (Farrah Fawcett) has regressed into a childlike state before
the extravagant society wedding of their cheerleader daughter (Kate
Hudson) who, according to their other daughter (Tara Reid), is having
an affair with her enigmatic maid-of-honor (Liv Tyler). His boozy
sister-in-law (Laura Dern), in the midst of a divorce, has moved in
with her three little girls. And controlling the chaos of his
overbooked practice falls on his adoring office-manager (Shelley
Long).  It's no wonder that he flees to the country club, where he
finds solace with the level-headed, briskly independent, new assistant
golf pro (Helen Hunt). Written by Ann Rapp and directed by Robert
Altman, who collaborated on "Cookie's Fortune," this stinging
character study and satiric social commentary with its curiously
twisted ending has a distinctly misogynistic undertone. Certainly, the
vulnerability of a woman with her legs in stirrups during a
gynecological exam is ripe for humor - "That man knows how to handle a
speculum!" - but Richard Gere plays the charming doctor like an
amiable sap who's constantly victimized by the privileged, pampered
shrews who surround him with their shrill cacophony of whining,
demanding voices. Lyle Lovett's honky-tonk score provides welcome
distraction. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dr. T and the
Women" is a flimsy 4. It's an irreverent, estrogen-enhanced farce that
just isn't very funny.
