Title
Review for Split Decision (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Robin Clifford
Gabriel Jesus Sandoval Chavez was as an American kid as you can get. He got
by okay at school, showed talent as an amateur boxer and worked at
McDonald's. When he decided to go along with his new gang friends on an
armed robbery, he didn't know that it would end in a 3˝-year prison stint.
Since his release in 1994, he started a new life and went professional as a
fighter, but his struggles weren't over in Marcy Garriott's first
documentary feature, "Split Decision."
Documentary films have been making some inroads into the mainstream of
American movies these days, what with such docs as "Sound and Fury," "Keep
the River On Your Right: A Modern Cannibal Tale," and "The Girl Next Door."
It's a real pleasure to see a newcomer to the documentary film field come
along and show a solid understanding of this underrated craft.
Docu-maker Garriott takes an interesting subject - Mexican boxer Jesus
Chavez - and builds a story based on the young man's legal plight of
deportation while he slowly, steadily assembles a career for himself as a
professional pugilist. The documentary style is simple and straightforward
- talking head interview footage combined with views of Jesus's day-to-day
life and his family, cutaway scenes of his different neighborhoods and,
finally, a look at his many boxing matches. Garriott is a woman who takes
her craft seriously and has paid close attention to the construction of her
work.
There are other aspects that make this 75-minute tome a tight, interesting
work. There is a lot of information conveyed about Jesus's life and his
battle with the Immigration and Naturalization service that make this more
than just a rags-to-riches story. While Jesus may be American to his core,
his family came to Chicago, illegally from Mexico, when he was a small boy.
Because of his criminal record and a 1996 Federal law that mandates that
convicted illegal immigrants will be deported for their crime - regardless
whether they are rehabilitated or not - he is deported to Mexico, where he
is a stranger in a strange land. Jesus, his managers and, as his prominence
in the ring built up, his big-time promoters, spent years trying to reverse
the government's unbending position. It's a bout that Jesus is still
fighting.
Other aspects of Jesus's story are told by use of title cards to convey
important supplementary information to the viewer in a succinct and simple
way that progress the film nicely. Music that fits the various locales is
also a plus.
I know there are a lot of boxing fans out there and it's nice to be able to
promote (pun intended) a movie about a young fighter on his way up the
ladder. That "Split Decision" is a straightforward, unadorned documentary
about an honest, hard-working young man trying to make it - successfully
here - in one of the world's toughest, most violent sports is a major plus
for these fans, and others, too. I give it a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
