Title
Review for North (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This could have been an enjoyable movie.  Rob Reiner, who has
given us one excellent film after another, really blew it on this one.
Even the great cast were not utilized to their fullest, most being on
the screen for a few minutes at a time.  Was he just snowing us with
big names?
     North (Elijah Wood) is eleven years old.  His dad and mom
(Seinfeld's Jason Alexander and Julia Louis-Dreyfus) are totally
oblivious to him; at the dinner table he can't get a word in.  And that
is sad because everyone else loves the kid.  He is tops in school
grades, best hitter and pitcher on his baseball team and even does a
great Tevye in his school's "Fiddler On The Roof" play.  Every parent
holds him up as an example to their kids: "Would North do that?"
     Every kid has a place where he likes to be by himself and think
about his life.  North's is a chair in a department store in a mall.
Passersby would think he was just a young boy waiting while his parents
are shopping.  But along comes someone dressed as a bunny.  (Bruce
Willis ... who also does the narrating).  The bunny works at the
store and is on a break.
     The bunny hears out North's sad story and gives him some options.
North brings his parents to court where a judge (Alan Arkin) rules in
his favor, allowing him to seek out some parents he would prefer to his
own.  The courtroom scene with the crazy judge is funny.
     The stipulation is: find parents you want by Labor Day or you will
be sent to an orphanage.  North sets out to various places around the
world looking for parents with whom he would be happy.
     Where did the movie go wrong?  In a couple of places.  The
"adventures" become repetitious and the 88-minute film drags.  But the
worst and most incredible part, given Reiner's history, the sub-plot
involves someone trying to murder North, actually firing at him.  What
a poor plot for a movie for children!

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: MONEY TRAIN now has company on my list of worst movies of all time.
I am having trouble putting my total contempt for NORTH into words. NORTH is
easily one of the worst movies ever made by a major studio, and what's worse,
it was made by a filmmaker I normally respect -- Rob Reiner, who gave us
SPINAL TAP and THE PRINCESS BRIDE, two of my perennial favorites, among the
many other excellent movies he's made. Now he gives us this... thing, which I
suppose was intended to be a comedy in another, better world. In this one,
it's a bag of garbage.
NORTH alleges to be the story of a young boy by the same name, who lives with
his well-off but uncommunicative parents. The movie doesn't even bother to
properly establish the lack of communication between child and parents: it
dives right into a wretched scene at the dinner table where North (Elijah
Wood) fakes a heart attack as a way of getting attention. Yuk, yuk, yuk. His
father, a clothing inspector, makes the first of several dreadful cracks
involving too-tight garments, none of which bear repeating here.
It gets much worse. After North decides that he has to divorce his parents
(in itself the subject of the terrifically funny IRRECONCILABLE DIFFERENCES,
but worthless here), they go into comas and have to be wheeled into the
courtroom on pallets. Yuk, yuk, yuk. North then heads off on a worldwide
quest for better parents. Because of the publicity involved in his case, he
gets lots of offers from various countries.
What happens next is a flabbergastingly shameless series of on-screen
humiliations by dozens of actors, all of which play prospective parents from
different locales. We get Dan Aykroyd as a Texan, Kathy Bates as an Eskimo,
just to name two -- all of which are painted as such mindless caricatures
that they don't even work as being *deliberately* hokey. It's a double
insult: not only are the images of, say, the chainsmoking Frenchmen laughing
like nitrous-oxide-crazed hyenas with the Eiffel Tower looming over them not
funny, but they're not even interesting. One especially odious scene, which
the filmmakers had the temerity to include in a trailer for the film, had
North backing out of joining an Amish community, retreating into his airplane
and laughing, "I think I left my butter churner in the overhead compartment."
Yuk, yuk, yuk.
Oh, yeah. Wandering through this horrible mess is another character in
various guises, played by Bruce Willis (who must have been real short on cash
the week he agreed to be in this movie). Was there a clause in the contracts
that required every actor to be humiliated beyond redemption?
I watched NORTH in appalled silence, waiting all the way through past the end
credits for some sort of gag to be sprung on me. I kept waiting for the movie
to turn itself inside-out, for some kind of meta-joke to start unspooling and
make the whole wretched mess worthwhile. It never did. It really WAS that
bad. With this and SPECIES II, I'm on a roll for the week.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Elijah Wood, Bruce Willis, Jon Lovitz, Mathew McCurley, 
           Jason Alexander, Julia Louis-Dreyfus 
Director:  Rob Reiner 
Producers:  Rob Reiner and Alan Zweibel 
Screenplay:  Alan Zweibel and Andrew Scheinman based on the novel by 
             Alan Zweibel 
Cinematography:  Adam Greenberg 
Music:  Marc Shaiman 
Released by Columbia Pictures 
     Rob Reiner has had an amazing string of hits.  His resume dotted
with such critical and popular successes as THIS IS SPINAL TAP, THE
SURE THING, WHEN HARRY MET SALLY, MISERY, and A FEW GOOD MEN, Reiner
has transformed his Meathead image into that of a "can't miss"
director.  Unfortunately, this time he has missed--and by quite a
bit.  The premise of NORTH sounds flat, the previews look insipid, and,
while the movie doesn't turn out nearly as bad as either would lead you
to believe, NORTH is still a lackluster production.
     This is a modern fable, complete with a moral (something about the
value of parents and families), that tries to be witty and offbeat, but
more often is merely overlong.  Reiner did a wonderful job in the realm
of the fantastic and absurd with THE PRINCESS BRIDE, but here his
approach comes closer to that of Barry Levinson's disastrous TOYS.
     The story opens with North (Elijah Wood) being ignored by his
self-absorbed parents (Jason Alexander and Julia Louis-Dreyfus).  The
unstable domestic situation begins to prey on North's mind, affecting
all aspects of his life, including his ability to play baseball and his
unimpeachable academic record.  He is in a quandary about what to do
until he encounters a department store Easter bunny (Bruce Willis in a
fuzzy pink suit) who gives him an idea:  become a free-agent, and let
parents everywhere make bids for his "services."  And so begins the
quest for the ultimate mother and father.
     North's adventures are designed mostly as satire and, as such,
painted with the broadest strokes.  Sometimes, when the movie strikes
the right chord, it is refreshingly funny, but on most occasions, it
doesn't know when to move on.  During the course of his search, North
visits a number of prospective families:  the wealthy Ma and Pa Tex
(played by Dan Aykroyd and Reba McEntire), the governor of Hawaii and
his wife, two Alaskans living in an igloo village (Graham Greene and
Kathy Bates), a Parisian pair laughing at Jerry Lewis, an Amish couple
(Kelly McGillis and Alexander Godunov from WITNESS), an African duo,
and a Cleaver-Nelson version of the "ideal" mom and dad (John Ritter
and Faith Ford).
     In one way or another, each of these distorted snapshots into
family life is intended to parody some facet of modern culture.  When
the sequences are kept short, they work.  However, three of these (the
Texans, the Hawaiians, and the Alaskans) take up too much screen time.
Once we see Ma and Pa Tex in a 100-foot long stretch limo, is there a
need to spend additional minutes hammering home the point?
     Another problem is the inclusion of a subplot featuring Jon Lovitz
as an ambulance-chasing lawyer (whose entrance is wonderfully-staged,
by the way) and Mathew McCurley as Winchell, a kid with ideas of world
dominance.  Not only do these scenes not work, but they interrupt the
already-unstable flow of NORTH.  The need to have villains seems to be
a mistake.
     In NORTH, we are given an opportunity to view both ends of the
child acting spectrum.  On one hand, there's Elijah Wood, who is
convincing as a boy wanting nothing more than to be loved and
recognized by his parents.  Then, on the other hand, there's Mathew
McCurley, whose shrill and annoying performance recalls Macaulay Culkin
at his absolute worst.  Whoever cast this kid, a TV commercial veteran,
made a blunder.
     Despite all the flaws, however, this is still Rob Reiner's product
and, as such, is not entirely devoid of worthwhile moments.  These are
sprinkled throughout--the only difficulty is getting through the
padding in between.  Aside from McCurley's nearly-unbearable job, the
deficiencies seem more related to the script than the direction.
Nevertheless, for a movie being touted as a sophisticated farce
suitable for family viewing, NORTH turns out to be surprisingly
immature.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Elijah Wood, Jon Lovitz, Mathew McCurley, Jason Alexander,
           Julia Louis-Dreyfuss, Bruce Willis.
Screenplay:  Alan Zweibel and Andrew Scheinman.
Director:  Rob Reiner.
     In 1987, director Rob Reiner brought to the screen a satirical
fantasy that was thought to be unfilmable, William Goldman's THE
PRINCESS BRIDE.  Though uneven, it basically worked thanks to a genuine
sense of whimsy and Goldman's own clever adaptation.  The relative
success of THE PRINCESS BRIDE would seem to suggest that if anyone
could make a movie out of Alan Zweibel's goofy fable NORTH, it would be
Reiner.  Wrong.  Instead, he has turned out a smug, tedious and
wrong-headed mess which wraps the moral of THE WIZARD OF OZ in a
thoroughly unappealing package.
     NORTH is the name of a multi-talented eleven-year-old (Elijah
Wood) who feels that he is being ignored by his self-involved parents
(Jason Alexander, Julia Louis-Dreyfuss).  He decides that he deserves
better, and declares himself a free agent, offering himself to the most
attractive pair of parents.  A judge grants North's request under the
condition that he make his final choice in two months or face being
sent to an orphanage.  North then sets off on a globe-spanning quest
for the perfect parents which inspires a kid's rights movement,
masterminded by North's devious classmate Winchell (Mathew McCurley)
and an ambulance-chasing lawyer (Jon Lovitz).  Along the way, North
receives advice from a ubiquitous man (Bruce Willis) who acts as his
guardian angel.
     For a few moments at the very beginning, NORTH looks like it might
be on the right track.  There is a clever little sequence showing North
as a brilliant student, a top athlete and a budding star of the musical
theater, pitched at just the right level of low-key surreality; a bit
later, a series of parents chastise their children with all the things
that "North wouldn't" do.  But very early on, NORTH takes a precipitous
dive into near-unwatchability.  North's encounters with his prospective
parents (including Dan Aykroyd and Reba McIntire as "How-dee" Texans,
and Kathy Bates and Graham Greene as Eskimos) are repetitious and
annoying, all variations on the same theme.  In order for the
fairy-tale one-dimensionality of these parents to work, they all need
to represent something unique, not interchangeable levels of
stupidity.  Most surprising, Reiner paces everything at a crawl,
including a production number in the Texas sequence which should have
pumped some life in the proceedings.  Instead, it's just another part
of an 89 minute film which feels 85 minutes too long.
     There is yet another massive misstep with an emphasis on the
subplot involving Mathew McCurley as the miniature Machiavelli and Jon
Lovitz as his attorney-toady.  McCurley is allowed to chew the scenery,
lisping ruthless-beyond-his-years dialogue and mincing about in
suspenders and slicked back hair (as sure a sign of cinematic evil as a
"666" tattoo).  Cringing is Lovitz's forte, and he gets to do a lot of
it, playing to all of his worst instincts.  The youth revolt might have
worked with a lighter touch, but Reiner makes it too nasty, darkened
further by a murder plot which engenders a pointless chase.
     Where did so much talent go so dreadfully wrong?  Reiner has been
box-office gold; co-screenwriters Zweibel (an original "Saturday Night
Live" scribe) and Andrew Scheinman (this summer's pleasant fantasy
LITTLE BIG LEAGUE) have some great product under their belts.  Elijah
Wood, a talented young actor, is a rather obnoxious North, taking the
book's more measured nine-year-old protagonist and turning him into an
adolescent packing a serious attitude.  Reiner probably called in every
favor he had to pepper NORTH with cameos, but they serve only to show
that it's possible for an entire supporting cast to be as bored making
a film as the audience is watching it.
     Perhaps the biggest mystery of NORTH is for what audience it
was intended.  It's too slow and full of dopey in-jokes to keep kids
interested, and too simplistic for adults.  Rob Reiner had better
check his compass; he got dreadfully lost trying to find NORTH.

Author
John Walker
     My form of "rating": NORTH kept me chuckling throughout, with a
     suitable number of guffaws, and a continual presence of neat
     things to grin at or think about.  I just got the sound track and
     book; now how do I get the tee-shirt and baseball cap?!
     NORTH is practically an archetype, a fable, a myth, of an
     important set of experiences in growing up--when you realize
     that your parents aren't perfect, and that other families and
     cultures are sort of strange, and so are you!
     Based on the 1984 kid's book of the same name by Alan Zweibel, the
     film takes an unabashedly kid's-eye view of the world.  If you
     want a traditional category to describe NORTH, it's
     "whimsy"--utterly fantastic things presented as if they were
     completely ordinary.
     My suspicion is that responses to NORTH will depend on how well
     people can cope with a whimsical and kiddish perspective, *and*
     on how they have dealt with the experiences on which the film is
     based.
     (Why anyone would *not* find NORTH *at least* a pleasant
     diversion is beyond me.  I suppose I can "understand" how someone
     might have a negative reaction, but it's something I can't
     "experience".  When those negative reactions are extreme, I begin
     to wonder whether something else is afoot--something more than
     merely a bizarre response to a funny, well-made flick.)
     At eleven years old, North (Elijah Wood) is The Perfect Kid.
Bright, athletic, the works.  He is popular with the other kids even
while their parents hold him up as a rebuke to any failing.  ("*North*
*flosses*.")  But his own parents (Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Jason
Alexander) are so wrapped up in themselves and their jobs, they don't
even seem to *notice* him, much less appreciate him.  His schoolwork is
suffering, his Little League performance, everything.  He fails at
trying to break through their self-absorption.  He's got to do
something.
     Prompted by an idea that comes up during a conversation with a
department-store Easter Bunny (Bruce Willis, who also narrates), North
begins thinking of becoming a free agent.  In short order, his friend
Winchell (Mathew McCurley), editor of the school paper, has put him
together with Arthur Belt (Jon Lovitz), a shyster lawyer.  North sues!
He wins!  But Judge Buckle (Alan Arkin) rules that he has to be in the
arms of his new (or old) parents by noon on Labor Day, or it's The
Orphanage for him.
     It's July.  Now, he has to sort through all the candidate parents
who are flooding him with first-class tickets to come to them.
     While he globe trots, Winchell is making his move.  Parents are
hysterical with fear.  If North can do it, why not *their* kids?
Winchell is building a movement out of this--out of the parents'
fears, and out of the kids' dawning sense of power.  (Will the voting
age be lowered to seven?!)
     So, we get to see prospective parents from Texas, Hawaii, Alaska,
China, Africa, France, and others back in the States.
     I don't think it's any spoiler to say that North will have to deal
with less than ideal candidates.  Even when they *look* ideal, there'll
be personal problems, personal quirks, and cultural differences, just
for starters.  Parallel to that are the implications of North the real
kid becoming a Symbol--not a *player* in the Game of Power, but a
*prize*, a *precondition*.
     Well, how will it end?  What are the candidate parents really
like?  Who among them will be the lucky winners?  How will North factor
in to Winchell's growing power and lust for world domination?
     In NORTH, Wood plays perhaps the only character who might be
"real."  He has to deal with a wacko universe, and still respond,
believably, in a relatively sane way.  Wood's essential reality gives a
center of gravity to the whole film--in the context of everyone else's
lunacy.
     Everyone else is either a kid's perspective of what adults are
"really" like--or what many (whether kid or adult) would really *like*
to be if they had the chance.  McCurley's Winchell is, well, a sleaze.
A creep with a certain kind of charm and intelligence, Winchell is
sneaky, underhanded, treacherous, power hungry, devious, and dangerous,
perhaps even a genuine fiend--in other words, I enjoyed McCurley's
performance immensely.
     Lovitz's attorney Belt is a lot like Winchell--except without
things like intelligence and "charm".  Therefore he's less dangerous.
He's a perfect grown up to be used as a pawn by Winchell.
     Willis, besides narrating, shows up on the scene in a number of
guises--such as ranch hand, beach bum, stand-up comic.  He has a nice,
easy-going, off-handed detachment.  Removed from everything, he mainly
gives North the opportunity to say what's on his mind and to bring his
choices out into the open where he can think about them.
     Besides those characters, there is an army of cameos.  I'll
mention some (not all!) names later, but if the names aren't always
familiar, the faces are.
     Also, as a bonus for adults, there are lots of nifty little points
integrated into the film.  For instance, for independent research:
Where have we seen the house in Texas?  What product placement is
incredibly blatant--and yet true and to the point!
     From the opening credits, there's a sense that NORTH is *not*
gonna be giving us an "ordinary" picture of reality.  As the credits
roll, the camera takes us around what is apparently North's room.  But
it looks like a department-store window display of the perfect
room--packed with toys, trains, and what-not, in an impossibly tidy
arrangement that no one could really walk through without disturbing
something.
     The room doesn't figure in the story, but if it's any consolation,
its surreality is relatively realistic compared to the rest of the
film.  What NORTH gives us will be painted with a very broad brush.
Remember, it's based on a kid's book, a very whimsical one.  (Think
about the names of most the characters for a while.)  And the original
author, Zweibel, joined with Andrew Scheinman in writing the
screenplay, and was co-producer, along with director Rob Reiner.
     I just picked up a copy of the book, and while I haven't had time
to more than glance at it, both book and movie seem to give us similar
ideas.
     I'm sort of surprised that I haven't seen more comments about
cultural stereotypes in NORTH.  North's parents fall into a "suburban
Jewish" role; Ma and Pa Tex (Reba McIntire and Dan Ackroyd) are into
*Big*ness; the Alaskans (Kathy Bates, Graham Green, and grandpa, Abe
Vigoda) live in an electric-operated *igloo*!  (And in summer, the day
is six months long!)
     But more to the point is the personal baggage that at least *some*
of the parents carry.  Without, I hope, doing spoilers, we get a clear
drawing of things lots of kids have to live with in their parents:
North's own parents are wrapped up in their work, some of the
candidates act from insecurities, or want to lay a trip on their
Perfect Kid.  Others are just from different planets, culturally.
     Well, I can't speak for anyone else, but it certainly sounds
familiar to *me*.
     Maybe the burbs insulate some people from cultural differences,
but that wasn't the case in small-town Rhode Island, with lots of
nationalities clearly visible.  And in my own family, we had Scotch
Calvinists and Southern-Irish Protestants as well as Catholics to deal
with.
     Yeah, other nationalities do things that are weird, don't they?
But don't *we* look a bit weird to them, too?  And doesn't the same
thing happen with people in different classes?  I can remember my
parents discussing or explaining to me how they dealt with people from
different worlds.
     So, also, I came to realize that those around me, including my
parents, were a bit messed up--quite independent of class or culture.
Fears, limitations, quirks, they were all there.  And if I mentioned
them, my parents' response was sort of "Well, of course!" That's just
part of life, isn't it?  Isn't *everyone* a little messed up?  And
sometime or another, I came to see that even *I* was part of that!
     NORTH gives us all those ways in which we're different, and weird,
and messed up--writ large and presented as fun.
     On one level, NORTH gives us a world that is plainly ridiculous.
Its connection with "reality" is downright adversarial.  (I mean, if
NORTH is any indication, then there have been some *major* changes in
the situation in China since I last saw the news on the tube!)
     The rampant whimsy alone will be enough to bother some people.
But underneath the whimsy, is a view of life that can be seen as
radically dark, as unspeakably bleak.  It takes no effort to see that
NORTH recognizes serious questions of social order, death, and
alienation.  Also, think of the things we wanted as kids--and want as
grown-ups: attention, wealth, influence, a wonderful place to live.
North finds that they can come with a high emotional price tag.
     And in facing some really nice people, North has to admit that his
*own* limitations prevent him from accepting them as his parents.
     On one level, the message is stark: You're *alone*.  If you can
understand adults, you won't be able to rely on them.  And if you can
rely on them, you won't be able to understand them.  In the rare case
where you can both understand and rely on them, they'll still be alien
somehow.  And whether or not they're messed up, you've certainly got
problems yourself.
     Cheerful little message for kids, isn't it?  Yet it describes
facts of life we all have to deal with.  So what are we supposed to do
with that?
     Think of how the stereotypical Silent Generation, Boomer, and
X/Thirteener "ought" to respond when they find out that their parents
and other grown ups are messed up and there's lots of weird customs in
the world.
     The Silent Generation would try be Responsible Social Units, and
work to make everything tidy.  Or at least work to keep busy and make
money.
     Boomers would denounce all "stereotypes" as vicious lies and deny
the facts.  Alternatively, they'd go either blaming or self-condemning
or both; then they'd do therapy about it.
     Xers would whine about it and say it showed how rotten everything
was and showed why *their* lives were "dysfunctional"--a word the
Silents and Boomers gave them.
     True, those descriptions are strictly cartoons and cardboard.  But
they all agree that the weirdness and the dysfunctions are *very* big
deals indeed, and must be treated as such.
     Supposedly, however, there's a *fourth* generational type--the
same type as World War II's GI generation--the generation that got
dropped through a meat grinder.  The ones who survived came out to
produce the prosperity the the Silents matured in and Boomers grew up
in.  This is the generational type that will allegedly characterize
kids of Elijah Wood's age.  How would the cardboard GI generation
respond?
     I suggest they'd say, golly, that's too bad!  But ya can't let
little stuff like that get ya down!  C'mon!  We got a movie t'make!
(Break into big musical number of the sort they grew up on.)
     Less cardboardly and cartoonishly, they'd agree to the facts but
not do any big angst trip on them.  They'd try to deal with the
dysfunctions.  They'd probably *like* a lot of the simple weirdness,
and make movies that skewered every group possible.
     Stereotypes aside, of the four responses, which seems to make the
most sense?  And which does NORTH come closest to?  And how do you
think some people are going to deal with NORTH when they really come
from a different planet?
     Let's face it, NORTH might well be patently offensive to some
people for the very reasons others find it entertaining.  How did *you*
deal with waking up to the facts that *everyone* is messed up to some
extent?  If someone else's dysfunction was really major, was that cause
for self-doubt?  Or cause to feel sorrow for the person?
     And how did you deal with recognizing that some folks are just
*different*?  Was it a big deal?  Or was it just life?  Was it maybe
even sort of neat?
     I think I know how North the kid would answer those questions.
And I'm afraid I suspect how some of the critics of NORTH the movie
would answer them.
