Title
Review for One Foot On a Banana Peel, the Other Foot in the Grave (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Max Hoffmann
Scale 0-10 (10 = highest): doesn't apply
     Seldom does a film so effect you, through its naked self-honesty,
that the audience's urban cocoon of indifference and separation is
completely stripped away...  With ONE FOOT, it was to the point that
after viewing the film in the Kabuki's coffee bar, I had three total
strangers come up separately and say, "Excuse me, but I saw you in the
audience, can I join you and talk about that film?  I can't go home ...
not just yet...."
     Each member of the audience briefly reached the point of unafraid
self-revelation that had filled the screen for 85 minutes.  There is no
rating or recommendation that is worthy of this work.  Each viewer will
have his or her own unforgettable connection with the cast, and the
creators.
     In 1992, Juan Botas related to friends Jonathan Demme and Joanne
Howard his experiences (mostly life affirming) of his daily visits to
the "Dolly Madison" room of a Greenwich Village clinic (where he was
receiving IV medication to battle AIDS.)  At Demme's prompting, Botas
purchased a Hi-8 video camera ... and recorded his daily ordeal, with
himself on camera as well.  Demme's involvement as producer in this
project should more than make up for any resentment over his tepid
treatment of a gay relationship in PHILADELPHIA.  ONE FOOT completely
collapses the distance between any viewer and this pandemic by
revealing the patients' humanity to such an extent that unwelcomed
self-recognition will descend over many a viewer.  If silence equals
death, this film is about as far from silence as you can get!
     Botas was a gifted visual artist.  Victoria Leacock's camera often
captures close-ups of him creating Matisse like pastels while waiting
for his treatment to end.  With over half a dozen fellow patients and
the doctor's staff, an intimate and life-affirming extended family is
revealed.  These are men who have nothing left to lose, and no motive
for censoring their speech or opinions.  Nakedly honest assessments of
ex-wives, family and children (some of whom refuse to see them) are
shared with the camera and the audience.  Frustration over family
denial that refuses to let them make their wishes known for proper
burial or estate settlement are revealed.  Thru it all, again and again
we see needles being painfully injected into arms ... arms where
virtually all of the veins have collapsed.
     All action takes place in a single room, with sparse color (a
veridian green chair, variously colored T-shirts) that often resembles
the simple sketches Botas is working on.  Amazingly, the visuals and
content are never monotonous.  A simple, original score of guitar music
is progressively simplified, until by the film's end ... only one
string is plucked at a time, (underscoring the peeling away of physical
resources experienced by the patients.)  Lucas Platt revealed (in his
post-screening talk) that he had over 140 hours of video to edit, and a
three-week deadline for the world premiere of a rough cut, (held at a
Festival in Spain last year.)  It was possibly that frantic deadline
that forced him to instinctively select the most cogent sequences ...
resulting in a perfectly balanced, simple portrait of love, laughter,
survival, triumph of the human spirit, and utter pain and desolation.
     Half way through the project, Juan Botas dies.  The camera
unblinkingly records it all: his last visit to the room, when his fevers
have gotten worse and he is forced to confront his own imminent
mortality; the speculation amongst his friends while he's in the
hospital; finally, the naked grief they share on the day of his death.
That is, perhaps, the film's greatest gift: it completely strips away
whatever distance you have managed to construct between yourself and
AIDS.  A recent survey revealed that 56% of Americans claim they don't
"know" anyone who is gay.  With this film, you get to know the patients
more than you might want to ... and there are many moments of stark
self-recognition (including internalized homophobia and shame over
AIDS) that you might not want to recognize.
     Self-described as "healthy and heterosexual," Lucas Platt
completed the project for the deceased Botas.  Footage was shot over a
13-month period.  Platt confessed that he was plagued with self doubt
about being able to do the men justice, about being able to capture
their stories the way that Juan would have. "Doing this project has
forever changed my life," Platt confessed in an emotion-choked voice,
"the greatest compliment I got was from the clinic's administrator,
Gene Fedorkov, who phoned me after seeing it, and said, 'I didn't think
you'd understand us enough to be able to do this ... you proved me
wrong ... and I love you for that.'"  Platt continued, "I don't know what
my next project will be, but I wouldn't hesitate for a moment to do
another film about AIDS .... even if it typecasts me."
     One of the film's most unforgettable sequences is as a Canadian
patient describes the agonizing deterioration his lover when through
before his death.  "I had to beg his family to attend his funeral ... I
had to beg for his ashes ... after all of that love ... to be treated
like ... nothing!"  He collapses into dry, heaving sobs.  The black
orderly, Tyrone, kisses him on the head, kneels and holds him, with all
the majesty of a classic piece of sculpture.  The unmoving camera
records this sequence, with no music for a full two minutes.  Though it
is painfully obvious that the two men have forgotten the camera is
there ... it is a soaring and searing visual image.
     Amazingly, overall the film isn't depressing or a "downer."  It
is full of wonderful, camp, black humor.  (At one point two patients
discussing their inability to find someone to sign a living will ...
laughingly speculate on signing for each other.)  The film is very life
affirming in the naked honesty, shared unhesitatingly, by real people.
By the time of the film's premiere, nearly half the patients had died.
Botas's project records the staggeringly loss of talent and humanity
that AIDS has wrecked upon our society in a highly personal scale.  ONE
FOOT will reveal a lot about yourself, as whatever you have placed
between yourself and the plague, (denial, "I didn't know any of them")
is removed.
