Title
Review for Iron & Silk (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I have visited thirty-two countries other than my own, but none have
had such an impact on me as China during my 1982 visit.  This was just the
tail end of Mao's China.  In most of the places we saw everyone still
dressed in the Mao suits and caps.  Some of the cities I visited had been
open to Westerners for only a year and you only had to be non-Chinese to be
treated as a celebrity.  The Chinese were not shy about their curiosity
about Westerners either.  In many cities in the north we would have crowds
five and six deep around our bus, just to be able to look in the windows.
Parents held up youngsters to see into the bus.  People still talked very
sadly about the horrible disaster that recently had struck their country.
It was a man-made disaster called a "cultural revolution."  In 1982 this was
one China.  The China of five years later seemed another China altogether,
with Western styles, new fancy hotels, Coca-Cola, and Reeboks.  In their
words, they were "letting a thousand flowers bloom."  Two years later at
Tienanmen Square there was yet another China.  Truly a country that
comprises one quarter of humanity changes little in any but the superficial
face it shows to foreigners, but that face to visiting foreigners it makes a
big difference and it is a very different China to them.
     As something of a coincidence, the 1982 China I saw was also seen by
Mark Salzman.  He graduated from Yale that year and went to fulfill a dream
he had had.  He was a martial arts film enthusiast as a teenager and he went
to live in China and to try to study martial arts if possible.  The
ostensible reason for his visit was to teach English at the Hunan Medical
College in Changsha, but he also wanted to learn martial arts in the
classical manner.  After a two-year stay he returned to the United States
and wrote a book about his experiences in China, IRON AND SILK.  With
Shirley Sun, he co-authored a screenplay based on his book.  He returned to
China with Sun to film the screenplay.  This time he went to Hangzhou, which
stood in for Changsha in the film.  Sun produced and directed; Salzman
starred.  The day after the film was completed, as VARIETY reports, the
Chinese military moved on Tienanmen Square and crushed a student rebellion
and a thousand flowers.
     The film shuttles back and forth among several subplots which are not
entirely independent.  We see Mark's relationship to his class and his
teaching.  He is a teacher teaching teachers English and in turn being
taught by them about Chinese culture and the Chinese people.  Through one of
the members of his class, Mark meets a great and famous martial arts
instructor, Teacher Pan (played by Pan Qingfu, a.k.a. Teacher Pan--yes, both
Mark and Pan play themselves).  Pan is pleased by the interest of the
American but at first wants no part of teaching a spoiled foreigner who is
unwilling to "eat bitter."  A third subplot has Mark attracted to a young
woman with a taste for English literature.  And a  fourth subplot deals with
Mark just learning about the ageless culture and the current government.
     The stereotypic plot for such a story would have the foreigner and the
local Chinese misunderstanding each other and conflicting at first, then
learning to like each other.  Ironically, that is just the reverse of what
happens.  In the early part of his visit, Mark's relationships with the
Chinese are characterized by friendly cultural curiosity on both sides.  The
one early ominous note is that the teachers in Mark's class who had earlier
learned Russian were ordered not just to learn English, but to forget their
Russian.  Mark drops this detail gleefully without reflecting how firmly it
indicates that the government can vengefully turn against a foreign
nationality and how powerfully they can order the people to follow suit.
Eventually Salzman comes to realize, or at least believe, that the
government wants foreigners to believe that the country is open to new
ideas, but at the same time it is determined to force the people to reject
change.  There is almost no mention of political differences until well into
the film when suddenly Mark discovers that some of his closest friends are
under heavy censure for showing too much interest in Western ways.
     Most of what is wrong with IRON AND SILK is in the iron part of the
film: the martial arts.  Salzman's martial arts accomplishments are
impressive without being all that interesting.  Entirely too much screen
time is spent on showing uninteresting martial arts demonstrations and with
characters, particularly Salzman himself, showing off for the camera.  Also
Salzman uses a cutesy touch--scenes from old martial arts movies intercut in
the film to show what he is thinking.  A similar touch is used on a cable
situation comedy currently, but it undercuts the atmosphere of the otherwise
serious film.
     Salzman makes a surprising and disturbing mistake in the script when he
tells his girlfriend that he wanted to learn Chinese so he would be able to
speak to a quarter of the world.  In fact, he speaks Mandarin and nowhere
near all people who speak a dialect of Chinese speak Mandarin.  Mandarin and
Cantonese are as different as are English and German.  Written Chinese is a
different matter, I believe.  There is basically only one written Chinese
language and that all dialects share, but there are several spoken dialects
that might as well be different languages.
     I did find that the film reminded me much of my trip.  I did not visit
Changsha, but I did visit Hangzhou and the film very nicely captured the
feel of that beautiful city.  The highest compliment I can pay IRON AND SILK
is that not only did my visit help me to understand the film, the film
helped me to understand better my visit.  In spite of excessive martial arts
sequences this is the best film I have seen this year.  I give it a low +3
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Wayne Citrin
     I was very much looking forward to this filmed version of Mark
Salzman's book on his experiences as an English teacher in China.  I
must admit that I've never read the book (although a friend of mine who
had was enthusiastic about it), but I did once see him read from the
book in person at the Black Oak Bookstore in Berkeley (where he also did
some of his kung fu routines), and I knew a woman who knew Salzman and
had been in China on the same Yale program as Salzman and was a witness
to some of the events described in the book (although she, and Salzman's
other American colleagues, had generally been written out of the book
and the film).  Salzman, who is an engaging personality in person,
insisted on starring as himself in the film version (he also seems to be
something of a self-promoter), and I was curious to see what he would do
with it.
     The result, in my brother's words (he also saw the film), was
"insipid."  Salzman comes off engagingly.  Some of the reviews called
him a bad actor, but I think he was just fine.  The problem is in the
story.  There's no conflict, no tension.  (At least, none that seems to
matter.)  There's no sense of any real failures that he experiences, no
feeling for the difficulties he must have had teaching English to a
class of middle-aged Chinese teachers who had been told to forget their
Russian and learn English, not even any feeling for the efforts he must
have gone through to become the kung fu expert that he became (although
he must have worked very hard).  We have no idea of how, or even
whether, Salzman has grown at all over his two years in China.  He comes
into the country fully well-adjusted, and we never feel that he ever had
occasion to call any of his beliefs into question.
     What's good about the film?  Well, Salzman himself isn't bad, and
the man who plays the head Chinese teacher is a rather interesting and
ambiguous characher of whom I would have liked to see more.  Salzman's
kung fu teacher, who was also his kung fu teacher in real life (he plays
himself), has a fun part, although he's played as a crusty guy with a
heart of gold - it would have been interesting to get into his head a
little more.  The kung fu practice scenes are interleaved with scenes
from the old kung fu movies that Salzman thrived on as a kid; it's a
witty touch.  The photography is also good, and there's one sequence
where Salzman visits a boat-dwelling family that's breathtaking.  I wish
there were more scenes like that in the film.
