Title
Review for Dark Half, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Timothy Hutton, Amy Madigan, Michael Rooker, Julie Harris
Director:  George Romero
Producer:  Declan Baldwin
Screenplay:  George Romero based on the story by Stephen King
Music:  Christopher Young
Released by Orion Pictures
     As a young boy, Thad Beaumont (Timothy Hutton), an aspiring
writer, develops a brain tumor.  When he's wheeled into the operating
room and his skull is opened, the tumor turns out to be the undeveloped
remains of a twin that Thad had incorporated into himself while still
in the womb.  Over twenty years later, Thad is a successful writer with
a wife named Liz (Amy Madigan) and two infant children.  The books he
writes under his own name are "literate," but to keep his income up, he
writes violent, formula fiction under the pseudonym of George Stark.
When a blackmailer threatens to reveal his double identity and threaten
the profitable secret, Beaumont goes public himself, "burying" George
Stark.  That's when the murders start.  As the body count mounts,
Beaumont becomes the prime suspect--his fingerprints have been found
in the victims' blood--but Thad has no idea what's going on.  The
question that needs to be answered is whether Thad has a split
personality or whether there is some sort of evil entity--connected to
Thad--is loose in the world.
     Recently, when it comes to movies, everything the name Stephen
King has been associated with has turned to dross.  In some cases, King
has denied any association with the productions (PET SEMATARY TWO, THE
LAWNMOWER MAN), but he was much in evidence in one of 1992's worst
films, SLEEPWALKERS.  Now, King's name is back on the marquee with THE
DARK HALF and, while this isn't a masterpiece of the genre, it's an
often-entertaining and sometimes-intelligent production.
     George Romero, an accomplished horror film director, is at the
helm for this movie, and it's undoubtedly his skill that prevents THE
DARK HALF from sinking into the realm of the unwatchable.  It's easy to
see how this could have happened, but Romero is able to keep the
characters real and the situations (mostly) believable where a lesser
filmmaker might have botched things up.
     Key to the success of THE DARK HALF, as is the case with almost
every horror film, is the need to suspend disbelief, and it is here is
where the movie stumbles.  The setup, as well as most of the every-day
character interaction, is so normal and "real" that when the
consideration of a supernatural explanation arises, it becomes a little
difficult for the audience to swallow.  Had Romero created a slightly
more skewed vision of America (akin to David Lynch's towns in BLUE
VELVET and TWIN PEAKS), the eventual transition might have been easier
to accept.
     Nevertheless, there's a lot that's positive about THE DARK HALF in
its examination of a Jekyll and Hyde personality.  While the resolution
is pure formula (not to mention more than a little silly), the events
leading up to it are not.  For roughly the first hour of the feature,
we're treated to a slick psychological thriller and a whodunnit all
rolled into one.  The characters are well-written and well-developed,
the cinematography is effective, and the special effects are a cut
above the norm.
     Timothy Hutton, who's other recent role in THE TEMP was an
unmitigated disaster, shows excellent range here.  Amy Madigan brings
some personality to the thankless role of "the wife."  If there's a
sub-par performance, it belongs to Michael Rooker as the local sheriff,
but even his acting is far better than most of what emerges in typical
films of the genre.
     While there's little doubt that most Stephen King fans and lovers
of horror movies in general will enjoy this film, there's enough in THE
DARK HALF to attract a wider audience.  The gore is not excessive and a
successful effort has been made to keep the picture from collapsing
into a grade-B flick.  While this isn't a complete comeback for screen
adaptations of King's work, it's a worthwhile step.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
Success of Stephen King's literary career was such that the
writer himself couldn't resist to be inspired by that
phenomenon. He wrote two novels on the subject - MISERY and
THE DARK HALF. The latter one was inspired by the real
events of King's career - discovery of his early four
novels, written under pseudonym "Richard Bachman". As
anything King ever put on paper, that novel was adapted to
screen. The 1993 film was written and directed by George A.
Romero, filmmaker whose classic NIGHT OF THE LIVING GENRE
created a cult following among horror movie fans.
Protagonist of the film is Thad Beaumont (Timothy Hutton),
literature professor whose own writing is failure. But, few
people, including Thad's loving and supportive wife Liz (Amy
Madigan) know a secret - Beaumont, under the pseudonym
"George Stark" wrote whole series of graphic, violent novels
that turned to be best-sellers. One day, facing blackmail,
Beaumont decides to go public, reveal true identity of
"George Stark" and stop writing those novels. After the
symbolic burial of "George Stark" his life should turn to
normal, but, instead, first the blackmailer, than his own
publisher and few other people fall prey to vicious serial
killer. Sheriff Alan Pangborn (Michael Rooker) discovers
evidence pointing to the writer's complicity, but Beaumont
claims that the murders were committed by "George Stark" who
somehow turned into living flesh and wants to have his life
and writing career back.
Many screen adaptations of King failed because even the most
talented directors simply couldn't process richness and
complexity of King's prose into cinematic language. In this
film Romero tried to evade this by making a longer film,
with the plot slowly unfolding, thus allowing development of
atmosphere and characters. That also gave room for
exploration of few themes - like existence of "dark halves"
in every personality, and sometimes blurring boundaries
between the author, his work and the outsiders' perception
of both. Unfortunately, the link between supernatural
segments in the beginning and the end haven't been properly
explained. So, most of the time we watch standard
psychological thriller about mad slasher/split personality,
with mystic elements being somewhat out of place. The
finale, that in King's adaptations usually turns into cheap
schlockfest, is very original and spectacular in this film.
The actors did very good job, especially Timothy Hutton in
an interesting double role. Amy Madigan was good as his
wife, and Michael Rooker was very believable as sympathetic
lawman. All in all, although not very successful, THE DARK
HALF is one of the better adaptations of King, that could be
enjoyed even by those who aren't fans of his literature.
