Title
Review for Château de ma mčre, Le (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     MY MOTHER'S CASTLE is a film by Yves Robert, based on the
autobiographical writings of Marcel Pagnol.  In French with English
subtitles.
     I note in the display ad for this film the following: "'TWO THUMBS
UP ENTHUSIASTICALLY' SISKEL & EBERT".  If there was ever a demonstration
of the gross inadequacy of the Nos Morituri approach to movies, it is
this.  Exactly how many thumbs would be adequate to properly rate I
leave to someone else's anatomical imaginings.  For myself, I have
seldom seen a movie which more perfectly also demonstrates the
difference between heart-warming and sentimental, between deepening the
emotional life of the viewer and exploitively manipulating him or her.
To put it another way, MY MOTHER'S CASTLE was everything CINEMA PARADISO
pretended to be and was not.
     Yves Robert is also the creator of the two-part movie set, JEAN DE
FLORETTE and MANON OF THE SPRING, movies that were received with almost
fanaticism a year ago or so in Seattle.  I allowed myself to miss them.
Now I will have to backtrack to a little more au courant with a
wonderful talent.
     Speaking of talent, alas, I do not have the cast list available, 
which is a shame.  Everyone, the schoolteacher/father, the frail 
mother, little Marcel, and their friends, neighbors, relatives,  and
adversaries, were actors, real actors, who convince, seduce, and conquer
the audience.
     Actually, I saw MY MOTHER'S CASTLE out of order.  It is the second
part, as it were, of a super-movie, the first part being MY FATHER'S
GLORY.  Both movies derive from the autobiographical writings of Marcel
Pagnol.  I must confess that being the cultural dustbin that I am I
never heard of Marcel Pagnol.  He appears to be something of a cultural
landmark in France, an early film maker and a member of the French
Academy.  At the very end of MY MOTHER'S CASTLE, we see a snippet of
what one assumes is a Pagnol film, something with a black cat and a
woman talking to a man in his undershirt.  If anyone wants to fill me
in, I'd be appreciative.
     Whoever the real Pagnol is, this film makes me love him.  We see 
him as a boy on the edge of beginning manhood and we hear his adult
voice as the narrator.  This is a film permeated with love, love for the
mother, the father, the hills of Provence, a year of growing up.  But it
is an honest, candid love, that sees the pimples as well as the beauty
spots.  I came away with a small portion of that love and that is the
great wonder of MY MOTHER'S CASTLE.
     Not only are the characters brought life by wonderful actors, but
they are photographed in a most painterly fashion.  The colors are warm
as flesh, suffused with the clear light of Provence, highlighted by
shadows.  The hills that young Marcel loves so are stunningly beautiful.
I have never traveled in that country, but if the reality can match the
film--the white limestone teeth and terraces of those ancient hills, the
open-work trees, the wild herbs, the life en plein air--it must be a
kind of paradise.
     MY FATHER'S GLORY is still playing in Seattle--both films were big
hits at the last Seattle International Film Festival--and I intend to
see it tonight if I can.  However, I'm sure that one can see either
movie independently of the other.  MY MOTHER'S CASTLE begins a small
precis of the other part and otherwise stands nicely on its own.  I want
to see the other part, not to catch up on the action or story, but
because I want to see more of the Pagnol family and more of the hills of
Provence.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     A young French boy is in love with the hills of France.  He would
like to spend all his time in his family's second house in the hills,
but because of schooling and his father's job he is unable to spend much
time there.  He tries, whenever possible, to go up to the hills so he
can have fun.
     I found MY MOTHER'S CASTLE to be a very interesting and beautiful
film to watch.  What makes this film so interesting is not so much the
plot, as it is in the scenery.  I highly recommend that if this film
comes to a theater near you, you go see it.  It will be well worth the
trip.  I rate MY MOTHER'S CASTLE a four on a scale of zero to five.  MY
MOTHER'S CASTLE is rated PG and I couldn't find anything that anyone
might find objectionable.
     MY MOTHER'S CASTLE is the sequel to Yves Robert's earlier film MY
FATHER'S GLORY, which unfortunately I have not yet been able to see.  MY
MOTHER'S CASTLE, and MY FATHER'S GLORY, are based on the writings of
Marcel Pagnol.  From the way this film ends I think that it will be the
last in the series.  The title of the film makes little sense until just
before the end when it gets explained to you.
     The best part, I feel, were the locations used for the filming.  I
assume that the locations are in France, but at any rate they are
perfect.  The film would not be near as good as it is if the locations
weren't as well picked.  The opening credits are shown while a camera
pans around a beautiful mountain.  The acting was really well done, by
all the people in the film.  The actors really convince you that they
are the person in the film.  I started to actually feel for the people
in the film.
     I almost didn't go to see this film when it was playing in my town,
because I thought that it was going to be boring.  I haven't had a good
record with imported films.  I have seen a dreadful French film called
CHOCOLAT, a boring Danish film called PELLE THE CONQUEROR, a semi-poor
French film called BAXTER, and a reasonably good Italian film called THE
STORY OF BOYS AND GIRLS.  But I am really glad that I went and saw MY
MOTHER'S CASTLE.  I just can't put into words the way that I felt about
it.  I am going to try to see if I can get my local art/import theater
to get MY FATHER'S GLORY to see if it is just as good.
