Title
Review for Needful Things (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
Stephen King is a prolific and sometimes gifted writer, but his track record
with the movies is spotty.  Every now and then, we get an original vision or
an offbeat story to begin with, and the result is really memorable: THE
SHINING, THE DEAD ZONE, STAND BY ME, THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION were all
strong and enjoyable.  The rest of them have been by-the-numbers piffle,
like this one.
What's wrong with this movie?  It was lifted more or less intact from his
novel of the same name, and I think that's the source of the problem.  Many
of his novels have become windy, overcooked exhalations to no clear purpose.
Once you get your mind around the basic conceit of the story, the rest is
just a taxi ride.  NEEDFUL THINGS fits squarely into that category.  As a
movie, it's even more insufferable and dessicated than the book it was taken
from.
The story opens up in Castle Rock, another of King's fictional Maine towns
that looks peaceful on the outside but you just know is brimming with
repressed horror.  Ooo.  One day a store that vaguely resembles an antique
store, named "Needful Things", opens shop.  The proprietor is played by Max
von Sydow, who is probably the best thing in the movie, since he is always
enjoyable as someone of diabolical intent.  I'm half expecting a movie
biography of Anton Szandor LaVey with him starring in it, and come to think
of it, that would be far more interesting than anything that happens here.
Never mind.  The store has in its collection of bric-a-brac various items
for which all the members of the town all harbor the deepest desires.  The
proprietor sells them, but he is of course charging the highest possible
price for them: your soul.  There are other developments, too, which involve
the townspeople stabbing each other in the back to curry favor with Satan.
The only person who holds out against the Big Sellout is Ed Harris, playing
a police chief with an ugly past, but soon everyone else in town has
succumbed and it isn't long before the whole place is going up in flames.
God, I'm so sick of a movie's third act where they "solve" everything by
blowing it up.  It didn't work in ZABRISKIE POINT, so why should it work
now?
There's not much variety in the movie, either; it's all horribly
monochromatic and repetitive.  Satan arrives, sets up shop, people fall all
over each other selling out to the devil, mayhem ensues, movie eventually
terminates on a sarcastic note.  When I think about how much money and time
and care goes into making any movie, and I see something like this, my heart
dies a little.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Max von Sydow, Ed Harris, Bonnie Bedelia, J. T. Walsh.
Screenwriter:  W. D. Richter.
Director:  Fraser C. Heston.
     NEEDFUL THINGS is the eighteenth feature film based on the
published works of author-cum-cottage industry Stephen King.  If one
adds sequels, original screenplays and television adaptations, that
totals roughly 50 hours of film treatment, about two thirds of which
has been useful only as a mild sedative.  Although to state that King's
works have fared poorly in translation to the screen may be to give him
more credit than he is due, it is certainly true that King on screen
has been far less successful than King in print.  That is not likely to
change with NEEDFUL THINGS.  Lacking the suspense to be a crossover hit
like MISERY, or sufficient mayhem to please the Freddy Krueger crowd,
it treads a soggy middle ground, going for cheap laughs rather than
working up solid scares.
     Set in King's favorite haunted hamlet of Castle Rock, Maine (still
thriving in spite of serial killings, a rabid St. Bernard and two or
three minor demonic possessions), NEEDFUL THINGS begins with the
arrival of Leland Gaunt (Max von Sydow), a grandfatherly sort who opens
a curio shop called Needful Things.  It turns out to be a rather
special shop, one wherein every patron can find the one thing that he
or she wants most in the world.  As a fee, Gaunt asks only that the
purchaser perform a small task, a prank on a fellow citizen.  When the
pranks begin to turn sour, Sheriff Alan Pangborn (Ed Harris) begins to
investigate, and slowly begins to believe that Mr. Gaunt is not exactly
what he seems.
     There is the germ of an intriguing idea in NEEDFUL THINGS, one
borrowed from Ray Bradbury's SOMETHING WICKED THIS WAY COMES:  what
would you be willing to do for your heart's desire?  Add to that the
simmering hatreds and intolerance beneath the veneer of polite
interaction, and there's the potential for something beyond your
run-of-the-mill gore fest.  Screenwriter W. D. Richter and director
Fraser C. Heston set up reasonably well, but don't deliver.  NEEDFUL
THINGS seems to take forever to get any kind of momentum going, and
when it does at last seem to be moving it runs into a brick wall of
silly dialogue and shoddy acting.
     The latter is somewhat surprising given the reasonably talented
cast.  The performances range from the competent (Bonnie Bedelia as the
sheriff's girlfriend) to the confused (Harris) to the scenery- chewing
(almost everyone else).  Valri Bromfield sneers and swears as a loony
turkey farmer; Amanda Plummer does a New England accented variation on
her standard eccentric; J. T. Walsh seems to be channeling Jack
Nicholson's performance from THE SHINING, but without the charisma, as
the town's pompous leading citizen.  The biggest shock is von Sydow,
who seems completely miscast.  He appears to revel in the campier
elements, never bringing any genuine menace to Gaunt.  It's hard to
stir up any dread towards a character who calls his enemy a "wussy."
     I suppose the blame for that lies with Richter, best know as the
creator of the campy cult favorite THE ADVENTURES OF BUCKAROO BANZAI.
He seems to have been a poor choice for this job, sacrificing suspense
for silly punch lines.  His black-humored approach to the story just
didn't work.  Similarly, director Heston (yes, _that_ Heston's son)
doesn't quite have the deft touch required to direct suspense.  He does
a nice job with the fantasy sequences as Gaunt entices his customers,
but other elements go completely astray.  He never gives his actors a
sense for the proper tone, which makes it appear that Harris and
Bedelia are acting in a different movie than everyone else.  And he
lays on the atmospheric smoke in Gaunt's shop so thick I thought I
could see it puffing in from off-camera.  NEEDFUL THINGS is muddled,
and in too many of the wrong hands.
     I did find a few moments of amusement, all of which were probably
unintentional.  In one scene, a jukebox skips while playing "Achy
Breaky Heart," repeating the title over and over.  Also ironic is
Harris' statement that "this is a quiet town."  Given Castle Rock's
history in the King canon, "quiet" is definitely not the adjective
which springs to mind.
     I think a line by Gaunt summarizes NEEDFUL THINGS better than I
ever could:  "A couple of deaths, a few explosions ... not my best
work, but what the hell."

Author
James Berardinelli
     In the quiet New England town of Castle Rock, an unassuming
elderly man by the name of Leland Gaunt (Max von Sydow) has arrived to
open an antique shop called "Needful Things."  Most of Castle Rock's
residents discover some rare and coveted treasures within--a 1956
Mickey Mantle baseball card for a young boy, a china figurine for a
slightly off-balance woman, a magnificent chalice for a priest, and a
necklace that can take away an arthritic's pain.  The price asked by
Mr. Gaunt is always more than reasonable, at least where money is
concerned, and if a couple of pranks have to be played to round out the
deal, so be it.  The only one immune to "Needful Things" appears to be
Alan Pangborn (Ed Harris), the local chief of police, so when the
carnage starts, it's up to him to stop it.
     How is it that a film with a good cast, stylish direction and
camera work, and an intriguing premise can turn out mediocre?  Perhaps
if the production crew had known the answer to this question, NEEDFUL
THINGS would have been a far more engrossing and satisfying motion
picture experience than it actually is.
     What at the outset is the film's strength turns into its greatest
liability.  The basic concept is solid:  a gentle-seeming yet truly
sinister old man comes into town and acts as a catalyst to incite
people's greed to turn them against one another.  Unfortunately, once
that has happened, the movie doesn't know where to go with the story,
so it turns to the old Hollywood stand-bys of a pyrotechnics show, a
lot of dumb dialogue, and an ending that is unlikely to satisfy many.
     The final scene isn't the problem; it's the one that immediately
precedes it.  This is so dumb that I felt like yelling at the screen.
The big payoff in NEEDFUL THINGS is a gyp, and it takes the rest of the
film down a couple of notches.  Those that sit through this picture
deserve more than they're given.
     It's too bad about the climax, because the bulk of the overly-long
film shows promise.  There are the usual horror staples, like the meat
cleaver in the head and the shock-tactic swell of music, but most of
the story is scripted with the intelligent viewer in mind, and the
villain of the piece never dirties his hands.  The terror here is more
psychological than physical, and the real root of evil lies in the
cupidity of the citizens of Castle Rock.  Leland Gaunt only causes it
to surface.
     Max von Sydow is an inspired casting choice, and the performance
he turns in is by far the best thing about NEEDFUL THINGS.  He manages
a kind of gentlemanly wickedness that keeps the audience off-balance.
He's the bad guy, all right--there's never any doubt about that--but
he's so cultured and smooth, and delivers the one-liners so bitingly,
that it's almost impossible not to have a sneaking admiration for him.
Certainly, it's von Sydow's rendering of Gaunt that keeps the movie
from becoming tedious.
     Ed Harris, Bonnie Bedelia, and Amanda Plummer have shown great
ability in the past, but none of that is evident here.  The best of the
three is Bedelia, and her role is relatively small.  Plummer is so bad
that she comes close to creating a caricature.  Harris, who's supposed
to be playing the heroic lawman, is about as potent as a limp noodle.
     If he hasn't done so well with three of the four main actors, at
least first-time feature director Fraser C. Heston (son of Charlton)
can boast excellent cinematography (by Tony Westman) and a creepy
atmosphere.  NEEDFUL THINGS consistently looks nice, even during its
most banal scenes.  Some of the choppy pacing is clearly Heston's
fault, but the editor cannot absolve himself entirely of blame.
     In the three Kenneth Branagh films he scored (HENRY V, DEAD AGAIN,
and this summer's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING), Patrick Doyle showed
significant versatility and range.  Sadly, the same ability is not in
evidence here, where Doyle reworks his DEAD AGAIN music into an
overwrought theme that, at best, does little for the film.  There are a
couple of effective musical sequences, but neither uses Doyle's work,
instead relying on "Ave Maria" and Grieg's "In the Hall of the Mountain
King".
     NEEDFUL THINGS is another example of a good idea gone awry.  This
seems to happen with alarming frequency when a Stephen King story is
involved.  Since I'm not a fan of Mr. King and can't claim to more than
occasionally read his work, it's difficult for me to say whether or not
this trait is indicative of his books.  Whatever the case, in Leland
Gaunt, NEEDFUL THINGS wastes one of the year's most intriguing
villains.  This is a case of a film building to an apex that isn't
there.  By the time the end credits roll, a lot of people will be
wondering if that was really everything.  Sadly, the answer is yes, but
at least the time invested is repaid in part by the fine performance of
Max von Sydow.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
