Title
Review for Innocent Man, An (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
        AN INNOCENT MAN is not a great film; in fact, I'm about to
criticize the hell out of it.  But the funny thing is, the movie left me
satisfied.  Although it is sometimes laughably unbelievable, AN INNOCENT
MAN packs a powerful emotional punch.
        Tom Selleck plays Jimmie Rainwood, an airline mechanic who's
wrongfully sent to prison for three years when two dirty vice cops frame
him.  David Rasche and Richard Young play the corrupt detectives as kind of
a Crockett and Tubbs gone haywire.  They're so sleazy they give dirt a bad
name.
        While Jimmie serves his time behind bars, he has to abandon
everything he's ever known and conform to a prison society where it's kill
or be killed.  The movie depicts prison life with all the usual cliches:
uptight guards, racial tensions, beatings, and murders.  Nothing new
here--just recycled material from countless other prison movies.
        Jimmie Rainwood is Selleck's most challenging film role to date,
one which calls for much more than just making googley-eyes at a baby.
Unfortunately, Selleck isn't quite up to the task; he's somewhat stiff.  He
gets the surface gestures right, but he never digs deep enough to reveal
Jimmie's underlying rage and vulnerability.  However, Selleck does have
enough charisma to get by in the role.  Jimmie seems like a decent man, and
we feel sorry for him.
        Unlike Selleck, who's in over his head, F. Murray Abraham is in his
element.  He is dazzling as the seasoned inmate who takes Rainwood under
his wing and shows him the ropes, teaching him how to survive prison
politics.  Abraham is good enough to make you forget he's playing a stock
character.  Newcomer Laila Robins plays Jimmie's loyal wife Kate, who
tirelessly works to prove her husband's innocence while he's incarcerated.
Robins is effective in the role.  Even when her lines sound artificial, her
emotions come across as sincere.
        Selleck, Robins, and the rest of the cast get little help from
ex-convict Larry Brothers who wrote the script.  Apparently, Brothers
dropped out of college in the '60s to pursue his main interests: drugs and
crime.  Eventually, he wound up in Los Angeles and began working in the
film industry.  The screenwriting classes in prison must not be so great
because Brothers' dialogue is often unbearably phony.  For instance, Robins
has to deliver this classic line: "I'm not a theory!  I'm a real human
being, and so is Jimmie!"  And try this one on for size: Jimmie and Kate
are about to have sex for the first time in three years...
Kate: "We have all the time in the world."
If you think the dialogue is bad, wait until you hear the gushing musical
score; you could pour it over pancakes.
        The saving grace of AN INNOCENT MAN is its emotional charge and
dramatic intensity.  The movie is superficial in many respects, but it
pushes all the right buttons to arouse our emotions.  We're infuriated by
the two arrogant cops who think they're untouchable.  We're distressed by
the actions Jimmie is forced to take while he's in prison.  Selleck and
Robins are a little too cutesy as husband and wife, but there is a
genuinely moving tenderness between them.  The scene in which she first
visits him in prison is heartbreaking; at least, I had a lump in my throat.
        Director Peter Yates shot AN INNOCENT MAN on location in two
prisons and used actual inmates as extras.  The bleak locations and tough
convicts give the film a sense of gritty reality, which helps to distract
us from the weaknesses of the script.  It's a close call, but I think the
good in AN INNOCENT MAN outweighs the bad.
