Title
Review for Stanno tutti bene (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
Compared to THE ICICLE THIEF, this is not a better film, or any recent
Italian films shown here recently.  And only because THE ICICLE THIEF has a
funnier  story.
But, STANNO TUTTI BENE, has the best showcase for ACTORS.
Marcello Mastroianni, has been around for what it seems like ages.  He is
usually good, and more often than not a bit boring.  The Italian stallion
who bags all the women, and gains it all, and then squanders it before the
ending and has to return to his unsatisfactory situation with his wife.  And
finally, he gets a role that he can showcase, that he is no slouch of an
actor.
Playing a Sicilian father of five children, whose wife just recently has
passed away, he decides to take advantage of the old folks pension plans and
goes on a trip through out Italy, to try and visit his children.  But as an
aging man, little does he know that his family doesn't want him around, and
in fact, hide a lot from him.  He had some tremendous expectations for his
children, and tried to get them the best positions available, in order to
insure that they would succeed.  None of them do.  And four of them are
struggling to make ends meet, and not having an easy time of it.  They tip
each other off, so they
won't be home when dad arrives, or will try to make arrangements to make
sure he doesn't notice their sad situation.
And by the end, it all has to come to a halt, and he is told by one of his
children, at a dinner for the whole family ( only two sons came ) that one
had died, and that they all were having a hard time.  Dad finds a reason to
not accept the death of one of his sons, and has a small stroke.  He goes to
the hospital where they all visit him.  The young grandson has gotten a
girlfriend pregnant and he dishes out one last piece of advise to the
youngster. This time the grandson follows the advice and the film ends
with the old man standing at his wife's gravesite telling her that all  was
well.  He means well.  And he wants his wife to be happy.
This film, is both about the old age neglect, as it is about the oldsters
inability to accept the life of the young ones, they raised.  And
invariably, in all societies, the children end up paying a much harder price
for surviving.  Marcello Mastroianni, is outstanding, and deserves the
accolades.  As the  old man, who talks to himself, and reasons every thing,
and is rather  congenial, he stands out.  And in the process, 'buries' his
children, because he has strength where they do not.
Written and Directed by Giuseppe Tornatore, who can't escape the gags
through out the film.  And there are some really hilarious moments for a few
of us, who enjoy seeing the unexpected.  The Mona Lisa joke is one of the
best, and really sums up the whole thing.  They not only don't know what
they are talking about, they don't even see where they stand in time.
WORTH SEEING. Gags are totally unexpected and will surprise you. Very nice
little film, and it is too bad that some of us have to enjoy it  with
subtitles, because there are a lot of small Woody Allen type little gags all
over that are harder to see if the subtitles.
