Title
Review for My New Gun (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
     Irwin (Bruce Altman) and Myra (Maddie Corman) are going to get
married.  When they break the news to their friends Debbie and Gerald
Bender (Diane Lane and Stephen Collins), Myra also shows off something
Irwin bought for her:  a .38 with "Myra" engraved on it.  Gerald,
deciding that this is a good idea, buys Debbie a similar weapon, even
though she states emphatically that she doesn't want a gun in the
house.  The gun turns into a real issue, however, when it is
appropriated by the Benders' odd neighbor Skippy (James LeGros).  While
Debbie thinks Skippy is harmless, her husband is convinced that he's
either a Satan-worshipping junkie or a hit-man who has botched a job.
     The first half of MY NEW GUN is a bitingly funny satire on life in
suburbia and the yuppies who live in it.  There are scenes that are
incisive precisely because they're so close to reality.  Gerald Bender
is the kind of self-absorbed, pompous, property-obsessed person who
inhabits an expensive condominium and considers spending nearly $400 on
a windbreaker.  This film successfully lampoons him and his lifestyle.
     Unfortunately, about midway through, the movie starts getting away
from what makes it work.  The second half has none of the freshness and
originality of what went before--it tells a simple, uncomplicated story
with less humor and little energy.  As the end drew near, I waited for
something wildly unexpected to occur.  I was still waiting after the
end credits had rolled.
     Taken on its own without the unspectacular ending, the first part
of MY NEW GUN is brilliant.  It shows how the introduction of a gun
into one household can lead to a complete change in lifestyle--and not
in the expected way.  The gun, as Gerald puts it, is a "catalyst." In
today's world, where people buy guns and bring them into their homes
with about as much thought as they buy a toaster, it's refreshing to
see a movie take a closer look, no matter how absurd, at the issue.
     I don't know why writer/director Stacy Cochran changed the
direction of the film the way she did.  Perhaps, as a first time
movie-maker, she didn't know how to conclude the movie.  Or maybe she
simply ran out of ideas for the satirical parts of the script.
Whatever the case, MY NEW GUN loses a lot in its last forty-five
minutes.
     Stephen Collins is almost too good as the arrogant, stuck-up
Gerald.  Collins, normally relegated to playing clean, nice-guy roles,
gets an opportunity to play a rather unlikable but regrettably
realistic person.  Diane Lane, whose list of credits continues to grow
more fascinating and diverse with every new film, is especially
noteworthy.  Her performance is one of the few worthwhile things in the
second half.  James LeGros is merely okay--his role demands more than
he seems willing to give.  LeGros' Skippy is supposed to be a
charismatic figure, but it's difficult determining what Debbie sees in
him.
     As a first film for Stacy Cochran, MY NEW GUN is a worthy effort.
Miss Cochran had an idea and a script that developed it, which is more
than can be said for many movies.  While the second half is certainly
watchable, and occasionally entertaining, it's neither as engaging nor
as acute as what preceded it.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
