Title
Review for Parfum d'Yvonne, Le (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Gareth Rees
     This film sets out to create a sense of isolation, of two people
becoming lovers in a cocooned summer of walks by Lake Geneva, parties
full of beautiful people, and languid love-making in hotels; two people
whose relationship is built more on their separation from reality than
anything they share between them.
     Patrice Leconte's film creates this feeling of isolation by
suggesting hidden subtleties in the background of the characters but
never revealing the truth behind them.  There is the mystery about
Victor's real name and background: he's lying about being a Russian
Count, but where does his money come from?  He can't really be living
off the proceeds of selling a collection of butterflies, can he?
Victor never, ever says anything about himself, and rarely about
anything.  What about the relationship between Yvonne and the old man
Rene?  Are they two loners drawn together by some spirit they have in
common?  Are they connected in some way by family?  They aren't
saying.  Yvonne's uncle is the only person who talks about Yvonne's
past, but it's not clear whether what he says is to be trusted.  What
is it exactly that Rene does?  He's a doctor, right, but what are the
"favours" he does for people in Geneva?  Why does an injured man
suddenly turn up at his house one day and why doesn't he want Victor
and Yvonne to see?  Who are the people he seems to be having feuds with
and why?  Who is the young man he is saying goodbye to at a railway
station?  Perhaps his son, going off to die in the war in Algeria?
     There are more mysteries, and none of them are resolved.  These
hints emerge suddenly from the depths of the film and then sink back
into the calm waters, never to be seen again.  The two lovers are
unaffected by this; they're incurious about each other; they just
exist, together, living from day to day.  Only when Victor starts to
plan, to think of the longer term, do things go wrong.
