Title
Review for Englishman Who Went Up a Hill But Came Down a Mountain, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Ben Hoffman
     In 1917, WW I was going strong in England.  Everyone was involved
in the war effort. This film's story, probably a myth or legend which
was passed on to writer-director Christopher Monger by his grandfather,
is about a now non-existent town in Wales, and a couple of Englishman
who were sent to survey the terrain for purposes of having accurate map
information should the war spread there.
     Two men, Reginald Anson (Hugh Grant) and George Garrad (Ian
MacNeice) are the surveyors.  Specifically, there job is to measure the
town's most famous attraction, its mountain.  When Garrad makes an
educated guess before the actual survey begins that it probably is some
number of feet short of being a mountain and so is really a hill, the
townspeople, a weird lot, are furious and determined it will be a
mountain.
     The film is a delightful and charming farce.  When the two
surveyors do the actual measuring they find that, indeed, the mountain
is rather a hill, short by fifteen feet.  Outrage sweeps the town's folk.
What they do, among other things, to keep the mountain designation,
includes inviting the beautiful Betty of Cardiff (Tara Fitzgerald) to
help persuade the surveyors to stick around while the hill is turned
into a mountain.
     THE ENGLISHMAN (and the rest of the title which will not fit on
any marquee) is one of the better comedies so far this year.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP A HILL, BUT CAME DOWN A MOUNTAIN is one
of those terminally cute, quirky British comedies.  It is a movie
populated with sweet, non-offensive characters.  It is told as if it
were a true story and yet the tone of the film is that of an Aesop
fable.  It is the sort of show that will undoubtedly work its charm on
many of you.
     Although the movie is billed as the latest Hugh Grant flick, it is
an ensemble cast.  Grant plays Reginald Anson who, with his coworker
George Garrad (Ian McNeice), are English cartographers.  They have been
assigned by their government in 1917 to determine the exact height of
the "first mountain in Wales".  This first mountain is the one just
over the Welsh border in Ffynnon Garw.
     The townsfolk of Ffynnon Garw are proud of their mountain, but to
be a government certified mountain, it must be at least 1,000 feet
tall.  The locals led by the local publican, Morgan the Goat (Colm
Meaney), are aghast when Garrad and Anson declare their mountain to be
just shy of 1,000 feet and hence must forever after must be known as
merely a hill.  Morgan enlists everyone, even his nemesis, the local
preacher, Reverend Jones (Kenneth Griffith), and his favorite of his
many girlfriends, Betty (Tara Fitzgerald), to implement his scheme to
fix the problem.  The movie is about the fix.
     The story is predictable which is probably okay since it is a
fable and not a mystery.  The characters are all played with great and
consistent gusto by all of the cast.  My favorite was Tara Fitzgerald
(from A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE, SIRENS, HEAR MY SONG, "Cadfael" (TV), and
"Fall from Grace" (TV)) who continues to impress me in how she can make
a minor character so compelling.  All she needs do is give her
infectious smile at the right time and the screen lights up.  Hugh
Grant (so wonderful in FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL and SIRENS among
others) gave a nice performance, but not his best.
     The director (Christopher Monger) was in complete control and
crafted a movie clearly reflecting what he had to set out to do.  It is
his goal and the script he wrote that was my problem with the picture.
For me the characters, while cute, were not credible enough to be
believable nor humorous enough to be funny.  To me it was an attempt at
droll humor that failed.  I almost felt guilty about not caring more
for a sweet little movie with carefully drawn characters, effective
cinematography (Vernon Layton), and dramatic music (Stephen Endelman).
I found the slow pacing by the editor (David Martin) and the low key
tone of the dialog boring and even sleep inducing at points.
     THE ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP A HILL, BUT CAME DOWN A MOUNTAIN runs
fairly short at 1:38, but it felt much longer.  It is a G show that
tried and succeeded in getting its more marketable PG rating by
throwing in a few mild cuss words.  No one would be harmed by seeing
this show, but I can not see how it would appeal to kids under 8.  I
award the movie ** for good acting, but give it a mild thumbs down as
it just did not work for me.  I have trouble with shows with elevated
saccharine levels.  You may fall in love with this movie if you have a
higher tolerance.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     If you're expecting a big joke about the unfortunate title of this
film, you'll be disappointed.  Everyone else has done it already.  I saw
the film late, and I'm just not falling into that trap.
     With that out of the way, THE ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP A HILL BUT CAME
DOWN A MOUNTAIN refers to the title character, Hugh Grant, who is given
this wacky Welsh nickname as the result of some wacky events surrounding
the wacky title hill/mountain.
     The story is a classic comic farce.  Set in 1917, in the village at
the foot of the mountain, Ffynnon Garw, a pair of surveyors from England
come to the village to measure its height.  Grant is Anson, as one of the
surveyors who recently returned from World War I only to find himself
shell-shocked so badly that public service is his only apparent employment
option.
     When Anson measures Ffynnon Garw, he finds it to be just a bit too
short to be called a mountain.  Now the Welsh take their mountains very
seriously, and this is quite a blow to the village, so with the aid of
villagers Morgan (Colm Meaney), Betty (Tara Fitzgerald), and a host of
others, they conspire to keep the surveyors in town long enough to pile
enough dirt atop Ffynnon Garw to push it into mountaindom.  Through high
school-style pranks and the affectionate ministrations of Betty, Anson
stays in town long enough to be charmed by its beauty, simplicity, and
fraternity.
     Some of this works.  Some of it doesn't.  THE ENGLISHMAN can be
hilarious at times, and really quite silly at others.  In fact,
Fitzgerald, who is normally the embodiment of the phrase "ingenue," looks
downright goofy with her 1917 Shirley Temple curls and period dress.  I
couldn't take her seriously at all.  Worse still, the critical romance
developing between her and Anson is completely unbelievable, and was a
real stumbling block for me.
     Otherwise, the film is good, if not entirely memorable, featuring
some excellent bit players and an original story (but not too
original--the story of Ffynnon Garw is true).  The film drags a bit here
and there, but the ending had me walking out with a smile.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Hugh Grant, Colm Meaney, Tara Fitzgerald, Ian McNeice, 
      Kenneth Griffith, Ian Hart, Robert Pugh
Director: Christopher Monger 
Producer: Sarah Curtis
Screenplay: Christopher Monger based on the story told by Ivor Monger 
Cinematography: Vernon Layton
Music: Stephen Endelman
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     The title of this film, THE ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP A HILL BUT CAME 
DOWN A MOUNTAIN, is so long that it can function as a plot synopsis in 
its own right.  "The Englishman" in question is British cartographer 
Reginald Anson, played by Hugh Grant with his usual aw-shucks charm, and 
"the hill/mountain" is Ffynnon Garw, a 984-foot high protuberance in the 
Welsh terrain.  In 1917, as World War One is winding to a conclusion, 
Anson arrives in Wales with his commanding officer, George Garrad (Ian 
McNeice), to survey Ffynnon Garw's height.  When the mountain is 
measured at less than the 1000 feet necessary for official recognition 
as more than a hill, the locals are up in arms.  Horrified by the 
thought that the "first mountain in Wales" might be considered anything 
less than grand, they decide to build a twenty foot high dirt mound at 
the summit, then get the measurement repeated.  As an inducement to keep 
the two Englishmen in town until the construction is complete, a young 
woman, Betty of Cardiff (Tara Fitzgerald), is called upon to use all her 
wiles and charms.  And, just in case Betty isn't persuasive enough, the 
visitors' car is sabotaged.
     It's rare that a movie owes this much of its success to its 
director and stars.  The storyline for THE ENGLISHMAN isn't all that 
dynamic and the screenplay is rather bland.  However, using the acting 
skills and natural charisma of Hugh Grant, Tara Fitzgerald, and Colm 
Meaney, director Christopher Monger has compiled a wonderfully droll 
comedy.  For the most part, the humor is witty, not laugh-aloud funny.  
Chuckles and smiles can be expected, but not explosive guffaws.  THE 
ENGLISHMAN is low-key in all aspects, from the comic elements to the 
love story.
     Frankly, Grant and Fitzgerald (who were also paired in John 
Duigan's erotic SIRENS) do a lot more with the relationship than the 
script provides.  Without the chemistry between them, this part of the 
movie would have been a complete throw-away, limiting the production's 
appeal.  Love, after all, makes for the perfect icing on Ffynnon Garw's 
cake.
     The supporting cast, comprised primarily of character actors, is 
solid.  Colm Meaney, best known to American audiences from his work in 
two STAR TREK series, plays a self-serving pub owner who advocates 
adding to the mountain so he can sell beer to the thirsty workers.  
Kenneth Griffith is wonderful as the crotchety old reverend who sees 
Ffynnon Garw's height as a matter of theological importance.  Ian 
McNeice finds the right mix of pomposity and superciliousness as Garrad, 
and Robert Pugh plays a far less menacing role than the one he took on 
in PRIEST (where he was an incestuous father).
     THE ENGLISHMAN is framed as a true story told to a child and, as 
was the case with THE PRINCESS BRIDE, this is the best way to establish 
the somewhat fanciful narrative.  The picture has some things to say 
about the importance of community and the desultory effects of war, but 
its primary concern is lightening the heart's burden -- a job at which 
it is eminently successful, regardless of how mountainous the task 
proves to be.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Hugh Grant, Colm Meaney, Tara Fitzgerald, Ian McNeice, Kenneth
Griffith, Ian Hart, Robert Pugh Director: Christopher Monger Screenplay:
Christopher Monger based on the story told by Ivor Monger
We all have our unique quirks and obsessions; but when it comes to what
is considered a hill, and what is considered a mountain, the Welsh win
hands down. People have fought and died over less, so let's give this
tale of metric measurements a twenty foot chance.
'Ffynnon Garw' Welsh hill turned mountain, or mountain turned hill
(depending on the change of seasons or it's human residents), is twenty
feet short of one thousand. So guess what the community does about it?
Toil, sweat and buckets of dirt; a dead priest, a coffin at its peak,
and of course enough soil to allow 'The English Man' (Hughes) to walk
down a mountain.
This is not a particularly exciting, or well made film. But if ever
interested in a bit of Welsh history, or the joining of human effort -
T.E.M.W.W.U.A.H.B.C.D.A.M. is for you.
Comment: Not Mount Everest but still a pretty hill.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Hugh Grant, Colm Meaney, Tara Fitzgerald, Ian McNeice,
           Kenneth Griffith.
Screenplay/Director:  Christopher Monger.
     If it had not been for Jim Carrey, Hugh Grant might have been
hailed as *the* breakout star of 1994.  His affable, self-effacing
persona turned FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL int the biggest "art house"
hit in the history of the country, leading to a not-so-coincidental
increase in business for another Grant film, SIRENS, after his face was
substituted for Elle Macpherson's bare backside in that film's print
ads.  THE ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP A HILL BUT CAME DOWN A MOUNTAIN might
have faced a monumental marketing challenge, or at least a name change,
if not for the advantage of being Hugh Grant's first post-WEDDINGS
effort.  Unfortunately, it's no honeymoon.  Grant's fans could be
massively disappointed, both by his relatively minor role and by the
film's frequently tedious pace.
     Grant plays Reginald Anson, an English surveyor who comes to
Wales in 1917 with his partner George Garrad (Ian McNeice) to map
the terrain for the war effort.  Among their tasks is determining
the height of Ffynnon Garw, a geographical feature which the locals
take inordinate pride in calling "the first mountain in Wales."
However, Anson and Garrad find that Ffynnon Garw is sixteen feet
short of the 1,000 foot height required for the designation of a
mountain.  Refusing to accept that Ffynnon Garw is just a "hill,"
the locals, led by innkeeper Morgan (Colm Meaney) and the Reverend
Jones (Kenneth Griffith) concoct an elaborate plan to add the
required height to Ffynnon Garw, and to keep Anson and Garrad in
town as long as necessary to obtain a favorable re-measurement.
     The story, based on a tale from the family of Welsh writer/
director Christopher Monger, begins as a promising enough fable
about fish out of water and a legendary act of combined community
will.  Monger does a nice job of establishing the scene, introducing
the quirks of the characters in the matter-of-fact manner of an
accomplished tale-teller who relates a story he knows to be fanciful
with utmost earnestness.  The clash of personalities between the
merrily profane Morgan "the Goat" and the ever-apoplectic Reverend
Jones is entertaining, thanks largely to a good-natured performance
by Colm Meaney, and Stephen Endelman provides a bright and lilting
score which keeps the tone light.
     Sadly, although it is clear that Monger has a great affection
for this particular story, it isn't nearly as interesting as he
seems to think it is, at least not for 100 minutes.  The key problem
is that as much as he tries to convey why this "mountain" is so
important to the people of Ffynnon Garw, he never quite manages to
do so.  He toys both with the idea of Welsh identity being tied to
the mountains, and with the general sense of loss brought on by the
first World War, but as hard as he tries to draw us into the
imperative of the Ffynnon Garw mission, he can't make it matter as
much to the audience.  While the efforts of the townspeople to
thward Anson and Garrad in their every attempt to leave are
sometimes amusing, there is a lot of space between them, and THE
ENGLISHMAN slows down to become a sporadically whimsical bore.
     It also appears that the presence of Hugh Grant resulted in an
ill-advised restructuring of the script.  The story really should
have been about the Welsh townsfolk, not about the two Englishman,
and indeed Hugh Grant is little more than a peripheral figure for
fully half of the film.  Then Tara Fitzgerald (Grant's wife in
SIRENS) appears as a woman of ill repute brought to town to keep
Anson occupied, Anson becomes sympathetic to the determination of
the Welsh villagers, and suddenly we have an unnecessary and
unwelcome love story thrown into the mix.  Grant really just walks
through this part, relying on his crinkly smile and hesitating
delivery and little else.  If the story had to focus on one of the
Englishman, it should have been Garrad, played with puffed-up
impatience by Ian McNeice.  Of course, McNeice is only an actor;
Hugh Grant is a movie star.  THE ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP A HILL BUT
CAME DOWN A MOUNTAIN has some charms, and an appealing sense of
place.  It is also a case of an hour's worth of story stretched an
extra forty minutes, and of a big name star in an essentially
supporting role who becomes a tail wagging the dog.

Author
Frankie Paiva
Few of us will ever know the feeling of loving something so much that you will
do anything and everything to protect it. Such warm, gentle emotion is rarely
the subject of feature films, but Miramax has taken a change with Englishman. A
loving, affectionate portrait of the love a Welsh village has for its mountain
is the type of thing that should be filling the modern motion picture screen.
Yes, this is another one of those quirky, quiet, and subtle English comedies,
but it’s one that everyone should enjoy.
George (Ian McNeice) and Reginald (Grant) are cartographers (people who make
maps) that come to a small Welsh village to measure their great mountain. The
two men are very out of place in this type of community and no one really seems
to like them. This dislike of them increases when the town learns that in order
to be classified as a mountain on the British maps, their mountain (or is it a
hill?) has to be at least one thousand feet high. The first reading doesn't
please the townspeople, it’s just under a thousand feet high.
Devising a plan the local pub owner, Morgan the Goat (Meaney), decides to screw
up the cartographer's car so that they can’t go anywhere, he also hires a
woman to pretend that she fancies Reginald. This all happens while the rest of
the townspeople bring dirt up in buckets and pails so that they can build on
the fourteen or so extra feet that is needed for their beloved treasure. Morgan
fights with the town’s reverend about whether or not the people will work on
the Sunday of church to rebuild the mountain. He won’t let him, so how will
they get it done before they leave the next day? Will the townspeople be able
to have the first mountain in Wales?
This movie is so cute and full of little details that you can’t help but
liking it. It’s these little details that keep the film running ninety-four
minutes without the presence of a very solid plot. Hugh Grant gives his usual
bumbling English performance and Ian McNeice is funny, especially after he
drinks way too much gin. The really fun parts of the movie are seeing how they
try to delay the two individuals from leaving the town so that they can measure
the mountain again. For instance, the local train station says that all
passenger trains are flooded, yet the coal trains can still go right through.
The answer? They have different tracks of course. I also don’t quite think
that the love story between Reginald and Betty works very well. They both seem
awkward and not showing off their best acting abilities in those scenes. While
it’s obvious that the title is too long, I had some trouble coming up with
alternative ones. The Englishman? The Hill? One Thousand Feet? Nah, none of
them fit the film’s fun, quirky atmosphere. A great movie to rent (a must for
English comedy lovers if they haven’t seen it already) The Englishman Who
Went Up A Hill But Came Down A Mountain gets *** stars.
The Young-Uns: I can’t say that most young children will get this movie, but
there is a some mild language and plenty of drinking. Good Age 9 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://www.homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html
