Title
Review for London Town (1946)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Roger Mellor
The critical and financial failure of the extravagant LONDON TOWN (1946),
Britain's first major Technicolor musical (there were one or two attempts in
the thirties, but not on this scale), is part of British film legend.
Lavishly funded, and produced by the Rank Organization in association with
the American director Wesley Ruggles at a time of rationing and shortages of
materials (perhaps this explains why so many of the chorus girls costumes
are muddy green or khaki!), it was filmed in the shell of 'Sound City
Shepperton' (later renamed the London Film Studios by Korda, and later
'Shepperton Studios') which had just been made available as a film studio
after being requisitioned during the war as a factory for aircraft parts.
According to reports, part of the studio was still being used for this
purpose during the production of LONDON TOWN. It was unusual for Rank to
produce a film here, but perhaps Denham was fully booked! (Pinewood was
still occupied by the goverment, not being released for film production,
until well after the war).
Sid Field was the talk of London town at the end of the war, having just
conquered and cheered up wartime London audiences with his enormously
successful stage variety shows, and so he could more or less dictate his own
tems for the film. He insisted on having an American director, as was of the
opinion that no British director was capable of making a good musical
(hadn't he heard of Victor Saville?). J.Arthur Rank, flush with funds
(Cinema admissions in 1945 were at an all time high), was happy to spend
large sums of money to bring over a fading American comedy director of the
1930's with little experience of musicals, whose career was, frankly, on the
slide in Hollywood, and give him lots of money and a financial stake through
his own production company, mainly funded by Rank. Top US songwriters were
comissioned, musicians were placed under "long term contracts", and the stud
io also had to be re-equipped from the ground up! Rank was confident that,
even though he was wasting money left, right and centre, the cinema business
was so boyant at this time, that he would still make a healthy profit. And
financial Controls were slack, to say the least......
The movie became a legendary turkey! It was not that UK audiences stayed
away in droves from "London Town", just that the film needed to perform
spectacularly well just to break even at the box office. Critics were
dismissive, calling it "Tacky and Tasteless". In hindsight, and especially
for 1940's nostalgia fans, these aspects make it absolutely fascinating!
Apart from the kitsch elements, the film is also interesting historically.
After Britain's victory in the war, it can be seen as a tribute to London
and its citizens, and as a celebration of popular cockney culture,
especially music hall. It also, in a way in which the makers almost
certainly did't intend, celebrates the sense of community, the "all classes
in harmony" as seen in the Riverboat sequence, filmed as a day out on the
River Thames, below Windsor Castle. The symbolism of this is fascinating, as
all are included, from the very high, Royalty in the Castle, to an Eton
Schoolboy, to the cockney folk, all living in harmony in this "English
Utopia". With its emphasis on "Community Values", it could almost be an
election commercial for Clement Atlee's Labour government, which swept to
power in the same year!
The Songs in 'London Town' include: 'You Can't Keep a Good Dreamer Down',
'The 'Ampstead Way', 'Any Way the Wind Blows' 'So Do I ' (performed by
1940's Dance Band singer Beryl Davis),  'My Heart Goes Crazy', and a  medley
of cockney songs: 'Knock 'em in the Old kent Road/Any Old Iron/(My Old Man
said) Follow the Van'
The musical director was Tutti Camerata, from Decca Records, and many of the
musicians who played on the Soundtrack went on to form the Ted Heath band.
The film orchestra is, in effect, the Ted Heath band of 1945 in embryonic
form. (Ted Heath was the "orchestral contractor" for the film, which may
have given him a taste for band leadership!). The music and lyrics were by
Bing Crosby's regular collaborators,Jimmy Van Heusen and Johnny Burke, and
the film is not without interest. Much of the material for the comedy
sketches comes from comedian Sid Field's two West End wartime variety
revues, Strike a New Note(Prince of Wales,1943) and Strike it Again (Prince
of Wales,1944), which were highly successful with the public (followed by
Piccadilly Hayride (Prince of Wales,1946). Strike it Again featured the golf
sketch which is seen in LONDON TOWN. Thus the film provides a valuable
historical record of 1940's variety, with comic sketches and musical
production numbers, and all in Technicolor. Among those featured are Kay
Kendall singing 'The 'ampstead way', and with 'The Dozen and One Girls'
(also known as 'The London Lovelies', as they are billed in the film's press
book) 'My heart goes crazy': fourteen year old Petula Clark appears in a non
singing role, and Tessie O'Shea, later to appear in Noel Coward's The Girl
Who came to Supper (Broadway Theatre NY, 1963) demonstrates her ability to
steal the show, in the 'Pearly Kings and Queens' sequence.
LONDON TOWN was released in the US in a truncated form by United Artists in
1953 under the title MY HEART GOES CRAZY.
Roger Mellor
If you have any comments on this review, or the movie, you can e mail me at:
roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk
Check out the British Musical Movies site at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com
