Title
Review for Dolores Claiborne (1995)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Steve Rhodes
     DOLORES CLAIBORNE is somewhat of a thriller and is based on a
Stephen King story.  More later on why I say "somewhat."  It stars
Kathy Bates as Dolores Claiborne in another one of Bates brilliant
acting performances.
     Dolores is a mother and a wife who has worked almost all of her
life as a maid for a self-described bitch named Vera Donovan (Judy
Parfitt).  As the story opens, Vera has fallen down the stairs and, we
see Dolores starting to finish off her with a rolling pin.  The local
policeman, Detective John Mackey (Christopher Plummer) wants to convict
Dolores of Donovan's murder because Dolores's husband died years ago
under mysterious circumstances, and he tried at the time to pen the
murder on Dolores but failed.  He is still angry since that is the only
case he ever lost.
     Selena (Jennifer Jason Leigh), Dolores's estranged daughter, soon
appears on the scene.  Being a hot shot reporter, she tries to save her
mother, but her mother sticks her foot in her mouth at every turn and
generally tells everybody off.  At first, her mother's behavior is so
strange it appears she may be mentally deranged.  Selena, likewise, is
a walking time bomb of pent up anger about something.
     The movie is told as a series of flashbacks to the incidents
leading up to the death of Dolores's husband (David Strathairn).  The
scenes of the present have people from the past appear and then the
scenes evolves into the past.  It was an interesting and effective
editing technique.  The two parallel stories work equally well, and
thanks to the editing, they are interwoven nicely.
     The past has lots of abuse, violence, and major alcoholism.
Selena was clearly affected by this past since she has become a
alcoholic and a drug abuser herself.  Selena frequently gets out her
hand lotion and rubs it into her hands as she talks.  I was never quite
sure the meaning of this while watching the show.  A couple of days
later it hit me why, and it made sense.  If you see it and can not
figure it out, I am not going to tell you the answer.  You will have to
keep pondering.  Actually, that you still think about a movie after you
leave is a tribute to its effectiveness.
     The cinematography was certainly beautiful in the golden hues of
sunset and in the glow of a solar eclipse.  On the other hand, I felt
it overpowered the story and would have been more appropriate in
another movie.  The scenes of dark and depressing grays were also
overdone I thought.  Better to have the acting and the script convey
the mood and have the cinematography complement it rather than
overwhelm it.
     The acting was good around with one exception.  The casting of
Strathairn as the evil husband was poor.  He is too much of a nice guy,
and it showed through.  His evil was too one dimensional and was rarely
threatening.  A thriller needs a strong villain, and DOLORES CLAIBORNE
had none.  I attribute this problem solely to Strathairn and to the
directing (Taylor Hackford) and not to the script (Tony Gilroy).
     Having a weak villain relegated the movie to being somewhat of a
thriller with a lightweight mystery attached.  With a more effective
bad guy, this movie could have really taken off.  Instead, it became
more a character study, which was very effective, and a mood piece,
which, as I already said, was overdone.
     DOLORES CLAIBORNE runs 2:11, but it did not seem that long.  It is
correctly rated R for significant amounts of realistic domestic
violence and for alcohol and drug abuse.  I think it would be fine for
mature teenagers.  I recommend this movie to you, and I award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Great works of literature seldom produce a good material for
films, and the career of Stephen King is living proof for
that. However, some transitions between the written word and
silver screen image are better than other and, again,
Stephen King is a nice example for that phenomenon.
Interestingly enough, among dozens of novels and short
stories adapted for films and televisions usually those not
belonging to his favourite genre of horror proved to be good
source for films. One of such examples is DOLORES CLAIBORNE,
1995 drama directed by Taylor Hackford.
The plot is set on the small island off the coast of Maine
and begins when one of her residents, feisty old housekeeper
Dolores Claiborne St. George (played by Kathy Bates) becomes
target of criminal investigation, following the suspicious
death of her long-time employer, bed-ridden wealthy old
widow Vera Donovan (played by Judy Parfitt). To make things
worse for Dolores, the investigation is led by Detective
John Mackey (played by Christopher Plummer), mainland
policeman who had been investigating her twenty years before
after equally suspicious death of her husband. Everyone is
convinced that Dolores killed the old woman, and that might
include even her daughter Selena (played by Jennifer Jason
Lee), successful journalist who comes from New York
following anonymous tip. When two women finally meet, the
issue of Dolores' guilt or innocence is going to be settled
together with painful memories and ghosts of the past that
haunts their lives.
Taylor Hackford and his scriptwriter Tony Gilroy are among
those rare filmmakers that managed to successfully tackle
with King's fiction. Dark, menacing atmosphere of King's
home state of Maine - the perfect setting for the unpleasant
and often depressive subjects of family abuse that this film
tackles - is brought here due to the clever use of Gabriel
Beristain's photography and Canadian coastal locations.
Hackford also manages to give depth to the characters by
using flashbacks and non- linear story structure. The actors
are doing wonderful job - Kathy Bates is excellent in her
complex role, as well as Jennifer Jason Lee, as well as
Christopher Plummer as near-psychopathic detective. The most
impressive work was, however, done by David Strathairn in
the role of Dolores' mean husband. All that would guarantee
a very good film, but in the last segments Hackford seems to
lose pace and David Elfman's musical score becomes somewhat
too irritating. And, same as with many Hollywood films that
had great potential, ending is formulaic and represents a
disappointment. However, despite that, and despite the fact
that depressive viewers might do themselves a favour if they
watch something else, DOLORES CLAIBORNE is a good film not
only compared to the majority of King's screen adaptations.
Review written on September 19th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Thomas Skogestad
Starring: Jennifer Jason Leigh (Selena), Kathy Bates (Dolores Claiborne),
          David Strathairn
Directed by Taylor Hackford
Screenplay by Tony Gilroy, based on the novel by Stephen King
Rated R (language, sexual situations, violence)
Released: Friday March 24, 1995
Reviewed at Landmark's Shattuck Cinemas, Berkeley
     Castle Rock has a knack for turning out well
made--excellent--adaptations of Stephen King novels (STAND BY ME,
MISERY).  Last year brought us the sadly little seen, but terrific
THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION.
     So it's sad to say that DOLORES CLAIBORNE is a bit of a letdown.
The plot seems to be the problem--as it's quite thin and at 131 minutes
a lack of a strong plot becomes a bit tedious.
     Saving the film is an excellent performance by Kathy Bates, a
fitting score by Danny Elfman and some cinematography that's excellent
in parts.
     Kathy Bates as the title character perfects on her performance as
a loony fan in MISERY.  Yes, she even runs around with an ax, but we
never loose sympathy for her since she truthfully portrays an
"ordinary" woman who is sometimes pushed too far.  Jennifer Jason Leigh
is a bit hard to take at times, at times she seems to be too distant;
and redoing her accent from THE HUDSUCKER PROXY and MRS. PARKER AND THE
VICIOUS CIRCLE only distracts more.
     Since the movie is released by Sony's Columbia Pictures, the movie
is also available in SDDS.  Save your bucks and don't travel too far to
see a movie that rarely uses the system.  In fact all instances of SDDS
seem to have added by the foleys long after the movie wrapped up its
shooting.  The best use of the system is hearing an upstairs doorknob
being turned!  Often I kept thinking, had the director filmed this
scene from a different angle, we would have a perfect SDDS moment....
     This is after all a Stephen King movie, so there are a few plot
twists here and there.  Perhaps one too many, the ending doesn't quite
feel right.  Sadly, it seems to have been heavily influenced by the
"convenience city syndrome" found in OUTBREAK.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: general release 3/24/95
Running Length: 2:11
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, language)
Starring: Kathy Bates, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Christopher Plummer,
          David Strathairn, Judy Parfitt, Ellen Muth, John C. Reilly,
          Eric Bogosian
Director: Taylor Hackford
Producers: Taylor Hackford and Charles Mulvehill
Screenplay: Tony Gilroy based on the book by Stephen King
Cinematography: Gabriel Beristain
Music: Danny Elfman
Released by Columbia Pictures
     Stephen King makes his living by writing horror stories, so it's odd
that the most successful screen adaptations of his work are those outside
the boundaries of his usual genre.  STAND BY ME, MISERY, THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION, and now DOLORES CLAIBORNE are all intelligent, well-fashioned
films that bear little resemblance to the gory schlock of SLEEPWALKERS
and PET SEMATARY.
     DOLORES CLAIBORNE begins as a dark and dreary murder mystery set in
the small town of Little Tall, Maine.  The skies above this village are
continually congested with clouds, the streets are slick with rain, and
the sea is gray and angry.  Yet this story, which starts out as an
investigation of a suspicious death, soon takes a grim, disturbing turn.
Memories crowd out the present as the narrative takes us back eighteen
years to expose the ugly roots of one family's dysfunction.
     Two deaths lie at the center of DOLORES CLAIBORNE--Vera Donovan's
(Judy Parfitt) in the present and Joe St. George's (David Strathairn) in
the past.  After Joe fell into a partially-concealed well during the
total solar eclipse of 1975, his wife Dolores (Kathy Bates) was
suspected, but never convicted, of murder.  The death was eventually
ruled as accidental, splotching the previously-perfect record of
Detective John Mackey (Christopher Plummer).  Now, nearly two decades
later, Dolores stands accused of killing her invalid employer and,
although the evidence is entirely circumstantial, Mackey is determined to
get a conviction.
     Dolores' daughter Selena (Ellen Muth at age 13; Jennifer Jason Leigh
at age 31), a reporter living in New York city, receives a fax of an
article in a Bangor newspaper detailing her mother's suspected
involvement in Vera's death.  Haunted by her muddled recollections of her
father's end and driven by an unshakable conviction that her mother is
guilty, she takes a brief leave-of-absence to go home.  Once there, she
is confronted not only by the unpleasantness of the present, but by the
ghosts of the past.
     Parts of DOLORES CLAIBORNE are delivered with an unshielded
emotional and psychological impact.  The script is not consistently at
this high level--there are times, most notably during the climactic
sequence--when unfortunate choices are made, but the overall result is
a film that illuminates certain "forbidden" shadows.  Generally,
mainstream movies avoid risky material like this honest exposition of the
issues underlying the fissure between Dolores and Selena.
     The main characters, mother and daughter, are well-written and
effectively portrayed.  Dolores is a sad, lonely survivor who has,
perhaps unjustly, endured a lifetime of misery.  Secrets can be an
oppressive burden, and Dolores has been worn down by them.  Selena, on
the other hand, has become an alcoholic and drug-abuser as the result of
what she has repressed.  Bates and Leigh, two accomplished and versatile
actors, are in peak form as they settle into the isolation of their
characters--two very different people whose individual pain is
intertwined.
     Less effort is vested in DOLORES CLAIBORNE's male principals.  In
the case of Joe, this is understandable.  He exists only in flashbacks
with our impressions filtered through Dolores' perspective.  She has no
reason to recall him kindly, and Strathairn's portrayal echoes this.
Plummer's John Mackey, on the other hand, is basically an unpleasant
person.  Supposedly, he's a very good detective, but we're never shown
anything other than obsession and bitterness.
     There's a lot to digest in DOLORES CLAIBORNE.  The subtle visual
effects, which mix digital animation and live-action, form an effective
framework for a story teeming with emotional turmoil.  With their unique
method of delineating shifts in time (a person in the present actually
walking into the past), the flashbacks are invested with a degree of
eerie immediacy.  Although the forced ending, which seems deigned to
create an unnatural moment of triumph, weakens the climactic catharsis,
it doesn't diminish the human tragedy which is central to DOLORES
CLAIBORNE.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Alex Fung
Starring Kathy Bates, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Christopher Plummer,
         David Strathairn, Judy Parfitt
Screenplay by Tony Gilroy, based on the novel by Stephen King
Produced by Taylor Hackford and Charles Mulvehill
Directed by Taylor Hackford
Rated AA [Adult Accompaniment for those under thirteen] in Ontario for
         brief violence, profanity and mature themes
Running time: 131 minutes
     The release of DOLORES CLAIBORNE into wide release this weekend
adds another entry into the long list of film adaptations of Stephen
King's work.  This slow-moving character study provides some
outstanding acting performances by the principals, but suffers from a
tepid conclusion, inconsistent direction, and may not have wide
commercial appeal.
     When the maid, Dolores Claiborne, is found brandishing a rolling
pin standing over the bloody and dead body of her employer, it seems
like an open-and-shut murder case.  Upon hearing of the death via a
mysterious fax, Dolores' estranged and bitter daughter, Esquire
magazine writer Selena St. George, returns from New York back to her
tiny island village childhood home.  As the two clash horns, the story
behind the mysterious death of Dolores' abusive husband two decades
ago, ruled an accident despite the protests of Detective John Mackey,
is revealed.  Did Dolores kill her husband?  And did she kill her
employer?
     DOLORES CLAIBORNE is certainly more of a character study than a
suspense thriller.  Consequently, it is fortunate that their cast
includes some of Hollywood's finest character actors, such as Bates,
Leigh and Strathairn.
     Kathy Bates plays the film's title character, and gives a
sensational lead performance.  DOLORES CLAIBORNE is essentially a
showcase for the talent of Bates, as her character has a huge amount of
screen time.  She dominates the screen, producing a character that is
compelling and arresting, as we watch the character go through two
decades of history via flashbacks.  Kathy Bates' performance is
award-calibre stuff.
     The rest of the cast is also very good.  Jennifer Jason Leigh
plays the perpetually sour, bitter Helena St. George well, and
Christopher Plummer seems to be enjoying himself as Dolores'
ever-present nemesis, the determined Detective John Mackey.  David
Strathairn is particularly interesting and suitably smarmy and
despicable as Dolores' husband, Joe St. George.  Judy Parfitt is fine
as Dolores' tyrannic socialite employer, Vera Donovan--it would have
been interesting to see, say, Meg Foster in this role.  Child actor
Ellen Muth is also worth noting as the young Selena during the
flashback sequences; she is very impressive.
     The direction of DOLORES CLAIBORNE by Taylor Hackford wildly
varies throughout the film, ranging from some parts which are quite
clever in their own right, to parts which are embarrassingly hokey.  The
segues between flashbacks and the present are very hit-and-miss in
terms of effectiveness.  The pacing of the film tends to be numbingly
slow, which tends to undermine any suspense which might be built up.
However, the cinematography by Gabriel Beristain is wonderful--I
particularly like the chilling ice-blue hue permeating the present-day
scenes, contrasting well with the many Nova Scotia ocean shots--and
Danny Elfman provides a surprisingly understated score for the film.
     It would seem that the commercial potential of DOLORES CLAIBORNE
is limited.  None of the performers in the film could be classified as
a big draw, and its pacing may be a turn-off to those expecting a
gripping suspense film filled with twists and turns and car crashes and
axe-wielding psychopaths.  Although being essentially the only film in
its genre in release now, it may also be hurt by the negative
perception of King works, even with the recent critical success of THE
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION and THE STAND.
     DOLORES CLAIBORNE suffers from a very unsatisfying conclusion, and
moves very slowly.  However, the performances are uniformly excellent,
particularly Kathy Bates, and the film has its moments.  On my
four-star scale, I give DOLORES CLAIBORNE three stars.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     A film as hard-going as DOLORES CLAIBORNE is in its first 85
minutes had better work particularly hard to redeem itself in its final
act.  We have a story that is relentlessly downbeat with uniformly
unpleasant characters.  One wonders how this tale could possibly come
out to make this dreary story worth the telling, or the sitting
through.  In fact, this turns out to be a surprisingly moving story
with some fairly powerful emotional overtones and perhaps it even hasa
hero.
     The film opens with two women struggling at the top of a
staircase.  Vera Donovan (played by Judy Parfitt) is thrown down a
flight of stairs and her housekeeper, Dolores Claiborne (Kathy Bates)
chases after her to see the results.  Finding Vera not yet dead Dolores
ransacks the kitchen to find the proper tool to finish the job.  She is
found there standing over the body, marble rolling pin in hand, ready
to strike a death blow, not realizing that the woman at her feet is
already dead from the fall.  And, as it turns out, this may not be the
first fall that Dolores arranged.  Her husband died in an apparent
accidental fall years earlier under very suspicious circumstances.
Police Detective John Mackey (played by Christopher Plummer) would like
to prove the woman with the rolling pin was indeed a multiple killer.
     The drama will have one more major character.  Selena St. George
(Jennifer Jason Leigh), daughter of Dolores Claiborne St. George--is a
successful magazine writer who comes to Bangor to help her mother and
to understand the situation.  In her first visit to her mother in many
years, Selena starts to delve into her mother's life of hard work and
harder knocks.  Dolores herself seems fixated on her own history and
slips all too easily into recollection of the past that intrude on the
present.
     Kathy Bates does a terrific job in the title role, an unglamorous
drudge with long-simmering angers and occasionally a sarcastic wit.
She effectively plays a woman whose personality has been mostly rubbed
away by disappointments and by the total lack of anyone to care for or
about her.  Jennifer Jason Leigh who played journalists with affected
nasal twangs in MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE and THE HUDSUCKER
PROXY, plays yet another journalist and curiously occasionally lapses
into the same nasal twang, though here it is hard to account for where
she might have picked it up.  I have always liked Christopher Plummer
as an actor with some range who is better than his roles.  But most
unusual is David Strathairn as Dolores's abusive husband.  His mild
personality has till now made him seem like another Henry Fonda.
     Director Taylor Hackford uses weather and sky conditions in
unusual ways in this film.  Flashbacks are signified by sunny skies.
Scenes filmed in the present are always shot under dismal gray skies.
Not only does this not make sense literally, it doesn't even make sense
symbolically since the events under the sunny skies seem just as dismal
as those under gray.  Just occasionally Gabriel Beristain's camera
gives us a startlingly colorful sky effect--always in flashbacks, of
course.  One sequence under a total solar eclipse brings a surprising
special effect into a story that at least on the surface does not seem
to need them.
     It is ironic, perhaps, that most of the best films based on
stories by horror writer Stephen King, tend not to be the ones based on
his horror stories.  Of the four best films based on his writing--I
would say subjectively that they were CARRIE, STAND BY ME, THE
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, and DOLORES CLAIBORNE--only the first is based on
a horror story.  And I would rate DOLORES CLAIBORNE a low +2 on the -4
to +4 scale.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Columbia)
Directed by     Taylor Hackford (AN OFFICER AND A GENTLEMAN)
Written by      Tony Gilroy, based on the novel by Stephen King
Cast            Kathy Bates, Jennifer Jason Leigh, David Strathairn,
                Christopher Plummer
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time    131 minutes
Reviewed at     General Cinema at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh (3/21)
     Since Brian DePalma first dumped a bucket of blood on Sissy Spacek
almost twenty years ago, filmmakers have been scrambling to adapt
Stephen King.  Thirty-five times they've tried, and thirty-five times
(by my count) they come up with only four words to describe their
results:  "very good" or "very bad."
     No middle ground has ever existed for the bestselling author, who,
in some circles, remains misunderstood because of those "very bad"
ones.  (He even directed one of them.  MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE.  Shudder.)
     DOLORES CLAIBORNE, thank goodness, is one of the "good" Stephen
King films.  The murder mystery--about a feisty New England woman
(Kathy Bates) facing her second accusation of murder--is also a fitting
companion piece to last year's THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION.  There's even
a script reference to the fictional prison.
     Director Taylor Hackford and writer Tony Gilroy have expanded the
bestseller.  They've both jettisoned the first-person narrative, and
introduced an adult daughter (Jennifer Jason Leigh) who doesn't appear
in the novel.  Purists may scoff, but the changes work.  The result is
a dark feminist fantasy--one that works better as a showcase for the
actors than as a statement of its politics.
     Kathy Bates is no stranger to misery.  She's a delight as the
harried heroine who may have just pushed her employer--that wealthy
invalid witch--right down the stairs.  Dolores is just as colorful as
described in the novel, even if the script omits some of her better
confrontations.
     Jennifer Jason Leigh, who is less fun, spends the entire movie
moping as Dolores' estranged daughter Selena.  The young actress broods
better than any actress her age, though she could stand to lay off the
cigarettes for a film or two.  Who would've thought she'd still have
her lungs after MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE?
     The role of Dolores' late, abusive husband goes to David
Strathairn.  He plays it pretty broad.  More appealing is Christopher
Plummer who hams it up as the local detective.  Watch for bit parts
from Eric Bogosian (!) and Bob Gunton.  The latter starred in
SHAWSHANK.
     Told with a number of flashbacks, the narrative of DOLORES
CLAIBORNE is very easy to follow.  The photography (by Gabriel
Beristain) is great, the direction is smart, and the dialogue is
crisp.  If the ending's too tidy, it's no big deal.  The source
material still shines through.
BOTTOM LINE:  One of the "good" Stephen King films, Mr.  Man!

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Looking for a suspenseful thriller with psychological overtones?
You will find it all here in this adaptation from a Stephen King
best-selling novel.  Screenwriter Tony Gilroy took Dolores Claiborne's
long monologue in the book and changed it for the film by replacing
some of it with an adult character only referred to in the book, the
daughter, Selena St. George (Jennifer Jason Leigh).
     Dolores Claiborne (Kathy Bates) has been charged with the murder
of a rich society matron, Vera Donovan, (Judy Parfitt) for whom she
worked and, as everyone knew, she hated.  Detective John Mackey
(Christopher Plummer) is determined to get a guilty verdict against
Mrs, Claiborne who once before was accused of murder.  That time it was
her abusive husband (David Strathairn) but she got off "not guilty"
that time.  Now, Mackey thinks he has several sure-fire motives for the
killing of Mrs. Donovan and he will nail her.  There is, however, much
more Mackey (and the audience) cannot guess while the film moves back
and forth, revealing hidden events.
     Kathy Bates turns in a first class performance.  No surprise there
although she has to age some twenty years during the film.  Jennifer
Jason Leigh, as the daughter who has been estranged from her mother
since the father's death, is induced to come home and face her own
hidden past.  Ms. Leigh, with no surprise here, either, is also
excellent.  Between Bates and Leigh, the film brings real life to the
tragedy and mystery.  Both should be Oscar contenders.

Author
Andrew Hicks
     Yet another movie that proves beyond a shadow of a doubt that
Stephen King can tell a compelling story without falling back on the
traditional elements of horror and the supernatural.  DOLORES CLAIBORNE
is also the second three-star King film to star Kathy Bates (the first
was MISERY).  Bates plays Dolores Claiborne, a feisty old woman who's
been accused of treating her aging employer to a fatal fall down the
stairs.  What makes the small-town detective that much more obsessed
with putting Claiborne in jail is the fact that Claiborne was also the
defendant of a murder trial eighteen years ago, the only one of his 86
cases that hasn't been solved.  She was acquitted of a crime that may
or may not have been an accident.  Her abusive husband fell down a well
and died, even though Baby Jessica was down there to break his fall.
     Claiborne's daughter, Selena (could have sworn she was murdered
too?), played by Jennifer Jason-Leigh, hears of the most recent
accusations against her mother and comes home for the first time in
years.  We learn through flashbacks that Dolores worked as a maid for
the dead woman for over twenty-five years and toward the end all they
had were each other, even though there was a mutual dislike between the
two.  And Selena soon begins having flashbacks too (those things are
more contagious than yawns) and recovers a few repressed memories that
prove to her that her dad wasn't quite the guy she thought he was.  For
starters, on more than one occasion, he made her bruise his fruit.  Tag
his cattle.  Slap his salami.  Bridle his horse.  Crash his bumper
car.  You get the picture, although I'm sure you wish you didn't.
     DOLORES CLAIBORNE is a dark thriller with plenty of drama and
suspense.  Bates does the complicated world of eccentric King
characters justice once again in an excellent performance.  Sure, she's
not the usual emaciated, glamorous Hollywood model/actress.  Never
mind that 90% of men would choose Cindy Crawford over Kathy Bates (with
the other 10% choosing Fabio over both of them), Bates can act Crawford
into a mole in the ground... excuse me, a hole in the ground.  And is
it just me, or does this movie set a new record for use of the word
"bitch"?

Author
Scott Renshaw

Author
Jon A. Webb
Directed by Taylor Hackford
Written by Tony Gilroy
With: Kathy Bates (title role), Jennifer Jason Leigh (Dolores's daughter),
      David Straithairn (Dolores's husband),  Christopher Plummer
      (investigating detective).
130 minutes
     There are two kinds of Stephen King films: (1)  adaptations of his
novels and stories with supernatural elements, which range from real
trash (NIGHT SHIFT, THE MANGLER, etc.) to well-meaning mediocre to good
productions (THE DARK HALF, the television productions of IT and THE
STAND, THE SHINING, etc.) and (2) the Castle Rock productions of his
stories and novels without supernatural elements: STAND BY ME, MISERY,
and now DOLORES CLAIBORNE.
     The first category is sometimes entertaining, sometimes thrilling,
sometimes embarrassing.  The second category is consistently as good as
mainstream American cinema gets.
     Dolores Claiborne is a resident of a small island off the coast of
Maine.  She's had a tough life--an alcoholic husband who abused her,
hard domestic work all the time, nothing much else except her love for
her daughter.  When I read the novel I found it weak.  The central
scene in the book with Dolores's head silhouetted against the sky while
a solar eclipse reaches totality fell flat for me.
     But in the movie this scene sings.  We see Kathy Bates's rough
face in the left and in the upper right a perfect dark circle and
crescent of awesome beauty.  Then we shift to the circle of the view
from the well, then back again.  I was really overwhelmed.
     The story has been sharpened considerably from the novel.  The
novel is centered around Dolores herself and her hard life; the movie
is centered around Dolores's relationship with her daughter Selena.
Not only is the story better cinematically, it's stronger in any case.
     But even a much weaker script would have been saved by this
exceptional cast.  You have Kathy Bates, who of course won an Academy
Award for her work in MISERY; the highly talented and versatile
Jennifer Jason Leigh; David Straithairn; and Christopher Plummer.
     Bates, at least, and maybe Leigh as well, deserves another Oscar
nomination for her performance.  Their two faces fill the screen; the
constrast between Bates's plump roughness and Leigh's gaunt youth is
rich and full of meaning in itself.  The absorbing puzzle they find
themselves in, with Bates remembering everything but hiding it under
her crustiness, and Leigh remembering nothing--barely remembering her
mother, even--drives the movie and makes that transcendent moment as
the eclipse reaches totality stunning.  Leigh's spirited turn in the
courtroom recalls other famous Hollywood defenses.
     The cinemaphotography appropriately shows the modern scenes gray
and drained of life, as they have by events, and earlier scenes full of
garish color.  The last scene keeps this drained effect, marking the
way these two women cannot really recover their youth and innocence.

Author
Christopher Null
     Kathy Bates and Jennifer Jason Leigh have returned in a new Steven
King film, DOLORES CLAIBORNE.  Another departure from typical King
fare, this is a tense psychological drama and character study, akin to
last year's THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION (also based on his work).
     Set on a depressed and perpetually wet island off the coast of
Maine, Dolores Claiborne (Bates) is the focus of the film.  Looming in
her past is a secret:  she may or may not have killed her abusive
husband (played in flashbacks by David Strathairn).  In the present,
Dolores has apparently been driven to madness by her husband and her
employer Vera, the elderly woman for whom Dolores nursemaids.  At the
film's opening, we are presented with what appears to be Vera's death
by Dolores's weathered hands.
     This all sets the tone for the ensuing investigation, in which Max
Von Sydow plays the investigator "thwarted" by Dolores during his
investigation of her husband's death eighteen years earlier.  Selena
(Leigh), Dolores's similarly insane daughter shows up to help out in
the crisis.
     What follows is pretty much predictable.  After a promising start,
the film begins to rely on way-over-the-top acting, culminating in the
worst courtroom scene in years, to get its point across (basically:
abuse is bad).  Clocking in at well over two hours, DOLORES CLAIBORNE
is far too long for the audience to stare at the same dull grey sky and
dead landscapes, while its stars deadpan for the camera.
     Thematically simplistic, DOLORES CLAIBORNE is a mildly interesting
story with some memorable characters.  It's not what we've come to
expect from King, and it is a step in the right direction, away from
the author's customary schlock horror.  But with another King story
playing in theaters now as well (THE MANGLER), it doesn't look like
he's changed his evil ways.
