Title
Review for Fathers' Day (1997)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Walter Frith
'FATHERS' DAY' IS A PLEASANT ENOUGH FORMULA FOR WILLIAMS AND CRYSTAL
Comments on this review may also be sent to wfrith@icom.ca
Film buffs have waited for quite sometime to see the teaming of two of
Hollywood's funniest men.  Robin Wiliams and Billy Crystal have finally
pulled it off with hilarious results in 'Father's Day'.  This film reportedly
took about thirteen agents between the two stars to close the deal and their
names appear on screen at the same time during the opening credits and while
Robin Williams' career seems to be sagging a little bit lately, it's Crystal
who needs a hit.
Crystal plays a high powered California lawyer while Williams plays a failed
writer on the verge of suicide.  They don't know each other until each one of
them is contacted by a former girlfriend (Nastassja Kinski) who tells them
separately that they are each the father of her sixteen year old son.  The
meet under bizarre circumstances while searching for the boy and they soon
work together in trying to find him.  
The screenplay by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel ('Splash', 'Gung Ho',
'Parenthood', 'City Slickers', 'Greedy') contains enough of their jokes which
some find offensive but others find their humour squirmingly funny.  Director
Ivan Reitman ('Stripes', 'Ghostbusters', 'Twins') finds a formula good enough
to make this comic escapade work as he relies on allowing the two leads to
improvise many scenes which make them such brilliant comedians.  
Seventy per cent of the movie's laughs come from Robin Williams but I'm sure
if you ask him about the film's success he'll tell you that the success of a
lot of comedy films depends largely on the straight man which Crystal plays
in a professional manner almost without blinking.  
A word of caution.  You may never use an outhose again after seeing this
movie and look quickly for an almost unrecognizable Mel Gibson!
Visit Mr. Frith's 'Movie Reviews' section of 'The Review' at
http://www.arrowweb.com/review

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robin Williams, Billy Crystal, Charlie Hofheimer, Bruce Greenwood,
      Nastassja Kinski, Julia Louis-Dreyfus
Director: Ivan Reitman
Producers: Ivan Reitman and Joel Silver
Screenplay: Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel, based on the film
      LES COMPERES by Francis Veber
Cinematography: Stephen H. Burum
Music: James Newton Howard
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     FATHERS' DAY simply has to be seen to be believed.  It's beyond my
comprehension how a motion picture with so much talent associated with
it -- actors Robin Williams and Billy Crystal, super-producer Joel
Silver, and director Ivan Reitman -- can be such a complete waste of
time.  FATHERS' DAY isn't just bad, it's awful.  Without a doubt, this
is one of 1997's most disappointing motion pictures. 
     On the surface, the film looks like it could be good.  The comic
pairing of Robin Williams and Billy Crystal would seem to be a dream
match belonging alongside such other recent high-profile couplings as
Steve Martin and John Candy (PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES) and Martin
and Michael Caine (DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS).  In fact, Williams and
Crystal might not even need a script -- just the two of them on camera
together should be enough to garner laughs.  As it turns out, that would
have been a better approach, because the screenplay for FATHERS' DAY,
written by feel-good scribes Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel
(MULTIPLICITY, CITY SLICKERS), saps all life and humor from the leads'
performances.  The painful, predictable result is a dearth of mirth.  If
you see FATHERS' DAY and laugh more than once, consider yourself lucky.
     The plot, which is based on a early-'80s French film called LES
COMPERES, tells the story of one mother, one son, and three fathers.  It
seems that the mother, Collette (Nastassja Kinski), used to get around a
little back in the late-'70s and early-'80s.  Sometime in that period,
right before she married her true love (Bruce Greenwood), she slept with
both Dale (Robin Williams) and Jack (Billy Crystal).  Nine months later,
a child was born, and she didn't know which of the three men was the
biological dad.  That didn't matter until 1997, when 16-year old Scott
(an unpromising Charlie Hofheimer) decides to run away from home. 
Desperate to get him back, Collette calls up Dale and Jack, surprises
them with the news about their paternity, and implores them to look for
Scott.  And, although the two start separately, they end up together on
a chase that goes from San Francisco to Sacramento to Reno.
     FATHERS' DAY wants to be a hilarious, screwball comedy that doubles
as a buddy film, with a dash of family values thrown in for good
measure.  Unfortunately, these concepts got lost somewhere in the
translation (maybe Ganz and Mandel don't know French).  FATHERS' DAY is
a one-hundred minute bore without a single character worth caring about. 
Crystal and Williams generate no chemistry, and both look like they're
on hand solely to pick up a paycheck.  The feel-good moments, which are
available in embarrassing abundance, border on nauseating.  However,
perhaps the most disheartening thing about FATHERS' DAY is its complete
lack of energy -- even Williams' patented manic impressions come across
as more scripted than spontaneous. 
     With the addition of FATHERS' DAY to his uneven resume, film maker
Ivan Reitman can now boast "the ugly" in addition to "the good" and "the
bad."  As a director, Reitman has been responsible for several
entertaining movies, including GHOSTBUSTERS and DAVE, and an even larger
number of mediocre-to-poor offerings, such as the Arnold Schwarzenegger
comedies (TWINS, KINDERGARTEN COP, JUNIOR).  But nothing he has
previously accomplished equals this travesty.  Hopefully, FATHERS' DAY
will be nothing more than an unpleasant memory by the time the third
Sunday in June rolls around.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Eric C. Robinette
Starring Robin Williams, Billy Crystal, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Nastassja
Kinski. Charlie Hofheimer
Written by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel Based on the film ``Les
Comperes'' by Francis Veber.
Directed by Ivan Reitman.
Why do I begin my review of Father's Day by saying that? Because it's
basically the reason I went to see the movie this weekend even after the
tepid reviews came in, and why I wrote what you're reading. I wanted to
hear McCartney's new  song "Young Boy" which I knew played over the
opening credits. It's a good thing it did, too. The lift I got from
hearing the typically jaunty McCartney melodies was about the only fun to
be had in the movie.
What's depressing about the movie  is not that the jokes are bad. Even a
bad joke can inspire laughs in a retroactive kind of way. It's that there
aren't that many of them.  Father's Day has no comic zing it; the movie
just sits there, seemingly expecting to wring laughs out of the mere sight
of Robin Williams and Billy Crystal sharing the screen Unfortunately, the
washcloth that is this movie is so dry there's nothing to wring out of it.
When I first heard the storyline, I wasn't that encouraged:  "Woman
(Nastassia Kinski) dupes former flames Williams and Crystal into believing
they are the father of her wayward son so they will both go looking for
him." It sounded like a setup for some saccharine baby boomer/male bonding
scheme, and my suspicions were proved correct.
But even that would have been okay if someone had thought to write some
jokes into the script or tell what story there is with some kind of flair.
As it is, Ivan Reitman's usually enthusiastic direction is completely
missing and is replaced by a "point the camera this way, then that way"
strategy..  Even the mild "Junior" was filmed with more pizzazz. Crystal
and Williams don't seem to be in the mood to inject the movie with their
usually boundless energy For whatever reason, they seem content to coast
on characters with chips on their shoulders and a couple of mildly amusing
traits which elicit only the occasional "heh, heh." Worst of all, it seems
like Reitman's edited out most of the moments where Crystal and Williams
improvised, which provide the only "HA-HA HAAA''S
What went wrong?  Before the movie made it's way into the theaters, the
prospect of teaming two of the funniest comic actors with a winning
writing team and director seemed like it couldn't miss.  But miss it did,
largely because, I think, usually reliable writers Lowell Ganz and Babaloo
Mandel got a serious case of the mushies.  Instead of One of the "funny"
scenes in the film is  the old "generation gap" gag.: Williams and Crystal
start moovin' and groovin' to an old Sly and the Family Stone tune so the
son shakes his head in amusment and asks them if they were "freaks." Heh-heh.
What's all the more dispiriting about all this is that this kind of male
bonding stuff can be funny, and it's not in this movie, even with all the
top-notch talent on board.. Ganz and Mandel themselves pulled it off quite
nicely in City Slickers, and even the sentimental Nine Months had it's
moments of bawdy laughs. Sigh--a movie is really disappointing when it
brings back fond memories of Tom Arnold.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Ever weepy, ex-Berkeley hippie Dale Putley (Robin Williams) has
had some exciting news.  He now has a son he never knew had.  It seems
that one romantic trip to the wine country with Colleen (Nastassja
Kinski) produced a son, whom Colleen named Scott (Charlie Hofmeimer).
     But there is a small problem which Colleen springs on Dale along
with the news that he is a father.  It seems their seventeen-year-old
has run away, and she needs Dale's help to find Scott since her husband
refuses to look for him.
     Colleen, being a generous sort, decides to share the good news
with others.  She finds hot shot lawyer Jack Lawrence (Billy Crystal)
and proudly announces that he is Scott's dad.  Oh yes, and could he go
looking for him?  With Jack's skills at head butting and groin kicking,
he is just the right person to tangle with the behemoth bouncers at the
rock concerts where Scott has become a groupie.
     Jack and Dale accidentally meet and join forces to look for their
sons before they compare pictures and realize that one of them has been
hoodwinked.
     FATHERS' DAY is a remake -- you didn't expect Hollywood to waste
time trying to generate fresh ideas, did you?  -- of the 1983 French
film LES COMPERES.  The setup for FATHERS' DAY takes place in the first
twenty minutes of the picture.  After that, they capture Scott, and
this one-joke movie is over.  The script by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo
Mandel then proceeds to tread water until the requisite feature length
movie time has elapsed.
     Besides running out of gas, the film has other problems too.
Charlie Hofmeimer, playing the central figure of the boy, gives such a
lethargic performance that it becomes hard to care what happens to him.
Neither happy nor angry, he sleepwalks through most of his part.
     Of course, people come to see FATHERS' DAY for only one reason,
the considerable comic talents of Williams and Crystal.  Williams, the
more unreliable of the two actors, does his usual shtick.  As Williams
gets older so does his routine.  As he showed in the unsuccessful movie
JACK, he seems to be losing his creativity and runs too often on
autopilot.  Although some of his routines in FATHERS' DAY are funny,
most, such as the one where he sings an ode to his intestines ("Hello,
Mr. Colon"), are lame and lackluster.  Williams has a single character
now, and he recasts his role in every movie so he can do it again.
     Crystal, whom I normally love, is not given much to work with.
Although he does have a good line every now and then, he has less jokes
in the entire movie than in his opening monologue at the Oscars.
     Perhaps the real surprise of the movie is Nastassja Kinski's
return to a significant, albeit small, part in a major American movie.
Lacking the raw sexuality she evidenced in CAT PEOPLE, she now has
become a radiantly beautiful middle-aged woman.  Her part in FATHERS'
DAY is just enough to make you want to see her cast in a more
substantial role.  (Even more surprising perhaps is Mel Gibson's
uncredited cameo as a walking ad for body piercing.)
     Producer and director Ivan Reitman (KINDERGARTEN COP, DAVE, and
JUNIOR) generally has a deft touch when it comes to comedy, but his
FATHERS' DAY manages only sporadic bits of humor.  If there weren't so
many funnier shows in current release, it might be worth recommending,
but as it is, you are better off waiting to rent it so you can fast
forward to the few funny parts.
     FATHERS' DAY runs a long 1:41.  It is rated PG-13 for sexuality
and profanity and would be fine for kids say 9 or 10 and up.  I cannot
recommend the film, but will give it ** for a few good laughs.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     What are the odds that the two would-be fathers of one woman's son
would be two of the biggest comedians of the screen today!?  Well,
they're pretty good if you see FATHERS' DAY, yet another Ivan Reitman
(BEETHOVEN, TWINS, KINDERGARTEN COP, et. al.) film that is so
disgustingly sweet you'll want to spit out your jujubes.  Billy Crystal
and Robin Williams play the titular fathers, out to rescue the missing
son they never knew they had.  (Plot Simplified: Nastassja Kinski was a
stonkingly huge slut and doesn't know who daddy is.)
     For all its saccharine heavy-handedness, FATHERS' DAY does manage
to come across as one of Reitman's better efforts in recent years, but
the by-the-Hollywood-book formula, structure, and pacing really bog down
the production.  There's plenty of missed comic opportunities, but
plenty that hit dead-on -- especially a notable, heavily-pierced cameo
(watch for it!).  And yes, the estranged son looks exactly like me.  A
1/4 star bonus for that.
     And yes, I'm sick of *writing* mediocre reviews, too.
-Christopher Null  /  null@poboxes.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Steve Kong
Pairing up Robin Williams and Billy Crystal for a movie sounds too good to be 
true. These two men, alone, are hilarious, how hysterical can they get if they 
are together? In Ivan Reitman's film, Father's Day, they don't get hysterical. 
They hardly make the audience laugh. I walked into the theatre with images 
from the commercials in my mind. And in the commercials, these two are 
hysterical.
In Father's Day, two men (Williams and Crystal) are called upon by a former 
romance to find a missing kid. The spin to this is that, the kid could belong 
to either one of them. The kid has run away from home, and his mother, because 
of an argument with his "father" (played by Bruce Greenwood). He has run away 
with a group of teenagers who are groupies following a band around the 
country. After waiting for Greenwood's character to chase down the kid, the 
mother resorts to lying to both Williams and Crystal, telling them that they 
are the fathers, in order to find the kid. Crystal's character lives in L.A. 
and Williams character lives in San Francisco, so there would be no problem 
there. They would never run into each other, or so the mother thinks. 
Crystal's character is a lawyer and just happens to have a client in San 
Francisco. It is here that he meets up with Williams. Unknowingly to either of 
them, they both go hunting for the kid together. This is where the fun is 
supposed to start. But it doesn't.
Now, back to the images from the commercials. If you've seen the commercial 
and laughed out loud at some of them, you've laughed at most of what there is 
to laugh at in the movie. The clips from the commercials, strangely enough, 
work very well in the commercials. But when you do see them on the screen they 
fall flat.
Stay away from this film. It's not funny at all, and I think that the studio 
executives relied mostly on big names to draw the audience into the theatre. 
How could you resist a film from Ivan Reitman (Ghostbusters) starring both 
Robin Williams and Billy Crystal? Don't fall for it. Save your money, and 
maybe catch this one on video.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) FATHER'S DAY has nothing new to add to the world of
film comedy. Robin Williams and Billy Crystal are funny, but not
memorably so. In short, this is a perfect example of a flat,
take-it-or-leave-it, 2-1/2 star movie.
Williams plays Dale Putley (oops, just gave away one of the jokes), an
unpublished writer of poems and plays on the verge of suicide. It is
impossible to imagine any character played by the animated Williams
committing suicide, but we need to know that Dale is a quirky loser.
This is a very good character type for Williams, if a little restrictive
for his style, and it allows him some funny dialog.
Crystal plays Jack Lawrence, an uptight lawyer on his third wife. This
is a very good role for Crystal. He usually plays a whiny east coast
Jew, (which I always think I will find annoying, but usually end up
liking), and this role suits him perfectly.
Seventeen years ago, both Dale and Jack had a fling with the same woman,
Collette (Nastassja Kinsky). Now, she tells them each (separately) that
he is the father of her son Scott (Charlie Hofheimer). Not only that,
but Scott has run away and she needs help tracking him down. Each,
separately, agrees to go in search of his long lost son.
Dale and Jack eventually meet and team up to find Scott.
For the most part, FATHER'S DAY is an extended comedy sketch. If you
know Robin Williams and Billy Crystal, then you already know what this
movie is going to be like. There are very few surprises, which in this
case, is not necessarily bad. Perhaps the only scene that really stands
out in the movie's favor is a brief cameo of a well-known action movie
star as a Pierced Wonder (nose rings, eyebrow rings, etc.).
There are also some scenes which make this movie A Movie, and not pure
comedy. Frankly, the movie would have been better off without them. The
first scene is one of the few in which Williams is given some room to
maneuver. Unfortunately, it comes off as an old trick reaching for
insincere laughs. It is a montage of Williams practicing the phrase "I'm
your dad" in the mirror in several different voices and costumes. This
is the stuff Williams is good at, but it comes right after his character
tried to commit suicide. Is Williams playing the quirky loser Dale or is
Williams playing himself? This scene says that the filmmakers don't
really care.
The other scene(s) that should have been left out involved two
caricatured drug dealters hunting down Scott. The conflict of a runaway
teen and the question of paternity was all the conflict this movie
needed. Introducing the conflict of the drug dealers detracted from the
everyday human quality that the other conflicts brought to the movie.
I did laugh. Williams and Crystal can make almost always make me laugh.
But there is nothing in FATHER'S DAY that you can't find better
somewhere else.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Michael Redman
This film has just about everything going for it. Writers Lowell Ganz
and Babaloo Mandel are responsible for two of the wittiest comedies of
recent years:  "City Slickers" and "Parenthood". Producer/director Ivan
Reitman has "Ghostbusters" to his credit. Some of the supporting cast
are well respected (Nastassja Kinski, Julia Louis-Dreyfus of "Seinfeld"
fame). It's a nice touch that a film entitled "Father's Day" is released
on Mother's Day weekend.
But the real reason that it looks great is the inspired teaming of Robin
Williams and Billy Crystal, two of the top comedic actors working today.
You can easily imagine them bouncing off of each other with quips and ad
libs and movie-goers want to get in on some of the fun. The scene in the
previews where Crystal is trying to explain who Lou Gehrig is ("The guy
who died of Lou Gehrig's Disease." "Wow! What are the odds of that?") is
inspired.
Based on the 1984 French "Les Comperes", the movie is an odd couple
buddy road trip film. Happily married Collette (Kinski) is disparate to
find her runaway 16 year old son. Being a friendly sort 17 years ago,
she knew both Jack (Crystal) and Dale (Williams) in the Biblical sense.
Calling and telling each of them that they are the father of her son,
she begs them to find him.
Of course both of the fathers accidentally discover the other and pair
up to find missing Scott (Charlie Hofheimer). Their journey takes them
from a tough auto repair shop to a tough rock tour via encounters with
tough drug dealers.
Jack is a sophisticated LA lawyer with a talent for head-butting. Dale,
a San Francisco poet with a history of suicide attempts, bursts into
tears at the slightest provocation. Both actors are perfectly suited to
their roles and pull them off with style.
It just doesn't work. The story is old hat. Most of the shticks have
been done before and often. The middle-aged man at a rock concert was
funnier on the "Simpsons". With a few exceptions, the jokes fall flat on
their faces even though Crystal and Williams do their best to grab them
out of the muck.
Part of the problem is that Hofheimer is remarkably uninspiring as the
16-year-old with too many hormones and too little money. Kinski is
adequate but nothing special as she exhibits none of the steaming
sexuality that has always been her forte and could have been used in a
role that is defined by her irresistibility. Louis-Dreyfus does better
with Jerry, George and Kramer or perhaps she needs a project with
genuinely humorous moments.
Crystal and Williams __must__ have been a hoot on the set, but
unfortunately there's not much evidence of that on the screen. There are
a few times where their chemistry shows through the mess and those
meager minutes are what saves the film from being a total waste of time.
The hotel shower scene is occasionally hilarious, but you've seen it
before. I get the feeling that the better movie was left on the cutting
room floor as outtakes.
If this were ranked on a "Living Up To Potential" scale, it would rate a
Zero. 
[This appeared in the 5/19/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Robin Williams, Billy Crystal, Charlie Hofheimer, Bruce Greenwood,
Nastassja Kinski, Julia Louis-Dreyfus Director: Ivan Reitman Screenplay:
Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel, based on the film LES COMPERES by
Francis Veber
I like presents. There is nothing quite like the feel of wrapping paper
ripping beneath your finger tips, and hearing the edges tear at the same
time. So I was pleasantly surprised by this particular 'Father's Day'
offering. Expecting to find some recycled, thoughtless gift beneath the
pretence of some pretty wrapping paper with the names 'Williams and
Crystal together for the first time' written all over it; instead I
found a decent, amusing, thoughtful pairing.
In this package of unusual goods, we have contained 'three fathers with
a teenage baby', and in the card a single question from the mother
(Natasha Kinski). Who is this baby's father?
Our options are the manic depressive, effervescent one minute, tearful
the next, failed playwright (Williams). Who is compassionate, but lacks
any direction in life. Then there is the smart talking, head butting,
sensible, no nonsense lawyer (Crystal). Who wants to have kids, but has
great reservations because of the heavy responsibility of child bearing.
Lastly, we have the usual regular, round the mill, responsible 'I can't
understand my son', 'how do I break through to him', 'struggling to
reach out' father (Greenwood). Who wants the best for his son, but
doesn't quite know how to express his feelings of love for his son.
Now if I had a choice, I would probably choose the best qualities of all
three fathers - fun but not frivolous, sensible but not stern, reliable
but not restrictive. In truth it takes all three of these very different
fathers to reach out to this very confused, lost prodigal son, who has
been waylaid by the wayward temptations of this world. Namely, drugs,
alcohol and untrue friends. This movie brings a positive message to all
fathers who have difficult teenage children, the reminder given is never
give up on them no matter how lost they have become.
Ivan Reitman has done a good job in controlling the talents that are
Williams and Crystal. My greatest preconceived fear before watching this
movie, was that these comic talents would be trying to out funny, or out
perform the other; but instead I have found a good rapport and mutual
respect develop between these two actors, who have fairly distributed
the humour between them. Was there electrifying chemistry? Probably not,
but friendship, self control, and a good understanding of timing under
the umbrella of sensitive direction is all that is required to make this
movie work.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     FATHER'S DAY is an unfunny, unmoving sentimental comedy, about two
middle-aged men (Robin Williams and Billy Crystal) who team up to find a
17-year-old runaway who may or may not be one or the other's son.  For-
get the missing jokes, or the glaring lack of sympathetic characters, or
the wasted talents of two talented comedians, or the throwaway role for 
Julia Louis-Dreyfus.  Most stupefying is the premise itself:  we are to
believe that a happily married woman (Natassia Kinski) has no other re-
course than to contact her decades-since-seen lovers?  I mean, her
husband is already on the case.  Doesn't she have any friends or family
who can also assist?  Idiotic.  Directed by Ivan Reitman and written by
Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel, all of whom can do (and have done)
better.

Author
Michael Dequina
Fathers' Day (PG-13) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
Robin Williams and Billy Crystal are both funny men in their own
right, and as such one would expect their first big-screen pairing, Fathers'
Day, to be just as funny, if not funnier, than their solo film efforts.
Alas, the whole is definitely not greater than the sum of its parts, for
Ivan Reitman's family comedy, as amusing as it is, never reaches the
expected heights of hilarity.
The underachievement of Fathers' Day does not have so much to do
with the performers involved than the material.  The film is based on the
1983 French comedy Les Comperes, starring Gerard Depardieu and Pierre
Richard, a blah, often labored farce which I was not terribly impressed with
when I saw it way back in 9th grade French class.  Screenwriters Lowell Ganz
and Babaloo Mandel follow the original fairly closely, but their take on the
story is a bit more successful.   In adapting the first film, they have
duplicated the original knotty premise--two men (Williams and Crystal) are
duped into searching for a former lover's (Nastassja Kinski) runaway son
(Charlie Hofheimer) after she falsely tells both that the child is their
own--while adding some flourishes tailor-made for these two stars.
Williams, stepping in for the bumbling Richard, is a complete nutjob,
suicidal and prone to weeping at the drop of a hat; Crystal, assuming
Depardieu's tough guy part, is more of a dry, sarcastic, no-nonsense type
who just happens to do a mean headbutt.  These modifications in place, the
two settle into their roles quite nicely and put some bite into the
sometimes cloying material.
While the two snugly fit into their individual roles, Williams and
Crystal do not quite catch fire as a team.  There are laughs to be had in
Fathers' Day, but instead of generating from the duo's interaction with each
other--the sign of a good comic team--the big laughs come courtesy from only
one half of the pair: Williams.  Granted, Williams's manic, go-for-broke
comic energy steamrolls everyone and everything around him, and broader
schtick always upstages the more subtle stabs at humor.  But Crystal, so
clearly in his element with this role, is surprisingly unable to hold his
own.  Ganz and Mandel give him a stinging remark to deliver here and there,
but as a whole he is strangely passive.  Just as passive is enormously
gifted Seinfeld Emmy winner Julia Louis-Dreyfus as Crystal's wife.  The
small size of her role would not have been such an annoyance if she were
given a chance to display her vast comic talents, but she is totally wasted
in this thankless, completely straight role.
None of what I say will likely keep Fathers' Day from becoming an
early summer hit.  It has two popular stars; it does have its moments; and
you can take the kiddies.  Those three things may be enough to satisfy most
mainstream moviegoers, but anyone expecting one and one to equal two will be
disappointed--the end result is more like one times one than one plus one.


Author
Ben Hoffman
There are few productions that are more risky than taking a perfectly
good movie and doing a remake.   How do you improve on a movie that is
just about perfect . . . and why would you want to do that?     In this
case, the film was a subtitled French comedy that despite  raves from
audiences and critics played only in  art-houses for no other reason
than that subtitles are anathema to American audiences.    To insure
that this remake will not be a fiasco, some  heavy professionals were
brought in:  the director, the screenwriters and the cast.  Needless to
add, the movie is hilarious, a worthy successor to Les Comperes which
starred, in 1984, Pierre Richard and Gerard Depardieu.
This time around the film is called  FATHERS' DAY.   Several of the
gags in the original film are used again  such as the head-banging.
The story, with but few exceptions, remains the same.   In Les
Comperes,  (The Godfathers) Depardieu's role was that of a journalist
with some Mafia-types after him.   Here, Jack  (Billy Crystal), is a
well-to-do lawyer.
The story is of a married woman, Collette Andrews (Nastassja Kinski)
whose 16-year-old son. Scott (Charlie Hofheimer) has run away from
home.   When Collette feels that her husband, Bob, (Bruce Greenwood, is
not up to the task of finding their son, she embarks on her own.  First
she visits an old boyfriend, Jack, to enlist his aid in looking for her
son. Jack asks why, after 17 years of their not having seen each other
does she suddenly think of him as someone who would help her.  "Because
you are his father."  She explains that when last they saw each other
she was pregnant but did not tell him.  He asks if she has a picture of
the son;  she shows him a photo. Examining it, offhand he sees no
resemblance.  Collette tells him that when Scott smiles, you can see
the resemblance.   "Do you have a photo of him smiling? " he asks
her.   That funny line was also in the original film.
Feeling that Jack is probably not going to help her, she goes to the
home of Dale with whom she spent some sack time  in Berkeley, also 17
years ago.  Same routine: "because you are his father."    A very funny
bit (also in the original) is Dale about to commit suicide, a gun in
his mouth when the phone rings.  He talks with the gun in his mouth.
Dale is a "nebbish" for whom nothing ever went right.  He has all kinds
of phobias, cries easily and has a few suicide failures.     But
hearing that he has a son, he is delighted and asks no hard questions.
Yes,  he will be very happy to search for his son.
Then begins the search which includes visiting the father of the girl
with whom Scott ran away. Then visiting the girl's mother.  Each of
these adventures is very, very funny as only a one-two punch such as
Robin Williams and Billy Crystal, good friends in real life, can
deliver.   They work extremely well together to make this a most
enjoyable film. When you also have the two funniest screenwriters,
Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel who together wrote Night Shift, Splash,
Spies Like us, Parenthood, City Slicker I and II, A League of Their
Own, Greedy, Mr. Saturday Night  . and more, you cannot miss.
Julia Louis-Dreyfus, who is best known for starring  on the Seinfeld
show on TV, has a rather small part as Jack's wife.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Robin Williams, Billy Crystal, Julia Louis-Dreyfuss, Charlie
Hofheimer, Nastassja Kinski, Bruce Greenwood.
Screenplay:  Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel, based on LES COMPERES by
Francis Veber.
Producers:  Ivan Reitman and Joel Silver.
Director:  Ivan Reitman.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  101 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I don't even need to have seen the infotainment show interviews of
Billy Crystal and Robin Williams to know the substance of them.  "Well,"
Billy/Robin would say, "Robin/Billy and I have been looking for a long
time for a project where we could work together, and FATHERS' DAY seemed
like the perfect opportunity."  "Yeah," Robin/Billy would then chime in,
"we had a great time making it."  Whereupon would ensue much good-natured
riffing between the two, guaranteed to have the hosts chuckling merrily as
we returned to the studio.  For those uninitiated in promo-speak, allow me
to provide a translation.  The real plot of FATHERS' DAY has nothing to
do with two men -- attorney Jack Lawrence (Crystal) and struggling
writer/performer Dale Putley (Williams) -- who are both told by the same
ex-lover (Nastassja Kinski) that one of them is the father of her runaway
17-year-old son Scott (Charlie Hofheimer).  The real plot of FATHERS' DAY
is Robin Williams and Billy Crystal running around being Robin Williams
and Billy Crystal.
    That plot shouldn't have been too hard to pull off.  Crystal and
Williams are funny, talented men, and the screenwriting team of Lowell
Ganz and Babaloo Mandel has produced charmers like SPLASH, PARENTHOOD and
CITY SLICKERS.  FATHERS' DAY, however, isn't merely disappointing.  It is
one of the laziest and most ineptly constructed comedies of the decade.  I
spent 101 minutes staring at a screen in blank-faced astonishment, waiting
for this group of talented people to show me something remotely
entertaining.  I wanted someone, anyone, to explain to me what in God's
name they were thinking when they set this beast in motion.
     Of course, I knew the answer to that question.  They were thinking
that they had Robin Williams and Billy Crystal, and that everything else
would just sort itself out.  FATHERS' DAY is filled with scenes where it
looked like the script consisted of the phrase "Robin does something crazy
here."  You can see it when Williams tries out different ways to greet his
new-found son; you can see it when Williams pretends to be a German record
producer for the express purpose of rattling off a string of car names in
a funny accent.  It is the rare film which has made good use of Williams'
improvisational skills -- GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM comes to mind.  More
frequently, a careless creative team like this one will use Williams as a
comedic "In-a-Gadda-Da-Vida" drum solo, filling time between "Fade In" and
"Fade Out."  Without a structure to contain him, Robin Williams becomes a
train just looking for a place to jump the tracks.
     Crystal isn't even _that_ lucky, consigned with the rest of the cast
to picking up whatever scraps Williams leaves behind.  He plays the Felix
Unger in this odd couple road show, maintaining the same vaguely perturbed
expression for roughly the entire film.  You might think FATHERS' DAY
would be built around the conflict between the opposing personalities of
the two leads -- Crystal as the uptight lawyer and Williams as the
unhinged creative type -- but you'd be wrong.  Williams and Crystal hardly
raise their voices to one another, perhaps fearing that the audience only
wants to see them as funny chums.  The film is so desperate for some kind
of conflict that it drags in a couple of drug dealers, as well as Scott's
_other_ father (Bruce Greenwood).  Respectively, they provide the
opportunity to watch a mosh pit full of head-butting and a Port-a-Potty
sliding down a hillside.  Thanks for coming.
     Most critics tend to reserve their greatest outrage for films
featuring Pauly Shore, Chris Farley or even Jim Carrey, perhaps believing
that moronic physical comedy is what's wrong with modern film-making.  I
consider FATHERS' DAY more contemptible by far.  Whatever else one might
think about Farley or Carrey, they give everything they've got to a role.
No one involved in FATHERS' DAY even seems to be trying.  The performances
are lifeless, the plot incorporates that over-used trope of the workaholic
who gets religion about family life, and the dialogue is so devoid of
creativity that it re-cycles a gag about the odds of Lou Gehrig dying of
Lou Gehrig's Disease (comparative stories about how long ago you first
heard that one mailed to this address, please).  I'm sure the stars had a
wonderful time making FATHERS' DAY, just like Burt Reynolds, Dom DeLuise
and company had a wonderful time making those CANNONBALL RUN movies.  As
the credits started to role, I began to hope that FATHERS' DAY would
include out-takes, something to justify my time.  They also would have
provided a fitting post-card coda for a film which amounts to a working
vacation for Robin Williams and Billy Crystal at our expense:  "Having a
good time -- glad you were there."
