Title
Review for Abre los ojos (1997)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
in Spanish with English subtitles
an Artisan Films release
starring Eduardo Noriega, Penelope Cruz, Chete Lera, Fele Martinez,
Gerard Barray, Pepe Navarro, Najwa Nimri
written by Alejandro Amenabar and Mateo Gil
directed by Alejandro Amenabar
As anyone who has seen The Matrix and eXistenZ knows, this year we
have has an abundance of exceptional science-fiction films. I am not a
very big sci-fi fan, but as the year 2000 approaches, these films have
begun to fascinate me immensely.
The latest entry into the genre, Alejandro Amenabar's psychological
thriller Open Your Eyes, suffers from bad timing. While the film is
indeed very good, I have seen it shortly after two very similar
films(look in the first paragraph), and the originality doesn't strike
me nearly as much as it could have.
Open Your Eyes is the story of Cesar(Eduardo Noriega), a young,
handsome, wealthy Spanish man who finds himself accused of a murder
which he is sure he didn't commit(If you think this sounds like Dark
City, you're not the only one. Infact, the first scene of Open Your
Eyes, a dream sequence, shows Cesar waking up, going outside, and
realizing that there is no one on the streets). As he is interrogated
by a prison psychologist(Chete Lera), we, through the eyes of Cesar,
try to figure out exactly what happened.
Cesar decides to throw a party at his house, and his best friend
Pelayo(Fele Martinez) brings with him Sofia(Penelope Cruz), a
beautiful woman whom he met in the library.  Cesar falls instantly in
love, and he ends up taking her back to her home after the party.
After a night of chatting, they agree to meet again the next day. But
as Cesar walks outside, his lusty mistress, Nuria(Najwa Nimri), drives
by in her car, and begs him to join her for one last rendezvous.  He
gets in the car, and she ends up driving off the side of the road and
hitting a tree, killing herself and completely wrecking Cesar's face.
>From then on, the film goes through many, many twists as Cesar tries
to figure out what the hell is going on. There is a line in this
year's extraordinary The Matrix in which Morpheus(Laurence Fishburne)
asks: "Have you ever had a dream that you're so sure was real?  What
if you were unable to wake from that dream? How would you tell the
difference between the dream world, and the real world?"
Open Your Eyes is essentially about our dreams, and the tricks that
our subconscious plays on us.  While the film is clever and
psychological, it is not as fun or stylish as The Matrix and eXistenZ.
Open Your Eyes is definitely worthy of an audience, as long as they're
not expecting the flash of the others. I'm sure I would have enjoyed
this film more had I seen it earlier, though.
Regardless, Alejandro Amenabar is a smashing new talent, and this film
was a hit in it's native Spain.  Penelope Cruz, who made her American
debut in last year's embarrasing The Hi-Lo Country, shows depth as
well as beauty, and hopefully her appeal will cross over to
America. Open Your Eyes is an incredible movie, and if this is not one
of the new sci/fi genre's best, then the genre's gonna thrive for a
long while. Once again, congrats to Artisan Films, quickly becoming
one of best distributors in film today.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST


Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Alejandro Amenabar
Cast: Eduardo Noriega, Penelope Cruz, Chete Lera, Fele Martinez, Gerard
Barray, Pepe Navarro
Screenplay: Alejandro Amenabar, Mateo Gil
Producers: Fernando Bovaira, Jose Luis Cuerda
Runtime: 117 min.
US Distribution: Artisan Entertainment
Rated R: Language, sex, violence
Copyright 1999 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
        In order to avoid spoiling the film, I can say almost nothing about the
twisted story behind Alejandro Amenabar's Open Your Eyes, a
psychological thriller unlike any I've ever seen.  The film is a
convoluted and fast-paced journey into the nightmare-like madness of a
Spanish man (Eduardo Noriega).  With each twist of the plot, the film
becomes increasingly interesting and profound.  The performances are
wonderful, with a standout presence from Noriega.  But what really makes
Open Your Eyes a unique experience is Amenabar's attitude towards his
film:  he avoids pretensions and overwrought preaching, and goes
straight for philosophical depth.  Open Your Eyes could have been a
ludicrously confusing film, but instead turns out to be an unforgettable
and intense expedition into the world of dreams.  

Author
Steve Rhodes
The rich and incredibly handsome playboy César (Eduardo Noriega) has
been horribly disfigured in a car accident.
To make his nightmare worse, he's been accused of murdering his
ex-girlfriend, Nuria (Najwa Nimri), a sexual predator straight out of
FATAL ATTRACTION.  Not only does he believe that he didn't murder her,
he has recently been confused by her claims that she is really his new
girlfriend, Sofía.  He knows and loves Sofía (Penélope Cruz), and she
doesn't look anything like Nuria.  Even his best friend, Pelayo (Fele
Martínez from THE LOVERS OF THE ARCTIC CIRCLE), doesn't believe him.
It is even suggested that César isn't disfigured at all.  Perhaps, he's
told, he's like those anorexic teenage girls who just think they're fat.
Welcome to the Escher world of writer and director Alejandro Amenábar's
OPEN YOUR EYES (ABRE LOS OJOS), a movie that delights in playing tricks
with our minds.  Dreams within dreams within dreams are some of its more
straightforward stratagems.  More baroque is the layering of cryogenics
onto virtual reality in this MASK meets THE TRUMAN SHOW meets EXISTENZ.
As a purposely-confusing mind game of what's real and what's a mirage,
the story has an undeniable attraction.  Like trying to finish the
Sunday crossword puzzle before your spouse, you're likely to stay glued
to the screen.  But when it's over, you won't have much more to take
away than the puzzle's solution.  The characters act like disconnected
figures in a video game.  They run through their lines as fast as they
can but never connect with each other.
The screenplay uses sexually charged settings to establish the story and
then lets it get bogged down with long discussions between César and his
prison psychiatrist, Antonio (Chete Lera).  The latter character should
have been eliminated entirely.
With its richly textured music and its striking cinematography, the
movie is a feast for the ears and eyes.  As the story drags and turns
increasingly bizarre, its handsome production makes up for many of its
shortfalls.  Never a bad movie, it's more of a near miss, unlike the
other recent Spanish film, THE LOVERS OF THE ARCTIC CIRCLE, which is
nearly perfect.  Both films play games with reality and time sequences.
César's experiences are just "one of those Candid Camera jokes,"
Antonio suggests.  Perhaps.
When they finally reveal the Big Secret in the end, you're liable to
just shake your head -- both because it's so ludicrous and because you
can easily and correctly write the epilogue.  The latter is so obvious
as to be trite.
OPEN YOUR EYES runs too long at 1:50.  The film is in rapid fire Spanish
with English subtitles.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, profanity and
violence and would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jonathan Richards
     "Open Your Eyes" is the picture Alfred Hitchcock might have made
if he were very young and Spanish and in film school today.  It's a
twisty, multi- leveled succession of screens and masks (literally and
figuratively) that takes on identity and reality with all the earnest
passion of a late-night bull session among college kids who are
flirting with the idea of switching majors to Philosophy.
Eduardo Noriega is Cesar, a young Lothario who makes it a point
of honor never to sleep with the same woman twice, until he meets his
best friend's new girl Sofia (Penelope Cruz of "The Hi-Lo Country")
and falls madly in love.  Unfortunately, his wild oats have sown a
bitter harvest with Nuria (Najwa Nimri), a recent one-night stand who
is so obstinate about trying to keep him that she drives her car off a
cliff, killing herself and horribly disfiguring his once-pretty face.
As time and reality scramble, we find Cesar scrunched on the
floor of a cell in a psychiatric prison wearing a mask to conceal his
deformed face and amnesia to conceal who it is he's killed (and why
and how), while his doctor (Chete Lera) tries to peel away these
coverings.  We go back to pick up key moments of the story, some of
them obviously dreams, some of them apparently real, with the
distinction becoming more and more blurred.
The 27-year-old tyro Amenabar has the talent to dress his story
up handsomely and twirl it with dazzling flourishes, but his
immaturity shows through and becomes more and more pronounced as he
reels toward the finish line.  Masks play a big part in his legend,
and he's partial to repeated lines of dialogue ("Can't you tell dreams
from reality?") that resonate with meaning.  Cryonics also play a big
part, to fuzz the line between life and death just as dreams and
reality are confounded and confused.
The Hitchcock thing is a conscious embrace -- an homage, you
would say, that Amenabar overtly acknowledges when at the end his hero
is teetering on the ledge of a skyscraper and says "I forgot, I get
vertigo."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Artisan Entertainment
 Director:  Alejandro Amenabar
 Writer:  Alejandro Amenabar
 Cast: Eduardo Noriega, Penelope Cruz, Chete Lera, Fele
Martinez, Gerard Barray, Pepe Navarro, Najwa Nimri
   Patrick Henry once said that it is natural for man to indulge
in illusions.  Our mere attendance at the cinema is proof of
that.  While we know, deep down, that what we are seeing on
the screen is only a movie, we suspend reality and for a
couple of hours we are the great lovers, the heroes that
saved the day, the perfectly proportioned and handsome
celebrities.  Happily we don't need to patronize the theater or
even read a book to enjoy these fantasies.  We can
daydream during those painfully dull parts of the day that find
us engaged in routine work, and conjure up a host of spirits
during our nights of rest.  But what happens when those
gauzy fantasies turn into nightmares: when our comely looks
turn into a gory countenance, our favorite lover turns into a
person we have tried to avoid, and we're sent hurtling into a
Kafkaesque predicament which finds us guilty of crimes we
have no recollection of having committed?  With the special
effects technology now available even to low budget
productions and given the unfettered imagination of an
ambitious director, our screen characters can change
appearance and personality in a moment.  Brad Pitt can turn
into The Phantom of the Opera with the stroke of a computer
key, while Disneyland can be transformed into Dark City in a
flash of directorial inspiration.  
   The Spanish director Alejandro Amenabar eagerly exploits
the medium's protean abilities in "Open Your Eyes."  He
follows up his first feature, "Tesis," with a bizarre tale of one
26-year-old man's nightmarish experience in his home city of
Madrid, one which transforms his life to a greater extent in a
period of weeks than the vast majority of us have
experienced in a lifetime.  The picture is audacious, though
not as original in concept as Amenabar may realize.  What is
particularly noteworthy is that the director, ingeniously casting
a flurry of images on the screen from a script co-written by
Mateo Gil, has successfully transformed genres at breakneck
speed from romance to sci-fi to horror, keeping us guessing
for most of its two-hour duration about the way the enigma
will be resolved.
   The focus remains throughout on the handsome, self-
centered Cesar (Eduardo Noriega), whose amoral character
leads him to betray his best friend when such a deception
suits his needs and whose ego will not permit him to sleep
with the same woman twice.  Obsessively pursued by the
passionate Nuria (Najwa Nimri), he is immediately captivated
by the cooler Sofia (Penelope Cruz), currently dating his best
pal, Pelayo (Fele Martinez).  When Sofia tentatively responds
to his flirtations, the jealous Nuria reacts viciously.  Inviting
Cesar for one last ride in her car, Nuria floors the accelerator
and, deliberately plunging off a cliff, she kills herself and
grossly disfigures Cesar's face.  
   Like Gaston Leroux's Phantom of the Opera, Cesar must
hide his face behind a mask, having discovered to no one's
surprise that Sofia no longer bears the same feeling toward
him that she had the first time around.  When plastic
surgeons inform him that a new procedure will allow them to
restore his original good looks, he can scarcely believe his
good fortune.  But shortly after he recovers his comely
features under a dazzling array of futuristic machinery, he
begins to suspect that what he sees is not necessarily what
exists.
   Amenabar delivers spine-tingling tension at select points in
the drama, particularly when the good-looking Cesar looks in
the mirror only to discover that his maimed visage has
returned, and especially in one stark moment of horror when
the woman with whom he is making love turns into the
person he has tried to elude and who is thought to have died
in the crash.  While "Open Your Eyes" deals throughout with
life's dualities--with the gap between appearance and reality
and our inability to grasp thoroughly what goes on in the
minds of others--its principal appeal lies in its enigma.  We
are challenged by the writers and director to figure out
exactly what is going on; to determine who is the real Cesar
and who is the actual Sofia.  In that regard it shares the
stage with the most puzzling movie of David Lynch's output,
his 1997 "Lost Highway," about a jazz musician who believes
his wife is having an affair and suddenly finds himself the
main suspect in a murder he has no recollection of
committing.  While Lynch's plot is as baffling as ever two
years after its initial screening, "Open Your Eyes" seems to
reveal The Answer in the final seconds.  Therein lies its
major flaw.  We in the audience sit upright, perplexed about
the cloudy visions which are tossed before our eyes,
assessing that all will be clarified in the concluding scene. 
When the big payoff does finally arrive, we cannot help
feeling let down by the film's copout.  While Amenabar might
have unravelled the many quandaries of the picture in a more
intriguing and clever manner, he takes the easiest way out.
   Nonetheless "Open Your Eyes" is well acted by a primarily
young cast headed by Eduardo Noriega and possesses
several particularly bold images that take good advantage of
the qualities of the medium.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
An eclectic mix of The Matrix, The Game and Groundhog's Day, this
Spanish import was the winner of the Grand Prix award at the Tokyo
International Film Festival.  And if you've seen any Japanese
psychological thrillers lately, you'll know exactly why.
Director Alejandro Amenábar, who co-wrote the script with Mateo Gil,
casts Eduardo Noriega as César, a handsome, well-to-do bachelor that
prides himself on never bedding the same girl twice.  That is, until he
meets Sofía (Penélope Cruz, The Hi-Lo Country).  The trouble is that his
previous conquest, Nuria (Najwa Nimri, Lovers of the Arctic Circle) is a
bit of a wacko, continually stalking César and eventually disfiguring
his pretty-boy face in an automobile accident/suicide attempt.
But is any of it real?  César repeatedly wakes up to a world that is
slightly different than that of the previous day.  Was there really an
accident?  Is there really a Sofía?  Were doctors really able to
reconstruct César's face?  You'll have to see it to find out, and even
then you may not even know.  It's tough to follow and the subtitles
don't help.  But it is sufficiently strange to whet this boy's
appetite.  (1:50 - R for nudity, strong sexuality, language and some
violence  In Spanish with English subtitles)

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Cornerhouse (Manchester)
Released in the UK by Redbus on February 25, 2000; certificate 15; 119 
minutes; country of origin Spain; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Alejandro Amenábar; produced by Fernando Bovaira, José Luis 
Cuerda.
Written by Alejandro Amenábar, Mateo Gill.
Photographed by Hans Burmann; edited by Maria Elena Sainz de Rozas.
Being tickled is horrible as well as enjoyable, but worth it for that moment 
of relief when the tickler finally stops. Alejandro Amenábar's "Open Your 
Eyes" is like that. The film involves us in one man's private hell, as his 
life falls apart and his understanding of why keeps lessening; but by the 
time it's over, and he gets an answer, we're so glad to stop holding our 
breath we leave grinning.
It's hard to describe the film's premise without spoiling any surprises. 
Eduardo Noriega plays César, who we first meet in a high-security psychiatric 
facility, trying to convince a psychiatrist that he is not guilty of whatever 
crime he's been accused of, and telling the doctor all he remembers of recent 
months. César was a promiscuous cad, we learn, who was involved in a car 
accident which left him horribly disfigured and bitterly angry.
His vile temper strained his friendships with best buddy Pelayo (Fele 
Martínez) and love interest Sofía (Penélope Cruz), until, César remembers, 
plastic surgeons managed to repair his face. His life started to get better, 
but then he suffered memory loss, saw people's faces change into those of 
others, and experienced various other weird happenings.
What was, and is, going on? Is César mad, or is somebody playing an elaborate 
prank? Is anything real? And of what significance is the cryptic Mr. 
Duvernois (Gérard Barray)? "Open Your Eyes", originally titled "Abre Los 
Ojos", involves and entangles us with these urgent questions until we DEMAND 
an explanation. It's been quite a while since I've seen a movie mystery, but 
this is clearly a good one.
Amenábar, the director, occasionally takes us inside César's dreams, but 
mostly relies on the screenplay's drama to be surreal enough, shooting his 
picture without a lot of flashy tricks. This is a good tactic, because it 
draws us in more realistically than a film like "The Matrix", which was more 
fun for style than story.
The performances, too, walk the line between the mundane and the strange. 
Noriega, Cruz, Martínez and Najwa Nimri speak and carry themselves fast and 
slow, confidently and cautiously. It's odd, and yet not odd, and certainly 
hard to describe... I guess it's intended that way.
"Open Your Eyes" is better than "The Sixth Sense", another recent film with 
an odd feel and surprise ending, which got great reviews, huge revenues and 
six Oscar nominations. I thought that movie was a con, purporting to be about 
one thing, making us wait for that thing's payoff, then pulling a stupid 
trick out of its hat with the hope of dazzling us. "Open Your Eyes", from 
very early on, takes unexpected turns, makes seemingly impossible twists and 
draws us into a confusing puzzle. When we realise what the score is, and 
everything slots into place, it's exactly what we've been waiting for.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Dennis Schwartz

OPEN YOUR EYES (ABRE LOS OJOS)(director/writer:Alejando Amenabar;
screenwriter: Mateo Gil; cinematography: Hans Burmann; cast: Eduardo
Noriega (Cesar), Penelope Cruz (Sofia), Fele Martinez (Pelayo), Najwa
Nimri (Nuria), Gerard Barray (Serge Duvernois/Man on TV), Chete Lera
(Antonio), 1997-Spain)
"Open Your Eyes" asks a lot of questions, such as: How do you know if
you are awake or dreaming? How do you know if you are sane or mad? How
do you know what is real or fantasy? How do you know if you killed
someone or not? The Spanish director Alejandro Amenabar (Tesis) has made
a psychological thriller that entertains these questions, intermixing
his story with ideas about such subjects as virtual reality and
cryogenics, in his story about a vain and selfish man, who lives by his
good looks and accrued wealth, who when he loses his looks, has to
rethink who he is.
This stylish work, filmed in all the sleekness of a modern Madrid
inhabited by the affluent young, tells its jarring tale in a non-linear
way, sure to confuse even the most avid moviegoer.
Cesar (Eduardo Noriega), a handsome ladies man, is 25-years-old and is
rich, having inherited his father's restaurant chain when his parents
died 15- years ago. He is proud of his luxurious apartment, his three
expensive cars and a reputation for never spending two nights with the
same woman. He has the smile of a professional charmer and the warmth of
a snake.
The main event of the story comes at its beginning, as he is having a
birthday party in his "pad" and his last night's sexual conquest shows
up uninvited, Nuria (Najwa Nimri), and when she refuses to leave, only
wanting to go to bed with him again, Cesar asks Sofia (Penelope Cruz),
an actress, the date of his best friend, Pelayo (Fele Martinez), to aid
him in avoiding her.
Cesar takes the very attractive Sofia back to her place, hoping to sleep
with her, instead they stay up all-night talking and finding out things
about each other, but do not sleep together. They are attracted to each
other and make plans to date again, as Cesar leaves her place in the
morning.
Waiting outside in her shiny red Alfa, is Nuria, who dares him into
getting in for a ride. When he goes for a ride, she takes some pills,
which he refuses, and asks him if he believes in God, and then crashes
the car, resulting in her death and in his facial disfigurement; and,
for the viewer, it is the end of the story being told without the
filmmaker playing mind- games with the reality seen onscreen.
In the next scene, Cesar awakes disfigured, hiding behind a mask, in a
psychiatric prison cell, being held there on a murder charge. He is
being interviewed by a psychiatrist, Antonio (Lera), who tells him he is
only trying to help him understand what happened.
The dead Nuria will reappear as someone still alive and to add confusion
onto confusion,
 she will become interchangeable with Sofia. Also appearing, is the
suave Serge Duvernois (Gerard Barray), who is seen on television
advertising cryogenics and the possibility of life after death, which
can be accomplished by freezing methods, adds another element of mystery
to the tale. There is one tremendous line, where Cesar comments to
Antonio, "These quacks promise immortality, just like the priests do."
The final unresolved question will be:  Is Cesar's life a dream or a
nightmare?
If you like playing guessing games and are taken with the slickness of
this bold but not exactly fresh script (I've seen mind-games like this
played-out in some recent films, including "The Game"), then you will
have a more favorable impression of the film than I did. I felt it tried
to be interesting, and touched on many different genres, from romance to
sci-fi, to tell its Kafkaesque denouement, but it was not particularly a
moving experience. I felt uninvolved, finding myself easily drifting
into my own dreamworld, and as diverting, beautifully acted and
photographed, and entertaining as the film was, I thought it was mostly
about style and not ideas.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
