Title
Review for Danzón (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
DANZON (Mexico, 1991) ***. Directed by Maria Novaro. Written by Maria and
Beatriz Novaro. Photography, Rodrigo Garcia. Editing, Nelson Rodriguez,
Maria Novaro. Art direction, Marisa Pecanis and Roberto Sanchez. Music,
Danzonera Dimas de los Hermanos Perez, Pepe Luis y su Orchestra
Universitaria, Danzonera Alma de Solavento, Manzanita y el Son 4, Marimba
La Voz de Chiapas. Cast: Maria Rojo, Carmen Salinas, Margarita Isabel, Tito
Vasconcelos, Blanca Guerra, Cheli Goodinez . A Sony Pictures Classics
Release. In Spanish with subtitles. 103 min. Rated PG 13.
Mexican director Maria Novaro is building up a repertory of films about
women who go through some form of adversity end up by finding themselves.
"Lola," her first feature, dealt with a woman with a 5-year old daughter,
abandoned by her man. The much more upbeat "Danzon" centers on thirtyish-
fortyish Julia (Teresa Rojo),  the single mother of a 15-year old girl, who
searches for a man who is not really her  man.
Both films have won the Best Picture award at the Latino Film Festival in
New York, respectively in 1990 and 1991, and diverse other prizes. "Danzon"
was best Mexican film in Mexico, with Maria Rojo  copping the Best Actress
award at the Chicago and the Valladolid (Spain) Festivals.
Julia, a telephone company operatrix in Mexico City, is a cheerful soul
whose one passion is "danzon," a ballroom dance originating in Haiti and
originally patterned after French cotillion dances. Via Cuba it became
popular and quickly spread to the Mexican port of Veracruz one century ago.
For 6 years, Julia has been getting top prizes in danzon contests, always
with the same partner, Carmelo. Carmelo is fiftyish, always immaculately
dressed in a chic white suit and hat. Oddly (or not so oddly if you think
that  the realistic "Danzon" has discreet elements of fantasy and
symbolism), Julia knows next to nothing about Carmelo, whom she meets only
at the dance hall. "He's married, all men are married" says a friend, but
Julia discounts this.
One day, Carmelo disappears. Julia is not only left without a dancing
companion but somehow realizes that the man meant a lot to her. On the
slightest of clues, she goes to Veracruz, presumably Carmelo's home town,
to look for him. There she stays in a shabby hotel frequented by "ladies of
the night," makes friends with various women, principally with the
originally gruff owner, with a prostitute with a cute baby,  and with a
gentle transvestite nightclub "artist" whom Julia always refers to as
"she." They all try to help her locate Carmelo.
Near the end of her mini-Odyssey Julia has a fling with a much younger man,
then calmly and happily returns to Mexico City where, in the ballroom, a
wonderful  surprise awaits her.
"Danzon" is linear and episodic and linear, and, like the dance itself,
slow. It is constructed-- on purpose-- along the lines of older popular
Mexican movies, with a kind of pervasive naivete.
What it tries to accomplish is threefold. The film is an affectionate paean
to danzon and  local music for the masses, and simultaneously it is a
political statement by Ms. Novaro (who majored in sociology) since it
celebrates autochthonous tradition as opposed to imported modernism.
"Danzon" is also about the "growing up" of an already grown woman. And it
focuses too on the strength of sisterhood, of women sticking together.
In a way, "Danzon" shares with several films of recent years a trend
towards populism. While the former Soviet bloc nations are anxious to do
away with screen proletarians, other countries seem to be adding them to
their productions.
"Danzon"s personal points are made quietly, and Julia is played with the
right mix of high spirits, resolution and worry. The musical points are
made quite raucously. The sounds vary from the playing of accomplished
bands or well sung, very Mexican sentimental vocals (from records) to
strident or cacophonous blarings.
Worked in quite naturally and nicely photographed is the town of Veracruz,
a port city that must be the dullest and least picturesque in Mexico,
though compared to Mexico City's horrendous pollution and congestion, the
movie shows crisply and palpably Veracruz's clean, fresh sea air and its
airy, uncrowded places.
I looked, however, in vain for the famous Cafe de la Parroquia where the
best coffee in Mexico is served and sold. Perhaps it was there, but not
pointedly enough shown to be identified.
This, in a sense is typical of "Danzon." The movie feels as though it were
trying to avoid specificities of time and place. It could be set in the
1980s or decades earlier. The Mexico City practitioners of the dance wear
Sunday-best 1950s clothes, the Veracruzans' summery outfits are undatable.
The cars and the radios are older. The shabby freighters have no age.
There's an advantage to this generalizing, but at the same time this spills
into a kind of mildness and vagueness that might border on dullness for
those viewers accustomed to more dramatic action. Visually, a symptom of
this is the systematic use of long shots when closeups are expected.
Plot-wise, the lack of spelling out things makes you wonder how Julia, who
declares herself broke soon after arriving in Veracruz, finances her stay
and the gifts she brings back to Mexico City.
Unexpectedly for a Mexican work "Danzon" pursues understatement rather than
broad filmic discourse.  On one occasion, this becomes unwittingly funny,
as when Julia joins her new, temporary young lover in his boat. Their
lovemaking is unseen and only alluded to by the up and down movements of
the ship's hull.  On the other hand, when, the next day, the young man
reappears with his hair cut short, Julia's dismay at seeing him look even
younger is touchingly effective.
For some viewers "Danzon" will be too leisurely and lacking in strong
rhythms (except for the music) or incidents. But it certainly has a special
kind of sly charm and it is an interesting addition of movies by women and
about women.

Author
Pedro Sena
Danzon is one of those films that is actually pretty nice, although you
wonder what it is getting at.  It dedicates much time and attention to the
little things that make a good dance, or dancers, and to the
sensuality necessary to make it work between two partners.  But Julia, has
not only lost that partner, she has also lost what could be her one and only
special love, although it isn't clear that the lost
partner is her lover at all, although she would wish him to be.
After winning many dance contests with this man, she is now troubled because
he has disappeared.  And she starts looking for him.  And gets teased
miserably by her friends in the process.  Her chase
leads to a different town where she ends up caught up in a small  pair of
lies, and also has an affair with a younger man, who works in one of the
boats, she thinks her lover has gone, or has he.?
When the time comes for her to accept that she is running out of funds and
can no longer stay in this town, she leaves her younger  love, leaving him
in the same predicament that she was left with before she came here.  And
when she returns, her partner is there, and silently takes her and they
dance, what is obviously a very smooth combination..... still not clear
wether he is her lover or not, but it is clear that they move very well
together.
The film is slow, and the music is the Mexican variety used in the dance
halls, and is not what we might like to appreciate, but it is the
background, with very nice and romantic touches of what
appears to be a very well designed film about dancing..... though we wonder
if the chemistry is about sensual pleasures, or more than that.... Julia is
about more than that, as is her partner, even if they are not connected.
Very interesting film, slow at times, and very subtle.... all the ship names
at port have a hopeless ideal in love, and the lyrics in the many songs in
the film are shown in the sub titles as a meaningful
way for Julia to think.  Not a great film, but a very nice film that is very
slow developing, but the main character's desire and acting ability just
keeps us tied to it... and curious to find out what will
become of it all.
