Title
Review for Night Falls on Manhattan (1997)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Peter W. Ely
Screenplay and Direction by Sidney Lumet.
Starring Andy Garcia, Richard Dreyfus, and Lena Olin
Capitol Square and Brittania 6 [14 adult entertainement].
This film, by the great Sidney Lumet is almost certain to disappoint.  It
is a confused collage of cliches 
and improbable scenes, implausable story line, and simply bad casting
that results in a movie that is not worth viewing unless you are ready to
laugh your way through the last 90 minutes of the film.  
Do you believe that a lawyer fresh out of law school could within one
year, successlly prosecute a kingpin drug lord being represented by a
brilliant defense attorney (Dreyfuss), and subsequently be asked by the
mayor to run for the office of chief district attorney, win, and then
undertake a massive shake up of corrupt police services, all the while
establishing a relationship with another lawyer who seemingly only wants
to cook eggs for him and to have sex with him?  How about a judge who
tongue in cheek is party to the falsification of evidence?
Funnier than the implausible script is the myopic development of badly
casted characters from the hypomanic buffon (Andy Garcia) who 
stands on tables, desks, or bars to rant vitriole whenever more than six
people are present in a room to jailed drug lords who present to trial in
snappy blue suits rather than in standard prison issued clothing.  You may
also be amused by the other characters in this flop; for example, the
character played by Andy Garcia's father, who would make a more convincing
septogenerian rather than a late fifties cop near retirment.
Sidney Lumet has made some brilliant movies in his time, but this
character study is not vintage Lumet.  Rather, is seems to be from the Mr.
Magoo school of character development.
I was looking at the reviews in the newspaper today.  Rex Reed of the New
York Observer reportedly described it as "One of those rare movies with
impact and insight."
Bruce Williamson of Playboy reportedly wrote:  "Night Falls' has grit and
intelligence."
Mike Cidoni of ABC-TV reportedly wrote:  "Powerful! Truly Triumphant."
Larry Ratliff of FOX-TV reportedly wrote:  "Sidney Lumet scorches the screen."
Tonight, I discovered that even though I have not written a movie review
since my undergraduate years in University, the aforementioned "movie
critics" have nothing to teach the masses.
Save your money.  I predict that this dud will experience a core meltdown
before the end of May 1997.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN adapts Robert Daley's pulp novel "Tainted
Evidence," about a New York City Assistant District Attorney (Andy
Garcia), whose first big case is prosecuting the cop-killing drug dealer
who wounded his police officer father (Ian Holm, yes, Ian Holm).  If
that premise is difficult to swallow, don't even bother with the later
scenes, when bozo time compression makes months pass as minutes and
Garcia's character is suddenly elected the new District Attorney.  (And
very little of which bothered me.  I took offense to the abrupt addition
of Lena Olin's love interest.  In her scant scenes, she adds nothing.)
While it plays like a three-hour movie condensed into the space of two,
there are several riveting sequences, excellent acting across the board,
and a tidy lesson about the grayscales of justice.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Andy Garcia, Ian Holm, Richard Dreyfuss, Lena Olin,
      James Gandolfini, Shiek Mahmud-Bey, Ron Leibman, Colm Feore
Director: Sidney Lumet
Producers: Josh Kramer and Thom Mount
Screenplay: Sydney Lumet based on the novel TAINTED EVIDENCE by
      Robert Daley
Cinematography: David Watkin
Music: Mark Isham
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     Into the calm before the box-office storm of THE LOST WORLD rises
NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN, Sidney Lumet's triumphant return to worthwhile
movie-making.  The director of such memorable films as SERPICO, DOG DAY
AFTERNOON, and NETWORK has been in a slump since the 1990 release of
Q&A.  His last two movies, A STRANGER AMONG US and GUILTY AS SIN, have
been unworthy of Lumet's talent and reputation.  Fortunately, with NIGHT
FALLS ON MANHATTAN, which is based on a fact-inspired novel by New York
writer Robert Daley, the film maker is again in top form.
     One of the most refreshing things about this movie is the manner in
which it combines genres in unexpected ways.  The basic framework is
familiar:  corrupt cops, tainted evidence, and a big trial that will
make or break the hotshot lawyer protagonist.  But, if you think you've
seen this story already, be prepared for more than one surprise.  Not
only does Lumet throw away almost every stereotype in favor of real,
three-dimensional characters, but he has written a script of unexpected
intelligence and perceptiveness.  What's more, the traditional formula
for this sort of picture has been turned on its head.  The courtroom
drama happens at the beginning, not the end.  By NIGHT FALLS ON
MANHATTAN's midpoint, the verdict has been read and we're left wondering
what's next.
     Sean Casey (Andy Garcia) is an earnest young lawyer fresh out of
school.  A former cop, he's one of the few in his profession who still
cares about the importance of justice.  He goes to work as an assistant
district attorney not because he views it as a stepping stone to the
next plateau of his career, but because he cares about the cases.  The
situation becomes personal when his police detective father, Liam (Ian
Holm), is shot in a drug bust gone bad.  Liam is the lucky one -- three
of his fellow officers are dead.  The suspect, a drug kingpin (Shiek
Mahmud-Bey), turns himself in via a media circus that's carefully
orchestrated by his attorney, Sam Vigoda (Richard Dreyfuss).
     For the DA, Morgenstern (Ron Leibman), it's an election year, and
he decides on a risky strategy that, if it works, could give him a
publicity edge.  He chooses Sean to prosecute the case, with Liam as the
star witness.  The media goes wild with the story, Sean sees this as his
big chance, and Liam is bursting with pride.  But there's an obstacle --
Vigoda is a brilliant lawyer, and he has an ax to grind.  From the
moment the defense attorney presents his opening argument, it's clear
that his tactic will involve putting the entire NYPD on trial.
     NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN is savvy about a number of things.  Not
only does it have a good feel for both sides of the police corruption
issue, but it's aware of the political rivalries and behind-the-scenes
dealmaking that keeps a city running.  The script is smart, and the
characters are better realized than their counterparts in countless
similar-yet-inferior motion pictures.  Sean may be the knight in shining
armor trying to stay afloat in a sea of corruption, but it doesn't take
long for him to recognize that survival demands compromise.
     Andy Garcia's calm, controlled portrayal is one of NIGHT FALLS ON
MANHATTAN's small pleasures.  The performances of Richard Dreyfuss and
Ian Holm, both fine actors with impressive resumes, are two others. 
Dreyfuss enriches his character, refusing to let Vigoda slip into the
"wily, liberal defense attorney" cliche.  Holm gives both heart and
conscience to a cop with 36 years of experience on the force.  Solid
support comes from James Gandolfini as Liam's partner, Colm Feore as
Morgenstern's in-house political rival, and Lena Olin as Sean's love
interest.
     According to Morgenstern, the two keys to being a good lawyer are
"a boundless love of the truth and an instinct for the jugular."  NIGHT
FALLS ON MANHATTAN shows that there's more to practicing and enforcing
law than that.  Sean may still observe the world in stark blacks-and-
whites, but everyone around him sees it as a series of murky grays.  In
life, there isn't a clearly-delineated line between the good guys and
the bad guys -- a truth that Sean is ultimately forced not only to
confront, but to reconcile himself with.
     Sidney Lumet has done something that I wasn't sure was possible in
this age of instant, formulaic gratification:  make a riveting cop movie
without a car chase and a courtroom thriller without cheap theatrics. 
NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN isn't about the trappings of these situations;
it's about their inner workings, their underlying issues, and the men
and women who keep things moving. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Walter Frith
Comments on this review may also be sent to wfrith@icom.ca
DIRECTOR SIDNEY LUMET'S LATEST FILM COVERS FAMILIAR TERRITORY WITH A NEW
TWIST 
His first big screen film as a director came in 1957 with '12 Angry Men' and
he was already showing dimensions of talent that would place him in film
history as one one Hollywood's most searing and dramatic filmmakers.
 Throughout they years that have passed since then his other films such as
'Long Day's Journey Into Night' (1962), 'The Pawnbroker' (1965), 'Serpico'
(1973), 'Dog Day Afternoon' (1975), 'Network' (1976) 'Prince of the City'
(1981) 'The Verdict' (1982) and many others have served not only as obvious
social commentary but as scorching indictments of the 'system'.  His name is
Sidney Lumet, a man with a mind as diverse as the subject matter he
successfully tackles and rarely does he miss the mark.  
His latest effort 'Night Falls on Manhattan' shows signs of a well seasoned
mind ready to bring an old story to the screen with a very new twist.  Based
on the novel 'Tainted Evidence' by Robert Daley it focuses on a police
officer turned lawyer (Andy Garcia) who wins an important case as an
assistant D.A. for the city of New York in the trial of a major drug dealer
and is nominated to run as head D.A. when the one in office (Ron Liebman)
suffers medical problems.  During the trial that made his career he butts
heads in court with a liberal, idealistic defense attorney (Richard Dreyfuss)
and falls romantically for Dreyfuss' assistant (Lena Olin).  This needless
romantic subplot is about the only thing that's really not necessary to the
film's success.  Garcia's father (Ian Holm) and his father's partner (James
Gandolfini) are under suspicion as rogue cops who may have accepted money
from the dealer convicted by Garcia and the story gains depth and subtext
better than practically any other film released so far this year with a top
notch cast in fine form all around.
What makes 'Night in Manhattan' such a credible and well textured film is the
fact that Lumet served not only as the film's director but worked directly
from the adapted screenplay he wrote on his own without anyone else's point
of view disrupting his work and does justice to Robert Daley's novel in the
process.  With overtones of 'Serpico' mixed in as well, Lumet has not
duplicated his own success but has created a film brimming with emotional,
moral and legal factors that are credible and ones that make us shake our
heads while watching the evening news or looking at our daily newspapers.
Visit Mr. Frith's 'Movie Reviews' section of 'The Review' at
http://www.arrowweb.com/review 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     NIGHT FALLS ON PLAUSIBILITY, oops I mean NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN
is the gritty new crime drama written and directed by Sidney Lumet.
     The key police witness chews gum on the witness stand in the
biggest case of the year.  An assistant DAs slaps his indigent client
when he isn't paying proper attention to the questions.  Police get
spooked and gun down another cop BONNIE AND CLYDE-style.  Police use
cocaine to pay off their stool pigeons so they can catch the big drug
dealer.
     And in the piece de resistance, Ron Leibman, as District Attorney
Morgenstern (Morgie) , climbs on top of a desk and, shamelessly
overacting, screams his orders to a hundred of his minions huddled
around him in a crowded hallway.  They will drop all of their cases and
work for 72 hours straight so that they can catch the drug dealer,
Jordan Washington (Shiek Mahmud-Bey), that killed some cops.
     When Jordan is caught, whom does Morgie appoint to try the highest
profile case in years?  Why, green Assistant DA Sean Casey (Andy
Garcia), whose father, Liam (Ian Holm), was wounded by Jordan.  Since
Morgie's chief prosecutor, Elihu Harrison (Colm Feore), might run
against him in the next election, Morgie gives the case to someone with
less than a year of experience.  And these are only a few of the
improbabilities.
     Holding back your laughter as one incredulous scene after an
another rolls across the screen is not easy.  Still the film affords
several guilty pleasures -- watching Garcia's hair being chief among
them.  In his casual scenes his bangs are carefully tossed in front of
his face in exactly the same way each time in order to avoid any
continuity errors.  When he dresses for business, the make-up
department uses a superglue-like gel to make sure that his hair stays
properly in its place.  Nuclear weapons could not move it in these
scenes.
     Even the ridiculous aspects of the film create laughable fun.
Peggy Lindstrom, the assistant to the William Kunstler clone defense
attorney, Sam Vigoda (Richard Dreyfuss), is played by the ever radiant
Lena Olin.  Before the trial's conclusion, she will take Sean to bed
solely because she has the hots for him.  This part of the plot leads
nowhere and only serves to titillate the audience.  Neither actor shows
any skin or much emotion.
     Ian Holm gives the only genuine and moving performance in what is
otherwise a plastic show, despite the realistic grimness of David
Watkin's cinematography and Philip Rosenberg's sets.
     The ultimate failing of the picture is Lumet's inability to ever
set the proper rhythm for the picture.  Individual parts of the plot
work, but they are never drawn into a convincing whole.  Couple this
with the picture's lack of energy, save the periodic overacting, and
the shows bogs down hopelessly with the weight of its implausibility.
     NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN runs 1:54.  It is rated R for violence
and profanity.  It would be fine for most teenagers.  The film has
little worth recommending so it's thumbs down and * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Sidney Lumet, whose early work for film included the now classic
12 ANGRY MEN, has built up a major body of sharp films, frequently set
in New York and frequently about the criminal justice system.  In spite
of a little violence, and that mostly off-screen, this is a low-key
ironic look at how the system works and where it chooses to fail to
work.  While in the final analysis the film may not deliver a whole lot
more than some of the better television police procedural programs, it
is an intelligent and adult alternative to this season's fluff and
"blow 'em up real good" films.
     Sean Casey (played by Andy Garcia) is a new investigator in the
office of District Attorney "Morgy" Morgenstern's.  He is something of
a straight arrow who expects to go it on his own and stick to the
letter of the law.  His father Liam (Ian Holm) is an experience-
hardened cop who has encouraged his son to pursue a career in law.  The
plot thickens as Liam is on a stakeout of Jordan Washington (Shiek
Mahmud-Bey), a local drug pusher on his way to being a drug lord.  An
attempted arrest goes very wrong as three different precincts send in
backup, two policemen are kill by Washington and a third policeman is
accidentally killed in the confusion.  Liam himself is very nearly
killed.  District Attorney Morgenstern, who is having a bad time with
his public image and who is being betrayed by his own ambitious
assistant, decides to give the job of prosecuting Washington instead
assistant.  This in spite of any conflict of interest or emotional
entanglement Sean might have prosecuting the man who nearly killed his
father.  And there is a further complication as the defense--led by the
Alan Dershowitz-like Sam Vigoda (Richard Dreyfuss)--implies that the
police involved in the attempted arrest may have been on the take.  In
specific suspicion falls on Liam and his long-time partner Joey (James
Gandolfini).  Lumet wrote the screenplay himself, basing it on the
novel TAINTED EVIDENCE by Robert Daley.  Daley also wrote the novel
that was the basis for Lumet's PRINCE OF THE CITY.
     When one actor in a film gives a good performance, he is probably
a good actor.  When there are many good performances in the same film,
some from almost unknown actors, it probably is because of the talent
of the director.  One of the better performances in the film is James
Gandolfini as the partner of Liam.  He has just a scene or two, in
which he is an important character, but he seems very believable in
those scenes.  Holm and Garcia play reasonably well off of each other
though they do not give much feeling of being father and son.  The most
memorable performance is probably that of Ron Leibman as the District
Attorney, played with what could be called "an excess of personality,"
to borrow a phrase from JURASSIC PARK.  Richard Dreyfuss underplays
just a bit as a celebrated defense attorney who does not reveal the
dimensions of his character until the end of the film.  Rounding out
the cast is Lena Olin the attractive but somewhat dispensable character
Peggy Lindstrom, assistant to Vigoda who has an affair with Sean.
     This is not Lumet's best film and its final irony is more a subtle
point than a hard-hitting one, but it is an intelligent adult story.  I
rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Paramount)
Starring:  Andy Garcia, Ian Holm, Lena Olin, Richard Dreyfuss, Ron
Liebman, James Gandolfini.
Screenplay:  Sidney Lumet, based on the novel "Tainted Evidence" by Robert
Daley.
Producers:  Thom Mount and Josh Kramer.
Director:  Sidney Lumet.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  115 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There are a couple of things you can generally count on finding in a
Sidney Lumet film:  people in positions of power or influence who become
corrupted, and the noble crusaders who oppose them.  In a career spanning
six decades, Lumet has trained his camera on the back-room workings of
power in America, creating gems like TWELVE ANGRY MEN, SERPICO and NETWORK
in the process.  Recent years, however, have found Lumet telling the same
cynical story of perverted criminal justice over and over:  PRINCE OF THE
CITY, Q&A, GUILTY AS SIN.  NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN is not a bad film.
It's just a terribly familiar one, one which Lumet races through so
quickly that it leaves little more than a blur of crooked cops and
shattered naivete.
     Andy Garcia stars as Sean Casey, a young New York prosecutor who gets
handed a career-making case.  Notorious drug dealer Jordan Washington
(Shiek Mahmud-Bey) stands charged with the murder of two police officers,
and the wounding of a third who happens to be Sean's father Liam (Ian
Holm).  The district attorney (Ron Liebman) thinks this connection makes
Sean perfect for the case, which would appear to be a slam dunk even for
an inexperienced prosecutor.  The surprise comes when Jordan's lawyer,
civil rights attorney Sam Vigoda (Richard Dreyfuss), mounts an unexpected
defense.  Jordan, he claims, was acting in self-defense against cops he
had been paying off for years, but who now planned to kill him for
refusing to pay more.  As Sean follows up on the accusations of police
corruption, he finds them leading him into dark corners where the line
between justice and the law gets very indistinct.
     The best moments in NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN come early in the film,
with a superb montage of Sean learning the hard facts about his new job.
One judge chuckles at Sean's suggestion that a $500 bail for a poor black
woman is too low; another judge dozes off during an earnest summation.
The day-to-day workings of the legal system may never have looked as
mundane and depressing on film.
     That's all interesting stuff, but it's nothing particularly new.  TV
programs like "Law & Order" have turned the technicalities and small
compromises of crime and punishment into effective drama without turning
them into the stuff of morality plays.  NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN is about
Sean's fall from grace, which is both overly melodramatic and a bit
disingenuous.  If the indignities we watch Sean suffer in the first
fifteen minutes aren't enough to puncture his idealism, he's already more
saint than civil servant.
     Sean's character might have made more sense if watching NIGHT FALLS
ON MANHATTAN didn't feel like a drill from a speed-reading course.  Weeks
of narrative time fly by in seconds, Jordan Washington's trial is over in
an anti-climactic ten minutes, Sean and one of Vigoda's assistant
counselors (Lena Olin) become soul-mates overnight, and Sean is elected
district attorney almost before he is ever a candidate.  The unpredictable
rhythms Lumet injects in NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN would be welcome of they
didn't come at the expense of a well-developed protagonist.  Andy Garcia
is an actor of limited range even when he has a detailed characterization
at his disposal.  Sean Casey, for all his moral turmoil, is little more
than a prop in a film so over-burdened with plot that he gets carried
along in its wake.
     There are some interesting performances in NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN,
notably Ron Liebman's flamboyant work as the animated, 
angina-waiting-to-happen D.A. Morgenstern, which make many individual
scenes in the film worth watching.  Even those performances, however, are
subjugated to the idea of the story.  The rules are only there to be bent,
Lumet informs us.  If he hadn't already told us the same thing before --
and better -- NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN might have been a more engrossing
experience.

Author
Bradley Null
     With Night Falls on Manhattan, Sidney Lumet has created one of the
most dedicated issue movies in a long time.  As a high-profile, yet
righteous, defense attorney (a first in modern film), Richard Dreyfuss's
character admits that he took an unwinnable case because he wanted to
expose corruption in the NYPD.  Lumet seems to have created an
unwinnable film for similar reasons.
     Lumet has taken a very bare-bones approach with the plot of Night
Falls on Manhattan.  One minute Andy Garcia's Sean Casey is an assistant
DA trainee, the next minute he is the District Attorney of New York. 
Likewise, the first twenty minutes of the film set up a courtroom drama
which Lumet flies through in a series of quick scenes.  Unconventional
editing techniques, including periodic jump cuts and abrupt truncations
of scenes that barely seem to have begun, help push the narrative
forward, all of which serves to confuse the audience as to the film's
true focus.
     Ultimately, it becomes clear that the goal of this hectic structure
is to unfold a series of issues for the audience.  Lumet confronts us
with tough questions at every turn:  Who do we blame for police
corruption?  To whom is a lawyer most responsible, the law or his
family?  How much can we share with the people we love?  Lumet packs it
in, and he does so by creating several only-in-Hollywood coincidences. 
For example, Garcia happens to be in the right place to try the case of
the drug dealer that shot his father.  The perfect woman for Garcia also
just happens to work for a lawyer on the other side.
     The issues and questions that Lumet poses are powerful, but his
plot manipulation and acceleration for the sake of these issues hurts
his bid to satisfy a sophisticated audience.  In his need to get in and
out of every scene in half the time that it should take to develop,
Lumet seems to have resorted to a short-hand form of directing his
actors.  At every emotional point in the story, one character invariably
begins yelling.  Lumet is obviously trying to make a point that such
issues lead to uniform short-temperedness, but the consistency of these
outbursts prevents us from distinguishing the different character's
personalities.
     With this subject matter, Lumet is obviously trying to make a
gritty, un-Hollywood picture.  The sets (such as a courtroom modeled
after Lance Ito's instead of Perry Mason's) and the overwhelmingly drab
color of the film beg us to look at it as a slice of realism.  However,
the plot twists and flat characters confound this attempt to make an
intelligent film.  Lena Olin, miscast and unbelievable as Andy Garcia's
love interest, portrays the most awkward character.  Not until the end
of the film does it become clear that her character is actually in love
with Garcia's, when the plot resolution tells us so.
     An audience looking for a traditional Hollywood courtroom drama
will be taken aback by Night Falls on Manhattan.  Nevertheless, it
brings with it some powerful questions which a thoughtful audience will
want addressed.  In the end, the film's uncomfortable blend of Hollywood
conventions and complex subject matter will have a hard time finding its
audience among the main-stream majority of moviegoers that are only
looking for answers.
-Christopher Null  /  null@poboxes.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Ben Hoffman
The word that springs to mind is SPELLBINDING.   In every way, which
includes the taut direction, the superb cast, the witty and precise
dialogue, and of course, the story (based on Robert Daley's book,
TAINTED EVIDENCE, that word sums up the film.   Andy Garcia, who is in
almost every scene, gives a terrific performance.  Richard Dreyfuss, a
real pro, just has to give a slight smirk, a lift of an eyebrow and he
is utterly believable.  And then there is the rest of the superb
supporting cast aiding to make this a Four-Byter.
This is a story of integrity, of being able to look oneself in the
mirror. That is what eventually confronts Sean Casey (Garcia) when he
begins to investigate the police force, 3 suspect precincts in NYC; and
he has to wonder about Joey (James Gandolfini), the cop and partner of
Sean's  father, Liam Casey (Ian Holm) and who is on the take,
protecting and giving information to the drug dealers in exchange for
money?
Jordan Washington (Shiek Mahmud-Bey) is impressive, tall, handsome and
menacing as the drug dealer the police would like to kill because they
have been offered a better deal than he was willing to give them.
When they close in on him, he ends up fatally shooting several police
and severely wounding the police veteran, Liam Casey.   That is all the
excuse District Attorney Morgenstern (Ron Leibman) needs to order his
cops to  make Washington sorry he was ever born "and we'll worry about
the Civil Liberties Union later!" Washington had surrendered to
Attorney Sam Vigoda (Dreyfuss), an attorney in the mode of famed
attorney William Kunstler.   And is Dreyfuss ever good!
Morgenstern is running for higher office against another District
attorney, Elihu Harrison (Colm Fiore) and in this high profile case
against Washington, he invites Sean, a former cop, and now a neophyte
attorney in the District Attorney's office, to be the prosecutor.   He
tells him the trial will be a snap: several police fatally shot by
Washington, Sean's father in the hospital, drug  dealer.  "You can't
lose."    They reckon without the brilliance of Vigoda.
Love interest in this tale of divided loyalties, backbiting and
honesty, is provided by Peggy (Lena Olin) who works in Vigoda's office
but falls in love with Sean.
Sidney Lumet feels: "The greatest threats to the nation are drugs and
racism."  He wants us to start fighting back before it is too late.
"Where is the line that separates "healthy compromise" from
"destructive loss of idealism?  'Just don't do it' and 'Just say "No"
is symptomatic of everything cockeyed about how we live: Put a sound
byte on it and it will go away."
Written and Directed by Sidney Lumet.

Author
Jerry Saravia
We've been accustomed to seeing Al Pacino play loud, unruly lawyers so it is
quite refreshing to see Andy Garcia as a smart, tough lawyer in one of his best
roles since "Internal Affairs." The movie may not be great but it is a
well-crafted, watchable piece of entertainment.
Garcia stars as Sean Casey, a tough New York City lawyer who has been trying
minor cases such as freak accidents, drug dealers, petty thieves, etc. He's no
ambulance chaser but he's trying to get ahead by playing the rules, and he was
a former cop so he "knows the streets." His father, Liam Casey (Ian Holm), is
an undercover cop trying to catch a big-time heroin dealer and is subsequently 
shot while on a stakeout. Sean is upset by this and so is the whole city since
two cops were killed by this psycho dealer. The D.A. Morgenstern (Rob Leibman)
screams bloody murder and wants the dealer found who managed to escape in an
NYPD car! The D.A. makes Sean the leading prosecutor, much to everyone's
chagrin, but he's also risking his political future when the defense attorney
turns out to be a brilliant shyster, Sam Vigoda (Richard Dreyfuss). It is,
theoretically, an easy case and one that could launch Sean's career, but is
there police corruption at the core? What do you think? Have you seen movies
about corruption before or is this something entirely new to you? 
"Night Falls on Manhattan" is not an original film nor should you think that
director Sidney Lumet hasn't made similar films before. This time, Lumet has
made it fresh by instilling a sense of humanity and making his characters
invigorating and real. Garcia's Sean Stone is the moral center of the film - a
lawyer who uncovers a hotbed of corruption and lies and people who mask the
truth. Could his father, Liam, be concealing evidence? And what about Liam's
partner, Joey (James Gandolfini)? And how did all three precincts manage to
arrive within seconds after Joey calls for backup during the stakeout? If you
haven't heard the disturbing news of New York City cops lately, then you must
be residing on a mountain top in Tibet somewhere. 
Lumet's problem as a writer is his frequent lack of credibility. For example:
why would a psychotic dealer turn himself in to a defense attorney when he
could have skipped town? Why would the D.A. assign such a media crazed event
over to a small-time lawyer who has no experience trying such cases? Because
the lawyer's father is a cop who was badly injured? I don't think such cases
occur in New York City but what do I know. This movie was written for the
screen by Lumet and based on a pulp novel by Robert Daley. Maybe that explains
it. 
As usual, Lumet's casting is impeccable. Garcia is strong and believable as
Sean, a lawyer who by chance becomes D.A. in a movie full of miraculous
chances. Richard Dreyfuss is superbly witty as the Alan Dershowitz-type who is
trying to reveal the corruption himself. The great British actor Ian Holm is
quietly understated as the wise old cop who may or may not be involved, and
adores his bewildered son and his partner. James Gandolfini, who has appeared
in a slate of mediocre movies, shines brightly and evocatively as Liam's
partner - his scene with Ian Holm and Garcia crackles with energy as he begins
to admit his involvement. This is an actor to watch for in the future. Veteran
actor Rob Leibman shouts and spews with relish in several great scenes as
Morgenstern, the D.A. who is always looking for a fight. The one performance
that doesn't ring true is Lena Olin ("Unbearable Lightness of Being") as Peggy,
a legal assistant to Sam Vigoda. Her frivolous romance with Sean exudes little
charisma or excitement and takes up too much screen time. 
"Night Falls on Manhattan" falls short when compared to Lumet's great,
intelligent police movies such as "Prince of the City" and "Serpico."
Nevertheless, it is a fine film and uniformly well acted but it ends with a
silly anticlimax that diminishes the power of the first three-quarters (a
similar problem pervaded Lumet's "Family Business"). Still, how can you resist
a great cast in a generally vivid, exciting picture when we are mostly
bombarded by superfluous hogwash nowadays. Don't resist.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at
Faust667@aol.com
