Title
Review for Nowhere (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Omar Odeh
Instead. Instead of a movie about two guys echanging banal witticisms
in a convenience store.  Instead of three brothers pandering to every
cliche surrounding religion, relationships and infidelity. Instead of
holier than thou posturing by making a movie about three girls even
thouhg you're a guy. Instead of masturbatory musings about your
personal problems and LA nightlife.  Instead, Greag Araki has
committed to himself to the relentless pursuit of a unique style and
uncompromising vision that has yielded true gems of Americain
Independent filmmaking.
I missed the first installment of the Trilogy that this film
concludes, (Totally Fucked Up, The Doom Generation, Nowhere). However,
it is clear from the last two, that Araki is taking leaps and bounds
cinematically. Continuing its alarming capacity for ignorance, the
popular press gave Nowhere a cold reception. Most complaints centered
around accusations of a 'vacuous style'. A bizarre comment considering
how accomlished Araki's direction is here.
The first time you see a film by Araki, it looks like the work of a
cheap and clumsy wannabe. However, it seems that as his trash aesthtic
becomes apparent, along with his ideological position (a gay male in
US society) and subsequent psychoanalytic and semiotic concerns, Araki
emerges as an interesting and very competent filmmaker. Although his
homosexuality has recently come into question Nowhere wrapped in 1995,
and so many of these concerns were still brought to bear on the film.
As such, Araki's films in general are unappologetic, very loud
challenges to virtually every position held in conventional society.
Nowhere in particular is a savage critique that is both relevant and
convincing of youth in America and their cult-of-slacker-horseshit. On
this basis, although rooted in 90210 and other contenporary pop icons,
the film also reads as a poignant comment on the 'Kevin Smith set'.
 Araki's visual style here is head and ahoulders above his previous
work both technically and aesthetically. Despite accusations of
excess, I'd much rather see Araki shoot loud murals than Ed Burns
incompetently choregraph steady-cam shots. Nowhere's quick off-tempo
cutting and surrealism is ample support to Araki's ideological
concerns. This film is evidence of heroic bravery in the face of the
Americain Independant scene as it exists today. This is best
epitomized in the final scene in which Araki shows no mercy in
carrying out a complete and total sabotage, thematically as well as
visually, of his entire film.

Author
Larry McGillicuddy
1/2* (out of 4)
Directed by Greg Arraki
Starring James Duval, Rachel True, Kathleen Robertson, Ryan Phillippe,
 Sarah Lassez, Christina Applegate
Gregg Araki's The Doom Generation was possibly the very worst film 
ever made. So why did I see his latest teen bisexual angst opus? 
First of all, some of the reviews were fairly positive. Also, the 
cast, consisting of cameos from dozens of washed up ex tv stars 
(including Christopher Knight, Eve Plumb, Shannen Doherty, and David 
Leisure) was promising. Last of all, I wanted to give Arraki one more 
chance. I mean, the guy can't be THAT untalented, can he? The answer 
to that question is three letters long.
Nowhere follows the character Dark on his wild and odd journey 
through Los Angeles. Since Arraki doesn't know how to make anything 
coherent, it's hard to describe the plot. Let's just say that Dark 
spends the bulk of the movie whining that his girlfriend won't make a 
commitment to him and jealous because she sleeps around with other 
guys and girls. The only remotely compelling storyline involves Sarah 
Lassez as a teen who has a chance encounter with a famous tv star. He 
turns out to be a nice guy who doesn't care for fame and wishes he 
could walk down the street without being mobbed by fans. This story 
has a shocking twist and a tragic end that I did not see coming. It 
is the first time I ever felt any compassion for a character created 
by Arraki, and this can be attributed to the appealing performance of 
Lassez.
I thought maybe Arraki was improving in his craft. He works better 
with the camera this time around, especially in the early scenes. 
Halfway through the film, I didn't necessarily find myself enjoying 
the film, but it seemed like a considerable improvement on The Doom 
Generation. Then as the movie went on, Arraki loses all sensibility 
and introduces us to exploding heads, twisted sex games, and alien 
abductions. It's sad, because he almost actually had some decent 
material here, but he ruined it with his usual in your face "I'm such 
a renegade maverick filmmaker, look what I can do" attitude.
The performances are generally better than in The Doom Generation, 
which isn't saying much. At least we don't have to suffer Jonathan "I 
am the most hideous man in America" Schaech. We are, however treated 
to another round of James "I'm more wooden than Keanu" Duval. Sarah 
Lassez gives the best performance in the film, and Kathleen Robertson 
(formerly of 90210 and now Arraki's wife) and Rachel True are 
talented actresses caught up in this mess. Of the tv star cameos, 
John Ritter is the most interesting as a deranged right wing tv 
evangelist.
If I prefer Nowhere to The Doom Generation, it is only in the way 
that I would prefer being assassinated than receive constant physical 
torture. Maybe Greg Arraki doesn't want you to like his characters. 
Maybe he wants to laugh and make fun of those of us who try to care 
about them. Maybe he just wanted to piss me off. If so, he was 
successful.
