Title
Review for From Here to Eternity (1953)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Dragan Antulov
Hollywood was always treating film as an industry, but these
days its products are becoming increasingly predictable. Few
words about plot, names of the people involved and years of
viewing experience - all that can enable you to predict
general outlook and the overall quality of the movie. PEARL
HARBOR, newest action spectacle by Jerry Bruckheimer and
Michael Bay, is the latest example, being mercilessly
badmouthed even before the principal photography began. One
of the reasons for such campaign is the fact that the film
deals with the historical event already covered by Hollywood
in previous decades. In two cases, such coverage produced
classic films, awarded with "Oscars", and Bruckheimer is
going to have huge problems matching their quality. While in
the case of TORA! TORA! TORA! his project has some realistic
chances of being better (at least in special effects
department), only the bravest could predict PEARL HARBOR
being in serious competition with FROM HERE TO ETERNITY,
1953 drama by Fred Zinnemann. This film was awarded with
eight "Oscars", and its reputation of Hollywood classics was
never in doubt, not even after few uninspired television
remakes in 1970s and 1980s.
FROM HERE TO ETERNITY is based on the best-selling novel by
James Jones, American author deeply influenced by his own
experiences in US military at the Pacific Theatre in WW2.
The plot is set in 1941, at the time when USA was still out
of war. Young US Army private Robert E. Lee Prewitt (played
by Montgomery Clift), former bugler, has been transferred
into infantry unit, Company G. Its commander, Captain Holmes
(played by Philip Ober) is boxing coach and he wants
Prewitt, soldier with reputation of good middle-weight
boxer, to fight in regimental boxing team; good results in
boxing competition would ensure Holmes' promotion. Prewitt,
deeply traumatised by the boxing accident that had left his
friend blinded, is adamant that he wouldn't fight; Holmes
responds by ordering his NCOs to make Prewitt's life in
company miserable and thus make him to change his mind. The
only NCO that doesn't take part in intimidation campaign is
Sergeant Warden (played by Burt Lancaster), experienced,
tough but fair career soldier who actually runs the company.
Warden, however, has some flaws - one of them is lust
towards Karen Holmes (played by Deborah Kerr), beautiful
wife of Captain Holmes. He starts relationship with her,
despite her reputation of "easy lay" and despite risking 20
years of military prison for adulterous affair with
superior's wife. In the meantime, Prewitt is introduced to
New Congress "social club" by his friend Private Maggio
(played by Frank Sinatra) and there he falls in love with
Alma a.k.a. Lorene (played by Donna Reed), one of the
"hostesses". Their romance, as well as the destiny of all
protagonists, would be affected with incoming Japanese raid
on Pearl Harbor.
FROM HERE TO ETERNITY was considered great in its time
because it, among other things, dealt with some
uncomfortable subjects previously ignored in Hollywood.
Although screenwriter Daniel Taradash (later awarded with
"Oscar" for his effort) took great pains to tone down or
edit out all questionable material from 800-page book, the
content of the film still looks brave for its time, breaking
taboos by depicting the serial adultery, prostitution,
rampant alcoholism and showing US military to be infested
with corruption and incompetence. Because of that, producers
were denied co-operation by US Army during the production,
which was the first such incident in Hollywood-US military
relations after WW2. The depiction of US Army in this film,
as well as in the novel, is unflattering but historically
accurate. Because of the widespread isolationist sentiments
and notion of country being safe from invasion, US Army in
the first years of WW2, unlike the Navy and Marines, was
neglected - small, made out of soldiers who had enlisted
only to escape poverty and never expected to earn their
living in actual fighting, inexperienced and under-equipped
in comparison with other great military powers of the time.
When stationed in tropical tourist paradise, like the
protagonist of this film, US military succumbed to hedonism
and war came as really nasty surprise that made such
shortcomings quite obvious.
The film, however, deals more with the shortcomings of
characters than with the shortcomings of the institutions as
a whole. Actually, FROM HERE TO ETERNITY, like any good
drama, doesn't feature perfect characters - almost any of
them is affected with an affliction or character flaw. In
order to portray that, Zinnemann had to rely on really good
actors, and FROM HERE TO ETERNITY was blessed with great
acting talent. Montgomery Clift is grand as Private Prewitt,
character whose pride and conviction, instead of being
virtue, turns out to be the source of doom for him. That
doom could be foreshadowed by the almost always-painful
expression on Clift's face - his character, even when he
looks happy, is constantly bothered with something. Burt
Lancaster plays character that requires less acting ability,
and more of his personal charisma; he is good acting choice
for Sergeant Warden, though, since that character, despite
being affected with unhealthy lust towards woman legally out
of his reach, is the closest to the criteria of the
conventional Hollywood hero. Those criteria are later met
when Warden in the end of the film chooses duty (and Army as
surrogate family) over marriage with Karen. Deborah Kerr is
also great since the inner pains of her character provide
good contrast with her physical attractiveness. The most
interesting female role belongs to Donna Reed, who plays
character very different from those who would later make her
icons of 1950s values. The most memorable acting job was, of
course, given by excellent Frank Sinatra in "Oscar"-awarded
role of Private Maggio; his character, which initially looks
like some kind of comic relief, later underlines the
pessimistic, depressing atmosphere of the film with its
tragic fate. Ernest Borgnine is also great in the memorable
role of sadistic Sergeant "Fatso" Judson.
FROM HERE TO ETERNITY is a film that relies heavily on
well-developed characters and superb actors playing them.
Zinnemann focused film around them, and although his work in
that regard was superb - especially the way he handles
parallels between two movie romances - film is not visually
attractive enough to be considered true masterpiece. Few
action scenes in the end are well- done, as well as famous
romantic beach scene (now overcliched, and very brave and
erotic for its time), but the film is hurt by the use of
black-and-white photography. Use of colour, together with
more shots of the Hawaii countryside, would have provided
effective contrast between heaven outside setting and hell
inside movie's troubled protagonists. On the other hand,
that lack of attraction won't prevent FROM HERE TO ETERNITY
to remain true classic and very high standard for all future
films dealing with Pearl Harbor.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Frank Sinatra.  The comparisons are long and debatable and my preference
as the twentieth century's greatest entertainer/singer is still Elvis
Presley for his diversity in country, western, rock 'n' roll, ballads,
gospel, blues, and although Presley and many others after him enjoyed
success based on the influences of Sinatra and those from his
generation, Presley still has more gold records than anyone else.  Frank
Sinatra was a legendary performer who passed away on May 14, 1998.  I'm
writing this movie review one day after his death to celebrate the most
successful film work he ever turned in.  He won a Best Supporting Actor
Oscar for his work as the noble soldier Maggio in director Fred
Zinnemann's powerful 1953 adult drama, 'From Here to Eternity'.  It was
this film that revived Sinatra's career and he never looked back after
it.   This movie is #4 on my all time list, behind (3) 'The Godfather
Part II' (1974), (2) 'Platoon' (1986) and 'The Godfather' (1972).  Other
films that Sinatra enjoyed success in such as 'The Man With the Golden
Arm' (1955), 'The Manchurian Candidate' (1962) and 'Von Ryan's Express'
(1965), were all a result of his success in 'From Here to Eternity'.
It was based on the novel written by James Jones and was toned down
somewhat by screenwriter Daniel Taradash (an Oscar for him) and the film
proved that times change but people don't.  I often listen to the
stories a lot of older folks tell about how morality was at its peak
fifty or sixty years ago compared to today but this film proved with its
adult oriented theme and ground breaking manner that nothing could be
further from the truth.  The film contains heavy references to adultery,
prostitution, alcohol abuse, violence, military injustice, murder and
the outbreak of war.
It begins in 1941 at an army barracks in Hawaii, shortly before the
Pearl Harbor attack, and we are introduced in the first scene to an army
private (Montgomery Clift) who has transferred over from another unit
and meets Sinatra in the first scene as we learn later in the film that
the two of them are good friends.  Clift meets a base Sergeant (Burt
Lancaster) who introduces him to the company commander who we learn has
pulled some strings to get Clift on his boxing team.  Clift has quit
boxing because he once blinded a man and his refusal to fight angers the
company commander to the point where he instructs his fellow officers to
put the screws on Clift until he agrees to box.
The film moves very leisurely from there and the character's personal
lives are displayed in great detail.  Lancaster has an affair with his
company commander's wife (Deborah Kerr), a woman bitter about her
husband's infidelities and drinking and who lost a child through a
painful and disruptive birth which prevents her from having any more
children.  The film's trademark scene is Lancaster and Kerr kissing
while they lay in the sand on the beach as a wave washes over them and
it is one of the most romantic scenes in movie history.  Clift has an
affair with a girl who works at a social club (Donna Reed - Best
Supporting Actress) and their conflicts are as important to the film's
tone as any other.  Sinatra locks horns with a stocky piano playing
military prison officer (Ernest Borgnine) which has tragic results.
The film earned 13 Oscar nominations and won 8, Best Picture, Director
(Zinnemann), Supporting Actor (Sinatra), Supporting Actress (Kerr),
Adapted Screenplay (Daniel Taradash), Sound, Film Editing and
Cinematography.  The stark black and white photography by cameraman
Burnett Guffey is perhaps its greatest technical achievement.  Many
scenes are photographed with little camera movement, giving the film's
most well acted scenes their own strength but using light and shadows in
many other scenes of tragic occurrence to enhance those scenes of
memorable emotion.  Burt Lancaster and Montgomery Clift split the vote
in the Best Actor category and the award went to William Holden in
'Stalag 17'.  Deborah Kerr lost Best Actress to Audrey Hepburn in 'Roman
Holiday' and the film also lost in the Costume Design and Original Music
Score categories.
Throughout the 60's, many ground breaking adult films in the
contribution to great American cinema such as 'Who's Afraid of Virginia
Woolf?' (1966), 'The Graduate' (1967) and 'Bonnie and Clyde' (1967) are
direct influences of 'From Here to Eternity' and Frank Sinatra probably
gives the film its most memorable performance, to be enjoyed by
generations to come from a man who could entertain tremendously at the
musical level and was also a top notch actor, without a doubt.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Brian Koller
"From Here to Eternity" racked up 13 Academy Award
nominations, and won five Oscars, including Best Picture,
Best Director (Fred Zinnemann, who had been nominated
the year before for "High Noon"), Best Screenplay
(Daniel Taradash) and Best B/W Cinematography (Burnett Guffey).
Winning the only Oscars of their careers were
Best Supporting Actor Frank Sinatra, and Best Supporting
Actress Donna Reed.  Montgomery Clift and Burt Lancaster
were nominated for Best Actor, while Deborah Kerr picked
up a nomination for Best Actress.
Today, the film is best known for the beach scene
with Lancaster and Kerr, considered to be one of the
most romantic in screen history, and Sinatra's performance,
which rejuvenated his career.
The setting is Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, shortly before the
surprise Japanese attack began direct U.S. involvement
in World War II.  Clift is a soldier and bugler who transfers
to a new regiment.  A former middleweight boxer, he is pressured
by contemptible Captain Holmes (Philip Ober) to box for
the regiment.  Clift refuses, and is harassed by Holmes
and the regiment's boxers.  Clift's sole friend is Maggio
(Sinatra).  Clift gets a girlfriend (Reed), who is a
'hostess' at a private club (in the novel, the club is
a whorehouse, while Reed's character is a prostitute).
Holmes' right hand man is Lancaster, a Sergeant who has
eyes for Holmes' unhappy wife (Deborah Kerr).  Their affair
is illegal under Army rules and could land him in prison.
The much-lauded beach scene is not representative of
the Lancaster/Kerr romance, which is furtive and bitter.
The critical and commercial success of "From Here to
Eternity" is understandable.  It is a good film, and it
has strong appeal for both men (war theme) and women
(romance theme).  It appeals to American patriotism,
especially in the scene where heroic soldiers led by
Lancaster shoot down a Japanese bomber.
Essentially the film is a soap opera, with the dual
troubled romances of Clift/Reed and Lancaster/Kerr.
To increase sympathy for our romantic leads, Holmes'
character is selfish, cruel and philandering, while
Sinatra's tormentor Fatso (Ernest Borgnine) is a sadistic
bully.  How much one appreciates the film is proportional
to one's sympathy for Clift and Lancaster, both of whom
are stubborn with self-destructive streaks.  Some of
the dramatic scenes are manipulative and heavy-handed,
especially the various death scenes, Clift's fistfight,
and the come-uppance of Holmes and the regiment's boxers.
"From Here to Eternity" reminds me of "The Young Lions",
a film from 1957.  Clift plays a very similar character,
a soldier forced to fight other soldiers, who gets the
girl, goes AWOL, and forces the premature retirement of
his Captain.  In "The Young Lions", Dean Martin's
character merges the roles of Sinatra (Clift's friend)
and Lancaster (in refusing to get a promotion).
Since "The Young Lions" is the later film, one could
say that it ripped off "From Here to Eternity".  But
"The Young Lions" is really an improvement, as it is
a much better film, probably due to the presence of
Marlon Brando.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Lars Lindahl
Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
"From Here to Eternity" (1953) ***1/2 (out of four)
Starring Burt Lancaster, Montgomery Clift, Frank
Sinatra, Donna Reed, Deborah Kerr, Philip Ober,
and Ernest Borgnine 
"We may seem all alike. We ain't all alike." Private
Robert E. Lee Prewitt (Montgomery Clift) tells his
newly found lover in the middle of a crowded Hawaiian
bar. Prewitt is representing men in society - how they
ostensibly are exactly the same, but in actuality are
as individual as can be.  The 1953 classic From Here
to Eternity dedicates its entire running time to
proving this quote, and with all of the interesting
male characters it introduces - it succeeds. From the
loner, to the alcoholic, to the adulterer, to the
torturer, to the gentleman, the only thing that links
these unique individuals is the military suit they
wear to work everyday. Living in the same vicinity
just prior to the attack on Pearl Harbor, the
cooperation of these men seems infinitely more
difficult to them than fighting in the war. 
Between these five central characters preparing for a
world war, a powerful emotional war takes place. And
when the Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor
occurs starting World War II in America, it provides a
thunderous conclusion to this war. The film opens with
the arrival of the sensitive Prewitt, a former
professional bugle player and boxer for the army who
inexplicably wants to become a private. This is all
sounds perfect to Captain Dana Holmes (Philip Ober), a
man eager to become a major and finds the only way to
move up a rank is to have a winning boxing team. But
Prewitt has quit boxing and says there is nothing in
the world that will convince him to do so again. This
angers Holmes who has his officers, including Sergeant
Milton Warden (Burt Lancaster), train Prewitt
especially hard until he finally changes his mind. The
only soldier who supports Prewitt is Angelo Maggio
(Frank Sinatra), a man who knows all the hot spots in
town and regularly gets drunk for entertainment. So
drunk at times that it gets him an enemy named
Sergeant "Fatso" Judson (Ernest Borgnine) who swears
he will get Maggio one day. Meanwhile Sergeant Warden
is having an illicit affair with his Captain's
depressed and lonely wife (Deborah Kerr). 
Did that just sound like an example of your everyday
soap opera? Yes, there are a lot of characters in From
Here to Eternity (in fact I left out Lorene (Donna
Reed), a woman Prewitt meets and falls in love with at
one of the clubs he stops by at). Do not be mistaken,
this movie is a soap opera, several things are
happening at the same time - but unlike something on
CBS at 2 P.M., the acting and directing in this movie
is amazing. Also despite the large cast, impressively
there isn't one confusing moment and the script, based
on the controversial novel by James Jones, ingeniously
connects everyone with everyone. By the end, there
will be a large collision.  
The mistake the film makes is that the female
characters stand in the way. The relationships between
Prewitt and Lorene, and Warden and the Captain's wife
Karen, are both unconvincing due to expedient set ups
by director Fred Zinneman. Just when you start to
believe that these people actually are beginning to
love each other, the movie is already ten steps ahead,
raising the possibility of marriage. Both love affairs
are so melodramatic and predictable that they hold
back the entire movie. 
Winner of 8 Academy Awards in 1953 including Best
Picture, Best Supporting Actress (Donna Reed), and
Best Supporting Actor (Frank Sinatra), I was somewhat
shocked that Reed won. She just didn't amaze me as
much as other winners of the prestigious award (at
least she was better than Beatrice Straight in
Network). Sinatra, on the other hand, really surprised
me as Angelo Maggio. Simultaneously hilarious and
depressing, he single-handedly shifted this film's
status from good to classic. 
Zinneman, to show his range, directed this movie just
before Oklahoma! and just after High Noon. He
skillfully hints at the upcoming Pearl Harbor attack
with newspaper articles, dates, and images scattered
everywhere that tease the audience and build up
suspense for the unavoidable incident. And when the
moment finally comes, the execution is satisfyingly
accurate.  You can tell this was a surprise attack by
men running back and forth for cover with just towels
on. 
>From Here to Eternity revolves around a war yet to
happen. It looks at American society right before the
country's entry in the war; a quiet period compared to
the disorder that soon follows. But the beauty of the
film is that it is far from quiet. The emotional
dilemmas that these characters face is as powerful and
realistic as any battle sequence in a World War II
film such as Saving Private Ryan.

Author
Nicholas Amado
The fifties provided some of the greatest films in the history of cinema. New
ideas were developed, new themes explored. Anti and post-war feelings ran
high in Hollywood, and, as a result, films like From Here To Eternity were
made. This Oscar winning picture has ranked among the greatest films ever
made, and with good reason.
>From Here To Eternity takes a hard look at the American Army during World War
II. Corrupt officers, rebellious privates, and an emotionally unstable
Seargent are the focus of this cinematic masterpiece. Mostly, it chronicles a
brief period in the lives of Private Pruit (Clift) and Seargent Warden
(Lancaster), their loves and their sense of duty and honor. 
This picture offers filmmaking excellence at every turn. Each main actor
gives the performance of his or her career, particularly Clift, Lancaster,
Sinatra and Reed. (The latter two both won supporting Oscars for thier work
in the film.) Clift is masterful as Pruit, and after viewing this film, (or
re-viewing it, if it has been a while) one cannot imagine anyone else in the
role. He portrays his character with such depth and subtle emotion that a
film about his life prior to where the film picks it up would be thoroughly
engrossing.
Zinneman brings together all the elements of the film brilliantly. His edits
between scenes of Warden and Pruit courting their respective loves are
flawless. In one sequence, he dissolves the crashing waves of one cathartic
episode between Lancaster and Kerr into the rippling smoke of Clift's
cigarette as he opens up for the first time to Donna Reed. 
As all the men grow gradually restless on the base, subtle visuals warning of
the attack on Pearl Harbor creep into the frame. Lancaster leans against the
wall while on the telephone, for the first time making us aware of any
time-related element; the calendar shows December 6th. Shortly thereafter, he
moves along a boardwalk , pausing in front of a directional marker, showing,
amongst other things, a sign reading "Pearl Harbor 8m". And on the morning of
the strike, a clock looms in the background, clearly showing ten minutes to
eight, the first bomb hits seconds later. The attack sequence includes
authentic war footage that blends well with the staged action.
This 8 Oscar motion picture helped define the filmmaking of the fifties. It
manages to express anti-war, and in many cases anti-military sentiment while
never allowing us a moment away from a military man. Daniel Taradash won a
well deserved award for his brilliant screenplay. He has each main character
starving for release from what they claim to be their one true love, the
Army. While Warden becomes involved with his superior's wife, Pruit is
falling for a woman who is paid to keep men company in a private club. Each
man picks an emotionally dangerous (and in some respects career-threatening)
situation to break the drudgery of their military lives. The dialogue is
realistic and involving, and each character speaks to us from an emotional
level.
>From Here To Eternity should be viewed by anyone with a respect for fantastic
filmmaking. It begs for a repeat viewing from those who havn't seen it in
ages, and it needs to be seen by anyone who has never had the pleasure. 
Four out of Four stars
Copyright (C) 1997 Nick Amado
*************************
Questions? Comments? Complaints? Email me: NAMIAM@AOL.COM 
