Title
Review for Animal Factory (2000)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Silver Nitrate Releasing
 Director: Steve Buscemi
 Writer:  Edward Bunker and John Steppling, novel by
Edward Bunker
 Cast: Willem Dafoe, Edward Furlong, Seymour Cassel,
Mickey Rourke, Steve Buscemi, Tom Arnold, John Heard,
Danny Trejo, Jake La Botz, Mark Boone, Edward Bunker,
Christopher Bauer, Michale Buscemi
    "Animal Factory" looks like a hard-boiled prison drama--
and that it is--but what makes it different from every other
jailhouse story including Frank Darabont's "The Shawshank
Redemption" is that it explores the nature of mentoring. 
Mentors, of course, are people who take other under their
wing, explaining the culture of organizations such as 
businesses to the neophytes, and going to bat for the new
guys to advance the careers of their followers.  Why are
some of us willing to do this?  The least altruistic reason is
that the boss assigns someone to do this job, to show the
ropes to a new worker.  On the other hand, the Online Film
Critics Society maintains an exciting mentoring program in
which volunteer critics look over the reviews of new
applicants and show them how to improve their writing so that
they can be admitted to the fold.  This ranks as the most
unselfish kind of service. 
   Now then: why should a hardened criminal in his late
forties show an interest in a handsome guy of about 25 from
a rich family who is sentenced to a tough institution in an
election year for possession of a large quantity of marijuana? 
To get points for an upcoming probation hearing?  Possibly. 
But I know what you're thinking.  The older fellow wants to
turn the callow youth into a punk, meaning in prison
vocabulary a guy who permits sexual favors in return for
protection and a kindly shoulder.  Is that what motivates Earl
Copen (Willem Dafoe) to take  special notice of a new kid,
Ron Decker (Edward Furlong) while some more sinister-
looking guys in the jail have their eye on Decker as well? 
That is perhaps what director Steve Buscemi wants us to
think. That's the most logical assumption and you couldn't be
blamed for holding the view.
   "Animal Factory" is gritty, as you might expect since it
comes across as hardly a country club reformatory for
stockbrokers who trade illegally on specialized knowledge.
Yet Buscemi has made a picture more believable than did
Frank Darabont in '94 when he told the tale of a
straight-arrow guy who is railroaded for a double murder and
sent to prison for life in the late 1940s.  Where Darabont's
drama is an overlong 142 minutes, Buscemi's is a just-right
94, and where "Shawshank" is predictable, "Animal Factory"
surprises.
   The prison which is the scene of frequent stabbings, work
stoppages, rapes, and countless rounds of convict politicking
and scheming is called Eastern State and is actually filmed
by Phil Parment outside Philadelphia at Holmsburg State
prison and at a nearby house of detention.  In the story, we
find that Decker has spent two weeks in the correctional
facility with hopes for an early parole thanks to his rich dad's
(John Heard) manuevers, but when he could use a couple of
favors such as a ticket to the prison show, he is introduced to
Earl Copen (Willem Dafoe), who is looked up to as the de
facto leader of the convicts.  Because Copen has no ulterior
motive in taking the kid on--he simply had developed a liking
for the lad--he gradually, without pressure, explains the
ropes, among which is the advice that the word "inmate" is
out.  The prison population like to call themselves "convicts." 
Why?  Who knows.  That's just the culture.  When Decker is
ultimately threatened by the large and menacing Buck Rowan
(Tom Arnold), who approaches the frail young man in the
bathroom demanding that Decker be his punk, Copen is
called on to take the needed action.  
   The serious consequences that follow, including a stringent
penalty thrown on poor Decker by an unsympathetic judge,
turns the 25-year-old onto the road leading to hardened
criminality--making yet another mockery of the idea that our
penitentiaries are correctional facilities.  
   Buscemi's movie is in no way a highly commercial,
frequently hysterical and calculated melodrama such as "The
Shawshank Redemption" or "Midnight Express," and that is to
its credit.  Rejecting the standard Hollywood path, Buscemi
gives the impression at times that he's making a docu-drama,
portraying the real story of prison life but without the deadly
talking-heads routine of conventional documentaries.  We get
the impression that whatever we see actually goes on behind
stone walls--the transvestite Jan the Actress (Mickey Rourke)
who, surprisingly, is not bothered by the goons; the
separation of blacks and whites, occasionally yielding to
outright race riots; the sporadic stabbings in the prison yard
that lead to lockups and to the dumping of suspects into
solitary; the sharing of HIV-infected needles by the dopers in
the jail who are able to get heroin smuggled in with the
cooperation of friendly or indifferent guards.  
   Despite the violence, this is not the sort of movie that
would have even the most sensitive person in the audience
turning away from the screen with one possible exception,
one portrayed in stomach-churning fury by Copen in his
attempt to avoid transfer to a different institution.  The
chemistry between Dafoe and Furlong is this indie's most
valuable offering, an even more important and touching one
than the portrayals of the boredom and brutality that regularly
touch the lives of these unfortunate people.  Buscemi gets
good ensemble work from these veteran actors, who work at
the low end of the pay scale to put out this minimal-budget
movie in just 29 days.
Not Rated.  Running time: 94 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Christopher Null
        After seeing Steve Buscemi's sophomore directorial effort, The Animal
Factory (following 1996's Trees Lounge), I nearly reconsidered choosing
film criticism as a career path.  For the first hour of this film, it
seemed the way to go was to become a convict.  (By the way, ma, they
don't call 'em inmates in the pen, they call 'em convicts.)
        Puffy faced Edward Furlong plays young Ron Decker, a new convict in the
pen.  He's small, skinny and smart -- an ideal candidate to become some
solid's girlfriend.  Fortunately, he is befriended by Earl Koper (Willem
Dafoe, sporting a clean, bald head) and his gang of old-timers.  This
more or less prevents the kid from getting raped, though Earl admits
that he wouldn't have bothered if the kid was ugly.
        Prison life seems pretty swell at first.  There are no women, but the
men all pat each other on the back, are loyal to their friends and call
each other "brother."  They get three squares a day and if they've been
inside long enough, the guards give them freebies like steak dinners,
extra packs of cigarettes, or porno magazines.  Life isn't so bad on the
inside as long as you got friends.
        I was all set to phone up my boss at filmcritic.com and hand in my
resignation when Tom Arnold showed up on the scene as a hillbilly
scumbag whose first act of malice is to suck on his own finger and shove
it up Furlong's bum.  Suddenly, prison life didn't sound so lovely
anymore.  This is before the razor action in a later sequence where one
of our main characters gets sliced up pretty good.  Violence can spring
up at any time in the joint.
        This adaptation of Edward Bunker's novel knows the prison lingo
backwards and forwards.  Bunker was in prison himself, and it shows. 
(He's now a fine, hard-boiled novelist and played Mr. Blue in Reservoir
Dogs, opposite Steve Buscemi.)  The grimy cellblocks and hallways,
filthy mattresses, and lousy food all seem to have been well researched
here, present and correct.  Buscemi fills his film with paranoia, often
inserting shots of convicts looking over their shoulder or shifting
their eyes.
        Buscemi the filmmaker trips up by turning the prison playground into a
showcase for his actors.  Dafoe and Furlong are excellent in the lead
roles, thinking their way through each scene.  Thing is, they're
surrounded by people who are sinking their teeth into their roles (and
scenery) so much that each scene plays like a vaudeville number.
        The spotlight is on Mickey Rourke as a mealy-mouthed drag queen, then
on Tom Arnold's aforementioned renegade hick, then on Seymour Cassel's
"guard who's seen it all" character.  Instead of blending into a fine
ensemble, each actor's shining presence only serves to remind us that
this is only a movie.  We're not in a jailhouse; we're in a talent show
for the best and brightest in the "Intense Character Actor" category.
        It's entertaining, sure, but it destroys the authenticity.  Suddenly, I
realize I'm not really in a prison.  I'm in an independent film directed
by Steve Buscemi.
        As though driving the nails into his own coffin, Buscemi even steals
the 360-degree pan from Reservoir Dogs in one shot.  Tarantino's film
was filled with pop cultural references, reminding us that we were
watching a movie, and it worked in that context.  But Buscemi, instead
of going for cinema verite realism, throws in this flashy camera move. 
It's pretty tactless, here.
        These blunders don't kill the movie.  The relationship between Dafoe
and Furlong is touching, drifting through a no man's land between being
father/son or lovers without sexual congress.  Dafoe schools the kid on
the prison ropes.  Furlong keeps his eyes and ears open.  While I found
it hard to believe that a boy as pretty as Eddie Furlong wouldn't wind
up as someone's dinner, I struggled to suspend my disbelief because
there are some fine, subtle glances between these guys that resemble
love.  I'm a sucker for romance, even in prison.
        This key plot point treads on the verge of sentimentality, but the
grand finale lapses into the familiar terrain of Prison Movie 101.  Of
course we have the obligatory "let's get out of prison" bit.  Buscemi
and Bunker (whose novel is terrific, by the way -- much grittier than
the film) blow their opportunity to leave well enough alone.
        The Animal Factory is rarely boring, though.  For all my qualms about
Buscemi's directorial flourishes and self-conscious moments for the
actors, he's made a movie that at least cares about developing those
characters within their environment.  At least it observes these people
in their daily routine, takes it's time to let us get to know Earl, Ron
and all the rest.  It's not as raw as it would like to be, but it's sure
got character.
Director: Steve Buscemi
Producer: Steve Buscemi, Elie Samaha, Andrew Stevens
Writer: Edward Bunker, John Steppling
Starring: Willem Dafoe, Edward Furlong, Seymour Cassel, Mickey Rourke,
Steve Buscemi, Tom Arnold, John Heard, Edward Bunker
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ANIMAL FACTORY, THE (director: Steve Buscemi; screenwriter: from novel
by Edward Bunker; cinematographer: Phil Parmet; editor: Kate Williams;
cast: Willem Dafoe (Earl Copen), Edward Furlong (Ron Decker), Seymour
Cassel (Lt. Seeman), Mickey Rourke (Jan the actress), Jake La Botz
(Jessie), Danny Trejo (Vito), Tom Arnold (Buck), Steve Buscemi (Warden);
Runtime: 90; 2000)
Ron Decker (Furlong) is a minor dealer in marijuana, but he gets
sentenced to a severe term of five years. He is thrown into a hardened
prison environment, where gangs are broken down according to ethnic
groups: black, Puerto Rican, or white. For his protection, the soft kid
who looks like he's from the suburbs, seeks the help of the white gang
leader, Earl Copen (Dafoe).
The question raised, is whether the political climate is so paranoid
that it doesn't understand the difference between violent criminals and
nonviolent drug criminals, who make up a large percent of the
overcrowded prison population. Apparently, the judicial system has
broken down, so much so that it can't satisfy the political electorate
who want stiffer punishment and those who want more of an emphasis on
education and counseling programs for the nonviolent offenders.
Through Decker's suburban eyes we get the picture of how prison looks to
someone like him, who is a fish out of water. He has to be constantly
fearful because he is now in a world where violence is the name of the
game. He has to watch out that he is not gang raped or drawn into a
fight or have someone pull a shank on him. A Puerto Rican gang wants to
rape him and, even though, he tries to keep a low-profile, he is under
constant scrutiny by all the prisoners. He has to learn how to conduct
himself while in prison, so he is not considered a punk. Earl, who
treats him as if he were his son and represses his desire to rape the
beautiful kid, as he tells him no one can take a chance and be without
protection from friends while in prison these days.
Earl is his mentor, as he shows him how to adjust to prison life. After
being in this prison for 18 years, he knows everything about it and runs
it like it was his turf. Earl has befriended the prison guard Lt. Seeman
(Cassel) and has connections with the convicts who have key jobs in the
prison, and can get weapons and drugs whenever he wishes. Earl tells him
that the trick to doing the time is to get a good job and live in the
right cell, and not get labeled as a punk. That bad name, once gotten,
stays with you no matter what prison you go to.
The prison atmosphere of hostility, constant danger, noise, and
inhumanity, was fully captured, as the film had the gritty, realistic
look of a prison. The film was shot in Holmsburg State Prison,
Pennsylvannia. The convicts looked scary, the prison looked real, and
the feeling of despair was the only air that was present, as
rehabilitation seemed to be a farce, a show that one puts on to score
clemency points from the judges.
Decker is having a tough time surviving, even with the savvy help from
Earl, who was once an angry convict but always had a tender spot for the
right person. His help is altruistic; he does it because he sees the
injustice of the system and lives vicariously through this kid, thinking
that maybe he can have more of chance than he ever had.
As Decker uses Earl's knowledge of the law to appeal his case, two
troubling incidents in the prison show him that it will be impossible
for him to get his sentence reduced. A black con in the shower attacks
him with a razor and slashes his face, and later on the con is found
dead in the garbage truck; and, a hillbilly prisoner in for raping an
elderly woman, Buck (Arnold), tries to rape him in the bathroom. In
retaliation, Decker gets a shank and puts it into Buck's back. In the
hospital Buck spills the beans on Decker and Earl puts out the word to
get him, so Buck's IV is poisoned with cleaning fluid and he dies in the
hospital.
Seeing no other alternative but escaping from prison, Earl works out a
plan for them to escape in the garbage trucks.
The acting was just fine. Furlong plays his part with trepidation,
knowing that he has arrived in hell and that he is ill prepared for it.
Dafoe with a shaved head, convincingly has the moves down pat of a
hardened convict, knowing all the angles needed to make prison like his
home, Mickey Rourke has a flamboyant part as a cross-dressing prison
queen, amusingly offering his take on things to his impressionable cell
mate Furlong.
The film had the right message to deliver about the stupidity of the
current drug laws and the horrors of prison life. I don't know if anyone
seriously believes anymore that the prisons can be a place of
rehabilitation. The film does a very good job in bringing this out and
creating an entertaining picture because of the fine performances. But
it also seemed to stage everything in the story to weigh heavily into
what its message was. The film didn't feel like it was freely flowing
along, and because of that the story floundered at times.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
