Title
Review for Skin Deep (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Alba, Jr
     Through the years, Blake Edwards has made some outrageously funny films.
Remember all the Pink Panther movies?  More recently he has also made some very
funny films like S.O.B., 10 and VICTOR/VICTORIA.
     His latest directorial effort is entitled SKIN DEEP.  This is a film about
a married, successful writer and musician (John Ritter), who decides to engage
in the art of infidelity.  This new hobby of his succeeds until his wife 
unexpectedly catches him fooling around.  He soon gets ousted from his happy
home.  He is later seen explaining all of his female encounters to his
psychiatrist.
     This motion picture features Vincent Gardenia (MOONSTRUCK) as his friend.
It also features Julianne Phillips (the former Mrs. Bruce Springsteen) and
Denise Crosby as two of his female conquests.  He soon learns the meaning to
the saying "Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned."
     This film simply stated is a light romantic comedy.  It is not really
Blake Edwards' best work, but it does contain a few funny moments.  This
advertisement for this film promotes a scene that they say is too sexy to be
mentioned on television.  Well, it is too sexy for me to mention it here
either.  All I can say is that it is probably the funniest scene in the movie.

Author
Randy Parker
     One of my favorite songs by the Stranglers includes the lyric,
"You'd better watch out for the skin deep."  I'd like to extend the same
warning: watch out for SKIN DEEP, but whatever you do don't watch SKIN
DEEP.
     SKIN DEEP is a tedious and uneven comedy written and directed by
Blake Edwards.  John Ritter stars as Zach, a dried up writer and insatiable
womanizer with a big-time drinking problem.  I never saw Edwards' comedy
THE MAN WHO LOVED WOMEN, but I have to wonder whether SKIN DEEP is a
remake.  You see, to put it mildly, Zach goes to bed with just about each
and every woman he meets.  As the movie opens, Zach's wife, Alex, catches
him with not only his mistress but also his mistress' hairdresser.  Like
any sensible wife, Alex kicks Zach out of the house and divorces him.  In
response, Zach goes on a spiritual journey of drinking, womanizing,
psychotherapy, and self-discovery.  If you're turned on by the idea of
watching Ritter drink, get arrested, have sex, drink, crash his Mercedes,
have more sex, drink, get arrested again, drink, and sing horrendously at
the piano, then SKIN DEEP should be right up your alley.
     SKIN DEEP makes the fatal mistake of inflicting on us unbelievable
and unsympathetic characters.  Zach is a rich, '80s L.A. version of
Ritter's Jack Tripper character from "Three's Company."  Like Jack, Zach is
clumsy and inept; he's the type of guy whose bad aim makes him accidently
squirt breath freshener into his eye.  Zach is supposed to be charming and
charismatic, but I failed to see even one redeeming virtue in him.
Consequently, I never felt the least bit of sympathy or pity for the
philandering alcoholic during his moments of crisis.  In fact, when Zach
crashes his ex-wife's wedding in a desperate attempt to stop her from
remarrying, I actually rooted for her to go through with the ceremony.
     To add insult to injury, Edwards gives his large supporting cast
nothing but stereotypes with which to work.  For instance, Vincent
Gardenia's talents are wasted in his role as the fatherly bartender.  Of
all the women in the film--and there are many--Alyson Reed, alone, stands
out as Zach's wife; Reed brings intelligence and sensitivity to the role.
     Because we don't care the slightest bit about anyone in SKIN DEEP,
the film's few feeble attempts at drama inevitably fail.  The comedy in
SKIN DEEP doesn't fare much better.  Most of the jokes are dumb,
predictable, and sitcomish.  About every ten minutes, however, Edwards does
manage to come up with a good line or a novel sight-gag, the most effective
of which involves a pair of "dueling" condoms.  Overall, the laughs in SKIN
DEEP are just too infrequent and the characters just too shallow for the
film to stay afloat.
     My final criticism of the film lies in its glamorous depiction of
alcohol and alcoholism.  Zach's excessive drinking is clearly ruining his
life, but nevertheless it seems to give him more pleasure than pain.
Zach's drinking binges never have any truly serious or lasting
consequences.  If he crashes his Mercedes, he gets a new one.  If he gets
arrested, his lawyer bails him out of jail.  If his wife leaves him, she
will eventually decide to give him a second chance if he'll clean up his
act.  The tone in SKIN DEEP is all wrong; Edwards treats a very serious
issue far too lightly, making a joke out of a problem that is no joking
matter.  Perhaps Edwards should have studied Dudley Moore in ARTHUR or,
better yet, Michael Keaton in CLEAN AND SOBER before making SKIN DEEP.
