Title
Review for Mighty Aphrodite (1995)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Ben Hoffman
     There appears to be no end to the genius of Woody Allen.
Over the years I have seen some great comedies but I do not recall
ever seeing any movie as funny as MIGHTY APHRODITE.  There is no
one in the film world who comes close to Allen  not only in his
incredible sense of humor but in originality.  You have never seen
any movie such as this one. From the opening scene (about which I am
not about to tell you) to the ending clincher it is a beaut.
     Right along with the comedy is a story with an ending O. Henry
would have loved.
     To tell you what role each actor had would reveal too much so
let us just name a few that will not give anything away.  There is
F. Murray Abraham, Olympia Dukakis, David Ogden Stiers, Jack Warden
(as a blind man), and Peter Weller as an art gallery owner who tries
to get Amanda (Helen Bonham Carter, who plays Woody's wife) to leave
Allen. If you remember (and how could you forget?) the lovely Carter
from ROOM WITH A VIEW and HOWARD'S END, you are in for another
surprise.
     The story line is relatively simple.  Amanda decides to have a
baby with her husband, sports writer Allen.  He emphatically puts
his foot down.  Next scene shows them cooing over a one-day-old baby
boy whom they have adopted.  This is followed by a discussion of
choosing a name.
     When the son is about six years old, Woody begins to wonder who
the birth mother was and who the birth father was because he feels
that one day their son will want to know about the parents who are
responsible for his birth.  Visits to the Home where they had
adopted the child leads him on a great search.  He finally finds
Linda (Mira Sorvino) who has changed her name several times for
reasons you will discover when you see the film.  She is the birth
mother.  Her circumstances are not very good so Woody introduces
her to a handsome onion farmer with whom she can live happily ever
after.  That part is played by Michael Rapaport.
     Enough!  For a great evening (or matinee) of laughter, this is
the film to see.  Surely the OSCAR people are furiously taking
notes.
Written, Directed and starring Woody Allen.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 10/27/95 (limited), 11/3/95 (wide)
Running Length: 1:38
MPAA Classification: R (Sexual situations, mature themes, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
     The film opens in an amphitheater in Greece, with an appropriately
garbed Greek chorus chanting of the deeds of Achilles and Oedipus.
Suddenly, unexpectedly, the masked men and women decide to switch to the
tale of Lenny Weinrib (Woody Allen)--definitely not a name known from
mythology.  And, as things go from slightly absurd to completely
ridiculous, the Chorus, led by F. Murray Abraham, say things like "Oh
cursed fate!  Some thoughts are better left unthunk!" and breaking into
verses of "When You're Smiling."  And all this is accomplished with an
appropriate level of pomposity.
     MIGHTY APHRODITE, Woody Allen's 1995 film, lacks the brilliance and
hilarity of his two previous efforts (MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY and
BULLETS OVER BROADWAY), but it's not bad as a lightweight one-hundred
minutes at the movies.  Thematically, the film is pretty thin, unless
you consider that everyone's life can resemble a Greek tragedy in one
way or another.  Allen appears determined to craft a motion picture that
can be laughed at without plumbing any especially deep neuroses of the
human condition.
     The story opens with Lenny and wife Amanda (Helena Bonham Carter,
sans period costumes and British accent) discussing adoption.  Lenny
doesn't want a child, but Amanda does, although she isn't willing to
sacrifice a year of her life to have one the normal, biological way.
Eventually, Lenny gives in and the couple gets a healthy male infant,
whom they name Max.  As the child grows and Amanda becomes more wrapped
up in her attempts to procure her own art studio, Lenny fights a growing
curiosity to learn more about his son's natural mother.  Eventually, he
sneaks a peek at the adoption agency's records.  This leads to a meeting
with Linda Ash (Mira Sorvino), the woman who gave birth to Max.  Much to
Lenny's dismay, she turns out to be a statuesque blond with a helium
voice and little in the way of intelligence.  Worse still is how she
makes her living--her dual career involves starring in porn films and
turning $200 tricks for a bald-headed, homicidal pimp.
     Woody Allen really only has one on-screen personality, and he plays
it here as usual, although, at this point in his career, he's getting a
bit old for roles better suited to someone twenty years his junior.
Helena Bonham Carter, taking time out from Merchant/Ivory type
productions, gives a snappy turn as a contemporary American woman.  The
only noticeable acting blot on MIGHTY APHRODITE is Michael Rapaport, who
displays the same lack of range and energy he showed in HIGHER LEARNING.
     The shining star is, without a doubt, Mira Sorvino (AMONGST
FRIENDS, BARCELONA), giving the finest performance of an as-yet short
career.  Since, in BULLETS OVER BROADWAY, Jennifer Tilly earned an Oscar
nomination for an inferior portrayal of a character of similar
intelligence, Sorvino deserves at least that much--if not more.  This
is a star-making outing by one of America's top young actresses.
     The most original element of MIGHTY APHRODITE is the use of the
Greek Chorus.  However, what starts out as a clever, innovative device
quickly becomes tedious through overuse.  The Chorus seems always to be
on hand to make pithy remarks, and their presence becomes intrusive.  At
times, it's as if Woody Allen is attempting to take a page out of the
MONTY PYTHON book, and those two very different styles of humor do not
mix well.
     While not up to the level of many of Allen's recent films, MIGHTY
APHRODITE is nevertheless an entertaining diversion.  The comedy, most
of which is light and easily accessible, is worthy of some laughs, and
the movie has a good sense of irony.  MIGHTY APHRODITE is far from a
tour de force, and some Woody Allen die-hards may be disappointed, but
there's enough in this picture to recommend it.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1996. All Rights Reserved.
Woody Allen has always been around with some eccentric stories. This is
probably as good a film as he has ever done, at least it is better centered
as a story, than he usually is.
And it almost is not the story that attracts us to this film, but  the way
that his characters carry themselves. It is difficult not to consider this
an excellent film, in the way it is done, with its ludicrous Greek chorus
and all, which is just perfect, though the people I saw it with, do not
understand this stuff, and did not find it funny to see the chorus break
into a musical number, while also editorializing everything, which Woody
Allen has always
done on his own character and we got bored with it.
The story is simple, though it has its intricate turns.  A Manhattan couple
and their marriage are just about over, and they adopt a child. The man's
curiosity wins out and he finds that the child he adopted is the son of a
porn star, whom he goes after to meet. And she is a bit on the bird brain
mentality, but she does have feelings.  And Woody tries to help her along,
but never tells her that it is her lost child that he has adopted.  But in
the
middle of it all, in a lark, they get together, finally, and have an evening
of fun, which the story suggests has her get pregnant, and she is feeling
better about having lost her first child.  And on the way out of town, she
meets another man, and lo and behold everyone is happy ever after... well,
the marriage of Woody and his wife, is probably dead too, as she  has done
her side thing also.
Well, if anything, this is typical Woody Allen, in that the stories are
totally intricate, and intermixed so much that
it is off the wall. On the other hand, it is the "innocent"  side that makes
this an intricate story, and Woody refuses to condemn that part of things.
There are plenty of moments when we could easily get disgusted with the
young girl's lifestyle, and living. But somehow, we take some pity on her,
and do not spend our time judging her wrongs, or her next movie.  And we
definitely know that Woody's marriage in the story, is in trouble, as its
fires have gone out.
Were it not for the funny stuff, this film could easily be considered styled
a bit after the Godard method of filming, where a suggestion as to right and
wrong is never made, and the audience has to choose, something that the
Hollywood viewer can never appreciate, where all the characters have to be
separated by either colors, or obvious deeds. In this film, people are just
that, people.  And this style, creates a lot of funny, weird moments, that
are enjoyable for the discriminating seer, although terribly boring for
others. In so many ways, Woody lets the camera talk, or keeps it running so
that the characters have to live a bit longer, and do not become a shadow of
themselves, an idea, a mere representation of who they are.  And thus we
never
really find the girl unattractive, Woody boring, or any of the other
characters in the film out of place.
But the funniest thing in this film is not even Woody, but Myra Sorvino, who
ended up getting the Oscar for
her portrayal, of what starts out being a blonde bimbo, and becomes a rather
nice woman in the film.  And it
is hard to let go of F. Murray Abraham, as Woody's friend, and alter ego, as
the leader of the chorus, whose
staging, is what separates this film apart from others. Unfortunately one
has to have known the Greek chorus
in the boring Greek plays, to appreciate the style that Woody has designed
for this production, which is immediately off the wall, specially when it
breaks its commentary into a song and dance routine.  But it never stops to
make its point.  It's the modern chorus for the 20th century, used in the
only way that we will ever understand, or probably ever appreciate.
Magnificent film, if you want to appreciate one of America's truly great
writers and directors, the Capra of the 80's and 90's.  It's a shame that
while he has critical success, his films rarely go beyond that. He deserves
so much more than that, and he will be forever remembered for his writing
and directing, never his acting, the character of which we are basically
tired of.  But what is around him, makes for an excellent film.

Author
Christopher Null
     I guess it's true that you can't win 'em all.  One of my favorite
writers and directors, Woody Allen, just released his 25th film as
director.  Unfortunately, his recent streak of wildly funny films
(including HUSBANDS AND WIVES and BULLETS OVER BROADWAY), his hit a speed
bump with the unfulfilling MIGHTY APRODITE.
     It's a contemporary story about--surprise--a neurotic New Yorker
(Allen) and his dysfunctional relationships and search for happiness. 
Allen's character, Lenny, is a sports writer this time.  He's married to
Amanda (Helena Bonham Carter), with whom he rather suddenly adopts a
child.  When marriage with Amanda starts to fizzle and their new son Max
begins to shine, Lenny begins to wonder if Max's real mother might just be
the girl for him.  Come to find out, mom is really prostitute/porn actress
Linda (Mira Sorvino), and Allen's paranoia and angst really begin to
shine.
     As you can imagine, this scenario makes for some perfect comic
opportunities.  Unfortunately, the time needed to set this up is extreme,
as is the time needed to resolve everything at the end.  The result is a
few good bits of comedy right in the middle of the movie, when Lenny is
first getting to know Linda.  The rest of it, about Amanda's wandering eye
and Lenny's attempt to set Linda up with a boxer (Michael Rapaport), is
simply limp.
     The worst of all is Allen's decision to use an inexplicable "chorus,"
in the style of an old Greek tragedy, in lieu of his own narration.  So
between scenes of downtown Manhattan, we switch to an ancient stone stage,
where 20 guys in period costume wax poetic about Lenny's dilemma.  It's
cute, but it never really works.  Allen is usually skilled at pulling off
this kind of out-of-place addition (as in ALICE, THE PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO,
and others), but this time it's just too much and too silly.
     Mira Sorvino's Linda is the one to watch, pulling off the "ditzy
blonde" more memorably than anyone else has in recent years.  Allen's
acting is good, but he seems a bit tired, and most of the additional
supporting cast is solid.  Helena Bonham Carter turned out to be an
enormous casting mistake, completely lacking credibility as a New York
high society type, mainly because she keeps slipping in and out of her
naturally thick British accent.  It's almost painful to listen to her.
     The real disappointment here is that MIGHTY APRHODITE lacks the rich
subtlety of Allen's previous work.  You can watch ANNIE HALL a hundred
times and catch something new with each viewing.  MIGHTY APHRODITE beats
its messages over your head with a stick.  Like the chorus directly states
at the end:  "Isn't life ironic?"  Well, yeah.  But there are much better
ways to tell us about it.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Andrew Hicks
        If you think people who walk around talking to themselves 
are strange, you'll gain a new respect for them when you see 
MIGHTY APHRODITE, the latest Woody Allen film, in which he 
regularly consults with imaginary characters from Greek tragedies. 
The Greek chorus, led by F. Murray Abraham, narrates the movie 
from an outdoor theatre and even performs a couple a cappella 
song and dance numbers. But this isn't some weird fantasy either; 
the real star, as always, is Allen, who plays a slightly toned-down 
version of his usual uptight, neurotic self.
        His wife (Helena Bonham-Carter) wants a baby but doesn't 
want to give up a year of her life carrying and delivering it, so she 
talks him into adoption. Even though Woody is dead-set against it 
(after all, think of the trouble he got into the last time he adopted a 
child), they end up with a newborn son anyway, and over the years, 
Allen is convinced his son inherited the intelligence of some 
superhuman Mensa members, and decides to track down the 
parents.
        The Greek chorus warns him not to (but then again, no one 
listens to the Greek choruses in their heads) but Woody sneaks into 
the adoption agency files and gets a name and a phone number 
anyway. Several apartments and name changes later, he finds out 
the mother is Linda Ash (Oscar nominee Mira Sorvino), part-time 
porno star (SORVINO: I was in THE ENCHANTED PUSSY.  
ALLEN: I don't believe I've seen that one...) and full-time hooker. 
So he sets up an appointment with her at her apartment, where the 
clock on the wall with the two pigs humping ensures even the most 
uptight men will be in the mood.
        Woody wisely resists the urge to become the woman's 
client and instead slowly becomes the woman's friend, a confidant 
who cares enough to try to turn the woman's life around. She doesn't 
know he adopted her son (which provides a huge irony at the end of 
the movie), she just thinks he's some kind of whacko whose sexual 
fetish involves helping strangers on the road to a better tomorrow, 
kind of like Michael Landon in "Highway to Heaven." And with no 
one else in her life to care about her, she welcomes the perennial 
beacon of hope that is Woody Allen.
        After a bonding experience at a horse race (where Sorvino 
bets on "Eager Beaver"), Woody tries to play matchmaker. And if 
you think his taste in women is weird, you should see the guy he 
picks out for her, a boxing onion farmer who's as dumb as a box of 
hammers (Michael Rappaport, the neo-Nazi from HIGHER 
LEARNING) and wants a nice "church girl." Woody bends the 
truth a little bit by telling him she's a virgin (and, to be honest, he 
was only a few hundred sexual experiences off on that estimate), 
but rest assured he only has the best intentions.
        The ending is as contrived and far-fetched as they come, 
but it's a welcome one. In MIGHTY APHRODITE, Allen returns to 
his 70's roots of making movies that are more entertaining than 
believable but still make a few serious observations about people. 
Allen is in top form as always, even though he looks a little too 
too old at this point to be a new father. He'd be attending that kid's 
graduation in a wheelchair. Still, like I said, it doesn't have to be 
believable as long as it's entertaining. Woody is the rare sort of 
filmmaker who can switch gears between movies, from the cynical 
dramas (INTERIORS, SEPTEMBER) to the wacky comedies 
(BANANAS, ANNIE HALL), while almost always being 
entertaining.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!

Author
A. Estey
        Just leave it to Woody Allen to compare the life of a neurotic
New Yorker to Greek Tragedy - after all, no one else is going to do
it. Allen is probably the only American director that can get away
with making a film which intercuts a traditional narrative with scenes
of a Greek Chorus commenting on the story. Heck, he's the only
director who can actually pitch this sort of idea and not be laughed
at by the studio executives.
        The story follows Lenny (Allen), a sports writer who is
persuaded by his wife Amanda (Helena Bonham Carter) to adopt a baby.
As the child grows older, Lenny becomes obsessed with finding the
parents of the child, and embarks on a minor odyssey to meet them,
despite the warning of the Greek Chorus. Eventually he manages to
track down the biological mother of his child, Linda Ash (Mira
Sorvino), who lacks all of the qualities which Lenny's son seems to
posses. She also turns out to be an unintelligent and extremely
perverted prostitute. Needless to say, this causes much grief for
Lenny and he tries to change her into a wholesome lady so that he can
romantically pair her with Kevin (Michael Rapaport), an equally dim
boxer.
        The Greek Chorus is certainly the most innovative features of
this film, and serves as the premise for many of the jokes in the
film, such as the Chorus appealing to Zeus for guidance but only
getting his answering machine. Unfortunately, the film does suffer a
bit from the fact that a few too many of the jokes fall flat,
especially considering that this is coming from Woody Allen and not
just any other writer-director.
        Mira Sorvino won the Academy Award for best actress, and it is
a worthy performance. Sorvino manages to portray the naďve character
with a sense of balance; she plays dumb but without diving to absurd
depths where the authenticity of the character is lost.
        Mighty Aphrodite certainly isn't Allen's greatest film, but
for fans of his work (like myself), it's still worth seeing how the
auteur creates yet another bizarre situation for himself and laughing
along as he tries to work it all out.
Reviewed by: A. Estey
Copyright 1999, by A. Estey (gbv_adam@hotmail.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     MIGHTY APHRODITE is a strange title.  I guess the implication is
that love or at least sex is a powerful force in people's lives.  Or
perhaps that love conquers all.  But the title just does not seem to be
all that clever and in the final analysis it just does not work very
well.  That makes it perfect for one of Woody Allen's rare films that
is a nearly complete total misfire.  Admittedly, it is hard to be
totally objective about whether a film is funny or not, but from my
point of view the jokes fail one after another.  Perhaps part of the
problem is Allen's choosing the motif of the Greek drama complete with
chorus to comment on the action.  Somehow lampooning Greek choruses is
an exercise in futility.  It worked with Russian literature in LOVE AND
DEATH because he hit many different aspects of Russian literature and
make clear what he was kidding in each case.  Here it is one or two
jokes repeated over and over.  One joke is to have the chorus use
modern language and especially Yiddishisms.  The other is to have the
chorus sing modern music and it is a very similar gag.  Generally Greek
choruses just are not funny and it takes a great deal of skill to make
these jokes funny the first time they are used.  When Allen milks the
jokes by using them repeatedly, they fail him in a major way.
     The story told is of couple Lenny (Woody Allen) and Amanda (Helena
Bonham Carter) who are considering adopting a child.  Lenny is a
newspaper sportswriter and plays the role only a little less believably
than he played Jimmy Bond in CASINO ROYALE.  Posing him standing on a
basketball court cannot make the New York intellectual look or sound
like a sportswriter.  Suddenly the couple who have applied for a child
are given an opportunity to adopt if they decide to quick, quick,
quick.  (Is this really how the adoption process works?)  They go with
it and get what turns out to be a great child.  But Lenny is obsessed
with finding the child's real mother.  The agency has a rule against
giving out this information and, in fact, to do so would be breaking
the law.  But in an incredibly contrived scene Lenny gets the illegal
information.  Lenny tracks the woman down to find her to be hooker and
porno actress, Linda (Mira Sorvino).  Linda has a winning personality,
a losing intellect, and an irritating voice.  Getting interested in the
woman's life, Lenny tries to arrange a marriage for her with a boxer,
Kevin (Michael Rapaport), and to bury the feelings he is starting to
have for her.
     The jokes in this film are not just unfunny, some verge on mean-
spirited.  Among the subject for jest are about how stupid Linda and
Kevin are.  Kevin has to ask to find out which is his right fist and
which is the left.  It is not very likely and even less funny.  One of
the hallmarks of a Woody Allen script is the clever dialogue.  Here the
dialogue comes off as neither believable nor witty.  And it is given
too important a place.  Scenes that would have major dramatic impact
take place off-screen.  Prostitute Linda is freed of her entire
unwanted commitment to her pimp, but we never see her reaction when she
is told.  A later major scene between Kevin and Linda we are told about
but do not see.  Instead these scenes appear to have been eliminated to
allow room for "witty" dialogue scenes that do not advance the plot and
eventually drag.
     The strain of writing, directing, and starring in a film, as he
does here, is starting to show on Allen.  Each task is executed with
unexpected mediocrity here.  Allen does absolutely nothing to
distinguish his current character from the one he played in previous
films like MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY.  Helena Bonham Carter's role is
fairly colorless and is a departure for her only in that she is not
playing an indignant, pouty aristocrat.  Mira Sorvino wins the film on
points alone.  Her likable prostitute, with the Liza Doolittle
propensity for saying the unintentionally shocking, steals the show.
Ordinarily, stealing a Woody Allen film is a major distinction.  With
MIGHTY APHRODITE it seems hardly worth the effort.  Hopefully Allen
will be back on form next film.  This one gets an amazing -1 on the -4
to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MIGHTY APHRODITE is an innovative, funny, but slow Woody Allen
comedy that Woody wrote, directed, and stars in.  In the movie, Lenny
Weinrib (Woody Allen) is a sportswriter married to an up and coming art
gallery manager and would be owner, Amanda Sloane (Helena
Bonham-Carter).  Amanda is an attractive young wife, and Lenny is an
older, frail husband with thinning hair, pale skin and millions of
lines in his face.  From the very beginning there is no chemistry
between the two leads, but the audience is supposed to assume that
there once was.  Amanda is obsessed with getting her own gallery
whereas Lenny is content hanging out with his sports pals talking about
boxing and basketball.
     When Amanda announces that she wants a baby but through adoption
since she does not want to undergo the inconvenience of pregnancy,
Lenny is upset.  He says, "Adopt.  What.  I don't want to adopt.  Not
with my genes.  I have award winning genes."  Given how old and
unhealthy Woody appears in this movie, these lines bear a special
poignancy.
     Soon they adopt a baby (Max), and by age 5 he is clearly
brilliant.  Max and his father converse a lot.  In one of these
interchanges, Max asks, "Who is the boss between you and mommy?"  Lenny
taking offense, replies, "Who is the boss?  You have to ask that?  I'm
the boss.  Mommy is only the decision maker."
     Max's intellectual capacity sends Lenny off in a quest to find
Max's real mother since Max's father is dead.  Lenny wants to know
Max's true lineage.  Not surprisingly, the mother (Mira Sorvino from
BARCELONA and BLUE IN THE FACE) turns out to be less that Lenny had
hoped.  He finds Max's mom is a porn star turned hooker who has many
names, some unprintable, but as a prostitute, she is now known as Linda
Ash.  She comes from a family full of serial rapists, drug pushers, and
worse.
     Lenny decides to take care of Linda and even attempts to arrange a
relationship with her and one of his young fighter friends, Kevin
(Michael Rapaport).  Lenny believes that given their good looks
combined with an equal lack of intelligence they are made for each
other.  Linda in her crazy high pitched voice says at one point, "I'm
not religious either.  Both of my folks were Episcopalians."  Kevin is
so dumb he can barely even construct a full sentence.  Together their
IQs would not add up to more two digits.
     The innovative part of MIGHTY APHRODITE is a Greek chorus that
appears frequently to give Lenny advice.  The Greek chorus (Dick Hyman
Chorus) is lead by F. Murray Abraham and has Danielle Ferland as
Cassandra.  The chorus is dressed in traditional robes and masks (by
Jeffrey Kurland) and is shown in an ancient Greek amphitheater.
Sometimes they start off with parts of what appears to be an Euripides
play, but soon they are speaking vintage Woody with words like
"unthunk" and bursting into song (including "When you're smiling") and
dance.  For me, the chorus is one of the highlights of the show.  It is
a fresh approach that is a lot of fun.  One of my favorite characters
in the movie is Cassandra and her best piece of dialog is "I see
disaster.  I see catastrophe.  Worse, I see lawyers!"  Another time,
the chorus calls on the great god Zeus to get advice, but gets his
answering machine instead.
     The problem with MIGHTY APHRODITE is that it is like a first
grader learning to read.  He pronounces each individual letter slowly
yet is unable to form them into a word.  Here the dialog is great in
pockets, but there are no characters to care about to keep the
audience's interest in between humor.  There are four or more putative
love stories in the movie, but none of them are believable.  These
problems are mainly with Woody's direction and script, but the actors
own some of the blame.
     Rapaport is pathetic and delivers a caricature of a dumb boxer.
He is an actor from MONEY FOR NOTHING and other films where he has yet
to demonstrate he has the chosen the right career path for himself.
Maybe he can box?  Sorvino gave a fairly good performance as an
airhead, but Nicole Kidman in TO DIE FOR shows how this role can be
done much better.  The biggest disappointment for me was Helena
Bonham-Carter (from many movies, but my favorite is LADY JANE).  Her
love interest in fellow art gallery owner Jerry Bender (Peter Weller)
could have been much better developed and could have provided some real
tension and actual romance in the movie.  Instead, most of the show is
played only for the cheap laughs.  A real opportunity missed.  Finally,
Woody is Woody, but a tired and sad looking Woody.
     The sets by Santo Loquasto are pretty outlandish.  The hooker's
apartment is decorated as a garden of pornographic kitsch.  The
cinematography (Carlo DiPalma) is straightforward with the exception of
one wonderful scene at night of Lenny and Amanda in a New York City
taxicab.  Lenny is unhappy with his marriage, and he looks at an
attractive and happy couple nearby with melancholy and wistful eyes.
These brief images form the best scene in the show.
     MIGHTY APHRODITE only runs 1:30, but if the editor (Susan Morris)
had done a little tighter editing, perhaps she could have prevented the
show from dragging so often.  The movie is rated PG-13 for extremely
explicit references to all kinds of bizarre sexual behavior.  There is
no nudity or violence.  The movie would be probably okay for mature
teenagers, but the dialog is laced with pornographic movie quality
rhetoric.  For a great Greek chorus and for a lot of good laughs, I
give MIGHTY APHRODITE a mild thumbs up, but I was disappointed by it.
It had the potential for so much more.  It gets ** 1/2 in my book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
