Title
Review for Impostors, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Victory Marasigan
Review by Victory A. Marasigan
http:www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
I have to admit that I admire what writer-director Stanley Tucci was
trying to do with his latest film _The Impostors_. Obviously an
homage to the screwball "program picture" comedies of the 30s and 40s, the
movie exudes a _joie de vivre_ which is hard to dislike.  It's too bad
that Tucci's screenplay degenerates into the formulaic drivel and
standardness which derailed many films of that very same era. 
Oliver Platt and Stanley Tucci play Maurice and Arthur, a pair of starving
actors in 1930s New York.  They are desperate for work, but they aren't
idle.  Among their pastimes is putting on loud, brash arguments in public,
with the inevitable conclusion of one of them falling to the ground with
exaggerated death throes.  Though they'd rather have jobs, Maurice and
Arthur find that such real world practice works more directly to their
benefit, particularly in scamming vendors out of their food.  When they're
not begging, they're auditioning (the line between the two has become
blurred for the desperate pair).  What is such a shame is that the film
fails to milk their comedy-rich plight in the city and opts instead to
plop Maurice and Arthur haphazardly into a completely different locale. 
Through an ill-fated encounter with a Shakespearean actor named Jeremy
Burtom (Alfred Molina, who makes one of the worst Hamlets ever captured on
film), the pair end up as stowaways on a cruise ship.   In classic
ensemble fashion, the film introduces the various players whom Maurice and
Arthur will encounter on their maritime adventure.  There's the rich sheik
(Teagle F. Bougere). There's the stuffy aristocrat (Dana Ivey).
There's the depressed lounge singer (Steve Buscemi, who actually sings!).
There's the deposed Queen (Isabella Rossellini)... it's that kind of yarn.
The only caricatures missing are Frankenstein and Dracula (catch that,
Abbott and Costello fans?).  From here it's strictly hide-and-seek mayhem,
as our bumbling pair of heroes hop from cabin to cabin trying to avoid the
peeved Mr. Burtom who, it turns out, is also on board.       
The cruise ship plot is a yawner, but some appropriately hammy
performances do get to light up the screen.  Campbell Scott gets some of
the film's best lines from his role as the head steward, a scar-faced
German with an unrequited lust.  Lili Taylor and Matt McGrath are
irresistably sweet as lovers who must overcome the crazy circumstances
which keep them apart.  And Tony Shalhoub must be awarded the brass ring
for having the, um, _cojones_ to do a wild phone sex scene.
The film's catchy jazz score and art deco production design make _The
Imposters_ easy on the ears and eyes.  I confess that had the film been
shot in black-and-white, I may have given it a half-star higher.  It's
details like that which can make all the difference in a film like this.
Although _The Impostors_ is in toto only good for a few chuckles, there
is a certain joy to be had in watching an ensemble cast having a fun time
just being silly.  Here's hoping that next time, director Tucci makes a
film that's as fun for the audience as well. 

Author
Susan Granger
 Stanley Tucci's "Big Night" was one of my favorite films of
1996 and, incredibly, his second comedy is a genuine delight. No, it's
not as witty as "Big Night." That's a hard act to follow. But it is
genuinely wacky and hysterically funny. Conceived as a madcap
screwball farce, it stars Tucci and Oliver Platt as two out-of-work
theater actors who, after bumbling a big audition with a
writer/director (Woody Allen), accidentally stow away on a luxury
ocean liner in the 1930s. No, not the Titanic, the
S.S. Intercontinental, sailing to Paris. Masquerading as stewards,
they try to avoid a pretentious British actor (Alfred Molina) whom
they have unwittingly offended. Dashing down the corridors, they
encounter various crew members: the German Head Steward (Campbell
Scott,) who is in love with the Head Stewardess (Lily Taylor), who is
in love with the ship's detective (Matt McGrath), a shy young Italian
who is terrified of hurting anyone. Then there are the passengers: a
suicidal singer (Steve Buscemi), a deposed Queen (Isabella
Rossellini), an obsessed sheik (Teagle F. Bougere), an impoverished
socialite (Dana Ivey), her morose daughter (Hope Davis), and a tennis
pro who plays a better game off the court (Billy Connolly). And when
they discover that the nefarious First Mate (Tony Shalhoub) has
planted bombs to go off at midnight, chaos reigns. Written and
directed by Tucci, at times it resembles a silent movie but with
sound. There's Buster Keaton slapstick and Charlie Chaplin
pantomime. Tucci's Laurel, Platt's Hardy. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "The Impostors" is a frothy, zany 7, as bubbly and
intoxicating as a glass of vintage champagne.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Perhaps if THE IMPOSTORS didn't have so much going for it, it wouldn't
have been such a tremendous disappointment.  Written, directed, and
produced by one of its two stars, Stanley Tucci, whose last picture was
the indie smash hit, BIG NIGHT, THE IMPOSTORS almost never catches fire.
Sputtering like a two-day old campfire, the story plays like an ad-lib
sketch that was never polished or completed.
The film's other star, Oliver Platt, was hilarious as the Senator's aide
in BULWORTH.  The bloated supporting cast is a veritable cornucopia of
acting talent, including Woody Allen, Steve Buscemi, Hope Davis, Alfred
Molina, Campbell Scott, Lili Taylor and Tony Shalhoub.  All are wasted
save Allen, who plays a theatrical director who stares in disbelief at
the bad acting before his eyes.  (The audience will easily identify with
Allen's sentiments.)
With the exception of a single original joke involving mirror-imaged
subtitles, the movie engenders little genuine laughter.  The stale humor
is so embarrassingly bad that you will find yourself laughing
sporadically at the picture rather than with it.
The plot for the movie involves two starving actors, Maurice (Oliver
Platt) and Arthur (Stanley Tucci), who accidentally end up on a cruise
ship.  In order to escape an angry Shakespearean actor (Alfred Molina),
who is chasing them, they dress up as ship's stewards.
The over-the-top script has the subtlety of a sledgehammer.  When the
leads hide from their pursuers, Arthur covers Maurice's mouth as he
suffers an unending sneeze.  At other times, we have the typical zany
comedy routine where everyone chases everyone else, while darting in and
out of staterooms.
With the film's chapters introduced like placards at a vaudeville stage,
it is clear the movie wants to be taken as farce.  The press notes
describes how everyone that came on the set remarked at what a good time
all of the actors were having.  Too bad they weren't more concerned with
the audience's potential enjoyment.  The jokes, frequently framed in
silence, fall like stones with such intensity that one can almost hear
them hitting the ground.
One wonders if anyone ever viewed the film's dailies.  Surely, if they
had, they would have realized what leaden results they were producing.
It is tricky having good actors play bad ones, but, if they couldn't
pull it off, they should have just given up.  "The show is over for this
fella," Steve Buscemi's character says towards the end.  The mystery is
why they didn't all give up in the beginning.  There must have been a
better script somewhere for such a wonderful cast.
THE IMPOSTORS runs 1:42.  It is rated R for a little profanity and would
be fine for kids around 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Fox Searchlight Pictures/Cold Press Production
 Director: Stanley Tucci
 Writer: Stanley Tucci
 Cast: Oliver Platt, Stanley Tucci, Alfred Molina, Lily Taylor,
Tony Shalhoub, Teagle F. Bougere, Steve Buscemi, Isabella
Rosselini, Richard Jenkins, Billy Connolly, Dana Ivey, Hope
Davis
   The great English librettist W.S. Gilbert once said that
things are seldom what they seem. Writer-director Stanley
Tucci seconds the concept with "The Imposters"--a free-
flowing, farcical account of the adventures of two hapless,
starving actors who must play different roles just to survive. 
Presumably inspired by the Marx Brothers' greatest comedy,
"A Night at the Opera," "The Imposters" is a pale parody of
counterfeit characters, a film which looks wildly improvised
rather than deeply thought out but a picture in which the cast
seem to be having the time of their lives.  Stanley Tucci now
makes his presence felt as director, writer, and co-producer
as well as one of our funniest actors.  In a picture being
released at about the same time as this one, "The Alarmist,"
he is at his satirical best as a con artist who steals from the
very houses he services.  In "The Imposters," however, he
performs in the role of a merely timid, out-of-work actor who
alternates between schemes to scrounge up some food and a
desperate flight from a silly man whose anger he has
provoked.  He is teamed up with Oliver Platt, as his good
friend and similarly unemployed actor, with whom he plots his
narrow escape until the two ultimately emerge as heroes. 
"The Imposters" is not a coherent picture but more a dim
series of vignettes, each involving a passenger or two on a
luxury cruise to Paris, each entourage bearing its own
agenda.  Like Arthur (Oliver Platt) and Maurice (Stanley
Tucci), the passengers on the ship are often other than what
they seem, some ardent revolutionaries plotting terrorism,
others depressed to the point of suicide, and still others
seemingly normal but actually deposed monarchs.  As in "A
Night at the Opera," the action takes place in pre-World War
Two times, an age before transatlantic airlines took a large
chunk from the business of long-distance cruising.
   The difference between illusion and reality is portrayed
early on as Maurice and Arthur, apparently strangers who are
sipping espresso in a restaurant by a lake, become involved
in a violent argument.  Soon after one appears to stab the
other to death while surrounded by a crowd of gaping
spectators, we become privy to their game. They are
rehearsing scenes from a play to keep their on their toes for
future auditions, and they do not hesitate to use their thespian
charms to finagle food from unsuspecting merchants.  The
funniest scene, in fact, comes not after they have boarded a
cruise ship to escape from a stage actor they've enraged but
early on as they botch a plan to lift a few boxes of pastries
from a gullible baker (David Lipman).
   Having insulted performer Jeremy Burtom (Alfred Molina)
who does a substandard job in portraying "Hamlet," they are
pursued by the thesp who will stop at nothing short of killing
the two offenders.  Stowing away on a ship bound from New
York harbor to Paris, they soon disguise themselves as
stewards who run into a series of escapades involving a
motley group of passengers.  They eavsdrop on an attempt
by head steward Meistrich to pursue his love for his female
counterpart Lily (Lili Taylor).  Hiding under a bed, Maurice
overhears a plot by the first mate (Tony Shalhoub) to blow up
the boat and its "bourgeois" passengers.  They sit in on an
awful vocal concert by entertainer Happy Frank (Steve
Buscemi) who, having just been divorced is intent on suicide. 
Disguised as a married couple with Maurice dressed in drag,
they are aggressively pursued by a bisexual Scot named
Sparks (Billy Connolly).
   In "A Night at the Opera," every scene worked, but in "The
Imposters," only a few spectacles catch fire.  A shipboard
romance between the depressive Emily (Hope Davis) and the
suicidal Happy Franks is both funny and touching, while the
carrying out of the First Mate's revolutionary plan is just plain
silly.  Best of all is Campbell Scott as the precise Teuton
frustrated by his inability to get anywhere with Lily--who is in
love with the handsome young cohort of actor Jeremy Burtom,
Marco (Matt McGrath). On the whole, though, "The Imposters"
looks more like a rough sketch for a series of vaudevillian
skits than a well-planned conception.

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE IMPOSTORS
(Fox Searchlight)
Starring:  Stanley Tucci, Oliver Platt, Alfred Molina, Tony Shalhoub,
Campbell Scott, Lili Taylor, Steve Buscemi, Hope Davis.
Screenplay:  Stanley Tucci.
Producers:  Beth Alexander and Stanley Tucci.
Director:  Stanley Tucci.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, sexual situations)
Running Time:  102 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It has long been one of my most closely-held dramatic axioms that
there is no middle ground when it comes to the execution of farce.  Either
a writer and director get it, or they don't.  If they get it, the result
is exhilarating comic brilliance.  If they don't get it, the result is
nearly unendurable.  And never, I believed, could the twain meet.
     Another false dichotomy bites the dust.  Writer/director Stanley
Tucci's THE IMPOSTORS is old-fashioned farce that floats along amusingly,
yet only occasionally hits the high notes that turn chuckles into
gut-busters.  Tucci and Oliver Platt star as a pair of struggling 1930s
actors named Arthur and Maurice who, through a tortuous series of events,
end up as inadvertent stowaways on the luxury liner U.S.S.
Intercontinental.  They've been pursued and accused of assault by
egomaniacal thespian Jeremy Burtom (Alfred Molina) -- who also turns out
to be a passenger on the ship -- but Burtom becomes the least of their
worries.  A pair of con artists (Richard Jenkins and Allison Janney) plot
to seduce and kill two wealthy passengers, the first mate (Tony Shalhoub)
plots to blow up the ship as a political statement, and an ambiguously
sexual tennis pro (Billy Connolly) plots to make Maurice his "savage gypsy
lover."
     It's a classic screwball farce set-up, which Tucci cleverly chooses
to place in the classic screwball farce era of the 1930s.  Opening with a
great bit of pantomime accompanying the opening credits, Tucci establishes
Arthur and Maurice as protagonists in the mold of the classic silent film
comedians -- lovable losers, not above a bit of duplicity if it suits
their purposes, yet ultimately heroic (and, in particular, chivalric).
The pre-shipboard scenes, though little more than isolated comedy
sketches, do a nice job of showing the chemistry between the two.  By the
time the Intercontinental hits the open sea, Tucci and Platt's starving,
utterly sincere artistes have generated plenty of good will.
     I was ready for THE IMPOSTORS to soar once Arthur and Maurice began
dashing from stateroom to stateroom; instead, it levels off at a pleasant
cruising altitude.  Tucci populates the ship with plenty of goofy
characters -- a fascistic head steward (Campbell Scott), a suicidal
entertainer incongruously named Happy (Steve Buscemi), a wallflower
heiress (Hope Davis), a deposed monarch-in-hiding (Isabella Rossellini) --
clearly intended to make Arthur and Maurice look like the sane ones in a
sea of chaos.  Yet he doesn't allow these characters to function in scenes
that build comic momentum.  Tucci's gags are mostly of the hit-and-run
variety.  While there are a few admittedly hilarious ones, they seem
like wasted opportunities to do what great farce does best:  have each
comic moment draw from the previous comic moment, and lead into the next
comic moment, in a hysterically unstoppable domino effect.
     Those missed opportunities are most evident when Tucci _does_ allow a
scene to build momentum.  In one brilliantly unpredictable moment, Maurice
hides under the bed while foreign radical Shalhoub radios his superiors,
the sub-title translations for Shalhoub's dialogue becoming an
ever-more-bizarre bit of business.  In a later scene, a tracking shot
through the ship's dance floor eventually catches Rossellini, who quickly
hides her face from the camera.  Such fourth wall-breaking captures farce
at its anything-for-a-laugh finest.  More often, Tucci goes for the gentle
touch which worked so well in BIG NIGHT.  As frisky and unpretentious a
comedy as THE IMPOSTORS is, it traffics in an unnecessarily restrained
level of lunacy.  Tucci's spin on MONKEY BUSINESS has plenty of funny
business, but it doesn't let anarchy reign quite as often as it should.
It's that rarest of comedic animals:  the merely-good farce.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: Roughly 60 years after its heyday, the farce returns.
Stanley Tucci wrote, directed, and stars in a very funny movie about
two out of work actors on a boat.  It is not exactly like Laurel and
Hardy, not just like the Marx Brothers, but it is in that vein.  And I
did laugh, which is rare these days.  Rating: 7 (0 to 10), 2 (-4 to +4)
   - I first noticed Stanley Tucci in PRELUDE TO A KISS where I thought
     he was very funny.  Since then I have been watching for him.  But
     THE IMPOSTERS is like nothing he has made before and like very few
     films made since the 40s.  The only other true farce I remember
     from recent year is BRAIN DONORS and that was almost entirely
     taken from the Marx Brothers school.  THE IMPOSTERS is a new and
     very funny comedy team of Platt and Tucci.  It is hard to know if
     comedy will be funny for other people.  Currently people are
     laughing uproariously at THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY which did
     not do very much for me.  Other films like OSCAR and THE CHEAP
     DETECTIVE crack me up but are not successful comedies at the
     boxoffice.  So take it from whence it comes.  THE IMPOSTERS did
     make me laugh very hard at times.  Not many comedies make me
     laugh.
   - Tucci co-produced, wrote, directed, and starred in the film.
   - Cast includes Oliver Platt, Stanley Tucci, Alfred Molina, Lily
     Taylor, Steve Buscemi, Tony Shalhoub, Teagle, F. Bougere, Campbell
     Scott, and Isabella Rossellini.
   - The language and one or two modestly sexual situations are not in
     the classical farce tradition.
   - Out-of-work actors are given tickets to see HAMLET with a
     particularly hammy actor.  When Maurice (Platt) insults the actor
     they are chased hide in a packing crate and find themselves loaded
     onto an ocean liner.  From there a large number of subplots start
     working themselves out, GRAND HOTEL style with the help of Maurice
     and Arthur (Tucci).
   - Steve Buscemi sings???????
   - Bizarre scenes as the two seem to get into a fight at an outdoor
     restaurant.
   - An unexpected and uncredited role near the beginning.
   - Campbell Scott as a German crewmember is very funny.
   - The shooting title was SHIP OF FOOLS.  I saw that it was being
     filmed and expected a remake of the Catherine Anne Porter.  Uh,
     not quite.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE IMPOSTORS (1998) ** 1/4.  Written & directed by Stanley Tucci. Prodcyed
by Beth Alexander & Tucci. Photography, Ken Kelsch. Editing, Suzy
Elmiger.Prodcution design, Andrew Jackness. Music supervisor, Margor Core.
Music, Gary DeMichele. Music consltant, John Head. Cast:  Cast: Oliver
Platt (Maurice), Stanley Tucci (Arthur), Alfred Molina (Jeremy Burtom),
Lili Taylor (stewardess Lily), Tony Shalhoub (the Communist First Mate),
Steve Buscemi (Singer Happy Franks), Allison Janney (Maxine/Maxi), Isabella
Rossellini (Deposed Queen/Veiled Woman), Campbell Scott (Head Steward
Meistrich), Teagle Wrougere (the Sheik), Billy Connolly (gay Scots tennis
player Sparks), Dana Ivey (Mrs.Essendine), Hope Davis (Emily, Miss
Essendine), Richard Jenkins (Johnny, the French gangster), et al.  A Fox
Searlight release. 102 minutes.R (I have no idea why)
Film, TV and stage actor Stanley Tucci had made his debut behind the
cameras, co-writing and co-directing "Big Night," one of the best  pictures
of 1966. He also co-starred in it. The Impostors, where he shares top
billing with Oliver Platt, is Tucci's first solo directorial effort. And
that's what it is, an effort. A likeable (but with limitations),
well-intentioned spoof of Hollywood screwball comedies and farces of mostly
the 1930s and early 1940s.
Platt (Maurice) and Tucci (Arthur), are Depression-era, unemployed stage
actors (or would-be actors, it is unclear) and almost literally starving.
They find themselves impersonating stewards on a transatlantic liner going
to France. The main action of the film involves a crew and passengers,
mostly off-the-wall characters inspired by stock types in old comedies.
The Impostors uses up its best scenes early. The opening is an all-silent,
nifty parody of pals Arthur and Maurice having coffee in a lovely outdoor
cafe, getting into a pretend fight in public, stabbing each other with
stage (fake) knives. Why this? It is open to interpretation. The duo may be
practicing the "realism" of their art as thespians, or trying to get out of
paying for their coffees, or both. It is an amusing sequence, although it
goes on for too long.
Then the buddies take turns as, in their shoddy room, they rehearse various
stage emotions and reactions. A hopeful visit to a producer (Woody Allen,
uncredited) gets nowhere as Allen's rich wife phones to tell him that she
is dumping both him and her financing the play. In a bakery, they scam the
owner into providing free samples of pastries in an energetic, rather
inventive scene, but also a bit messy in its writing as well as protracted
by farcical standards.
They somehow end up with the baker's gift of tickets for a performance of
Hamlet starring big-name thespian Jeremy Burtom (Alfred Molina). He is a
ham actor they detest and who performs in alcoholic stupor.
In a bar, after the show, Maurice publicly caricatures Burtom, the latter
walks in, all hell breaks loose, the pals are chased by cops, hide in a
ship's container, wake up the next morning as unwilling stowaways on board
the liner ...and have to pose as stewards.
So far, so good, in spite of flaws. The big balance of the film is on the
ship. It uses the old formula of motley characters within an enclosed
space, something that can be found in many genres, from war films
(foxholes, submarines) to public transportation (John Wayne and others in
John Ford's Stagecoach; Murder in the Orient Express; the ship in the Marx
Brothers' A Night at the Opera; etc. etc.), to Grand Hotel-type movies, to
the Towering Inferno, and on and on...
Among the passengers, who shows up but  Burtom, the pals' Nemesis, who
spots them and adds to the complications, of which there is a Niagara.
Almost all caused by characters who by and large already are, or become
impostors, in one way or another. (They are played by good New York
actors). The First Mate speaks an invented Eastern European language, is a
dedicated Red who plans to blow up the ship;  a couple (man and woman) of
French "aristocrats" are in reality underworld figures; a society widow
hides the fact she's destitute and pins her hopes on her wallflower
daughter finding a rich husband on the ship; an incognito, veiled lady is a
deposed queen who turns out to be the ship Captain's long-lost love;  and
more. Others, presumably authentic, are a black African sheik; stewardess
Lily who loves a fellow steward but is pursued by the Nazi-like Head
Steward; a suicidal singer (Buscemi) who will be saved by love; etc.
There are problems with all this. There is a plethora of characters, all of
whom are almost totally undeveloped, even by farcical standards. Their
interactions and interrelationships are nonexistent, or at best, arbitrary.
The continuity, also arbitrary and haphazard feels like a series of
improvisations which must have been great fun for the cast and crew but
less so for this viewer. Some funny bits (there are several) get weakened
by the script's cavalier construction.
On a basic level, The Impostors has been caught in a double trap. It
ignores the fact that  comedy is very hard to write and execute. Think of
the famous 19th century actor who on his deathbed,addressed his loved ones:
"Don't cry for me. Dying is easy, comedy is hard."
Comedy needs well-crafted dialogue (absent here).Think of the superb
Preston Sturges films which The Impostors faintly echo. Farce has to be
constructed like clockwork. Even the successful exceptions to such rules
(the Marx Bros, Monty Python) have a hidden logic/illogic that make for a
feeling of improvisation but are the fruit of experience.
Then there is the other major trap. You cannot parody with real success
what is already a parody. Many a clever writer-director have failed at this
in their take-offs of established comedies and of "serious" genres that
contain humor, such as Hitchcock movies. Here, I have the same feeling I
might get from a printed column that tries to imitate Dave Barry's.
The Impostors spoofs elements of so many older films that the question is
"which genres does it NOT spoof?" And why is this done so spottily in this
movie? Take the shot of many people inside a closet. Unlike its model,
Groucho Marx's cabin in A Night at the Opera, it does not go to
rib-tickling, outrageous extremes and has no true context. The film,
unbridled in its movie-consciousness, piles on too much, as if following
the "more is more" principle.
There are compensations, however. Film buffs will be kept busy figuring out
the in-jokes and the quotes from or allusions to older movies.(The
references to silent films are also intensified by the use of intertitles,
some funny, others forced).
Tucci and Platt are obvious neo-Laurel and Hardy, strictly in appearance
and not in their characters and rapport. Their fake doctors probably issue
from A Day at The Races. Tucci brings the movie's sources up to later
decades at least twice.He has the gay character utter a variant of Joe E.
Brown celebrated last line in Some Like it Hot (1959)  He is smitten by
Jack Lemmon (as a girl) who tells him "I'm a man" to which the
imperturbabale Brown replies "Nobbody's perfect."
In another instance, Tucci also may well have been thinking of Francois
Truffaut's Shoot the Piano Player (1960) in which a character says
something like "That's true. I swear it on my mother's head," and we see a
silent-movie-type insert of an old lady keeling over.
The look of the ship is in clever opposition to the Titanic-style luxury of
real and movie ocean liners. Interiors are stagy, even tacky, portholes
show a painted sea that does not move, the floor of corridors is linoleum,
and so on.
Several other details are nice. Perhaps the best visual is the makeup of
Alfred Molina,  whose Jeremy Burtom at first looks like a dead ringer of
the boozing John Barrymore. Then the likeness disappears.
Inexplicably, the press information's credits says zero about the music and
those responsible for what is a most winning aspect of the film: the choice
of lovely period tunes, many using bandoneons (a type of concertina).We are
treated to Hispanic classics--Siboney, La Cumparsita , Adios
Muchachos...The black Sheik is passionate about his original 78 rpm shellac
record of the French  Parlez-moi d'Amour (Speak to Me of Love), a huge hit
for decades, sung and made famous by Lucienne Boyer. And Steve Buscemi's
rendition of The Nearness of You is surprisingly good.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
Comedy is the most volatile topic to write about.  There have been
innumerable instances where I laughed wholeheartedly at a film, only to
stare blankly at a second viewing.  I don't know the criteria for making
comedy "timeless", and very few comedies make me laugh over repeated
viewings.
That said, _The Impostors_ made me laugh a whole lot.  It is light,
whimsical entertainment--a throw-back to the silent comedies of Keaton
and Chaplin.  It doesn't take itself too seriously, and that's a relief.
It's about two unemployed actors who find themselves in crazy
circumstances beyond their control.
Stanley Tucci and Oliver Platt (his credits are erratic--from Flatliners
& The Three Musketeers to Bulworth and Simon Birch) play their own
rendition of Laurel and Hardy, unemployed actors who, in running from
Jeremy Burtom, an irate established actor (Alfred Molina--Boogie Nights)
hide in a crate, only to find themselves as stowaways on that very same
ship that Burtom is on.  Ha ha.
Afterwards there are deceptions, takeover plots, mistaken identities,
cross-dressings, broken hearts, and the worst subtitles joke I+ve seen
since _Monty Python and the Holy Grail_.  It+s so bad, that you can+t
help but laugh at the inanity of it all.
The great cast includes Lily Taylor (Ransom), Billy Connolly (Mrs.
Brown), Steve Buscemi (Fargo), Hope Davis (Next Stop Wonderland),
Campbell Scott (The Spanish Prisoner) and Isabella Rossellini (Big
Night).  They are all given roles that best exploits (or drastically
alters) their standard screen personas.
Granted, ensemble casts don't mean as much as they used to.  (Take a
"Cannonball Run" film, or a Leslie Nielson film, and count the
recognizable actors with the "doin' this for a paycheck" mentality).
Here, however, it appears that the cast is game.  The atmosphere is
contagious.  The actors are having fun. We have fun too.
_The Imposters_ was produced, directed, and written by Tucci, who
enthralled moviegoers with _Big Night_ two years ago.  I felt _BN_ was
overrated, but I liked _The Impostors_ a good deal more. Tucci has
crafted a very light, very funny comedy that works in its own right.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Perhaps if THE IMPOSTORS didn't have so much going for it, it wouldn't
have been such a tremendous disappointment.  Written, directed, and
produced by one of its two stars, Stanley Tucci, whose last picture was
the indie smash hit, BIG NIGHT, THE IMPOSTORS almost never catches fire.
Sputtering like a two-day old campfire, the story plays like an ad-lib
sketch that was never polished or completed.
The film's other star, Oliver Platt, was hilarious as the Senator's aide
in BULWORTH.  The bloated supporting cast is a veritable cornucopia of
acting talent, including Woody Allen, Steve Buscemi, Hope Davis, Alfred
Molina, Campbell Scott, Lili Taylor and Tony Shalhoub.  All are wasted
save Allen, who plays a theatrical director who stares in disbelief at
the bad acting before his eyes.  (The audience will easily identify with
Allen's sentiments.)
With the exception of a single original joke involving mirror-imaged
subtitles, the movie engenders little genuine laughter.  The stale humor
is so embarrassingly bad that you will find yourself laughing
sporadically at the picture rather than with it.
The plot for the movie involves two starving actors, Maurice (Oliver
Platt) and Arthur (Stanley Tucci), who accidentally end up on a cruise
ship.  In order to escape an angry Shakespearean actor (Alfred Molina),
who is chasing them, they dress up as ship's stewards.
The over-the-top script has the subtlety of a sledgehammer.  When the
leads hide from their pursuers, Arthur covers Maurice's mouth as he
suffers an unending sneeze.  At other times, we have the typical zany
comedy routine where everyone chases everyone else, while darting in and
out of staterooms.
With the film's chapters introduced like placards at a vaudeville stage,
it is clear the movie wants to be taken as farce.  The press notes
describes how everyone that came on the set remarked at what a good time
all of the actors were having.  Too bad they weren't more concerned with
the audience's potential enjoyment.  The jokes, frequently framed in
silence, fall like stones with such intensity that one can almost hear
them hitting the ground.
One wonders if anyone ever viewed the film's dailies.  Surely, if they
had, they would have realized what leaden results they were producing.
It is tricky having good actors play bad ones, but, if they couldn't
pull it off, they should have just given up.  "The show is over for this
fella," Steve Buscemi's character says towards the end.  The mystery is
why they didn't all give up in the beginning.  There must have been a
better script somewhere for such a wonderful cast.
THE IMPOSTORS runs 1:42.  It is rated R for a little profanity and would
be fine for kids around 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Impostors_ (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
The sophomore slump has hit actor-screenwriter-director Stanley Tucci with
this flat farcical follow-up to his auspicious 1996 filmmaking debut,
_Big_Night_ (which he co-helmed with Campbell Scott).  Tucci and Oliver
Platt play Arthur and Maurice, two starving actors in Depression-era New
York who unwittingly stow away onto a Paris-bound oceanliner after being
falsely accused of assault by a pompous Shakespearean hack-tor (Alfred
Molina).
In theory, _The_Impostors_ should come to life when Arthur and Maurice
find themselves on the cruise ship (which, of course, has their accuser as
one of the passengers).  However, that's where the film goes downhill.  The
film is at its best in the early going, during which the
acting-technique-obsessed Arthur and Maurice attempt to con their way to
free food; a wordless opening credits sequence harkens back to the best
silent comedy, and one hilarious scene in a bakery is, as it turns out, the
film's premature highlight.  The problem with the shipboard antics is that
only a handful of the eccentric array of passengers hold interest.  For
every inspired character and performance, such as Steve Buscemi's suicidal
cabaret singer and Campbell Scott's creepy German steward, there are duds
like a faux French con couple (Richard Jenkins and Allison Janney) and a
golddigging older woman (Dana Ivey).  The terrific timing and rapport
between Tucci and Platt keeps _The_Impostors_'s head above water, but just
barely.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Matt Williams
Following the art house success Big Night, Stanley Tucci has set his
sights on making a screwball comedy.  With a top notch cast, and plenty
of good humor, The Impostors is warmly reminiscent of the great
screwball comedies of old.
Arthur and Maurice (Stanley Tucci and Oliver Platt) are two struggling
actors in the 1930s. Desperate for work, they perform impromptu live
performances in the middle of an unsuspecting sidewalk cafe.  They've
also been known to attempt the occasional con or two in order to get
food on their meager plates.
Through a convoluted series of events, the bumbling pair mistakenly stow
away aboard a cruise ship.  There, they disguise themselves as stewards
and mingle with a zany variety of vacationers, including an arrogant
actor out for their blood (Alfred Molina), and a man's man tennis pro
(Billy Connolly) who's after them for very different reasons.
The crew of the ship isn't too helpful to the pair.  Although they do
find a sympathetic ear in Lily (Lili Taylor), they find the fascistic
head steward Meistrich (Campbell Scott) has no tolerance for stowaways.
A suicidal entertainer (Steve Buscemi) and a first mate with a secret
agenda (Tony Shalhoub) simply add to the already bizarre mix.
Writer-director Stanley Tucci was apparently aiming to recreate a  good
ol'-fashioned screwball comedy...and he mostly succeeds. Even when a few
of the far-fetched setups don't quite work...the actors seem to be
having such a good time that the frantically festive mood begins to rub
off.
Tucci and Platt enjoy a hearty comradery from right off the bat, a fact
crucial to making the film work.  The pair are introduced in a hilarious
silent bit, and we get to know the characters before even a word is
uttered.
The title of The Impostors doesn't just represent the main characters.
Virtually everyone in the film is an impostor of one sort or another,
pretending to be something he or she isn't.  The various plots and
intersections of the characters provide much of the film's humor.
When the film actually gets to the ship and introduces us to its
whirlwind of characters, the introductions are swiftly and deftly
handled without confusion.  The supporting ensemble deliver terrific
performances all around, and are a delight to behold.
There are a few misfired gags here and there, but the film has plenty of
good gags to spare.  While it won't rank up with the all-time screwball
classics, The Impostors is still a wonderful little comedy.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases
