Title
Review for King Cobra (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frankie Paiva
I have a weakness. There is something about watching (and renting) a movie that
you know is going to be bad to begin with and then watching it for the pure
pleasure of laughing at the bad acting, the poorly written script, and the
inane plot sequences. King Cobra is a straight to video release that markets
itself as "Thirty feet of pure terror!" with a mutated snake mix of Eastern
Diamondback and a cobra. King Cobra is everything that it promises to be: bad,
stupid, silly, cliched, etc., etc., etc. To help you through this review, I
will be listing the amount of cliches that we've all seen in other movies.
During a freak laboratory explosion (cliche #1) a extremely dangerous species
of snake (cliche #2) escapes to a peaceful small town (cliche #3.) Breeding
with one of the snakes there, (cliche #4) as it begins to reek a new kind of
terror (cliche #5) and bite everyone in sight (cliche #6.) So it's up to the
town's good looking doctor (cliche #7) to save everyone from the snake.
The film even features the biggest creature feature cliche of all: "Oh darling,
let's make sweet, passionate love in the forest. I hear something that sounds
like rattling, let's go. OK, I'm sure your right, it's nothing to worry about.
Even though the last three people to hear snakes rattling died of snake venom I
still want to make sweet, passionate love in the forest." (cliche #8.)
The film is full of all of these fun cliches, and it's fun to see where it
turns. The film does have some suprising twists though, Pat Morita (obviously
doing this film for the work) turns up late in the picture as a snake expert
that has to inject hinself with snake venom monthly to make his blood an
anti-venom and poor Erik Estrada makes an extremely bad and embarrassing cameo
as the town's homosexual Richard Simmons type fitness guru. King Cobra also
features some good special effects and some effective jump scenes that are
surprising in the midst of this otherwise horrible production. So if your
looking for a fun film to watch and make fun of, rent King Cobra which gets **
stars.
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at: SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic
