Title
Review for Journey to Spirit Island (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
Like many cultures, the NAHKUT ( northern Canadian Indians ), have always
dedicated a special area for their burial grounds. However, modern days and
the speed of progress and commercialization are threatening one thing which
many cultures have respected for so very long.  In this case, the group has
had their burial ground in a remote island, which is becoming increasingly
more attractive to many outside interests.  It seems that someone has an
idea about turning the island into a tourist spot with a resort and all the
trimmings.
And as is the usual case, there are some Indians who have been convinced
that this is a good idea, and a chance for success, and much more money for
the poorest tribe.  And this film is really about the extremes one will go
through just to try and speed up the process.
But Hawk makes a misjudgment. His hunger for progress is caught up in the
Reaganomics of his area.  Cash in.  And at any price.  He, however, does not
seem to realize that there are other forces working and that he needs some
support, other than the villagers.  They have come to accept his ideas, and
are ready to sign a deal for the resort, and in the process, show that they
are in danger of cutting off their very
livelihood to their once glorious past.  The real question is: future with
no spirit, or future with A spirit.
The film's obvious content is that there is no future without the full and
complete spirit, regardless of who we are.  Lucky for us, the white man has
not been too oppressed as yet, so that they too will lose their burial
grounds in this day and age.
Mixed into this is a wonderful child's tale of becoming an adult.  The young
woman, is on a walkabout of sorts with the younger brother and two friends.
And they are to go to the island.  Jimmy seems to think that the young Maria
is the person who can lift the veil of doom from their own people, and help
save them from the oppressing modern forces.  She doesn't tell us this, and
she does not explain much of the mystical
goings on either, but in many ways that is what makes the film even more
attractive, and not pushy.  Disguised as a story, and adventure for four
kids, is much easier than tackling the livelihood of many indigenous tribes.
While in the island, the children help Maria discover what her dreams really
mean, and why they came to the island.  They take care of what they have to
do, and in the process dismantle the bad intent of Hawk's, who has been
going to the island and
making sure that the eagles, and various other animals move from the area,
so that it can not be considered a natural habitat, and therefore a
protected area, which of course, helps the commercial development, if there
is going to be any.
An excellent film, never boring, not pushy at all, with no spiritual
pretentious.  It just does its thing, lightly, and in a subtle way, and in
doing so, it keeps us interested, rather than lectured.
