Title
Review for Hudsucker Proxy, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Andrew Hicks
     I've never reprinted reader mail in a review before, but there's 
a first time for everything. A guy by the name of Brad Nash from the 
University of Michigan once e-mailed me with the comment, "I was 
just wondering why you have so blatantly chosen to ignore the films of 
the Coen brothers, i.e. BARTON FINK, THE HUDSUCKER PROXY, 
MILLER'S CROSSING and especially BLOOD SIMPLE. All great 
movies."
     Well, I didn't want to say this before, but yes, I have blatantly 
chosen to ignore the movies of Ethan and Joel Coen. It's all a 
conspiracy, you see, started by a Coen-hater who paid me an 
undisclosed sum not to review the above four movies, because it's 
obvious every time I review a movie, thousands of people instantly run 
out and watch it. By not reviewing these movies, I am ensuring the 
failure of the Coen brothers in Hollywood. And I would have gotten 
away with it too if it wasn't for that meddling Brad.
     Actually, I was blissfully ignorant of this issue until Brad's 
comment. I had no intention of excluding the Coen brothers from my 
little orgy of hilarity. And I've seen BARTON FINK, it was just a year 
or two before I started doing movie reviews. My feeble memory was 
too hazy on that particular film to construct a review. I do know I liked 
it, if that's any consolation. I was going to watch THE HUDSUCKER 
PROXY on Cinemax last summer, but it was bumped at the last minute 
for the premiere showing of the adult movie parody of FORREST 
GUMP, entitled TORRID HUMP. ("Life is like a woman's naked 
chest. You can have everything you want if you'll just take hold of it.") 
I'd go see MILLER'S CROSSING, but I have about twelve other 
gangster movies from the early 90's to get to first. BLOOD SIMPLE 
I've never even heard of.
     So there's your answer, Mr. Nash, for God and the rest of the 
world to see. And I think you should know it's because of you I rented 
THE HUDSUCKER PROXY (a strange title probably thought up by the 
same guy who gave the band Toad the Wet Sprocket their name). 
Unfortunately, I took up so much space replying to that comment I 
now have to do a condensed review.
     The movie's set in 1958, with Tim Robbins working in the 
mailroom of the Hudsucker corporation with plans to move up in life, 
through the aid of an idea he's drawn up--a circle ("You know, for 
kids"). He does move up, straight to the office of president, after the 
current president jumps to his death and the board members (headed 
by Paul Newman) decide to put an imbecile in his place to deplete 
value of company stock so they can buy it cheap. If they'd waited about 
30 years, they could have hired Dan Quayle for the job, but Robbins 
was the best they could do on short notice.
     At first, the plan works, and one reporter (Jennifer Jason-
Leigh) writes scathing newspaper articles about Robbins' inefficiency 
while masquerading as his secretary. But everything changes (nothing 
looks the same through the eyes of love) when Robbins' circular 
invention--which the board members feel sure to fail--becomes the 
hottest fad item in the country. That invention's name? The hula hoop. 
Geez, now I sound like Casey Kasem. And now we're up to our request 
and dedication. It comes to us from a woman in Sioux Falls, Iowa, 
who writes, "Dear Casey, my infant child died, my husband left me, I 
got laid off, my parents refuse to speak to me and I'm being evicted 
from my apartment next week. So could you please play 'The Future's 
So Bright I Gotta Wear Shades'?"
     That's the peak of a good movie that falls from grace toward 
the end, when silliness dominates and all shreds of believability are 
removed. Still, THE HUDSUCKER PROXY is a stylish and mostly 
entertaining movie. Leigh is especially fun to watch, her role as an 
acid-tongued, independent yet lonely woman seemingly lifted from 
various movies of the 50's.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America for over 1/50th of a century!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     THE HUDSUCKER PROXY is the most technically accomplished film that
you're likely to see this year.  And it's also the coldest.
     Courtesy of a believe-it-or-not partnership with producer Joel
Silver--whose films typically have high body-counts and low Roman
numerals--Minnesota twins Joel and Ethan Coen have gift-wrapped and
delivered their biggest tinkertoy-set film yet.  HUDSUCKER is just as
calculated as BLOOD SIMPLE, just as manic as RAISING ARIZONA, just as
showy as MILLER'S CROSSING, and just as stylish as BARTON FINK.
     It looks good and moves good and sounds good, but, for the first
time in five films, it feels awful.
     HUDSUCKER opens with a desperate young man stepping onto the ledge
of a skyscraper on a snowy New York New Year's Eve, 1958.  His name is
Norville Burnes (Robbins) and the story recounts how he came onto that
ledge of Hudsucker Industries.
     Fresh off the bus from Muncie, Indiana, Norville gets his start in
the mail room on the very same day that president Waring Hudsucker
(Durning) takes a flying leap from the 44th floor.  Or 45th, if you
include the mezzanine.  The executive board--headed by schemer Sidney
J. Mussberger (Newman)--wants to forestall a public takeover and
installs Norville as a puppet president to lower investor confidence.
The theory, of course, is that Norville is an idiot without an idea in
his head.  Said theory holds right up until the new head of Hudsucker
invents the hula hoop....
     The first half of HUDSUCKER moves just as quick as anything in the
Coen comedy RAISING ARIZONA.  Eye-popping gags and breathtaking
set-pieces whiz by at a breakneck speed that's good for a solid hour of
goofy giggles.
     (Not to mention the uncomfortable realization that the Winterland
Wunderkinds *throwaway* more tricks in one film than many directors use
in a lifetime.)
     Complimenting the visual wizardry is page after page of tart, ripe
dialogue that moves as fast as the film.  The Coens love old movies, no
duh, and everyone in HUDSUCKER hurries through their harangues.  Best
Blabbers are Jennifer Jason Leigh, as a reporter-in-disguise with a
Katheryn Hepburn accent, and John Mahoney as her editor.
     The characters in HUDSUCKER look sharp and talk smart--but, with
few exceptions, they never radiate much warmth or humanity.  Which is a
problem when the film slows and the characters stand revealed and the
story strives for a moral message.  Even *with* the Capraesque ending,
THE HUDSUCKER PROXY nevers really warms up.
     The last fifteen minutes of HUDSUCKER are a sheer delight as they
mark the return of a supporting character who beams with more life than
any of the prominent players.  Without spoiling the surprise, this
person is the *real* flesh and blood in a towering set of tinkertoys
and he makes you smile because he shows that there's at least a little
heart buried under all the ice.

Author
Chad Polenz
** (out of 4 = fair)
1993, PG, 111 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[satire]
starring: Tim Robbins (Norville Barnes), Jennifer Jason Leigh (Amy Archer),
Paul Newman (Sidney J. Mussburger), produced by Ethan Coen, written by Ethan
and Joel Coen, Sam Raimi, directed by Joel Coen.
In many adventure and fantasy movies there is a tendency to rely too heavily
upon effects and gimmicks to make for an entertaining story. The same thing
happens in "The Hudsucker Proxy" except with satire and image. This film is
obviously a satire through mood and genre, but it's hard to tell what exactly
it's satirizing. It's essentially a live action cartoon, but a strange one at
that. 
We meet Norville Barnes (Robbins) who is fresh out of college and searching
for success. But he is stuck with an timeless dilemma: how to get a job
without experience and how to get experience without a job? 
The immediate outlook of the film doesn't seem like a comedy, but more of a
lighthearted, satirical story that is certainly curious. The characters don't
act like real people, but like parodies of parodies. The production design is
quite surrealistic, like a cross between the darkness of Gothic and the
lightheartedness of Bugs Bunny cartoons. Everything happens so quickly with
little explanation, it's hard to tell what's real and what's part of the
atmosphere.
We witness the president of Hudsucker Industries, the most important company
in the world, leap from the 44th floor (45th counting the mezzanine) to the
pavement below. The execs of the company are like those on commercials;
drone-like and organized like clockwork, which is somewhat humorous, but not
laugh-out-loud funny. They need a new leader, one that will be a total idiot
in order to drive down stock prices so they can buy it all for themselves.
Guess who's going to be their proxy?
At this point there is a lot of potential - the film could go on to be a
straight fish-out-of-water comedy, but instead it remains on course as a
decorative, highbrow, satire. Eventually we have many formulated characters:
Norville, the lowbrow, gullible manchild; Mussburger (Newman) the typical con
man in a world full of idiots; and Amy Archer (Leigh), the fast-talking,
feminist journalist.
It all seems to blend together within its context, but as a whole, the film
doesn't work. The settings, acting, and direction are all fine but the script
is just plain boring.
So what is the point of "The Hudsucker Proxy?" What are the points of the
things that are mocked? And why make it all so formulated and cliche?
Sometimes open-ended stories like this can be fascinating, but this was just
puzzling. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
The Coen Brothers have occupied a weird little world of their own for a long
time now, making movies that are motivated by some kind of damaged clockwork
mechanism that we can't see.  All we see is the surface, which generally
consists of weird and sometimes frightening behavior that is sometimes
endearing (FARGO, BLOOD SIMPLE) and often just weird and off-putting
(MILLER'S CROSSING).
THE HUDSUCKER PROXY is a high-end Coen production, with big, bold sets and
broad-screen cinematography in the service of nothing much in particular.
It's like the cinematic version of a shaggy dog story, somehow, and the
goofy voice-over narrations and the non-plot only hammer home the point.
The film takes place in an Art Deco New York of the Fifties, a world of
giant boardrooms and snappy hats, where the monolithic Hudsucker Corporation
makes jillions of dollars making... something.  But all is not well.  After
the most recent declaration of record-busting profits, the president of the
company hops up on the boardroom table and leaps out the window and falls
what looks like half a mile before finally going splat.
This scene, which was hinted at by dozens of people before I finally saw the
movie, is a good indicator of how the movie works -- or does not work.  It
consists of a single visual moment with no real payoff.  At first I thought
this was just an aberration, but the whole movie unfolds like that.  It's a
series of visual setups in search of a story.  Another scene, for instance,
has the old fuddy-duddies in the boardroom laughing at someone's wisecrack.
They laugh.  And laugh.  And laugh.  And laugh, until all possible patience
and perspective has been drained out of the moment and all we're left with
is weird behavior.
Eventually a plot accrues from all of this material.  The new dark horse in
the company (played by Paul Newman), takes hold and sticks an incompetent
mailman (Tim Robbins) into the top slot, hoping to drive stock prices down.
Unfortunately, the kid has an invention in mind -- actually, a whole slew of
them -- and soon the company is making recordbreaking profits all over
again.  But that was about it.  I was absorbed after the first half hour,
amused by the first hour, and then everything after that was me checking my
watch.
Why?  Because the story never really elicits our interest on any other level
other than the superficial.  It is, as they have said, all style and no
substance.  It's like the guy who tells you a really funny joke today and
then is offended when you're not still laughing a week from now.  It does
show that the Coens are very comfortable manipulating visual cliches for
short-term payoff, and there are some scenes that are hilarious -- I liked
Jennifer Jason Leigh's character, who is clearly modeled after the heroines
in the screwball comedies of the Thirties.
But the Coen brothers are also capable of making us care deeply about all
their characters, as they did with FARGO -- which makes this movie seem all
the more calculated and humorless in comparison.

Author
David Cowen
     The Coen Brothers have found success again.  After producing and
directing four stylish and increasingly brilliant films: BLOOD SIMPLE,
RAISING ARIZONA, MILLER'S CROSSING, and the spectacularly complex
BARTON FINK, one would guess that the brother's stab on the
high-budget, commercial genre would create a watered-down result not
even close to matching the quality of their previous successes.  And
while its doubtful that HUDSUCKER PROXY will be able to recoup its $25
(rumored at $40) million budget in the theatres, the film spends the
budget well, mixing the Coen's brother's usual dark themes (Death,
Fate, Work, Failure, Fear of pretending to be what one is not) into a
lush, magical, accessible, Capraesque family movie.  The Coen brothers
have put cream in their coffee, and the result is nothing short of
amazing.
     Tim Robbins stars as Norville Barnes, a small-town rube from the
Muncie School of Business who came to New York with a huge dream and
considerably less work experience.  He finally finds an exploitative
job at Hudsucker Industries in the mail room, and goes to work "long
hours and low wages," attempting (and failing at) absurdly huge tasks.
     Waring Hudsucker, on the other hand, is at the top of the huge
Hudsucker Enterprise, sitting at the end of a tremendous lacquered
board table, smiling as he listens to his accountant give an assessment
of the company: one of incredible success and optimism for the future.
However, his salubrious smile melts into a frown of serious dread as he
realizes that his pocket watch is ticking perilously close to noon.  He
winds the watch, sets it on the table, and as the watch ticks past
noon, runs down the board-room table, jumping through a huge plate
glass window.
     Paul Newman stars as Sidney J. Mussberger, Hudsucker's right-hand
man.  A cut-throat businessman, Mussberger instantly mans the helm of
the company.  Realizing that Hudsucker had decreed that in the event of
his death, Hudsucker Industries stock would be taken public--a move
that would take control of the company away from Mussberger and the
other power-elite in the board room, Mussberger forms a plan to keep
control of the company--find a stupid, unwitting dupe to be the
president, which would screw the company up so bad that Hudsucker stock
would lose its value so that it could be bought up cheaply by the board
members.
     Coming up from the mail room to deliver correspondence to
Mussberger, Barnes terrorizes Mussberger's office, setting important
documents on fire, letting contracts blow out the window, spilling
water all over the floor, all the while attempting to show Mussberger a
diagram for a crackpot new product--a perfectly drawn circle on a
crumpled piece of paper.  Mussberger, impressed by Barnes' bumbling
naivete makes him the head of the company.
     However, the crackpot plan turns out to be the hula hoop, which
Barnes produces using the Hudsucker's resources.  The ensuing hula-hoop
craze quickly turns the former small-town rube into a paparazzi-stalked
celebrity, hounded to come up with an idea greater than a hula hoop.
Jennifer Jason Leigh plays Amy Archer, a Pulitzer-prize winning
reporter who lies her way undercover into Hudsucker Industries and
discovers Barnes' inexperienced past.  Barnes is made out to be an
imbecile, and his fate turns for the worse as he senses his time at the
top running out.
     Not enough can be said about the Coen's knack for creating an
atmosphere in their films.  Shots of the inner-workings of Hudsucker
Industries, from rooms full of pneumatic tubes and the inner workings
of the huge Hudsucker Building clock to the ticker-tape luxuriance of
the offices of Mussberger and Barnes are striking and beautiful.  The
film's editing moves smoothly between segments, giving it a grace
missing in the somewhat abrupt editing of other Coen brother's films.
The dark, thick tone of dread found in their other films has somehow
given way into the air of a genuine magic one finds in the charm of
40's and 50's Christmas films.  The music adds greatly to this: it
swirls into heavenly, wistful crescendos at all the right moments.  THE
HUDSUCKER PROXY is by far the most handsome and magical American film
to be in wide distribution in a couple of decades.
     The performances are superb as well.  Tim Robbins has proved
himself to be one of America's finest actors in his roles in THE PLAYER
and SHORT CUTS, as well as an impressive director/actor in BOB
ROBERTS.  Robbins' Norville Barnes isn't just a hick
caricature--Robbins plays Barnes as a genuinely charming imbecile: a
wise fool, as it were.  Jennifer Jason Leigh's Amy Archer at first
glance seems to be a obnoxious imitation of the Katherine Hepburn type,
but upon closer inspection it becomes obvious that its the Archer
*character* who wants to be the fast-talking tough dame, not Leigh
imitating one--and Leigh's acting reveals all sorts of subtleties and
innocence in Archer's character a lesser actress would gloss over.  The
only loose point is Paul Newman, who doesn't give his character any
more life than of any other "scheming greedy rich corporate head"
caricature.
     Of course, the dialogue is incredibly well written--in a Coen
Brothers film, it is hard to have a favorite quote because everything
that flies out of every actor's mouth is instantly catchy and
quotable.  The only problem is occasionally, especially with the scenes
in the newspaper office, the actors fly through their dialogue so fast
it takes two or three viewings to decipher everything they say.
     All of this begs the question: why is what appears to be (and is
marketed as) an innocent light comedy given a $25 million dollar
treatment by action film producer Joel Silver?  Silver claims "It's
just ... a good *story*, and the invention of the hula hoop, that's
just *cool*."  Somehow, I never thought retro-cool was the only thing
needed to net a $25 million production budget (well, yeah, there was
Oliver Stone's tedious THE DOORS, but that's another story
altogether).
     But THE HUDSUCKER PROXY is much more than just a well-produced
light comedy.  Somewhere, buried beneath the high-gloss sheen of the
sets, the fine acting, the well-paced jokes and the machine-gun paced
dialogue lurks a bit more ... the Coen Brothers' scripts spawn layers
of themes below the surface of the plot, commentaries on life which
span from the evolution of man's survival, the difficulties of
producing successful art, to a literal struggle betwixt time and fate.
     The Coens proved themselves masters of this sort of
script-writing with the obtuse but engrossing Barton Fink, but in many
ways Hudsucker Proxy may be more successful--it turns the Coen's
twisted, enlightened view of the enigmatic sides of life into a
completely audience-accessible film, suitable for the entire family.
In doing so, the Coen brothers have either made the most realistic,
normal surrealist films ever imagined, or one of the most complex,
multi-faceted family films ever made.  "You know, for kids!"  Either
way, the film is superb.
David S. Cowen2609cowend@vms.csd.mu.edu
eschat@solaria.mil.wi.us

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Joel Coen
Writers: Joel and Ethan Coen
Starring: Tim Robbins, Paul Newman, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Charles
Durning, John Mahoney, Bruce Campbell, Peter Gallagher, Steve Buscemi,
Anna Nicole Smith
"The Hudsucker Proxy" is basically the only film from the Coens that was
nearly critically and commercially admonished.  Costing about 30 million
bucks or so to make, and making about...1, as well as being trashed by a
lot of critics for having "style but no substance," it was therefore
dubbed "a failure."  But don't be fooled by all this; "The Hudsucker
Proxy" is one of the funniest and warmest comedies to come around.
Playing as a kind of parody of the Frank Capra films of the 30s and 40s,
as well as a semi-satire of 40s industrialism, and general blue-collar
working, "The Hudsucker Proxy" presents a surreal vision of the world of
the past, filled with the wacky, off-beat humor of the Coen brothers,
which seeps into all of their films, even if they're not comedies
(except "Blood Simple," which plays it straight).  What's great is that
this film never looses its humor.
Taking place, I suppose, in the 40s, it deals with a kind of dim-witted
yet hopeful young man (Tim Robbins) who comes to the big city to get a
good job, but finds he has to settle with a crap mail room job for a
company called "Hudsucker Enterprises" (the company in "Raising Arizona"
too).  Ironically, the day he's hired, the president of the company
(Charles Durning) mysteriously and joyously leaps from the top story to
his ultimate squish.
Since this means that the stocks will go out to the general public as of
the new year (some company technicality...), the heads of the company,
ruled by the cigar-smoking Mussburger (Paul Newman), decide to find a
total dupe to replace Durning, who will drive the stocks way down, so
they can buy them cheap.  And guess who has to deliver a "blue letter"
to Mussburger on that day?
Before you can say "cliche," Robbins is being fitted for a nice suit,
and his hair is being plastered down.  Enter the Rosalind
Russel-inspired Amy Archer (Jennifer Jason Leigh), a feisty reporter who
bets her pullitzer that it's a sham and goes undercover to find
everything out.  Soon she's posing as his adorable secretary, and finds
she's falling in love with him, and he with her.
The company thinks they've scored gold with chosing Robbins for the job,
especially when he comes up with his idea for the company's new gimmick:
a drawing with a circle which he carries along with him in his shoe
("You know: for the kids," he says when he introduces it anyone).  The
company goes along with it because they don't know what the hell it is,
but there's a sad (for them) irony in it, especially when you see what
it is he's actually invented.
The film is one of the most frequently funny films of the 90s, going for
various academic gags throughout the course of the film.  They seem to
be going for the humor they did in their amazing "Raising Arizona,"
which is one of the funniest flicks I've ever seen.  Of course, with the
big budget, it means they can improve on the sets and overall production
of their film.  The mail room is actually reminiscent of any set in
"Brazil," with its negative outlook in beaurocratic jobs, which the film
satires frequently.  We get giant sets, a cast of seemingly thousands,
and some just-plain-cool shots, and even some special effects.  The
suicide jump by Durning, and a later one by another character, is the
best I've ever seen in a film.  I think.
If there's a downside to the film, it's that it's just not as cool as
their other films.  Sure, I think it's a fantastic comedy, featuring
many great jokes and even some satire.  But it doesn't have the great
heart of the earlier Coen brother films.  But to me, it's okay, because
this film is one of the few films to be non-stop funny for its full
time.
With Tim Robbins' giddy performance, Paul Newman's deliciously cold
acting, and Jennifer Jason Leigh's awesome Rosalind impersonation, we
get a parody of the screwball comedy and the films of Capra, as well as
a satire of companies and beurocracy which is definitely one of the most
enjoyable films I've seen in the past couple years.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Tim Robbins, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Paul Newman.
Screenplay:  Joel Coen, Ethan Coen & Sam Raimi.
Director:  Joel Coen.
     Please complete the following sentence based on your reactions to
the previous films of Joel and Ethan Coen (RAISING ARIZONA, BARTON
FINK).  The Coen brothers are:
     a) a pair of intellectual dilettante/pop cannibals whose films
lack any kind of soul.
     b) a pair of brilliant visual stylists who manipulate genre into
something completely original.
     Your choice will probably tell you all you need to know about how
you would react to THE HUDSUCKER PROXY.  Coen brothers fans will revel
in their delightfully off-center perspective and their twisted sense of
humor; their detractors will grouse over their cold mechanics and
inaccessibility.  And both sides will be correct.  Fortunately, there
is more that dazzles than there is that distracts.
     THE HUDSUCKER PROXY opens on New Year's Eve 1958, as Norville
Barnes (Tim Robbins) prepares to jump from the 44th floor of the
Hudsucker Building.  The story behind how he ends up there flashes back
one month as naive go-getter Norville arrives in New York from Muncie,
Indiana.  He gets a job in the mail room of Hudsucker Industries on the
same day company founder and president Waring Hudsucker (Charles
Durning) chooses to leap to his death from the window of the board
room.  Hudsucker's right hand man Sidney Mussburger (Paul Newman)
decides to install an easily manipulated buffoon as the new president
in an attempt to shake investor confidence, force down the price of the
stock and allow the board to buy a controlling interest.  That buffoon
is Norville Barnes.  When the news goes public, reporter Amy Archer
(Jennifer Jason Leigh) smells a rat, and sets out to expose Norville as
a fraud, much to the delight of Mussburger and the board members.
However, Norville has at least one trick up his sleeve.
     Many of those off-putting elements which have limited the Coens'
appeal are still in place.  Director Joel is given to wild, manic set
pieces and near constant camera movement, which often seem to yell,
"Look at me, I'm a director!"  Fans of vintage cinema note that their
spins on established genres read like film school projects: make a
"film noir," make a gangster film.  THE HUDSUCKER PROXY clearly owes
most of its inspiration to Frank Capra's MEET JOHN DOE, with nods to
Sturges and Hawks along the way.  At a certain point, however, homage
gives way to parody; Jennifer Jason Leigh's clipped Katherine
Hepburn/Barbara Stanwyck delivery is cute for a while but eventually
becomes annoying, while Paul Newman simply seems cartoonish as the
snarling, cigar-chomping wheeler dealer.  But perhaps most
disappointing is the character of Norville, whom the Coens and
co-scripter Sam Raimi didn't seem to have any interest in making
interesting.  There's almost a mockery of Capra's everyman heroes, who
were simple but always imbued with common sense.  Norville is just a
dolt, and Robbins plays him that way.  Consequently, it's hard to care
about anything except what is on the surface.
     Of course, there is plenty more going on on the surface of a Coen
brothers film than any dozen other films put together.  Dennis
Gassner's production design is part Gotham City, part BRAZIL, but
stunningly evocative in its own right, while Carter Burwell provides a
fantastic and diverse score.  However, it is with two magnificent
visual pieces that HUDSUCKER makes its mark.  The first involves
Hudsucker's fall to his demise, a dizzyingly comic blue screen effect.
The other, even better, is a montage beginning with the testing and
marketing of Norville's big idea, the Extruded Plastic Dingus, leading
to a brilliant scene of one boy beginning a fad which will sweep the
nation.  There are dozens of individually memorable moments, lines and
scenes, which makes it all the more frustrating that they aren't
supported by a memorable story.
     With triumphant films like MILLER'S CROSSING and BARTON FINK, the
Coens have established themselves as among the most original filmmakers
of their generation.  Still, it has only been on rare occasions that
they have appeared as concerned with creating characters as they have
with framing shots.  THE HUDSUCKER PROXY is worth seeing for its quirky
invention, but it's hard not to wish that so much talent could come
with a little more heart.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Tim Robbins has a knack for finding his way into superior
satires.  After taking the lead role in Robert Altman's THE PLAYER and
starring in his own big-feature directorial debut, BOB ROBERTS, Mr.
Robbins has now landed top billing for the latest film from the Coen
Brothers, a wickedly funny and incisive lampoon of big business called
THE HUDSUCKER PROXY.
     Norville Barnes (Tim Robbins) is an imbecile from Muncie with a
single idea for a children's toy when he wanders into Hudsucker
Industries for a job in the mail room.  Coincidentally, as Barnes is
going in, the president of the company, Waring Hudsucker, is on his way
out--through the window of the board room on the forty-fourth floor
(not counting the Mezzanine).  Hudsucker's death sets off a panic;
company rules state that since he died without a will or living
relatives, his majority share must be sold on the open market.
Determined to devalue the stock so that the current board members can
afford to buy it up, Chief exec Sidney J.  Mussberger (Paul Newman)
devises a scheme to destroy the Hudsucker reputation by choosing a
complete incompetent for the top seat.  At that moment, he meets
Norville Barnes...
     >From the opening sequence, soaring through the snow over the
benighted building tops of an unnamed city, it's apparent that THE
HUDSUCKER PROXY is going to be a awe-inspiring visual experience.
Given that the producer/director pairing is that of brothers Joel and
Ethan Coen, who headed such projects as BLOOD SIMPLE, MILLER'S
CROSSING, and BARTON FINK, the emphasis on set design, artwork, and
innovative cinematography (by Roger Deakins), shouldn't come as a
surprise.
     THE HUDSUCKER PROXY skewers big business on the same shaft that
Robert Altman ran Hollywood through with THE PLAYER.  From the
BRAZIL-like scenes in the cavernous mail room to the convoluted
machinations in the board room, this film is pure satire of the
nastiest and most enjoyable sort.  In this surreal world of 1958 can be
found many of the issues confronting large corporations in the 1990s,
all twisted to match the vision of the filmmakers.
     If the main title sequence is impressive, numerous scenes
throughout the movie are no less so, including (but not limited to) the
plummet of Waring Hudsucker from the forty-fourth floor (not counting
the Mezzanine).  The spiraling, vertiginous drop is breathtaking to
watch, thanks to the Coen's vision (aided by second unit
director/co-writer Sam Raimi, who was heavily involved in the special
effects shots) and the wizards at ILM.
     For those who have ever felt stymied by the bureaucratic process,
the mail room of THE HUDSUCKER PROXY offers a cartoon-like indictment,
with Norville's whirlwind orientation promising him "the boot" if he
forgets his employee number or messes up voucher colors.  Also, when
the moment of silence for Waring is announced, it goes without saying
that the brief stoppage of work will demand an appropriate deduction
from all paychecks.
     The dialogue crackles, with one-liners and double entendres
peppering the character exchanges.  A Hula Hoop is referred to as an
"Extruded Plastic Dingus," and a very un-Wim Wenders-like angel makes
an appearance singing "She'll Be Comin' Round the Mountain."
     Tim Robbins, who by now has a firm grasp on how to play characters
in films of this nature, is perfect as the dimwitted, good-natured
Norville Barnes, a man who fears his old mail room supervisor even
after he's been named president.  Mr. Robbins is effective mingling
"straight" acting and physical comedy.
     Paul Newman, continually chomping on his cigars, provides the
perfect villain--the personification of corrupt corporate ideals.  Mr.
Newman clearly has a lot of fun in this role and, during the casting
process, needed little convincing beyond a reading of the script to
accept the part.
     The scene-stealer, however, is Jennifer Jason Leigh, lampooning
Greer Garson and Katherine Hepburn as a fast-talking, tough-as-nails,
Pulitzer- prize winning reporter.  Her scenes with Bruce Campbell and
John Mahoney include so much snappy dialogue that they sometimes feel
like a tennis match. and she packs a mean right cross and left hook.
     In addition to a number of brief "period piece" parodies (such as
a fake newsreel detailing developments at Hudsucker Industries and a
scientific dissertation on how a Hula Hoop works), THE HUDSUCKER PROXY
includes one of the most openly-hilarious on-screen moments of the
year.  Then again, there's a lot in this movie to laugh at beyond that
single scene.
     Neither the Coen brothers nor Sam Raimi are regarded as
particularly mainstream, and THE HUDSUCKER PROXY is the first
big-budget motion picture from them.  Hopefully, the eclectic
reputations of the filmmakers will not limit the movie's box office
success.  With its refined wit and glorious vision, THE HUDSUCKER PROXY
is certainly deserving of a wide audience.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
