Title
Review for Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (1989)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Harrison Ford; Sean Connery; Denholm Elliot; Alison Doody & John
Rhys-Davies
How do you make an Indiana Jones film even better? By adding Sean Connery to
the cast. With the one two punch of Harrison Ford and Sean Connery, it is
pretty darn difficult to come up with a bad final product. When you add
Stephen Speilberg as the director and George Lucas as producer and one of
the writers, all the elements are there for a spectacular film experience.
Indiana Jones And The Last Crusade does not disappoint on any level. Other
than the fact that this has long been reputed to be the last film in the
series. One can not be just a little sad that this much talent may never
collaborate again to make another one of these films that really represent
why people love going to the movies.
This time out, Indiana's (Ford) father, Henry Jones (Connery) is working for
a wealthy collector who is financing his life long quest for the Holy Grail.
The Nazis, who are also interested in the Grail, are in competition with
Jones. (I guess they are still ticked off over that whole Lost Ark thing.)
Anyway, Jones goes missing. So son Indiana travels to his fathers last known
location, Venice, to try to find out what happened to his father and also
see if he can't complete his father's search for the Grail. He travels with
longtime friend, Marcus Brody (Denholm Elliot), and the hook up with the
elder Jones' assistant, Dr. Elsa Schneider (Alison Doody). Together the
three search Venice for clues to the location of the Grail. Jones eventually
finds his father who joins the group on the quest for the Grail. As usual,
Indiana's adventures are never dull, and this time he has to deal with
Nazis, rats and a high speed boat chase on the way to his goal of the Grail.
Indiana Jones And The Last Crusade is very well written and lives up to the
first two films. No disappointments here. The film opens with a flashback
sequence with Indiana as a boy and explains many of the reasons that Indiana
is the man he is. Last Crusade is frequently funny which is a tribute as
much to the interaction of the leads as it is to the sharp writing. Harrison
Ford and Sean Connery are perfectly cast as the father and son who don't
always see eye to eye. Throw in the supporting cast of Denholm Elliot and
John Rhys-Davies (Sallah), both returning to their roles from Raiders Of The
Lost Ark and there are more than a few light moments intertwined with the
seemingly nonstop action.
Like the previous films, Stephen Speilberg gives us a film filled with
elaborate stunts and the sort of settings that can only be found in an
Indiana Jones movie. There is virtually nothing wrong with this movie from a
technical standpoint. Last Crusade has stood up well in the 10 years since
it first hit the big screen. It is easily one of the finest action/adventure
films ever made. This film also compares very well to the first one, Raiders
Of The Lost Ark, which in my opinion, is quite possibly the best film ever
made.

Author
Ife Hsu
Paramount Release (1991)
Running Time: 2:05hr approx.
Starring: Harrison Ford, Sean Connery, Allyson Doody, River Phoenix.
Director: Steven Spielberg
It is always refreshing to watch [again] summer movies from
previous years and compare them with current movie flicks. This
is especially true given the emphasis placed on special effects
that seem to carry 1996 summer films. 
Indiana Jones and The Last Crusade is the third movie in the
adventurous trilogy of Dr. Henry Jones, Jr. [Harrison Ford]. In
this entry, Indiana Jones attempts to rescue his father [Sean
Connery] and battles old nemesis in the journey for the Holy
Grail.  The journey is engaging, entertaining, and filled with
obstacles. 
Even at the most dangerous barriers, this movie is light-hearted
and humorous. It contrasts heavily with the previous Indiana
Jones movie - The Temple of Doom, a dark and horrific tale drawn
on black magic and revengeful characters.  Some of the best
sequences in fact revolve around the chemistry of Ford and
Connery who find themselves at odd circumstances that call for a
level of personal interaction they are not accustomed to.  
Yes, this movie also had numerous special effects. But unlike
current movies, they are not designed to overshadow the
characters or undermine the storyline. Special effects are
utilized to enforce visualization, thus demonstrating how
drazzling some of Indiana Jones' stunts really are.  
Characterization is what makes Indiana Jones movies entertaining
and enjoyable.  Even removing the somewhat outdated special
effects, there remains a movie that can still be recommended.  

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is no real secret.  The Hollywood wonder-boy of twelve summers ago
and much of the time since, George Lucas, is hurting for money.  Things have
not really panned out for him.  HOWARD THE DUCK, which featured the greatest
technological duck special effects the screen has ever seen, laid an egg.
And it was NOT a golden egg.  That was only one of several projects that
have enhanced neither Lucas's fortune nor his reputation.  Lucas needs a
hit.  That much seems to be fact.  My opinion is that Lucas knows how to
have a pit if all he wants is a hit rather than trying something new and
original.  He just makes another one of his series films.  It takes too long
to do a STAR WARS film, so he did another Indiana Jones film instead.  The
one drawback is INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM was a disappointment
and done much more in the Spielberg style than in the style Lucas put into
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK.  Spielberg directs all the Indy films, of course,
but I suspect some of the exaggerated cartoonish feel of the second film was
Spielberg's.  And many of the fans preferred the style of the first film.
All Lucas really needed for a hit was to do again what he did with RAIDERS.
And he did.  The style of the first film is back.  Welcome back.
     INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE semi-fulfills Lucas's unrealistic
promise that each episode would be a prequel to the one made before it.
Harrison Ford is not getting younger.  So of the three films, this takes
place the latest, but there is an extended flashback in which we learn a lot
of H=how Indiana Jones became Indiana Jones.  The young Indy is played by
River Phoenix, who almost resembles a young Harrison Ford, and in fact
played Ford's son in MOSQUITO COAST.  In Indy's early adventure we see where
he got a lot of what he becomes and even what he wears.  When he gets older
we also get introduced to his father (voiced, and in later scenes played, by
Sean Connery).  Indy is once again after a Biblical treasure.  Earlier it
was the greatest prize of the Old Testament, the Ark of the Covenant.  This
time it is the greatest prize of the New testament, the Holy Grail.
     Do you remember what you liked about the first film?  If you said Karen
Allen, you are out of luck.  This time Indy's female sidekick is Elsa
Schneider (played by Alison Doody), the most attractive of the traveling
companions of the three films, but also the one with the least real
personality.  That means in this aspect, as in most aspects, this is better
than the second Indy film but not up to the original.  If you said you liked
just about anything else about the original--the gritty chases, the fights,
the baroque Nazi military equipment, the ancient sites that are gamuts of
booby traps, the snakes, whatever--you are in luck.  It is all back and
more.  You also get Indy's love/hate relationship with his father.  You get
to see more of Sallah and Marcus Brody (played by John Rhys-Davies and
Denholm Elliot respectively).  One disappointment is that they did a Nigel-
Bruce on Denholm Elliot's character (i.e., they turned a perfectly serious
and interesting character into a buffoon).  But for almost any reason that
you liked the first Indy film, you will also like the third.  On the -4 to
+4 scale, I give RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK a +3, INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE
OF DOOM a flat 0, and INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE a high +2, missing
a +3 only for its lack of originality.

Author
Jerry Saravia
The third time's the charm in the last entry of the wonderful "Indiana Jones"
series. Although it is essentially a recap of "Raiders of the Lost Ark" using
Nazis again as villains, it is also the official sequel to "Raiders," taking
place two years later after the original. It also has a comforting, relaxing
atmosphere that restrains itself from being as over-the-top as "Temple of Doom"
was. But do not fret, "Last Crusade" is chock full of action scenes and plenty
of humor and provides more depth on Indiana than the last two did. 
This time, Indiana Jones (Harrison Ford, aging gracefully) is in pursuit of the
Holy Grail, the cup that Jesus Christ drank from at the Last Supper. A
millionaire named Walter Donovan (Julian Glover) wants to acquire the Grail
before anyone else does and suggests that Indiana find it. Indiana, being the
resourceful adventurer and archaeologist, senses that his father (Sean Connery),
an expert on Grail mythology, is the more appropriate choice. Unfortunately,
Indy's father is already on the search and is missing, which means that Indy not
only has to find his father but also the Grail. Accompanying Indy on his first
stop in this journey to Venice is Indy's mentor, Marcus (the late Denholm
Elliott), and a typically beautiful art historian, Dr. Elsa Schneider (Allison
Doody). Lots of chaos ensues as well as wall-to-wall action scenes in
motorboats, planes, motorcycles, zeppelins, tanks, horses, and so on. The film,
as directed by Steven Spielberg, justaxposes all these scenes with moments of
pure comic relief a
nd enough moments of pause and reflection before embarking on yet another
dazzling action sequence. One inspired moment has Indy confronting Adolf Hitler,
a scene that is hilarious and eerie in a strange way (apparently, there was a
deleted scene where a Leni Riefenstahl filmmaker is shooting footage of the
burning of books in a Nazi rally). 
It is remarkable that after two movies, "Last Crusade" still finds something
innovative and fresh in situations that are as cliched as romantic kisses before
a fade out. For example, a typically sorry bit involving a revolving wall  is
punctuated by tightly edited action and some burst of humor, like using an Adolf
Hitler head statue to block the revolving wall from letting Nazis enter. A
motorcycle chase is handled with finesse when it turns into a jousting
tournament. A plane ready to fire at its heroes on a beach is demolished by
flying geese. Another plane nearly explodes when its wings fall apart entering a
tunnel where the heroes are being chased in a car. The climactic tank chase is
especially good, though it does seem to run out of steam after a while until it
ends with...well, just see the movie. Oh, yes, and the zeppelin sequence has a
one-liner by Ford that remains something of a classic. 
It was a blessing to cast Sean Connery as Indiana's father, Dr. Henry Jones, a
highly private professor who is amazed at his son's ingenuity from getting out
of one scrap after another. This also serves a more historical note in cinema in
that Connery used to play James Bond, who is the true sire of Indiana Jones
(lest we forget that Spielberg initially wanted to make a Bond movie before
George Lucas introduced an idea about an archaeologist). Connery and Ford have
the right chemistry and their bickering and shouting results in a newfound
respect for one another (Indy's father has mostly been estranged). 
The villains are nastily evil, as always, yet none come close to the great
villain Belloq from "Raiders of the Lost Ark." He had a charm and humanity that
is unrivaled, particularly when wooing Karen Allen's Marion, Indy's original
leading lady. Here, we have Michael Byrne as Vogel, a Nazi commandant, who
certainly has a hardened evil streak within but is mostly a cartoonish variation
on his similar role in "Force 10 From Navarone," which also starred Ford. There
is one other villain but it would be a spoiler to reveal who he is. 
Alison Doody has charisma to spare as the good doctor with a few cards up her
sleeve, but she is a disappointment when compared to Karen Allen's feistiness. 
She is a major improvement on Kate Capshaw's whiny love interest in "Temple of
Doom" if only because she does not scream every two minutes. 
"Raiders" returnees Denholm Elliott and John Rhys-Davies bring back their roles
with equal relish and delight. There is also a nod to "Raiders" when Indiana and
Dr. Schneider are in the catacombs of Venice and find a familiar illustration on
the wall: 
"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade" is a more mature, less wildly over-the-top
entry in the series. It is lots of fun and often magical in its continuing
affectionate tribute to the serials of yesteryear. The action is still
frightfully intense and surprising thanks to Steven Spielberg's assured and
strenuous direction. Indy may still return in the future but with this
magnificent trilogy in place, there is no real need. Besides, we now know where
Indiana got his name from. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Before getting into Review Mode, I should disclaim a bit: I haven't been
crazy about previous Indiana Jones movies.  I liked RAIDERS, particularly the
first 15 minutes, but it always seemed like a one-joke concept -- take all
those old serial cliffhangers and one-up them.  Stylishly done, but after
coming out of the theater, I had no great wish to pay $4.50 (those were the
days) to get back in again....  TEMPLE OF DOOM, on the other hand, was a film I
wished I'd never gotten into in the first place.  The film had a thin, brittle
edge that made the whole thing impersonal; it was as if Spielburg was so out of
breath doing his rollercoaster bit, that he never gave the audience the
opportunity to treat the characters as more than cardboard cut-outs.  I walked
out of TEMPLE feeling gyped and a bit wary of future Spielburg/Lucas
collaborations.
     With this out of the way, let me give a whole-hearted thumbs-up to INDIANA
JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE.  The film opens up with a flashback of Indy as a
young man (River Phoenix), and goes from their into the setup of the whole
film: the Holy Grail is near to being found again, and Indy's father has
disappeared on the quest.  Indy, accompanied by Marcus (Denholm Elliot) and
eventually Sallah (John Rhys-Davies), accompany Indy on his search for both
relic and father.  Yes, there are a ton of stunts; yes, there are loads of
visual humor; yes, there is a female romantic interest and yes, there are
Nazis.  (It is always convenient to have villains whom you can have no qualms
about seeing shot, blown up, or run over by large man-made objects; the Gestapo
are particularly appropriate for this.)
     So, what makes this different than previous Indy films?  Well, the first
part is still a bit too frantic, even the Phoenix bit; a lot of plot is tossed
off, and a lot of stunts done.  It almost reaches RAIDERS during this time ...
and then, in a sudden flash, it surpasses it.  I can tell you exactly when,
too: the introduction of Dr. Henry Jones (Sean Connery).
     Several things happen immediately after Connery makes his entrance.  One,
the script improves ... and improves and improves.  Witty dialogue, and an
actual story, with a few moralistic messages which go down pretty easily (at
least, more easily than in THE 10 COMMANDMENTS).  Secondly, the actors do more
*with* the dialogue.  Connery plays each of his lines for all their worth, but
what's more, he and Ford seem to bounce their performances off one another,
making a funny line twice as funny due to the chemistry that the two set up.
And believe me, this is *great* casting; Harrison Ford and Sean Connery do a
father/son routine that several recent comedies dealing with filial relations
would envy.  
     The rest of the film is a breeze -- you just sit back and let it carry
you.  (P.S. See it with a large audience -- this is a definite crowd-pleaser.)
One of my major complaints with RAIDERS has always been that the best
puzzle/stunt scene is the opening; in LAST CRUSADE, Spielburg has the sense to
put his puzzle at the end, and to make it a good one.  Rhys-Davies is never
given much of chance to perform, Elliot plays alarmingly close to a dithering
idiot (I seem to remember him as a somewhat tougher character in RAIDERS),
Alison Doody (my God, woman, people change their names in Hollywood *all* the
*time*) does what she can with her role, and for some reason Julian Glover is
given an American accent, when he does a wonderful British one.  But Marcus and
Sallah aren't made to feel like baggage, and if they aren't exactly given the
chance to entertain, their presence is a comfort, as second banannas if nothing
else.
     In summary, it's worth the $6 I paid to see it, and I think you'll enjoy
it, even if you weren't that much of a RAIDERS fan.

Author
Randy Parker
        With INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE, Steven Spielberg and
George Lucas have finally fulfilled an informal agreement they made in 1979
to make a trilogy of movies about an adventurous archaeologist modelled in
part after James Bond.  In this alleged final installment of the series,
Professor "Indiana" Jones embarks on a quest for the Holy Grail, an
endeavor that takes him from the United States to Venice, Austria, Berlin,
and the Middle East.  During his adventures, Indy must contend with Nazis,
religious fanatics, rats, a femme fatale, and perhaps most challenging of
all, his father.
        THE LAST CRUSADE begins with an extended flash-back to 1912.  River
Phoenix, doing his best Harrison Ford impersonation, plays Indiana Jones as
a teen in a humorous sequence that establishes the hallmarks of the
character: his fear of snakes, his hat, his whip, his scar, and his love of
adventure.  Then the film shifts to 1938 with Harrison Ford once again
reprising his most famous role.  Actually, THE LAST CRUSADE contains quite
a few familiar faces as LOST ARK alumni Denholm Elliott (as Marcus Brody,
the curator who once got lost in his own museum) and John Rhys-Davies (as
Indy's faithful ally, Sallah) both have returned for Indiana's last
adventure.  The cast also includes Alison Doody as the requisite
love-interest, an Austrian art historian who has nothing in mind but her
own self-interests.
        In many ways, THE LAST CRUSADE is the antithesis of INDIANA JONES
AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM.  In fact, Steven Spielberg claims that he made THE
LAST CRUSADE to apologize for the gloomy, gruesome violence in TEMPLE OF
DOOM.  Where DOOM showed excess, CRUSADE shows surprising restraint;
Spielberg has toned down the violence considerably.  Where DOOM was dark
and mean-spirited, CRUSADE is light-hearted and good-natured.  Spielberg
and company play this one for tongue-in-cheek laughs.  Whereas the
relentless, non-stop action in TEMPLE OF DOOM completely overshadowed and
overwhelmed the characters, the action in LAST CRUSADE takes a back seat to
character development.
        The first third of THE LAST CRUSADE is untypically slow, but the
pace immediately picks up the moment Sean Connery hits the screen.  Connery
is brilliantly cast as Indy's father, Dr. Henry Jones, a professor of
Medieval Literature who has devoted his entire life to locating the Holy
Grail at the expense of estranging himself from his son.  Playing against
type in a tour de force performance, Connery is hilarious.  A far cry from
his days as 007, he's bookish and blundering--making him totally ill-suited
to his son's dangerous lifestyle.  Connery's welcome presence on screen
keeps THE LAST CRUSADE from being just a retread of the first two films.
Connery always seems to inject life into his movies, whether they are good
(THE UNTOUCHABLES) or mediocre (THE PRESIDIO), and THE LAST CRUSADE is no
exception.
        The heart of the movie, making it special, IS the father-son
relationship between Connery and Ford, who play off each other well and
build an amusing rapport.  The movie is at its best when Indy and his
father bicker and nag at each other, especially during their attempts to
foil the Nazis.  The friction between the Jones boys runs especially high
whenever Henry Jones infuriates his son by calling him "Junior."  When he's
around his father, Indy often feels intimidated and defensive, and Harrison
Ford effectively portrays these emotions.  THE LAST CRUSADE is the first
film in the series to grant Ford an opportunity to give Indiana some depth
and humanity.  Eventually, of course, the two men overcome their
estrangement to forge a relationship of warmth, tenderness, and mutual
respect.
        When it comes to action, THE LAST CRUSADE falls short in comparison
to its predecessors.  Although the movie is well-paced, not one of its
action sequences is memorable or terribly original, and the film never
really got my adrenaline pumping.  THE LAST CRUSADE is fun and exciting,
but it's not dazzling or awe-inspiring.  In my mind, nearly every action
sequence in RAIDERS is a classic, and although TEMPLE OF DOOM goes
overboard, the film is undeniably tense and hair-raising.  By contrast,
CRUSADE is too tame and fails to distinguish itself from imitators of the
series, such as ROMANCING THE STONE.
        The plot is also disappointing.  Except for substituting the Grail
for the Ark, the movie is just a regurgitation of the RAIDERS story line,
with Indy once again racing against the Nazis to unearth a powerful
religious artifact.  And unfortunately, THE LAST CRUSADE is the only film
of the trilogy without any lasting impact.  Whereas RAIDERS left us stunned
and awe-struck and DOOM left us disturbed and exhausted, CRUSADE is
memorable mostly for Sean Connery's performance.  The movie also suffers
from being the third in the series; it faces higher audience expectations
and must labor harder to achieve originality and to avoid repetition.
        But perhaps it's unfair to draw so many comparisons between THE
LAST CRUSADE and its predecessors.  While it may not be a classic, THE LAST
CRUSADE is certainly an appealing crowd-pleaser that never fails to provide
old fashioned, larger than life entertainment.  And while I was somewhat
disappointed, I have to admit that I haven't had so much fun being
disappointed since INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM.  I'll definitely
miss Professor Jones and his wild escapades, but I have to admire his good
judgement in knowing when to hang up his hat ... and his whip, for that
matter.
