Title
Review for Green Berets, The (1968)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
amerwar@earthlink.net (The Amer War Lib'y)
Judged as "a prelude to American Imperialism" by student, anti-war
Vietnam protesters; Concluded as "unrealistic" by junior-enlisted,
non-Special Forces Vietnam vet grunts; And shunned by the
predominantly liberal Academy of Motion Pictures, Golden Globe and
New York Critics award voters, John Wayne's United Artist (BATJAC)
production of "THE GREEN BERETS" has, like Vietnam veterans --
almost thirty years late -- finally received the gratuitous
respect it has always well deserved.
Not surprisingly, new respect for the fore- and farsighted United
Artists' production of "THE GREEN BERETS" -- the premier Vietnam
War film of the Sixties -- is coming from rank and file Vietnam
veterans. Belatedly, but unanimously, Vietnam vets are
acknowledging that Mr. Wayne's DEPARTMENT's of STATE and DEFENSE-
approved representation of the war in Vietnam is ac,
American, inspirational and, most of all, was predictable of
future events in the war.
    DURING WW2, JOHN WAYNE WAS ONCE, Believe It or Not, BOOED
On one of John Wayne's USO appearances during World War II, 'The
Duke', (as Mr. Wayne was affectionately referred to by Hollywood
intimates), was warmly introduced. He then walked on-stage to
receive the only boos, catcalls and audience criticism of his
acting career... until he produced and starred in "THE GREEN
BERETS."
The anger servicemen bespake and articulated during this singular
WWII appearance narrow-mindedly reflected their individual and
personal surprise that real-life war duty was not the antiseptic
and bloodless unreality Hollywood movies depicted war service to
be. What soldiers in this day's audience failed to realize at the
moment was that Hollywood dramatizations were never meant to be
100% real. They were meant to be inspirational.
"THE GREEN BERETS" was realistic in its inception, dramatization
and delivery. Mr. Wayne, much learned from his previous war film
accomplishments, insisted upon and strived for the most accurate
replication of American military service in Vietnam from the
viewpoint of the 5th Special Forces soldier. Whether or not a
scene was scheduled for his appearance, The Duke attended EVERY
set schedule and shooting. In his own words:
Grunts who served in cavalry, infantry and artillery units were
never told that John Wayne was personally ORDERED by three
American presidents to withdraw his enlistment papers.
Vietnam experiences can only be understood by the man or woman who
survived a war experience. Which is to say, the 1st Cavalry grunt
was no more qualified to FULLY judge the Vietnam experience of a
5th Special Forces operative anymore than vice versus. Yet, SOME
grunts who briefly interfaced with Vietnam soldiers of a different
uniform mistakenly and misjudging felt they COMPLETELY understood
the work of a counterpart. Wrong!
PERSONALLY supervising all levels of production, The Duke ordered
that all military, political and diplomatic aspects of America's
'backchannel' military mission in Vietnam be screen-written into
THE GREEN BERETS' dialogue and action. Lyndon Johnson
Administration and military consultants -- some of whom served in
Vietnam-related federal duties as far back as the Eisenhower
Administration -- attended every filming sequence. In its efforts
for accuracy alone, THE GREEN BERETS succeeds admirably. Monsoons,
Saigon-night life, military protocol, Vietnam vernacular, ARVN
relationship, Communist conspiracy, Special Forces
training/camaraderie/assassination/operations were all accurately
emphasized... and not to be reproduced in such accuracy and detail
until Francis Ford Coppola's painfully detailed "APOCALYPSE NOW"
received the numerous Academy Award nominations and awards eleven
years later that John Wayne and THE GREEN BERETS were shamefully
denied.
The creation and development of THE GREEN BERETS exemplifies all
that the combined United States military departments hoped to
achieve since our first (formal) involvement in international
armed expeditions beginning in World War I. The American Special
Forces concept was unknowingly created by Douglas MacArthur, who,
alone with his scout and armed only with a frequently mis-firing
pistol and his characteristic neck-scarf, journeyed far beyond
friendly lines to survey the Kaiser's defenses. MacArthur's astute
courage in that Teddy Roosevelt-like mission earned him the MEDAL
OF HONOR... awarded over a quarter of a century later. Yet, it was
from this courageous and selfless mission that the concept of the
Green Berets was first stimulated.
Today, the Army's Green Berets, along with similar brother-
services in the United States Air Force and Navy (SEALS), still
commands and deserves the highest respect of our military
heritage.
The following words were spoken not long ago by a Commander-in-
Chief who attended a yet-unreported military event on a secret
Army training base. As a teenager, this Commander-in-Chief shook
the hand of President JOHN FITZGERALD KENNEDY, now indisputably
recognized as 'THE FATHER OF THE GREEN BERETS'.
On the lawn of the White House that was now his home, and with
tears rolling down his face, this Commander-in-chief spoke to an
applauding crowd of ex-Special Forces, recent Secret Service
graduates,
     "I take my hat off... proudly... and in deep personal
     embarrassment... I raise my strongest arm in salute to
     American courage and selflessness in the face of mortal
     adversity. Had I better foresight... some twenty years
     ago... I would have volunteered to serve proudly
     alongside you... during your military service... as my
     father did. I... very deeply regret... the wrong
     decision I made. Please accept... your President's
     humble... and most respectful... apology."
This president's name is William Jefferson Clinton.

Rudely interrupted with deodorant and laundry soap commercials,
Ted Turner's TNT of Atlanta, Georgia has yet to air a single, non-
interrupted veteran-related broadcast.
The "G" rated "GREEN BERETS" is available in video stores
nationwide. Mr. Turner is married to the former Jane Fonda.
With fond memories, Jim Hutton, David Janssen, Raymond St. Jacques
and Aldo Ray provided exemplary, starring and exhausting
performances.
     Dr. Yosarian  retired as a Specialist, Fourth Grade from
     the United States Army in 1972. Under the G.I. Education
     Bill, Dr.  Yosarian  completed  Masters  and  Doctor  of
     Philosophy degrees in Clinical Psychology with minors in
     History, Education and Sociology. Along with publishing,
     speaking engagements  and Department  of Defense-related
     consulting,  Dr.  Yosarian's  most  recent  work  is  in
     encouraging and assisting military veterans of all ranks
     to pursue  writing and  higher education for the purpose
     of assuming Elder Statesman status.
Established by vets for vets, Since 1988
E-mail........amerwar@earthlink.net
..............amerwar@aol.com
WWW.......... http://home.earthlink.net/~amerwar/
..............http://members.aol.com/amerwar/
