Title
Review for Home Fries (1998)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: Black comedy set in part in and around a burger
restaurant that serves French fries not Home Fries.  So the title
doesn't really work and neither does the film.  Drew Barrymore and
Catherine O'Hara star.  Rating: 5 (0 to 10), high 0 (-4 to +4) Minor
spoilers in this review.
   - Dean Parisot directs a screenplay by Vince Gilligan.
   - Sally Jackson (Drew Barrymore) does not know what will become of
     her.  She will soon be having the baby and the father Henry is
     telling her he will soon be leaving his wife, but he clearly has
     little intention of doing so.  Then when driving home one night he
     turns up a back road and is attacked by an army battle helicopter.
     The surprise kills him.  The helicopter it turns out was operated
     by his two stepsons angry about Henry's philandering.  But due to
     radio interference, somebody at the local Burger-matic overheard
     the attack and may or may not have understood what they were
     hearing.  One of the stepsons (Luke Wilson) gets a job at Burger-
     matic to find out what people know.
   - Sally's father holds whole restaurant hostage.  He is overpowered,
     but nothing ever comes of it.  He is not punished.
   - Catherine O'Hara manipulative character makes suggestion that her
     children kill people and then claims to have been misinterpreted.
   - Luke Wilson perpetually has a pained facial expression that looks
     like someone is stepping on his toe.  Drew Barrymore is too much
     like a baby doll.  There just is no chemistry between them.
   - Exaggerated and overdone chase scene.
   - Plot has not much to do with Home Fries, or even the burger
     restaurant.
   - A black comedy needs funny ideas.  This one seems strained.  The
     timing was off or something else intangible, but the film just did
     not work.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
HOME FRIES (director: Dean Parisot; screenwriter: Vince Gilligan;
cinematographer: Jerzy Zielinsky; cast: Drew Barrymore (Sally),
Catherine O'Hara (Mrs. Lever), Luke Wilson (Dorian), Jake Busey (Angus),
Shelley Duvall (Mrs. Jackson), Chris Ellis (Henry Lever), Lanny Flaherty
(Red), 1998)
A screwball comedy that is conceptually funny but the more ridiculous it
gets as the story picks up its pace the less funny it seems. It never
has an edge to it, therefore it seems more like a sitcom than a
comedy/drama. Drama and characterization are thrown out the window, and
contrivances rule the day... which allow the home fries to become too
tasteless to enjoy.
Drew Barrymore as the not too swift red-headed Sally, the girl with a
golden heart, who works in a small-town Texas hamburger fast-food place,
is pregnant and falls for the clean-cut stepson, Dorian (Luke), of the
married man (Chris Ellis) who fathered her unborn child. Dorian and his
maniacal bother Angus (Busey) are helicopter Air National Guard pilots
who attempt to scare their cheating stepfather for their mother's
(Catherine O'Hara) sake, but go too far in scaring him and cause him to
have a heart attack when they hover over his car in their helicopter and
force him to flee the car on a darkened country road. The only problem
with the perfect murder, is that the obedient sons are afraid that the
voices they heard on their helicopter's radio might be witnesses to the
murder. They figure out that those voices came from the hamburger place,
so Dorian gets a job there in order to see what any one there knows
about the murder, which the police are not even suspicious of.
Sally and her family are made to appear like caricatures from the
Beverly Hillbillies, living in a run-down shack, with a father
(Flaherty) who is a loud- mouth drunkard with pangs of violence. The
film touches bases with the Oedipal problem, sibling favoritism,
normalcy, a dysfunctional family, and violence in rural areas. It hones
in on the life of fast food workers and the low quality of life in the
small town, hoping to make a satire on that lifestyle. But the film just
can't get above the absurdity of its bizarre tale to say much more about
why everyone is so screwed up or make the romance between the shy Dorian
(the good brother) and Sally feel like it belongs in the film. These two
are not believable as lovers, as I saw no sparks flying from them. Also
the murder plot is just not that funny, and when it becomes more
involved, it just becomes a sick joke that goes on for too long; and,
the film ends with a one-too many helicopter scene that couldn't be more
ridiculous. The film had all the hints of going somewhere in its opening
premise, but it seemed to get stuck, not knowing how to tell a story
about what the film really should have been about, the quest of Dorian
and Sally for a normal life despite their dysfunctional up-bringing. I
grew weary of the manipulative mother acting out her revenge fantasies
against a husband who cheated on her and her sons trying to be obedient
to her in their own ways. Being a weirdo does not make one necessarily
an interesting character. That is a lesson that this first-time director
should take away from this failed effort at dark humor.
It should be mentioned that there was one appetizing scene in the movie,
as Dorian escorts Sally to Lamaze class and we see them go through those
exercises; it is still a good scene even if it is still not clear why he
does so. I just had the feeling he felt sorry for her, rather than that
he was in love with her, as I presume the director wanted us to believe.
This is a film that might please those who frequent fast-food places and
don't worry about their cholestral count and indigestion. In other
words, the film moved along at a fast pace, there wasn't much to think
about, and might be just the thing for those who would consider this a
date movie and not be concerned that it didn't deliver a heavier meal.
As for me, I try to eat junk food only when I'm stuck on the road and am
starving to death. In this case, since I wasn't stuck on the road, my
excuse for eating this junk food was that I was enticed to try something
new they were advertising on the menu, but after tasting it, I felt it
was just like the same old stuff they always serve in those places, and
I just wasn't hungry enough to appreciate that.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Kevin Patterson
If I had skipped the Farrelly brothers' THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY, I
think I could comfortably say that HOME FRIES is the strangest romantic
comedy I have ever seen. As it is, it can't quite match the gross-out gags
of MARY on the weirdness meter, but's actually a slightly better movie, if
nothing else because its mix of light-hearted romance and dark humor never
seems forced.
As HOME FRIES begins, Henry (Robin Williams) stops by the drive-in at
Burger-Matic and speaks to Sally (Drew Barrymore), who is eight months
pregnant with Henry's illegitimate child. On his way home, Henry is
suddenly intercepted by a black helicopter that descends from the sky,
chases him, and frightens him so much that he dies of a heart attack. Soon
after, we learn that the helicopter was piloted by Henry's stepsons Dorian
(Luke Wilson) and Angus (Jake Busey), whose mother (Catherine O'Hara)
suggested the stunt when she learned of Henry's infidelity.
While piloting the helicopter, Dorian and Angus had crossed frequencies
with the employee headsets at Burger-Matic, which means that Sally and some
of the other employees may have overheard their conversation. Angus, who is
extremely paranoid and fiercely loyal to his mother, prods Dorian, who had
been reluctant to participate in the scheme in the first place, into taking
a job at Burger-Matic in order to find out how much anyone there knows.
There he falls in love with Sally, which is also a problem, seeing as Angus
and his mother plan to kill her as well once they find out about her
involvement with Henry. (Believe me, all of this makes much more sense on
screen than it does on paper.)
>From this point on, director Dean Parisot and screenwriter Vince Gilligan
use this setup for a number of bizarre confrontations and situations--some
of them hilarious, some of them disturbing, and some of them both--while
crafting the oddball romance between Dorian and Sally, who emerge as
genuinely likable and believable. Aside from the romance angle, the
characterizations are certainly interesting, though a bit puzzling at time.
Dorian is somewhat of a dim bulb, but he turns out to be good-natured nice
guy, so much so that one can scarcely believe he took part in the
helicopter scheme (though it does seem that he may have thought the plan
was only to scare Henry, not kill him). His mother is by far the most
frightening and manipulative of anyone in the film, though she too is a
little awkward in places: there's a scene at Henry's funeral in which she
completely overdoes her fake grief, and I'm not sure whether she was
supposed to seem hateful and nasty here or just kind of dumb and pathetic.
Still, even the more uncertain scenes do not seriously disrupt the story,
and they seem to flow naturally even if their purpose is unclear.
With its mix of humor both light and dark and its rural setting, HOME
FRIES bears some resemblance to the Coen Brothers' RAISING ARIZONA, and in
fact I wouldn't be surprised if that film was a direct influence: Gilligan,
an admitted Coen-head, reportedly wrote this script back in 1989, only two
years after RAISING ARIZONA was released. It's a tough act to follow, and
Parisot and Gilligan certainly don't match the Coens' comic genius, but
they have created some hilarious scenes here. The best is probably Dorian's
first day at work at Burger-Matic, which is a laugh a second for anyone
who's ever labored in fast food hell. He gets rapid-fire,
impossible-to-follow directions on how to prepare people's orders ("This
ain't a pickle burger!" another employee scolds him when he puts too many
pickles on a hamburger), tries to change into the costume of the
restaurant's mascot in the freezer, and finally beats the jammed freezer
door open with a slab of meat, only to find that someone is now holding up
the restaurant with a shotgun.
It's tough to say whether or not HOME FRIES is entirely successful, since I
often wasn't sure whether it was supposed to be funny or just plain weird.
But I was rooting for Dorian and Sally by the end, and I was certainly
never bored or irritated with the film, and that ought to count for
something.
Send comments to ktpattersn@aol.com.
Film Reviews archived at:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
James Sanford
 You could dress a hamburger up with hollandaise sauce and raspberry chutney
and still not have a dish that could pass for haute cuisine. Similarly,
writer Vince Gilligan has invested "Home Fries" with plenty of eccentric
characters and wacky situations but hasn't quite come up with enough movie
to fill the big screen. This homey, homely little tale has "Lifetime movie
special" written all over it.
 That may be part of the reason "Fries" has been on the back-burner at
Warner Brothers for the better part of two years; the only conceivable
reason for its appearance now is the surprise success of Drew Barrymore's
recent turns in "The Wedding Singer" and "Ever After."
 But though her fans may applaud Barrymore's willingness to hide her sex
appeal under a Little Orphan Annie hairdo and an enormous belly, "Fries" is
one of her lesser vehicles. As Sally, the slightly dim drive-thru cashier
whose affair with a married man ends with her pregnant and him dead,
Barrymore waddles through scene after scene in a variety of shabby
housedresses and fussy, fluffy sweaters, the kinds of ridiculous clothes
Hollywood seems for some reason to believe downtrodden young women in the
Midwest actually wear. Since Sally is a cheery and passive sort, Barrymore's
performance is little more than a series of cherubic smiles and fey
line-readings.
 Like "Meet Joe Black," "Fries" infantilizes its love interest, in this case
Luke Wilson's Dorian, who's supposed to be a helicopter pilot and former
soldier, but who still sleeps in bunk beds with his brother Angus (Jake
Busey) and gets all gee-whiz bashful whenever Sally's near. No wonder The
Reverend Horton Heat's "Big Little Baby" is featured on the soundtrack.
 The charms of "Fries" are mostly incidental, like the "Space Cadet"
lunchbox Sally carries or the wake at which "You Light Up My Life" can be
heard playing in the background. The only stand-out in the cast is Catherine
O'Hara's twisted portrait of a widow so obsessed with finding out the
identity of her late husband's mistress she believes she can feel the
woman's presence in the air, "like the sick, sweet smell of a cow's breath."
 This is a movie that strains to win over its audience with its cornpone
characters and every so often the effort pays off as director Dean Parisot
concocts a truly funny scene or a convincingly tender moment between Sally
and Dorian. But finally "Home Fries" is much like the food it takes its name
from -- a trifle greasy and sorely lacking in nourishment. James Sanford

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Home Fries (1998)
Drew Barrymore, Luke Wilson, Catherine O'Hara, Jake Busey, Shelley Duvall,
 Kim Robillard, Daryl Mitchell, Lanny Flaherty, Chris Ellis, Blue Deckert.
 Produced by Mark Johnson, Barry Levinson, Lawrence Kasdan, Charles 
Newirth. Screenplay by Vince Gilligan. Directed by Dean Parisot. 93 
minutes.
Rated PG-13, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Oh, what a difference a Coen brother makes. Or rather, the lack thereof. 
More than anything, "Home Fries" wants to be a black comedy in the vein 
of "Fargo" or "Raising Arizona," but the film lacks Joel and Ethan Coen 
and their skewed sensibilities. The result is a strained, pedestrian 
effort that fires off all its rockets, but never attains escape velocity. 
Despite some nice moments, "Home Fries" remains a flat little curiosity.
Set in Texas, the story revolves around Sally (Drew Barrymore), a sweet, 
sad, very pregnant fast-food cashier at the Burger-Matic. While taking 
drive-through orders one night, she picks up some strange chatter over 
her headset. In fact, she is listening to brothers Angus (Jake Busey) and 
Dorian (Luke Wilson) who, at the behest of their mother (Catherine 
O'Hara), are piloting a helicopter in an attempt to scare the bejesus out 
of their philandering stepfather. The stunt works all too well - - Dad 
has a heart-attack and dies. 
The fatality leaves Mom quite annoyed and the boys very worried: they 
also heard Sally over their headsets and have no idea how much she knows. 
So Dorian takes a job at the burger joint to do some reconnaissance work. 
At this point, you surely can figure out the rest. The dead stepfather is,
 of course, the father of Sally's unborn child. Sally, of course, broke 
things off as soon as she found out he was married and Dorian, of course, 
is destined to fall in love with the comely lass.
Some scenes in "Home Fries" work. When authorities find the corpse 
sitting upright in the middle of nowhere, one cop has his picture taken 
with the body ("I'll go to Hell for this," he chuckles, "but I can't 
resist"). A hostage situation involving Sally's drunk, shotgun-wielding 
hillbilly pappy degenerates into a family squabble that achieves a 
certain Jerry Springer-style absurdist comic rhythm. Unfortunately, these 
are rare successful moments in a black comedy that too often is merely 
gray.
Director Dean Parisot simply lacks the skills to mix irreverent humor and 
a traditional romance. His production feels as half-baked as the romance 
between Sally and Dorian is unconvincing. Never for a moment do you sense 
any chemistry between the two characters. Luke Wilson, who looks a lot 
like Freddie Prinze Jr. with lockjaw, projects a sincere, mildly dazed 
charm, and, as always, the angelic Drew Barrymore is sweet as can be, but 
their characters behave as if they are in two separate movies.
Catherine O'Hara, as the vengeance-obsessed widow, and Jake Busey, as a 
psychotic mama's boy, are more effective, but both suffer from incomplete 
story arcs. Just as their characters near the point in the film where 
their mayhem should reach its manic climax, things wrap up abruptly, 
snuffing the comic payoff. I've no idea whether the choppy resolution of 
their stories is the result of sloppy writing or poor editing, but the 
unfinished feel is quite frustrating.
Frustrating is the best overall word for "Home Fries." You know what the 
filmmakers were shooting for, and, every so often, they actually hit 
their target. But the many near-misses and overall tepid feel just made 
me want to slap a Coen brothers movie in the VCR and watch how the big 
boys do black comedy.

Author
Michael Dequina
Hollywood Hotline Featured Review
_Home_Fries_ (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
Being fairly tired of the assembly-line product foisted upon us by the
Hollywood studios, I'm generally all in support of something offbeat.  But
it's one thing to be offbeat, and another thing entirely to be off-pitch.
The quirky dark comedy _Home_Fries_, I'm afraid, falls under the latter
category.
Don't be fooled by Warner Bros.'s misleading marketing campaign, which
sells this strange film as a light-as-a-feather romance.  At the center of
_Home_Fries_ is Henry Lever (Chris Ellis), whose upright dead body is found
in the middle of a field.   Harry, who had a heart ailment, was quite
literally scared to death by his two National Guard helicopter pilot
stepsons Dorian (Luke Wilson) and Angus (Jake Busey), who chase him down
with a chopper as a favor to their unhappy mother (Catherine O'Hara).
Since it all happened in the middle of nowhere, there are no witnesses--at
least by eye.  Possibly overhearing everything, thanks to some crossed
radio signals, is Sally (Drew Barrymore), a very pregnant young woman who
works the drive-thru at a local burger joint.  And, as it always
conveniently happens in the movies, the father of Sally's baby is the late
Henry.
To get close to Sally and find out what she may or may not know, Dorian
takes a job at Burger-Matic himself.  But he gets more than he bargained
for, slowly but surely falling for her.  _Home_Fries_ could have worked if
writer Vince Gilligan and director Dean Parisot kept things simple and left
the film at that.  But real-life loves Wilson and the always-engaging
Barrymore aren't given much breathing room to build an on-screen rapport;
they're all but drowned out by all the strange goings-on that compete for
attention.  Lurking in the background and occasionally stepping up to
center stage is the conniving Mrs. Lever, who has a Machiavellian grasp on
Angus, who will do anything he can to make his mother happy--even kill.
Gilligan obviously intended this subplot to give the film an
unconventional, dark edge, but it is largely unfunny, too broadly played,
and too much of what springs from it feels out of place.  Does there really
need to be a go-for-broke copter-car chase climax?
While I applaud the filmmakers' ambitions in creating something different,
I cannot help but feel that _Home_Fries_ would have been better if it were
more conventional.  Ironically, despite all the quirkiness being bandied
about, it is the film's most conventional aspect--the romance--that
remotely holds any interest.  Everything else, as offbeat as it is, is
simply a bore.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Fontaine Lien
        I'll admit that what made me go see "Home Fries," an eccentric
romantic comedy that looked suspiciously like the gazillions of other
eccentric romantic comedies that have come out in the past five years,
was the name Vince Gilligan.  The man behind many of the greatest X-Files
episodes, a man known for his knack at combining humour with great
dialogue and in-depth looks at the Mulder/Scully relationship.  Quite
honestly, after viewing "Home Fries," I felt that the film was suspiciously
like the gazillions of other eccentric romantic comedies that have come
out in the past five years.  Suffice to say that I was disappointed, but not
really.  For what did I expect of Vince?  He got is start in 45 minute
episodic television.  In retrospect, this episode was exactly like some of
the episodes he's written: crazy, romantic, eery, right down to the
goofball murders and wacky townsfolk.  If I had looked really closely, I
might have seen some of the genius Vince has in writing about the sincere
and the genuine, the Southern Boy that he is.   Or it might just be a
figment of my biased imagination.  
        As much as I appreciate the morbid sense of humor the film has,
there's something that just feels not quite right about things.  Am I too
conservative, or does the romance between Dorian (Luke Wilson aka
Sheriff "Bad Blood") and Sally (Drew Barrymore) seem utterly contrived
and unconvincing?  Granted that it's a wacky world, but the way the script
was written it seems that those two fell in love because of a *La Maz
class*.  Not that I don't believe in rapidly developing romance, but not
under these circumstances, which are a little TOO morbid.  They're asking
us to suspend all sympathy we might have for a human being, and they
want us to believe in the "long shot romance."  I wish I had seen enough
movies or remembered as much so that I might cite a movie as a counter-
reference.  You never quite understand what the deal is with Dorian's
dysfunctional family, except that they're murderous and simple-minded. 
Hilarity ensues, romance develops, Sally and Dorian live happily ever
after.  Shot of cute baby.  Awww.  Add some moody songs and Addams
Family-ish score and you get your average ERC (Eccentric Romantic
Comedy).  Drew Barrymore is charming as Sally, if only because Sally is
simple, down-to-earth, not that hard to portray if you have a smile as
innocent and sweet as Drew's.  The same goes for Luke Wilson, whose job
is to look like the nice and sweet Southern Boy that he is.  An admirable,
entertaining effort by Vince Gilligan (and the other folks -- yes, I know
other people made this movie too ), but one that looks suspiciously like
your run-of-the-mill...  well, you get the gist.
Rating: C+  (First viewing, 11/28/98)

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Dean Parisot.
Cast: Luke Wilson, Drew Barrymore, Catherine O'Hara, Jake Busey, Shelley 
Duvall, Chris Ellis.
1998 - 92 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for violence and profanity).
Reviewed November 28, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
"Home Fries," has been wrongfully sentenced to a misleading ad campaign 
which makes the film look like a simple, sweet love story. But, on the 
other hand, I can also understand the marketer's decision, since, "Home 
Fries," is actually a dark comedy involving deception and murder, with a 
romance stuck in between. In some ways, it felt like a PG-13 version of 
another new, and far superior, film that was released on the same exact 
day, "Very Bad Things."
The first sign that this would not be your usual romance came in the 
first five minutes, in which a middle-aged man (Chris Ellis) is 
terrorized at night by a helicopter, and is scared to death. The people 
in the plane, we find out, are the man's sons, sympathetic Dorian (Luke 
Wilson) and bad-tempered Angus (Jake Busey), who only meant to frighten 
him a little because their domineering mother (Catherine O'Hara) wanted 
to seek revenge on him due to him having an affair. While in the 
helicopter, Dorian and Angus hear voices over their head phones, and 
suspect that someone might have heard the murder. After narrowing down 
the possible people it could be, they find out the voice was coming from 
Sally (Drew Barrymore), a sweet-natured young woman pregnant with Dorian 
and Angus' father's baby, who works at the Burger Matic, a fast-food 
restaurant. Dorian is forced to get a job there to figure out who the 
witness was, but in the process, begins to fall in love with Sally, even 
though his mother and brother want her dead!
As you can see, "Home Fries," is anything but an ordinary romance, but 
instead, a wicked, offbeat comedy, with a few action scenes sprinkled in 
for good (or bad) measure. Although I appreciate the fact that director 
Dean Parisot and screenwriter Vince Gilligan were trying to make an 
original film, it simply doesn't work.
The heart of the film does, in fact, come from the blossoming romance 
between Barrymore and Wilson (also dating in real life), and I liked all 
of their scenes together a whole lot. As always, Barrymore is radiant 
throughout, managing to develop a three-dimensional, likable character 
with an underwritten role. Wilson, who is actually the main character, 
is engaging and every match for Barrymore. Also lending support is 
O'Hara, who could have easily played one-note throughout, but chose 
instead to not just make her character a cliched villainess. Meanwhile, 
Shelley Duvall, as Sally's mother, was amusing, but not given enough 
screen time.
Unfortunately, for every good performance and delightful, well-written 
scene, there would be a large amount of off-the-wall material that did 
not work at all. It was as if two very different films had been 
forcefully molded into one. A climactic helicopter chase was annoying 
and failed to salvage my last remaining hope for the movie.
Perhaps my biggest overall problem with, "Home Fries," was that it felt 
as if it had been heavily edited prior to its release. When the end 
credits began to roll, I was surprised, since I was expecting at least 
another fifiteen minutes. The film felt rushed, and all of the 
relationship remained open-ended and unsolved. The character 
development, although I liked what they had of it, was also 
unsatisfactory. In the case of, "Home Fries," more would have most 
certainly been more.

Author
Bill Chambers
HOME FRIES * (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (wchamber@netcom.ca)
[For past reviews, bi-weekly trivia, etc., visit
FILM FREAK CENTRAL
http://www.geocities.com/~billchambers/ ]
starring Drew Barrymore, Luke Wilson, Jake Busey, Catherine O'Hara
screenplay by Vince Gilligan
directed by Dean Parisot
Note to screenwriters and self: when you hit the big time, and the
studios come knocking for those scripts that are sitting in your
bottom drawer, tell em all to hit the road.  Gilligan wrote the
arbitrarily-titled HOME FRIES ten years ago; it was shelved until he
found success as one of "The took a second look at Gilligan's
"comedy" - they read it again wearing rose-tinted glasses.
Drew stars as Sally, a dim (but sweet), pregnant waitress at a small
town burger joint located somewhere in the Southern United States. The
father of her child is dead, the victim of a severe heart attack
brought on by sadistic torture from his two stepsons - these
flyboys scared him with their low-flying helicopter. Dorian (Wilson)
and Angus (Busey) were getting even for his philandering ways on
behalf of their anguished mother (O'Hara). Trouble is, Sally picked
up some interference on her drive-thru headset, and Angus worries she
may have heard conversations that took place in the helicopter prior
to the accidental killing. So Dorian goes undercover as a
burger-flipper; before you can say "with cheese" he falls for the
mother-to-be. Too bad Mom and Angus have homicidal plans for Sally.
Does this sound like a movie you want to see?
Without a doubt, the best thing about HOME FRIES is Barrymore; at the
risk of sounding sexist, she's never looked better than here, as a
curly redhead with twinkling eyes. She is winning in a role that
requires her to do absolutely nothing except look apple-cheek cute and
gawk at Wilson, her real-life boyfriend. But the plot and the
situations are so off-putting that nothing could save it. This movie
desperately wants to get mentioned in the same breath as the Coen
brothers, but HOME FRIES' brand of laboured hipness would be
foreign to geniuses like Ethan and Joel. It's Raising Arizona
without babies, without charm, without laughs, without human
characters, and without intelligence; worst of all, it's
creepy. What's funny about threatening to gun down a pregnant woman
with a machine gun? (Unless the woman in question is a Spice Girl.)
Take out the helicopters, the quasi-incestuous relationship between
the mother and her sons (it is absolutely illogical, within the
movie's framework, that Dorian still lives with his mother and
brother), and the scenes of murder (attempted and otherwise), and what
are you left with? The story of a single woman with child who works at
a fast food joint (but dreams of becoming a country singer). That
could turn out to be the most boring movie ever made, but it'd be
better than HOME FRIES.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     HOME FRIES opens with the bucolic, folksy feel of a girl-appeal
comedy-drama.  Sassy young Sally (Drew Barrymore), drive-thru cashier at a
small town BurgerMatic, is visited by Henry Lever (Chris Ellis).  Sally is
eight months pregnant; married Henry is the father, though he never
revealed his marriage to Sally during their affair.  As Sally explains to
her customer exactly why he can no longer have it his way, you might
suspect that HOME FRIES will follow our plucky, unconventional heroine on
her search for independence and true love through the world of greasy
dining -- HOME FRIED GREEN TOMATOES, or something of the sort.
     Be prepared to dismiss such notions quickly, as Henry leaves their
encounter...only to be pursued by an ominous black helicopter through the
woods until he has a heart attack.  Thus begins a darkly twisted, truly
unexpected comic concoction from a decade-old script by "X-Files" producer
Vince Gilligan (who clearly has a thing for black helicopters).  It seems
that the copter was piloted by brothers Dorian (Luke Wilson) and Angus
(Jake Busey), two Air National Guardsmen who also happen to be Henry's
stepsons.  At the insistence of their maniacal mother (Catherine O'Hara),
they've scared philandering stepdad to death, with the as-yet-unknown
object of Henry's affections next on their list.  The first order of
business, however, is finding out who was on the same frequency as the
copter's radio during their ambush, leading Dorian to an undercover
assignment at a certain BurgerMatic, and a tentative relationship with a
certain drive-thru cashier.
     The kind of quirky humor HOME FRIES deals out can easily become
oppressive if not directed with a sure hand.  First-time feature director
Dean Parisot seems to know just how to drop the peculiar into a scene
without pointing at it for you and slapping your knee.  A sensitive moment
in which Dorian presents Sally a gift for her baby -- a toy helicopter he
describes as "non-toxic, I think" -- is set against a grease fire in the
BurgerMatic kitchen.  Henry's wake features Zamfir's pan flute rendition
of "You Light Up My Life."  And the sequence of most profound bonding
between our two young lovers occurs at a natural childbirth class where
the instructor tells her students "you didn't get into this with your legs
closed, and you won't get out of it that way."
     It's all consistently off-beat in a way that's more often refreshing
than just plain weird, but it also comes with an undercurrent of
sincerity.  Luke Wilson -- deadpan in an "aw shucks"-appealing kind of way
-- does a nice job with Dorian's ambivalence over his bizarre family
dynamics and his attraction to Sally's sweet (relative) normalcy.  In
fact, the search for a "normal" family comes to play a significant role in
the proceedings.  Dorian and Angus still share bunk beds in their
childhood room, frozen in the time they were abandoned by their father;
Sally's father (Lanny Flaherty) is an alcoholic in and out of the good
graces of her mother (Shelley Duvall).  There's something almost touching
to the convoluted family tree Dorian describes for Sally's baby, since it
comes with the hope that the next generation will somehow be less screwed
up than the last.
     It's too bad that HOME FRIES concludes with an overwrought
helicopter-car chase that feels ridiculously out of place.  It's also too
bad that Drew Barrymore can't make Sally more interesting as the object of
everyone's love or hate, her character slipping in and out of focus like
her generically Southern accent.  Ultimately, the story isn't even really
about her.  If anyone is the true protagonist, it's Dorian in his search
for affection outside a dysfunctional family where mom spews crocodile
tears at her husband's death and big brother pumps carbon monoxide into
the trailer of an unsuspecting woman.  Not exactly the stuff of a folksy,
girl-appeal comedy-drama, is it?

Author
Matt Williams
Home Fries is an unusual romantic comedy where you never quite know what
to expect.  Just when you think you've figured it out, the film veers
off in a different direction.  The end result may leave you disoriented,
but its ultimately pleasing.
Sally (Drew Barrymore) has been having an affair with a married man.
Not only that, but she's eight-months pregnant, and her lover still
refuses to leave his wife.  Oh well, at least Sally has her dependable
Burger Mart job to count on.
However, one night, she picks up a radio communication on her drive-thru
headset.  She hears the chatter between Dorian (Luke Wilson) and Angus
(Jake Busey), two brothers in the Air National Guard, who have
"borrowed" a helicopter to use in an elaborate prank.
However, when the prank backfires, Dorian is sent to the Burger Mart to
discover if anyone there knows what happened.  Yet, instead of finding
witnesses, Dorian finds love...with Sally.
So is this movie a spunky romantic comedy where Sally and Dorian
overcome their obstacles to fall in love?  Or is it a quaint small town
slice-of-life story, where the glamourous jobs are all at the local
cigarette factory?  Maybe it's a dysfunctional family portrait, or even
a grim black comedy?  The answer to all of those is yes.
As you might surmise, the movie becomes a bit cluttered here and there.
However, though it may not always know what genre it wants to be, it
always manages to be amusing, tackling all of its varied topics with a
true sense of fun.
Drew Barrymore fits perfectly as the wholesome young woman who just
happened to get pregnant while having an affair with a married man.
Compared to her easygoing style, Luke Wilson comes off a bit stiff.
However, the supporting roles are all top notch.  Jake Busey is a hoot
as Dorian's brother Angus...but he can't compare to the masterfully
wicked performance by Catherine O'Hara, as the boys' mother. Shelly
Duvall and Lanny Flaherty, as Sally's white trash parents, deliver a
couple of good scenes as well.
If you're in the mood for an out of the ordinary romantic comedy (and
like your humor a little warped), Home Fries fills the bill.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
DeWyNGaLe
Drew Barrymore has had a very good year.  First, she did The Wedding Singer
with Adam Sandler, and then she carried her own movie, Ever After.  Both were
huge winners at the box office.  Now she brings us Home Fries, a romantic
comedy costarring Catherine O'Hara and Luke Wilson.  Luke Wilson isn't the
biggest name in Hollywood or anything, but he is still a good actor.  He and
Barrymore are dating in real life, after meeting on the set of this cute movie.
Barrymore stars as Sally, a worker at a restaurant called Burger Matic.  She is
pregnant from the affair she had with a man named Henry.  Henry's son, Dorian
(Luke Wilson), and his other son, Angus (Jake Busey), accidentally kill their
father by giving him a heart attack.  Their mother put them up to this because
he had an affair with another woman.  On the radio in the helicopter, they hear
fast food workers on interference and figure that they know.  So, Dorian gets a
job at Burger Matic, the same place where Sally works, the woman who had an
affair with his father.  OK, right now, you are probably very lost, but so was
I.  As the movie goes on, Dorian and Sally fall in love, not knowing that Sally
is also in love with Dorian's father.
When Dorian's mother (Catherine O'Hara) commands Angus and Dorian to kill
Sally, (she finds out from pictures who the woman is) Dorian must stop them
before the love of his life is killed.  Home Fries has a very weird and
original plot, not like any other movie I have ever seen.  That really boosts a
movie to a high level.  Drew Barrymore gives an outstanding performance, her
best since Scream.  This movie should boost Luke Wilson to a star level. 
Catherine O'Hara gives a very fake performance that was hard to believe.  Jake
Busey was very annoying and I wanted him to  go away.  Shelley Duvall did
great, and you really believed how her character was feeling.  Home Fries was
also suspenseful in it's own way.  I wanted certain things to happen and I
couldn't tell if they were going to or not.  
There were a lot of laughs in Home Fries, but not crack up funny ones.  Home
Fries is a cute, small movie, which should make some pretty good money at the
box office, but it wont be a blockbuster.  It should keep some people just
entertained.  It is a very simple movie, nothing really complex about it
(except the plot).  Home Fries was a really nice movie to watch on
Thanksgiving, and I enjoyed it a lot.

Author
Vince Yim
    As the film opens up, expectant unwed mother Sally (played by Drew
Barrymore) encounters her baby's father in a fast food drive-through
window. After he gets his milkshake, he drives off, only to be pursued
by a military helicopter. From this moment forward, you know that this
isn't going to be your run-of-the-mill romantic comedy.
    Home Fries tells the tale of the relationship between Sally and
Dorian (played by Luke Wilson), a helicopter pilot who has a different
kind of connection with Sally...more than he would care to admit (hint:
it has something to do with the father of Sally's unborn child). After
taking a personal (and professional) interest in her, he finds work at
the local fast food restaurant at which she works, and the fun goes on
from there.
    This movie is a lot of fun. It is comedic on two levels, as a
romantic comedy and a dark comedy. The romantic moments are sweet, yet
not sappy. One of the more poignant moments is when Dorian accompanies
Sally to Lamaze classes.
    However, the dark comedic moments are more memorable. This is also a
tale of revenge, and a funny one at that. The father of Sally's unborn
child also happened to be a married man, whose wife is played by
Catherine O'Hara. She does a wonderful portrayal of a jealous wife who
is targeting the person who had an affair, and is not above getting
other people to do her dirty work. (My apologies if this sounds cryptic,
but there is too much of the plot to give away).
    Rounding out the cast are Jake Busey as Angus, Dorian's overzealous
brother and Daryl Mitchell as Roy, Dorian's trainer at the fast food
restaurant. The dialogue is sharp and not filled with sappy overtones,
even with the romantic nature of the plot.
    If there are any complaints, it is over Drew Barrymore's
performance. While she does light up the screen, there are moments when
she doesn't seem all that convincing. The movie was filmed in Texas, and
most of the characters have southern Texan accents. Drew Barrymore's
accent tends to come and go (Luke Wilson doesn't seem to have this
problem). As well, she seems awfully agile for a woman that is eight
months pregnant.
    Still, this movie is one that will please many viewers. With plot
twists galore and hilarious dark moments, this is sure to entertain.
--

Author
Jamie Peck
HOME FRIES
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The dark, mischievous tone will therefore jar viewers expecting what 
they've been promised by TV spots and theatrical trailers, but fans of 
films like "Grosse Pointe Blank" should have a terrific time eating up 
the many offbeat pleasures "Home Fries" has to offer. Chief among them 
is seeing Luke Wilson, star of the indie great "Bottle Rocket," finally 
nail a lead role in a major studio picture; other charms include a plum 
role for Catherine O'Hara and a keen screenplay that combines 
disarmingly sweet characters with murder, mayhem and a few helicopter 
chases. 
One such action sequence kicks off the movie, as a chopper navigated by 
two National Guardsmen (Wilson and Jake Busey) ends up scaring a 
middle-aged man to death. Turns out the pilots are the dead guy's 
stepsons, ordered by their domineering mom (O'Hara) to do away with him. 
To give away much else would risk ruining the increasingly surprising 
story, but a later destination worth noting is that Wilson's Dorian 
takes a part-time job at the local Burger-Matic, where he works 
alongside pregnant drive-thru cashier Sally (Barrymore). Sally, of 
course, has a more sinister connection to Dorian than she first 
suspects. 
"Home Fries" eventually rushes towards an uncanny courtship between 
Sally and Dorian, and due to the adorably passive charisma of the 
actors, the sparks don't fly as much as they hover. A lesser movie might 
have run into a problem area there, but this low-key, fast-food romance 
seems perfectly rational in such a warped universe. Only helping matters 
is that Barrymore and Wilson are eternally likeable performers; how they 
turn a Lamaze class interlude into subtle, grin-inducing physical comedy 
without a gag-inducing sap factor is remarkable. 
Though the ending fails to tie up the loose ends of some of the more 
convoluted story threads, "Home Fries" still ranks as an oddball 
delight, one that perhaps seems less askew given that the script was 
penned by "X-Files" producer Vince Gilligan. Credit him for creating an 
atypical combination of person and place that's worth a repeat visit, 
and credit debut director Dean Parisot for handling the material just 
right. Some may arguably carp that these collective efforts have 
produced the textbook definition of a "smallish film," but even so, 
"Home Fries" is still a side order that satisfies on its own.

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 11 December 1998 by myself at the UA 64th Street for $4.50
Somewhere in Hollywood it was decided that mix-and-match genre screenplays
area good idea. Action-adventure? Comedy? Psychodrama? Taut mystery?
Screwball romance? Honestly, just pick two and leave it alone. But that is
not what director Dean Parisot and writer Vince Gilligan decide to do. The
only mistake avoided was casting Valerie Bertinelli, always good for an
unintentional laugh.
The oddly named and aimless *Home Fries* suffers a series of coincidences
and motivations that baffles the moviegoing imagination. What is intended
to draw in the audience and sustain our interest is merely annoying. I
must admit, I was curious to see where it was going, and in reviewing it,
I must warn you that I will give it all away.
Sally (Drew Barrymore) gives her married lover Henry the heave-ho, even
though she is pregnant. Cut to Henry run off the road by a mysterious
black helicopter, and then scared to death when they fire a series of
shells at him. Scared to death (heart condition), but untouched by the
weapons. Then we discover that the two men flying the copter, Dorian and
Angus (Luke Wilson and Jake Busey, both of whom have mostly made
forgettable films) are the stepsons of the dead man. So it was not just a
"prank gone wrong." Then there's the matter of the people who might have
heard them over their radio communications. It seems that Sally heard them
talking (but didn't know what they were saying) on her fast-food radio
headset. She works at the local franchise of a burger chain. So naturally,
Angus insists that Dorian get a job there and figure out if they need to
*kill* her to protect their butts and Mom's (played by Catherine O'Hara
whose comedic talents go completely untapped in favor of sheer frenzy).
But then Dorian falls in love with the very pregnant Sally. But the
increasingly murderous Angus wants to kill someone. What a pickle (no bun
intended) for Dorian. How does he keep Sally from getting killed without
telling her that he killed the father of her unborn baby, who happened to
be his stepfather?
*Home Fries* goes on *further* to dabble in the possibility of a
class-struggle story, with the rich Dorian romancing the utterly poor
Sally. It's all too stupid.
Meanwhile, thoughout, there is some absolutely splendid filming (kudos to
Jerzy Zielinski), and a dynamite soundtrack. If they had just decided to
film the Texas scenery with the Chris Isaak music, I would have loved
that. It was just the plot and the dialogue that got in the way.
PS: That's Shelley Duvall as Sally's mother. She may not be dead, but her
career obviously is.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
So what is worse?  Trailers that tell you too much about an upcoming
movie or ones that mislead you?
HOME FRIES is in the latter category.  The trailers make you think it is
a light-hearted, romantic comedy, but the movie features a family that
settles it arguments with military, attack helicopters.  Even if the
film isn't quite what it seemed to be, it is extremely cute, filled with
lovable, oddball characters within a ridiculously crazy plot.
A sweet-as-Apple-pie Drew Barrymore plays the lead, Sally.  Poor Sally
is a very pregnant unwed mother.  The father of her child is married and
doesn't support her, so she works at the local Burger Matic.  With her
head sporting ten-pounds of red curls, she looks like she just came back
from an audition for the musical "Annie."
In the first part of the story, her lover's two stepsons, Dorian (Luke
Wilson) and Angus (Jake Busey), are sent by their mother, Mrs. Lever
(Catherine O'Hara), to kill their stepfather.  Mrs. Lever, who
specializes in feigned grief, claims she didn't really want him killed.
When they go after their dad with the aforementioned helicopter, they
cause him to have a heart attack and die.
Meanwhile, back at Burger Matic, Sally's headphones get some
interference that lets her hear part of the helicopter attack.  Dorian
then goes to work undercover at the fast food restaurant to determine
exactly what Sally knows.  In the process they fall in love.
As Dorian, Luke Wilson delivers a touching portrait of a troubled guy.
His brow constantly furrowed, he comes to love Sally and her unborn
child, but he is troubled by the implications of it all.  Sally sums up
their predicament on the way to the birthing room.  "You can't be the
father and the brother at the same time!" she cautions.  "That's the
kind of thing that messes kids up."
Fast food, a prime part of Americana that movies generally ignore, plays
a central role in this comedy.  Dorian chants the hamburger recipe as a
form of mantra.  And the funniest scenes in the movie happen at the
Burger Matic.  The best is a simple one in which Dorian is taught the
precise way that they make their burgers.
HOME FRIES isn't much of a movie, but it is a charming one thanks to
some lovely performances.  Where else could you get a film in which the
most romantic scene happens at a Lamaze class between two people who
only recently met?
HOME FRIES runs 1:33.  It is rated PG-13 for mature themes and some
sexual humor and would be fine for kids around 11 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The difference between an idiotic comedy like "The
Waterboy" and a silly comedy (disguised as a quirky one) like
"Home Fries" is that Adam Sandler and his colleagues
seemed to be having a ball during the filming.  The
performers in "Home Fries" go through the motions just this
side of embarrassment in a work that tries to emulate the
style of the Coen Brothers but possesses scarcely an
smidgen of originality.  The laughs that scripter Vince Gilligan
must have hoped to get from his 10-year-old screenplay are
purportedly the old chestnuts like spoofing the awkwardness
of the male gender when dealing with impending childbirth
and of the females by showing how they coax the men into
doing the nuttiest things.  Mother-son sallies complete the
formula in a movie that would not have seen the light of day
had not Mr. Gilligan become famous as one of the key writers
of "The X-Files" series.  Its one saving feature is the
presence of the cupie-doll cute Drew Barrymore in the role of
a very pregnant burger-flipper in a small-town fast-food stand
who is assigned to the auto take-out section to keep her
lower body hidden from the customers.   
   Barrymore has just concluded an affair with a Henry Lever
(Chris Ellis), a married man about twice her age whose only
possible appeal to the smooth-skinned young redhead is that
he's the only man in the southwestern backwater who lives in
a house rather than a trailer or a wooden shack.  Filmed in a
Texas hamlet thirty miles from the capital of Austin, "Home
Fries" almost takes wings when Dorian (Luke Wilson) and
Augus (Jake Busey), two young stepsons of Henry Lever, fly
over their stepdad's car in a chopper aiming the scare him
out of his affair.  Instead, Lever falls dead from a heart attack
but Lever's widow (Catherine O'Hara) is more relieved that
the affair is finally over than she is about her husband's
demise.  
   Believing that burger-flipper Sally (Drew Barrymore)
overheard their helicopter-based conversation in her headset,
Angus convinces Dorian to take a job in the Burger-Matic
stand to learn more about what Sally knows about the killing.
Though Angus, who has an overly close relationship with his
young mom, wants to eliminate Sally just to make sure that
Mrs. Lever is safe, his brother Dorian has fallen in love with
the precious little pregnant package and considers proposing. 
His differences with his brother and his mom serve as a
setup for farcical actions, and "Home Fries" moves ahead on
a conventional level, painting by the number in as formulaic a
manner as the clowning employees in Burger-Matic apply the
pickles, onions, bun, burger and sauce.
   The movie makes about as much sense as Vince Gilligan's
"The X-Files."  Would these two fellows in their mid-twenties,
test pilots for the armed forces from the looks of things, be
living their mother, one of them willing to eliminate the
woman's nemesis with extreme prejudice?  As the diabolic,
self-centered mother, Catherine O'Hara looks good--about ten
years older than her sons--but director Dean Parisot fails to
evoke genuine nastiness from her image.  While the
borderline-psychotic Angus does indeed convince the
audience of his effect on the flustered Dorian, the film simply
sinks, lacking humor, its self-indulgent characters coming
across as vapid rather than convincingly odious, its situations
lackluster.
