Title
Review for American Werewolf in London, An (1981)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: John Landis
Starring: David Naughton, Jenny Agutter, Griffin Dunne
With the upcoming "An American Werewolf in Paris" coming out Christmas
Day (and looking way too hokey rather than comical), I thought I'd
finally check out "An American Werewolf in London," the original film,
and one of comical director John Landis's first.  What it does is take
the old melodramatic horror films and kinda mocks them with great black
comedy.  Still, it has its flaws.
"An American Werewolf in London" (great title) deals with two Americans
David and Jack (David Naughton and Griffin Dunne, respectively) who go
to London to bum around Europe, get laid, etc.  They are dropped off
after a bit of hitch-hiking around the moors, where they meet some
creepy brits, who mysteriously warn them to "beware the moon" and "stay
away from the moors."  They kind of laugh at this (once they're out of
there, of course), and soon find themselves off the main road, and near
the moors...and with a full moon out.  Soon enough, they are attacked by
a giant wolf, who slaughters Jack, and merely wounds David, before it is
shot by the villagers, and subsequently turns into a human.
David awakes from a coma, and has a series of nightmares, fantasies,
etc, including one where a decomposing Jack visits him, and tells him to
commit suicide since he's a werewolf...and once he dies, he can actually
go on to the next life.  But David has soon fallen in love with his
nurse (Jenny Agutter, from "Logan's Run"), and just thinks he is going
insane.  Then one night, he turns into a werewolf...
The chief positive note about "An American Werewolf in London" is the
humor...and the effects.  If you've ever seen a John Landis film
("Animal House," "The Blues Brother"), you know he has a cool sense of
humor.  Here, it's very dark, as he finds humor from almost anything. 
So we don't take this seriously, he places cool ironic oldies on the
soundtrack, including a couple different versions of "Blue Moon," and at
one instance, CCR's "Bad Moon Rising."  This makes us kind of grin at
the whole thing, even when David is a werewolf and chasing people around
London.
The effects are also quite amazing.  The legendary Rick Baker (who also
worked on "Men in Black") did the creature effects, including the
greatest mutation-into-a-wolf scene in celluloid history (how many of
those have you seen?).  It's disgusting, humorful, and just plain cool
all at the same time, and even look realistic.  I mean, this was made in
1981, and David Naughton's hand is shown actually growing.  And for you
Michael Jackson fans, there's a shot of hair growing behind ears that
was used in the "Thriller" video (also directed by Landis).
The acting's good, especially from Naughton, who's great and comical in
the title role, as well as very likable.  Griffin Dunne all but steals
the film, but what else would you expect from the man who created the
Kafka-stare (in "After Hours").  Jenny Agutter does a good job too, as
the nurse who takes David in to her house, and subsequently screws
around with him a bit.
But as I said, the film is still flawed.  The film is way too short,
seeming to be afraid to expand on any themes it presents.  At roughly 90
minutes, the film moves slowly for the first hour, then speeds up in the
final 30 minutes, which is when he first changes into the wolf.  There
isn't any real depth to the film, even with the romance between Agutter
and Naughton, even if they have fairly good chemistry.  And the ending
is almost anti-climactic and ends way too quickly.  Sure the second the
credits role, I laughed, but it ends on way too serious a note.
Still, "An American Werewolf in London" is an 80s classic (not a bad
thing, believe me), and still a very entertaining little flick.  The new
one looks way too over-produced and effects-y.  This one uses the
effects perfectly, without overcoming the story.  I personally believe
that minimalism would be the best thing to use with this film, and I'm
glad that Landis could make a good film, even if he hasn't made one now
in awhile.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring David Naughton; Griffin Dunne; Jenny Agutter; Don McKillop & Paul
Kember
An American Werewolf In London is John Landis' groundbreaking feature about
an American tourist who gets himself bitten by a werewolf in jolly old
England. The groundbreaking part of the movie is the special effects. More
specifically, the makeup used for the transformation of a man into a
werewolf; and for the ghosts that haunt the main character. Even twenty
years after its release, that part of the movie is still impressive.
Although, I would have to say that it really is the only part of the movie
that could be considered impressive. The rest of the movie is a run of the
mill werewolf flick with some extra gore thrown in for good measure. If it
weren't for the cutting edge makeup effects used in the werewolf
transformation it is most likely that this is a film that would have gone
largely unnoticed when it was released back in 1980. And with good reason --
the acting isn't great and neither is the writing. Well OK, we don't
actually expect either of those things to be great in a horror film. But one
other important element is lacking here too -- it isn't scary. With no
exception, you know what is going to happen before it happens. You don't
even need the obligatory scary music to give you a hint. I will give
director John Landis credit for this being one of the best looking horror
films that I have ever seen. But John, it just wasn't scary. I didn't know
if this was intended to be some sort of romantic drama and the whole
werewolf thing was just thrown in to get people to come to the theater to
see it, but it didn't work for me. Actually, it was intended as a sort of a
spoof on horror films. But the mix of the comedic moments with the melodrama
was so bad; the intended humor was lost on me. It's never a good sign that
you don't realize a movie is supposed to be funny until after the movie is
long over and you read it in the background material. Call me crazy, but you
shouldn't have to do research on a movie to enjoy it.
I'm not even going to get into the plot of the movie that much, since the
title pretty well sums the whole thing up. Werewolf bites boy (David
Naughton). Boy ends up in hospital where he is tended to and eventually
falls for pretty nurse (Jenny Agutter) and then strange things begin to
happen to boy. Including, and I must admit this is a very nice touch, visits
from his friend who was killed in the same werewolf attack that ended up
with him in the hospital. The neat thing here is that his buddy is a rapidly
deteriorating corpse. I know it sounds strange, but it actually works. The
scenes between David Naughton and the dead buddy (Griffin Dunne) are really
the best parts of the movie.
As I said, probably the only reason that this film was a hit was because of
the special effects. While they are still impressive today, they aren't
impressive enough, or plentiful enough to warrant watching this film. And
since they are more or less the highlight of the film, there are far better
choices out there if you want a scary movie to curl up with your sweetheart
to watch. Actually, the 1998 sequel, An American Werewolf In Paris, is more
entertaining since it doesn't take itself as seriously and actually provides
a few more laughs along the way.
