Title
Review for Crush, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dragan Antulov
Many men dream of being the love interest of a beautiful
young girl. However, such dream can turn into nightmare,
especially when such girl happens to be emotionally unstable
minor. Protagonist of this film, 28-year old journalist Nick
Eliot (Carey Elwes) can't imagine the ordeal that waits for
him, when he rents garage in upper-class home of Forresters.
14-year old Darien Forrester (Alicia Silverstone) needs
company and Nick soon becomes her trusted friend. However,
young nymphet soon develops certain feelings for Nick and
tries to seduce him. But her efforts are in vain; Nick not
only wants to do the right thing, he finds love interest in
Amy Maddick (Jennifer Rubin), female colleague with more
appropriate age. Darien is furious and begins not so subtle
campaign of harassing and dirty tricks, with the sole aim to
grab Nick and keep it for herself. Soon, Amy's, and later,
Nick's life come into danger.
The script by movie director Alan Shapiro was ideal for the
dark, erotic thriller inspired by Kubrick's LOLITA.
Unfortunately, the producers, fearing any possible
controversy during the zenith of Political Correctness,
decided to drop any hint of erotica down the drain. Instead,
they turned the movie into just one of the many thrillers of
those times, dealing with disturbed individuals who wreak
havoc in the idyll of middle-class American families. The
only difference this time is the fact that the psychopathic
individual in question happens to be is 14-year girl. She
was played by Alicia Silverstone, teen actress who had
already became famous as the star of "Aerosmith" videos. The
fame received through those videos was enough for
Silverstone to win the 1993 Best Villain MTV award based on
the role in this movie. Although she did put some effort in
her first major film role, her talent doesn't show very
much, mostly because of the terrible, formulaic script, full
of implausible situations and standard plot devices. In
order to be really impressive villain, her character had to
be really charismatic and possess some evil intelligence -
being pretty isn't enough, when her actions don't make sense
(like putting the object of her affection in jail). Even
erotic appeal, required for this kind of movie, is suppressed
because of auto- censorship. With the exception of male
lead, Carey Elwes, other actors in this film are doing the
capable job, and the direction is more or less adequate. In
the end, THE CRUSH is watchable, but easily and justifiably
forgettable Hollywood product, who could be interesting only
for the hard core fans of Alicia Silverstone.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Alan Shapiro
Starring: Alicia Silverstone, Cary Elwes, Jennifer Rubin, Kurtwood
Smith, Gwynyth Walsh
It's kind of sad to see that superstar Alicia Silverstone has made only
one film that's good ("Clueless," by the way).  The rest of her career
consists of some big budget flops ("Excess Baggage" comes to mind), and
these: cheapie thrillers.  "The Crush" is, sadly, the best of them.  I'm
not saying it's good.  This film stinks worse than a big fat pile of
dated limburgher.
Alicia plays the precocious 14-year old daughter of two rich people
(Kurtwood Smith and Gwynyth Walsh), who run some nice housing complex. 
Into her life, one day, comes the dashing Cary Elwes (there's an
oxymoron) sans his fake English accent (which makes him dashing).  He's
a writer who needs a little place to write.  Soon, he's being spied on
by little Alicia, who begins to follow him around and stuff, seeming
just like the typical teenage crush on the older man (but why Cary?).
After a little kiss he gives her (we have no clue why, though she does
look fantastic at the time), she becomes full-fledged obsessed with him
like a teenage Hinckley Jr.  She begins calling him, pulling down her
bathing suit in front of him, and even begins stalking his new love
interest from work (Jennifer Rubin).  By the time she's stripping in
front of him (a body double - I know, I was sad too), we know exactly
where this film will go, and just want to get off the little ride.
Soon, not only is she trying to kill people around him, and annoy the
hell out of him, but she comes up with the ingenius idea of the typical
obsessive film character: she'll try to kill him.  Yeah, that will solve
all her problems.  So the man she loves is dead, AND she's in jail.  And
this girl's supposed to be a genius.  Guess she just tests well.
"The Crush" gets more annoying as it goes on, and succumbs to every
single cliche (writing grafiiti on his car, spying on he and his chick
having sex, breaking into his house, etc, etc, etc, bore, bore, bore). 
There's nothing to really reccomend from this, unless you're trying to
watch the entire filmmography of Kurtwood Smith or something.
Alicia's not even worth seeing.  She won all these awards at the MTV
Movie Awards, and yeah, she looks fantastic, even for a 14-year old, but
she's just not that good.  Then again, the script is horrible, giving
her no depth or interesting character points.  I'll give Alicia this:
she tries her best to give a creepy performance, and become attractive,
but it really never takes off.  Luckily, she was great in a similar role
in the "Cryin'" video.  But yeah, she occasionally gives off some
glimpses of good acting.  If there was a reason to see this, it would be
for her nude scene, but it's not even her real ass.  Alicia has a little
problem with doing screen nudity.  Oh, but she doesn't have something
against doing crap films?!
In short, "The Crush" is just a crap film that shows that these little
cheapie thrillers suck, even if they star a future star (not Elwes).
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  4/2/93 
Running Length:  1:29
Rated:  R (Language, sexual situations, violence, brief nudity)
     Nick (Cary Elwes), a journalist for a trendy magazine, is looking
for a nice, quiet place to live.  He finds one in the guest house owned
by the parents of a precocious 14-year old girl named Darian (Alicia
Silverstone).  Darian and Nick quickly strike up a friendship, but
sexual tension soon intrudes.  Nick, determined to do the right thing,
rebuffs Darian's none-too-subtle advances.  Frustrated and jealous,
however, Darian makes it plain that she won't take "no" for an answer.
     It's not unusual for a young girl to fall for an older man.  It
happens all the time.  Most girls in that situation are content with an
occasional smile and a few kind words from the object of their
affection.  They recognize that any hope of a real relationship is
exceedingly slim (at best) and are content to let things deepen only in
the realm of fantasy.  Not so for Darian in THE CRUSH.  Her unnatural
obsession drives her to extraordinary--and unbelievable--lengths.
She kisses Nick, taunts and teases him, seductively strips in front of
him, steals his used condoms from the garbage, and tries to kill his
girlfriend.  And that's only for a warm-up....
     THE CRUSH is saddled with one of the more improbable and laughably
absurd scripts to come along this year.  At every possible
opportunity--and those come along with alarming frequency--it insults
the audience's intelligence.  The story not only relies on the complete
and unalterable stupidity of every character in the movie, but on the
gullibility of those who watch it.
     Movies should be fun, but the source of entertainment shouldn't
come from identifying plot holes and other assorted implausibilities.
I went into THE CRUSH expecting the umpteenth clone of FATAL
ATTRACTION--a movie that I consider to be of marginal, but not
exceptional, quality.  But to compare this effort the 1987 thriller
would do FATAL ATTRACTION a tremendous injustice.  When it comes to
tension, plotting, acting, and characterization, THE CRUSH is nowhere
close to the same level.  This is an irredeemably bad movie.
     There aren't any big-name actors in the cast of THE CRUSH.  Not a
surprise--anyone valuing their reputation would have headed away at
top speed after taking a look at the script.  Of course, it's sometimes
possible for little-known performers to do impressive jobs even with
poorly-conceived characters.  Not here.  The best of a
generally-uninspired lot is newcomer Alicia Silverstone.  From time to
time, she brings glimmers of a character to the screen.  Everyone
else--especially Cary Elwes with his indecipherable accent--is
terrible.  Acting lessons would seem to be in order, although I'm sure
the director shares a significant part of the blame.
     While the material forming the basis for THE CRUSH can't make any
claims of originality, there's certainly enough there to craft a decent
film around.  With a challenging story, a real script, and actors
willing to take a few chances, THE CRUSH could have been enjoyable.
Essentially, all that would have been required for a success is a
complete scrapping of the film that was actually produced.  Even lovers
of formula thrillers will find this picture a little to hard to
swallow.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
