Title
Review for Puppet Masters, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Jon A. Webb
     THE PUPPET MASTERS is a throw-back to 50s science-fiction films,
which were really more horror or suspense movies, and which rarely got
the science anywhere near right ("the blonde exobiologist straightened
up from the electron microscope.")  This is kind of refreshing, in this
age when so many of us are wondering about what technical innovation
allowed the refitted Enterprise to not only exceed the Warp 5 galactic
speed limit, but actually achieve Warp 14 in the future scenes of "All
Good Things...."  Even more so because this film is based on Heinlein's
novel of the same name, which, like all of Heinlein's writings, seem
exactly suited for this kind of shlocky presentation.
     In the story alien brains invade the earth, and immediately start
turning everyone in the Midwest into mindless zombies, something like
Rush Limbaugh.  The whole thing is sped up quite a bit in the movie,
because of the need to compress the story so it can fit in a feature
film; the result is the addition of tension due to the very rapid
advance of the invasion, but this is almost completely undone by the
swift conclusion of the story.  The addition of the predictable final
fight absolutely does not help.
     What the movie unfortunately misses is Heinlein's study of the
experience of being a mindless zombie, which is the best part of the
book.  It would be hard to portray this in a film; it would be hard to
market a film built around this psychological conflict rather than
fights, sex, etc.  But it would've been nice if they had tried.
     It also misses effective direction.  The blonde exobiologist
peering down into the spaceship should have been a scene fraught with
tension and danger; it had almost no impact. The father-son
relationship was never properly developed prior to the torture scene.
More could have been made of the brief romantic moment. Etc.
     Still, it is nice to see the army out once again to fight against
the aliens; they go at it with the same gusto, but none of the
technical innovations (undoubtedly due to limited budget), that they
brought to our recent successful invasions of Kuwait and Haiti.  (I
wish that the film-makers had been able to work in some stock footage
of the B2 Stealth bomber taking off to fly against the aliens -- it
would have been such a nice reference to the scene in, I believe, a
version of War of the Worlds, where a Fifties "flying wing" does just
that, to no dramatic point.) In fact, the whole movie seems stuck in a
kind of time warp -- when the aliens are shipped to somebody's
apartment, they show up in a wooden crate, packed in excelsior. No
overnight delivery and styrofoam peanuts for these guys!  One almost
expects to see cars with huge fenders and men in fedoras.
     Pointing out the technical flaws in a film like this seems silly,
though, because the film does not take itself so seriously.  There were
plenty of nice bits (but not enough to make a nice film.)  I
particularly liked the encysted aliens, hidden like snakes in
mailboxes, or later like Easter eggs; the arrival of the aliens was
neat, quickly making the point without wasting lots of time and money
on special effects; some of Donald Sutherland's dialogue is pretty
funny.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  10/21/94  
Running Length:  1:48 
Rated:  R (Violence, language, nudity, gross alien creatures) 
Starring:  Donald Sutherland, Eric Thal, Julie Warner, Keith David, 
           Will Patton, Richard Belzer 
Director: Stuart Orme 
Producer:  Ralph Winter 
Screenplay:  Ted Elliott & Terry Rossio and David S. Goyer based on 
             the novel by Robert A. Heinlein 
Cinematography:  Clive Tickner 
Music: Colin Towns 
Released by Hollywood Pictures 
     This film must have given lead actor Donald Sutherland a sense of
deja vu.  After all, this isn't the first picture he's starred in about
otherworldly beings coming to this planet and taking over human
bodies.  Unfortunately, his second exploration of the scenario isn't
nearly as good as his first, 1978's creepy INVASION OF THE BODY
SNATCHERS.
     THE PUPPET MASTERS tells a story of alien invasion.  The
creatures, which bear a remarkable resemblance to the face-suckers from
the ALIEN movies, have come to Earth on a mission of conquest (at least
that's the loose impression that the picture gives--it's not too
concerned about motivation).  They attach themselves to a victim's
back, stick a probe in their neck, and take over their nervous system,
in effect turning them into a puppet.
     First contact comes in Ambrose, Iowa, a small town with a
population of just over 10,000.  The aliens multiply at an alarming
rate, so it isn't long before the entire town is possessed and, like a
disease, the infestation spreads rapidly.  Called in to investigate are
two members of the ultra-secret Office of Scientific Intelligence, the
father-and-son team of Sam and Andrew Nivens (played by Eric Thal and
Donald Sutherland, respectively).  Joining them is exobiologist Mary
Sefton (Julie Warner), who is "on loan" from NASA.
     What they find in Ambrose is a hoax covering up the aliens' true
plans.  The race is then on as the U.S. government seeks to find a way
to vanquish the invaders before the human race is overwhelmed.
     Director Stuart Orme's film is fast-paced, apparently more
concerned with the action elements of the story than the science
fiction ones--not that these are neglected entirely.  One of the most
fascinating portions of THE PUPPET MASTERS involves an autopsy done on
a creature.  This scene has a sense of authenticity that is often
missing from the rest of the largely comic book-style adventure.
     Attempts at detailed characterization don't work particularly
well, and there's a love story that feels as forced as it is
superfluous--although even that isn't as unnecessary as the film's
final ten minutes.  The tactic of having a "second ending" (a technique
that is used often, but rarely accomplished well) is misplaced in THE
PUPPET MASTERS, especially since it includes the movie's only incident
of obviously inferior visual effects work.
     It's refreshing to have a human hero who seems to be on top of the
situation.  As portrayed by Donald Sutherland, Andrew Nivens is a man
with a quick intelligence.  He's his adversary's match, and only once
does he get outmaneuvered or out-thought.  In case of a real alien
invasion, I'd want this guy on my team.
     THE PUPPET MASTERS is not a science fiction classic, but it is
solidly entertaining.  The movie is not so cliche-riddled that is seems
hopelessly familiar, nor is it burdened with a complex plot that
requires an unpleasant exertion of brain power to unravel.  As a
Halloween season release, this movie delivers exactly what's most
desired:  cheap thrills.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Donald Sutherland; Eric Thal; Julie Warner; Keith David & Will
Patton
Donald Sutherland stars in this story of aliens trying to take over the
Earth. They have landed in a small town and they are taking over the bodies
of the town's folk by attaching themselves to their backs and sticking a
probe into their brains. Even worse, they are rapidly spreading to the
neighboring communities. So it's up to Andrew Nivens (Donald Sutherland) and
his son Sam (Eric Thal) to stop them before the entire United States ends up
as the puppets for these aliens. Also along for the ride for the required
amount of sex appeal is Julie Warner playing a brilliant scientist who
eventually falls for Sutherland's son.
Even in the brief overview I gave of this movie, you may be able to glean
that it is a formula film right from the opening credits. It's sad to say,
but I don't think that the writers had one original thought when they wrote
this movie. I can't think of a single plot point that I hadn't seen in some
other movie. Anything that was even the slightest bit original was so
predictable that you almost knew what was going to happen without even
giving it any thought. Having said all that, the writers did manage to use
some decent plot points from all of the movies that they had obviously
watched, so the movie wasn't a total disaster. It's just not something that
you should sit down with expecting to be overwhelmed by all of the
creatively ingenious ideas. Because it isn't going to happen.
The acting is passable at best, on all counts including Sutherland. In
Donald's defense, he didn't have a great deal of material to work with. He
was playing the uncaring S.O.B. in this movie, which is a role that he has
played many times before with much greater success. Julie Warner was also a
disappointment since I had been very impressed with her in Doc Hollywood.
The only others worth mentioning were Richard Belzer (Homicide: Life On The
Street), and his character only said a few dozen words. Keith David also had
a small role, but as usual, he made the most of it.
The Puppet Masters is just your typical cookie cutter horror / sci-fi flick.
There was absolutely nothing remarkable about it. But it was just good
enough to keep my interest through the whole movie. Although, I can't say
that I would rush out to watch it again any time in the near future.

Author
Wayne Throop
     I had an odd sensation as I watched the movie version of
Heinlein's THE PUPPET MASTERS.  I'd just read the expanded book version
a day or two before, and as I left the flickery, I didn't have a sense
of whether the movie I'd just seen was any good or not.
     As I say, an odd sensation.  And not that I thought it was bad, or
even that it wasn't good.  Just ... blank.  People with me, who hadn't
read the book, said it was good.  But (unusual for me) I had no sense
one way or any other.  I think what happened to me was, the automatic
mental processes that normally work while I watch movies, and yield a
"goodness" value, were busy analyzing issues orthogonal to any good/bad
distinction (at least movie-wise).  Not completely pre-occupied perhaps,
but enough so to produce this odd sensation I mention.
     Hence I can't really "review" it in the sense of recommending
going or not going.  But having just read the book, I *did* notice
several points about the technical issues of book-to-movie conversion,
which may be of some interest.
     First, the obvious plot compression.  There simply isn't even
vaguely enough time to put all the book content into a movie.  The
scenes and subplots cut seemed to be reasonable choices.  Much like how
the "six days of the condor" became three days in the movie, the months
of the invasion in the book became weeks.  The vast Zone Red became
simply a single state.  No international implications.  No
hard-to-convince President.  Several of the agents and minor characters
are combined or eliminated.  The usual stuff.  Understandable.
     A specific example of such an economy: the combination of Sam's
rescue and the foiling of the plot to capture the president, blending
smoothly into a modified interrogation scene, eliminating reams of
Sam/Mary falling-out subplot, plus long hospital scenes,
skeptical-president scenes, and researching-UFOs scenes.  Fairly neatly
done, I thought.
     The "compression effect" is also somewhat amplified, because the
book was told in first person, with mental self-dialogue and
digressions incorporated.  A *lot* of information of this sort was
dropped, and some of the interactions were somewhat caricatured as a
result to convey subtleties the book could convey because of its
intimate relationship to Sam's viewpoint and observations.  But again,
not too badly done compromises with necessity, I thought.
     The conversion from a setting in 2007 or so Furture History, with
space travel throughout the inner system, and "aircars" as common as
wheeled cars today, to a more-or-less-today setting, was also handled
fairly well.  Things that were done in "duos" transfer to either
ordinary cars or helicopters, or private jets for longer range.  Not
too bad.
     The mechanics of the PMs were also handled fairly well.  The
physical probe into the spine was a departure, but not an annoying
one.  In fact, giving them an interesting internal organ structure was
rather nice, rather than simply being amorphous blobs.  Though some of
the leaps from vague supposition to foregone conclusion were a bit
much, such as going from "What's this little thing? Oh, it must be an
RF recognition signal" or "Gee they're touching tentacles? Oh, they are
transferring memories by chemical cues, we should have guessed, ants do
that!".  The compression into a movie explains some of this, but the
portrayal was just a little too glib, too "Dr. Zarkov," too "science
oracle" for me.  It stuck out as quite un-Heinlein-esque, who's books
always portray a bit more sweat in the science, and a bit more
skepticism, a bit less cocksurity.
     And in fact, most of the remaining points that seem worth touching
on are of this variety: alterations that aren't all *that* bad, but
just aren't quite Heinlein standard "look and feel."
     Examples.  In the book, the major plot break comes with the
discovery of one of the subsequent saucer landings, and the discovery
(via "Mary"s childhood memories) of the vital weakness that could be
exploited.  The conversion of this to the movie exposed several
un-Heinlein-isms, IMHO.  First, the interaction of Sam with his father
was made a bit too overt, too confrontational.  The caricature to
translate from the first person book perspective a bit too
caricature-ish in this case.
     This leads to Sam's "I'm going to rescue Mary," which is pretty
much out of character, but leads us to an "infiltrating alien
territory" scene with a similar dramatic function to the exploration of
the damaged saucer in the book.  But problems abound.  The replacement
scene has Our Hero (with red-shirted sidekick) going into totally
occupied territory, and faking possession.  The book treated that issue
well, and rejected it as implausible.  Especially when Sam prepares to
commune with the central "mother alien" or "queen alien."  The
masquerade lasting as long as it did, and the implausibly ineffective
pursuit when it was exposed were simply not up to Heinlein standard
"look and feel" as I said.
     Similar breaks from HSL&F pepper other modified scenes.  "Sam!
Kill him!" is gone.  Sam's desperate fight to free Mary, and ultimately
forcing him to sacrifice Pirate is gone.  "Schedule Bareback" and
"Schedule Suntan" are gone.  Vigilanti patrols are gone.  The death of
Sam's father, and the reality of long-term infestation are gone.  All
replaced by less plausible, less gritty, vaguely more saccharine
substitutes.
     And there are a couple of cases where the Old Man or the PMs or
both act uncharacteristically stupid when compared to the book, such as
forgetting the cane, or having the apes show intelligence unprovoked.
     But again, not *all* the modifications are inferior.  The
substitution of disease, for another example, and the foreshortened
discussion of disease as the solution, the delivery, and the analysis of
possible vectors, was all quite good.  "Mosquitos" a bit lame, perhaps,
but all in all, an actual improvement on the vague "9-day-fever"
exposition, I would say.
     So bottom line: is this a good movie?  Should you spend your N
bucks?  As I said to start out, I think my subconscious mental
processes were so busy analyzing minutiae of the "look and feel" that
they just plumb failed to render up the usual and expected "thumbs up"
or "thumbs down" signal.  I'm simply not sure "in my gut" whether this
is a "good" or "gripping" movie.
     But it's certainly interesting in many ways, especially if you've
read the book.  And I didn't feel sick to my stomach as I did with the
"weirding modules" and other nauseating modifications in the
movie-ization of DUNE.  So I guess on balance, I'd have to give it a
somewhat abstracted, weak, wishy-washy sort of thumbs up.  *If* you try
it, you *might* like it.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  THE PUPPET MASTERS is a no-holds-
     barred alien invasion film.  It is a dark and humorless
     exercise in which virtually every scene advances the war
     between humans and parasitic, mind-controlling aliens.
     Robert Heinlein's 1951 novel comes to the screen in a
     film that takes little time away from the main plot to
     develop its characters, but does strike home with a
     story of a hard-fought battle with a fairly alien and
     devious enemy.  Rating: high +1 (-4 to +4)
     The obvious comparison to make would be between THE PUPPET MASTERS
and the three film versions of Jack Finney's BODY SNATCHERS.  That
would probably not be accurate, however, since this film is about the
aliens possessing humans rather than passing for them.  But the
paranoid, trust-nobody spirit is much like that of those previous
films.
     An alien craft lands in the rural town of Ambrose, Iowa, and
authorities rush in to investigate, only to find that the locals all
now claim that the landing was a hoax.  In this case the authorities
are two agents of a scientific sub-agency of the CIA: Sam (played by
Eric Thal), the head of the agency, and Andrew (Donald Sutherland).
Also along is an expert borrowed from NASA, Mary (Julie Warner).  They
quickly determine that there is good reason to believe the landing was
indeed authentic.  And shortly afterward they also determine that
humans are being mentally possessed by slug-like aliens who hide on
humans' backs and tap into the nervous system to enslave the hosts.
The number of people possessed in this way increases super-
exponentially.
     If one compares THE PUPPET MASTERS to any version of THE BODY
SNATCHERS, one finds the emphasis very different, and, in fact,
different from most other science fiction films.  In the earlier films,
the time is taken to establish who the characters are and to provide a
context for their actions.  This is a film in which things start
happening in the first minute of the film and from that point on
virtually every scene is devoted to the conflict.  The people never
stand around and talk about each other long enough for the script by
Red Elliot, Terry Russo, and David Goyer to develop their character.
This makes for rather flat characters but a very tense film.  Their
script also "downdates" the story, moving it into our present.
Heinlien's 1951 novel set the story in a 2007 when interplanetary
colonization was already well under way.  That and perhaps budget
constraints limit this invasion to just a first foothold in a limited
area.  Perhaps that is more realistic than the novel, but it also
leaves open the unspoken possibility that if it came to a question of
human survival, the alien menace could be ended with a few carefully
placed nuclear weapons.  A few other changes are made to keep the film
consistent with its present or near-future setting.
     Under Stuart Orme's direction THE PUPPET MASTERS is a film that is
fact-paced and yet very dark and somber in tone, reminiscent of John
Sturges's SATAN BUG.  Donald Sutherland plays his role as the head of
the security agency with a sinister dignity.  As a man supposedly
without emotion, he speaks always in hushed tones which only add to the
tension.  Eric Thal, who was Ariel in A STRANGER AMONG US, plays a
character similarly dedicated to his purpose and similarly one-
dimensional.  It must be disheartening for Thal to be the film's
ostenstible main character but to be outacted by ten-inch slugs from
the special effects department.  The slugs, incidentally, are
sufficiently alien and repulsive as well as being reasonably convincing
as effects.  Julie Warner also is given more distress than personality
by the script.  The design of the film goes slightly downhill from a
rather beautiful celestial event at the beginning to scenes of alien
architecture that look a bit cheesey in spots.
     THE PUPPET MASTERS is a nail-biter with some good moments, but
will probably be easily over-shadowed by the upcoming FRANKENSTEIN and
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE.  It gets a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Peter J. Scott
     Heinlein fans don't come any more devoted than me, so I had some
trepidation about going to see a Hollywood interpretation of one of the
works that mean a lot to me.  I was pleasantly surprised to find about
as faithful a reproduction of the book as one could hope for given
time, movie reality, current fashions.  When I heard several lines of
dialog that were almost verbatim early on, I figured that the writers
had at least some respect for the origin; if this has been another one
of those films where all they do is take the title and one idea from a
book and then do their own thing with it, I would have written angry
letters telling them to take RAH's name off it.  But I won't.
[Spoilers follow.  Also much *personal opinion*.]
     Given the two-hour limit, any novel has to have drastic surgery,
and attempting to cover everything in a complex book just by going
faster won't work (c.f. DUNE).  I would have liked to have seen the
bareback Congress, that scene would have worked; but I think they were
right not to try to show the vigilantism; for one thing, RAH covered
this in rapid narration, which is too boring in a movie, and showing it
makes for too much quick cutting between characters and settings you've
never seen before.  I suspect there were some controversial edits,
since 1) there seemed to be something missing in between the chase of
Miss Haines and the presidential arrival, and 2) the TV news of
rioting was pretty brief and isolated, so I suspect there was more
filmed around those scenes.  (Anyone know where there might be
published a "Making Of" story?--I've already read the posting earlier
in rec.arts.sf.movies.)
     Also, movies emphasize visual and action sequences more than books
by their very nature; while so many authors' novels reveal them to be
frustrated screenwriters in disguise, with lengthy blow-by-blow fight
descriptions, RAH focussed more on ideas, thoughts, and emotions,
spending pages on fascinating dialog, while a fight scene would last a
couple of sentences.  In the movie business it's the other way around,
because even die-hard intellectuals will get bored otherwise.  So that
emphasis was to be expected.
     I was in much the same place as throopw%sheol.uucp@dg-rtp.dg.com
(Wayne Throop):
> As I say, an odd sensation.  And not that I thought it was bad, or
> even that it wasn't good.  Just ... blank.  People with me, who hadn't
> read the book, said it was good.  But (unusual for me) I had no sense
> one way or any other.
     It didn't grab me emotionally, and I'm not sure whether that was
the fault of the movie, the book, or what I was thinking while watching
it.  On the plus side, Donald Sutherland as the Old Man worked for me -
and that's a tough set of expectations to live up to.  It would have
been easy for the movie to have been embarrassing to watch (and I'm
still quaking at the thought of Tom Hanks as Valentine Michael Smith),
but it wasn't--in the end, I was happy that RAH's name was on it, and
I'd like to think that he would have been too.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Bring the 1951 novel THE PUPPET MASTERS into present-day and there
should be at least one major character in the course of the story who
chimes in the line "oh, like one of those BODY SNATCHERS movies?"
Unfortunately, not once in 108 minutes does anyone on-screen make a
reference to either Don Siegel's 1956 classic or the two remakes that
followed.  And that's too bad, because no one in THE PUPPET MASTERS
should be acting as seriously as they are.
     Sure, the first forty minutes are ultra-creepy as Donald
Sutherland leads his crack crew of scientists through the "infested"
hamlet of Ambrose, Iowa.  The veteran actor-- who also appeared in the
'78 remake of BODY SNATCHERS-- is appropriately stone-faced while
poking around a town "taken over" by alien parasites.  And, as told
from the scientist's POV for a change, these first few scenes have an
edgy, matter-of-fact feel.
     But as the story wears on and more and more people are
"compromised," Sutherland's stone-face never lifts.  Nor does the
film's.  Instead of fun we get fight scenes, and chase scenes, and one
"runaway" helicopter.  Ugh.  All too much for the scope of this simple,
spooky story.
BOTTOM LINE:  Cut thirty minutes and you'd have something here.

Author
Paul Robinson
     As a faithful translation of Heinlein's book, the movie is well
nigh perfect in terms of translation to film, and I suspect Heinlein
himself would appreciate how close to his original story the movie
stays.  The few times it does deviate is to make the film closer to
reality here and now, e.g., as if the events shown in the movie really
could happen today.  The original book had human beings already
possessing space flight to other places as well as a few other things
which would not work today.  Also, a couple of incidents in the book
were eliminated to streamline the plot of the movie and make it more
consistent with reality.  A few items were left out which probably
should have been covered, and might be (or were but were edited out) if
the movie goes to video or gets a sequel.
     As a translation of a book into a movie, it rates perhaps B+ or an
A-.  The translation is very good and the original story is very well
carried across.
     As a science fiction movie in and of itself, it unfortunately
rates only a C.  Possibly it needed some narration or some additional
material to explain the opening; I felt that the way the opening of the
film, including introducing the three main characters in the film, was
a bit strained.  If I hadn't already read the book more than once over
the last ten years or so, I might have been a little bit lost.
     I felt the treatment of the material was excellent, and unlike too
many films involving extraterrestrial invaders, the "gore level" was
toned down from what could be expected / has commonly been used for
such films, only showing oozing material, blood or other gory items
when it was necessary for plot development and story, unlike too many
films that use gore to nauseate the audience and to substitute for a
real story and a plot, this story realizes that the audience has an
imagination and letting them realize what is happening (rather than
showing them directly) is often more effective in a story than
saturating the audience with goo.
     I mentioned that I felt something was missing in the scenes
involving the three main characters (Andrew, the head of the agency,
played by Donald Sutherland; Mary the scientist; and Sam, Andrew's
son).  What I felt was also missing was the connection between Sam
becoming contaminated by the invaders and his escaping the agency,
which the connection wasn't made clearly.  (A similar thing occurred in
ALIENS where we are suddenly cut to the aftermath of an explosion but
the cause of the explosion itself nor the reasoning behind it weren't
explained.)
     A couple more minutes of material in a couple of places could have
made what was a fairly good film even better.  Where the invaders came
from, and whether there are more left, are not covered, as well as the
final disposition of the original group in outer space.
     In and of itself I can recommend the film.  I suspect that with
some minor and unimportant changes (dropping a couple of swear words)
the film might have been able to get a PG-13 rating.  (On the other
hand, the producers may have felt this film should not be seen by
unattended kids; however this film was much less gory and violent than
the last year of the "War of the Worlds" TV show which started to "gore
up" the show in a futile attempt to increase its ratings.  There is
some killing and torture in this film, but it is much less "gratuitous"
as other films and most of which is well done in the context in which
it occurs.)
     I think that it's suitable for teenagers or anyone who saw
JURASSIC PARK and didn't have nightmares.  Take any of the
Untouchables episodes and any of the later WAR OF THE WORLDS episodes
and you have more gore and violence than appears in this movie.
     The actors do an excellent job in this movie, and Donald
Sutherland's portrayal of the essentially ruthless head of a government
agency is very well done.   It's "ruthless" in the sense that he will
stop at nothing to get rid of the invaders; and it turns out that in
the long run, they are fighting a war and his opinion was the correct
one after all.
--
Paul Robinson - paul@tdr.com / tdarcos@MCIMail.com / tdarcos@access.digex.net
