Title
Review for Mars (1996) (V)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
On corporate dominated Mars, the all useful fuel "silax" is mined
for a huge profit.  But a Keeper - one of the company policeman -
has been murdered in circumstances that suggest his corruption.
His brother and fellow Keeper, the strangely expressionless
Caution (!)  Templar (played by the strangely expressionless
Gruner) travels to Mars to kickbox the baddies into a confession.
You might think that there aren't many SF/F films made.  A
trip to the video store belies this, with numerous titles
slipping unannounced onto the shelves.  Surely, one of these must
be a hidden gem?
Uh, no.  A lot of good films go straight to video, but some
scaling law seems to ensure that any SF/F bound on that route is
at best mediocre, at worst stygian.  Why pick "Mars"?  Well,
Gruner is the martial artist who played the lead in "Nemesis".
As terrible as that picture was, Gruner showed some promise.  His
acting was subdued but better than wooden with some flair for
action.  In time he might evolve past Jean Claude van Damme in
the SF-action roles.
But not in this role.  Hampered by a lobotomised script, a
poor supporting cast, tepid direction and his own underacting,
Gruner is throwing his career into full reverse.  (And strangely,
while in "Nemesis" he used his own voice, here he seems to be
dubbed by someone else.)  "Mars" is not even gloriously bad or
overly-ambitious, it merely inspires indifference.
Strike one against it, is that while the script shows signs of
a bigger project, the grander themes have been roughly edited
out, sometimes leaving dangling threads.  (The Keepers are
apparently a quasi-religious order with its own agenda.  The
Templars have some old family conflict.  But these ideas don't
lead anywhere.)  Strike two is the sheer laziness of the story
telling.  Throw in a sympathetic female doctor, a scuzzy thief, a
smooth corporate apparatchik and in Hollywood shorthand (with no
development or surprises) you know they will become the feisty
love interest, the comic sidekick and the cold-blooded enemy.  We
learn of a horrific plague affecting the miners by Caution
walking past a quarantine room full of victims with huge oozing
sores, retching blood.  Scenes in the Martian Domes appear to
have been filmed in a hospital basement.
Even these problems could be overcome by some competent
direction.  But (Strike three!  You're out!)  some scenes are
constructed in such a way as to make them hard to follow.  In
fights it is difficult to know who is where and doing what.  At
times Caution wanders around, seemingly so (a la James Bond) the
baddies can attack him and reveal part of the plot to him.  It's
difficult to develop much feeling for a film that does so little
to hook you in.
Possibly worth looking at, if you're stuck on an airflight
with no reading material.  [**/ok] and early morning TV on the
Sid and Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews/]
