Title
Review for What's Cooking? (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, screensavers, trailers & more, visit http://www.joblo.com/
If this movie does not get released during the holiday of Thanksgiving, it
will be one of the worst cases of marketing/distribution decisions ever made
by a studio at any time. This is the ultimate American Thanksgiving holiday
movie. Jodie Foster's HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS was a decent start but this film
basically takes all of the required elements from that movie, the touches of
humor, the emotions, the family issues and multiplies them across four
different cultures celebrating the holiday on the same day.
PLOT:
Four families from different cultural backgrounds (Jewish, Latino,
Vietnamese, African-American) celebrate the holiday of Thanksgiving in
respectively intertwining stories. Many issues are comedically and
dramatically discussed here including adultery, racism, cultural
ethnocentricity, teen accessibility to guns, homosexuality, mother-in-laws,
parental pressure, old school mentality, interracial dating and much, much
more.
CRITIQUE:
A well-rounded blend of stories combine to create an ideal picture for all
families to see in respect to the holiday of Thanksgiving. This movie has
many of the elements needed to create a good movie, including plenty of
humor, dramatic moments, confident directing and wonderful acting
performances. Alongside that are all the elements needed to generate
resonant feelings of Thanksgiving, including the cozy nature of the picture,
the light, agreeable soundtrack, the wonderful presentations of food and
drink, and the ultimate feelings of love and anger shared by family members
throughout. I truly enjoyed this movie because it didn't really allow me not
to like it. It presented me with four stories, each of which was as
interesting as the next, many engaging characters, most of whom shared
issues and tribulations to which I could relate, and a lot of cultural
differences, many of which are universally appreciated. The film is well
presented, easily understood and doesn't overdo the "sappy" stuff.
In fact, that is sort of related to the one thing which sort of disappointed
me about the film, and that was its lack of powerful closure. The film
cleaned up all of its stories by the final frame, but I honestly expected
more of an emotional punch from each. The conclusions were all generally
well-handled, but after spending so much time with each family, I was hoping
to feel a little more from their stories, but alas, t'was not to be.
Overall, the film worked on various levels including its humor, which seemed
to particularly rile up the older members of our audience, and its
characters, all of which were played admirably by its actors, none of whom
particularly stood out more than the others. And despite a little
stereotyping (to be expected since most stereotypes do derive from a little
bit of fact), all of the families were very evenly presented here and giving
more than enough opportunity to ingratiate themselves to the audience. A
perfect movie for the holidays, one that presents a universal theme of highs
and lows of family life within different cultures, this movie has the
laughs, the drama, the direction and the characters to complete its
interesting story presentations. Gobble-gobble and prepare to get real
hungry after seeing this film, as the dishes presented within are quite
droolable!

Author
Steve Rhodes
Like visual crib notes for reviewers, the opening to Gurinder Chadha's 
WHAT'S COOKING? sweetly and concisely summarizes the movie's message.  
As the national anthem plays in the background, a turkey slowly comes 
into focus.  The camera pulls back to show us that the turkey is part of 
a Thanksgiving meal in a Norman Rockwell-style painting on the side of 
an L.A. city bus.  We then cut to the multi-ethnic tapestry of life 
inside the bus.  
Set at the quintessential American holiday, Thanksgiving, the movie 
celebrates our country's melting pot tradition.  The warm-hearted but 
completely forgettable WHAT'S COOKING? would have been more 
appropriately released as a television movie for the holiday season.  
Four large families -- one black, one Vietnamese, one Jewish and one 
Latino -- gather for Thanksgiving in their homes on opposite corners of 
a street in a middle-class LA neighborhood.  Taken together, the 
families become the dots in a large pointillism canvas.  Their numerous 
stories are little more than clichés on their own, but taken together 
they form a handsome portrait of American life.
The extensive ensemble cast includes Alfre Woodard, Dennis Haysbert, Ann 
Weldon, Mercedes Ruehl, Maria Carmen, Victor Rivers, Douglas Spain, A 
Martinez, Lainie Kazan, Maury Chaykin, Kyra Sedgwick, Julianna 
Margulies, Estelle Harris, Joan Chen,  Will Yun Lee, Kristy Wu and Jimmy 
Pham.  Each actor gets a brief time on stage, but none gets a 
well-developed character.  Loud, warm-hearted music fills in the gaps 
left by the erratic story.  
As in LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE and other motion pictures that celebrate 
the joy of cooking, WHAT'S COOKING? features significant amounts of food 
photography.  Jong Lin's lensing of the food is quite respectable and 
colorful but doesn't have the mouth-watering appeal of most food films.  
Still, this is certainly the longest product placement ever for 
America's turkey breeders.  
As the families have their small squabbles and discussions prior to and 
during their big culinary events, their conversations never amount to 
much nor are they intended to.  This is a mood piece that intends mainly 
to evoke a warm nostalgic feeling in the viewers, which it does quite 
successfully.  Even if WHAT'S COOKING? is little more than an ephemeral 
treat, it is a relatively flawless one.  Save one shamelessly 
manipulative scene which the studio has specifically asked critics not 
to reveal, there isn't anything wrong with it.  WHAT'S COOKING? is a 
movie that conjures up respectful, but not enthusiastic adjectives.  
It's a nice, pleasant but inconsequential picture.  
WHAT'S COOKING? runs 1:46.  It is rated PG-13 for some sexuality, brief 
language and a perilous situation and would be acceptable for kids 
around 10 or 11 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
  This tasty cinematic Thanksgiving celebration gently
interweaves the tension and turmoil of four different Los Angeles
families as they prepare turkey, sweet potatoes and pumpkin pie for
the traditional dinner - along with tamales, spring rolls, kugel,
macaroni & cheese.  There's also sex, politics and prejudice on the
menu, along with philandering husbands, stressed-out wives, prodigal
sons, rebellious daughters, meddling grandparents, plus estranged and
just plain strange relatives. These surprisingly interconnected
Jewish, African-American, Latino and Vietnamese families relish their
diversity while acknowledging their buoyant, bonding similarities and
generational conflicts. Under the kaleidoscopic direction of British
film-maker Gurinder Chada ("Bhaji on the Beach"), who wrote the
screenplay with Paul Mayeda Berges, the excellent and extensive
ensemble cast includes Alfre Woodard, Julianna Margulies, Kyra
Sedgwick, Joan Chen, Mercedes Ruehl, and Maury Chaykin. Unlike Jodie
Foster's "Home for the Holidays" (1995) about a dysfunctional family,
these frustrated pilgrims are simply coping with the all-too-real
problems within the contemporary American melting-pot of cultures -
even if, at times, the flavorful syrup spills over into contrived
cliches, stereotypes and sentimentality. Credit Jong Lin ("Eat, Drink,
Man, Woman") for the mouth-watering, almost surreal cinematography,
emblematic of the culinary heritage of the respective ethnic groups
and Janice Hampton for judicious editing that allows you to follow
each story clearly. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "What's
Cooking?" is a sumptuous, succulent, spicy 7, a joyous, nurturing
cornucopia, timed for gleeful holiday viewing.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Trimark Pictures
 Director: Gurinder Chadha
 Writer:  Gurinder Chadha, Paul Mayeda Berges
 Cast: Alfre Woodard, Dennis Haysbert, Ann Weldon,
Mercedes Ruehl, Victor Rivers, Douglas Spain, A. Martinez,
Lainie Kazan, Maury Chaykin, Kyra Sedgwick, Julianna
Margulies, Estelle Harris, Joan Chen, Will Yun Lee, Kristy
Wu, Jimmy Pham, Brennan Louise
   "What's Cooking" is one of those movies that make you
wonder why so many people bother having families.  In the
case of the folks in this film by Gurinder Chadha ("Bhaji at
the Beach"), there's no problem of money.  All can afford the
kids they've had.  But if there's just one day of the year that
families should show how happy they are to be together
feasting on turkey with all the trimmings, that day is of course
Thanksgiving.  On the other hand, the enforced closeness
could give rise to a outbreak of seething conflicts and to
revelations of truths that most of the diners would rather not
face.  The latter informs the theme of the movie scripted by
director Chadha and Paul Mayeda Berges which is directed in
the mosaic style favored by Robert Altman.  The movie falls
way short of anything done by Altman, as "What's Cooking"
lacks dialogue to match the pungency of the spices used on
the holiday bird.  What makes the picture worth viewing at all
are the performances by some first-rate stars who are stuck
in a genre that's as fresh as two-week-old turkey leftovers.
   In the tradition of foodie movies like "Woman on Top," "Like
Water for Chocolate" and "Babette's Feast," "What's Cooking"
features some mouthwatering photography by John Lin of a
cornucopia of provisions, all of which are cooked by four
families who live within walking distance of one another in a
prosperous section of L.A.  Each family puts its own cultural
stamp on the national dish, some adding kugel for dessert,
some stuffing the bird with chili peppers, while another adds
macaroni and cheese to the traditional greens.  While the
four groups are doing well financially, they are of various
ethnic and cultural backgrounds; specifically, Vietnamese,
Black, Jewish, and Latino.  Oddly enough, though, the
conflicts that rage within each household are not specific to
its cultural background but are of the sort that could easily be
imagined to take place in any of the diverse groups explored
here.  
   The only really comical interchange takes place within the
Jewish household.  Ruth and Herb Seelig (Lainie Kazan and
Maury Chaykin) have a daughter Rachel (Kyra Sedgwick)
who brings home her lesbian lover, Carla (Julianna
Margulies) as a guest.  While the Seeligs are not exactly
kvelling over their daughter's orientation, they're not kvetching
either.  The dinner comes to life at dessert time as the
slightly inebriated Aunt Bea (Estelle Harris) asks the young
women some question that evoke surprising answers.  
   As the African-Americans giving thanks, Audrey Williams
(Alfre Woodard) has a problem with her husband Ronald
(Dennis Haysbert), who is an aide to the conservative
California governor.  Ronald works long hours and, in fact,
may not be working during some the time he's away from
home.  Audrey is particularly stressed out on this day
because her intrusive mother-in-law criticizes her cooking, 
turning her nose up at the shiitake mushrooms that Audrey
uses in place of the traditional stuffing.  
   The Latino family of Elizabeth Avila (Mercedes Ruehl) is on
the verge of tumult during the Thanksgiving feast when
Elizabeth's estranged husband Javier (Victor Rivers) shows
up though invited only by their son Anthony (Douglas Spain),
while the Vietnamese living a hop away and presided over by
Trinh Nguyen (Joan Chen) go ballistic in discovering that their
daughter Jenny (Kristy Wu) has a condom in her jacket
pocket and their son Gary (Jimmy Pham) is hiding a gun.
   While L.A. has gotten bad press during the past few years,
the cops getting the brunt of the hostile journalism and the
country getting the impression that every teen is in a gang,
"What's Cooking" provides a nourishing antidote.  If the story
is banal, the dialogue lacking in sharpness, and the
exposition taking forever before Chadha cuts to the chase,  
the well-acted film is a love poem to the city of angels,
making Thanksgiving into a valentine's-day ode to American
diversity.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 106 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
It's Thanksgiving and all kinds of family trauma is occurring within one
cross cultural L.A. suburb.  The African American Williams deal with a
rebellious son amidst a traditional mother-in-law/daughter-in-law kitchen 
tussle while the Mexican Avilas face the breakup of a matriarchal marriage 
and two new boyfriends.  
Meanwhile the Jewish Seeling family daughter has come home with a suitor
of the wrong gender while the Vietnamese Nguyens argue tradition across a
generation gap in director/cowriter Gurinder Chadha's ("Bhaji on the Beach")
"What's Cooking?"
There hasn't been a good Thanksgiving movie since 1987's "Planes, Trains 
and Automobiles" (Jodie Foster's "Home For the Holidays" was a misfire
and "The House of Yes" isn't exactly traditional fare).  Indian eyes
bring a cross-cultural look at this most American of holidays, extended 
families with all their complications, and not incidentally, the glories
of world cuisine.
Of the four families, there's really only crossover between the Mexican
Avilas and Vietnamese Nguygens.  Their college age children are a couple,
just being introduced to the Avila clan while being hidden from the Nguygens.
Elizabeth Avila (Mercedes Ruehl, "The Fisher King") is also the teacher
of the Nguygens' youngest and rents videos from their family store.  These two
families represent the extremes in acceptance of other cultures and
close-mindedness (ironically, it's Trinh Nguygen (Joan Chen), not her
husband or her mother, who clings most to the Vietnamese way of life).
The story deals with father and son conflict (Ronald Williams (Dennis Haysbert,
"Love and Basketball) and his son Michael) and father and son bonding
(Javier Avila and his son Tony embarrassingly both try to relate to
daughter/sister's boyfriend Jimmy Nguygen by praising Bruce Lee).
Acceptance of non-traditional relationships (Kyra Sedgwick as Rachel Seeling
and Julianna Margulies as Carla), marital infidelity, premarital sex, 
education, gang warfare and the proper side dishes to serve with a turkey are 
all explored.
The large ensemble cast is one of the most cohesive of the year and are
too numerous to mention.  Mercedes Ruehl gives a sexy, confident performance 
as a middle aged mom blooming within a new relationship.  Alfre Woodard 
(Haysbert's costar in "Love and Basketball") is a mother on the verge of a 
nervous breakdown, trying to hold her family together.  Sedgwick and Margulies 
are a believable couple dealing in their different ways with Rachel's mystified
parents.  Maury Chaykin ("Mystery, Alaska") is terrific as Herb Seeling,
a man mad about his dachshund Marty, his hot tub and his twin grandchildren,
but bewildered by his daughter Rachel's dinner announcement.
Lainie Kazan ("The Crew") completes the Seeling couple.  Newcomer Will Yun
Lee ("Witchblade") makes a strong impression as Jimmy Nguygen.
Chadha keeps multiple story lines going not only within each family, but
across the four, without ever losing her audience, nicely allowing the
families to intersect at the film's climax in a rather surprising visual.
Camera by Jong Lin is immediate and intimate with both the characters and the
food preparation and presentation.  The film's score begins 
with salsa and remains lively until the film's latter section where Chadha
wisely dispenses with the music to rachet up the growing tension of her
(and cowriter Paul Mayeda Berges') story lines.
"What's Cooking" is a solid little film that should endure as a holiday
favorite.  Which dinner looks the best?  Well it's a toss up between the
Avila's Mexican al fresco spread and the drumstick Marty's overjoyed to
find in his dog bowl.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
