Title
Review for Alice in Wonderland (1951)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Alice in Wonderland" is a Disney animated feature that
is better than its reputation.  It is not as great as
some of the Disney features that preceded it, such as
"Snow White", "Dumbo", or "Pinocchio", but there is
still considerable charm in the animation, story,
and voice characterizations.
"Alice in Wonderland" is based on the 19th century 
Lewis Carroll book of the same name.  The book was written
as a satire.  Disney has tried to put some of the satire
into the film, but mostly emphasizes the silliness.
There is strong appeal for both children and adults.
Alice is an English girl, perhaps thirteen years old.
She fantasizes about a world where animals talk and
things aren't so logical, and finds herself in that
world.  She is determined to learn more about
a frazzled white rabbit, a search that leads to encounters
with various extremely silly characters.  One of them
is quite dangerous: the Queen of Hearts, who is fond
of beheading those who question her authority.
The animation is quite good.  In particular, the studio
has a knack for splashing liquids, and there is great
"choreography" of dancing playing card soldiers.
The story does have an edge to it.  The walrus eats
the oysters, the crocodile eats the fishes, and the
Queen beheads several playing cards.  This is in keeping
with the spirit of Carroll's writings, which have
the useful moral that gullibility is punished.
There are some slow parts to the story.  Alice gets
lost and cries.  The audience is supposed to feel
sorry for her, but this cold-hearted reviewer merely
lost interest.  There is also a song that the flowers sing
to Alice that isn't that interesting.
Whatever Alice eats in Wonderland has her either grow
or shrink considerably.  It is fortunate for her that
her clothes change size with her as well!  Also, her
hair and clothes never get wet or dirty or have red
paint sloshed on them despite all her adventures.  I guess
liberties need to be taken with cartoons.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
