Title
Review for Land and Freedom (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
T. Robin Sutherland
     LAND AND FREEDOM is a difficult film to watch, for many reasons.
First and foremost, it is a war film and since Vietnam, war films
have typically been about skewed politics, lost idealism, the vanity of
the glory of war, and pain and death without reward.  This film is not
an exception.
     It is also initially difficult in that it is a film whose
protagonists are from many different countries: they are volunteers and
mercenaries rallied from across the world to fight Franco in the
Spanish Civil War.  This creates a very rich atmosphere for the drama
of the film as one gets used to the sporadic subtitling, outrageous
accents, and lost dialogue which is either too rapid or stilted to be
translated.
     And it is finally a difficult film to appreciate without a fairly
detailed understanding of the elements of the Spanish Civil War.  To
have known that the Poum (the faction to which the main character has
become attached) was actually a Trotskyist splinter group would have
made a significant difference to my viewing.  Many local political
problems constitute the focus of conflict on both regional and personal
levels.
     But war films are supposed to be hard to watch: war is not a
simple thing--it is the essence of politics, and in this spirit, the
film illustrates many themes.  Textbook idealism, for one, does not
translate well in the battlefield.  What you believe you are fighting
for may be utterly at odds with the politics of your group (despite
their propaganda).  Relationships which are sound and strong may be
lost in a moment over a political detail.  Loyalty wears many
uniforms.  Most of the fighting is not in the trenches.  And, of
course, people die for no comprehensible reason.  All of these points
are made strongly and specifically enough to make you regard them as
more than the cliches of war--they are experiences of each fighter, and
you must see each in its own context.
     This film is beautifully shot.  Most of it is (necessarily)
presented in picturesque outdoor locations which contrast with the
brutality of its action.  Two sequences attract particular attention.
One somewhat overlong sequence outlines the local political infighting
which takes place when the Poum tries to decide to collectivize a
captured estate.  Here it would have been interesting to contrast the
local politics of the Poum against their "official" political line, but
the confusion is indicative of the splintering which causes the
freedom-fighting factions to actually fire on each other later on.  A
second sequence involves the capture of an enemy position--the action
sequence is frantically paced and artfully executed, and creates a
novel build to the film's actual climax.
     Ian Hart has no difficulty in his role as the misplaced man from
Liverpool whose ideals exceed his understanding.  His frustration is as
thick as his loyalty to the principles for which he left his home.  His
character is incredibly honest, and places the common man's plight to
preserve freedom and decency in the world squarely in the swamp of
world politics.  He is easy to identify with, despite his obvious
distance from the audience's context, and it is impossible not to
sympathize with him without being deeply cynical.
     This was not a profound movie for me, but it was an engaging,
educating, and at times, genuinely entertaining film.  I would
recommend it, not as an art film, nor as popular fare, but perhaps as a
film which may provide an honest look at a sparsely filmed bit of
history, presented plausibly from an outsider's point of view.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1995
U.S. Release Date: varies
Running Length: 1:49
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Violence, profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Ian Hart, Rosana Pastor, Iciar Bollain, Tom Gilroy, 
      Frederic Pierrot, Marc Martinez, Suzanne Maddock, Mandy Walsh
Director: Ken Loach
Producer: Rebecca O'Brien
Screenplay: Jim Alleln
Cinematography: Barry Ackroyd
Music: George Fenton
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     One of the most consistent makers of excellent motion pictures 
during the 1980s and 1990s has been Ken Loach.  With a resume 
highlighted by such unforgettable titles as HIDDEN AGENDA, RIFF-RAFF, 
RAINING STONES, and LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD, Loach is recognized as the kind 
of director who will face challenges without backing down.  His 
provocative, idea-rich movies are always populated by believable 
characters, and his latest offering, LAND AND FREEDOM, is no exception.  
With this movie, however, Loach has moved out of his familiar territory 
of modern-day England, turning the clock back to 1936 Spain to tell the 
story of one group who stood against General Franco and his fascist 
supporters.
     The Spanish Civil War was like no other uprising in history.  It 
was a messy, disorganized affair with pro-communist and pro-democracy 
forces fighting each other instead of uniting against their common 
enemy.  This lack of organization among the country's landless workers 
led to victory by Franco, who was backed by both Mussolini and Hitler.  
Some, including Loach, believe that the pernicious influence of the 
Stalin-backed Communist party fostered the divisiveness among the 
revolutionaries that resulted in the fascist victory.
     LAND AND FREEDOM opens in present-day England, with a young woman 
(Mandy Walsh) reading the diaries and letters of her late grandfather, 
who was part of the multi-national Republican Militia fighting against 
Franco.  David (Ian Hart), a card-carrying member of the Communist 
Party, was unemployed in Liverpool when the call went out from Spain for 
support in the war against fascism.  Driven by idealism, David left his 
wife behind to join a ragtag division of one of many local militias 
struggling to defeat Franco.
     There are several gritty battle scenes in LAND AND FREEDOM, but, as 
with all of Loach's movies, this one is impelled by ideas.  It's 
unlikely that you've seen a war movie quite like LAND AND FREEDOM.  
After the militia liberates a small town, they join the local workers in 
a lengthy argument about the pros and cons of collectivization.  It's a 
rich, spirited discussion, and both sides make excellent points.  LAND 
AND FREEDOM is filled with such scenes as characters talk about things 
that mean something, like why they should reject the organized Communist 
army and why they shouldn't moderate their slogans just to gain the 
support of other nations.
     The story unfolds as seen through David's eyes.  This is his tale, 
and, like all epic journeys of the heart and spirit, it involves 
triumph, tragedy, love, passion, and pain.  Torn between supporting the 
organized resistance and continuing to be a part of an isolated but 
autonomous militia, David makes the "safe" decision, then, to his 
dismay, learns the reason why Franco is winning the war -- the 
Stalinists are more interested in suppressing the real freedom fighters 
than opposing the fascists.
     While in Spain, David falls in love with a Blanca (Rosana Pastor), 
a fiery Spaniard who has already paid a terrible price in the war.  This 
relationship forms the film's emotional center, but, like everything 
else that David holds dear, it is endangered by his ambivalence about 
which revolutionary arm to support.  
     Loach directs with a deft hand, and Jim Alleln's script is filled 
with small, unpredictable turns.  Violence is used sparingly but 
effectively, as when a substandard gun blows up in David's face while 
he's trying to teach townspeople how to use it.  In LAND AND FREEDOM, 
death is given a face, and one scene late in the film underscores the 
real tragedy of what was, in Loach's words, "the revolution betrayed."
     For the director, there's a relevance between what happened in 1936 
Spain and what could happen today, and that's why he chooses to frame 
the story with David's granddaughter unraveling his story.  Loach sees a 
creeping apathy enveloping Western society, and wonders whether the 
fires of idealism are dying or dead.  As a wake-up call, LAND AND 
FREEDOM reminds us of the price of fighting for beliefs, and the greater 
price of being abandoned by supposed allies during that fight.  Idealism 
can be a lonely, difficult road when action is required -- something 
that David, Blanca, and all the other members of the Republican Militia 
learn. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     English Director Kenneth Loach's last film was the brilliant and
powerful but hard to watch LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD.  This time he brings us
LAND AND FREEDOM (Tierra y Libertad) about English men and women going
to Spain to fight in the Spanish Civil War in 1936.
     The film starts in the present with the death of an old man named
David.  David is played by Ian Heart who was John Lennon in BACKBEAT.
In going through David's effects his granddaughter (Suzanne Maddock)
learns out how he was a member of the trade unions and the British
Communist party who left the safety of Britain to answer the call to
join the socialists, anarchists, and communists in Spain in their
battle against the fascist forces of General Francisco Franco.
     The movie is shown in flashback as we relive David's life as a
member of the Spanish militia.  The brilliantly lit cinematography
(Barry Ackroyd) and the decaying sets (Martin Johnson) evoke a feel of
the desperation of their cause.  They are in a ragtag army and fight
under miserable conditions.  You never see Franco's forces, but somehow
the picture conveys the feeling that they must have been much better
off since after all at least they have fancy uniforms and a real chain
of command.  Nevertheless, David loves the militia and in one of his
letters writes, "We elect the officers and everything.  It's socialism
in action - not like the army back home."  He is an idealist who
thinks, "Revolutions are contagious."
     At first the fighting is a lark with both sides trading insults
and jokes from their respective foxholes.  During this time, David is
in bliss.  Soon however the militia and the film bogs down in talkfests
as thick as molasses.  The socialists, anarchists, and communists get
locked in long verbal battles over their goals.  They each want
immediately to remake society exactly according to their recipe and
defeating Franco is only of secondary importance.  This infuriates
David.
     The script by Jim Allen gets so wordy that you feel like screaming
"enough already, back to the story."  A little of this infighting is
fascinating; extremely long scene after scene of it is not.  A typical
battle among the leftists has the socialists thinking dirt poor farmers
should be allowed to keep their measly four acres of land whereas the
communists believe that they should immediately collectivize everything
even if that means they starve for a while since the collectives thus
far have proven unsuccessful.
     The acting by Ian Heart is quite good.  The acting by the rest of
the cast, Blance (Rosana Pastor), Maite (Iciar Bollain), Lawerence (Tom
Gilroy), Vidal (Marc Martinez), and Bernard (Frederic Pierrot) is okay,
but nothing special.  The historical perspectives the film provides
from the inside of the Militia is fascinating, but the picture drags
incredibly through its long middle.  It needed much stronger editing
than Jonathan Morris provided.
     LAND AND FREEDOM runs 1:49, but should have been shorter and more
focused.  It is in English and Spanish with English subtitles.  It is
not rated, but would probably be rated R.  There is no sex, no nudity,
a couple of uses of the F word, and only mild violence considering this
is a war picture.  It would be fine for any teenager.  I liked a lot of
the picture, but the long, slow, and pedantic middle was too much for
me to be able to recommend it.  I do give it ** for many good parts.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
