Title
Review for Speed (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Can you really take "too far" too far?  The producers of SPEED
don't think so.
     Audacious action doesn't get any better than SPEED, a non-stop
nail-biter about a SWAT-team specialist (Reeves), a brilliant bomber
(Hopper), and a bus rigged to blow when it slows below 50.  Cross DIE
HARD with AIRPORT and you're got the idea.
     SPEED stars Keanu Reeves, trying to look tough after his recent
upgrade from Most Excellent to Most Enlightened.  The dude can't do
drama, no duh, but he's nimble enough for the job. (From BUDDHA to
Bruce and he even does his own stunts!)  Bullock is a better bet as the
poor passenger with driving duties.  She showed her strength in
DEMOLITION MAN and, here, she's the best bargain on board.
     Dennis Hopper plays Dennis Hopper, chewing on scenery while
spitting out sentences like "Do not attempt to grow a brain." (Good
advice if there ever *was* any.)  Bill Pullman-lookalike Jeff Daniels
has a modestly meaty role as The Partner, while TERMINATOR 2 alumni Joe
Morton plays the commanding officer.
     The script, by Graham Yost, has enough humor to keep you smiling
while you're sweating.  Even better: the story never turns Reeves into
a wisecracking hero.  Thank you for small favors.
     Of course, the best bursts of SPEED are those without words.
     First-time director Jan DeBont--a former cinematographer who
handled such heavies as LETHAL WEAPON 3--gets everything right, from
the credits to the close.  And those details! Watch for the reflection
of a burning bus on a pay phone.  Or a banner beside Reeves that reads
"To avoid personal injury, do not stand in stepwell."
     As the stunts get bigger, the film only gets better.  Collisions,
explosions, and big-things-sent-flying.  Even the throwaway stunts are
spectacular.  Blink and someone's stepping from a speeding vehicle.
Blink and someone's dangling from an elevator car.
     Credit a pace that keeps you from thinking; credit some stunts
that just can't be faked.  Let ILM just *try* to duplicate the
simplicity of Reeves really jumping from car onto a moving bus.
     (If nothing else, SPEED is a *great* exercise in wish
fulfillment.  Who *hasn't* wished that they could barrel a bus around
slow drivers and through busy intersections?)
     SPEED could be reduced.  Earlier scenes run a bit too long and the
ending is clearly too much.  But, that's the joke.  The producers know
that *everything* in the film is too much and so they damn the torpedos
and take over-the-top right over-the-top.
     Nitpickers can enjoy the plot-holes, while the more, ahem,
"retentive" viewers will have a field day finding the continuity errors
that occur in nearly every scene.
     Except for the ending, all technical credits are tops.  Obvious
minatures and mangy mattes undercut the film's next-to-last scene.
But, by that point, who cares?  SPEED is a full-scale tinkertoy set
that makes the beginning of THE FUGITIVE look like a little Lionel
train.
     Twenty years ago, SPEED would've starred Charleton Heston, and
Karen Black, and George Kennedy.  No guns would've been needed--but a
plane would crash, and a nun would sing, and the girl would get kissed
at the end.
     But this is the Nineties and, with DIE HARD dollars still fresh on
the brain, set-piece *is* plot.  Add some fireworks, and blow a few
bombs, and it's Jennings Lang all over again.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Wow!  SPEED is DIE HARD with all of the slow parts taken out.  One
non-stop roller coaster of a movie.  White knuckle city.  The woman
next to me (seriously) had her fingers in her ears during the entire
movie.
     Amazing to me at least, I found a movie where Keanu Reeves (awful
in MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING and only slightly better in LITTLE BUDDHA)
finally proves that not only can he act, he can be do some great stuff
if he is cast and directed right.  Jeff Daniels (a much under
appreciated brilliant actor from SOMETHING WILD and GETTYSBURG) is
Reeves SWAT cop sidekick.  Daniels is the brains and Reeves is the guts
of this team.  The mad bomber is played by Dennis Hopper who is known
for his overacting (e.g.  PARIS TROUT) but can be an excellent actor if
the director keeps him under control.  He is terrific in this movie
because of the director, Jan De Bont.  Lots of small actors do a great
job.  Alan Ruck (who was super as Ferris Bueler's pal in FERRIS
BUELER'S DAY OFF) is the quintessential and obnoxious LA tourist.
Sandra Bullock is great as the driver of the bus.  Good slightly
underdone, ongoing romance between her and Reeves.
     The plot of the show sounds pretty ridiculous on the surface, a
bus must never be driven under 50 miles per hour, or it will explode.
In the show it works fine.  Keeping the bus going at this speed in LA
traffic can be pretty hard.  Many great stunt and driving scenes.
Watch the words on the bus and on the billboards for douses of subtle
humor.
     The script by Graham Yost is filled with memorable one liners.
One of my favorite parts of the script is: "Pop quiz.  You have a
villain holding a gun to a hostage's head, and he is running for the
plane and about to leave with him.  What do you do?  Answer: shot the
hostage." You will have to see the show to hear why this makes sense.
     SPEED runs 1:56 but feels like half that since it goes so fast.
It carries a well deserved R rating for violence.  Every teenager in
America will probably want to see it and will undoubtedly enjoy it if
they go.  It easily won *** 1/2 from me and a big recommendation.
     Watch out when you leave the theater.  Your adrenaline is liable
to be rushing so much that you are bouncing off walls.  Best to have a
designated driver who does not get to see the movie.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Phineas Narco
     I can just imagine the pitch for the new movie SPEED at some
Hollywood power lunch at Spago's: "Okay, picture IN THE LINE OF FIRE
meets DIE HARD.  A psycho bomber rigs a bus full of people so that if
it falls below 50 MPH it explodes.  We get Christian Slater or Keanu
Reaves for the lead, you know, someone young and virile, he has to keep
the bus running while trying to disarm the bomb."  SPEED is pure junk
food entertainment ... like a Snickers bar it's delicious and cloying
when you're eating it, yet virtually devoid of substance, nutrition and
credibility.  After you've come down from the initial sugar rush you
feel kind of empty and cheated, but only if you were expecting anything
more from it.
     That Spago power lunch HAD to have taken place at some point.  DIE
HARD meets IN THE LINE OF FIRE.  Keanu's hair (which keeps getting
shorter and shorter with each movie he makes--is he bald in LITTLE
BUDDHA?) is close-cropped like Bruce Willis' in DIE HARD.  Like IN THE
LINE OF FIRE there's a lot of verbal sparring over the phone with the
psycho and talk about "the game" and Keanu's partner (like Eastwood's
partner) gets ... well, you know ...  Unlike IN THE LINE OF FIRE, SPEED
doesn't spend much time on things like character and plot development,
it's too busy blowing things up ... and they blow up real good.
     Keanu plays Jack Traven who works on a bomb squad and points his
gun at every conceivable angle when entering a room while trying to
eradicate the last remnants of his valley-boy accent from the BILL AND
TED movies with a steady, macho baritone register ... along with Jeff
Daniels, his partner and in the movie's opening they are trying to save
an elevator full of people from plummeting thirty floors or so unless
Dennis Hopper, our resident psychopath, gets a few million dollars
delivered to him.  We're asked to believe that the police forget to
check the freight elevators in one of which Hopper's hanging out (how
he plans to collect the money, due in a few minutes, from this
clandestine vantage point is not explained).  Well, our belief is
suspended about as well as the elevator and it soon comes crashing down
as well but not before they rescue the hostages.  Reeves and Daniels
corner the psycho in the basement discovering that he's taped a dozen
sticks of dynamite to his torso all ready to blow.... Keanu utters such
inanities as: "Give it up, you've got nowhere to go!" while Hopper
takes Daniels hostage with a gun--why I don't know since he can blow all
three of them to Kingdom come.  Why Keanu shoots Daniels in the leg is
equally stupid, but then Hopper walks out the door (why he doesn't
shoot both of them is anybody's guess) and there is a huge explosion on
the other side.  How in the world Hopper survives the explosion is
simply never explained....  Well, that pretty much sets the tone for
the film, full of action and would-be suspense, and utterly
nonsensical.
     The main part of the film, of course, concerns the bus that can't
slow down or it will explode....  Matthew Broderick's buddy from FERRIS
BUELLER'S DAY OFF is one of the passengers, a tourist, sporting a deep
tan, and spends most of the movie rolling his eyes and muttering to
himself, probably wishing he was kicking a Ferrari through a plate
glass window instead of being on the "wrong bus."  There is some
chemistry between Jack and Annie (Sandra Bullock) who takes over as
driver of the runaway bus.  Bullock is good here but as the movie wears
on, our credulity is further stretched as their conversations become
flirty and casual as she drives along hardly glancing at the
speedometer or the road at some points.
     Meanwhile Hopper is monitoring all this action, ostensibly, from
the overhead television newscopters live footage on the local news.
Later we find out he's monitoring the action in another way in another
laughable revelation.  Hopper isn't that great of a psycho, he concedes
too much, he gives away too much information about himself in flagrant
clues to his would be victims.  We never *really* find out what Hopper's
beef is.  There's some talk about how he used to be a cop (again,
echoes of IN THE LINE OF FIRE), how he lost a finger and got put into
retirement and was pissed off cuz he got a gold watch.  So what?
Doesn't really add up to a motive for all the mayhem.  Keanu snarls his
lip while yelling things at him over the phone like:  "I'm going to rip
out your spine!"  (They got this line from THE RUNNING MAN).  Oh,
please!
     There are other problems.  Never mind the fact that it would be
logistically impossible to keep a bus at the speed limit on the Santa
Monica freeway for almost any length of time...  After a while they get
onto a highway under construction only to find out that two miles ahead
of them there is a fifty-foot stretch of highway that is simply not
there.  I almost laughed out loud at this sequence.  I thought for a
second that E.T. must be driving the bus because it literally *rises
up* of its own accord like Peter Pan.  We're not even given a long
shot of the bus making the jump from what I can remember ... you see the
bus take off then a shot of people screaming and being jostled around
inside the bus then you see the bus landing and driving on.  Perhaps
some physics major can demonstrate the impossibility of that stunt, but
you don't have to be one to see that the bus should have dropped like a
stone.  By this time I was wondering if they ever considered just
busting the glass on that speedometer and holding the needle all the way
to the right?
     They make it to an airport to drive around and around the
runways.  There is a truly great sequence (a la RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK)
where Keanu slides under the bus on a dolly while it speeds along
coming dangerously close to becoming road pizza.  This sequence just
about had me jumping into the row behind me.  I won't reveal the
physical impossibility of how Keanu and Bullock exit the bus at the end
but I could hear the audience members scoffing around me.  "Yeah,
right!"
     Well, every good action movie nowadays has to have at least two
climaxes and, of course, the obligatory mano-a-mano showdown and this
is no exception.  It takes place on the top of a subway car traveling
underground and is derivative of SILVER STREAK in more ways than one.
     SPEED seems to be another one in a long line of recent calculated
blockbusters that Hollywood has been churning out a lot of lately along
the lines of BATMAN RETURNS, CLIFFHANGER, JURASSIC PARK, and DEMOLITION
MAN ... movies that visually are wonderful to look at, technically
slick, expertly edited, yet also implausible, derivative and almost
utterly devoid of substance or meaning.  In terms of things like plot,
character and acting, they're a mess.  It's getting to the point where
I expect there to be a movie called "BOOM!" released.  BOOM! will be
just two solid hours of explosions.  No plot.  No characters.  No
actors.  No story.  Just explosions and great visuals.  Well,
fortunately every so often Hollywood does come out with suspenseful
thrilling gems like SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, THE FUGITIVE, and IN THE LINE
OF FIRE ... movies that have wonderful performances, believable and
engaging characters and events, and taut plot lines.  SPEED is in a
whole different ball park.  It will make a *whole* lot of money this
summer.  It is a fun ride if you accept and expect it for the junk food
entertainment that it is.  However, it's not much beyond that.

Author
Steve Kong
Speed is a slam bang flashy and fun action film.
The premise? There's a bomb on a bus, if the bus speed drops below 50 mph
the bomb goes off. The premise is pretty simply and on paper it seems
pretty ludicrous. But, onscreen, it works very well building some fun and
highly tense scenes.
The movie starts us off with an energetic action sequence in an elevator
shaft that will make you fear elevators for a long time to come. A mad
bomber (Dennis Hopper) has taken the people in the elevator hostage and it
is up to two LAPD SWAT members to save these people. The two cops are Jack
Traven (Keanu Reeves) and Harry Temple (Jeff Daniels). After the situation
is "resolved" I was exhausted from the tension and action, but that's not
it! We now get to the part about the bus. It looks like Jack has made the
mad bomber very angry and the mad bomber is going to take it out his
frustrations (is that it?) on another bunch of hostages.
A bus is rigged with a bomb. The bomb will arm itself when the bus passes
50mph and will explode if the bus speed goes below 50mph. Jack, the
inventive one, finds a way to get on the bus and he now has to save these
people from the bomb. The bus sequence is suitibly solved by Jack and his
SWAT team members and I though the movie was over. After the bus sequence,
I was truly worn out, but Yost and de Bont don't stop yet! There's more,
and this all works out for the best. There is an additional action sequence
on a subway train! (If this all sounds like one of those TV infomercials,
"AND THERE'S MORE!", the movie does not run that long -- or at least it
doesn't feel that long.)
The script is by Graham Yost and that explains the silliness of the plot.
In the Yost tradition, Speed is definitely high concept but because it has
a talented rookie director behind the camera, Speed works very well. The
talented rookie director was Jan de Bont (Speed 2: Cruise Control,
Twister). De Bont, previous to directing Speed, worked as a
cinematographer, most notably with John Mc Tiernan on Die Hard and Hunt For
Red October. It looks like de Bont has learned something while working on
those films and it shows in Speed.
Speed follows the three main characters, Annie, Jack and Howard. Annie's
the down-to-earth next-door-neighbour girl type. She is one of the few
characters trapped on the bus. And she is one of the only characters on the
bus that is somewhat fleshed out. Jack is the LAPD guy who has to stop the
bomb. Dennis Hopper plays Howard Payne, the mad bomber, with a vengeance.
The great thing about Speed is that it gets you started with a bang and
never lets up. The movie moves quickly and efficiently from action sequence
to action sequence giving us a breathless ride that makes us forget about
all the things that are silly about the story.
Keanu Reeves is great as Jack Traven. Reeves makes for a good believable
action hero. His character is not given too much in order of showing an
acting range, but Reeves works well with the material he is given. I would
enjoy seeing Reeves in more action roles like this. Sandra Bullock is very
likeable as Annie. She has a lot of onscreen charisma and it makes the
movie all that more fun to watch. Hopper is eery and creepy as Harry Payne.
His performance is way over-the-top, but it is also fun to watch.
After you finish watching Speed you'll be worn out from the sheer energetic
approach that Jan de Bont employs to direct Speed. Sure, there is a lot of
silliness going on in Speed, but who cares? Speed is one of the most fun
films to watch. Don't Miss Speed!

Author
Mark R. Leeper

Author
James Berardinelli
     Place your foot on the accelerator.  Press down.  Watch the needle
on the speedometer creep above fifty.  Now you're trapped.  Whatever
happens, you can't drop below that level--if you do, you're dead, and
everyone on the bus with you.  It might not be tough to maintain that
speed on the freeway in the middle of the night, but this is rush
hour.  So what do you do when the traffic comes to a screeching halt up
ahead, without an off-ramp in sight?
     It's an ingenious premise that first-time director Jan De Bont has
turned into a tremendously well-executed motion picture.  A mad bomber
(Dennis Hopper) is out to get $3.7 million, and he'll stop at nothing
to get it--and to obtain a small measure of revenge on Jack Traven
(Keanu Reeves), a cop who foiled one of his plots.  So he rigs up a
bomb on a bus that becomes armed when the vehicle goes over fifty, and
is primed to explode when it drops below that speed.  And it's Jack's
job to save all the people on board--including himself.
     Good action movies are rare.  Great action movies come along once
every few years.  SPEED deserves a place in the latter category, being
the most intelligent and breath-stoppingly thrilling motion picture to
open since the original DIE HARD.  Normally, I like to write reviews
immediately after seeing a movie.  On this occasion, I had to wait
until the next morning--SPEED wore me out.
     This is a film that cries out for audience participation, whether
it be the silent majority's digging of fingers into armrests or the
vocal minority's cheers and catcalls.  SPEED is by no means an
intellectual challenge, but it's probably the most fun you can have in
any theater at this time.
     With a single exception (that of the bus "flying" through the
air), the stunts and special effects are flawlessly incorporated.  And
there are a lot of them.  A whole lot.  You could almost call this film
PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES, although for entirely different
reasons than those behind the naming of the Steve Martin/John Candy
flick.
     SPEED is clearly divided into three acts, each no less draining
than the others.  The first and last (which involve an elevator and a
train, respectively) bookend the longer and better sequence on the
bus.  The film may clock in at nearly two hours, but the time, like the
various vehicles, races.  There is, quite literally, never a dull
moment.
     Of course, there are plot contrivances.  How could there not be?
But these are subtle and convincingly woven into the fabric of the
story.  While watching SPEED, you may notice one or two (for an
example, consider how a bus traveling at fifty-two can slam into a car
and have its speed not drop below the red line), but you won't care
much.
     The low-level but persistent humor is used to blot the tension.
Most of the one-liners aren't as good as those in DIE HARD, but a few
are worth a chuckle, and they serve their purpose.  This is not, after
all, supposed to be a comedy.
     I never thought I'd be saying this, but Keanu Reeves does an
excellent job.  The actor has the perfect demeanor for Jack Traven, the
cocky cop who tries hard not to get emotionally involved--and
inevitably fails.  Reeves' attitude and physical appearance are ideal,
and even those who visibly winced during his scenes in MUCH ADO ABOUT
NOTHING are likely to accept him here.
     Sandra Bullock (probably best known from DEMOLITION MAN), as the
passenger who takes the wheel from the incapacitated driver, possesses
enough charisma and spunk not to get outshone by her co-stars.  Dennis
Hopper turns in one of his patented performances as a psychotic
killer.
     There are reasons why the preview audiences have been raving about
SPEED, and a purpose to moving the opening date from August to June.
This movie is a winner, and the closest you can get to an amusement
park ride in a theater.  Perhaps the same warning that's used for
roller coasters should be applied here.  You know, the one about high
blood pressure and heart problems.
     Oh, and one more thing.  Don't make SPEED the first film in a
double bill.  No matter what the second movie is, it will suffer by
comparison.  If you still have the stamina left to see it, that is.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Since the dawn of time, three Great Questions have defied the
greatest minds:  Is there a God?  Is there existence after death?  And
how does Keanu Reeves continue to get work as an actor?  All right,
that might be a slight exaggeration; I have some ideas about that life
after death thing.  Reeves remains a mystery, a physically striking but
mush-mouthed thespian who has been cast by Coppola, Bertolucci and
Branagh.  A post-BILL AND TED star-making vehicle has eluded him,
however--until now.  Arriving with more buzz than a swarm of killer
bees is SPEED, and you can believe the hype.  Thrilling and relentless
to a fault, SPEED seems destined to score big box office and make
Reeves a very hot property.
     Reeves plays Jack Traven, a risk-taking member of the L.A.P.D.'s
anti-terrorist unit.  In the film's sensational prologue, Jack and his
partner (Jeff Daniels) foil a bomber (Dennis Hopper) holding an
elevator full of people hostage.  Jack thinks the bomber is dead, but
he returns, still seeking his $3.7 million but now with a score to
settle as well.  The bomber tells Jack that a city bus has been rigged
to blow if it drops below 50 miles per hour, and that any attempt to
evacuate the passengers will also lead to the destruction of the bus.
Jack manages to get on board the bus, searching for a way to defuse the
bomb and helping the passenger (Sandra Bullock) who has taken over for
the incapacitated bus driver to keep them all alive and speeding.
     As high concepts go, SPEED would have been difficult to screw up
completely.  Where I had my doubts was regarding the ability to keep
things varied and interesting; there are only so many ways a bus can
crash through guardrails and other cars.  But astonishingly, SPEED
continues to come up with new and interesting predicaments just when
you think there can't be anywhere else for it to go.  Screenwriter
Graham Yost and director Jan DeBont almost give themselves too tough an
act to follow by opening with the elevator rescue, a stunningly staged
sequence that will leave you breathless before you're even out of
popcorn.  Once the action hits the road, the set pieces come fast,
furious and rarely derivative.  The location moves from crowded
freeways to open spaces, each new environment providing new
challenges.  There is even that rarity of rarities, a moment that
inspires a collective audible gasp, followed closely by relieved
laughter.  The term "edge of your seat" is thrown around a lot, but
that is exactly where I spent the majority of SPEED's two hour running
time.
     Still, there is the Keanu question, and the fortunate answer is
that Jack Traven is the perfect role for Reeves.  He is asked to do
little more than set his jaw and look good in a tight T-shirt, and he's
good at both.  The taciturn Traven is a switch from the Willis/
Schwarzenegger school of one-liner heroism, and something of a welcome
one at that.  With Reeves maintaining a poker face, the required
tension release falls to the supporting cast.  Sandra Bullock, so
annoying as Stallone's partner in DEMOLITION MAN, is extremely
appealing as driver/passenger Annie, managing to combine strength and
emotion in a surprisingly seamless performance.  Dennis Hopper as a
psycho killer is no stretch, but he plays it with panache, and Alan
Ruck (best known as FERRIS BUELLER's buddy Cameron) has a couple of
good moments as a tourist on the bus.  The performances are better than
one might expect from a film like SPEED, and from Keanu Reeves in
particular.
     If there is a fault to be found with SPEED, it's that it really
doesn't know when enough is enough.  The bus's physics defying leap
over a stretch of incomplete freeway is more comically absurd than
exciting, and almost lost me.  Once the bus-based plot is over, there's
still another fifteen minutes to go, and perhaps out of some sense of
houw an action film has to end there is a mano-a-mano between Reeves
and Hopper aboard a commuter train.  At that point, yet another set of
improbable crises becomes overkill.  And ironically, it may have
eliminated one possible plot for the sequel.  Don't be surprised if
there is one; SPEED is 1994's THE FUGITIVE, and then some.

Author
Dragan Antulov
"Thrillride of the summer" is a magical phrase that saves
legitimate movie critics from being branded sell-outs. It
allows them not to admit that they were degraded to the
intellectual levels of unwashed masses while they were
enjoying Hollywood blockbusters. It also helps them to later
explain why they were giving two, three or five thumbs up to
the industry products that couldn't pass objective
inspection. One of such products, ideal for the use of
phrase, is SPEED, 1994 action thriller by Dutch cameraman
turned director Jan de Bont, summer blockbuster that used to
be called "the movie of the year" in those pre-Tarantino
times.
The plot of the film is nice example of utter simplicity.
Harry Payne (played by Dennis Hopper) is a mad bomber who
wants to extort money from the city of Los Angeles and, in
the process, get even with Jack Traven (Keanu Reeves),
daring policeman who had foiled Payne's similar stunt in the
past. Payne rigs the city bus and sets the device to arms
itself whenever bus exceeds 50 mph speed limit. The bomb
wouldn't explode as long as the speed doesn't decrease below
that level. Traven becomes aware of that and first he races
to get to the moving bus, and than to stop it from going
under the critical speed limit. Among helpless passengers is
Annie (Sandra Bullock), who would have to take the role of a
driver.
Plot, although nothing but a loose cohesive material for
three long and spectacular action scenes, is rather complex
in comparison with the characters in SPEED. This "high
concept" product hardly needs characters - cardboard
cut-outs seem to do the trick. The most noticeable example
is Jack Traven, character without any life apart from what
we see on the screen. Lack of character and emotion is
adequate for the wooden style of acting by Keanu Reeves.
Dennis Hopper, on the other hand, plays just another in his
long series of psychotic villains, not trying at all to be
original. The only real personality in this film is Sandra
Bullock, in rather thankless role of romantic sidekick that,
ironically, launched her into Hollywood major league. But,
she, as well as anything else, is secondary to the
relentless attack on viewers' audio-visual senses and their
hormones. Jan de Bont, after spending lots of his career on
the sets of great directors, learned couple of tricks, and
it shows - SPEED is really entertaining film, full of
breathtaking stunts, explosions, chases and other
spectacular actions. Unfortunately, those qualities seem to
wear off on the second viewing, when the critical audience
becomes painfully aware of paper characters, lot of
implausibilites, lack of originality and whole series of
plot holes who could devour entire galaxies. The impression
is becoming even worse when SPEED gets compared with action
genre classics like DIE HARD or ALIENS, that could entertain
the audience for years afterwards. And here lies the answer
why "thrillrides of the summer" quickly burn out of our
memories as soon as leaves start falling in the autumn.
