Title
Review for 101 Dalmatians (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Tragic, perhaps, the fate that befalls the Disney 'toon.  In
recent years, our most-beloved family features have been transformed
into Saturday morning cartoons (THE LION KING), sequelized in made-
for-video movies (ALADDIN), and, even, staged on Broadway as fully-
functioning musical productions (BEAUTY AND THE BEAST).  Is anyone
really surprised, then, by a live-action remake of ONE HUNDRED AND ONE
DALMATIANS?  Talk about future marketing strategy!  Just pick any ol'
classic in Walt's vaults, re-release it into theaters, then re-release
it on video, and then remake it as a big-budget "event picture." Throw
in a boatload of licensed products, a video re- lease for the remake,
and a subsequent airing on ABC/Disney, and you've made millions.  If
not billions.  Repeat every five years-- duh, to cash in on the
current crop of toddlers-- and another four-way stock split before
the end of the decade is guaranteed.  Just like that.
    Happily, the sound of ringing registers is but a soft echo in this
exceptionally warm and fuzzy (furry?) remake.  Jeff Daniels and Joely
Richardson have a wonderful chemistry as the London dog owners who
fall in love after their Dalmatians do.  (Though I had to think twice
if I was watching the guy who played the President in INDEPENDENCE
DAY.  No, that was Bill Pullman.) They're also a world more interest-
ing than Glenn Close, whose narrow performance as Cruella De Vil is
the year's most overrated.  (Blame the script.  As written, she's less
a cruel villain than a campy eccentric.) Most impressive are the
technical credits, from art direction to animal handling to location
photography.  Some of the best production work of the year is on
display.
     Too bad that the script, by John Hughes, doesn't let the dogs
talk.  Several later sequences of inter-breed interaction are
particularly tiresome.  (Woof.  Cut to dog barking.  Woof.  Cut to
other dog listening.  Woof.  Cut to first dog running in direction of
second dog.  Repeat several times.) Another major problem of the
script is Hughes' overabundance of violent physical humor.  Okay, I
laughed at the bumbling bad guys (Hugh Laurie and Mark Williams, both
nicely underplaying) getting their 'nads fried on an electric fence,
but this movie really deserves something more than the unintended
alternate title of HOME ALONE 3: SEEING SPOTS.  I don't even know if I
can recommend this to young kids, as they'd probably fall asleep
somewhere in the middle.  
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Sometimes it is a single strategic mistake that is a movie's
downfall.  So it is with Disney's live action remake of their 1961
classic ONE HUNDRED AND ONE DALMATIANS.  This time they call it simply
101 DALMATIANS, and this time they simply forget the part that made the
original work -- the dogs' story.
     The live action version stars people who have dogs.  The cartoon
version is clear who is in charge, and it is not the humans.  In the
original the animals refer to the people as their pets.  In the
animated version the dogs are the stars.  Most important of all is that
the charm of the original came from the dogs' conversations, not the
people's.  In an era of talking animal pictures both good (BABE) and
bad (GORDY), there is no reason why the Disney remake could not have
given these pups a voice.
     Moreover, not only did they not give them a voice, they forgot
their personalities too.  In the cartoon there are many unique types,
but in the new version they do little more than give the dogs names.
There are only a few token scenes where they let the dogs attempt to
establish an identity.
     Even given the mistakes in its creation and its lack of effective
direction by Stephen Herek, there is still much to admire in the
picture.  Hands down, the best part of the film is Glenn Close's near
perfect performance as that archfiend Cruella De Vil.  Close has a
blast giving an outlandish rendition of a heinous fiend.
     Three time Academy Award winning costume designer Anthony Powell
(TESS, DEATH ON THE NILE, and TRAVELS WITH MY AUNT) out does himself
with Cruella's outfits.  Suffice it to say that she would make the top
of any animal rights group's hate list.  As she says, "I live for fur.
I worship fur."  When Cruella speaks, it is frequently accompanied by
thunder and lighting so that you do not miss the point of how wicked
she is.
     Cruella's hairdo with black on one side and white on the other is
the piece de resistance of her appearance.  She is one sinister acting
and looking devil.
     The script is written by John Hughes and is based on the book by
Dodie Smith.  Hughes does not know the word subtle.  You may remember
him from his first two HOME ALONE films, and I am sorry to report that
there will be a HOME ALONE 3.  In his defense, his FARRIS BUELLAR'S DAY
OFF is one of my favorite comedies.
     Working in Cruella's clothing design studio is meek Anita (Joely
Richardson from LOCH NESS).  When Anita confesses that she might one
day want to quit, get married and raise a family, an incensed Cruella
fumes, "We lose more women to marriage than war, famine, and disease."
     Through her Dalmatian, Anita meets and falls in love with video
game designer and fellow Dalmatian owner Roger (Jeff Daniels from
GETTYSBURG).  No boring old author as in the original.  Both Daniels
and Richardson are wasted in their roles.  They provide little more
than window dressing to Cruella and the pups.  On their first meeting,
Roger accidentally pops the question with, "Do you want a cup of
marriage, uh, tea?"  Soon she is delivering their first baby and their
dogs are having fifteen puppies.
     One problem with the remake is that you really need to have seen
and remember the original to appreciate the nuances of the story.  This
is particularly true of "the barking chain," which is carefully
explained in the cartoon but just happens in the live action version.
     The biggest disappointment to me is the scene where the puppies
watch television.  That is a long and precious scene in the original.
The remake has only a vastly truncated and lifeless reenactment.
     I am not going to bother outlining any more of the plot.  If you
want to know more of the story line, you can read my review of the
original that I wrote precisely 101 days before the opening tonight of
the remake.
     There are some technical aspects worth mentioning.  The set
designs by Assheton Gorton are imaginative, particularly the ending
scene, which is adorable on many counts.  Michael Kamen's music is full
of energy and bristling with adventure.  Adrian Biddle's cinematography
is bland indoors, but outside his blue gray snow images are lovely and
evocative of what the picture should have been.
     The makers of 101 DALMATIANS connected all the dots, but did they
weave a compelling story?  I think not.  Although there were some nice
dog shots, the show is devoid of life save Cruella's villainy.  A
picture more tedious than charming.  Skip this one and rent the
original.
     101 DALMATIANS runs 1:43.  Some theaters are showing a short
cartoon with it, but ours did not.  The picture is rated G and would be
fine for kids of any age.  There is one scene where Cruella is slashing
at a hay stack with a pitchfork in a futile attempt to stab a puppy,
but our audience of little ones did not seem frighten by it.  Other
than that, there is no violence, sex, nudity, or bad language.  I could
have done without the scene of a puppy peeing on Cruella's picture to
demonstrate his hatred of her.  My son Jeffrey (age 7 1/2) gives the
show a thumbs up, but he remained inanimate during most of the movie.
I give the movie a mild thumbs down and rate it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     Well, another new Disney movie is coming out and with it comes the
theaters packed with screaming babies, very restless kids kicking your
seat, and throngs of grownups providing running commentary of everything
on the screen (to themselves, not the kids).
     This is not a good thing.  This time, the Disney movie is 101
DALMATIANS, the live-action version, and if any movie could make me long
for a quick and painless death, this is it.
     In an era when we get smart "children's" movies like BABE, why does
dreck like this have to continue to be made?  The new 101 DALMATIANS
goes like this:  Roger (Jeff Daniels) is a video game designer in London
(where all the best video game designers live, I'm sure), and Anita
(Joely Richardson) is a fashion designer in the employ of one Cruella
DeVil (Glenn Close).  Roger and Anita both have Dalmatians, and the
super-smart dogs conspire to get Roger and Anita together.  He proposes
marriage an hour after he meets her, they get hitched, the Dalmatians
have puppies, and Cruella decides she wants them for a coat.  Cruella
steals the happy couple's puppies plus a bunch more from other people. 
Dogs outwit baddies and escape, bringing down Cruella and her evil
henchmen.
     Well, la-dee-dah.  This plot couldn't be less interesting if it was
written by HOME ALONE's John Hughes.  Oh, wait a minute!  It *was*
written by John Hughes!  Silly me!!!  In fact, 101 DALMATIANS is almost
*exactly* the same movie as HOME ALONE.  Point in fact:  Kid/dogs in
trouble; bad guys chase him/them; kid/dogs end(s) up being much more
resourceful; bad guys fall down a lot.  Oh, funny!
     Maybe you're saying, "Hey, this is a kid's movie!  Lighten up!" 
Well, I don't think it's anywhere near being suitable for children,
despite it's G rating -- there are blatant sex jokes, dead/dying
animals, reactionary Puritanical attitudes (women should stay in the
home), and downright destructive messages.
     And this movie isn't for adults, either, because this next brick in
the wall of the Disney empire is so dumbed-down it ends up just rotting
the audience's brains.  There's never any sense of "thrill" to this
adventure, the acting is mundane, and I laughed at *one* single joke
("Who gets the gold?")  But hey, this is Disney, and maybe brain rot is
what they're aiming for!  (Because then you'll pay to see next year's
animated HERCULES, which, from the trailer, looks even worse.)
     So what do we learn from 101 DALMATIANS?  That your dog is smarter
than you?  That if your dog saves someone else's dog, you get to keep
it?  Who can say?
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Glenn Close, Jeff Daniels, Joely Richardson, Joan Plowright, Hugh
Laurie, Mark Williams, John Shrapnel Director: Stephen Herek Screenplay:
John Hughes based on the novel by Dodie Smith
People look like the pets they own. There may be some truth in this
statement. Jeff Daniels carries the same dog eyed look of a Labrador,
and Joely Richardson carries herself with the same dainty steps of a
poodle, and Cruella De vil (Glen Close) has given the term 'bitch' a new
edge.
Animals talk to each other and this movie proves it. When our 99 puppies
are kidnapped, the dogs of England howl the night down like the sounding
of an air raid, and every creature whether domestic or wild, join in one
of the greatest rescues of the animal kingdom.
HOWWWWWWL, woof, woof, HOWWWWWWL. Sorry, I just felt like doing
something spontaneously canine.
Animals are more intelligent that human beings.  Of note is the similar
'Home Alone' sequences where the baddies, namely Cruella, get a run for
their money. Crime doesn't pay and the punishment for kidnapping puppies
is well deserved and hilariously painful to watch.
Forget about 'Perfect Match' or any dating service for lonely hearts.
All you need to find true love is a pet Dalmation, and a bicycle ride in
the park on a sunny day. I guarantee that your dog will sniff out all
the potential suspects for you. Falling in the pond also gains you extra
sympathy points, but getting the girl in the end is all that matters.
So the Disney cartoon classic, '101 Dalmations' comes to life, and I can
say that it is quite enjoyable to watch if one does not continually
compare it to the original. Like all Disney movies, they all get to live
happily ever after - Pongo, Pedita and all 99 puppies.
Comment: Furs are out this season says the 'House of Voon'.
Pet feel scale: 0% quack / meow / *WOOF* 100%

Author
Michael Dequina
Part vamp, part tramp, and all camp, Glenn Close's wonderfully
wicked turn as the ultimate Disney diva, Cruella DeVil, powers 101
Dalmatians, the studio's new live-action version of its beloved 1961
animated feature.  Problem is, unless you are age 10 or under, there is
little else to hold your attention for the entire 98 minutes.
Producer-screenwriter John Hughes and director Stephen Herek's take
on the tale of the fur-loving DeVil, the spotted puppies from whose coats
she wants to make herself a coat, and the married owners (Jeff Daniels and
Joely Richardson) of the dalmatian parents Pongo and Perdy is actually quite
faithful to the original animated feature.  Viewers familiar with that
version will be pleased with how well some scenes survived the
cartoon-to-live-action translation, such as Perdy's stressful delivery of
her 15 puppies and the apparent stillbirth and ultimate revival of the pup
Lucky.  While the dogs and other animals do not talk this time around, the
communication between the animals does come through and is easily
understood.  The "twilight bark," where Pongo barks into the night sky to
summon other animals to search for his and Perdy's stolen puppies, still
makes for a striking scene without the spoken exposition that frames it.
And Close's Cruella matches her animated counterpart's nastiness and then
some; her hilariously over-the-top turn is sure to influence drag queens
everywhere.
Hughes and Herek's failure, however, lies in their incessant
indulgence in broad slapstick, which comes off as labored and not especially
funny.  The scene where Daniels's Roger and Richardson's Anita first meet in
the park is cheapened by too many pratfalls and dives into water.  Also, the
puppies' big escape from their barn prison has been needlessly punched up by
Home Alone-type slapstick involving the two dognappers, Jasper (Hugh Laurie)
and Horace (Mark Williams).  Herek not only tries evoke that fluke Macaulay
Culkin phenomenon through the cartoony violence, but also through the duo's
appearance--Jasper sports a beard and curly hair a la Daniel Stern's
bumbling burglar, and Horace is a shorter, heavier fellow wearing a hat not
unlike Joe Pesci.  Worst of all, the slapstick gives Close the short end of
the stick, for in the end Cruella's campy edge takes a back seat to the
physical punishment she takes from the animals--having a boar fall on her,
being dumped in mud and molasses, etc.
Nonetheless, the film entertained the kids at the big critics'
screening, and I'm sure children around the world will have fun with 101
Dalmatians, which is exactly what the folks at Disney had in mind.  But with
the preordained success of this underachieving animation-to-live-action
translation, this Disney animation fan cannot help but worry about what
possibly ruinous adaptation ideas the studio has in mind for its other
cartoon classics...
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  /  mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Disney)
Starring:  Glenn Close, Jeff Daniels, Joely Richardson, Hugh Laurie, Mark
Williams, Joan Plowright.
Screenplay:  John Hughes, based on the novel by Dodie Smith.
Producers:  John Hughes and Ricardo Mestres.
Director:  Stephen Herek.
MPAA Rating:  G (cartoon violence).
Running Time:  103 minutes, plus 7 minute short in some theaters.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
    Resolved:  Trained dogs are cute, and puppies scampering about are
even cuter.  If you would take the con position in an Oxford-style debate
on this point, then the live-action remake of Disney's 101 DALMATIANS is
not going to be your cup of kibble.  101 DALMATIANS was made not simply
with an awareness of the usefulness of cute animals in the making of a
family film; it seems to have been constructed around that awareness.
There is such a crass calculation to the use of its canine stars as
bringers of innocent grins that the dogs don't even counteract the
brain-damaging slapstick which is John Hughes's stock-in-trade.  Somehow,
they make it worse.  Delivered for the holiday season in a big glossy bow,
101 DALMATIANS is a spectacularly packaged box of foul-smelling air.
     The story begins with two dalmatians and their owners living
blissfully unaware of each other in London.  Roger Dearly (Jeff Daniels),
an American software designer who has made a pilgrimage to that noted
video game mecca of London, shares a flat with his male dalmatian Pongo;
fashion designer Anita Campbell-Green (Joely Richardson) has a female
named Perdy.  When Pongo and Perdy fall in puppy love, their humans are
brought together, and soon both pairs form couples.  The result of the
dalmatian infatuation is a litter of puppies, which comes as wonderful
news to Anita's fur-obsessed boss Cruella DeVil (Glenn Close), who intends
to turn dalmatian fur into a beautiful coat.  Cruella sets her henchmen
Jasper (Hugh Laurie) and Horace (Mark Williams) to the task of dog-napping
Pongo and Perdy's fifteen puppies, and those fifteen join another 84
puppies already captured.  It is up to a slew of resourceful animals to
reunite puppies with parents and thwart Cruella's dastardly plans.
     The 1961 animated version of 101 DALMATIANS was far from the best of
Disney's self-proclaimed "masterpieces," but it had a low-key charm even
in the bumblings of Horace and Jasper.  Now the material has been
entrusted to writer-producer John Hughes, whose basic film-making
philosophy is "If more is better, and even more is even better, then
please-make-it-stop too much is just right."  Roger and Anita's initial
meeting is punctuated not by one careening chase sequence and bicycle
wreck into a pond, but two; Horace and Jasper don't just fall through
rotted floors and into freezing water, but also electrocute their gonads
on a high-voltage fence.  Even the magnificent, maleficent Cruella is not
safe from the onslaught of indignities, falling first into a vat of
molasses and then into a pile of manure.  It is a sign of Hughes's love
affair with "America's Funniest Home Videos" humor that he replaces the
original's most memorable suspense sequence -- the puppies' attempt to
slip past Cruella disguised as black labradors -- and replaces it with a
scene in a barn which ends with a pig landing on Cruella's chest.
     Glenn Close has obvious fun as Cruella, playing her as an imperious
drag queen, but I'm mystified by raves for her performance.  There is no
doubt that Close can be scary -- she scared a generation of married men
into zipping up their pants in FATAL ATTRACTION -- but there is no
malevolence in her characterization of Cruella.  Disney's great villains
were real threats, and they didn't take pratfalls; Cruella has Horace and
Jasper so that _they_ can be the comic relief while she spooks the little
ones.  John Hughes and hack-for-hire Stephen Herek aren't comfortable with
genuine villainy, so they have Cruella join her goons as dim-witted
victims of HOME ALONE 3 mayhem.  Close cuts a fine figure in Cruella's
outrageous outfits and commanding some impressive sets, and she is about
as intimidating as RuPaul.
     Then there are those adorable puppies.  There is no point arguing
that kids and many adults won't enjoy the frolicking dalmatians, because
they will.  There are a few marvelously trained animals in 101 DALMATIANS,
and they provide some amusing moments.  You could also get the same
reaction out of most kids if you sat them down in front of a home movie of
puppies playing, or an old episode of "Those Amazing Animals," or even a
Westminster Dog Show on ESPN2, because reaction to the dogs in 101
DALMATIANS is not based on any kind of plot requiring individual  
personality for the animal characters.  Though the same kind of
animatronic critters used in BABE are used in 101 DALMATIANS, the animals
don't talk here.  Not only does that make for some confusing narrative
(one scene found several kids around me perplexed as to why Lucky was
still in danger), but it makes the canine cast of 101 DALMATIANS little
more than a big spotted blur.  A certain kind of manipulative drama has
long been called a "tear-jerker," and 101 DALMATIANS is the family film
equivalent.  It's an "awww-jeker," trotting out the adorable little
puppies and having them yap at you until you begin to consider turning
them into a coat yourself.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Glenn Close, Jeff Daniels, Joely Richardson, Joan Plowright, 
      Hugh Laurie, Mark Williams, John Shrapnel
Director: Stephen Herek
Producers: John Hughes and John Comfort
Screenplay: John Hughes based on the novel by Dodie Smith
Cinematography: Adrian Biddle
Music: Michael Kamen
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     Conventional wisdom suggests that Walt Disney Pictures produces 
some of the best available animated films and some of the worst 
available live-action films.  101 DALMATIANS, a shamelessly sickening 
example of on-screen marketing, is neck-and-neck with SPACE JAM for the 
most obvious, feature-length commercial of the 1996 holiday season.  The 
difference is, for all its attempts to hawk merchandise, SPACE JAM still 
manages to be sporadically entertaining.  101 DALMATIANS, on the other 
hand, is a one-hundred-plus minute bore.  Even children, who will be 
enthralled by all the puppies, may have a hard time not fidgeting for 
protracted portions of the running time.
     With a script by John Hughes, it's no surprise that parts of this 
movie play like HOME ALONE.  Unfortunately, we've been exposed to this 
brand of nasty, moronic physical humor ad nauseum in the past half-dozen 
years, primarily through a never-ending series of HOME ALONE sequels, 
clones, and rip-offs (most produced by Hughes himself).  It's not 
remotely funny here.  See Jeff Daniels slam his bicycle into a park 
bench and go flying into a lake.  See two bad guys get zapped by an 
electrical fence.  See Glenn Close take a bath in marmalade.  Ha-ha-ha.
     The first 101 DALMATIANS, produced by Disney in 1961, is not one of 
my favorite animated classics, but its brand of charm and humor are 
completely lost in this version.  Back then, the dogs talked, and their 
dialogue made the film.  Here, the four-legged protagonists are 
completely without voice, and, consequently, without personality.  
Virtually half this movie lacks dialogue (unless you count occasional 
yaps by the dogs and quips by the bad guys as "dialogue"), and, with 
nothing to fill the void, 101 DALMATIANS turns out to be a stale, 
lifeless movie-going experience.  I felt like going to sleep and asking 
someone to wake me for the closing credits (which feature a jazzed-up 
rendition of the song, "Cruella DeVil", from the original).
     The villain of the piece, Cruella DeVil, has long been one of 
Disney's nastiest baddies, and Glenn Close seems the perfect choice for 
the role.  Sadly, although Close does her over-the-top best, Cruella 
doesn't really work.  In one of its few sly observations, the script 
notes that for a villain to be successful, the viewer's feelings for 
him/her have to go well beyond hatred.  We don't feel much for Cruella, 
and certainly not anything as passionate as the desire to see her 
annihilated (unless such an occurrence shortened the film).
     The story -- or rather what passes for a story -- takes place in 
contemporary England, and features some wonderful set design (101 
DALMATIANS' sole redeeming grace).  It tells of how, through the 
connivance of two Dalmatian, a computer game designer, Roger (Jeff 
Daniels), meets a fashion designer, Anita (Joely Richardson), one day in 
the park.  They fall in love and get married.  Anita's Dalmatian, Perdy, 
and Roger's dog, Pongo, follow suit, and soon, puppies are on the way.  
But all is not well.  Cruella DeVil, Anita's boss and a lover of real 
fur coats, has decided that she wants something with spots.  When Roger 
and Anita refuse her generous financial offer for the little dogs, she 
tries nefarious means, sending a pair of paid thugs (Hugh Laurie and 
Mark Williams) out to do some dog-napping.  In short order, not only do 
they have Perdy and Pongo's fifteen puppies in custody, but 84 others, 
as well. (99 + Perdy + Pongo = 101, if you feel obligated to do the 
arithmetic.)
     There's not enough human characterization in this film to fill a 
thimble.  Jeff Daniels (FLY AWAY HOME) and Joely Richardson (I'LL DO 
ANYTHING) seem almost superfluous, creating personalities that are as 
richly-textured as cardboard.  The crooks are generic -- if you lose 
track of which movie you're watching, you can be forgiven for confusing 
Hugh Laurie and Mark Williams with Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern, the inept 
burglars from the HOME ALONE series.  And Joan Plowright, who plays 
Roger and Anita's housekeeper, is nearly invisible.  
     This is a despicable motion picture.  Not only is it completely 
unnecessary (the animated version is perfectly adequate), but it's a 
blatant example of Disney's commercialism run rampant.  Simply and 
succinctly put, 101 DALMATIANS has one overriding aim:  to sucker 
parents into buying spotted paraphernalia for their children.  Worse 
still, thousands of real Dalmatian puppies purchased in pet stores this 
year will end up being destroyed by animal shelters when their new 
owners tire of, then discard, them.  The movie is bad, but the mentality 
behind it is worse, and, for that reason, 101 DALMATIANS belongs in the 
dog house.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
The cartoon is way better. That's the bottom line on Disney's incredibly 
hyped live action version of its 1961 animated feature. The alliance 
between Disney and slapstick king John Hughes has produced a frenetic 
"Home Alone" with puppies, and not much else.
When production of this remake was announced, the big question seemed to 
be "Why? The original cartoon still works, so what's the point?" The 
answer, it appears, is to give Disney an excuse for yet another massive 
merchandising campaign. 
The story, for those of you who missed childhood, is simple. Two 
Dalmatians, Pongo and Perdy, fall in love at first sight. They drag their 
"human pets" together, and in a short time both couples marry. The 
heavenly match-ups turn chaotic when Pongo and Perdy's new-born pups are 
stolen; their dog-napping engineered by the evil Cruella DeVil, who wants 
them for their pelts. Everyone in the animal kingdom then joins in a 
frantic effort to save the puppies.
In the original movie, the animated pooches had a broad range of facial 
expressions and distinct personalities. We also could hear them talk, 
which quickly established a crucial element to the charm of the film, the 
dog's view of humans as their pets.
In the new version, the dogs are mute and expressionless. Hughes attempts 
to give them character with repeated shots of the Dalmatians draping 
their heads over each other and licking their faces and necks. While he 
drew the desired "Aww, they're so cute" reaction from the audience, it 
was quickly followed by several people whispering "I wonder what kind of 
food they smeared on the dog's heads to get them licking like that?"
The canines' lack of personality would be easier to take if the human 
beings had a little. Joely Richardson and Jeff Daniels are stunningly 
bland in their lead roles. In previous films, Daniels successfully played 
off his white bread persona. In "Something Wild", he revealed the 
rebellious thrill-seeker beneath his neutral demeanor. In "Terms Of 
Endearment", his hapless appearance masked a cold, manipulative womanizer.
 Here, he and Richardson are so consistently bland that it's a wonder 
their images even stick to the film.
Glenn Close, however, has no problems establishing a distinct personality.
 As the villainous icon Cruella DeVil, she tears up the screen in a 
deliciously over-the-top performance. Close matches the intensity of the 
animated Cruella by becoming a cartoon herself. With a two-tone fright 
wig, red gloves with long nails attached to the fingertips, garish animal 
skin outfits and stiletto heels, Close bursts through her scenes like a 
force of nature. She's clearly having a ball playing this monstrous icon, 
and her wicked glee is infectious. When she spits out lines like "you've 
won the battle, but I'm about to win the wardrobe!," the film comes 
briefly to life. 
"101 Dalmatians" is crammed with John Hughes' typical heavy-handed 
approach to comedy. After an ingenuous opening showing Pongo's morning 
routine as he gets Daniels prepared for the day, the film quickly tumbles 
into lame slapstick as the pooch drags Daniels on a careening trek 
through a city park. A little slapstick goes a long way, but Hughes just 
keeps laying it on. The second half of the film, where local animals team 
up to rescue 99 nondescript Dalmatian puppies from DeVil and her henchmen,
 is a tedious Home Alone clone, with the bad guys enduring a variety of 
sadistic assaults worthy of an Itchy & Scratchy cartoon, including a thug 
getting his testicles fried on an electric fence. 
"101 Dalmatians" has cute puppies and a hoot of a performance from Glenn 
Close, but not enough to warrant enduring third rate slapstick, bland 
characters, and unconvincing animatronic raccoons high-fiving one another.
 Rent the cartoon! 
