Title
Review for Gossip (2000/I)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Steve Rhodes
A concept alone does not a movie make.  Applying chaos theory to rumor
deployment, GOSSIP tells what happens when a group of college students
plant a false story.  Like a computer virus, the rumor spreads rapidly,
harming more than the intended victim.
Working from an underdeveloped and ridiculous script by Gregory Poirier
and Theresa Rebeck, Davis Guggenheim directs GOSSIP with meat cleaver
subtlety.  It's too bad that the director didn't throw up his hands and
go for pure camp.  The over-the-top, creepy music (Graeme Revell) and
the ominously dark cinematography (Andrzej Bartkowiak) would have nicely
supported such an approach.  As those of you unlucky enough to have seen
BODY SHOTS last year will notice, the art design looks similar, right
down to the silly, pastel cocktails, served in a rainbow of colors.  As
a parody, the film might have at least worked its way up to a guilty
pleasure.  But, it is not to be.  The director buys into the pretentious
and preposterous story, producing groans from the audience instead of
laughter.
As the movie opens, a professor (Eric Bogosian) is teaching what appears
to be a course in rumor mongering at Jerry Springer U.  As he flashes
tabloid headlines on the screen behind him, he quizzes his pupils on the
relationship between gossip and the mass media.  Three of his students,
Derrick  (James Marsden), Jones (Lena Headey) and Travis (Norman
Reedus), are roommates and best buds.  Partly as a lark and partly to
injure a girl whom they don't like, they decide to plant a rumor about
her and see where it goes.
Naomi (Kate Hudson), the richest kid on a wealthy campus, has made a big
splash by renouncing sex -- shocking!  She is an old-fashioned girl who
is saving herself for marriage.  The Gossip 3 decide to plant a rumor
that Naomi's boyfriend, Beau (Joshua Jackson from THE SKULLS), had sex
with her at a party after she passed out.  The story gets changed many
times in the telling.  For a while the word on the street is that she
had sex with multiple partners on the fire escape and that she wears
rubber bras.  Eventually, however, the rumor solidifies into date rape
by Beau, who is charged by the cops.
In a film full of ludicrous moments, permit me to choose a favorite.
After consistently spurning Derrick's sexual advances, since they are
all 3 buddies, Jones finally yields to him just after learning something
terrible about him.  And she does this with Travis nearby, awkwardly
trying to ignore their sexual grunts while working on his computer.
The movie is filled with thoughts that will make your blood boil.
"We're in college," Derrick tells his two buddies in justification for
the catastrophic consequences of their actions.  "This is the time of
our lives when we're supposed to be making mistakes."
"I don't even know what I'm doing," Travis says of his art.  (I forgot
to tell you.  He finds a way to turn their rumor mill into an art
montage that covers his walls and that Derrick figures can be Travis's
term project for art class.)  The director might say the same of his
movie, which he directs with plodding lethargy.
But, if you have any doubt as to who or what killed the movie, wait for
the ending.  Derision and catcalls are liable to fill the air in your
theater as it did it ours during the ending scene.  The script did it.
GOSSIP runs 1:30.  It is rated R for sexual content, language and brief
violence and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
GOSSIP
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  James Marsden, Lena Headey, Norman Reedus, Kate Hudson, Joshua
Jackson, Eric Bogosian, Edward James Olmos, Sharon Lawrence.
Screenplay:  Gregory Poirier and Theresa Rebeck.
Producers:  Jeffrey Silver and Bobby Newmyer.
Director:  Davis Guggenheim.
MPAA Rating:  R (adult themes, sexual situations, profanity, violence)
Running Time:  90 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Hey, did you hear about the film that took on the subject of our
collective fascination with gossip and innuendo? It takes a serious look
about how any story, told enough times, takes on the ring of truth, even
if we have no concrete sense of where the story came from. It challenges
us to be more skeptical of the tabloid-ization of our culture, our
readiness to pass judgment on situations about which we know little and
our obsession with the lurid over the substantive. It uses nuanced
performances and taut plotting to give us a chilling glimpse into the way
we contribute to warped perceptions and damaged lives every time we pay
attention to the rumor mill.
     Well, that's the story Warner Bros. would like to see disseminated,
anyway. And like most buzz, there's a germ of truth to it surrounded by a
whole lot of nonsense. GOSSIP is actually a tawdry youth soap opera full
of attractive people doing awful things -- CRUEL INTENTIONS gone to
college. The story focuses on a trio of college roommates -- trust fund
brat Derrick (James Marsden), introverted aspiring artist Travis (Norman
Reedus) and nondescript obligatory female Jones (Lena Headey) -- who are
also taking a communication class together. As a class project, the three
decide to spread a patently false rumor about a classmate to track its
progress. Their target is Naomi (Kate Hudson), spotted at a party
wandering drunkenly upstairs with boyfriend Beau (Joshua Jackson). When
Jones begins gossip that the two had sex at the party, the tale soon grows
out of control. And suddenly Naomi believes the rumor herself, and is
pressing charges against Beau for date rape.
     Ah, what a deliciously scandalous and utterly exploitative premise.
Beneath the meticulously glossy production design and lifestyles-of-the-
rich-and-beautiful voyeurism is a bubbling underground river of hypocrisy.
It's bad enough that GOSSIP feigns ambiguity just long enough to set up
obvious hedonistic villainy. It's even worse that the entire atmosphere of
the film proves the filmmakers don't take any of its serious issues
seriously. It might be interesting to explore the destructive power of
rumor in a setting where you felt there was something at stake. GOSSIP, on
the other hand, is instantly disposable foolishness more interested in
being sexy than being substantive. A film like this trying to make a case
against people succumbing to their basest fascination with sordid stories
-- it almost makes you want to laugh in the faces of those responsible.
     But there are so many more reasons to laugh at GOSSIP besides its
philosophical ineptitude. There's good old-fashioned story-telling
ineptitude, like a police detective refusing to follow up a lead because
of a story someone told her, or a college student wandering into the
library of an exclusive prep school to do some research. There's poor Lena
Headey's ineptitude at affecting a New England accent to mask her Old
England accent. Then there are the more sublime bits of silliness, like
the obligatory torrential downpour for the finale, or the stunning lack of
characterization offered to anyone in the film. And the less said about
the dialogue, the better.
     Some critics of GOSSIP will probably fixate on its final, convoluted
plot twist as the film's most ridiculous element, but I'd be inclined to
disagree. Buying the ending simply involves believing that one of the
film's characters is not just too stupid to be in college, but too stupid
to be allowed to live. Considering the rest of the stupidity involved in
GOSSIP, that's not a tremendous stretch. I'd like to think that an
intelligent film could have been made about the scorched earth effects of 
our indiscriminate telling of tales. GOSSIP, a film targeted at teenagers,
had a chance to be that film.

Author
Michael Dequina
Gossip.  While most people wouldn't like to admit it, a juicy rumor has
a certain allure--one that is often greater than that of truth.  The
thriller _Gossip_ takes its promising cue from this idea, but then the
film rapidly goes nowhere with it, growing more and more ridiculous with
each successive turn of the plot.
_Gossip_'s premise is simple.  For a project in their journalism class,
university students Derrick (James Marsden), Jones (Lena Headey), and
Travis (Norman Reedus) decide to plant and then trace the growth and
evolution of a rumor: that freshman Naomi (Kate Hudson), known for her
strict attitudes on sex, did the dirty deed with boyfriend Beau (Joshua
Jackson) while drunk at a party.  While the intent in harmless, the lie
quickly takes a life of its own, and soon everyone is suffering from the
fallout--not least of which the trio that started the whole mess.
The initial 20 minutes of _Gossip_, in which the three come up with
their bright idea and unleash it upon the campus, exploits the potential
of the premise.  Director Davis Guggenheim employs a creative and
succinct way to show how the gossip spreads and mutates: numerous people
directly address the camera, recounting the story as they heard it (or,
rather, think they heard it).  Straight-to-camera confessionals are a bit
cliché in the age of _The_Real_World_ and its ilk, but the energized
editing captures the excitement that accompanies a particularly enticing
piece of hearsay.
But much like how the Naomi-Beau rumor spins out of control, so does
_Gossip_.  The interesting premise established, Guggenheim and writers
Gregory Poirer and Theresa Rebeck proceed to do nothing with it.  Before
long, the subject that lends _Gossip_ its title comes to bear less
importance, and the film becomes a dismayingly conventional thriller
where characters end up having secret paths that provide needless added
motivation for certain actions.  Even on these dumbed-down terms,
_Gossip_ falls far short of the mark, but that doesn't stop Guggenheim
and company from also making the film a high minded "issue" movie.  I
won't say exactly what issue (to do so would reveal one of the film's key
"twists"), but the film tackles it with a fraction of the depth you'd
find in an afterschool special.
The cast certainly doesn't help the not-ready-for-the-big-screen feel. 
Marsden doesn't do anything here to counter the vacuous _Teen_Beat_ pinup
image he projected in _Disturbing_Behavior_; in fact, his performance
here is even more embarrassing, making the credibility-straining turns
his character undergoes even harder to swallow.  Headey is simply miscast
on a surface level.  She clearly looks much older than the rest of the
cast, resembling a mature woman among a group of kids; her American
accent is also pretty shaky.  Reedus does little to redeem what is
already a bad part: an artist who inexplicably finds a new, almost
obsessive inspiration in Naomi and her plight.  Speaking of Naomi, Hudson
is the only person who delivers a slightly credible performance.  More
seasoned stars, such as Sharon Lawrence, Edward James Olmos (both playing
police detectives), and Eric Bogosian (as the journalism professor) are
wasted.
It's only fitting that _Gossip_ will undoubtedly fall victim to its own
hook.  When word-of-mouth spreads--and it will, and quite quickly at
that--the film will take a much greater trouncing than the one felt by
its mischief-making characters.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky has seen it before . . . when an kidlet audience heartily laughs
at "serious" (and non-comedic) lines coming out of a character's mouth
and still walks out saying they "liked" the film, that means I'm way too
old to be doing this job. That's as good a way as any to analyze Gossip,
which brings to the big screen a visual style that crosses teevee's NYPD
Blue and Miami Vice and takes a story grounded in reality and shoots it
off into the absurd like a skyrocket on the Fourth of July. That it has
a 1950s-ish stylish look to it can be attributed to producer Joel
Schumacher and that it looks like telly is no diss on episodic NYPD Blue
director Davis Guggenheim. What it is is what it is, and that is
nonsense.
Gossip is the story of students Derrick (James Marsden), Jones (Lena
Headey) and Travis (Norman Reedus) who, as part of their end of semester
final project for Professor Goodwin (Eric Bogosian), start a rumor about
a classmate to see where it leads. The rumor is that the very rich and
very pretty Naomi (Kate Hudson), whose rep for saying "no" to all the
boys on campus is the stuff of legend, got insanely drunk at a party and
put out for current would-be beau, coincidentally named Beau (Joshua
Jackson). The rumor, as rumors are wont to do, runs speedily out of
control and the next thing you know, Naomi has filed date rape charges
against Beau. And people start dying.
If Gossip had stayed on that course, it might have turned into something
interesting. As it throws gimmick and plot twist at you, again and
again, it quickly loses any sense of rhyme or reason. One of the
principal trio has old baggage re: Naomi to resolve. One may be a
psychotic sociopath. One is flat-out called a liar by the police
detective (Sharon Lawrence) investigating the "rape". One flat out lies
to the cop (Edward James Olmos) that shows up at the door. And all but
one may be scamming everyone else. That's five characterizations for
three characters and we haven't even begun to delve into the backgrounds
of Naomi and Beau . . .
What it all means is that, if you're still around nineteen or so, you
might buy into the big surprise plot twist and story revelations that
mark the conclusion of this piece o' junk (pretty much the reactions of
the audience I sat with). If so, answer the follwing question before you
dissmail Cranky: Why possible motivation did [you-know-who #1] have for
setting up [you-know-who #2] (said motivation must lie before the rumor
at the center of the piece starts getting spread, else any answer you
can come up with makes no sense whatsoever). While the kidlets are
working on that, let's talk about why films that try to look like NYPD
Blue don't seem to work on teevee, despite inflated budgets that allow
for the breakage of every piece of glass in sight.
It's 'cuz we see it every week on NYPD Blue which, even on its bad
weeks, still manages to cram a full story into less than an hour. Given
the luxury of a larger time frame writers Gregory Poirier and Theresa
Rebeck, basically, thought way too much and delivered a story that
collapses under the weight of its own cleverness (and explaining that
means giving away the end of this story, which we don't do). Personally,
we don't like walking out of a flick thinking "huh?" and we sure don't
like it when a director and/or writer falls back on visual gimmicks like
a lingering camera, as if to scream "BAD GUY! HERE'S THE BAD GUY!" And
to tell you that that lingering camera bit is just a deception layed on
top of a deception would mean we're breaking the rule about not tipping
the end. Sort of.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Gossip, he would have paid...
Pretty actors and half a story. Wait and rent.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Who hasn't speculated about the link between news and gossip?
At least, that's the premise for a college journalism class assignment
proposed by "professor" Eric Bogosian.  And three students - James
Marsden, Lena Headley, and Norman Reedus - decide to test his
theories. One night at a drunken, off-campus party, Marsden sees a
beautiful, wealthy, virginal freshman, played by Kate Hudson (Goldie
Hawn's real-life daughter), making out on a bed with Joshua
Jackson. Hudson calls it quits before she passes out, but Marsden
decides to start an "experimental" rumor that she's "put out" for
Jackson. It's kind of like "Cruel Intentions" goes to college. The
slanderous story spreads quickly throughout the university, soon
acquiring salacious details, including a black rubber bra. But then it
turns ugly, implicating that Jackson took advantage of Hudson after
she passed out, not before, which leads to his subsequent
arrest. Working from a taut, tension-filled screenplay by Gregory
Poirier and Theresa Rebeck, "NYPD Blue," "ER" director David
Guggenheim explores and exploits the date rape concept, bringing in
Sharon Lawrence as an angry cop and Edward James Olmos as a homicide
detective. It's an intriguing, dangerous premise but the execution
lacks believability. Why wouldn't any suspected rape victim undergo a
medical examination? What accredited college would allow Bogosian to
rant and rave in class? Which students can live in such an
extravagantly hip loft? And why would these distraught people talk and
behave in such an incomprehensible way?  On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Gossip" is nasty, tawdry, inept 3. Despite its R-rating,
it's obviously targeted at a teenage audience.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
GOSSIP (2000) 
Rated R; running time 90 minutes 
Genre: Drama 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0176783 
Official site: http://www.movies.warnerbros.com/gossip/index.html  
Written by: Gregory Poirier
Directed by: Davis Guggenheim 
Starring: Lena Headey, James Marsden, Norman Reedus, Kate Hudson, 
Joshua Jackson, Eric Bogosian, Sharon Lawrence, 
Edward James Olmos (Detective Curtis)
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsgossip.html
You Know The Movie You're Watching Is Stupid When...
...you stop bothering with taking notes on it and start wondering about 
silly stuff--like, do clubs that Disaffected White Teens frequent, 
really have big huge bathrooms and big huge bedrooms with big huge beds 
in them?
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Girl-Next-Door Cathy Jones (Lena Headey), Richie-Rich-Playboy Derek 
(James Marsden), and Strange-But-Loveable Travis (Norman Reedus) are 
Bored with living a life of privilege at their college, and even more 
bored with doing actual school work.  Given an assignment to write a 
paper on the effects of rumor and innuendo by their Professor (Eric 
Bogosian; is his character ever actually given a name?  If so, I missed 
it.  Not that I care.  But I do digress.), the trio decide to make it a 
group study by starting a rumor to see how far it spreads and what form 
it takes when it gets back to them.  
Partially because Jones hates rich folks (though she is decidedly fond 
of Derek "because he's nice"), they decide to make rich stuck-up Naomi 
(Kate Hudson) and her boyfriend Bo (Joshua Jackson) the target of their 
rumor.  After Derek watched Bo try to have sex with the drunk, teasing, 
but Just Say No-ing Naomi, Derek convinces Jones and Travis to start a 
rumor that Bo and Naomi actually had sex, though Bo apparently walked 
away from a passed-out Naomi.  And once the rumor spreads like Magical 
Wildfire across campus, Naomi--who didn't remember having said Yes--is 
convinced that Bo raped her; she reports his act to Detective Kelly 
(Sharon Lawrence), who proceeds to investigate him.  Seeing their little 
rumor take a Nasty Turn, Jones wants to put an end to it, but is met by 
some resistance by Derek, who may have a secret or two of his own.
Movies like GOSSIP (and its act-alike kin, BROKEDOWN PALACE) are an 
insult to hard-working White high school and college students 
everywhere.  They are not unlike BOOTY CALL to Black youth, in that both 
types of movies present their subjects as childish brats who need to be 
under constant adult supervision, lest they go off and do Stupid Stuff 
just so they can piss their parents and/or teachers off.
In GOSSIP, the lines are drawn quickly.  Derek is established as a liar 
and womanizer early on, saving the audience from having to Discover that 
for ourselves; likewise, Travis is shown to be The Weird One, and 
maintains that persona throughout most of the flick.  Strangely enough, 
Lena Headey chooses to play Jones with a constant smirk on her face, 
which only serves to make her character less likable; had she taken her 
character seriously and not constantly assault the audience with that 
winky smirk, Headey may have actually pulled off a more convincing 
performance. I spent the first half of the movie wondering what any of 
these characters saw in each other (especially once The Truth was 
revealed about one of them); by the second half, I no longer cared.  I 
simply prided myself on having the ability to sit through this torture 
without screaming obscenities at the screen.
As for the "adults" in this flick, I had to wonder why Edward James 
Olmos and Sharon Lawrence were so obviously slumming.  Is this what 
Lawrence left NYPD-BLUE for?  Not that she was getting much more play 
there; I guess this role must've been seen as a step up, after having 
been ignored for so long on that show.  And I don't know *what* Olmos' 
deal was; maybe they pay well for sleepy walk-throughs these days.  Eric 
Bogosian is another matter entirely.  One that I would just as soon 
forget.
I would say that the entire movie is telegraphed, leaving no surprises 
to be found; but that would be only partially true, if only because of 
the final scene.  But could these folks leave well enough alone and let 
the twist stand on its own?  I'll answer that by directing your 
attention to the redlight at the bottom of this review.
Ye gods, this was a bad movie.  Isn't there a cable channel we can 
restrict these kinds of vapid flicks to?  Criminy...we can Put A Man On 
The Moon; surely, we can Stop This Madness!
Bammer's Bottom Line: 
This one almost pulled out a yellow light solely on the basis of its 
twist ending--until they had to go and mess that up with a lame 
"explanation".  lord, save me from Disaffected Teen Flicks.
GOSSIP (rating: redlight): 
Pssst...c'mere...lemme tell you a secret: "Gossip" stunk.  But don't 
tell anybody...

Author
Christopher Null
     I have quickly found myself tiring of the peculiar tedium of the
gritty twentysomething whodunit.  While I'll fess up to having liked
Cruel Intentions, recent films like Body Shots and The Skulls have left
a sour taste in my mouth.
     While it's hard to pinpoint why Gossip is so uncompelling, the
fault lies mainly in a script that wants to be a thriller but is
structured like a thrills-free 80's romance/drama.  The premise itself
isn't awful: Three cliquish college students (Norman Reedus, James
Marsden, and Lena Headey) get their rocks off by making up rumors about
their classmates.  "Oops!" when one of these gossipy snickerings gets
out of hand, finding Beau (Joshua Jackson) arrested for the rape of his
girlfriend Naomi (Kate Hudson) -- a crime he didn't commit!  (Gasp!)
     After being twist-free for 30 minutes, we're thrown for a loop
involving a past relationship between Derrick (Marsden) and Naomi, with
James (Headey) playing amateur detective.  None of this goes very far...
in fact, the long stretches of confrontation among the principals (that
make up the bulk of the film) start out as silly and end up as just
boring.  The acting is fine; it's the script that stinks.
     The lack of attention to detail in Gossip is astonishing, as well.
Most annoying is: Why does Lena Headey speak with a thick French accent
despite her character's firm insistence that she's a working-class girl
from Plymouth?  Where does Sharon Lawrence's investigator disappear to
halfway into the movie?  And what's up with Eric Bogosian???
     The answer may lie in the credit "Executive Producer: Joel
Schumacher," but Gossip simply feels like a rush job that never should
have been made with the script in hand.  Four stars for a decent idea;
one for execution.  And minus another star for a Web site that claims
you need to download 20MB worth of files just to enter.  Skip the
site... and the movie.
Director: Davis Guggenheim
Producer: Robert F. Newmyer, Jeffrey Silver
Writer: Gregory Poirier, Theresa Rebeck
Starring: Eric Bogosian, Marisa Coughlan, Lena Headey, Kate Hudson,
Joshua Jackson, Sharon Lawrence, James Marsden, Edward James Olmos,
Norman Reedus

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by David Guggenheim.
Cast: Lena Headey, James Marsden, Norman Reedus, Kate Hudson, Joshua Jackson, 
Marisa Coughlan, Edward James Olmos, Sharon Lawrence, Eric Bogosian.
2000 - 91 minutes
Rated R (for mild violence, sexual situations, and profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, April 22, 2000.
There was this one rumor that I heard, about this movie named "Gossip," 
directed by TV veteran David Guggenheim ("NYPD Blue"). Supposedly, it started 
out a little shakily, but once it got going (at around the 30-minute mark), 
the pacing, performances, and plot developments really crackled. All elements 
were building up momentum to the ever crucial climactic moments, and 
then--like a swift kick in the pants--the final twist startles you and, at 
the same time, makes you angry and feeling like you have wasted your time.
Brainy Jones (Lena Headey), struggling artist Travis (Norman Reedus), and 
womanizer Derrick (James Marsden) are students at a posh university who share 
an even more posh (if that's possible) apartment. It looks like it has the 
type of extravagantly hip living arrangements that would be made for the cast 
of MTV's "The Real World." But anyway, one night while the trio are at a 
party, Jones gets an idea of what they could do for their class project in 
their Journalistic Ethics class: start a harmless rumor, and then track it 
down to see how far it spreads, and how the gossip's subject evolves from 
person to person. While up in the bathroom with a drunk potential 
one-night-stand, Derrick spies on the wealthy Naomi (Kate Hudson) and her new 
boyfriend Beau (Joshua Jackson). Both have had too much to drink, and once 
Naomi passes out on the bed, Beau ends his advances and leaves. Or maybe he 
doesn't, as the rumor the three start up is that Beau and Naomi had sex, 
something hard to believe considering that Naomi is known to not put out for 
guys. 
Soon, the news has spread to practically the whole school population, with 
each person believing something different. Supposed to be a funny experiment, 
Jones grows more and more guilty when the rumor transforms into something 
potentially very dangerous, as it becomes believed that Beau raped Naomi, and 
the police are brought in. Jones urges Derrick and Travis that all three 
should come clean, confessing to starting something that was far from the 
truth, but without any textual evidence, none of them can prove a thing. 
Meanwhile, the lives and futures of Naomi and Beau begin to crumble.
Ultra-glossy and stylishly filmed by cinematographer Andrezej Bartkowiak, 
from what I've also heard, "Gossip" is sort of like a cross between "Cruel 
Intentions" and "Body Shots," but without the humor and feeling of the 
former, and a noticeably giant step up from the vacuous latter. Like both 
pictures, every shot is picturesquely planned out to look beautiful and 
atmospheric, a production designer's wet dream; all of the actors are 
appealing, fairly talented, and physically to die for; and several of the 
characters are cold, emotionless people who do very bad things but, 
ultimately, are bound to receive their just desserts. 
Where "Gossip" fails is in its fairly empty, rushed screenplay by Gregory 
Poirier and Theresa Rebeck, which often moves so quickly (especially in the 
first-third), it's as if you are viewing an outline to a finished product, 
one in which the figures onscreen have not been fully written or thought out. 
When, midway through, there is a quiet, one-on-one sequence between Jones and 
the distraught Naomi, it is a startling shift, but one that comes 
refreshingly not a moment too soon, and throws the entire second half on a 
far more successful, taut, and involving course.
Lena Headey and James Marsden both manage to stand out in the central roles 
of Jones and Derrick, with Headey turning in a sympathetic portrayal of a 
young woman who realizes her mistakes but fears it is too late to turn things 
around, and Marsden is every bit her match as her brooding, highly sexual 
friend-cum-potential-bedmate. Norman Reedus has less to do as the 
work-starved Travis, the final piece of the three major players. Rounding out 
the cast in relatively brief, less-developed roles are Kate Hudson (as the 
confused Naomi), Joshua Jackson (as Beau), and Marisa Coughlan (as Jones' 
friend, Sheila). 
"Gossip" has many intriguing elements that might have equaled up to more in a 
tighter screenplay, but it ultimately doesn't satisfy once the end credits 
have begun to roll. And the final turn in the plot simply leaves you angry, 
as its own contrivances fail to hold up scrutiny upon inspection. I heard all 
of this through the grapevine, though, and although only a rumor, "Gossip" is 
an allegedly OK type of movie--a film worth a look if there's nothing better 
to do (or see), but one than can also afford to be missed. 

Author
John Beachem
What happens when a writer has an interesting idea for a film, but is so
thrilled by his idea that he apparently forgets to write a script to go
along with it? It would seem we get a movie like Gregory Poirier's
("Rosewood") "Gossip". This is a movie which sounds vaguely interesting at
first, only to start off poorly and grow worse and worse from there. While
this is mostly Poirier's fault for writing such a pathetic script (assuming
he bothered to write one at all), part of the blame can also land firmly on
Davis Guggenheim's (NYPD Blue) shoulders for not bothering to direct. The
movie simply flounders about, attempting to be hip, profound, and chilling
all at the same time. Instead, however, it comes off as confusing,
disjointed, and shallow.
Derrick (James Marsden), Cathy (Lena Heady), and Travis (Norman Reedus) are
roomates taking a class on communications. Their current topic is gossip and
the ways in which a rumor can grow and change, till the rumor is more
readily believed than the truth. The trio decide to start a rumor and track
its growth for a class paper. Derrick happens to catch two students, Naomi
(Kate Hudson) and Beau (Joshua Jackson), making out at a party. Naomi passes
out drunk and Beau leaves, but Derrick starts the rumor that the two
actually made love. Soon the rumor grows and grows to the point where Beau
is accused of rape, Naomi is being called the campus slut, and there seems
to be no way of stopping the rumor. The interesting thing is that Derrick
seems to have no desire to stop his lie, no matter what damage it may be
causing.
I am one of those people who has the ability to suspend my disbelief quite a
bit. For example, earlier this week I watched and enjoyed "U-571", despite
the fact that it was more than a little implausible. "Gossip", on the other
hand, is so ridiculously implausible that it pushed my suspension of
disbelief to the limits, and then it finally snapped. While things may start
off somewhat hard to believe, it's easy to forgive. By the film's ending,
however, things were so insanely outlandish that the few people in the
theater were actually laughing at the movie's serious moments. A good
example of one of the more ridiculous scenes would be one in which Derrick
claims Travis is the son of Mick Jagger to a bar tender. The jaded
bartender, who has no doubt heard it all, leaps at the idea and gives
Derrick, Travis, and Cathy drinks on the house.
The very young cast at work in this movie is, unfortunately, rather
talentless. This is made even worse by Guggenheim's apparent lack of ability
as a director. James Marsden's ("Disturbing Behavior") acting style seems to
consist of him grinning a lot, while trying to make his lines sound serious.
Lena Heady ("Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book") does nothing but pout a
lot, which I suppose is more Poirier's fault than her own. Joshua Jackson
("The Skulls") is a talented actor in desperate need of a new agent. His
part in "Gossip" is little more than a cameo in most respects. Lastly, we
have Norman Reedus ("8MM"), who somehow manages to breathe some semblance of
life into his part as a slightly disturbed, shy art student who creates a
rather interesting wall mural about the events unfolding around him.
Allow me to name a few more irritating aspects of "Gossip". The camera work
is quite obnoxious, jumping all over the place even while two people are
merely sitting and talking. The soundtrack is nothing more than a mix of
modern, popular songs used at all the wrong moments. Then we have the so
called "twists" sprinkled throughout the movie. The twists are always either
ridiculous and implausible, or so obvious they can hardly be called twists.
I wish I could say there was more to like here than simply the basic plot
ideas, but there really isn't. I can't honestly recommend "Gossip" to
anyone, and if you think the previews look interesting, I would still advise
you to catch a matinee or wait for video (given the poor attendance at the
showing I witnessed, it shouldn't take long for this one to hit video).
"Gossip" runs only 90 minutes, but it feels quite a bit longer. I give it
two out of five stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it only if you have nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Warner Bros./ Village Roadshow
 Director: David Guggenheim
 Writer:  Gregory Poirier and Theresa Rebeck, story by
Gregory Poirier
 Cast: Eric Bogosian, Marisa Coughlan, Debrah Farentino,
Lena Headey, Marc Hickox, Kate Hudson, Joshua Jackson,
Vicky Lambert, Sharon Lawrence, James Marsden, Edward
James Olmos, Norman Reedus, Timm Zemanek
   When people are not engaged in some activity that
requires concentration, they talk.  We're social animals, intent
on exchanging information on people, things and ideas, and
usually that's cool, but sometimes not.  We sometimes
forget the perfectly cogent adage that if you have nothing
good to say about someone, don't say anything.  Director
David Guggenheim attempts to validate that expression by
putting Gregory Poirier's story "Gossip" on the big screen, an
engrossing tale adapted into a taut screenplay by Poirier
himself.  
   The story takes place on a college campus that's not like
the place I attended back in the Jurassic Age. Students live
in lavish apartments decorated with drinking areas that would
be the envy of bartenders at the Oak Room of the Plaza
Hotel.  Each co-ed is more beautiful than the next one.  The
guys are budding Brad Pitts and know how to put their
elbows on the bar, and the young dancers could have fit right
in at Studio 54.  Though only one professor's class is on
display, that of a communications instructor (played by
acclaimed monologuist Eric Bogosian), the teacher apparently
knows the names of all of the 150-odd students in his lecture
hall and has the use of video equipment that puts images on
a big screen in front of the group.  Going to a hip school like
this is not enough for some, though.  
   What sorts of people need more stimulation?  Simply
these: The college houses at least three characters who are
vicious enough to spread nasty stories about the campus, so
that if you're the sort who goes to the movies only if you've
got someone to root for, this one is not for you.  "Gossip" is
about as sentimental as Roger Kumble's "Cruel Intentions"
highlighting performers whose physical advantages and
outward charm belie their downright mean-spiritedness.
   We get an idea of the love that one of the students has for
prevarication when Derrick (James Marsden), who is sharing
drinks at a party with his roommates Travis (Norman Reedus)
and Cathy Jones (Lena Headey), tells the bartender that
Travis is the son of a famous rock musician.  Soon after that
Derrick has picked someone up, escorting the inebriated
woman to the bathroom as she is about to throw up. 
Accidentally witnessing the gorgeous, fabulously wealthy but
equally plastered Naomi (Kate Hudson) making out with a
guy named Beau (Joshua Jackson), he spreads the
falsehood that Beau had raped Naomi just after she passed
out.  This gossip leads to disastrous consequences for poor
Beau. 
   Director Guggenheim takes us through the ramifications of
the slander, inserting a fair degree of surprising twists to a
story in which unlikely coincidences drive a preposterous plot. 
But never mind that.  We're at the movies and we're skilled at
suspending disbelief.  After all, despite the implausibilities,
this picture has quite a bit going for it including handsome
young actors, a college campus at which high school seniors
would kill to study, at least one flamboyant professor who
fashions a splendid object lesson for his Communications
class, and a whole scenario that the targeted twenty-
something audience can latch onto.  As an actor, Marsden
doesn't have the charisma needed for a guy who sets his
campus on fire.  But Reedus is a natural as the money-
challenged dude dependent on the kindness of his rich friend,
and Headey comes across with enough intensity to juggle her
coexistence and conflicts with two male roommates.  In a
small role, Edward James Olmos is effective as a detective
who never cracks a smile and who could scare even a
classroom of overactive junior high kids enough to be able to
teach them something.  
   A movie like this is like "The Insider."  After you've seen
what Jeffrey Wigand goes through in Michael Mann's 1999
film--the odious lies of the seven tobacco giants out to smear
him and the not-so-hidden message that smoking is bad--
you probably convince yourself to quit your own habit.  What
do you do as soon as you leave the theater?  Right.  You
light up.  Same here.  You watch as the consequences of
malicious gossip taking hold, the knot twisting gradually and
inevitably around the necks of the perpetrators, and you're
sure you will never again spread spiteful rumors.  Until
tomorrow.
Rated R.  Running time: 90 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
