Title
Review for Scarlet Street (1945)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
In few last decades Hollywood producers were very often
using critically and commercially successful film from
France for their own remakes. For many critics, such
practice was the sign that American cinema, at least the
segment associated with big studios, begins to lack the last
sparks of originality. However, remaking French films isn't
such new phenomenon in Hollywood. It happened even half a
century ago, but the results were usually much better than
today. That was the case with LA CHIENNE, 1931 classic by
Rene Clair. In 1945 it was remade as SCARLET STREET, classic
film noire by Fritz Lang.
Plot of the film is set in New York City. Christopher Cross
(played by Edward G. Robinson) is cashier who has nothing in
life except his job, gold watch and shrewish wife Adele
(played by Rosalind Ivan). One night he accidentally
stumbles in dark alley and rescues beautiful Kitty March
(played by Joann Bennett) from a street thug. Almost
immediately he falls in love with her, never knowing that
Kitty actually works on the streets for living and that the
thug happened to be her abusive boyfriend Johnny (played by
Dan Dureya). Of course, Christopher, blinded by the feeling
of love he hadn't felt for decades, lies too. Since his
hobby is amateur painting, he presents himself as successful
and wealthy artist. Kitty sees that as an opportunity to get
a lot of money, and these misunderstanding are just the
first in the spiral of events that would lead to ironic and
tragic finale.
Although SCARLET STREET belongs to the realm of film noirs,
viewers accustomed to more conventional examples of that
genre would have some difficulties cataloguing it as such.
Reason is in the script by Dudley Nichols, which brings
refreshing mix of drama, tragedy and devastatingly black
humour, that would seem somewhat out of place in standard
film noirs. People are not supposed to laugh at the
characters and situations in film noirs, but this is the
case here. To make this achievement even more unusual, the
characters are played by small army of very capable actors.
Edward G. Robinson as Chris Cross gives probably one of his
best performances; his character is flawed, artistic soul,
intelligent enough to deceive people but blinded by feelings
and unable to detect deception himself. Since we could meet
such small, inconspicuous people every day at street, his
tragedy gets very close to viewers. Joann Bennett is also
very good as not so bright femme fatale, but Dan Duryea
steals the show. His character is painted in most
unflattering light, he even doesn't look like someone who
could steal women's hearts, but Duryea plays him as someone
who could invoke audience's sympathy in the end. Fritz Lang
as director brought some of the European feeling into this
film. First of all, his New York doesn't look like American
metropolis. Instead, it looks like any big European town,
with slang phrases spoken by Bennett and Duryea as the only
clear national identification. But the biggest original
contribution by Lang is his ironic portrayal of New York art
world - critics, dealers and artist wannabes (with
always-reliable Vladimir Sokoloff in one of such supporting
roles). It is a real shame that the movie was made in black
and white; paintings that play important role in the plot
should have been displayed in their full glory. However,
this isn't the only problem SCARLET STREET had. Tragicomical
irony of the film and unexpected finale is compromised with
too dark overtones in the epilogue. Those last scenes,
although powerful in its own way, seem somewhat out of place
and nothing more than Lang's concession to censors, unable
to digest unconventional finale. On the other hand, despite
those flaws, this film is real gem of the Old Hollywood, the
one that justifies the existence of remakes.

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Scarlet Street" is one of the strangest noir tales ever told on screen,
primarily because it seems rooted in almost something farcical. Here is the
story of a modest cashier who makes a conniving woman believe that he is a
world-famous painter. This could be a comedy but under the hands of German
director Fritz Lang ("Metropolis"), it takes on the existential - showing that
one person's actions can result in a hopeless situation. 
Edward G. Robinson plays Chris, a sullen cashier working for an anonymous bank
company. His one joy in life is to paint, a habit not taken seriously by a
single character in the film. One night, after hastily leaving a celebration in
his honor, Chris sees a woman in the street robbed by some guy. The victim is
Kitty (Joan Bennett), a purely electrifying doll, funny yet devious with a
devilish smile. The thief gets away yet Chris is mesmerized by Kitty, taking
her out for a drink (initially coffee, as always with a noir protagonist). He
asks to meet her again, and his love for painting makes Kitty suspect he is a
renown painter with lots of money to spare. Kitty thus uses Chris, and we
discover the thief from earlier is actually her boyfriend, Johnny (Dan Duryea),
whom she passes off as her cousin. Chris sees Johnny as an intrusion, but
nevertheless, he falls hopelessly in love. He is so in love that he steals
money from his bank so he can rent her a luxurious Greenwich Village apartment!
Chris also sees the apartment as a studio where he can paint, away from the
constant squabbling of his unhappy wife, Millie (it is more spacious than the
bathroom he uses in his apartment). But Kitty has other plans - she sees
Chris's paintings as an avenue for success and profit, and so does the
irascible, persistent Johnny. Therein lie the twists. 
"Scarlet Street" has lots of comical scenes, mostly provided by Bennett who
does enough double takes and lascivious stares to make her the almost
cartoonish version of Joan Crawford. All her scenes with Robinson are set in
bedrooms or closed-in restaurants, and they are all perfectly flawless, exuding
both humor and tension. Bennett also makes Kitty ambiguous - we are never sure
what to make of her, and her sensuousness and supposed sensitivity reinforce
her two-sided nature. She is out to make a buck anyway she can, but is she as
amoral as Johnny, who goes so far as to sell Chris's paintings himself? 
Robinson is at his most restrained and sympathetic, even when his actions
become questionable, we know he will do anything for the love of his life.
Counterbalancing between blindsightedness and naivete, his final act of love
resulting in tragic consequences is a marvel to witness - his pained gestures
show a man slowly coming apart at the seams. This is an extraordinary
performance, almost as good as his similarly repressed protagonist in "Woman in
the Window."
Fritz Lang, who previously directed "Woman in the Window," does wonders with
the film, showing just about every single facet of noir - smoking, shadows in
the night, wrongful murders, accusations, double twists, and an unseen
electrocution. "Scarlet Street" is a terrific film, brimming with humor and
horror in balanced doses. Most significant is Lang's inevitable ending
reinforcing the hopelessness of Chris's situation. Though the ending initially
had problems with the censors, it is justified and shows a degree of punishment
- living with a crime is often more punishing than actual punishment from the
law. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or comments at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com
