Title
Review for Brain Smasher... A Love Story (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are various ways to classify movies that fail to reach
even the lowest possible criteria. Among them there should
be a place for a category labelled as "films by Albert
Pyun". Although there are directors who gained a lot of
notoriety due to the abysmal quality of their work, few of
them made so many atrociously bad movies as Pyun did.
Despite his reputation, Pyun almost always managed to
surprise even the most experienced viewers and show them
that there isn't a movie so bad that it couldn't be made
look good in comparison with another. However, Pyun once
actually made a movie that turned out to be watchable, but
this was not the case with his 1993 action comedy BRAIN
SMASHER... A LOVE STORY.
The plot of this film deals with Sam Crain (played by Terri
Hatcher), professional model that gets in the whole new
world of trouble after agreeing to smuggle a package from
Europe to Portland, Oregon for her sister Carrie (played by
Deborah Van Valkenburgh). Soon she becomes the target of
murderous Shaolin monks and her only protection comes in the
form of Ed "Brainsmasher" Molloy (played by Andrew Dice
Clay), a night-club bouncer.
Even Clay, comedian who carried the tragically underrated
ADVENTURES OF FORD FARLANE on his shoulder, seems unable to
save this film from its fate. Pyun, who also wrote the
script, seems to lack the sense of humour, while the action
scenes look unimpressive and the whole story, even with the
surprise twist at the end, completely unoriginal and
uninspiring. Teri Hatcher, future star of LOIS AND CLARK, is
also left without any opportunity to show her potential.
Fans of both stars should do themselves a great service if
they watch something else.
Review written on September 21st 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
