Title
Review for Chunhyang (2000)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
Beautiful but headache inducing.  Kwon-taek Im's CHUNHYANG can probably 
best be thought of as a Korean opera.  Featuring extensive sung 
narration in a type of ancient Korean music called pansori, which 
features a male singer whose singing sounds more like screaming, the 
movie can be jarring to untrained ears.  
I haven't wished for earplugs so much since years ago when I took my 
young son to a live performance of the Power Rangers.  The press notes 
include an article entitled "The Art of Noise," which quotes an 
ethnomusicology professor.  The professor says that he didn't like 
pansori the first-time he heard it but that most people like it once 
they get used to it.  That may be, but life is short, and I hope to 
avoid activities that assault my ears whether it be from the Power 
Rangers or pansori.  Then again, people's musical tastes vary.  To you, 
pansori may not be noise.  It may be, well, music to your ears.
The movie begins, ends and sometimes cuts back to documentary footage of 
a pansori concert by Cho Sang Hyun.  The singer, accompanied only by a 
drum, which his voice easily drowns out, is the film's narrator, and the 
movie is a dramatization of his long, narrative song.  The concert was 
four and a half hours long, but the film, thankfully, only runs two.  As 
they cut to the concert's audience, we see living proof that many 
Koreans are extremely moved by the music with reactions ranging from 
tears to dancing in the aisles.  
The very traditional story concerns a love affair that dares to cross 
class boundaries.  In the costume drama, Mongyong Lee (Seung-woo Cho), 
the governor's son, falls for Chunghyang Sung (Hyo-jeong Lee), the 
daughter of a courtesan.  There are no surprises in the script or the 
acting.  The same cannot be said of the production, which is sumptuous.  
The sets are impressive, the cinematography has a golden glow, and the 
costumes are intriguing.  My personal favorite was the tall black hat 
with the wide brim that many of the men wore.
Mark Twain once said that "Wagner's music is better than it sounds."  It 
may just be thus with pansori, but, for me, it's dominance of CHUNHYANG 
destroyed any hopes of my enjoying the film.  On the other hand, the 
minimal story and acting aren't particularly compelling on their own.
CHUNHYANG runs a very long 2:00.  The film is in Korean with English 
subtitles.  It is rated R for some sexuality and would be acceptable for 
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Robert Strohmeyer
Due in part to a dense shroud of regulatory policy, the Korean film
industry finds few viewers in the West.  One of a mere handful of
directors to break through this barrier in recent years is Im Kwon Taek
(Mandala, Ticket).  The latest in a line of more than 100 films for Im
(Korean family names come before given names), Chunhyang is a vivid
retelling of the classic Korean tale of an 18th century love that
withstands and defines a culture.
A musical of sorts, Chunhyang emerges as a rare pairing of film with the
ancient Korean operatic tradition of pansori.  As such, the picture
opens on a black, dimly lighted stage as the pansori singer begins the
tale, blending quickly into the moment of action.
Mongryong (Cho Seung Woo), the devoted son of a provincial governor,
asks his servant to show him the sights of the region and gets more than
he bargained for when he spies the beautiful Chunhyang (Lee Hyo Jung). 
The daughter of a courtesan, Chunhyang is a forbidden fruit that
Mongryong can't resist.  No sooner are the two married than Mongryong
must depart for Seoul.  But Chunhyang, being little more than a
courtesan herself, must stay behind or cost her husband his chance at a
noble title.
As Mongryong leaves, a new governor comes to town and learns of the
much-desired Chunhyang.  But, as a devoted wife, she refuses the new
governor's advances and is sentenced to death.  The remainder of the
picture concerns, of course, the return of Mongryong and the dishing out
of justice to the corrupt governor.
In itself, the story behind Chunhyang is no more intriguing than that of
Romeo and Juliet.  Two lovers come together against all odds, yadda
yadda yadda.  What surprised this critic was the stream of feminist
commentary surrounding this picture, laudable for its vision of strength
in womanhood.  If anything, however, Im's vision of Chunhyang as a
character is simply that of a devoted woman who knows her place.  Far
from an uplifting break from traditionally misogynistic views of
femininity, what we're really being offered here is a modern re-hashing
of an essentially Confucian idea that women can achieve greatness only
through self-sacrifice in the name of their husbands.
Simultaneously, though, it is a richly experimental movie, demonstrating
(as Mandala did before it) the vast cultural offerings of Korean
cinema.  Cunningly acted and breathtakingly filmed (except for the
pansori scenes, which appear to have been shot by a drunk with a
Handicam), Chunhyang takes bold risks with point of view and narrative
style that might never have come from any director other than Im Kwon
Taek.
Director: Im Kwon Taek
Producer: Lee Tae Won
Writer: Kim Myoung Kon
Starring: Lee Hyo Jung, Cho Seung Woo, Kim Sung Nyu, Lee Jung Hun, Kim
Hak Yong, Lee Hae Eun, Choi Jin Young, Hong Kyung Yeun
http://www.chunhyang21.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   While "Dancer in the Dark" does a satiric take on American
musicals, whatever parody informs "Chunhyang" lies in its
criticism of social-class rigidities and not in its use of music. 
"Chunhyang" could be called a musical but is unlike any such
genre known in the U.S.  Utilizing a legend of a woman who
is swept away by a nobleman in 18th Century Korea, director
Im Kwon Taek introduces a Western audience to a theatrical
form known to educated Koreans today in much the way that
Kabuki and Noh drama are perceived by cognoscenti in
Japan.  The result is a mixed bag.  "Chunhyang" displays
exquisite cinematography in a lavish, high-budget costume
drama using 8,000 extras that curled its way around the
festival circuits in Cannes, Telluride, Toronto and New York. 
The simple story is effectively told but is interspersed with
musical numbers not only unfamiliar and strange to most of
its targeted audience of cultivated viewers but to my Western
ears downright irritating, unnecessary and shrill. 
"Chunhyang" features a vocalist who, together with a
drummer, belts out the story in a piercing cacophony that
makes no distinction between elements of high melodrama
and components of ordinary, mundane affairs.  The tale is
recited by a Pansori who chants at various times during its
exposition like a Brechtian narrator foreshadowing and
commenting upon what is developing.  Lose this Pansori and
you're left with a lovely fable that could easily go over with a
broader audience but would, of course, deny the producers
their claim to originality and their apparent wish to enlighten
most of us about this unique feature of Korean culture.
   A Romeo-and-Juliet-style fable with a happy ending, Kim
Myoung Kon's screenplay, exquisitely photographed by Jung
Il Sung, focuses on a handsome scholar, Mongryong (Cho
Seung Woo), who is the son of the provincial governor and is
reading furiously in preparation for a state examination. 
Using his Sancho-Panza-esque servant, Pangja (Kim Hak
Yong) as a travel agent, he winds his way about the
countryside, looking in on villages to further his education
about his country, but forgets much of the landscape when he
discovers the topography of a courtesan's beautiful daughter,
Chunhyang (Lee Hyo Jung).  Arrogant at first in demanding
that Chunhyang come to him for a meeting, he gives in to
this independent lass by meeting her more than halfway,
charming her into secretly marrying him, and then sadly
leaving her when ordered to do by his father--who has just
been appointed to the king's cabinet.  The replacement
governor (Choi Jin Young) gives new meaning to the term
"male chauvinist pig," demanding sexual favors from this
married woman and ordering his chief penal officer to beat
her severely when she resists.  He has her thrown into prison
and orders her execution.  "I cannot serve two husbands any
more than I can serve two kings," she repeatedly cries as she
desperately hopes for her man's return.
   "Chunhyang," Korea's most lavish film ever, looks terrific. 
Costumes, art direction, and shots of the landscape are
magnificent.  Im Kwon Taek's direction is on target not only in
the portrayal of 18th Century Korea with its courtesans,
bureaucrats, and governors with unlimited power, but in his
vignettes of the lovers as they coyly take part in marriage-
night antics, later to become madly in love with each other as
they playfully roll in the hay.  As we witness the title figure's
growing passion for her husband, we easily believe her fierce
loyalty to the handsome, if somewhat bland noble, and we
accept Mongryong's willingness to overlook class differences
as irrelevant.  Credibility suffers only at one point:  Having
been beaten, left incarcerated for months or years, and about
to be executed, Chunhyang looks as beautiful as she was on
the day that her prince charming met her.  Every hair is in
place, her face is appropriately made up, her clothing
immaculate.
   Did I mention that Im should lose the drummer and Pansori
(nothing personal)?
Not Rated.  Running time: 120 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
