Title
Review for Silent Fall (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Richard Dreyfuss, Liv Tyler, J. T. Walsh, Ben Faulkner,
Linda Hamilton, John Lithgow.
Screenplay:  Akiva Goldsman.
Director:  Bruce Beresford.
     If you have not already done so, please add to your list of movie
cliches the "psychiatrist/psychologist who is as screwed up as anyone
he/she is treating."  While some might argue (and suicide statistics
might support) that this is a case of art imitating life, it is
becoming far too predictable to toss a psychiatrist with personal
demons into a suspense plot as flavoring; they are the MSG of the
psychological thriller.  Surely there's a happy, well- adjusted shrink
out there somewhere.  Well, not in SILENT FALL, and the inclusion of
that tired standby is just one of the many, many things wrong with this
good-looking but gimmicky thriller.
     The psychiatrist is Dr. Jake Rainer (Richard Dreyfuss), an expert
in autism who has given up his treatment of children in the wake of a
patient's death.  He is called in by the local sheriff (J. T. Walsh)
when the only witness to the murder of a prominent couple appears to be
their autistic son Tim (Ben Faulkner).  With the assistance of Tim's
sister Sylvie (Liv Tyler), Jake attempts to reconstruct what happened
the night of the murders before Tim is turned over to a less
compassionate psychiatrist (John Lithgow) for more radical treatment.
Their best shot:  Tim's uncanny ability to remember and mimic
conversations.
     I don't think I'm breaking any new ground when I say that Richard
Dreyfuss, talented though he may be, is a ham.  And if there is
anything more unintentionally amusing than watching a ham act, it is
watching him try desperately *not* to be a ham.  In SILENT FALL,
director Bruce Beresford has Dreyfuss wandering around in a daze of
what is supposed to be self-pity, but instead looks mostly like a
particularly bad Hamlet.  In the one scene where Dreyfuss plays
Dreyfuss, rattling off multiple voices in an attempt to calm Tim, it's
almost a relief.  Unfortunately, that is the level at which Beresford
has everyone pitch the performances; you only know they're alive
because they blink.  Linda Hamilton, energetic star of the TERMINATOR
films, has the appallingly under-written role of Jake's
oh-so-supportive wife, who struggles with dialogue like, "You're the
one hiding from the world, Jake."  Liv Tyler (daughter of Aerosmith's
Steven Tyler in her first major role) is lovely, but lacks any screen
presence, and her big emotional scenes are truly laughable.  From start
to finish, SILENT FALL is just so sluggish that I felt I was being
hypnotized.
     It's even harder to stay awake once you realize the preposterous
story that you are being asked to swallow.  First of all, no one from
social services ever appears to guard Tim's interests, allowing the
sheriff to treat him like a narcotics dog, expected to sniff out the
murderer.  Tim and Sylvie are allowed to return to their house,
disturbing a crime scene of an investigation in progress.  Most
ridiculous of all is Tim's special talent, and not so much because it's
impossible to believe his tape-recorder memory.  Rather, it is the
mimicked voices dubbed over Tim's lips which cross the line into
silliness, and every time they are used they just get sillier.
     Of course, a fundamental problem with SILENT FALL is that it's a
mystery where everyone seems too stupid to figure out the obvious.
Ultimately there are only three suspects in SILENT FALL, and it tips
its hand far too soon.  What pass for attempts at diverting attention
from the only real suspect fail miserably, and SILENT FALL is left to
fall back on the developing relationship between Jake and Tim for any
drama.  While there are moments in that relationship which work quite
well, they lead to the film's single most infuriating scene, a miracle
cure for Tim at a crucial moment.  For a film that wants to appear
serious in its treatment of a perplexing medical condition, it traffics
in solutions which are far too pat, and acts as a slap in the face to
everyone who has ever had to live with autistic individuals by
suggesting that all it takes to bring them out of it is just a little
more love.  And maybe the violent death of one or two family members.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The usually reliable actor Richard Dreyfuss stars in Bruce
Beresford's 1994 movie SILENT FALL.  Beresford has made some wonderful
films.  I have never seen one of his pictures that I would not
recommend and most are highly memorable.  I will never forget his
DRIVING MISS DAISY, CRIMES OF THE HEART, TENDER MERCIES, or one of my
personal favorites of his, BLACK ROBE.
     Dreyfuss is good in SILENT FALL and except for LET IT RIDE and
ALWAYS, I have found his work superb.  I thought he was unconvincing in
ALWAYS and everyone was awful in LET IT RIDE.
     In SILENT FALL, rich parents are killed in their bedroom.  Some
mysterious stranger hacked them both to death with a knife.  Sheriff
Mitch Rivers (J. T. Walsh) discovers their bloody bodies and finds
their young autistic son Tim Warden (Ben Faulkner) in their bedroom
holding the knife and with blood all over him.  They find his teenage
sister Sylvie (Liv Tyler - star of STEALING BEAUTY) in the closet,
knocked out and bloody.  The boy is out of control so they call in
child therapist Jake Rainer (Richard Dreyfuss) to get the knife from
him.
     Right away there are many mysteries.  Since the stab wounds are
done with much force, the boy is ruled out as the killer as is the girl
since she was unconscious.  So who is the mysterious stranger, and why
didn't he kill the boy and the girl?
     Since only the boy saw the killer and since he doesn't talk, Jack
is asked to work with him in an attempt to ascertain the truth.
Thinking Jack is not moving fast enough, the sheriff turns to Dr.
Harlinger (John Lithgow) who uses drugs to induce memory recollection.
     Jack and the doctor do not trust each other.  Moreover, there is
something hidden in Jack's past, and the doctor seems to be hiding
something himself as does the sheriff.  Rapidly the audience becomes
convinced that no one may be exactly whom they claim to be.  Ambiguity
lurks everywhere.
     The movie is about the quest for the facts behind the murders.
The script by Akiva Goldsman is intelligent and unpredictable.  The
performance by Dreyfuss and Faulkner are marvelous.  Dreyfuss crafts a
character with whom it is easy to empathize.  He tries so hard to break
the boy's shell, and yet he loves him at the same time.  Faulkner is
equally great as a walking enigma.
     Liv Tyler gives a pedestrian performance, but at least better than
her vacuous one in STEALING BEAUTY.  One wonders if she has any acting
talent at all.  Lithgow overacts as is his propensity unless carefully
directed.  Walsh plays the same character he has played many times
before and does not change it.
     The mystery keeps the viewer riveted to the screen.  Small details
like the background noise moving from silence to nature sounds to
storms enhance the thriller aspect.  I am sad to report that the end
turns into a low grade horror film and almost sinks the entire picture.
Why they did this is beyond me.  It is not necessary.  At any rate the
rest of the show is captivating.
     SILENT FALL runs 1:46.  It is rated R.  There are gory images,
violence, some bad language, sexual situations, but no sex or nudity.
The show would be fine for any teenager, but not for anyone younger.  I
recommend the show even with its schlock ending and give it ** 1/2.
With a better quality ending, I would have rated it higher.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
SILENT FALL has the shreds and shards of a far better movie lurking around
inside it somewhere.  It takes the form of a psychological thriller, where
the detectives work hand-in-glove with psychiatrists to disentangle the mind
of a witness to a murder.  The witness is an autistic little boy, and there
are strong hints that he is probably the killer as well -- after all, they
found him swinging the knife while standing over his parent's corpses.
Richard Dreyfuss is the psychiatrist, and it is to his credit that he does
the best job he can in a movie of such abysmal silliness.  He has one very
nice scene where he uses a deck of cards as a metaphor for how to jog the
kid's memory.  Unfortunately, like so many other ham-handed scripts, the
metaphor is hammered on again and again until its initial charm collapses.
I had high hopes going into this movie.  For the most part, psychiatrists
get short shrift in films: they get portrayed as soulless technicians (ONE
FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST), or fiendish maniacs (BAD DREAMS), or goofy and
ineffectual softies (AMOS & ANDREW).  Dreyfuss plays a fellow with smarts
and presence, and he does a decent job of soldiering on while the film
collapses around him.  John Lithgow gets dragged in for a wasteful little
cameo as a drug-dispensing doctor, which reminded me of what a good actor he
is when he's not in junk like this.
The movie has so few real ideas about its alleged subjects that it's
distressing.  Take, for instance, the murder investigation.  If you were a
cop, would you let the children of the murder victims live in their house
while it would still be a crime scene?  The movie's insights into autism are
also pretty much nonexistent.  Autism, like the rest of the movie's conceits
with psychology, are just cheap hooks onto which to hang the rest of the
plot.  And if there is another thriller out there with a more contrived mess
of a plot than this one -- write me, I've got cigars.
The film's big climax has Dreyfuss getting the kid to re-enact almost on cue
what he witnessed.  Never mind if the people in the movie watching this
thought it was believable: did anyone FILMING it think it was believable?
Really?

Author
James Berardinelli
     What happens when you start out with a decent mystery premise, a
solid lead actor, and a script that builds suspense nicely through the
first half before inexplicably self-destructing in the most messy and
unpleasant manner?  You have either 1993's BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT or
1994's SILENT FALL, thrillers that share a number of unfortunate
traits, the most notable of which is an inability to construct a
worthwhile picture despite several apparent advantages.
     Bruce Beresford, who is in the director's chair for this film, has
a history of inconsistency.  For every TENDER MERCIES, DRIVING MISS
DAISY, or RICH IN LOVE, there has been a KING DAVID, HER ALIBI, or A
GOOD MAN IN AFRICA.  SILENT FALL isn't a movie for which Beresford will
want to be remembered.
     The basic story is that a mother and father have been brutally
murdered and the lone witness appears to be their autistic nine-year
old son Tim (Ben Faulkner).  Tim, however, won't talk, so child
psychiatrist Jake Rainer (Richard Dreyfuss) is called in to bring him
out of his shell.  At first, because of ghosts from the past, Jake is
unwilling, but the treatments offered by nasty Dr. Harlinger (John
Lithgow) convince him otherwise.  So, with the aid of Tim's seductive
eighteen-year old sister Sylvie (Liv Tyler), Jake sets out to free the
child's memories so that Sheriff Mitch Rivers (J.T. Walsh), the
incompetent head of an inept investigation, can arrest a suspect.
     The first fifty minutes of the film have their high points--a
nice buildup, some attempts (although predictable ones) at setting up
character relationships, and a suitably creepy atmosphere.  However,
developments in the second half easily make the viewer forget whatever
good things came before.  The plot gets out-of-hand and, like a boulder
barreling down a mountainside, the implausibilities and contrivances
gather speed until a disaster is unavoidable.  The catastrophe comes in
the form of what the film makers apparently decided to call a
"conclusion."
     If the sheer inanity of this preposterous situation doesn't get
you, then the variety of uneven performances might.  Richard Dreyfuss
is generally solid (except when he's trying to mimic Robin Williams'
zany vocal antics), but the rest of the cast is lacking.  Ben Faulkner
doesn't display any range, Linda Hamilton is an absolute embarrassment
(fortunately, her screen time is limited), and John Lithgow looks like
he stopped by to pick up a quick pay check.  Liv Tyler, who has a
certain screen presence in low-key situations but fails to convince
when required to display extreme emotion, looks like she's acting in
her first feature--which is the case.
     There are three kinds of murder mysteries:  those that are solidly
scripted and hold together both during a viewing and while being
dissected afterwards, those that entertain while being watched but can
be picked apart later, and those that collapse even as they unfold on
screen.  SILENT FALL slides neatly into the third category.  I can't
emphasize how poorly arrived at the resolution is, how plotted the
whole film feels, and how unpleasant it is to sit through this tripe.
SILENT FALL is the kind of picture that results when a film maker loses
sight of the fact that a portion of his audience might actually think
while watching a movie.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
