Title
Review for Hooper (1978)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
     I know what you're thinking.  What could possible justify writing a
full review of a movie like 'Hooper'?  My reasons may surprise and please
you at the same time.  It just so happens that Burt Reynolds really is a
talented and clever actor.  Not necessarily in 'Hooper' but in other films.
Reynolds displayed a knack for the craft of acting in films like
'Deliverance', 'The Longest Yard', 'The End', 'Starting Over' and more
recently in 'Boogie Nights' which is a film he is certain to receive an
Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor and he has a very good chance of
winning.  The problem is that Reynolds like Tom Cruise, Harrison Ford and
Mel Gibson has somewhat buried the recognition of his talent in the minds of
the public because they often choose the commercial route in making movies.
I recently saw Reynolds on television talking about his work on 'Smokey and
the Bandit' and he said that he never saw a bunch of people working on a
movie in his life where they were having more fun and after all, a person's
occupation should be pleasant and I admire Reynolds for most but not all of
the choices he has made in his career.
     Another reason a film like 'Hooper' deserves some recognition is that
it symbolizes in an entertaining way the plight of the movie stunt man.  How
many categories do they have at the Academy Awards?  Both technical and
academic?  A lot, but they should have a category for stunt men because how
many people on a movie set put their lives on the line in the name of film?
It is an under rated and exploiting art form which gets over looked too often.
     Directed by Hal Needham, a former stunt man himself, 'Hooper' is about
the personal and professional life of a movie stunt man complete with the
trade mark 'good ol' boy' style that makes a Burt Reynolds movie such great
escapism.
     'Hooper' centers on the final career days of legendary stunt man Sonny
Hooper (Reynolds) as he is working on what will eventually turn out to be
his last film because of his ailing back and other physical discomforts and
Sonny relies on a great quantity of pain killers for his condition.
     'Hooper' showcases three generations of stunt men, Sonny (Burt
Reynolds), the middle, Jocko (Brian Keith), the oldest and Ski (Jan-Michael
Vincent), the youngest.  Although none of them are related in the movie,
Reynolds is having an intimate relationship with Jocko's daughter (Sally
Field).  There are other interesting characters involved including the
movie's producer (John Marley) and the film's unethical and spotlight
grabbing director (Robert Klein).  Even football legend Terry Bradshaw has a
scene as a tough guy who starts a bar room brawl with Reynolds
and his gang.  
     The climax in 'Hooper' boils down to a rocket car stunt which will make
a jump across a wide gorge.  A stunt that will be executed by Sonny and Ski
and a stunt for which Sonny will command an unprecedented $100,000 dollars.
     'Hooper' is a movie which plays like action on laughing gas and will
induce pleasant side effects for a movie audience that harmlessly embraces
that sort of thing. 
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
