Title
Review for Winslow Boy, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Every medium has its own constraints that pull it away from being
realistic.  Silent film acting is very much pantomime that must convey
much more than photo-realism would.  A three-act stage play must tell
an entire story from three points in time.  Each must have a single or
perhaps two locations.  This is why plays adapted to film often seem
claustrophobic and stagebound.  There is an entire art to adapting
stage plays to the screen without making them unbearable.  Connecting
scenes set in the out of doors will frequently be inserted.
     The play THE WINSLOW BOY by Terence Rattigan is an old favorite in
England.  Supposedly every little English hamlet with a theater company
has performed it one time or another.  It is a David and Goliath story
or one small boy against the British Admiralty.  A young naval cadet is
accused of stealing a five-shilling postal order.  The boy maintains
his innocence but is expelled from school nonetheless.  The Admiralty
insists they need only satisfy themselves of his guilt.  The Winslow
family supports the boy and resolutely demands a trial.  Meanwhile
somehow the case gets national attention and the country is torn on the
issue.
     David Mamet has adapted the play for the screen and has added some
generally inconsequential short scenes around the original major
scenes.  The major scenes all take place in the Winslow mansion, which
means they are divorced from the action.  In a more standard film
format, the storyteller would have the choice of showing or not showing
the stealing of the postal order and the resulting trial.  A three-act
stage play has too much territory to cover to have a scene at the
school or in a courtroom.  After the first scene in which we find the
boy has been accused of the crime, suddenly and jarringly we jump
forward months and the issue is already a national controversy.  How
such a minor issue could have become so important is totally lost.
Most films would have many scenes covering the interim.  And perhaps in
Britain what happened might also be common knowledge.  Here it appears
like there is a great whopping chunk of missing narrative.  One woman
near me in the audience was convinced for a while that reels were being
shown out of order because we had missed so much of the narrative.
     The actors are all playing people of the British upper crust.
They are people who have been trained to be dry and detached, even
among their own family.  This makes the film seem rather dry and
bloodless though one has a good idea what emotions are going on just
under the surface.
     Guy Edwards plays the accused Ronnie Winslow and Nigel Hawthorne
plays the father who is so standoffish to the boy but is willing to let
his family be destroyed rather than allowing what he accepts as a false
accusation stand.  Much like Dr. Stockmann in Ibsen's AN ENEMY OF THE
PEOPLE, he clearly loves his family but is willing to let his health be
ruined and his family be destroyed over a principle.  The central
characters however become Rebecca Pidgeon (of Mamet's THE SPANISH
PRISONER) as Catherine Winslow, Ronnie's older sister, and Jeremy
Northam as Sir Robert Morton, whom the family has defend Ronnie.  There
is a definite romantic tension between them on the screen.  Both seem
to recognize an attraction between each other but being oh-so-veddy-
proper it always remains frustratingly just below the surface.
     That seems to be the problem with THE WINSLOW BOY.  There is just
too much following of rules.  The two main characters cannot get
together; Mamet cannot show us the most dramatic scenes of the Winslow
case.  The whole thing is so correct and reserved that the viewer feels
a little cheated when all is said and done (with too much on the screen
said and not enough done).  Mamet is to be commended for setting
frustrating constraints on himself and for sticking with them at the
expense of dramatic impact.  But he probably should have cheated a
little to make this a better narrative.  I rate THE WINSLOW BOY 6 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Christopher Null
     David Mamet scores again, and in the unlikeliest of films.
     I've known and respected Mamet's directorial work since the gritty
HOUSE OF GAMES (1987) and have remained a fan through last year's THE
SPANISH PRISONER.  Without fail, Mamet works on gritty, hard-edged
con-artistry-related flicks like these.  So it's with no small amount of
skepticism that I greeted the G-rated WINSLOW BOY.
     Call me a fool.  WINSLOW ranks among Mamet's best and is a
refreshing change of pace.  A period peace set in 1911 London, this is
the story of 13-year old Ronnie Winslow, a naval prep school student who
is expelled for stealing and cashing a five-shilling note.  When Ronnie
proclaims his innocence to the very end, the case becomes a cause
celebre among the citizens of Britain - something of a former-day O.J.
Simpson case, though, this time, the people side with the accused.
     Mamet has layered this film, based on the stage play, with myriad
levels of nuance, enriching the role of each member of the Winslow
family to heights that Hollywood has never dreamed of.  As Ronnie's
ultimate lawyer, Jeremy Northam does his best work ever, by far.  Nigel
Hawthorne is similarly fantastic as Ronnie's dad, and as Ronnie himself,
Edwards proves there are still a few young faces who can act.
     Highly recommended, but don't let the G rating fool you.  This is a
film for adults about serious situations: Personal liberty, government
posturing, political bureaucracy, and justice, of course.  I urge you to
see it.
     Great double feature suggestion: THE BUTCHER BOY on tape, THE
WINSLOW BOY in theaters.
http://www.spe.sony.com/classics/winslowboy/
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE WINSLOW BOY" (Sony Pictures Classics Release)
 If you're looking for an intelligently crafted, superbly
acted, immensely engrossing, adult drama, this is the film for
you. Writer/director David Mamet ("Oleanna," "The Spanish Prisoner")
has adapted Terence Rattigan's renowned 1946 melodrama, which is based
on the real-life story of a 13 year-old cadet, Ronnie Winslow (Guy
Edwards), at the Royal Naval Academy who is accused of stealing a
five-shilling postal order and sent home in disgrace.  Convinced of
their son's innocence, the Winslows (Nigel Hawthorne, Gemma Jones,
Rebecca Pidgeon) persuade one of the country's leading lawyers, Sir
Robert Morton (Jeremy Northam), a Conservative member of Parliament,
to defend the lad in court. As the case proceeds, it challenges many
long-accepted legal traditions and sets off a national outrage,
pitting aristocrats against commoners and exacting a heavy price from
the participants. A family of the utmost gentility, the Winslows,
nevertheless, are determined to maintain their honor, steadfastly
maintaining that their son is not guilty of lying, forgery, and
theft. And, using a dark visual palette, Mamet adeptly reflects a time
period when values and social structure were in flux.  Despite the
1910 setting, the question raised by the film is timeless and
universal: What is the price of justice? The story was filmed once
before by Anthony Asquith in 1948, starring Robert Donat, Cedric
Hardwicke, and Margaret Leighton, but this version is excellent
although, in essence, it still remains a melodrama, never realizing
the full tragic impact of the situation. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "The Winslow Boy" is an exquisitely etched 8. It's
surprisingly provocative, filled to the brim with suspense and
romance.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Playwright-turned-filmmaker David Mamet (The Spanish Prisoner) has, in
his previous pictures, created gritty, urban crime dramas full of seedy
characters that bombard viewers with machine-gun-like expletives and
unpredictable double-crosses.  So why would Mamet, who until now had
written each of his directorial efforts, adapt Terence Rattigan's 1946
stage play for his next film project?
It doesn't matter - Mamet's leap into the period genre is magnificent.
The story, set in 1912, focuses on a real-life incident in
turn-of-the-century England in which the 13-year-old son of a wealthy
London banker is accused of stealing a five-pound postal note and is
unduly expelled from the posh Osbourne Naval College.  Ronnie (Guy
Edwards) continues to profess his innocence, earning the support of his
pop (Nigel Hawthorne, The Madness of King George) and sis (Rebecca
Pidgeon, Mamet's wife), who eventually hire Robert Morton (Jeremy
Northam, Emma), the country's top attorney, to both defend the boy and
right the good Winslow name.
The case becomes a national frenzy, spawning O.J.-like tabloid stories
and political cartoons as the Winslow family drains its considerable
finances to proceed with the case that most insiders believe is a lost
cause, as well as a colossal waste of both time and money.  Mamet's
characters, while not as slimy and crooked as we're used to, still speak
in hypnotically rhythmic salvos.  Northam really steals the show with
his portrayal of the attention-loving lawyer that can't seem to decide
whether he's involved in the case for the fame, the money, the
moralistic battle or for Pidgeon's Catherine.  And when was the last
time you liked an attorney in a film?  (1:50  G for just about nothing)

Author
Steve Rhodes
It was a question of a mere 5 shillings, but it was enough in the early
1900s to get a 13-year-old boy sacked from the military college he
attended and enough to get the British nation outraged when his father
kept trying to get his son's case heard in court.
Writer and director David Mamet's THE WINSLOW BOY, loosely based on this
actual case, is gem of a picture in the spirit of THE AGE OF INNOCENCE.
Most of the action, such as it is, takes place on the sidelines.  People
talk about trials and possible trials rather than attending them.
Emotions are carefully held in check as they would have been in that
era, but the absolutely exquisite performances by the ensemble cast
insure that the characters' feelings are nonetheless intense even though
displayed with subtlety and grace.
As the story opens, Catherine Winslow, played with carefully controlled
spunk by Rebecca Pidgeon, has brought her intended husband, John (Aden
Gillett), home to her father so that the two men can discuss the
couple's future finances and the size of her dowry.  You may remember
Rebecca Pidgeon as the slick confidence scheme operator from Mamet's
last picture, THE SPANISH PRISONER.  She brings a compelling precision
and intelligence to all of her parts.
Academy Award nominee Nigel Hawthorne (THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE), in a
loving performance, plays Arthur Winslow, Catherine's father.  Arthur is
an honorable father who wants only the best for his kids and who is
willing to risk his family's limited fortune in its pursuit.  In a movie
with a lesser cast, Hawthorne's masterful performance would have stolen
the movie, but his turns out to be but one of many bright lights.
After the matter of the marriage finances is quickly settled, the
ensuing celebration is abruptly aborted when a dripping wet 13-year-old
Ronnie (Guy Edwards) is seen by his mother, Grace (Gemma Jones), hiding
in the garden.  It seems that he has been expelled from the Royal Naval
College for stealing a 5-shilling postal note.
Arthur, who has long ago established good relations with his son, wants
to know if the charge is true, but, before he allows the boy to answer,
he issues a stern but respectful admonition.  "If you tell me a lie, I
shall know, because a lie between us can't be hidden," he warns.  The
boy, who looks like innocence personified, swears that he's not guilty.
Mamet, the master of ambiguity and unanswered questions, makes you
wonder right away what the truth is and how that truth will be
determined.
As the nation gets wrapped up in "Save the Winslow Boy" fever, which we
see only through cartoons laid on desks and posters stuck on walls,
Arthur depletes his fortune trying with almost no success to get the
boy's case heard in some court.  Eventually Arthur decides that, if he
is to prevail, he must hire the best lawyer in the land, Sir Robert
Morton, who is also a leading Conservative Member of Parliament.
As the charismatic and handsome Sir Robert, Jeremy Northam delivers an
absolutely mesmerizing performance.  A highly intelligent man who keeps
his opponents and his supporters guessing what he will do next, Sir
Robert is a master legal and political strategist and the type of busy
man who allocates you only a few minutes of his precious time to see if
it's worth ever seeing you again.  He is also an outspoken opponent of
women's suffrage, which gives great pain to Catherine, who is a trade
union activist and a women's suffrage worker.  The charged relationship
between these two opposites, who have to pull together, turns out to be
easily the most interesting of several subplots.  Like the rest of the
movie, this relationship makes some twists you don't expect and avoids
others that you do.
Although the script doesn't have much of Mamet's signature dialog style,
in which two characters exchange fast-paced staccato repartee, it has
the overall structure he likes and has a host of fully developed
characters.  The heart-warming story is the type that Frank Capra would
have loved.
Slowly and delicately the movie lays out a series of questions for us?
Is the boy innocent, or might it not be as cut and dried as it seems?
Will the father ever arrange to get a trial, and, if so, what would be
the outcome?  And is the father's fanatical pursuit of justice even a
good idea?  The newspapers accuse him of wasting the government's time
and resources, and his once wealthy family is having trouble living in
the lifestyle to which they are accused.  His son, his wife points out,
is quite happy at his new school.  The beauty and intelligence of THE
WINSLOW BOY methodically lays out questions where lesser movies would
quickly provide easy answers.
THE WINSLOW BOY runs 1:50.  It is rated G and would be fine for kids old
enough to be interested in serious subjects.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
Hitchcock would never claim to be an actor's director.  His emphasis was in
letting the casting do the work, and was far more interested in the
structure of the film, with each of the actors being used as pawns.  
David Mamet once wrote that his style is built on the same premise.  Never
mind with emoting or getting into character, or finding the person's
interior motivation.  Whooey.  Come up with an ingenius screenplay, an
intricate puzzle, and cast actors who you trust will be believable from the
get-go.  
To say David Mamet's name is to conjure up some of his great works.  Not
only is he an accomplished playwright (_Speed-the-Plow_,_GlenGarry Glen
Ross_) and screenwriter (_The Untouchables_) but he has two movies in his
repertoire that would have made Hitchcock proud.  _House of Games_ and last
year's _The Spanish Prisoner_.  If you haven't seen them yet, do so.
So it is with this anticipation that I went to see _The Winslow Boy_, his
latest.  It is altogether unique that it is the first film I've known in a
long, long, while that is rated G, but the film is really for adults. The
foul-mouthed characters of his R-rated films must be giggling somewhere.
Want a simple plot? Pre-teen Ronnie Winslow has just been expelled from
military school, with accusations that he has stolen a postal order.  He
claims innocence.  His father believes in him, and spends his estate's
riches to prove so.  That's _it_.
Want a cruel joke?  This film has all the components of a Hitchcock film,
only without Hitchcock.  You have the premise of the wrongly accused, only
to not follow it up with who actually did it.  We don't even see the too
much of the courtroom, and the triumphant climax is performed off-screen.
Instead, Mamet is far more concerned with the tensions within the family.
The patriarch (played effortlessly by Nigel Hawthorne), is quirky and
dignified, tough, caring, but a little reckless.  So the daughter (Rebecca
Pidgeon) has no dowry for her engagement.  So the elder son (Matthew
Pidgeon) can't go to college.  
Okay, fine.  But if false expectations can ruin a film, it certainly does so
here.  The film is passable, but I long for the bite of the earlier Mamet.
This has nothing to do with the G rating.  It has to do with showing scenes
that I expected to see.
Back to the actors-as-pawns directing methodology.  Such a style works as
far as the actors themselves are well cast.  Hawthorne--brilliant.  Jeremy
Northam--fabulous.  Rebecca Pidgeon--huh?  
The poor girl just plain can't act.  It would have been better if her words
were annunciated by a monotone voice-emulator than for her to say her lines.
I gave her the benefit of the doubt in _Prisoner_, only because I just
didn't know who she was.  But here she is, at the beginnings of the suffrage
movement, angry that she cannot marry, and she has the same, pause,
utterance-of-lines-and-no-more schtick.
I can enjoy period pieces as the next guy, and I can appreciate it when the
director goes out on a limb to try something new.  However, _The Winslow
Boy_ bored me.

Author
Jonathan Richards
     Somebody run a DNA test on David Mamet, and fast!  The expletive-
happy  playwright/filmmaker ("Glengarry, Glen Ross", etc.) has produced
a G-rated movie; the  master of painfully self-conscious pseudo-
naturalistic *dialogue interruptus* has turned  out an eloquent period
drama; and it's marvelous.
Mamet has adapted the Terence Rattigan stage play based on a
celebrated British court  case from the early part of this century.  A
boy is cashiered from military school for  stealing.  His father,
convinced of his son's innocence, fights the case first in the school 
and then in the courts, putting a tremendous strain on his family's
financial and emotional  resources, and catching the imagination of an
enthralled British public.  The boy's  suffragette sister champions his
cause though it wreaks havoc with her private life.   Buttons crop up
all over London, songs are written, cartoonists and editorial writers
opine  in newspapers, and even Parliament is tied up with hot debates on
the merits of the  Winslow Boy's situation.  One of London's leading
barristers takes an interest in his case -- and inevitably, past initial
friction, in his sister as well.
Nigel Hawthorne ("The Madness of King George") delivers an
extraordinary  performance that should once again land him in the thick
of the Oscar race.  His Arthur  Winslow is never quite what you expect. 
Our first impression is of a typically stern  Victorian patriarch, but
he immediately begins extending that character with humor,  shyness,
irony, tenderness, loyalty, and a perseverance that takes a toll on his
health and  family but not on his convictions.
Rebecca Pidgeon, the resident Mrs. Mamet, is Catherine Winslow,
whose  uncompromising dedication to principle has made her a leader in
the battle for women's  rights; when her brother's rights are
compromised, she brings the same cool fire and  perseverance to clearing
his name.  Pidgeon, who made Mamet's stylized dialogue work so  well in
"The Spanish Prisoner", here has a more nuanced character to work with,
and she  takes full advantage.  And there's an equally fine job from
Jeremy Northam ("Emma") as  the great lawyer, a man with the legal mind
of a Clarence Darrow and the dark  handsomeness and tightly controlled
emotional fires of a Heathcliffe.  
The movie is exquisitely lit by cinematographer Benoit Delhomme 
("The Scent of Green Papaya") with a conscious debt to the
contemporaneous American painter John Singer Sargeant.  Mamet's writing
is economical, powerful, and moving, and his direction is controlled and
sure.  He has burnished his characters with such sharp definition that
they move through his atmosphere like planets in the service of an
integrated theory of the universe.  You watch this celestial clockwork
with a profound appreciation of the individual elements, and of the mind
that shaped the whole.           

Author
James Sanford
        The audience that embraced all those tony Merchant-Ivory
productions of years past ("Howard's End," "The Remains of the Day," "A
Room with a View") is likely to adore "The Winslow Boy," a drawing room
drama which comes from a surprising source: David Mamet, the
dramatist-director best known for such jolting works as "Glengarry Glen
Ross" and "Oleanna."
How did the salty tongued Mamet manage to come up with such a
stately -- and, shockingly,  G-rated -- film? First of all, the source
material is not his own. "Winslow" has been adapted from Terence
Rattigan's 1946 play, which was previously filmed in 1948 with Robert
Donat and again in 1988 with Ian Richardson and Emma Thompson. The piece
was based on the real-life case of a young Osborne Royal Naval Academy
cadet whose expulsion in 1908 became the talk of London after Sir Robert
Morton, the solicitor who had once defended Oscar Wilde, took up the
case. Though Mamet has reshaped the material somewhat, this is still one
of his more straightforward works; anyone expecting the twists and turns
of previous Mamet movies such as "House of Games" or "The Spanish
Prisoner" may feel slightly short-changed.
Then again, "Winslow" is not a suspense story, but a character
study. Although there's a good deal of attention paid to the intricacies
of British law, what Mamet is primarily interested in is the inner
workings of the Winslows, a South Kensington clan who forsake their
comforts and social position in an effort to clear the name of youngest
son Ronnie (Guy Edwards). Despite numerous obstacles and setbacks,
Arthur (Nigel Hawthorne), the patriarch, forges ahead with his demand
for a fair trial, even though it means sacrificing another son's Oxford
education and his daughter Catherine's (Rebecca Pidgeon) prospects for
marriage. Even Arthur's devoted wife Grace (Gemma Jones) finds it
difficult to endorse what seems to her to be less a quest for justice
than a vain attempt to restore the Winslow name.
The Winslow's reversal of fortune comes when Sir Robert Morton
(Jeremy Northam) enters the picture and decides to assist them. Though
Catherine disapproves of Morton's aloof attitude ("Nothing could stir
that dead heart," she remarks), the controlled friction that develops
between them suggests they may still be seeing each other regardless of
how the case turns out.
 In typical British style, the emotions are consistently underplayed and
the toll of the trial on the household suggested rather than dramatized.
Nor do we see any of the courtroom action, a strategy which keeps the
focus on the family. At the same time, centering so much of the drama in
the home sometimes makes "Winslow" seem a little stagy and constrained,
especially in the movie's set-up sequences.
But the performances are strong enough to carry the film along.
Hawthorne expertly renders a picture of a gentleman who seems to be
disintegrating from the inside outside, while Pidgeon, whose awkwardness
in "The Spanish Prisoner" was that picture's only glaring weak spot,
does an admirable job of showing how the "modern woman" Catherine comes
into her own while protecting her brother. With a sly smile and an arch
tone of voice, Northam communicates everything we need to know about
Morton and his true motivations. James Sanford

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated G
Sony Pictures Classics
starring Nigel Hawthorne, Jeremy Northam, Rebecca Pidgeon, Gemma
Jones, Guy Edwards, Matthew Pidgeon, Colin Stinton
based on the play by Terence Rattigan
written and directed by David Mamet
Playwright/filmmaker David Mamet is truly a master of the literary
arts. To call him accomplished would be an understatement, for Mamet,
after scripting 23 movies(as well as numerous other plays), is beyond
accomplishment. The man has brought us projects varying from
"Glengarry Glen Ross" to "The Edge". Mamet also crafted last year's
brilliant mystery "The Spanish Prisoner". But, as we all know,
sometimes the masters have their disasters.
David Mamet's latest, "The Winslow Boy", is no disaster, but it is far
from perfect. The G-rated period piece is based on Terence Rattigan's
play about a court case involving a boy who is accused of stealing a
five-shilling postal order. I am unfamiliar with the source material,
but Mamet seems to have some trouble structuring the story into an
engrossing film.
Ronnie Winslow(Guy Edwards), the film's title character, is a
14-year-old boy who arrives home from his school bearing an expulsion
notice which tells of his theft. He lives in a large home in London
with his father, Arthur(Nigel Hawthorne), his mother, Grace(Gemma
Jones), his brother, Dickie(Matthew Pidgeon) and his sister(Rebecca
Pidgeon, Mamet's wife) who is about to be married.
Ronnie is afraid to show the notice to his father, but eventually he
is forced to. Arthur's reaction, however, is entirely unexpected. He
asks Ronnie to swear to him that he did not commit this crime, and
when Ronnie does, Arthur vows that he will "let right be done."  He
hires the distinguished Sir Robert Morton(Jeremy Northam) as an
attorney, and they take their case as far as they can.
The case of "The Winslow Boy" is criticized by reporters from the
start.  They say that the Winslows are going overboard, fighting the
legal system so viciously, but Arthur just proclaims that right must
be done.
I have to admit that I love the message of the film; that in order to
find justice, you must push the system. But it is here that the film
stumbles messily. We never get inside the courtroom, and we view the
case as outsiders. Instead of focusing on the trial itself, Mamet
focuses on the emotions of the characters, as they ponder whether or
not to drop the case altogether. While the characters are developed
rather nicely, they are simply not as interesting as the trial
itself. Therefore, "The Winslow Boy" is a meandering character drama
instead of an exciting courtroom thriller.
There is still much to admire about "The Winslow Boy". The acting is
top-notch, with Hawthorne, Northam, and R. Pidgeon standing out. David
Mamet accomplishes an interesting feat by making a G-rated feature
that has as much pizazz as many R-rated films. Mamet's previous film,
"The Spanish Prisoner", was a PG-rated thriller that offered much more
than any R-rated thriller of last year. David Mamet may very well be
the antidote to all the unnecessary on-screen violence. "The Winslow
Boy" is an intriguing project, but one that only a master can do
wrong.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST


Author
Dennis Schwartz
WINSLOW BOY, THE (director: David Mamet; cast: Nigel Hawthorne (Arthur
Winslow), Jeremy Northam (Sir Robert Morton), Rebecca Pidgeon (Catherine
Winslow), Gemma Jones (Grace Winslow), Guy Edwards (Ronnie Winslow),
Sarah Flind (Violet), Matthew Pidgeon (Dickie Winslow), Aden Gillett
(John Watherstone), 1999)
This is a story about personal freedom, government intransigence,
political bureaucracy, and justice. It is adapted from Terence
Rattigan's 1946 play about such a case of family loyalty in 1910
England. It is distinguished by Mamet's sharp dialogue and a cast that
is just outstanding. The Edwardian-aged story is chocked full of
sensibility and rife with a tautness to it that keeps you fully tuned
into its dramatics.The real trial of the 13-year-old English naval
student expelled from the Osborne Naval Academy because he stole a
five-shilling postal order was a big deal in the London headlines at
that time. It was called the trial of the century in England, with the
public taking sides with the wrongly accused youngster.
The film version of that event takes liberties with the real story. It
begins in 1912, on a rainy London day, in the immaculate sitting room in
the capacious early-century house of the Winslow's. We are introduced to
the family patriarch, Arthur Winslow (Nigel Hawthorne), his dignified
wife Grace (Gemma), the unsuccessful brother Dickie (Matthew Pidgeon),
the liberated, cigarette smoking, suffragette Catherine Winslow (Rebecca
Pidgeon) and her army officer fiancé John Watherstone (Aden Gillett).
Catherine soon discovers her 14-year-old brother, Ronnie (Guy Edwards)
standing in the garden, soaken wet and frightened. He shows her the
letter of his expulsion from the school, begging her not to tell his
banker father, who so much wanted him to attend that prestigious school.
But when the father finds out about his dismissal, he asks only one
thing of his son: Tell me the truth, Did you do it? When he professes
his innocence the entire family backs him, and they decide to take this
seemingly trivial matter to court and to parliament. This will prove to
be a great burden on the father economically and physically, it will
also strain the relationship of Catherine and John, Dickie will have to
leave college for a job at the bank, and it will cause Grace to cutback
on her social obligations.
Sir Robert Morton (Jeremy Northam,), the country's top attorney, is
asked by the family to defend the boy and save the Winslow's name from
disgrace. He turns out to be a better and more feeling lawyer than what
Catherine expected of him, which adds even more weight to the already
intriguing story. He is also a great actor, able to act with a proper
Edwardian sophistication as a very specially gifted and contentious
lawyer. His motives for taking the case had been suspect. But when he
secretly turns down a highly honored post to continue with the case,
even though those in-the-know about such things, think he doesn't have
much chance of winning, Catherine is convinced that she has found a new
love in her life.
The Winslow Boy answers both the legal and moral questions it asks about
this case. Its legal theme "Let justice be done" really equates in this
particular case to doing the right thing legally, which is acquitting
the youngster. So as Arthur states, "Let right be done." While on the
moral question, the hurt father, whose pride had been injured, pursues
vindication even though he realizes that Ronnie is happy in his new
school and what he is doing to his family almost borders on
irresponsibility on his part. Yet there is such grace and forthrightness
in the father's demeanor, that he stands out as a sympathetic and
lovable giant of a person. Nigel Hawthorne was simply brilliant in this
role, conveying an urbane wit and a strong backbone for taking on the
fight for a cause he believes in with all his heart.
This is just a wonderful and an almost flawless film (the only flaw: the
likable family seemed so smug with their upper-class status). David
Mamet has done a masterful job in directing someone else's words to its
fullest potential. On paper, the outline for this story and its
denouement, do not suggest how great a work this film turned out to be.
Even its old-fashioned story is more modern than it first appears to be.
Don't miss this one. You might have to wait a long time before you find
a film with both a family and a lawyer portrayed in such a genuine and
likable mold. It was delightfully startling to watch the nuances every
character performed, as they held their emotions in check by their keen
intellect. Yet what came through even more than their perseverance, was
that underneath, in their bellies, there were all sorts of emotions
taking place that we could see overtly in their character. We could feel
it in the sexual tension between Catherine and Sir Robert, in the
father's unspoken love for his family, and in the mother's quiet
humanity.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE WINSLOW BOY (1999)
(Sony Classics)
Starring: Nigel Hawthorne, Jeremy Northam, Rebecca Pidgeon, Gemma Jones,
Guy Edwards, Colin Stinton, Aden Gillett, Matthew Pidgeon.
Screenplay: David Mamet, based on the play by Terence Rattigan.
Producer: Sarah Green.
Director: David Mamet.
MPAA Rating: G
Running Time: 100 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Depending upon one's point of view, THE WINSLOW BOY is either as
unlikely a piece of material as one could expect from David Mamet or a
perfect fit in the Mamet oeuvre.  Certainly it's surprising to find Mamet
directing a script by another writer, even more surprising to find the
ultra-contemporary Mamet directing a period piece, and more surprising yet
to find the profanity-happy Mamet directing a G-rated script.  There's
also something perfectly Mamet-like in the film's themes of people seeking
the truth of things behind the formalized dance of conversation.  Mamet
isn't straying far from comfortable ground, but he strays far enough to
find an intriguing new perspective on film-making.  THE WINSLOW BOY may be
his finest work as a film director, perhaps because he's working from a
less tightly-controlled script.
     The story, set in the early 1910's, concerns an upper-middle class
English family called the Winslows.  Father Arthur (Nigel Hawthorne), a
banker, is comfortable with the life he has made, and even with the lives
of his underachieving son Dicky (Matthew Pidgeon) and Suffragette daughter
Catherine (Rebecca Pidgeon).  He is not at all comfortable, however, with
youngest son Ronny's (Guy Edwards) dismissal from military school when he
is accused of stealing a five-shilling postal order.  Determined to clear
his son's name, Arthur throws all his resources into Ronny's defense,
including retaining famed lawyer Sir Robert Morton (Jeremy Northam).  But
the Winslows face an uphill battle trying to obtain a civil trial before
either their money or Sir Robert's political connections run out.
     A contemporary movie-goer might expect THE WINSLOW BOY to turn into a
courtroom drama, chock full of witness stand backpedaling and banging
gavels.  In fact, there's not a second of courtroom footage in THE WINSLOW
BOY; the closest it gets is Morton's tense interview with Ronnie before
deciding to take the case.  Rattigan's text is more concerned with subtler
matters than the melodrama of legal confrontations, including issues still
resonant fifty years after the play's debut.  As the Winslows' resources
dwindle, Arthur begins to wonder whether he can afford to pursue the case
indefinitely, inspiring questions on the modern connection between wealth
and justice.  The story also attacks the casual dismissal of pursuits of
justice, not on the basis of right or wrong, but on the basis of how
annoying it is to have normalcy disrupted.
     As thought-provoking as THE WINSLOW BOY may be, however, it's often 
far too sedate in its interpersonal relationships.  Rattigan's narrative
generally focuses not on the people involved in the Winslow case, but on
all the business surrounding the case: the intense press scrutiny 
(including a "women's issues" reporter more interested in curtains than
Ronnie's guilt or innocence); the vagaries of public opinion; the
machinations required even to bring a case against the Admiralty.  The
characters in THE WINSLOW BOY face consequences for their choices, but the
choices are more interesting to Rattigan than those consequences.  There's
a Merchant Ivory vibe to the repressed emotions without the Merchant Ivory
readiness to show the intensity behind them.
     Mamet has never been known for his emotionalism, but the fault here
appears to lie far more with Rattigan.  Indeed, Mamet takes some of the
simplest scenes and charges them with more feeling than they might deserve
(notably Arthur's demand of honesty from Ronnie).  He has always been a
remarkably efficient film director, and THE WINSLOW BOY certainly doesn't
stray in that regard.  He does, however, find a facility with actors not 
always evident when he's working from his own words.  Hawthorne is
brilliant, Northam is appropriately enigmatic, and even Rebecca Pidgeon
seems vaguely human.  There's little Mamet can do with the huge chunks of
dialogue involving exposition of off-stage events, or to fill in the
spaces between the people, but he does a lot with a story that's more
conceptual than actual.  THE WINSLOW BOY is an interesting challenge to
which Mamet rises, applying his intricate construction as well to a
stately manor as he does to a skyscraper.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE WINSLOW BOY (UK,1999) *** 1/2 Directed and written by David Mamet,
based on the play by Terence Rattigan. Photography, Benoit Delhomme.
Editing, Barbara Tulliver. Production design, Gemma Jackson. Costume
design, Consolata Boyle. Music, Alaric Jans. Cast: Nigel Hawthorne (Arthur
Winslow), Jeremy Northam (Sir Robert Morton), Rebecca Pidgeon (Catherine
Winslow), Gemma Jones (Grace Winslow), Guy Edwards (Ronnie Winslow),
Matthew Pidgeon (Dickie Winslow), Colin Stinton (Desmond Curry, the family
sollicitor), Aden  Gillett (Captain John Weatherstone, Catherine's fiance),
Sarah Flind (the maid Violet), Neil North (First Lord of the Admiralty),
Sara Stewart (the journalist Miss Barnes), Perry Fenwich (a photographer),
Alan Polanski (Mr. Miahcels, Sir Robert Morton's clerk), Duncan Gould
(Commons reporter), Jim Dunk (colleague), Ian Soundy (local reporter), Eve
Bland (suffragette), Chris Porter (MP). Produced by Sarah Green. A Sony
Pictures Classics release.110 minutes. Rated G.
With The Winslow Boy, his sixth film as writer-director, (and seventh as a
writer) David Mamet pulls a Cocteau.  Jean Cocteau (1889-1963) was a jack
of all artistic trades and master of most. He wrote novels, poetry, plays,
ballets, movie scripts; he drew, painted, sculpted, designed pottery,
stained-glass windows; he was an illustrator, a film director, an
occasional actor --but then  his whole life was a performance. It is all
summed up when, in the years preceding World War I, Sergei Diaghilev (the
famed founder and director of Ballets Russes), before Cocteau's desire to
create ballets, told the young man: "Jean, etonne-moi!" ("Surprise me!")
Mamet is not  a Cocteau-like "touche-a-tout"  but a protean
stage-and-screen creator--and full of surprises. His latest and most
radical twist  is to switch from his tough, rough,   vulgar, profane
American subjects and colloquialisms to a most un-Mametish direction and
writing of a British drama of genteel people, manners and speeches. He
succeeds perfectly.
The Winslow Boy is based on a true event in 1908  Edwardian England. George
Archer-Shee was the youngest child of a retired Liverpool bank manager.
George, then approaching fourteen, and a cadet at the Osbourne Naval
College, was expelled for (allegedly) cashing a five-shilling money order
that was not his. His father, convinced of the child's claims of innocence,
challenged the accusation. Not an easy thing to do since he was up against
the College and its parent, the Admiralty which were immune to lawsuits.
The Archer-Shee case quickly caught the imagination of the British public
and became a "cause celebre" which, in some ways, reminds me of the
notorious Dreyfus Affair (1894-1906) which rent France into two camps. The
British camps were, it would seem, far from the rabid or hot-under-the
collar split across the Channel, so that the Archer-Shee affair did not
become notorious and did not create a world-wide stir the way the Dreyfus
case did. Anti-Semitism, played a huge role across the Channel;
anti-Catholicism may have been a factor in the Archer-Shee turmoil. The
French Captain 's indictement was also the result of intense hatred between
liberals and what we would call the extreme right today. The storm around
the English boy looks like more of a matter of belief or disbelief that a
well brought-up subject of the King could stoop to such an un-Britannic
deed. In any case, in 1910, the boy George was exonerated.
The playwright Terrence Rattigan, already popular in England for his
"well-made" plays since the mid-1930s, had his greatest isuccess in  the
U.K and the U.S.A  right after World War II, when he adapted the
Archer-Shee case as the stage-play "The Winslow Boy" (1946). This then
became a very good  film, as did Rattigan's other best known plays, the
Browning Version  and Separate Tables.
"The Winslow Boy" moved its family from Liverpool to London, and the
time-frame from 1908-1910 to 1912-1914. Mamet's version retains all that,
plus very much of the source play, including a change in George's big
sister Kate, from a conservative woman in real life to a suffragette in the
play.
I will not sort out what is Rattigan's, Mamet's or Caesar's. The Mamet
version, as I remember the earlier ones, is both wonderfully faithful to
the originals and wonderfully original at the same time -- a neat trick and
quite an accomplishment. Nor will I detail the story except for
generalities, the first of which is, of course, that the characters show
almost painful British politeness, and sang-froid which hides deep
emotions.
The second is the matching soberness of the superb performers--I mean all
of them.  Nigel Hawthorne triumphs as Arthur Winslow, the father. He has a
rich background of which only the TV series Yes, Minister and The Madness
of King George are familiar to Americans. He never loses his dignity--nor
do the other Winslows-- but is never stuffy either.  Mr.Winslow (no one
could call him just Arthur), goes through agonies which include the melting
of his fortune, yet keeps an upper lip worthy of a nation of Empire
builders.
Rebecca Pidgeon (she is Mamet's wife and plays Catherine Winslow) is
captivating in her disciplined ways. She is particularly appealing when
Desmond Curry, the family solicitor, older, forever and silently in love
with her, produces a coup: he enlists the help of legal eagle barrister Sir
Robert Morton to represent the Winslow boy. Kate, though not a rabid
suffragette, is politically at the opposite pole of conservative Sir
Robert's. Her logical mistrust of him (unfounded in this case) runs
throughout much of the film, enriching her role and his. The barrister is a
cold character (or so it seems), seems almost brutal as he questions the
boy (but there's a catch to this), is a handsome aristocrat who, when the
air is cleared ought to make a perfect mate for Kate. But the movie does
not succumb to easy asides of romance.
The entire family behaves nobly but un-stiffly throughout the ordeal which
includes the necessity to dismiss servants, to cut down expenses, and to be
public figures. Again, none of this is stressed. Facile cliches (in other
hands) are absent. We do not get the standard view passersby pointing to
any one Winslow and whispering "that's the mother, that's the brother."
A point of historical interest I dug up. The real Sir Robert was Edward
Henry, Baron Carson of Duncairn, a major political figure in Ireland and
England where he was elected to the House of Commons and served as British
solicitor general (1900-1905). In 1895, as Queen's Counsel, he was the
cross-examiner at Oscar Wilde's trial for homosexuality, and was
instrumental in the conviction of the writer. That's a bit ironical, given
that in the Archer-Shee affair, Edward Carson went against the Admiralty,
and that for awhile (1916-17) he was First Lord of the Admiralty.
The movie is promising from its start, with plain, sober credits and
unobtrusive music. Its construction also shines by its apparent, classical
simplicity, something that (cf. Renoir, Ozu, Bresson) is far harder to
accomplish than riotous complexity.
Right away, an elegant, sensitive sense of cinema prevails. Within the
first fifteen minutes or less, the stage is intelligently set. It is an
exposition in the tradition of well-made plays, but then, it is a smooth,
un-abitrary class A exposition which does not hit one with cliched verbal
or visual effects. (A class B stage exposition would be the "tell" rather
than "show" kind. Here, for instance, a couple of servants might be
discussing Arthur Winslow in terms such as "Our master, old-fashioned and
skeptical about certain modern trends, is not without a sense of humor.
Although he is the unquestioned head of the family, a give-and-take mood
prevails; etc. etc.") In other words, the class B exposition is a kissin'
cousin of plot-telling in reviews of films and plays.
For the discriminating audience, and especially for those who are familiar
with the source play and its film adaptation, the pleasures of Mamet's
Winslow are in details of speech and cinematography.
Example: as disgraced young George stands outside the family home, in the
rain, he is spotted by the household help. The maid throws a shawl on her
back as she goes out to get him. Seconds later, Kate too does this. But the
shawls and the gestures are different. Observe with care and you will
appreciate the subtleties in the flow and the discreet parallels.
Another example. George, now in another school, comes home  by railroad.
Boys will be boys. The youngster is all excited by the speed of train and
tells Father of his calculations of train speeds, while the old man listens
pleasantly but obviously with his thoughts on the family troubles. A
family, mind you, which without fanfare or rhetoric is smoothly shown
closing ranks and bonding more than ever. This includes Dickie (Matthew
Pidgeon, Rebecca's real life brother in his film debut) who has sacrificed
studies at Oxford to get employment. He bears more than a passing
resemblance to Tony Blair.
The Pidgeons, both American (Rebecca was trained at the Royal  Academy of
the Dramatic Arts) sound totally British, although my sharp-eared friend
Pearl Goodman, rich with the experience of teaching English as a second
language, opined that Rebecca's pitch was more American than British.
A third example. In the House, as Kate sit in the Ladies' Gallery, she sees
the now increasingly likable Sir Robert holding the floor. It is a mere
glimpse through the small openings in a metal trellis. The camera merely
touches on the people then cuts outside to a bobby lighting up a smoke.
That's lighter than air cinematography and editing.
A final example, among many. One aspect of the movie is a return to the
pre-Surgeon General's warnings about smoking. Older pictures exploited the
ways, styles and methods of smoking in a huge variety of telling ways.
Think of how, in Now Voyager, Paul Henreid lights cigarettes for Bette
Davis and himself. Think of  To Have and Have Not, and Lauren Bacall's
historic entrance Humphrey Bogart's room. Think of thousands of films from
all countries and all periods. The cigarette was, arguably, the most
creative of all props.
In Winslow the tradition of creative, expressive smoking is resumed,
notably by Kate, a modern, liberated woman. At the same time, in an early
sequence, the consideration of not overpuffing indoors logically leads Kate
and her fiance to step outside for a cigarette, and outside is where the
plot needs to place them.
I've seen the film twice, starting at the 1999 Cannes Festival's in its
third or fourth day. (It was an official selection but not in the main
competition).  The previous films had been rather disappointing. Winslow
was the first exceptionally good work. Yet there was scant attention paid
to it . I overheard no discussions yet I suppose that The Winslow Boy must
have been deemed "old-fashioned" or "traditional," when the truth is that
it was as clever, subtle and accomplished as a number of older, admired
classics. It is far from a routine filmed or "aired-out" play. What you get
is the best of both worlds.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Greg King
THE WINSLOW BOY (G).  
(Columbia Tristar)
Director: David Mamet
Stars: Nigel Hawthorne, Rebecca Pidgeon, Jeremy Northam, Gemma Jones, Guy 
Edwards, Matthew 
Pidgeon, Colin Stinton, Aden Gillett, Sarah Flind, Alan Polanski
Running time: 110 minutes.
In 1912, The Winslow family is shattered when their 13 year
old son Ronnie (Guy Edwards) is expelled from naval college after
being convicted of stealing a five pound postal note.  His father
Arthur (Nigel Hawthorne) believes in his innocence and is prepared to
gamble the family's reputation and wealth on establishing his
innocence and righting an obvious injustice.  He hires Sir Robert
Morton (Jeremy Northam, from Emma, etc), one of the country's leading
attorneys, to fight the legal battle.
While the trial is at the centre of the film, the court room
action itself takes place off screen.  This gently paced but incisive
drama concentrates on exploring the effects the trial and the public
notoriety has on this very proper wealthy family.  The Winslow Boy is
also a discreet romance, as the film explores the slowly attraction
that develops between Morton and Catherine (Rebecca Pidgeon), Arthur's
independent minded, suffragette daughter.
Terence Rattigan's 1940's play, based upon a real life trial
that shook up pre-war England, would seem like unusual material for
director David Mamet, the most contemporary of American playwrights.
Mamet is best known for his acerbic and hard hitting explorations of
the American dream turned sour (Glengarry Glen Ross, etc) rather than
sedately paced period pieces.  However, he directs with unusual and
unexpected restraint and insight - and there's not a harsh four letter
word in sight.
The performances from the ensemble cast are all uniformly
flawless.  Hawthorne has rarely been better, and is excellent in a
seemingly tailor made role as the prickly, but determined and
surprisingly sympathetic patriarch.  Pidgeon (Mamet's wife, also seen
in the recent The Spanish Prisoner) delivers an understated
performance that succinctly captures the passion and essence of her
enlightened character.  Northam brings a quiet strength and dignity to
his role as the lawyer who challenges many of the accepted precepts of
British justice.
This beautiful and intelligently crafted film has class
stamped all over it.  More importantly though, it also has a sense of
passion and warmth that seems to be missing from the period films from
the Merchant Ivory team.  Mamet's meticulous attention to the period
detail beautifully recreates Edwardian London, and Benoit Delhomme's
cinematography is simply sumptuous.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Nigel Hawthorne, Jeremy Northam, Rebecca Pidgeon, Gemma Jones.
Rated G.
David Mamet has long been my favorite screenwriter and director. With
his distinctive, more often than not ingenious dialogue, and his laid
back style of direction nearly all of his movies are absolutely
irresistible. Some of them tend to be thickly layered, deceptive
productions that require the audience to look at the film in a less
superficial manner than the plot seems to require in order to discern
its concealed message, or sometimes even a concealed storyline. And
although the real plot in his new project The Winslow Boy is slightly
more conspicuous than in some of his other endeavors, it is still a
brilliantly complex, consistently riveting motion picture about honor,
about sacrifice, and about the difference between what is commonly known
as justice and what is right. Oh, and it's rated G.
Incidentally, this is the first time that Mamet has decided to adapt
someone else's work; namely a play by Terrence Rattigan, set in the 19th
Century. He casts Nigel Hawthorne in the lead role as Arthur Winslow, a
rich, aging man who finds out that his 14 year old son Ronnie has been
kicked out of the Naval Academy for allegedly stealing a 5 shilling
postal note. "Did you do it?" he asks his boy. "No father, I didn't,"
Ronnie answers. That's enough for Arthur, who, with his oldest daughter
(Rebecca Pidgeon), immediately starts a crusade to bring his son's case
to court. They enlist the help of Sir Robert Morton, a notorious
attorney to help them achieve that formidably daunting task.
It all seems fairly frivolous, and no matter how you look at it, the
Winslow Case is not the trial of the century. But Arthur is determined
to keep his family's word clean and he is willing to go quite far to
make sure of that. Soon enough, Sir Robert Morton along with the rest of
the country becomes equally wrapped up in the proceedings. So do we.
All David Mamet does for the script is tighten and hone the dialogue,
but his style is still fairly apparent. The characters still talk in his
trademark staccatto lines and there is still tension present in
conversations that no ordinary writer would be able to make tense. But
this is not Mamet's norm, and it's refreshing to see Mamet deviate from
his world of crooks, gangsters as con men, wonderful as those films
were.
Nigel Hawthorne's performance is nearly flawless. His delivery is that
of a dignified yet not pompous man who seems to be getting beaten at his
own game. We pity the man, but we also like him. Rebecca Pidgeon, David
Mamet's wife, who gave a fairly awful performance in The Spanish
Prisoner is at the top of her game here as Arthur's oldest daughter, a
flailing feminist who gives her all to the Winslow case as a way for
making up for her lack of success in the Women's Suffrage Movement.
The Winslow Boy is a wonderful movie that avoids cliches such as a
seemingly inevitable courtroom scene and shoots higher -- it wants to
make a real impact rather than a phony one. Be honest: did you feel
anything profound at or after the courtroom scenes in films like A Time
To Kill? If you wanted to but didn't, this is a movie for you. It is the
epitome of subtlety: it's powerful without being too emotional, sad
without even trying to be depressing.
David Mamet can churn out some great scripts, but in this movie he
proves to those who ever doubted it once and for all that he is a hell
of a director too. He is almost a national treasure. His films deserve
their own genre.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
