Title
Review for Virgen de los sicarios, La (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
OUR LADY OF THE ASSASSINS (La Virgen de los sicarios)
   After the shootout at Colorado's Colombine High School the
cliche was bandied around once again: "In my day, disputes
were settled by fists.  Nowadays they use guns."  You think that's
bad?  Contrast that with what they're saying about the high
school kids not in Columbine but in Colombia: "They used to
settle disputes with machetes.  Now they use guns."  This is an
actual quote from Barbet Schroeder's new film, "Our Lady of the
Assassins," the first Spanish-language work from the director
familiar to Americans for movies like "Reversal of Fortune" and
"Single White Female."  In this bleak, cynical, blasphemous and
occasionally even humorous vision of life in Medellin--known to
us here as the capital of that country's drug cartel--Schroeder
hones in on a well-traveled homosexual now in his fifties,
Fernando (German Jaramillo), who has returned home, as he
puts it, "to die."  Why so?  Despite the large apartment with a
stunning three-sided view of the city and a considerable sum of
money which he has inherited from his sister, he is simply tired of
living.  Ah, but redemption, spelled L-O-V-E awaits in the form of
a innocent looking teen, Alexis (Anderson Ballesteros), to whom
Fernando is introduced at a party by a friend and with whom he
establishes a sexual and caring bond.
   Schroeder's take on the city of Medellin, based on Fernando
Vallejo's novel, is not the sort that the Colombia Tourist
Department would want to use to lure potential travelers to its
doorstep.  Schroeder filmed on the fly to avoid mighty unpleasant
repercussions from the locals who dwell in the drug-infested
barrios of the otherwise sparkling city.  Its clean, well-stocked
malls could pass muster in Southern Cal. and touristic areas of
Europe.  But "La Virgen de los sicarios" is a tour of a city, as
Fernando advises a witness to a murder, in which
"people get killed all the time....This isn't Switzerland."  The  lad
whom Fernando has taken under his wing and who is in turn
protected by young Alexis is sought by hit men.  Bearing the kill-
or-be-killed demeanor, Alexis has no problem whipping out his
Baretta and offing a cab driver who refuses to turn down his radio.
Ditto several people his own age who come bearing down on him
on their Kawas, guns drawn.  While Fernando does not much
approve of his prot‚g‚'s behavior, he seems remarkably
accepting, blaming the death of civilization for the murders that
befall his homeland in much the way that Wallace Shawn's
intellectual played by Mike Nichols in "Death of a Mourner" laments 
the demise of high culture.
   If Fernando were living on New York's Sutton Place, we'd
probably call him not so much a limousine liberal as an acolyte of
radical chic.  He has money, but he is a militant non-believer, an
atheist who believes that if God exists, then He has failed and
Satan has won the battle.  He understands that the rich run the
world, but like so many other radicals of the left, he has
considerable contempt for the poor, telling one young, ragged
woman with two children in tow to "beg for pesos from the person
who knocked you up."
   Amid the death and decay that Fernando and Alexis find in the
city (in one area there is a sign "Do not dump corpses," where, of
course, several bodies have been placed in states of advanced
decay), there is considerable humor.  In one scene Schroeder
contrasts Fernando's love of Maria Callas with Alexis's fondness
for rock, the latter insisting that the diva sounds as though she
were being strangled.  "Our Lady of the Assassins" is filled with
the music of the people--the tango of the night club, the drums of
the punk who lives in the apartment next door, the blaring beat of
the taxi radios--but a Jerry Bruckheimer-type score would be
gratuitous.  Schroeder delivers his message loud and clear:
civilization as the older generation knew it is dead, and Medellin
is merely metaphor.
Rated R.  Running time: 98 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Writer Fernando Vallejo (German Jaramillo) comes home to the tumultuous 
city of Medellin, Colombia after 30 years of absence. At a gay brothel run 
by an old friend he meets Alexis (Anderson Ballesteros), a teenaged boy toy 
who Fernando immediately takes a liking to. The boy moves into the older 
man's sparsely furnished apartment and the two explore the vibrancy and the 
violence of the city made infamous by drug trafficking in "Our Lady of the 
Assassins." 
Fernando, as close as I can figure, is a writer of some fame and fortune 
returning home, as he puts it, to die. (Ambiguous and enigmatic are two 
words I would use to describe "Our Lady of the Assassins.") He teams up, at 
once, with pretty, young Alexis, a tough-minded street kid who fears 
nothing and packs a big gun - for his own protection, he says. The pair set 
off into the modern/old city of Medellin, now called Medello according to 
Alexis, to satisfy the boy's desire for rampant consumerism. Fernando buys 
an expensive stereo and any other trinkets that Alexis wants and, for a 
while, they have a relationship that borders on being father/son-like 
(except for the sex part). There is a price to pay for this time of bliss 
and the violence that clutches the citizens of Medellin will inevitably 
visit the couple. 
Violent confrontation on the mean streets of city is a way life, especially 
if you are young, male and armed with a semi-automatic pistol - one gift 
Alexis and other boys ask for is a mini Uzi submachine gun, just to give 
you some perspective. Car jacking is a popular sport in town and Fernando 
watches as a guy who owns a car resists and is gunned down in cold blood by 
the 'jacker. Alexis, himself, is involved in one shooting after another as 
he protects himself from endless assaults from countless enemies on the 
street. With sudden death a real possibility for teenaged Colombian boys, 
the lives of the street kids burns brighter than for kids elsewhere, making 
the consumer ideology a thriving one in Medellin. Live fast and die young 
is the motto these kids live by. 
Fernando is an enigma as a man returning home to a world that is completely 
different from the one he left so long ago. The rise and fall of Pablo 
Escobar, the yoke put upon the country by the drug trade, the violence 
perpetrated by the country's rulers and, particularly, its youth all washes 
over Fernando but, apart from a frequently used look of melancholy, he 
seems unmoved by the events. (The man is humanized when he uses, and loses, 
Alexis's gun to put an injured dog out of its misery. You know that this is 
the film's pivotal scene and will color later events dramatically.) 
The autobiographical screenplay, by Fernando Vallejo, keeps the central 
figure, the writer, at arm's length from the events around him, even when 
tragedy strikes. There are lessons to be learned here but they are muted by 
keeping the audience from embracing the man. Jaravillo is too much of an 
enigma and being an observer of his observer, I never embraced the 
character or cared about the lessons to be learned. Anderson Ballesteros, 
on the other hand, is quite charismatic as the cocky, violent Alexis who 
thinks nothing of gunning down a cabbie who threatens Fernando. His lack of 
concern for life, even his own, is conveyed in a professional manner by the 
young actor. 
Barbet Schroeder, with lensing capably handled by Rodrigo Lalinde, uses 
high-definition digital video to capture the garish look of Medello, a city 
that was made modern on a foundation of illicit drugs. The utter 
believability of the violence, its sudden and final nature, that grip the 
city is palpably felt. I don't think that Schroeder is embellishing on the 
violence that routinely takes place  and gives the film a realistic tenor. 
The tone of this part of the film put me in mind of the 1981 Brazilian 
film, "Pixote," an even grittier look at the street life of homeless kids 
in a violent urban arena. 
"Our Lady of the Assassins" succeeds in taking you into the heart of 
Colombia and showing a violence-laden world that few will ever go to see. 
The main flaw is I never empathize, or even sympathize, with too enigmatic 
Fernando. I give it a B-. 
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com 

Author
Laura Clifford
OUR LADY OF THE ASSASSINS (La Virgen de los sicarios)
Worldly gay writer Fernando (German Jaramillo) returns home to family
inheritance, but no family, in Medellin, Columbia.  At a male gathering
in the elegant home of an old friend, Fernando meets teenager Alexis (Anderson
Ballesteros), the sole survivor of a gang that got wiped out on the city's
streets.  While Fernando opens his heart and pours out his bitter
philosophies to the young man, Alexis opens Fernando's eyes to the unremitting
violence that's taken over the places of his youth in the Columbian
submission for Best Foreign Language film, "Our Lady of the Assassins."
Adapted from his 1994 novel by Fernando Vallejo and directed by Barbet
Schroeder ("Reversal of Fortune"), "Our Lady of the Assassins" is a film of
contradictions, at once poetic and tender while also brutally violent,
where a machismo culture is shown matter-of-factly through the eyes of 
homosexual characters and gang members pay homage to the Virgin Mary before 
gunning people down in the streets.
Fernando rails against God as he visits old cathedrals overrun with the
homeless and drug abusers.  He's irritated by the music blaring from every
taxi he enters and the nighttime drumming of a young neighbor across the
courtyard even as he indulges heavy-metal punk loving Alexis in a stereo
system (which he later hurls off his balcony).  He relishes the irony of
finding bodies on a hillside posted with the sign 'No dumping of corpses.'
Fernando is shocked one morning as he crosses the street and witnesses
a man killed, literally at his feet, for refusing to turn over his car keys,
an act Alexis dismisses as stupid.  He's a little less shocked when
Alexis identifies his drumming neighbor on the street and shoots him dead,
decrying the senselessness of the act while attending to the practical 
matter of not getting caught.  Soon he's so inured to the environment that
he joins Alexis in making fun of the hysteria of a pregnant woman who
witnesses a gang murder, yet he continues to fret about food vendors and
restaurateurs who split paper napkins to save money ('a fly couldn't blow
its nose in this!').
As Alexis begins to get visits from the aptly named Deadboy, tipping him
off as to the nature of that day's assassins, Fernando seems to alternately
accept the surreal aspect of their existence and become suicidal.  In
saving Fernando from himself, Alexis loses his precious revolver, and
Fernando, perhaps now believing Alexis is invincible, naively professes
good riddance.
While Fernando's stance on violence never seems to be as strongly rooted
as he initially professes it to be, stage actor Jaramillo makes us feel
his nostalgic ache for more innocent times and the pain that would make
he himself pull the trigger.  Non-actor Ballesteros is astoundingly good as 
the handsome young Alexis, whose relationship with the older man reveals the
human side of a boy forced by his environment to deny one.  Juan David
Restrepo has less opportunity to prove his acting skills as Wilmar, the
second boy Fernando loves, as his character is largely symbolic, but 
he does make one important line a climatic, jolting revelation.
Schroeder, who was raised in Bogota, filmed his movie guerilla-style.
Warned by police that he was a strong candidate for kidnapping, Schroeder 
moved quickly, using high definition video to move through the streets
as unobtrusively as possible.  He captures both the beauty of a classical 
old city of plazas and cathedrals and the squalor of poverty and violence 
brought by the corrupt influence of powerful drug cartels.  His evocation of 
the religious fervor that still endures is most powerfully wrought in a 
Bunuelian scene of a street kid sharing sweet buns with beggars as if he 
were dispensing communion wafers at an altar.
"Our Lady of the Assassins" takes us on a poetic, nightmarish journey
into a spiralling cycle of violence and death that is all the life too many
people know.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
OUR LADY OF THE ASSASSINS (LA VIRGEN DE LOS SICARIOS), directed by Oscar nominee
Barbet Schroeder (REVERSAL OF FORTUNE), has a message.  The message appears to
be that a violent society will eventually desensitize its population to acts of
violence on its streets.  Then again, perhaps that's reading too much into the
plot.  Maybe it's just a love story between two people during troubled times.
The film is set in Medellín, Colombia, where the streets constantly erupt with
the sounds of gunfire like cars backfiring.  The night is filled with explosions
as well since the drug traffickers always set off a large and colorful display
whenever they successfully smuggle drugs into the United States.
Against this backdrop, fiftyish Fernando (Germán Jaramillo) takes on a new
lover, a sixteen-year-old kid and killer named Alexis (Anderson Ballesteros). 
The two of them delight in tossing electronic equipment out of the twenty story
window of Fernando's apartment.  When a "punk" next door plays his drums too
loud each night, Fernando asks Alexis to kill him, which he does without
compunction.  With the drummer gone, Fernando begins to have trouble sleeping. 
He's not sure if the buzzing he hears is his conscience or the crickets.  Since
he's conscience challenged, it has to be the crickets.
Shot on high definition digital video, the film does have a compelling
immediacy.  What it doesn't have are characters whom we care one wit about. 
Live or die, we couldn't care less.
OUR LADY OF THE ASSASSINS runs 1:38.  The film is in Spanish with English
subtitles.  It is rated R for "strong violence, language, sexuality and drug
content" and would be acceptable for high school seniors and older.
The film opens nationwide in the United States today, Friday, September 28,
2001.   In the Silicon Valley, it is showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
