Title
Review for Still Breathing (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Matt Williams
What happens when a confirmed cynic is confronted with the specter of
true love? That's the central dilemma in Still Breathing, James F.
Robinson's  charmingly nice romantic comedy.
The film opens with an eccentric San Antonio street performer, Fletcher
McBracken (Brendan Fraser), attempting to visualize the woman of his
dreams with an amalgam of magazine photos.  You see, the men of the
McBracken family have a gift:  they each have a vision of their true
love.  It happened to Fletcher's father, and his father's father before
him. Now Fletcher is having the visions, and he is trying to capture the
image so he can search the world for the woman of his dreams.
That woman, unknown to Fletcher, is in Los Angeles.  Rosalyn Willoughby
(Joanna Going) is a jaded high stakes con artist who bilks rich men out
of their money with an elaborate art scheme.  She has long since put
aside notions of true love in favor of a much more cynical attitude.
When Fletcher appears in the midst of his quest, Rosalyn mistakenly
confuses him for a rich mark.  But soon his eccentric ways and his
unflinching faith in his vision begin to erode her defenses, and she
finds herself unwillingly falling in love.
Still Breathing treads a thin line.  It manages to be sweet and charming
without ever becoming overly saccharine and sappy.  Its offbeat
sensibilities take a little while to warm up to (at first, Fletcher
could be mistaken for a sociopathic stalker), but given time they grow
on you.
Brendan Fraser does a superb job with his sheepishly charming street
performer.  In his best roles, he mixes confidence with a slight bit of
naoveti, as he does here.  Joanna Going is appropriately headstrong with
just a hint of vulnerability.  The two of them go well together, which
is a necessity for any romantic comedy.
If you're in the mood for a pleasant little romantic comedy, Still
Breathing hits all the right notes.  Cynicism need not apply.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Michael Dequina
A plot contrivance of mammoth proportions threatens to sink the romantic
comedy _Still_Breathing_ just as it makes its first attempts to get off the
ground.  San Antonio, Texas street performer Fletcher McBracken (Brendan
Fraser) somehow, someway sees a vision of one Roz Willoughby (Joanna Going)
narrowly escaping a mugging attempt on a Hollywood street.  Convinced that
Roz is his soulmate--apparently, his father, grandfather,
great-grandfather, and so on had envisioned their eventual wives before
ever meeting them--Fletcher flies to the left coast to find her.
This rather hard-to-swallow bit of magical realism, ironically enough,
sets the stage for some very effective magic of a different sort--that of
assured writing and direction, courtesy of first-timer James F. Robinson.
It is revealed that Roz is far from the angel that Fletcher thinks she is;
in fact, she is a con artist who teases and fleeces wealthy men, and she
hooks up with Fletcher believing him to be a rich Texan mark set up by a
friend (Ann Magnuson).  While Roz's less-than-pure, emotionally detached
nature is not the most original plot complication in and of itself, a
complication stemming from this trait adds a fresh wrinkle to the formula.
In most contemporary romantic comedies, the lovers fail to realize they are
perfectly matched until the last reel.  Here, Fletcher and even Roz
recognize their unique compatibility fairly early on.  So it is not a
question as to whether Fletcher is the right guy for Roz--it's whether or
not Roz, who has long renounced true love and emotion in favor of
admittedly empty riches, is willing to allow herself such happiness.
Roz's emotional predicament is brought to vivid, sometimes heartbreaking
life by the luminous Going, of whom I've been a big fan since her
television days (am I the only one who fondly remembers her work on the
1990 revival of _Dark_Shadows_?).  She also shares a natural rapport with
Fraser, who is her perfect screen complement.  He has much less of a
character to work with--Fletcher is simply a nice, somewhat naive
romantic--but he fills in the blanks with an appealing dose of charisma and
self-deprecating humor.  Fraser's effortlessly charming performance makes
it easy to see how Fletcher can win over a hard cynic like Roz.
For all its freshness, _Still_Breathing_ ends up exactly where one would
expect.  But as with many journeys, the trip is more important than the
ultimate destination, and the one taken by Roz and Fletcher is sweet,
moving, and with an irresistible magic all its own.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
