Title
Review for Colonel Chabert, Le (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release 1-2/95  
Running Length: 1:50 
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Violence, mature themes) 
     A snow-covered battlefield littered with the dead.  Bodies stripped 
of armor and clothing, then tossed naked into mass graves.  Seemingly-
uninjured young men whose throats are uncovered to reveal mortal wounds.  
Unmoving horses dragged through the snow to join their fellows on an 
ever-growing pyre.  Frozen corpses stacked like firewood.  And one man, 
still breathing, mistakenly thrown into a pit along with countless 
numbers of his dead compatriots. 
     This still-living man is Colonel Chabert (Gerard Depardieu), the 
hero of 1807's battle of Eylau between Napoleon and the Russians.  
However, due to injuries, Chabert is unable to declare himself, and is 
presumed dead.  His wife (Fanny Ardant) re-marries, becoming a countess, 
and takes Chabert's considerable fortune with her.  Ten years later, 
however, in a RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE-like turn of events, the Colonel 
comes back to Paris with the intention of re-claiming his lost life.  
After finding a sympathetic lawyer (Fabrice Luchini), Chabert confronts 
his former wife, now the Countess Ferraud. 
     One of the underlying questions in COLONEL CHABERT is whether it's 
possible to resurrect a life that no longer exists.  Just because Chabert 
presents himself in the flesh doesn't mean that the hero of Eylau has 
come home.  After ten years spent in poverty and near-madness, the 
Colonel has become aware of how little intrinsic value there is in money 
and material possessions.  It's unclear whether his primary motive in 
revealing himself is to regain what he lost or to exact revenge upon 
those he views to have taken it from him--most notably Countess 
Ferraud. 
     COLONEL CHABERT is not a romance about two former lovers finding 
each other after a tragic ten-year separation.  Any real affection 
between the title character and his former wife has long since burned 
out.  Instead, this film is about how those two manipulate one another in 
vying for control of a fortune that each has a legitimate claim upon.   
Cupidity and backstabbing lie at the center of CHABERT, and there's 
enough legal and political maneuvering to satisfy any who enjoy those 
sorts of murky machinations. 
     Wonderfully photographed and deliberately directed, COLONEL CHABERT 
progresses slowly (sometimes painfully so), often lingering on images 
rather than proceeding to the next scene.  There are times when this 
method of storytelling works exceptionally well, but others when the 
attention to detail causes the plot to grind to a halt.  Fortunately, 
however, novice director Yves Angelo is savvy enough never to lose his 
characters amidst all the cinemtographic splendor.  Finely-furnished 
houses and scenes of battlefield dead never upstage Depardieu, Ardant, or 
Luchini, all of whom give honest, entirely-believable performances. 
     Depardieu says he was attracted to this film version of Honore de
Balzac's novel because he was fascinated by the opportunity to play in
this sort of tragedy.  And, ultimately, that's what COLONEL CHABERT
is--a tragedy.  The question that looms large throughout the movie is
not whether Chabert will regain his honor and fortune, but whether
there's enough of him left to appreciate it.  Death, after all, has
many faces, and just because the body goes on doesn't mean the
personality still exists.  This is what Depardieu conveys to the
audience, and why CHABERT possesses a level of subtlety beyond that of
most historical dramas.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     COLONEL CHABERT is one fantastic movie.  Among those who truly
excelled were: the two leads, one supporting role, the director, the
set decorator, and the cinematographer.  Everyone else who touched the
movie was gifted as well.
     COLONEL CHABERT, by the great author Balzac, is a mystery and a
drama.  Even more important, it is a character study of four people.
In 1817, a bum (Gerard Depardieu) walks into a lawyer's office.  He
weaves a disconnected tale to the lawyer (Fabrice Luchini) of him being
a dead soldier--the famous and rich Colonel Chabert.  He wants to sue
his ex-wife (Fanny Ardant) to get his money back.
     This suit is complicated since the colonel has been officially
dead for ten years and his wife is now married to a Count (Andre
Dussollier) who is a social climber in the post-Napoleonic French royal
court.  Moreover, the lawyer he picks is also his ex-wife's lawyer, and
the "colonel" knows all of this.
     This plot setup happens in the first few minutes of the show.
>From that point on, expect many surprises.  I challenge you to
guess the ending.  I will only say that the ending is good, and yet it
leaves you with some ambiguities and a few loose ends.
     My favorite part of the show is easily the Academy Award quality
supporting actor role of the lawyer.  He is tricky, complex, and
absolutely mesmerizing.  He dominates every scene he is end which is a
strong compliment when playing opposite these two leads.  Easily the
best scene in the show is when "Colonel Chabert" charms the lawyer with
his story.  When he leaves, the lawyer says he has seen the greatest
actor of his time.
     Depardieu and Ardant do award-caliber work as well.  Watch their
faces and listen to the intonation of each word.  It is a joy to see
such great artists at work.  The cinematography is marvelous through
out, but it is at the height of perfection in the lighting on the faces
and in the blue gray of the lawyer's office.  The office itself reminds
me of something by one of the great Dutch painters like Vermeer.  This
and many other scenes show the brilliance in the set decoration.
     The overall composition of the show and the careful direction of
all of the characters means that much of the credit has to go to the
director, Yves Angelo.  I read that this was his directorial debut, in
which case, I eagerly await his second directing job.
     What would I change, probably nothing.  If you see the show and
give it ****, I would not argue with you.  I almost did myself.
     The movie is perfectly timed and runs 1:50.  It is in French with
easy to follow English subtitles.  It is not rated, but I would guess
it would get PG-13 for a total of about five minutes of battle scenes.
Other than the battles, there is no sex, violence, nudity, or bad
language of any kind.  I think any child over ten could see it and any
teenager would enjoy it.  I strongly recommend it and rate it *** 1/2.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: February 21, 1995
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.

Author
Raymond Johnston
     While the free-wheeling spirit of the French New Wave may be all
but gone, except for a few festival circuit oddities, the tide of
high-brow revisionist costume dramas keeps getting stronger.  Following
close on the heels of QUEEN MARGOT, a  Dumas novel adaptation, comes
COLONEL CHARBET.  This latest film is adapted with remarkable subtlety
from a novel by Honore de Balzac.  Balzac is one of those authors that
one always means to read sometime, but never quite gets the book all
the way from the shelf to the cashier's counter.  This impressive film
might change that.  It is one of those films that makes you want to
read the book to find out more of the elusive details of the strange
story.
     COLONEL CHARBET is somewhat of a similar story to THE RETURN OF
MARTIN GUERRE.  A soldier, after a long time, returns home to find his
wife remarried, and his money, well, tied up.  The setting for the
story this time is the Empire period,  1817 to be exact.  The Colonel
is played by MARTIN GUERRE'S Depardieu.  Early in the film, Gerard
Depardieu has a long monologue.  He explains his situation to a busy
lawyer.  Eventually they trade stories on the depths to which they have
seen humanity sink.  The story calls for flashbacks but few are given,
brief glinpses of a long ago battle.  Depardieu manages to hold our
interest merely by talking in a static shot.  His low-key, seemingly
effortless approach to the complex character of Colonel Charbet is one
of the things that sells the film.
     With all the expensive trappings and elaborate Empire era
costumes the film runs the risk of becoming a bloated Masterpiece
Theatre episode.  The screenplay downplays the pageantry and even the
battle scenes.  Universal themes of ambition, greed, happiness and
justice come the forefront.  Without being cardboard cutouts, various
characters come to stand for certain ideals; the lawyer being
interested in justice most obviously.  It is small moments, little
gestures and expressions that make them real.  The way the lawyer reads
his mail while listening, Countess Ferraud's (Fanny Ardant) ploy with
her necklace, Colonel Charbet's expression when he looks at his wife's
fraudulent tax statements, all of these things make the dusty literary
characters into real people.  Injecting otherwise dusty storylines with
a note of realism is one of the Balzac is noted for.  Director Yves
Angelo, along with additional screenwriters, managed to capture that
sense of realism.  Too often the subtle elements of a costume drama are
lost in the translation.
     In terms of visual style, realism abounds as well.  The candle-lit
night scenes are dim and yellowed.  The streets seem to be always
recovering from a recent mudstorm.  The handsome, and for women often
bizarre, costumes don't look like permanent press polyester.  The
household servants look like the underfed and poorly educated people
that they probably would have been.  The hard edged Colonel Charbet,
(Depardieu), looks awkward and uncomfortable the few times that he has
to wear his dandyish suit.  His lawyer on the other hand looks as if he
was born to inhabit such flamboyant attire.  The Countess, (Ardant) has
an elaborate array of  Empire era hair accessories and doo-dads in her
room, she at least seems to know where they all go and what they are
used for.
     Ardant has a difficult role in the Countess.  She is both a victim
of circumstance and a victimizer.  Her role could easily fall into
another spider-woman portrayal of the greedy and cold blooded woman so
often found in period literature.  Ardant manages to keep the Countess
a sympathetic figure, even as she tries to use her children as pawns
and tries to deceive her husband, Count Ferraud (Andre Dussollier).
     There is a lot of history  in the film, but it is a fairly
painless lesson in post-Napoleonic events.  COLONEL CHARBET is an
easily enjoyable and easily understandable film.  The writing, acting,
directing and production design is all first rate for a period costume
drama.
