Title
Review for Lawnmower Man, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
THE LAWNMOWER MAN:  Combines some stock elements with the new idea of
virtual reality (VR) to make an enjoyable SF/action/horror flick.
PLOT/KICKOFF:  While on hiatus from his job with a military-oriented
research company involving the new technology of virtual reality
(cyberspace imaging, using computers to 'project' an interactive reality
to users), Dr. Larry Angelo (Pierce Brosnan) starts his own special
experiment to increase the intelligence of the man (Jeff Fahey?) who
mows his lawn.  Things start to go wrong as the experiment has
unexpected results and Angelo's company gets interested in the military
potential of the new line of research.
CHARACTERS/ACTING:  Brosnan is fine as the borderline-obsessed-with-his-
work scientist (not too interested in "informed consent"), and Fahey is
fine showing the transformation of the gradually-getting-smarter
lawnmower man.  Most of the rest of the characters don't have much
depth.  I wasn't sure until three-quarters of the movie was done whether
the blond woman was actually one or two different characters/actresses
(the answer is two).  However, all the characters who got involved in VR
did good jobs making those parts of the movie believable.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  I've seen bits on 20/20 and elsewhere showing the
use of virtual reality, but this movie had some of the longest segments
I've ever seen.  The segments were well-done, but none of them were
mind-blowing for me.  People who have not tried to keep up with what's
going on with VR, or who haven't seen much computer animation (from
recent animated film festivals, etc.) lately may find it amazing.  The
movie did pretty well at showing what the VR experience might be like
for people actually immersed in VR instead of those just watching it
on-screen.  The transition between ordinary and virtual reality was done
well in every case.  This is probably a better movie for big-screen than
small-screen viewing.
VIOLENCE/GORE:  Belt-whipping, some domestic violence, bullets flying,
implied violent death, bodies disassembling (VR, not gory).
LANGUAGE:  Some profanity, not extreme.
SKIN/SITUATIONS:  Some foreplay, dancing in the sheets, VR sex (not
graphic, pretty in its way).
ANALYSIS:  I understand this movie was loosely based on a Stephen King
short story (no virtual reality involved).  I haven't read it, so can't
comment on that aspect of the movie.  I enjoyed this movie, though not
as much as I had hoped to.  There really was not all that much original
to it except VR, but there were a few nice small touches in it.  One
thing I liked particularly was that this movie *showed* me what was going
on, instead of always *telling* me.  It did not patronize the audience.
Although some might argue with the believability of the side effects of
the VR research, I put that down to the "neurotropic drugs" and left it
at that.  I think it could have been a better movie, but it is probably
worth watching for people interested in VR and cyberpunk, and others who
want to check out the special effects.

Author
Murray Chapman
     I saw "Stephen King's THE LAWNMOWER MAN" yesterday.  Unfortunately,
it looks like yet another Stephen King project has made a mediocre
movie.
     This movie is about research into virtual reality and intelligence
enhancement.  Resident Mad Scientist Pierce Brosnan takes the lovable
and retarded man who mows his lawn and tries to increase his
intelligence.
     The movie's computer generated scenes are visually stunning,
however the movie is so seriously flawed in other areas that I found
myself squirming every time they switched to real life action.
     The sets were dark and gloomy--I am surprised that nobody tripped
over the equipment which littered the lab.  The dialogue was *obviously*
re-recorded: two characters talking in a large concrete room should have
some sort of echo, right?  The imminent presence of either (a) a
supernatural force, or (b) massive computer power is signalled by puffs
of smoke and/or flashing lights.
     No character development.  No plot surprises.  Plenty of characters
with vultures on their shoulders.
     The only way in which this movie is similar to SK's short story is
the fact that there is a Lawnmower Man in it: someone who mows lawns.
SK *did not* write the screenplay, nor does his name appear anywhere but
in the title.  (He was not an executive producer or anything like that.)
     Virtual reality was handled *much* *much* *much* better in
BRAINSTORM.  Go and see THE LAWNMOWER MAN if you want ten minutes of
stunning computer graphics and 90 minutes of B-grade plot.
     Stephen King has declared himself an unabashed fan of B-grade
movies.  Well, he should be just thrilled to bits with this one.  It has
all of the cliches' of horror films from the 1950's, and likewise
degenerates to a predictable apocalyptic ending.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  In THE LAWNMOWER MAN, a mix of virtual
     reality and mind-expanding drugs turn a mentally retarded
     handyman into a psychic monster.  The film borrows heavily
     from ALTERED STATES, FORBIDDEN PLANET, and CHARLY, and pays
     back in some nice computer graphics and an over-used revenge
     plot.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
     Dr. Lawrence Angelo (played by Pierce Brosnan) is one more Stephen King
character being exploited by the evil government intelligence agency "The
Shop."  His experiments with drug-enhancing virtual reality not only make
the effect more complete, it may actually be raising the intelligence of his
chimpanzee subject.  Unfortunately, the chimp does not want to find out.
The ape picks the lock of his cage and is killed walking to freedom, zapping
humans as he goes.  Angelo continues with Jobe (Played by Jeff Fahey), a
mentally retarded lawn man.
     In over-used King style (perhaps "pseudo-King" since King had little to
do with the story in the film), Jobe lives in a world of people willing to
torment him because he is so powerless.  If only he had the intelligence and
power to get back at his tormenters.  But then the brain boost he is getting
from the ultimate video game and psycho-active drugs starts giving him a
super intellect as well as telekinetic powers.  As Angelo's wife tells him
early in the film, "It may be the future to you, Larry, but it's the same
old shit to me."  She obviously knows her Stephen King films.  Other lines
seem downright silly.  "He learned Latin in two hours!  It took me a year to
learn the Latin alphabet."  That may well be true, Larry, but I assume you
were about four years old at the time.
     If the plot is overly predictable--and believe me, it is--the computer
graphics are spectacular.  They may not always make sense.  Jobe's new
girlfriend sneaks into the lab to try the virtual reality equipment.  While
she appears to be the first woman who has been in the lab, the computer
knows to visualize her virtual reality body as a female.  The computer
visuals make one wish this film had been shot in 3-D.  Even shot flat, the
visuals are quite a trip.
     The screenplay is loosely based on the short story by Stephen King.
(No, let me correct that: it is tightly based on a Stephen King story title.
It has virtually nothing to do with King's story of a lawnman who worships
the God Pan.)  It was written by the director Brett Lawrence and the
producer Gimel Everett.  It is dedicated to the memory of the co-producer,
the late Milton Subotsky.  Those of you who are fans of British horror film
will remember some classics, particularly anthology films such as THE HOUSE
THAT DRIPPED BLOOD, ASYLUM, TALES FROM THE CRYPT, and BEYOND THE GRAVE that
were co-produced in the 1960s by Subotsky for his production company Amicus
Films.  His last film was typical for him: entertaining but not heavy on
thought.  I would rate THE LAWNMOWER MAN a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
144 min., R, Science Fiction/Horror, 1992
Director: Brett Leonard
Cast: Jeff Fahey, Pierce Bronsnan, Jenny Wright, Geoffrey Lewis
     Pierce Bronsnan is a scientist who is working on Virtual Reality,
which is a simulator that opens you up to a computerized dimension.  He
has been using monkeys for these experiments, but now he wants to use a
human to see what the effect would be.  Mentally retarded Jeff Fahey is
Bronsnan's lawnmower man.  Fahey loves to play with Bronsnan's computer
simulators.  Bronsnan starts using Fahey for his experiments, without
telling him what he is doing, and with disastrous results.
     THE LAWNMOWER MAN is a combination of science fiction and horror,
mostly the science fiction though.  It uses the new technology of
Virtual Reality, which I don't know too much about.  It has some
wonderful computer animation (I'll get back to this later), good special
effects, and a good plot.  On a scale of zero to five, I give THE
LAWNMOWER MAN a four.  THE LAWNMOWER MAN is rated R for explicit
language, violence, adult situations, and brief female nudity.
     THE LAWNMOWER MAN is one of two Stephen King films coming to the
theaters in the next few months.  The other film of his is called
SLEEPWALKERS (Columbia Pictures) and is scheduled to be released on
April 10.  THE LAWNMOWER MAN has been released by New Line Cinema and is
"based" on a short story by Stephen King.  A small hint of Stephen
King's short story shows up towards the end of the film, but other than
that, THE LAWNMOWER MAN has nothing to do with Stephen King's short
story.  In fact, Stephen King's short story has nothing to do with
Virtual Reality at all.
     The Virtual Reality segments are done with computer graphics and
are very well done.  The way that the colors and the shapes all blend
together makes THE LAWNMOWER MAN seem different than most other horror
movies.  The Virtual Reality segments make the film almost an art film,
for the Virtual Reality takes up most of the film.  If all that you are
interested in is the Virtual Reality segments, it might make it more
worth your money to go see a matinee.  This film definitely won't hold
up very well on video.
     The one thing that really upsets me about THE LAWNMOWER MAN is that
both the advertisements for the film, and the film itself, state right
on the title "Stephen King's The Lawnmower Man."  Yet barely any of the
film is actually "Stephen King's The Lawnmower Man"; most of it is just
"The Lawnmower Man."  I get upset when a film states that it is taken
from a certain person's work and isn't, like "Edgar Allan Poe's THE PIT
AND THE PENDULUM."  Some Stephen King films have been direct
translations of the novel, like IT and CARRIE.  Others like THE
LAWNMOWER MAN and THE RUNNING MAN have very little to do with the novel.
I feel such movies should say "Inspired by the Stephen King short story
THE LAWNMOWER MAN" or something like that.

Author
The Phantom
     The Phantom should know by now what to expect when Stephen King's
name is on the marquee: perhaps the worst theatrically-released horror
or science fiction of the year.  Although occasionally a talented
filmmaker will successfully adapt a Stephen King short story or novel --
Rob Reiner has done wonders with two of King's stories so far, and Brian
DePalma made a name both for himself and for King with his adaptation of
CARRIE -- we will more often get anything from the forgettable RUNNING
MAN to the terrible GRAVEYARD SHIFT to the absolute nadir of King
adaptations, MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE, directed by the master of horror himself
who apparently spared no effort in proving that a good writer does not a
talented filmmaker make.
     With THE LAWNMOWER MAN, King's name returns once again to the top
of the marquee, and it was with some trepidation that the Phantom
ventured into the Ziegfeld theater in New York (perhaps the largest and
most lavish movie theater on the East Coast) to see what looked as if it
might be a cross between a very vague memory of an old Stephen King
short story and the result of an Amiga run amok.  At the very least, the
Phantom reasoned, the film's extensive computer graphics would be shown
to best advantage on a screen big enough that it should have its own zip
code; the unavoidable downside of having Pierce Brosnan's unshaven face
looming fifty feet high above the Phantom for the bulk of the film's 100
minutes didn't occur to him until it was too late to sneak out and still
get a refund.
     But that unshaven face should have given the Phantom pause, for
although computer graphics are sprinkled liberally throughout the film,
the majority of screen time is occupied by Mr. Brosnan and his
inability to act.  He and his thespian disability share the screen every
so often with his incredibly cheesy-looking laboratory, which appears
for all the world to be nothing more than a parking garage with some
neon lights and two of those gizmos that David Letterman had on his show
some time back -- the ones that let you rotate yourself through 360
degrees in 3 dimensions.  The Phantom kept eager eyes peeled for the
Velcro wall or perhaps a large vat filled with shaving cream; after all,
although the Phantom has made the acquaintance of a computer or two in
his time, he's a novice when it comes to the exciting and
ever-so-interesting world of virtual reality and all the props that
world apparently requires.
     Mr. Brosnan and his stubble, you see, have invented a way to use
virtual reality to make people smarter.  At least the Phantom believes
that was his intention, as no one in the film behaves very intelligently
either in or out of virtual reality.  There is a fairly bright-looking
chimpanzee at the beginning of the film, but he's quickly dispatched,
most likely due to the "Don Johnson-look" clause in Mr. Brosnan's
contract: no one in THE LAWNMOWER MAN is allowed to have more facial
hair than the star of the film.  Later, and for a very brief time, a
complete idiot -- the "lawnmower man" of the title -- does seem to dress
somewhat better than he used to, and he does get to make love to an
incredibly bad actress, but he never seems very much brighter than he
did at the beginning of the film.  In fact, after that chimpanzee, it's
pretty much all down hill in the intelligence department.
     As it happens, THE LAWNMOWER MAN isn't really about virtual reality
or the possibility of using computer technology to help people
understand better the world around them; instead, it's just another
"scientist's good intentions cause catastrophic results when his little
refrigerated bottles of colored liquid fall into the wrong hands" flick,
with some 3-D video games, evil government agents, and megalomania
thrown in both indiscriminately and ineffectively.
     And yet THE LAWNMOWER MAN has done fairly well at the box office,
which can only mean that not everyone shares the Phantom's belief that
it is a fundamentally dishonest and mean-spirited film.  In the
Phantom's mind, this can only be attributed to the "My Little Pony"
effect, except here with computer graphics for the techno-geeks instead
of cloyingly cute pink ponies for 8-year-old girls.  There is a sizable
audience who will see -- and, apparently, enjoy -- anything at all with
computer graphics in it, just as there is a sizable number of
undiscriminating 8-year-old girls who will gladly coerce their parents
into attending MY LITTLE PONY: THE MOTION PICTURE.  Of course, the
salient difference is that those in the audience for the plastic
figurine's adventures are children, whereas those in the audience for
the R-rated LAWNMOWER MAN are supposed to be adults, and so should know
better by now.
     Films produced around computer graphics have had exceedingly poor
track records: of TRON, THE LAST STARFIGHTER, and THE LAWNMOWER MAN, one
would be hard-pressed to pick the one that's well off the "stupid" scale
that we reviewers always keep in mind once the auditorium lights dim.
(Just for reference: CITIZEN KANE is a 0 and HUDSON HAWK rings the
bell.)  In each case, the filmmakers apparently labored under the
mistaken belief that computer graphics would keep us mesmerized long
enough that we wouldn't notice how very silly or unoriginal the rest of
film was.  Yet when used sparingly, or with the grace and wit of the
artists at Pixar, computer graphics can provide a film with truly
breathtaking moments.  If asked what they think is the most memorable
scene in BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, many people mention the show-stopping
ballroom scene -- a scene that could have been animated only through the
use of carefully designed computer graphics.  Likewise, it's neither
Schwarzenegger nor the near-ceaseless violence that captured people's
imagination and caused audible gasps in the audience for TERMINATOR 2;
instead, it was the liquid-metal and optical effects provided courtesy
of extensive and ground-breaking computer graphics.
     But stripped of grace, wit and restraint, films that feature
computer graphics for their own sake are anything from trite, to dull,
to ridiculous.  It is in just this way that THE LAWNMOWER MAN seemed to
the Phantom to have quite a bit in common with "My Little Pony" -- in
both cases, a cynical attempt was made to capture audience dollars by
using poorly and unimaginatively a technique that could be used well and
with care.  And, alas, in both cases that attempt appears to have paid
off handsomely -- something that can do nothing but encourage future
attempts to cash in on some people's undiscriminating need to see
extended toy commercials or numbingly uninspired computer graphics in
the service of an even less inspired film.
     The possibilities of virtual reality have best been covered by
William Gibson's "cyber-punk" novels; perhaps someday someone will turn
his excellent NEUROMANCER or COUNT ZERO into a feature film.  In the
meantime, we have only the efforts of Brett Leonard and Gimel Everett,
who wrote and directed THE LAWNMOWER MAN as if they never had even the
slightest intention of exploring the concept of virtual reality.
Instead, every time the plot takes us inside the artificial world in
which Brosnan and his subject frequently lose themselves, all we get are
3-D video games, a strange and unlikely combination of TRON and FROM
BEYOND, and of course some obligatory cybersex, just to earn that
R-rating.  (FRITZ THE CAT this is not; FELIX THE CAT more closely
approximates the level of this film.)  And as anyone familiar with the
prop-laden world of virtual reality knows, one can only enter said world
if one is whirling about like a human gyroscope and covered from head to
toe in a rubber suit.  The actors do this quite a lot in the film, so
phans may wish to arm themselves with Dramamine beforehand.
     When not spinning about in Mr. Brosnan's contraptions, the
characters become involved in unlikely plot developments concerning "The
Shop" -- the only element of the film that is recognizably "from the
mind of Stephen King" -- and Brosnan's personal life (his wife walks out
of the film early on, and phans would be wise to note her behavior in
case they find themselves at a showing of THE LAWNMOWER MAN against the
Phantom's best recommendations).  We also witness the evolution of the
"lawnmower man" from slow-witted gardener to Megalomaniacal genius (at
one point Brosnan notes that he'd become smarter than Brosnan himself --
something that perhaps seemed more shocking in the script than it did on
the screen, given Brosnan's performance).  Along the way he dispatches
several people, each of whom dies an updated version of an 80s-style
Jasonized death.  Some die in computationally expensive ways, which
surely pleased the techno-geeks in the audience.  One dies after he is
chased out of his house by a lawnmower in a scene which perfectly
captures the film's level of plausibility.  Another staggers around in a
daze after hearing "Now The Lawnmower Man is inside your head --
forever!"; after the end titles rolled, the Phantom knew just how he
must have felt.
     So as not to make this a completely negative review, and to redeem
himself for the review's extreme tardiness, the Phantom will note that
all of this was done long ago -- and done much better -- by Ken Russell
in his extraordinarily loopy (but very enjoyable) 1980 film ALTERED
STATES.  Russell used a sensory deprivation tank and magic mushrooms
instead of rubber suits and gyroscopes, but the idea was the same, and
the film -- while not precisely a paragon of logic -- was at least
entertaining.  (There's also something to be said for watching William
Hurt -- in his screen debut -- wake up naked surrounded by baboons in a
zoo.  Now no matter how pretentious he becomes, we can always remind him
of his rather less-than-Shakespearean beginnings.  Only Jane Fonda has
more to live down....)
     Of course, much of the sensory-assaulting special effects will be
lost on the small screen, but phans will still be much happier watching
this typically over-the-top Russell exercise in alternate realities than
they will watching yet another in a depressingly long list of failed
films about computers.  HAL, where are you now that we really need you?
