Title
Review for Baby, It's You (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BABY, IT'S YOU, the story of an inter-faith romance, was the title of the
second movie written as well as directed (1983) by John  Sayles, that
superb independent film-maker. It is also the title of the film that opens
in June 1998 the 11th season of the excellent P.O.V. documentary series
airing on PBS. By another coincidence, Sayles's fictional works as well as
the P.O.V. offerings are both concerned with people and the human
condition.
The current BABY is by prize-winning film-maker Anne Makepeace. It is an
autobiographical slice of life and time, about Ms.Makepeace and her
Canadian-born husband, writer Peter Behrens, with a "supporting cast" of
their non-mainstream  (when not downright weird by conventional standards)
baby-boomer siblings.
Having reached their late forties the childless couple decide to have a
baby. At Anne's age "it's really hard to get pregnant the fun way," says
Anne, so the two decide to undergo modern fertility procedures. These
become a mini-medical Odyssey that involves body, mind and feelings I will
not reveal what actually happens (or does not ) since the film is, in its
way, a real-life suspense story, with revelations and with branching out
into the principals' families. To various degrees, the latter involve
Anne's brother Douglas who, in Utah, is planning to embark on polygamy and
have twenty kids; Doug's patriarchically bearded neighbor who has seven
wives; Anne's hippie-ishly bearded other brother Roger, a semi-recluse in
Appalachian mountains with his company of goats; uncles and aunts from New
England; Peter's artist sister Mary whose quandary parallels that of Anne
in her first days in college; Peter's sister Anne in Canada, who, with her
lover Tanya, adopts a baby; some other characters.
Very well shot by Uta Briesewicz, the film is a small tour-de-force in the
way it follows chronologically and step-by-step the efforts, dashed hopes
and new hopes of the parents-to-be (perhaps), their solid marriage, and
Anna's reflections on her past. In a sense, she, as the documentary's prime
maker, is stalking her own self, but with naturalness and no trace of
play-acting, setting up situations or staging anything.
Andy Warhol's dictum  that sooner or later everyone will have a few minutes
of fame is debatable. What is unarguable however, is that, as  BABY shows,
all the lives of all human beings contain at least one movie subject, and
probably many more as this documentary does.
It touches on family relationships, marriage, abortion, unexpected drama,
changing or new standards and mores. "To breed or not to breed? That is the
question " plus the belated decision to have a child in mid-life, while not
elaborated upon, still speaks loudly of the rat-race for success and
financial security, of the siren-song of professionalism, the business and
busy-ness of this waning century. Other problems of Anne and her brethren
can be laid on the doorstep of their Yankee parents whose relations with
their children were, we suspect, hardly confidential, and for whom any
mention of sex was inconceivable.
It's all there, both in text and sub-text, both in the banality of life and
its unconventionalities. To what extent viewers will be touched or
enlightened is an open question. But they will surely be interested and
intrigued.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BABY, IT'S YOU (1998 POV Documentary)  Directed, written, produced by Anne
Makepeace. Photography, Uta Briesewitz. Editing, Jennifer Chinlund & Anne
Makepeace. Music, Simon Kendall.  A P.O.V. release. Approcx  60 min.
The title has been previously used in a fiction feature (1983) , the story
of an inter-faith romance. It was the second movie written as well as
directed by John  Sayles, that superb independent film-maker. Do not
confuse it with the current film  that opens the 11th season (1998) of the
P.O.V. (Point Of View) documentary series airing on PBS.
The 1998 "Baby," by prize-winning film-maker Anne Makepeace, is an
autobiographical slice of life and time. Centering around Ms.Makepeace and
her Canadian-born husband, writer Peter Behrens, it includes a "supporting
cast" of their non-mainstream  (when not downright weird by conventional
standards) baby-boomer siblings.
Having reached their late forties the childless couple decide to have a
baby.  Says Anne : "At my age it's really hard to get pregnant the fun
way," so the two decide to undergo modern fertility procedures. These
become a medical micro-Odyssey involving body, mind and feelings.  I will
not reveal what actually happens (or does not ) since the film is, in its
way, a suspense story of private lives made public. There is a built-in
element of voyeurism as the filmed events proceeds, branches out into the
families and friends of Anne and Peter, provides a number of revelations.
To various degrees, the latter involve Anne's brother Douglas who, in Utah,
is planning to embark on polygamy and have 20 kids; Doug's patriarchically
bearded neighbor who has seven wives; Anne's hippie-ishly bearded other
brother Roger, a semi-recluse in Appalachian mountains with his company of
goats; uncles and aunts from prim New England; Peter's artist sister Mary
whose quandary parallels that of Anne in her first days in college; Peter's
sister Anne in Canada, and her lover Tanya as they adopt a baby.
Well shot by Uta Briesewicz, the film follows chronologically and
step-by-step the efforts, dashed hopes and new hopes of the potential
parents, shows a solid marriage, Anna's reflections on her past, especially
her upbringing.
In a sense, she, as the documentary's prime maker, is stalking her own
self, but with naturalness and no trace of play-acting, setting up
situations or staging anything.
Andy Warhol's dictum  that sooner or later everyone will have fifteen
minutes of fame is debatable. What is unarguable however, is that, as
"Baby" proves, the lives of all human beings contain at least one movie
subject.
It touches on family relationships, marriage, abortion, unexpected drama,
changing or new standards and mores. "To breed or not to breed? That is the
question." The belated decision to beget in mid-life, while not elaborated
upon, is obviously related speaks to the colossal growth (and siren song)
of professional women, to the race for success and financial security, to
the business and busy-ness of this waning century.
Other problems of Anne and her brethren can be laid on the doorstep of
their Yankee parents whose relations with their children were hardly
confidential, and for whom any mention of sex was inconceivable.
It's all there, both in text and sub-text, both in the banality of life and
its unconventionalities. To what extent viewers will be touched or
enlightened is an open question. The persons shown, including the offbeat
types, have no special interest per se. But the dilemmas of the
ever-increasing number of women who, unlike their parents and their
parents' parents, now decide to have a career first, then to try to
conceiveas their hair grows gray, are major problems of industrialized
nations in the last decades. Over and above discussions and arguments, it
is good that such such concerns be made vivid by the visual media.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel
