Title
Review for Cobb (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Eric Grossman
     Given Hollywood's affinity for baseball movies, it was just a
matter of time until  they decided to tell the real story of Ty Cobb,
one of the game's most loved and despised players.  Unfortunately, the
film fails to do the baseball legend justice or even injustice.
     It didn't have to be that way.  Tommy Lee Jones tries his best to
create a complex character but he is limited by the film's aimless
direction.  Writer/director, Ron Shelton, a filmmaker who has made some
very good sports films (BULL DURHAM, WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP), misses
terribly this time.  His script is fragmented and he makes the critical
mistake of having the movie deal mostly with Cobb's relationship with
famous sports writer, Al Stump.  Cobb invites Stump (Robert Wuhl) to
his Lake Tahoe house to interview "the great Ty Cobb."  He wants Stump
to write a book so the world will remember the man, the myth, the
legend.   After hearing stories and spending time with his subject,
Stump finds himself struggling between writing the truth about the man
or safeguarding his greatness.  The truth is that despite Cobb's
athletic abilities, he was a racist and a womanizer who also had abused
his family.  Cobb drags Stump along with him to Reno and the film
becomes sort of a buddy/road picture.  There are some time-outs to
show  flashbacks of Cobb as a child, the death of his father, and a few
(very few) baseball scenes.  Most of the movie is spent with Cobb
running around as an old man, coughing and taking pills, insulting
people, trying unsuccessfully to rape a woman, shooting his pistol and
ranting, "I'm Ty Cobb, the greatest baseball player ever."
     Although Cobb is a completely nasty person, Jones' likability as
an actor is able to create some sympathy for him.  He gives his
signature southern, eccentric performance and the strength of his
acting is the only thing that is cohesive in this film.
     Wuhl's Stump is a different story.  He is supposed to be the
audience's surrogate, the person we identify with as we learn about
this hideous hero.  However, Stump's motivation for staying with Cobb
is very thin, even non- existent at times.  Their relationship is
contrived and after the tenth time I heard Stump say to the abusive
Cobb, "I'm leaving," I kept wishing he would because then the credits
would roll and I could go home.
     The production values are solid but there is not much of
particular interest to note.  Lolita Davidovich is wasted in her small,
thrown-in part as a cocktail waitress who receives too much sexual
attention from Cobb.  Elliot Goldenthal's score is solid and we will
probably be hearing it in the previews for Hollywood's next big
baseball epic.
     COBB is frustrating because it had most of the ingredients to be a
good movie.  A interesting subject, a great actor to play him and a
major studio producing it.  It is a bad film made by good filmmakers
and every time this happens, I always wonder why they didn't see the
mistakes sooner.  Oh well, nobody bats a thousand, not even Ty Cobb.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Tommy Lee Jones is the best thing behind COBB, director Ron
Shelton's broadly played "biography" of baseball great Ty Cobb.  By all
accounts, the immortal Cobb broke more than just records.  He was
everything from a racist, to a wife beater, to a man who attacked a
handicapped heckler during a stadium game.  Jones plays the part
wide-open, and you can't take your eyes off of him.
     Costar Robert Wuhl is another matter entirely--he's *all* wrong
for the part of the sportswriter-turned-biographer.  The actor may have
a greater range, but here he acts like the dopey sidekick.  He shows
about five facial expressions total and, since he's in nearly every
scene, he basically kills the tone.  The overblown music suggests that
COBB is a drama.  You'd never know it from watching Wuhl.
     If this trip's worth taking it's because of the script.  Shelton
gives Jones a few great lines, and the actor hits each one right over
the fence.  On rude behavior: "life's too short to be a diplomat." On
Babe Ruth: "he ran okay for a fat man."  The gems are few and
far-between, thanks to the poor pacing, but at least they're there.
     When COBB finally wraps, it wraps thirty minutes too late.

Author
Maria Vitale
     What follows is not intended to be a indictment against Warner
Bros. and their decision to drop all support for this film, nor is it
meant to try to explain why such a decision was ever made.  Such an
effort would be fruitless.  It is instead a personal plea to all who
love to watch talented people do what they do best.
     Ty Cobb was the greatest ball player who ever played the game of
baseball.  That is undeniable, based on the stats.  Those are just
numbers though and to look at the man behind them is to take a long
hard look at something much less admirable.
     Tyrus Raymond Cobb, while a hero to many a boy as the finest
scientific hitter and the greatest base-stealer of all time, was also
reknown for his racism, misogyny, foul-mouth and viciousness on and off
the field.
     To portray the "Georgia Peach" on film without suppressing the
truth and yet produce an engrossing film is no mean feat.  Ron Shelton's
unflinching look at Ty Cobb does its subject justice by not
sugar-coating his many shortcomings but it allows for a glimpse at a
man tormented with his own personal failings.  These were not financial
failings, for in business, Cobb was a genius amassing a fortune in
investments with fledgling companies such as Coca-Cola and General
Motors.  His inner demons, however, would not let him rest.  He was
plagued by memories of his father's death, his mother's infidelity and
his own cruel deeds throughout his life.  He was dying from a variety of
diseases, not the least of which was cancer, but that didn't prevent
him from doing whatever he pleased, whenever he pleased.
     Into this story comes Al Stump, one of the highest paid and most
popular sportswriters of the time.  He receives a phone call from Cobb
informing him that he has been chosen to tell the tale of the greatest
sports figure who's ever lived.  What the film fails to mention is that
18 other writers had also been graced with Cobb's call only to either
quit or be fired when they failed to yield to Cobb's demand that the
book, the autobiography be limited to the game and nothing more.  No
mention of his family, nor of his many notorious antics with other ball
players such as sharpening his spikes for his much-feared spikes-high
slides or his trash-talking of catchers and pitchers or his many brawls
with spectators.
     The film's focus is on Cobb as he is approaching death and his own
mortality.  Portraying Cobb, in all his gruff and vileness is Tommy Lee
Jones in a tour-de-force performance.  His anger at the world and most
especially himself is quite evident but so is his great fear of death
which he fights tooth and nail to the end.  Shelton's script brings an
insight into the man through humor and through fury that Jones deftly
manages to balance and to exude.  That doesn't even begin to describe
the talents involved in the making of this film though.
     Jones, as Cobb, spews all the venom he has spent a lifetime
gathering up inside himself and explodes on the screen with a vitality
that is his trademark.  The range is remarkable as he can
good-naturedly tell a joke one moment and just as easily pull out a
pistol and threaten a man's life the next.  This erratic behaviour
might be unsettling were it not for the fact that it also grabs your
attention and does not ease up for a second.  An memorable moment
occurs when Cobb insists on visiting Cooperstown, the Baseball Hall of
Fame, after hours just to look at his own exhibit.  He is trying to set
down for posterity's sake a vision of his life, in terms of a game, so
as to be forever seen as one of America's greatest heroes.  And yet as
he looks at his life on display, he ends up crying for he knows that
it's all a lie.  A lie which he is fighting to maintain.  An image.  A
very misleading image.
     Another moving scene is near Cobb's death when he begins to cough
violently and blood appears.  He knows that his fight will soon end and
terrified, he begins to pray for his life.  He soon takes up the fight
again, unwilling to die quietly, he calls and checks himself into a
hospital.  Jones all the while nevers eases up on his hold on the
audience.  He is fascinating to watch as he moves across the screen and
embodies Cobb.  You can feel his fear as well as his rage and you can
see his disappointment with life and those around him as well as
himself.
     Another standout in the film is comedian and writer, Robert Wuhl
giving what is clearly his best performance to date.  His Stump shows
his contempt for Cobb even while accompanying him and attending to him
as his personal nurse and friend.  There is a mutual need, a parasitic
relationship between the two.  Cobb needs for his life to be viewed
only in terms of his athleticism and Stump cannot pass up the
opportunity to write a book about the most hated and loved man in
baseball.  But there is also a feeling of sadness which Stump cannot
unravel.  He's heard the tales that others including Cobb has related
but he still can't get a handle on the man behind the myth.
     Shelton's script is intelligent and has plenty of odd-ball moments
such as a car ride through a snow storm in Lake Tahoe where Cobb wrecks
his car and nearly kills himself but it doesn't phase him for a
second.  Dead drunk and filled with all sorts of medication for his
illnesses, he still insists on driving Stump's car.  When denied the
keys, he pulls out his ever handy Luger and threatens to shoot.  Stump
challenges him by saying that he needs him to finish the book.  Cobb
points out that he's killed a man.  It doesn't impress Stump a bit.
And so, of course, Cobb does in fact get the keys and drives just as
madly as before.  He always gets his way.
     The script also presents a wonderful opportunity to see what good
films can be made with some effort and good writing.  It could have
been a baseball movie with just the sports scenes expected to entertain
the audience.  Instead it allowed its cast to bring out emotional and
forceful portrayals of very real human beings filled with flaws.  This
study of human nature and more pointedly, of these two men, Ty Cobb and
Al Stump, has a beauty all its own with grace and strength.  It is
glorious in its handling of a very difficult subject and yet it manages
to be both accessible as a character study and as a tale worth
telling.
     In the end it is sad to know that this is a film worthy of the
highest praise and grandest awards, contains some of the greatest
performances yet by Messrs. Jones and Wuhl and some very fine writing
and direction by Mr. Shelton, yet it will be seen by so few people.
Pity.  This is filmmaking and acting at its very finest.
     I'd like to recommend this film to anyone who is still able to
catch it wherever it is still available.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Tommy Lee Jones, Robert Wuhl, Lolita Davidovich 
Director: Ron Shelton 
Producer: David Lester 
Screenplay: Ron Shelton based on COBB:  A BIOGRAPHY by Al Stump 
Cinematography: Russell Boyd 
Music: Elliot Goldenthal 
Released by Warner Brothers 
     It's the nature of our society to put people on pedestals.  Some 
wear the title of "hero" like a mantle; to others, it is an albatross.  
You need look no further than the O. J. Simpson story to see this.  So 
what defines greatness?  This question, in conjunction with the reality 
gap that so often exists between the media's portrayal of a public figure 
and their actual personality, lies at the core of COBB, a new film from 
writer/director Ron Shelton, the man who brought us the baseball comedy 
BULL DURHAM.   
     COBB is a character study of the greatest man ever to play Major 
League baseball.  It is not a biography, though it contains biographical 
(or pseudo-biographical, depending on how much you want to believe) 
information.  Rather, the film is an examination of Ty Cobb's
personality--a look at the demons that made him as much of a terror off
the baseball field as on it, and which didn't depart once his career
was over.
     A notorious drunkard, bigot, and womanizer, the "Georgia Peach"
had few qualities to praise other than his ability to hit a baseball.
He claimed to be misunderstood, but the sad truth is that he was
understood too well.  Described at various times as "difficult at best,
psychotic at worst" and someone whose "brooding soul ... bubbled with
violence", Cobb represented the kind of man who could be admired only
from a distance--the farther the better.
     In 1960, with death stalking him, Cobb (Tommy Lee Jones) decides
that he wants his story told.  To write this tale of a "prince among
men", he recruits sportswriter Al Stump (Robert Wuhl) to do the
typing.  At first, Stump is ecstatic at the opportunity to spend days
on end with the greatest baseball player of all time--until he meets
him, that is.  Cobb's poisonous personality quickly convinces him that
little pleasure will be derived from the task.  Yet, despite continual
verbal and physical abuse, Stump stays with Cobb, and even drives him
across country from his Nevada home to Cooperstown.  Friendship is
never the lure, however; Stump is seduced by the need to understand
greatness.  And, in the end, he compromises his principles to capture
his own small measure of it.
     With a lead character as abrasive as they come, COBB is not always
a pleasant movie.  At times, it is downright uncomfortable.  The film
is perhaps too long; much of the last half-hour feels excessive and
redundant.  Nevertheless, given such a forceful anti-hero, the viewer's
horrified fascination lasts all one-hundred twenty-eight minutes, even
to the end of the credits when Cobb declares, "Baseball is 100% of my
life."
     Jones' on-target portrayal of the dying athlete is mesmerizing.
Robert Wuhl has considerably less screen presence, but this serves only
to highlight Jones.  Wuhl gives his co-star someone to play off of.
There is a share of male bonding here, but not enough to turn COBB into
a cloying buddy picture.  And, thankfully, the title character is never
redeemed.  Cobb remains detestable to the day of his death.
     Shelton took a chance with this film.  Given a less talented
performer, COBB could have been an awkward, over-the-top melodrama.  As
it is, however, the movie works much as MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS
CIRCLE does--as an unobstructed view of human degradation and the
damage it wreaks.
     Forrest Gump might say that "Greatness is as greatness does." COBB
goes to pains to dispel this simplistic view.  Image has little to do
with reality.  Tremendous statistics do not make for a tremendous
person.  When our heroes turn out to be less like Dale Murphy and more
like Ty Cobb, we feel betrayed and slighted.  On those occasions, we
have only ourselves to blame because in our society, it's the .367
lifetime batting average that earns the reverence, regardless of how
despicable the man holding the bat is.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
The name Ty Cobb inspired fear and loathing in the hearts of
every Major League baseball player in the early 1900s. The
Detroit Tigers' star would do absolutely anything to win
(including deliberately injuring his opponents) and he hated
everyone but himself. He considered every turn at bat an act of
war against the pitcher. If an infielder tried to tag Ty Cobb
sliding into a base, they would get a razor-sharp spike stuck in
their chest. He was a mean bastard, but nice guys finish last and
villains finish first. Right? Well, they do! After all, Cobb was
the first man inducted into the Major League Baseball Hall Of
Fame. He's also the greatest baseball player of all time,
including the immortal Babe Ruth. 
Tommy Lee Jones was perfectly cast as Cobb. Coming off
Oscar-nominated performances in 1991 ("JFK") and 1993 ("The
Fugitive", for which he won the supporting trophy), Jones is a
man's man. He even resembles the crusty ballplayer. Ironically,
"Cobb" is a bio-pic about a baseball star, but it shows us very
little baseball action. Of course, all of the action that IS
shown is in flashback because Cobb is about 70 years old. Jones
looks good in both the flashback footage and in the decrepit old
man scenes. The man with the highest lifetime batting average was
always secure in his own abilities. Cobb has a great line in the
picture when he's asked by a guy how he would hit against the
pitchers of "today". Cobb responds that he would still hit about
.280, but we have to remember that he's almost 70 years old! The
jerk sure WAS confident.
Robert Wuhl, a sports freak in real life, co-stars as legendary
sports writer Al Stump. He sits around drinking with his cronies,
each of them boasting about writing a book. No one follows up on
it until Cobb phones Stump and asks him to write his biography.
Stump agrees, but soon regrets his decision. He threatens to quit
working with the drunken, gun-slinging, skirt-chasing old man
more than once. But he never does (or this movie would have been
awful short!) and they go on an odyssey of discovery.
The movie takes a "Scent Of A Woman" turn when Cobb forces Stump
to travel to Las Vegas against his will to find some women. On
the way, they pick up a Cobb nemesis, who just happens to be a
black man. Since Cobb is a racist, their discussions about
baseball are biased. The black man claims that Josh Gibson and
Satchel Paige (who starred in the Negro Leagues) were the
greatest players ever. Cobb disagrees vehemently, refusing to
admit that anyone who didn't play for his team, the Detroit
Tigers, are even worth mentioning.
Later, this turns into a "buddy" film. Cobb and Stump become
reluctant friends. It's apparent that they're going to stay
together until one of them dies. But even though they grudgingly
become chums, they clash about the content of the biography.
Stump wants it to be about the ballplayer's outrageous personal
life. He wants to describe the outlandish things Cobb does in his
old age and Cobb is viciously opposed to that viewpoint. He
demands that the book stick to baseball. Stump writes his own
version of the book when Cobb isn't around and must wrestle with
his conscience. Should he tell the world about how much of a
sonofabitch this man was (and still is) or shouldn't he?
Tommy Lee Jones is the whole show here. He gives a necessarily
overbearing performance. He's crazy in the beginning of the film
and just as lonely and crazy in the end. The script had its holes
though, which prevents the movie from soaring above its
weaknesses. Wuhl does a fine job opposite the bitter old man, but
he's not the reason to rent this video. Jones proved that he is a
world-class performer when he won his Best Supporting Actor the
year before and continued to show that with "Cobb". We don't see
much on-field material, except in the opening newsreel, but even
that is just enough action in this character study of the
greatest player to ever strap on a baseball uniform.
USELESS TRIVIA--Disgraced baseball great Pete Rose has also
played Ty Cobb (in a TV movie about Babe Ruth). Rose appeared in
a scene with Stephen Lang (Ruth) in a motel room. Rose, who is
banned from baseball, is not permitted to wear a uniform even in
a movie.

