Title
Review for Road to Glory (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   We all know by now--from the movies if from nowhere else-
-that priests, ministers and rabbis can be as human as the
rest of us. We're not that surprised to find highly religious
people interested in sports.  In the intriguing documentary by
Aviva Kempner released this year, "The Life and Times of
Hank Greenberg," we learn that the great baseball player's
rabbi encouraged him to play an important game on the
Jewish New Year, the second-holiest day on the Jewish
calendar.  The cantor even interrupted his singing at the 
synagogue to inquire how Greenberg was doing.  The rabbi
and the cantor were modern adults living in the New York
City of the 1930s and 1940s.  Would you expect Buddhist
monks, the fellas who live in secluded areas in the Himalayan
mountains, to be human as well?  
   Here's a movie that insists they are.   In Khyentse Norbu's
film "The 
Cup," the sports-addicted monastics in question, though, are
Buddhist 
monks from Tibet who, having fled from the hated Chinese
regime in that
province, took up residence in a monastery in Northern India,
praying for 
the day they can return to a Tibet free from Chinese rule. 
"The Cup" is a 
slight film, hardly the sort of work that you'd expect to be
nominated by its 
country of origin for Oscar consideration, but this is exactly
what has
happened as the 38-year-old Bhutanese director, who is
himself a high ranking lama in the Buddhist faith, convinced
his little nation to enter the competition for the very first time. 
The movie premiered last May at the Cannes Film Festival
and will officially open in the U.S. in January 2000 after a
screening at the Sundance festival in Utah.
   With Khyentse Norbu at the helm, "The Cup," which is
based on a true story, is at base a one-joke comedy which
becomes repetitive even at its modest 93 minutes.  If this
were a Hollywood production it would be considered naive
indeed, barely fit for pre-prime time TV.  Consider, though,
that it involves non-professional actors--actual monks residing
in Northern India who were handed their lines on a day-by-
day basis and used their discipline and powers of
concentration to pull off a believable story.  The devotees of
Buddhism had to get out of bed at 4 each morning to conduct
their prayers so that they could be ready for Norbu's camera
during the remainder of the day.
   The opening scenes exist largely to acquaint a western
audience with the daily routine of the monastery as the
Buddhists, dressed in ocher robes, sit in the main hall to
chant their litany in the Tibetan language.  The story gets
under way as Geko (Orgyen Tobgyal) and his boss, the
abbot, or Khempo (Lama Chonjor), welcome two new young
people sent out of Tibet by their mother to get a Buddhist
education.  We note that some of the regularly-ordained
younger members, particularly the volatile Orgyen (Jamyang
Lodro) and his best friend Lodo (Neten Chokling), horse
around during the prayers, passing notes, making paper
planes, and in one case waking up an older monk who
customarily sleeps through the prayer services.  Norbu's
camera generally makes the point that the monastery is a
microcosm of any civilian society, with one of its members,
the aging Godu Lama, acting in what Geko describes as a
loony manner and smelling terrible.  "He stinks," is the way
the second-in-command discusses the fellow with his
superior.
   The big question, hardly one that has the audience holding
its breath, is: will the abbot allow the monastery to rent a TV
and satellite dish so that sports enthusiasts in the cloistered
halls can watch the championship World Cup soccer game
between Brazil and France?  Obviously the film's
transcendent point is: can a traditional society make room for
the modern world?  
   The second half is the more involving one as the adherents
prove that the Buddhist ideal of giving up all attachment is
one that they are far from ready to effect.  As the happy
troupe drive down the road to the local Indian with the dish-
rental business, they must figure out a way to come up with
the 350 rupees needed to haul the monastery's first TV up
the hill.  "The Cup" is a far cry from Martin Scorsese's
"Kundum," which portrayed the saga of a two-year-old boy
who finds out that he is the reincarnation of the 14th Dalai
Lama.  Though Scorsese's 1997 film also uses
nonprofessional actors who are as remarkable as Norbu's,
"Kundun"'s monks are up in the clouds while Norbu's are as
earthy as their present digs at the foot of the Himalayas. 
Jamyang Lodro is especially convincing as the vibrant 14-
year-old who brings his housing unit another step toward our
just-past century.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 93 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Mac VerStandig
--- A copy of this review can be found at 
http://www.moviereviews.org/phorpa_(the_cup).htm ----
---Those of you in the Portland, Maine area can hear Mac VerStandig's 
movie reviews every Friday on the 98.9 The Point morning show---
The Cup, the first feature length film to ever be made in Bhutan, is a 
delightfully innocent piece that should be a strong contender in 1999's 
Best Foreign Film category.
Inspired by true events, The Cup is the story of an Indian monastery 
housing children with assorted international roots. The newest arrivals, 
Palden (Kunsang Nyima) and Nyima (Pema Tshundup) parted with their 
parents and were smuggled across the Tibetan border to the monastery so 
they could freely study Buddhism. The film touches upon the obvious 
politics of this delicate situation, but wisely shies away from handling 
the issue too seriously, something that would likely deduct from an 
otherwise lighthearted movie.
Awaiting the two new arrivals is Orygen (Jamyang Lodro), a 
self-confident and adventurous 14-year-old monk. Orygen has his own 
little near-religious cult that is celebrating its holiest of events 
which only occurs once every four year: The World Cup of soccer. Soon 
Ronaldo's biggest fan finds himself and his pals in a bind when they are 
caught sneaking out to watch part of the aforementioned tournament one 
night and are threatened with expulsion should they ever do so again. 
But the crafty Orygen wouldn't let the approaching final match pass by 
without his audience, and soon a surprisingly innocent plot is hatched.
One of the more fascinating aspects of The Cup is how the 1998 setting 
and the century old Buddhist traditions coexist. Orygen's wardrobe is 
2500 years old, but underneath he wears a soccer jersey. His walls are 
covered with a magazine clipped shrine to the sport, but he studies 
religion in bed. The list goes on.
Nearly all the young monks in the monastery find a certain fascination 
with soccer that goes beyond the concept of men fighting over a 
checkered ball. The singing of the National Anthems is a key point to 
the multi-national boys and the athletes on the field are truly 
ambassadors of their native lands.
The Cup is a very sweet film that should be well received by audiences 
that aren't deterred by subtitles. An upcoming release in the USA will 
likely lead to public note and boosted box office revenue can be 
expected should the country of Bhutan win an Oscar for their freshman 
attempt at the art. And even if no awards are collected, the nation's 
sophomore film will be eagerly anticipated.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Typically the first film from a filmmaker or from a country is a
simple one.  One starts with baby steps and learns to walk before one
can run.  Directed and written by Khyentse Norbu, THE CUP is a simple
little story of a tiny piece of the outside world coming to a Tibetan
monastery in exile in Northern India.
     The film opens showing the daily life in a Tibetan monastery.  It
may not be intended but the primary message of these scenes is that the
life of a monk is one of monotony that would drive the rest of us
crazy.  At least there are interesting characters to flesh out the
tedium like a monastery soothsayer who gets little respect from anyone.
In the daily routine there is cooking and prayer and occasional
exercise. Nothing drives home the monotony better than a scene in which
visitors have arrived.  The abbot and some high monks talk to them.
The monks are in the traditional yellow and maroon robes.  The curtains
are in the same yellow as the robes, the luggage is in the same maroon.
One's eye searches in vain for a break in the color scheme.
     The young monks like to play football with anything available. The
quality of life would seem to be stultifyingly dull if it were not for
the young monks' interest in football.  In the case we see it is a Coke
can.  The monks paste on their walls pictures of their football heroes.
Four of the young monks even sneak into town to watch the semi-finals
on TV.  This is all done under the stern but loving eye of Geko (Orgyen
Tobgyal), sort of the vice-principal or house-father of the monastery.
One of the new arrivals gets an idea that perhaps they can rent a TV
and an antenna and see the World Cup Finals from the monastery.  The
question is taken to the old abbot who does not seem to quite
understand the concept of a game.  (He must indeed be and old man to
have forgotten games.  The young monks play them all the time.)
     When the abbot agrees there are but ten hours until the game will
be on.  In that time there are several obstacles to be overcome.  First
of all there is the question of how to pay for the rental.  The must
figure how to move the dish.  Once they have it they must set it up
with no technical experience.  There are come complications as the
greed of the TV dealer almost ruins the night for the young monk who
planned it.  He scalps what money he can from the young monks and
misdirects them.  Norbu seems less than respectful toward Indians.
     The plot of kids sneaking out of boarding school and getting into
trouble has been a staple of films going back at least to silent film.
So have head masters who seemed gruff disciplinarians but at heart love
their charges and are old softies.  Certainly the revelation that holy
people can be interested in something as mundane as sports is not
original either.  In a film from any other origins with this plot would
seem cliched.  Norbu does not give us any new slant beyond the setting.
This is a film that is moderately entertaining but not very original at
all.
     It is, however, the very first feature film from Bhutan.  It might
be fairer to say that it is a Bhutan-Australia co-production.  To
paraphrase Dr. Johnson, it is not Norbu has made a great film, it is
just interesting that Bhutan has made a film at all.  Here Norbu has
given us enough of a look into the daily life of a Tibetan monk to
convince us that that life is not for most of us.  And he has told us a
small, simple, likable story.  The story is based on a real incident we
are told, though the copyright notice at the end denies it.  Still as a
film from Bhutan, it is a good start.  Welcome to the majors.  I rate
it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
A coke can as soccer ball? If you're a monk who's taken a vow to
renounce worldly possessions, then you make do with whatever's handy, as
do the poor Tibetan monks living in exile in India in THE CUP (PHÖRPA).
Writer/director Khyentse Norbu's THE CUP is an innocent little picture
that suffers from being a one-idea movie. If the characters in it were
not monks, then the only reaction would be to write off the formulaic
picture as a lame and amateurish version of the kids' big game movie
that has been done hundreds of times before and usually much better.
Whether the mere fact that the cast is composed of monks can supply
enough charm to make you ignore all of its shortcomings, only you can
judge. For myself, the charm quickly wore thin.
Set during the World Cup finals, the story concerns a group of the
younger monks who sneak out at night to go watch the games on television
in a nearby village. When it comes time for the final match, the soccer
fanatics try to get the Abbot (Lama Chonjor) to approve their renting a
television setup, including a near-broken satellite dish, so that the
whole abbey can watch the game. Geko (Orgyen Tobgyal) explains the game
to the Abbot as "two civilized nations fighting over a ball." Sounding
harmless enough, he gives permission for the event.
Ending in the traditional big game, this time a televised one, the
predictable movie has few surprises. As soon as you see their rag-tag
electronics setup, you know they'll have trouble with it. And given the
feel-good tone of the story, you can be sure that it will be resolved
successfully.
THE CUP runs 1:33. The film is in Tibetan and Hindi with English
subtitles. It is rated G and would be suitable for all ages.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I mean no disrespect to the burgeoning Bhutanese film industry when I
suggest that being selected as the Bhutanese representative for the Best
Foreign Language Film Oscar doesn't automatically qualify as an impressive
achievement. In fact, THE CUP is the first ever film selected as an
Academy Award candidate from Bhutan, made by a revered Buddhist teacher
making his first film. It's understandable that THE CUP would warrant some
unique attention on this basis. The question is whether anyone would be
paying much attention to THE CUP if it didn't happen to offer a unique
cultural perspective.
     It's always tough to say, but I'm guessing not. There are certainly
some charms in this fact-based bit of whimsy, set in 1998 at a Tibetan
Buddhist monastery-in-exile. The monastery's leaders are awaiting two new
arrivals as the film begins, brothers attempting to make the escape from
occupied Tibet. When they finally do arrive, Palden (Kunsang Nyima) and
Nyima (Pema Tshundup) find the young monks-in-training are currying a
passion for something more than Buddhist teachings: the ongoing World Cup
soccer tournament. The young monk Orgyen (Jamyang Lodro) has taken to
sneaking into town after dark to watch BBC satellite broadcasts, but when
he and some fellow monks are caught by chief disciplinarian Geko (Orgyen
Tobgyal), it looks like no one will be seeing the final match -- unless 
the abbot (Lama Chonjor) grants their request to rent a television to
watch the match in the monastery.
     There's no denying that THE CUP may be worth seeing simply for its
sociology lesson. The monastery is depicted not as a relentlessly somber
place, but as a sort of boarding school with boys who will be boys no
matter their national origin (passing notes during prayers, sewing
another boy's robe to a mat, scribbling nationalist graffiti on the
monastery walls). American films with Tibetan Buddhist themes -- SEVEN
YEARS IN TIBET and KUNDUN -- have often seemed to be so concerned with
telling the story of an important political issue that the personal side
has been lost. It is certainly refreshing to see a story in which Tibetan
people are seen as people, and not merely as martyrs.
     And then one moves past that humanizing appeal, and doesn't find a
whole lot more. Writer/director Khyentse Norbu understands his people, but
he has a lot to learn about structuring a narrative. Even at only 93
minutes, THE CUP drags along towards the monks' eventual efforts to gather
enough money to rent the television and satellite dish, then try to get
the whole apparatus working. It's worth a few chuckles to see the monks
trying to navigate the technology; it's considerably less entertaining
watching the film meander, dabbling in the crowd-pleasing qualities of
shadow puppets and a sort of "Gift of the Magi" sub-plot involving Orgyen
and a younger monk's beloved keepsake.
     The pacing of THE CUP may be perfectly representative of the culture
from which it originates, just as the story itself may be perfectly
representative. I find myself leaning towards a recommendation simply
because it showed me something I didn't know before, which is one of the
reasons I love film in the first place. There's just not much substance to
THE CUP worth getting enthusiastic over, unless the mere notion of Tibetan
monks playing pranks and watching soccer is enough of a hilarious
incongruity to carry your viewing experience. The amateur cast and rookie
director can't make the film soar on its own terms. Khytentse Norbu might
have been better served making a documentary about life among young
Tibetan monks ... or about making Bhutan's first Oscar contender.
