Title
Review for Georgy Girl (1966)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Lynn Redgrave was never more appealing than when she played the title
character in this breezy comedy-drama.  As was typical of many British
films of the period, this production has kinetic direction, crisp
black and white photography, pop music, urban realism, social issues,
and contemporary attitudes towards sex.  I must admit that I have
always found my interest in such films (TO SIR WITH LOVE also springs
to mind) to be prejudiced in favor of my enjoyment of their title
songs, which instantly evoke nostalgia and affection - unusual
considering it was an era I was never a part of!  It's a shame The
Seekers, who had a number one single with "Georgy Girl", didn't supply
a soundtrack throughout the film, as Simon and Garfunkel would do in
the following  year's THE GRADUATE.  They might have provided it with
a stronger sense of continuity/personality.  As it stands, the film is
crammed with music of varying styles - this at least reflects the
incidental storyline.  Putting it simply, Redgrave shares a flat with
her ungrateful, bitchy friend Meredith (Charlotte Rampling) as an
alternative to staying with her parents, who are live-in house help
for their rich employer (James Mason).  She is pressured to become
less dowdy and more ladylike.  But, being a product of the sixties,
she prefers to go her own way.
Refreshingly, Redgrave isn't portrayed as wacky or rebellious, as many
other young people were shown to be in other films of the time.  She's
a perfect alternative for young women who identified with her
conservative-yet-free-spirited persona and wanted to be themselves
without having to endorse drugs, alcohol, wild parties, or extreme
politics.  Her friends, however, are not so tame - their attitudes
towards premarital sex and abortion were no doubt included to remind
viewers of the changing times.  Film has spirit but its main problem
is that its characters are too mercurial to be taken seriously -
especially Alan Bates, who I find miscast here (he's ten years older
than Redgrave and Rampling, for a start).  By the end of the story you
won't believe anything they say - but think further and you'll realize
that they probably feel the same way too.  Every character is trying
to recreate unfulfilled wishes: Redgrave wants to set up a happy home
for Rampling's baby; Mason refurbishes his bedroom in the hope he will
have a mistress; Bates convinces himself that he's in love. 
Ironically, it is the nastiest of them all, Rampling, who really gets
what she wants, when she drives off in her new boyfriend's Mercedes
near the end of the film.  Ending remains open to many possible
outcomes until the last few frames. The lyrics sung over the closing
credits - which you won't find on the single - are unexpectedly
bittersweet, especially in light of the shift of expression on
Redgrave's face.  She and Mason were nominated for Oscars.  Silvio
Narizzano directed.
