Title
Review for Batman: Mask of the Phantasm (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     BATMAN: MASK OF THE PHANTASM belongs on the small screen. Based on
TV's acclaimed "Batman: the Animated Series," this modestly intriguing
film is undercut by second-rate animation that was clearly intended for
television viewing only.
     The plot introduces Phantasm, a fog-shrouded phantom who's preying
on key figures in Gotham City's underworld.  Dressed in a billowing
black shroud, the villain has the police thinking that "The Bat" is
behind the crimes.  The crooks, fearing for their lives, contact the
Joker to contract the Batman.  Soon, fights erupt on both fronts as
Batman battles both Phantasm and the Joker.
     Meanwhile, back at stately Wayne Manor, key subplots emerge which
include the reappearance of Bruce Wayne's one-time flame, Andrea
Beaumont, and, yes, the origin of the Caped Crusader....
     MASK OF THE PHANTASM proves that, in the case of cartoons, what
works on television doesn't always work in the movies.
     With the exception of a nifty computer-generated opening, the
animation in MASK OF THE PHANTASM is stiff and very awkward.  The
blending of foreground and background movement is lousy and there's far
two little detail hidden amid the simple but stylish backgrounds.  The
fight scenes are fluid and Gotham City looks the part, but that's about
it.
     The characters lack any expression, which makes watching any
non-action a virtual chore.  There's a load of lively dialogue in this
film--you just can't tell it from spying the speakers!  Only the
Joker, voiced by a surprisingly talented Mark Hamill, seems to get
around this problem.  With his grisly grin and gangly gait, he's the
only lively thing in the film.
     Plot holes frustrate as only comic-book creations can, a couple of
key settings are nearly indistinguishable from one another, and the
story relies way too heavily on flashback.

Author
ZENF@UVVM.UVIC.CA (Zen!)
     BATMAN: MASK OF THE PHANTASM is a moderately successful
translation of the small-screen animated series to the silver screen.
Unfortunately, the success of the animated series is this movie's own
worst competition; the film never comes close to attaining the 23:30
epiphanies of episodes like "Harley & Ivy," "Almost Got Him", or "Heart
of Ice."
     The plot is fairly straightforward.  A new vigilante, the Phantasm
(who bears a suspicious resemblance to the Reaper, the Barr/Davis
character from "Batman: Year Two") is killing mobsters.  Seen from a
distance fleeing the crime, the Phantasm is mistaken for Batman.
Naturally enough, Bats investigates.  It turns out that he encountered
all of these characters early in his crime-fighting career.  Through a
series of flashbacks, we meet an early love of Bruce Wayne's, Andrea
Beaumont (who is, I think, a character new to the Batman legend).  Most
of the flashback sequences concerns Bruce's indecision about whether to
allow himself to fall in love with Andrea (who is, it must be said, a
well-written foil to Bruce) or to follow his vow to his parents to
fight crime.  We get to see, for example, Bruce's first attempt at
crime-fighting without the cape and cowl (in a scene obviously drawn
from Miller's "Batman: Year One").  The Joker is involved in all of
this, too, but I won't say how in this review.
     As I mentioned, much of the story is told through flashbacks.
These scene have real emotions in them, and they're well done character
moments, but they slow the pace of the film drastically.  Expectations
are always a dangerous thing, but I was hoping for something with a bit
more action.  Fortunately, the finale between Batman and the Joker is
big and quite exciting, but the film *as a whole* is no
roller-coaster.
     While the Phantasm is appropriately menacing, the Joker once again
steals the show.  The Joker is superbly performed (thaaaank you, Mark
Hamill) and written--he's far more creepy than he ever gets to be on
the tube.  One reason for this is that, in a major break with the TV
show, people actually *die* in this film ... clearly, Warner felt it
could take a bit more dramatic license in a theatre than it could on a
weekday afternoon.
     The show's acclaimed "dark deco" look is intact.  The animation,
however, while without peer on television, is only average looking on
the silver screen, particularly with Disney's last few triumphs so so
recent in the public's memory.  The one thing I really noticed myself
was the sound.  Maybe for those of you with multi-thousand dollar home
entertainment systems won't notice, but with my tiny tinny little mono
TV speaker, the difference going into a theatre is *dramatic*.
     BATMAN: MASK OF THE PHANTASM is equal to the show that created
it.  If you want to see it in the movie theatres, though, better do it
within the next week or two.  The audience was pretty thin when I saw
it this weekend, and this one will probably be hitting the video store
shelves soon.

Author
Chad Polenz
1993, PG, 77 minutes [1 hour, 17 minutes]
starring the voices of: Kevin Conroy (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Dana Delany
(Andrea Beaumont), Mark Hamill (The Joker), Stacey Keach Jr. (Carl Beaumont,
The Phantasm), Hart Bochner (Arthur Reeves), written by Alan Burnett, Paul
Dini, Martin Pasko, Michael Reaves, produced by Benjamin Melniker, Michael
Uslan, directed by Eric Radomski, Bruce W. Timm, based on characters
appearing in DC comics, Batman created by Bob Kane.
"Batman: Mask Of The Phantasm" is a pretty exciting film that could have
been terrific if it just didn't try so hard. It's a serious, mature story
trapped in the spirit of cartoon adventure.
The immediate style, design, and animation here is overwhelming. As the
opening credits fade in and out over a computer generated animation scene,
the Gothic, art deco mood is established quickly. The film wastes no time and
getting in some action as we witness Batman (Conroy) crash a counterfeiting
scheme and single-handedly disarm a half dozen men. The lead gangster
escapes, but he is confronted in the parking garage by, what appears to be a
phantasm. This phantasm seems invincible; bullets, and even getting hit by a
car doesn't seem to stop it, and thus kills him.
This first scene, and the entire first act really held my attention. I liked
this Batman much better than those in the live action movies. He seems much
more realistic fighting "high level" criminals instead of costumed nut jobs.
The fact he uses some actual detective skills makes the film seem original
and even a bit realistic. 
The story does not follow a linear order, it constantly engages in
flashbacks to make things interesting and bit complex. Unfortunately, many
plot holes, continuity errors, and just plain corny scenes result from this
storytelling style.
Batman slowly puts the pieces together concerning the phantasm murders, but
Bruce Wayne is distracted as by the return of an old lover, Andrea Beaumont
(Delany). We get a tremendous amount of back story concerning his
relationship with Andrea and her father's involvement with the gangsters. In
fact, the back story often takes precedence over the main story, and at times
it seems both are happening at the same time. These flashback scenes also
tend to run on longer than they need to, and as the story shifted back to the
present, I sometimes forgot what the main story was about.
A gangster who thinks Batman is murdering mob bosses (and soon him), hires
The Joker (Hamill) to exterminate Batman. Mark Hamill is hilarious as the
Joker's voice, but the character's presence doesn't seem essential to this
story. This fact, along with the entire ending is a total cop-out.
There are a lot of things in "Batman: Mask Of The Phantasm" that could have
made for a great film instead of the satisfactory one it is. The actual
breakdown of the story is choppy and often distracting. I liked it for what
it was, but I didn't like it for what it was trying to be. 

