Title
Review for Bad Channels (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
86 min., R, Horror/Comedy/Science Fiction, 1992
Director: Ted Nicolaou
Cast: Paul Hipp, Martha Quinn, Aaron Lustig, Ian Patrick Williams,
      Michael Huddleston, Victor Rogers, Charlie Spradling,
      Melissa Behr, Ania Sava, Sonny Carl Davis, Tim Thomerson
     Controversial rock dee-jay Paul Hipp takes over an all polka radio
station when it changes to a world wide rock station.  That night an
alien takes over the station and takes Hipp hostage.   The alien starts
stealing beautiful, but ditsy, earth girls with the radio waves and Hipp
has to find a way to stop it.
     BAD CHANNELS is one of the newest films by Full Moon Entertainment.
Although the plot is preposterous I found the film to be great fun to
watch and recommend it to any fans of B- movies and any fans of Full
Moon Entertainment (one of my favorite film companies).  On a scale of
zero to five, I give BAD CHANNELS a four.  BAD CHANNELS is rated R for
explicit language and adult situations.
     The cast does a great job.  They all look like they are enjoying
themselves.  There are two cameos in the film.  Charlie Spradling (an
actress in several Full Moon films, as well as being their spokes
person) is a waitress and Tim Thomerson as Dollman (a character from the
Full Moon film DOLLMAN), who shows up at the end of the end credits, so
stick through them.
     The special effects are great, and the creature effects are cute.
One of the neatest of the creatures is the cute little robot with the
brain in its head.  The one part of the special effects that I didn't
like very much were the spaceship effects.   All that was composed of
was colored lights going in circles in the air.  The story successfully
combines science fiction and horror with a bit of humor thrown in.  The
script is well written and seems to be above the level of most B-movies.
The sets are great.  I especially like how the inside of the radio
station looks after the alien takes it over.
     Most of the music for the film is by Blue Oyster Cult and it is
great.  When a person gets grabbed there is almost a music video that
goes on and that I found to be very enjoyable.  One of my favorite bands
is the one in costume from the hospital.
