Title
Review for Bad Boys (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Columbia)
Directed by     Michael Bay
Written by      Michael Barrie, Jim Mulholland, Doug Richardson
Cast            Martin Lawrence, Will Smith, Tea Leoni, Tchkeky Karyo,
                Joe Pantoliano
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for violence and language)
Running Time    118 minutes
Reviewed at     General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh (8APR95)
     In the exaggerated universe of big-budget action, comic timing is
everything.  Well-timed jokes between "buddy cops," for example,
provide the buffer against a subject matter that's, frankly, quite
brutal.
     Good comic chemistry also overrides structural flaws.  Formula not
working?  Who cares?  If the audience laughs, it's a hit.  The best
entries in the "buddy cop" genre have practiced this by teaming actors
who can be tough *and* funny.  Nolte and Murphy in 48 HRS.  Gibson and
Glover in LETHAL WEAPON.  Even Schwarzenegger and Belushi in the
underappreciated RED HEAT (1988).
     In BAD BOYS, comic Martin Lawrence and rapper Will Smith team-up
to act tough.  They play wise-cracking Miami narcotic cops who have 72
hours to catch the creeps that burgled their headquarters.  The
high-tech robbers stole a stash of heroin--from the boy's recent
"career bust"- and the force has three days to save face before the
feds move in.
     The formula isn't tweaked *too* far:  Lawrence is the hard-working
family man, while Smith is the single, rich kid with the $100K
Porsche.  The two are best-buddies, though, and their rapport is
*easily* the best thing about this film.  Just watch them breeze
through a sitcom subplot that has each one impersonating the other.
     BAD BOYS marks the return of producers Don Simpson and Jerry
Bruckheimer (BEVERLY HILLS COP).  To direct their super-slick product,
they hired newcomer Michael Bay.  He's from the world of music-video
and it shows.  BAD BOYS has more style than READY TO WEAR, but there's
no punch to the plot.  The director overpowers the narrative with so
much splash and flash that nothing has any impact.  How can you feel a
rush from so much slow-motion?
     The story doesn't make much sense, either.  Though vaguely
believable at first, BAD BOYS spirals toward absurdity until it reaches
a kitchen-sink finale that only a fan of John Woo could love.  When
everyone converges on a airplane hanger--hey, it was shown in the
previews!--it's every stunt double for themselves.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 4/7/95
Running Length: 1:59
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, language, mature themes)
Starring: Martin Lawrence, Will Smith, Tea Leoni, Tcheky Karyo, 
          Theresa Randle, Joe Pantoliano
Director: Michael Bay
Producers: Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer
Screenplay: Michael Barrie, Jim Mulholland, and Doug Richardson
Cinematography: Howard Atherton
Music: Mark Mancina
Released by Columbia Pictures
     48 HOURS, BEVERLY HILLS COP, and LETHAL WEAPON were all, to some 
extent, reasonably entertaining action films.  The unavoidable result of 
their success has been a long string of sequels and rip-offs.  The latest 
is BAD BOYS, an overlong sample of MTV-style direction that "borrows" 
heavily from these (and numerous other) flicks, and, in the process, 
elevates them to the comparable level of CITIZEN KANE.  
     The action sequences--and there are a lot of them--are apparently
designed to camouflage the lack of a credible story.  I suppose someone
guessed that if the audience was too busy following bullets, bodies,
and explosions, they wouldn't have time to wonder about things like
logic and coherence.  Unfortunately, the movie contains occasional
moments of inactivity and, during those, the first thing that comes to
mind is:  What's the point?  After asking the question a few times, it
becomes clear that not only are things moving fast, but they're
completely out of control.  Consider what happens to a downhill skier
or race car in this situation, and you get an idea of what BAD BOYS has
to offer.
     When it came to putting ideas on paper, the writers had a beginning 
(a drug heist from the Miami P.D.'s evidence safe) and an ending (guess 
what happens to the bad guys).  They also had a premise:  take a couple 
of mismatched cops who hide their respect for each other, and team them 
with a female civilian/witness who is destined to prove her worth, but 
only after botching things a few times.  No, it's not original, but it's 
the only glue that holds this production together, even if it is spread 
far too thin.  Because outside of these few basics from script writing 
101, no thought was put into the screenplay for BAD BOYS.
     The cops, Marcus Burnett and Mike Lowrey, are played by TV sitcom 
stars Martin Lawrence and Will Smith.  For reasons too silly to explain, 
they're forced to swap identities whenever they're with a murder witness 
(Tea Leoni).  If there ever was comic potential in this unnecessarily 
contrived situation, it's not realized.  I think THREE'S COMPANY may have 
done the same thing, only better.  Much better. 
     Smith and Lawrence are likable, and they have a certain modest 
chemistry that surfaces during the so-called "humorous" banter, but 
everything about their characters is a regurgitation of previously 
recycled material.  (Does that make it re-recycled?)  The other 
characters are equally familiar:  the tough female sidekick, the loyal 
wife (Theresa Randle), the evil drug lord (Tcheky Karyo), and the loud-
mouthed police captain (Joe Pantoliano).
     The most complimentary thing I can say about BAD BOYS is that it has 
style and energy.  The cinematography is frequently inventive, and Mark 
Mancini's SPEED-like score is the perfect accompaniment for chases and 
fights.  Unfortunately, there's only so far a movie can go on loud music, 
nicely-framed shots, testosterone, and adrenaline.  BAD BOYS takes the 
often-traveled road, and leads the audience to a dead end.  
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Martin Lawrence, Will Smith, Tea Leoni, Joe Pantoliano,
           Tcheky Karyo.
Screenplay:  Michael Barrie & Jim Mulholland and Doug Richardson.
Director:  Michael Bay.
     Gnaw on this factoid for a moment:  BAD BOYS was originally a
project with Dana Carvey slated to play one of the leads.  That is
not a misprint.  Dana Carvey.  And if you think about it long
enough, you will realize why BAD BOYS never had a prayer of being
anything more than mediocre, and in fact turned out quite bad.  It
is the classic case of a shell plot intended to do nothing more than
showcase the star's familiar comic routine.  BAD BOYS is an
amazingly boring action film, and will be funny only to fans of
Martin Lawrence and/or Will Smith.
     Lawrence and Smith play Marcus Burnett and Mike Lowry, two
Miami narcotics officers with very different personalities.  Marcus
is a home body with a wife (Theresa Randle) and three kids; Mike is
a player with a steady stream of lady friends.  They do share a
problem, however...a fortune in heroin from one of their busts which
has been stolen from the police station by mastermind Fouchet
(Tcheky Karyo).  The case becomes complicated when a witness (Tea
Leoni) to a pair of murders committed by Fouchet and his goons calls
for help, setting in motion a sequence of events in which Marcus is
forced to pretend he is Mike.  Meanwhile, both Mike and Marcus try
to track down Fouchet before he re-sells the heroin to mobsters.
     I'll tell you exactly what kind of movie BAD BOYS is.  It is
the kind of movie where anything that *can* blow up, *will* blow up.
It is the kind of movie where glass exists solely to be shattered,
either by bullets or by bodies; in one hilariously idiotic example,
a glass aquarium is mounted in the wall of a nightclub, allowing a
convenient view of the inside of the men's room as well as providing
a ready-made breakable item.  It is the kind of movie where a
misinterpreted phone conversation turns into an episode of "Three's
Company."  And it is the kind of movie where a guy in a wheelchair
gets knocked over by the villain just so you know that he's *really*
a villain (he probably doesn't recycle, either).  In short, it is a
collection of every conceivable action film cliche, right down to
the high-strung police captain (an incessantly screaming Joe
Pantoliano).
     Don't expect much better from the characters.  Martin Lawrence
has the role with the most potential, the family man playing the
part of the sexy bachelor, but he completely butchers it.  The part
requires someone capable of a little restraint, someone who appears
uncomfortable acting smooth and seductive.  That someone is *not*
Lawrence, who is full of swagger and attitude.  Falling back on his
popular stand-up and sit-com persona might prove popular with his
die-hard fans, but others will wonder exactly how he is supposed to
be different from Mike.  Marcus is a part that actually requires
some acting ability, and Martin Lawrence doesn't have much.  Will
Smith *does* have acting ability, and plenty of it, but he really
takes a back seat to Lawrence.  When he is allowed to show his
frustration with the mess Lawrence is making, of his house and his
image, Smith is quite good, and there is actually some energy in BAD
BOYS.  Those occasions, however, are all too rare.
     The simple truth is that, basically, BAD BOYS is trying to
showcase Lawrence and Smith the way BEVERLY HILLS COP showcased
Eddie Murphy, and a coherent plot would just get in the way of the
jokes.  There are clearly a lot of people who think Martin Lawrence
is funny, but I am not one of them.  It is just depressing watching
him bug his eyes at the suggestion that he is gay, or fumbling for
an explanation when his wife catches him in a lie (which,
incidentally, exists only as a lame plot device).  While Will Smith
can be quite funny, he becomes something of a straight man to
Lawrence, and that is a real misuse of his talents.  BAD BOYS is a
generic action flick full of pointless slow-motion shots by director
Michael Bay and heavy use of orange filters by cinematographer
Howard Atherton, sporadically interrupted by Lawrence and Smith's
profane version of the traditional buddy film odd couple.  BAD BOYS,
even worse movie.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Annoyingly unentertaining, obvious and paper-thin
buddy/cop/drug/sexy-witness movie. Presence of director Michael Bay shows
none of the talent he demonstrated in THE ROCK.
I've seen this movie already, I said, as I looked at the box art. No, I
haven't even seen a trailer for the movie; I don't even know what it's
about, but I can look at the way they're promoting it, and I know I've seen
it already.
I thought: It's about these two cops. And they're buddies, sort of. They're
at each other's throats a lot, but they really do like each other. And
everyone else in their department hates them 'cause they're hot-shots. And
they have some kind of diametric opposition in their relationship. And one
day they're in the middle of cop business as usual when they get mixed up in
this plot that involves a really sadistic bad guy with lots of henchmen who
can never hit anything with the billions of rounds of ammo they are always
carrying. And the bad guy is a drug lord. And there's a witness, and she's
this sexy thing who rubs both of them the wrong way. And their supervisor
wants their badges for breakfast when they blow up half the town bringing
this guy down.
I only missed the bit about the badges. The rest I got dead-on. And I hadn't
even left the video store yet.
The cops in this movie are Will Smith and Martin Lawrence, and the bad guy
is the immensely underutilized Tcheky Karyo. Smith plays a cop who has a
trust fund and is thus not a cop for the money; Martin L. is a family man
(shades of the now-tired LETHAL WEAPON dynamic here) whose wife and he are
at total odds. This leads to some strained scenes about Lawrence's "not
getting any", and some totally unneccesary bits with him skulking around his
own house, thinking his partner is now his wife's "back door man". Not
funny; tiresome.
BAD BOYS gets some of its incredibly meager selling points from the presence
of Will Smith and Martin Lawrence. Will Smith is a natural, and I'm happy to
see him in movies like SIX DEGREES... and MEN IN BLACK. He's funny and
charming without trying to be; he really does seem to be enjoying himself.
Martin Lawrence is a different story; he's so uptight and verbally
constipated that sitting through his improvised riffs are a trial.
Movies like this are not about originality. I know this. They are about
style and energy and synergy between actors. I know this, too. And yet,
while watching BAD BOYS, which its glamorous photography and impossibly
exact stunt choreography, I felt fed up. I'd seen CON AIR, which despite
being completely implausible, was still great fun, because it tried however
feebly to put some new life into the mix. BAD BOYS is a dry run -- and
overlong, too, clocking in at just over two hours with a lot more by-play
than I felt could be justified.
I could write this movie. You could write this movie. Many people have. Many
people will continue to write this movie, over and over again. Other people
will buy it from them, and make it, and we will pay money to see it. More
the fools we all.
In a terrifyingly prescient line from his book A SCANNER DARKLY, Phil K.
Dick once mused that the McDonaldburger (as he called it) would eventually
eclipse money as the token of cultural and financial exchange. One day we
will all just sit in our living rooms and sell the same burger back and
forth to each other. The same could be said about this movie. I have the
sinking feeling we're going to see it again. Soon.
