Title
Review for Mahanagar (1963)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Murali Krishnan
This film is also known by the English title "The Big City".
In most ways, the Mazumdar family is a typical, traditional Indian
family. Subrata (Anil Chatterjee) is the head of the family and the
breadwinner, while his wife Arati (Madhabi Mukherjee) keeps
everything in order at home. Besides their two children, Subrata's
parents also live with them. That make quite a few people to support
on a single income, and Subrata's job as a bank clerk does not
always provide everything the extended family needs. Because they
live in Calcutta, a large modern city, they have the option of
getting a second income if Arati was to also join the workforce.
This choice is too tempting, so that is what they decide.
The Mazumdars live in a place and time where it is becoming
acceptable for women to work, but the idea does not sit well
with everyone. Initially, only Subrata is in favor of Arati
working because he know how badly the family needs the money.
Subrata's father, Priyogopal (Haren Chatterjee), is especially
opposed to Arati pursuing a career. The retired school headmaster
thinks it is undignified for women to work, yet he hypocritically
visits his successful students and begs favors from them.
Arati is initially unsure of the new world she has entered, and
she must learn how to be a door-to-door sales representative. Her
dedication and determination pay off as she becomes rather
successful, and a favorite of her boss. The extra money she brings
the family noticeably boosts their standard of living. The family
members are more accepting of her career now that they have access
to material comforts that they previously did without.
The story is set (and was filmed) in a time when it was still
uncommon for women to work outside the home. The practice was just
becoming acceptable in modern urban India. What may seem commonplace
by the standards of today, was more exceptional at the time the film
was made.
With this film, Satyajit Ray has crafted another good film. The
story is engaging and the viewer gets closely involved in the story
of the Mazumdar family. However, it does not reach the high
standards set by many of his other works. The problem is not that
the film is flawed in what it attempts, but rather it does not make
much of a statement beyond the narrative. The plot tells a story in
a single dimension, and does not contain much symbolism or
allegory. It is an enjoyable film, but it is not engaging.
Recommended. This is a well-made and realistic film. However, it
does not deliver much more than the surface level story, and as a
result is not as profound as other Satyajit Ray works.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
