Title
Review for Joe Dirt (2001)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Max Messier
As scary as it sounds, I was actually looking forward to seeing the new
David Spade comedy, Joe Dirt.  My entire childhood and much of my
adolescence was spent in such podunk California towns such as Exeter,
Georgetown, Placerville, Bakersfield, Visalia, Fresno, Garden Valley,
Kelsey, and Cool.  Such places where ripped Dokken t-shirts were worn
with pride, jeans were bathed in an acid wash, and hair cuts were
sported by the mullet kings of Cali.  I grew up in fear of Wrangler
jeans, Bob Seger t-shirts, and Chevy Camaros.
Joe Dirt was meant to be redemption for my miserable years at the hands
of these greasy, ignorant tormentors.  But then 30 minutes went by and
the movie took a sharp left into saps-ville, crashing and burning like a
74 'Cuda wrapped around an oak tree.  Oh well.
Joe Dirt the man (David Spade) is a rebel without a clue or a proper
barber.  While mopping the floors at a local radio station in LA, Joe is
corralled by a producer into an on-air interview with a Howard Stern
wannabe DJ (Dennis Miller, in a role that finally solidifies his
sell-out status), who ridicules his mullet hair and his white-trash
beard patches.  In defensive of his social stature, Joe tells the tale
of his life story -- his search for the parents who abandoned him at the
Grand Canyon; his various jobs as a 'gator wrestler, circus carnie,
walking billboard, oil rig worker, janitor at a grade school; and the
love of his life Brandy (Brittany Daniel) -- the "Tokyo Rose of the
Trailer Park."
Along the way, Joe Dirt has incestuous sex with an assumed sister; gets
pelted by hot chili and hot dogs; gets beat up by numerous thugs;
receives mental torment via Kid Rock and his white-trash crew; shoots
fireworks at gasoline-filled tubs; and is held hostage by Buffalo Bob in
a strange Silence of the Lambs homage.
It's too bad that instead of exploiting the ignorance and ridiculousness
of the white-trash mentality, Joe Dirt is portrayed as a sympathetic
loser who proclaims his vitality through motivational statements -- like
"Keep on keepin' on" and "Life's a garden, dig it" -- enough to make
Stuart Smalley cringe.  The sappy love story also carries about as much
credibility as Whitesnake's Greatest Hits, sucking the energy out of the
film.
Put simply, David Spade is not a romantic lead, and he really can't
carry a film on his zany attempt to be a thespian (see also Lost and
Found).  The collection of bit parts given to such notable actors as
Roseanne Arquette (a 'gator ranch owner), Christopher Walken (a janitor
hiding out in the Witness Protection Program), and Fred Ward (Joe's
mullet-headed bastard of a father) are actually the funniest parts of
the movie.  The best job in the film, though, goes to Kid Rock, who
clearly didn't need to stretch beyond his roots, with his greasy long
hair and limited vocabulary... the essence of trailer trash.
More white-trash movies are on the way.  Up next, a film about the Mr.
Show character "Ronnie Dobbs" called Run, Ronnie, Run.  Will the mullet
finally get its due?  We shall see.
Director: Dennie Gordon
Producer: Robert Simonds
Writer: David Spade, Fred Wolf
Starring: David Spade, Jaime Pressly, Brittany Daniel, Dennis Miller,
Fred Wolf, Christopher Walken, Kid Rock, Fred Ward, Roseanne Arquette
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
L'il Joey Dirt loses his parents at the Grand Canyon at the age of eight and
spends the next ten years of his life looking for them. During his grand
journey across the United States, Joe meets plenty of kooky characters, some
of whom just put him down and others who help him along the way.
CRITIQUE:
This movie is not what you'd expect. I went in looking for a short,
disposable film with lots of redneck and gross-out humor, but came out with
a long story, laced with a surprising amount of dramatic moments, little
laughs and a sweet side. And even though the film itself doesn't really come
through in the comedy department, I would still slightly recommend it on
video, since it does offer a cute FORREST GUMP-ish story, a truckload of
cameos and a couple of laugh-out loud scenes. But what the hell were they
thinking when they made this movie? I mean, it's got Adam Sandler and David
Spade's names all over it, the trailer features the four or five major
idiotic sequences from the film, but it's really just a slow-paced dramedy
about a kid who gets abandoned by his parents, with spurts of Farrelly
humor, which ultimately end up feeling out of place. Now I'm not suggesting
that they'd have tried to make an all-out drama out of this, but why not
sell it more as a cute comedy with some soft touches, rather than your
typical Sandleresque movie, since the latter will only leave people
disappointed in the end.
I actually stopped waiting for the laughs about halfway through this film
and tried to enjoy it as it was. With its wicked soundtrack packed with cool
tunes, fun cameos like Kid Rock showing off his acting chops and Christopher
Walken, once again, bringing the house down with yet another excellent
comedic performance. Now how's about giving this guy his own comedy
already?!? He's hilarious!! I will also admit to actually starting to care
for the Joe Dirt character, which is something I really didn't expect to do,
but with most of Spade's characteristic wise-cracks left behind him for a
change, it was nice to see him play someone with a heart. Of course, the
bevy of beauties gracing the screen throughout also didn't hurt the film
any, but someone please explain to me how these TOTAL babes always end up
going for Spade's goofy characters?? (see LOST & FOUND) Oh well, I guess
that's Hollywood! Anyway, the bottom line is that this flick doesn't come
through in the laughs department (save for a few rare moments), goes on for
way too long, but does offer some bitchin' tunes, a sweet story and a
character that is ultimately likeable, in that sorry-ass kind of way. See it
on video if you're looking for a few laughs and a cute story, but don't go
out of your way to get it, since it ain't really all that good.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Billy Madison (7/10) - Deuce Bigalow (7/10) - The Ladies Man (6/10) - Lost &
Found (4/10) - The Ringmaster (2/10) - There's Something About Mary (7/10) -
The Waterboy (4/10)

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Dennie Gordon.
Cast: David Spade, Brittany Daniel, Dennis Miller, Adam Beach, Christopher 
Walken, Rosanna Arquette, Jaime Pressly, Kid Rock, Erik Per Sullivan, 
Caroline Aaron.
2001 - 92 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, April 11, 2001.
"Joe Dirt" is woefully unfunny. Directed by television alum Dennie Gordon (in 
his feature film debut) and executive-produced by Adam Sandler, it is another 
halfhearted attempt to inundate audiences with bathroom humor and dog-humping 
jokes. The only problem is, these jokes are, by now, getting moldier than 
three-month-old bread, and it has a watered-down PG-13 rating. Every physical 
joke and every line of dialogue that is supposed to be humorous are both 
predictable and boring. I didn't laugh, or lightly chuckle, or even smile, 
once throughout the duration of "Joe Dirt," and it takes a really, really bad 
comedy to achieve such a dubious feat.
Joe Dirt (David Spade) is a radio station janitor in Los Angeles with a 
cheesy mullet hairdo straight out of the '70s. Living in the building's 
boiler room, lightning strikes one day when he finds himself on the air with 
"tell-it-like-it-is" radio personality Zander Kelly (Dennis Miller), 
unspinning his fascinating life story, from the moment when he was abandoned 
by his trailer trash parents at the Grand Canyon when he was eight, up until 
the present day, circa twenty years later. Passed along from one wacky foster 
family to the next as a child, Joe has spent his adult years desperately 
searching for the whereabouts of his parents, who have seemingly vanished 
into thin air. Amidst it all, he lost touch with the one person who ever 
really cared about him, Brandy (Brittany Daniel), a fetching young woman who 
is about to marry the oily Robby (Kid Rock) by default.
An uninspired road-movie-cum-love-story, "Joe Dirt" leaps from one comic 
setup to the next, without any actual care for the story at hand, or the fact 
that the comedy is D.O.A. David Spade (1999's "Lost & Found"), who also acts 
as co-writer to the episodic screenplay, can be a charming performer, but he 
tries too hard here to be like fellow comedians Adam Sandler and Rob 
Schneider. In the process, he flounders in a story that would be above the 
most listless actor in Hollywood.
Cameos are prevalent, perhaps to make up for the lacking material, as they 
include everyone from Christopher Walken (what is he doing her?), to rapper 
Kid Rock, to Rosanna Arquette. The only person who permeates any sort of 
cinematic screen presence is Brittany Daniel (a former recurring actor on 
TV's "Dawson's Creek"), as the sweet Brandy, who makes for an attractive love 
interest. Daniel's scenes, and one admittedly clever vignette in which Joe is 
captured and put into a well by a cross-dressing serial killer with a 
white-haired poodle, a 'la "The Silence of the Lambs," are the only elements 
that raise "Joe Dirt" above being utterly worthless. The classic rock 
soundtrack, including Blue Oyster Cult's "Burnin' for You" and Bachman 
Turner-Overdrive's "You Ain't Seen Nothing Yet," isn't bad, either.
There are so many things wrong with "Joe Dirt," however, that these passing 
bright spots are only cause for cursory interest. The whole of the film is 
birdbrained and silly, and doesn't work for a second. Likewise, director 
Dennie Gordon shows no flair for filmmaking, unable to set up even the most 
simple jokes for an acceptable payoff. "Joe Dirt" aspires to be the next 
"Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" or "Dumb & Dumber," but it ends up landing 
closer in quality to "Billy Madison" and "Black Sheep."
 http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/DustinPutman.htm
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com
--part1_83.98b5acf.28061539_boundary

Author
Robin Clifford
In 1985, little Joe Dirt (Eric Per Sullivan) was abandoned by his white,
trailer-trash parents at a Grand Canyon tourist stop. He has had to fend
for himself ever since and, even though he has lived a life of hard knocks,
he has not forgotten his mom and dad. Now, 15 years later, Joe (David
Spade) decides it is time to find his roots and begins his quest in "Joe
Dirt."
David Spade, since the death of Chris Farley, has not been able to break
out on his own in feature films - see "Lost & Found" for bad starring
choices. Usually, he plays the caustic, wise-cracking smartass - a routine
that gets tired outside of his Dennis Finch character on TV's "Just Shoot
Me." In "Joe Dirt" there is a kinder and gentler Spade in the role of Joe,
a not-too-bright but genuinely nice guy. Unfortunately, the movie isn't too
good.
Joe Dirt is a pathetic little guy who sports a 70's style shag hairdo
because, when he was a baby, his skull did not close correctly, so his mom
put a wig on him. When his head finally closed up, she forgot to remove the
wig and he has been burdened with the out-of-date hairpiece ever since.
But, he has an intense joie de vie that keeps him going even when he gets
covered in pooh-pooh or picked on by school kids. Joe firmly believes that
if you are a good person, you will get what you want from life.
Joe begins a cross-country, crisscrossing journey to dig up clues and track
down the parents that dubbed him "Dirt." This consists of a series of
disjointed, short incidents involving various wacky characters. Some help
him, some hinder him and you get the whole story via a radio talk show
hosted by the sarcastic Zander Kelly (Dennis Miller). Joe is brought onto
the show by the bored emcee to discuss what a loser he is and Joe tells his
story. As the tale of his search unfolds it is so compelling Joe instantly
gets a huge listener following.
The script by Spade and Fred Wolf is a mishmash of goofy slapstick scenes,
emotional moments, an oddball love story (Joe gets the beautiful girl,
Brandy (Brittany Daniel)) and a whole bunch of positive messages to the
audience. Joe's life, as we see it, is a string of mishaps ranging from
falling out of a balloon shaped like a molar to sleeping in a house being
fumigated. There are laughs along the way, but most are forced and none too
funny.
This Adam Sandler produced effort attracts a whole bunch of comedy figures
to it, mostly in small, fleeting performances. Christopher Walken plays
Clem, a school janitor in a witness protection program, who helps Joe,
dignifies the film with his presence. The rest - Rosanna Arquette as an
alligator rancher who hates gators; Joe Don Baker as an abusive, drunken
parent to Joe's girlfriend (funny, huh?); Fred Ward as Joe's greedy, stupid
father; Carson Daly as Carson Daly; and others - walk in and out of their
scenes without note.
At the end of the screening for "Joe Dirt" I chatted with one of the
patrons and asked what he thought of the movie. His response was, "If you
want a no-brainer, it's just what the doctor ordered." Now, I see enough
no-thinking-required movies as it is without wanting/needing to see yet
another one, but I know what the guy means. I, personally, prefer to be
challenged to think about a movie, but, if you want to leave your brain at
home, maybe "Joe Dirt" is the prescription you need. I give it a C-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
JOE DIRT, which has the second worst trailer this year (FREDDY GOT 
FINGERED's are even worse), is pretty much what you'd expect from a 
movie produced by Adam Sandler.  Full of bathroom humor, food fights and 
humping dogs, it's the kind of movie beloved by its target audience and 
correctly shunned by others.
Starring David Spade, who shares the writing "credits" with Fred Wolf, 
the movie concerns a boy abandoned by his parents when he was 8.  A guy 
who is treated like his last name, Joe has spent the last 15 years 
trying to find the folks who "lost" him.  Speaking of lost, Spade, last 
seen starring in LOST & FOUND, which I regretfully found, was worse then 
than in JOE DIRT.
Joe tells his life story in flashback to LA radio talk show host Zander 
Kelly (Dennis Miller), as LA waits with bated breath by the radio.  
Although Kelly maligns Dirt, calling him "exquisitely pathetic" and "a 
white trash idiot," Dirt just keeps dishing out his story to Kelly's 
eager audience.  Eventually, Kelly grows to respect his guest, upgrading 
his status to "white trash treasure."
In one of his stories, Dirt is literally "covered in crap."  The movie 
is like that.  Last week's TOMCATS is a comedic masterpiece next to JOE 
DIRT.
JOE DIRT runs 1:26.  It is rated PG-13 for crude, sex-related humor and 
language and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
