Title
Review for Eye of God (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

EYE OF GOD (director: Tim Blake Nelson; cast: Martha Plimpton (Ainsley
DuPree), Kevin Anderson (Jack Stillings), Nick Stahl (Tommy Spencer),
Margo Martindale (Tommy's Aunt), Mary Kay Place (Claire Spencer), Hal
Holbrook (Sheriff Sam Rogers), Richard Jenkins (Willard Sprague), 1997)
EYE OF GOD is the film version of Tim Blake Nelson's stage play. Its
genre is a sort of Southern noir-mystery, even if it emphasizes the part
of its story that is like a biblical allegory about redemption. The film
takes place in a dying rural town in Oklahoma called Kingfisher. Its
story is told in a jumbled order, flashback style, which at first is
quite confusing, but begins to make sense when we realize that the power
of the story is not in solving the crime that was committed, but in
understanding the people in this town, as we get to know them and feel
for their dreams and disappointments in life. The main characters are
the innocent young woman, Ainsley (Plimpton), a fast-food worker, with a
glass eye (The symbolism of that eye was not as clearly developed as it
could have been), the result of a childhood accident, who corresponded
with a prisoner just released, that she is meeting for the first time,
Jack (Anderson). He is a Christian fundamentalist, praising God for
changing his life, allowing him the opportunity to work an honest job as
a mechanic, who will become her husband and make her happy for a while,
before his religious intolerances become a real pain. The other star of
this film is Sheriff Sam Rogers (Holbrook), who is the voice of reason,
the one asking the most pertinent questions about whether there is a God
and whether it is feasible to just obey him blindly. He mentions the
Biblical tale of Abraham, who is ready to sacrifice his innocent son
Isaac for a God that he has never even seen. The sheriff believes the
story should really focus on the innocent child, and that he will do all
he can to see that children like that are protected from those who think
they are above the law.
The opening scene starts off like a horror story, as Tommy Spencer
(Nick), a fourteen-year-old, is found wandering in the woods, all
bloodied, unable to speak, as the police are startled to see him in this
condition, trying to figure out what happened. The sheriff practices
what he preaches, and gently handles the boy, showing deep concern for
his well-being. The film takes off from there and spends most of its
time developing the relationship between the intractible zealot, Jack,
and the vulnerable, good-hearted and very lonely Ainsley, desperate to
talk to people.
The film evokes a hopeless feeling of loneliness and boredom, as this
rural town is shown as a place where people are trapped in their own
invention of what a God should be like. There is never any doubt about
who the murderer of Ainsley will be, so it really doesn't matter that
her murder is what has made Tommie catonic. What matters is that
emptiness persists in this town, everyone seems trapped by their
despair. There is no getting away from it-- every small town in Oklahoma
looks like the other. Ainsley's marriage only increases her loneliness,
as her husband acts to control every movement she makes, forcing her to
stay in the house and not leave it without his permission. Religion is
reduced to being an inhibiting dogma, that makes a bleak life even
bleaker.
The only reason the film works so well and overcomes its tiresome tale,
is because the acting from  the leads is so convincing. Plimpton is the
glue that holds this picture together, as she is someone we come to
really care about. Holbrook is a gentle force, giving the film a
sensibility to it that is hard to question. Nick is perfect in his role,
conveying a quiet but unflagging desperation and teenage angst, as he
wrestles with his yearnings of how to escape from his unhappiness, ever
since his mother (Place) committed suicide and he is made to live with
his aunt, whom he does not respect. Martindale as the aunt, adds her
impenetrable mixture of private self-pity and public cheerfulness to the
town's drab soul. And, Jack, as the troubled clean-cut ex-con, is a role
we have seen played too often in recent years to be overwhelmed by his
effective performance...
The problem with the film, is that the performances convey a deeper
meaning to the film than the too many superficial messages about
religion do. Nothing new seems to be uncovered, except that the film is
right on target identifying this kind of Christian fundamentalism as a
very real problem in rural towns all across the country. But, less
religious metaphors would have allowed the film more time to develop the
more persuasive tale it has to tell, of expanding the noir-mood the
story set up so well but failed to follow through on.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
Running Length: 1:24
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Violence, mature themes, profanity,
      sex)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/8/97 & 5/10/97
Cast: Martha Plimpton, Kevin Anderson, Hal Holbrook, Nick Stahl,
      Richard Jenkins, Margo Martindale, Mary Kay Place
Director: Tim Blake Nelson
Producers: Wendy Ettinger, Michael Nelson
Screenplay: Tim Blake Nelson
Cinematography: Russell Lee Fine
Music: David Van Tiegham
     EYE OF GOD is the evocative title given by writer/director Tim
Blake Nelson to the film adaptation of his stage play.  A strange, dark
movie that ruminates upon several weighty questions about faith and the
existence of a Supreme Being, EYE OF GOD uses two stories spread over
four timelines to present its case.  The resulting examination of
characters and issues is expressed as a noir thriller.
     The film opens in the town of Kingfisher, Oklahoma, where a blood-
drenched, 15 year old boy, Tommy Spencer (Nick Stahl), is discovered
wandering around late at night.  The blood isn't Tommy's, but it's clear
that he has either witnessed or committed a terrible crime.  His stony
silence defeats all attempts by the chief of police (Hal Holbrook) to
uncover the truth about what happened.  Gradually, however, those of us
in the audience learn the story as the film flashes back on the
courtship and marriage of Ainsley Dupree (Martha Plimpton) and her ex-
con husband, Jack Stillings (Kevin Anderson).
     The strength of EYE OF GOD is Ainsley.  Not only is she superbly
acted by Martha Plimpton (playing against type as the shy, reserved,
small town girl), but Nelson's script does an excellent job of getting
into her head and uncovering her hopes, dreams, and motives.  As a
result, Ainsley becomes the kind of real person that an audience can
understand and sympathize with.  Even though her seemingly-happy
marriage is doomed from the start (Isn't this true of all happy
marriages in noir films?), we're glad to see the brief moments of joy
she manages to steal from an otherwise bleak life.
     Kevin Anderson is also effective, although his role is somewhat
less original and ambitious.  The fundamentalist "villain" has become
too much of a cliche over the years -- an easy target for film makers to
take aim at.  It's at the point now where if there's a fervently
religious character in a movie, he or she will inevitably turn out to be
a psycho.  In Jack's case, at least a partially-successful attempt is
made to turn him into a believable, multi-faceted individual. 
     The themes that form EYE OF GOD's backbone are questions that have
troubled humankind since the dawn of history:  Is there a God? and What
is true faith?  However, while these are fascinating questions, the
perfunctory manner in which Nelson presents them doesn't do them
justice.  One scene in particular -- two characters sitting together
gazing out across a darkened lake -- illustrates the gap between the
film maker's intentions and the viewer's reaction.  It's a reflective,
melancholy moment, but lacks the profound spiritual texture that Nelson
ascribes to it.  As a philosophical excursion, EYE OF GOD falls short of
the greatness to which it aspires.  Its success comes through the manner
in which it captures the day-to-day, mundane aspects of the human
experience.
     Since PULP FICTION, non-chronological storytelling has become
popular.  Many movies take this approach out of the belief that it will
make them appear more cutting-edge, when, in reality, it often results
in needless confusion and frustration on the viewer's part.  With EYE OF
GOD, however, Nelson has a legitimate reason for structuring the film as
he does, and it works.  His intent is not to tell the story linearly
across time, but to group together scenes relating to the same subjects
(relationships disintegrating, doomed characters moving towards their
ends, etc.).  While this approach diffuses some of the film's mystery
potential, it replaces it with a different dynamic that retains our
interest. 
     EYE OF GOD belongs in the same category as films like FARGO and
SLING BLADE -- it's the latest of many entries into the suddenly hot,
so-called "Southern Gothic" genre.  Yet, because of its structure and
the somewhat oblique manner in which it approaches its quietly appealing
lead character, this is a different shade of noir.  What matters here
isn't the blood and murder, but the people, their relationships, and the
concepts that define their lives and deaths.  Nelson's approach to this
material is ambitious, and, although he doesn't quite realize everything
he hopes to, there's enough here to make EYE OF GOD worth a look when
it's released commercially in the Fall of 1997.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
