Title
Review for Parallax View, The (1974)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Parallax View" is an interesting and disturbing thriller
that takes an unusual attitude towards assassination
conspiracies: not only do they exist, but they are vast,
organized, ruthless, faceless and permanent.
Warren Beatty stars as a third-rate reporter who uncovers
an enormous conspiracy about the recent assassination of
a U.S. Senator.  Not only did the real killer escape, but
witnesses to the shooting are also being killed, one by one.
Beatty is apparently the only employee of small-time
newspaper publisher Hume Cronyn, and he goes undercover
to infiltrate an organization that he believes hires
violent misanthropes as assassins.  Several narrow escapes
with death fail to convince him of the obvious: he is in
over his head.
There is much action in "The Parallax View".  Some of it
does not seem necessary to the plot, but it is engrossing
anyway; Beatty has confrontations with a rural sheriff
and his deputy, and with desperate witnesses who believe
that they are on a list to be killed.
But at the heart of the film is a mystery.  Beatty is
determined to find out what the Parallax Corporation is
all about, and whether there is any limit to its power.
Beatty must pass careful screening to become one of their
operatives.  He has to take an unusual written exam, and
be monitored while watching a bizarre film consisting of
positive and negative images.  This screening is to detect
sociopathic personalities that Parallax believes are present
in loyal assassins.
Beatty's character is not particularly bright, perhaps
overconfident in his ability to con people, and too greedy
for the big story to keep out of trouble.  But these
weaknesses make for an ideal male lead in a detective
story.  It also helps that there are no love interests
or other subplots to sidetrack the real story, which is,
will Beatty succeed in taking down Parallax?
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
