Title
Review for Muriel's Wedding (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Alex Fung
CIBY 2000/Miramax - 1994
Starring Toni Collette, Bill Hunter, Rachel Griffiths
Screenplay by P.J. Hogan
Produced by Lynda House and Jocelyn Moorhouse
Directed by P.J. Hogan
Rated AA [Adult Accompaniment for those under fourteen] in Ontario for
        profanity and mature themes
     After a successful run in Australia last year, and with much
critical praise heaped upon it, MURIEL'S WEDDING opens into medium
release this weekend in North America.
     Muriel Heslop is a withdrawn, overweight young woman living in
Porpoise Spit, Australia.  She is often the target of her father's
frequent rants at the family, and drowns out her feelings of inadequacy
with ABBA music and fantasies of marriage.  Her self-loathing is such
that only being wed shall she prove herself to be a success; marriage
will transform her into a new person who is respected and admired.
After her four cliquey friends dump her, Muriel plots to follow them to
a resort where they are celebrating the honeymoon of one of the girls,
and MURIEL'S WEDDING unfolds from there.
     Toni Collette plays Muriel in a winning performance, conveying
both the sadness of her character and her desperate eagerness to be
accepted.  Collette gained a frightening 43 pounds in order to play the
chubby title character.  She has a natural screen presence and exudes
charisma, easily winning the audience over with an honest, painful
performance.  Collette basically carries the film, appearing in almost
every scene.
     Muriel's father, Bill "The Battler" Heslop, is portrayed by Bill
Hunter as a slick politician/developer.  While chumming around with
young fans and crowing 'you can't beat progress' (his slogan), Bill
labels his family as worthless and embarrassments.  Rachel Griffiths
plays Rhonda, who becomes Muriel's cheeky new friend in the film.  She
has good chemistry with Collette, and the film suffers when Griffiths
is off-screen.  Muriel's tormenters, played by Pippa Grandison, Rosalind
Hammond, Belinda Jarrett and Sophie Lee, are two-dimensional
caricatures, all saucy, vain and bumblingly spiteful, though that is
probably due to Hogan's scripting
     MURIEL'S WEDDING is essentially a genre teen comedy with more
intelligence and a lot of charm.  Hogan's use of ABBA tunes (which
virtually comprises the entire soundtrack) is interestingly
appropriate, although its repetitiveness tires after awhile.  Hogan's
script is right on the mark in terms of proportionately mixing comedy
with Muriel's earnest quest for acceptance, and the gorgeous scene with
Muriel window-shopping beautifully illustrates the wonder that marriage
has for her.  The glaring pastel colours worn by the performers is an
interesting touch.  MURIEL'S WEDDING features a fine performance by
Toni Collette and a charming, if a bit too straightforward and
conventional story by P.J. Hogan.  On my four star scale, I give
MURIEL'S WEDDING three stars.

Author
Pedro Sena
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1996. All Rights Reserved.
It is hard to say that this is a bad film, as the story is so nice, and so
well done.  And it gets your attention as it is moving along.
This is the story of Muriel, who has finally gotten done with  high school
and is now the loser in all the battles with the other girls for attention.
She just isn't that good looking, and carries a few extra pounds that cause
her to be laughed at.  But this does not deter her abilities and her desire.
To grow up, or force it upon herself, she has to create a bit of a lie, and
an opportunity to do just so allows her to get out of town and move to the
city, where she can give herself a chance to grow.
As time goes by, she makes a friend or two, and learns to relate a little.
She has also incurred a large expenditure of dad's money so she could leave
town and start her new life. This she intends to pay, but this expenditure
causes a  terrible flap in her parent's life. The father is accused of
swindling the money, and it pretty much breaks his political career, which
is shady at best in any case. But it makes the family situation with the
other brothers and sisters even worse.
But things are improving for Muriel. Her new life is getting better, and she
gets into an arranged marriage, which is actually a nice setup for her, and
an advantage for her new husband.  He is a foreigner that has defected from
an oppressive country, and he has the ability to make it to the Olympics,
and his marrying an Australian girl allows him to fulfill that dream, and
give the country a chance at a medal.
While things get tough, and this marriage seems doomed to fail, the eventual
honesty, and Muriel's desire to get a fresh start, finally pay off... and so
does this film.
Much seems to be expected and desired from this film, but in its own way it
surprises. It's never pretentious, and it does  not overstep its abilities.
It is well written and it is designed well, so that its characters make the
best of it.
A very well directed film. It deserves better attention, than it has
received, and really... this film deserves a look.
There is so much other bad crap out there, and this film is not one of them.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MURIEL'S WEDDING is an Australian film that tries to be both a
comedy and a tragedy.  Most shows that attempt this fail miserably
because they keep pulling their punches and can not decide what they
want to be.  Muriel's Wedding on the other hand is a success at both.
I laughed out loud at the funny parts, and I got upset and concerned at
the serious.
     This is the classic ugly duckling fable retold for our generation
and given a different and imaginative development.  So often in this
show, you would think you can predict it, and it surprises you.  Our
ugly duckling is Muriel Heslop from Porpoise Spit, Australia.  The
names alert the viewer from the beginning that this is a scriptwriter
who is willing to go out on a limb with his material.  In fact, the
script by P. J. Hogan, who also directed the movie, is the second
best part of the show.
     There is great dialog through out the show.  One of my favorites
is when Muriel's "friends" tell her to get lost since they can not be
seen with her.  Muriel explains that, "I know I am not normal, but I am
working on it.  I can change.  I can.  I can." The unprintable sexual
banter and joking among the young women, I found absolutely hilarious.
     The best part of the movie has to be the incredible performance of
Toni Collette as the large boned, fairly homely, socially inept, and
not too bright Muriel.  Muriel had a singular desire in life and that
was to get married since nobody thought she could.  In fact the movie
opens with her getting the wedding bouquet in the traditional toss.
Her friends demand she give it back since she has no chance of finding
anyone to marry her and hence she should throw it to one of them.
Solid logic in their book.
     I found Collette's version of simple-mindedness more convincing
than that of Tom Hanks as Forrest Gump.  Gump was cartoon character
heroic.  Muriel is more like somebody you knew in High School and
either ignored or felt sorry for.  You may find yourself hunting up all
of those old wallflowers at the next High School reunion and trying to
get to know them for the first time.  This show really makes you think
about life and about how shy and ostensibly ugly people are treated.
     Some of my favorite scenes of her were when she got so happy she
started laughing uncontrollably as in her first romantic encounter.
Her happiness was infectious; I felt instantly giddy.  Muriel had such
a great way of expressing herself.  She said that when she was lonely
she used to stay in her room all day long listening to ABBA music and
now that she was happy she felt that her life was an ABBA song.
     The interesting parts of the show do not stop here.  The whole
Heslop family is highly dysfunctional.  Most appear to have low IQs,
all are overweight, and they are all lazy with the exception of Dad who
treats his whole family like dirt.  He is a local politician and
wheeler-dealer who worries that his family is a curse on his career.
Dad is played by Bill Hunter who was also good in STRICTLY
BALLROOM--which is definitely worth seeking out in the dusty corner of
your local video store.  Her mother (Jeannie Drynan) is so out of it,
she spends time staring at the cup with the tea bag in it going round
and round in the microwave.
     Although their roles were all one dimensional, I loved the
performances by the actresses who played the ditsy young women Muriel
hung around with in the first of the movie.  Their pancake makeup with
the glossy light colored lipstick and the 1970s hairdos really said it
all.  These women thought they were still the hot stuff they were in
high school.  They made fun of Muriel because she listened to 70s music
when they were more out of touch than she was.
     I have no criticisms of the movie.  For what it tried to be, I
think it hit the nail on the head.  Although we are not talking about
comedy on the level of TOOTSIE or tragedy on the level of ORDINARY
PEOPLE, MURIEL'S WEDDING, nevertheless, is a special movie.
     MURIEL'S WEDDING runs a well edited 1:45.  It is rated R for one
scene of brief male nudity, some profanity, and very explicit
discussion of sex.  It is almost a PG-13 show and would be fine for any
teenager.  I recommend the show to everyone above the age of 12, and I
award it ***.
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     What is it with Australians and ABBA?  First THE ADVENTURES OF
PRISCILLA took ABBA worship to a new level.  Now, MURIEL'S WEDDING
seeks to break that boundary with a nearly non-stop ABBA soundtrack.
After nearly two hours of exposure, I'm realizing that they weren't too
bad of a band.
     MURIEL'S WEDDING uses the songs of the Swedish supergroup as a
clever link to the thoughts and feelings of Muriel, a young Australian
woman obsessed with becoming married as soon as possible.  Muriel (Toni
Colette) lives with her go-nowhere family in the town of Porpoise Spit,
where she spends most of her time in her room, listening to ABBA when
her father isn't giving her grief.
     With the rest of her family members constantly off in their own
world, Muriel decides to take off on holiday with a little "borrowed"
cash from her father in order to escape the routine of Porpoise Spit
and make a new life for herself.  She eventually settles in Sydney with
her friend, Rhonda, where she can concentrate fully on her goal of
marriage.
     MURIEL'S WEDDING is an entertaining film with a bit of an identity
crisis:  it doesn't know if it wants to be a comedy or a drama.  The
filmmakers perpetually toy with the viewers, dragging them from high
comedy to melodramatic tragedy in a heartbeat, and more than once.
This problem arises whenever the camera is not on Colette, who really
owns this picture completely.  Whenever the plastic supporting cast is
the main focus, the film falls flat.  A tacked-on, bittersweet ending
doesn't help, either.
     Don't be discouraged; MURIEL'S WEDDING is still a solid and
entertaining movie.  Just understand what you're getting in to.
There's lots of music, but this ain't no disco.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release 3/95
Running Length: 1:46
MPAA Classification: R (Language, sexual candor, mature themes)
Starring: Toni Collette, Rachel Griffiths, Bill Hunter, Jeane Drynan,
          Gennie Nevinson, Pippa Grandison, Sophie Lee
Director: P.J. Hogan
Producers: Lynda House and Jocelyn Moorhouse
Screenplay: P.J. Hogan
Cinematography: Martin McGrath
Music: Peter Best and Abba
Released by Miramax Films
     The previews for MURIEL'S WEDDING liken this latest Australian
import to two of its predecessors, STRICTLY BALLROOM and THE ADVENTURES
OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT.  These are inaccurate, not to mention
misleading, comparisons.  Those expecting something light and airy from
this tragic-comedy are in for an unpleasant surprise, for, while MURIEL'S
WEDDING has its moments of exhilarating humor, it is, as often as not,
downbeat and even mean-spirited.
     Perhaps the best recent antecedent to MURIEL'S WEDDING is PROOF.
Both films are from House/Moorhouse productions (writer/director P.J.
Hogan is married to co-producer Jocelyn Moorhouse), and, while this film
lacks PROOF's seamless marriage of comedy and drama, there are distinct
similarities in tone and pacing.  MURIEL'S WEDDING could easily be viewed
as a social commentary thinly disguised as something a little less
pretentious.  Certainly, one is more likely to emerge from this motion
picture with a less upbeat attitude than the one resulting from BALLROOM
or PRISCILLA.
     Muriel Heslop (the vibrant, energetic Toni Collette) is a hopeless
romantic.  She spends her days locked in her bedroom, listening to Abba
songs and dreaming of the day she'll be able to put on a wedding dress.
Her walls are covered with momentos of her two favorite things in life:
posters of the singing group and pictures of brides-to-be.  Part of her
reason for living in a fantasy world is that her family life is so
depressing.  Her brothers and sisters spend all day lounging in front of
the television.  Her mother (Jeane Drynan) is oblivious to the goings-on
around her, and her father (Bill Hunter) doesn't miss any opportunity to
brand Muriel as "useless."  In fact, he derides her as the most useless
of his children.  On top of that, her bitchy friends call her an
embarrassment and announce that they don't want her accompanying them on
a vacation.
     Muriel takes all this to heart and decides that the only way to
change her life is to leave the town of Porpoise Spit and find a man.  To
this end, she follows her friends to the resort of Hibiscus Island.  Once
there, she encounters Rhonda (Rachel Griffiths), an old school chum.  In
this wild party girl, Muriel discovers something she has never before had
-- a real friend, someone who actually cares about her.
     One of the most pleasant aspects of MURIEL'S WEDDING is the
distinctly unconventional third act.  No one seeing this movie will
confuse it with a Hollywood picture, as it continually flouts the "feel
good" formulas that typically characterize this sort of romantic comedy.
The ending is far-from-perfect, but it's a great deal better than several
obvious alternatives.
     Nevertheless, parts of MURIEL'S WEDDING are heavy-handed and, as a
result, needlessly uncomfortable to view.  There are times when Hogan
almost seems to enjoy belittling and degrading Muriel.  While it's
necessary to understand her low self-image, the director goes to
excessive, almost-sadistic, lengths to get his point across.  On these
occasions, the film becomes a little difficult to endure.
     Balancing these moments are some high-energy scenes, including a
wonderful lip-synch of Abba's "Waterloo" by Muriel and Rachel, Muriel
trying on wedding dresses to the tune of "Dancing Queen", and an almost-
sex scene featuring sofa cushions being unzipped instead of skirts.  The
soundtrack, featuring at least five Abba songs, is effectively energetic,
and includes a Peter Best-arranged instrumental version of "Dancing
Queen" performed by a full orchestra.
     Those who rely on Miramax's ads to prepare them for MURIEL'S WEDDING
may be disappointed, but that's not the film's fault.  MURIEL'S WEDDING
isn't a perfect comedy, tragedy, or drama, but it contains enough
original elements of each to make it worth a look.  Ultimately, however,
individual enjoyment of this picture may be in direct proportion to a
viewer's ability to tolerate Abba's omnipresent music.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Reminiscent of British comedy/dramas of the 60s, particularly
GEORGY GIRL, the Australian MURIEL'S WEDDING tells the story of a
misfit finding self-esteem.  And while the film takes a lot of
unexpected turns along the way, its ultimate destination is obvious
from the beginning.
     Muriel (Toni Collette) is an over-weight and ungainly young woman
with absolutely no fashion sense.  Her home is the Australian town of
Porpoise Spit--I kid you not.  The clique of snooty school chums whom
Muriel considers her friends ostracize her for just being too frumpy to
be in their exalted presence.  Muriel gets little emotional support at
home from one of the ugliest families we have seen in film in a long
while, headed by an overly critical and unsupportive father (Bill
Hunter).  Our sympathies at first are with Muriel, but soon we find her
repeatedly stealing, first to have a dress to wear to a wedding and
then in order to be able to take a vacation with the women she
considers her friends--without their consent, incidentally.  On the
vacation Muriel discovers the vivacious and instantly likable Rhonda
(Rachel Griffiths), actually an old school friend, who strikes up an
unexpected close friendship with Muriel.  Much like the relationship in
HEAVENLY CREATURES, the very differences in their personality types
binds the two young women together.  But though the two form a solid
platonic relationship, events would soon take place that would place
heavy demands on that friendship.
     MURIEL'S WEDDING was written and directed by P. J. Hogan, her--
admittedly I am assuming it is a her--first such effort.  And it shows
in the freshness and the feel for unexpected situations in Hogan's
writing.  If this film were made in America, Muriel would likely be
written as an entirely sympathetic character.  Ironically, sympathetic
characters in American films live either apparently entirely moral
lives or are rebels and live entirely outside the law.  Of course in
life there are a lot of people who are in the gray area being mostly
honest and decent, but who would steal a little here or there and maybe
cheat on their taxes just a bit if they thought they could get away
with it.  That is the sort of person Muriel is.  People in her world
blame each other for their own shortcomings.
     Muriel's love of slightly tacky ABBA songs, matching her
questionable taste in clothing, is reflected Peter Best's score which
relies heavily on ABBA songs and a score that relies heavily on
dramatic variations on ABBA melodies.  As the Australians do so well,
this is not so much a good film but a clever reworking of a cliched
plot.  It takes several unexpected turns, but ends up where everyone
knew it was going all along.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Brian Koller
"Muriel's Wedding" is a comedy with dramatic elements.  The film
is often interesting, but many scenes aren't credible, and the
humor doesn't always work.
Muriel (Toni Collette) is an Australian young woman with 
problems.  She hasn't had a job for two years, is somewhat 
overweight, is getting shunned by her former friends, and 
spends free time alone in her room listening to ABBA songs.  
She steals a large sum of money from her parents, and 
spends it on a vacation, where she is befriended by old 
high school chum Rhonda (Rachel Griffiths).  Not able to 
face her parents, Muriel moves away from home.  Her situation 
continues to improve as she has an arranged marriage with a 
South African swimmer needing Australian citizenship.  
Things do not go as well for her parents, or for Rhonda.
The audience is expected to sympathize with Muriel, if not
identify with her.  But she has few redeeming qualities besides
humility: she is a liar and a thief, she's not particularly 
bright, and she has no ambition in life besides marriage.  
The people I feel sorry for is her parents.  Her father is a 
garrulous local politician with three unemployed adult children 
still living at home.  He makes the mistake of giving Muriel a 
blank check, and she cleans out his account and absconds.  Soon 
he finds himself facing prison with his career destroyed.  
The mother is betrayed by everyone she loves.
In the first part of the film, Muriel tries to hang out with
several snobbish young women who reject her.  They are
shallow beyond belief, and have no inhibitions about discussing
their crude sexual adventures.
Before meeting her husband, Muriel dates a nervous, pale
fellow.  He is so taken with her that he attends her wedding.
I just don't see his character attending the wedding.
He would have to go to some trouble to find out when and
where it was, and certainly there are more interesting women
for him to develop an obsession for.
Muriel's new-found husband proves to be a disappointment.  He
dislikes her and is only interested in Olympic training.  He
has a constant sneer on his face.  Later in the film, he
suddenly desires her.  This change in his behaviour isn't
convincing.  Even more unlikely is what happens next: Muriel,
who has fantasized about marriage all her adult life, dumps
her now-interested famous and dreamy husband to take care of
her now-paraplegic friend Rachel, who is already cared for
by her mother.
"Muriel's Wedding" is by no means a bad film, but it is
overrated.  I recommend it mostly to those who might enjoy
listening to some of ABBA's hit singles, since that constitutes
the film's score.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Toni Collette, Bill Hunter, Rachel Griffiths,
           Daniel LaPaine, Jeanie Drynan, Sophie Lee.
Screenplay/Director:  P. J. Hogan.
     MURIEL'S WEDDING presents me with a critical poser:  what do
you do with a movie when there was only one thing about a movie that
you liked, but you liked that one thing a *lot*?  I mean, *really*
liked it a lot.  MURIEL'S WEDDING is a truly disjointed effort,
bouncing from slapstick comedy to depressing domestic drama, but its
lead character is a marvelous creation, played with love and
sensitivity by Toni Collette.  I was always interested in what might
happen to her, but I was frequently disappointed by what happened
around her.  Does that one great piece outweigh all the other less
effective pieces?  In a word, yes...but just barely.
     Toni Collette plays Muriel Heslop, a homely, unemployed
22-year-old living in the seaside Australian community of Porpoise
Spit.  Muriel is obsessed with the idea of being married, convinced
that it will separate her from her layabout family and mean that she
has become a success.  She sees an opportunity in a blank check, and
steals several thousand dollars from her father (Bill Hunter), a
pompous local politician, to take a luxurious island holiday.  There
Muriel runs into Rhonda (Rachel Griffiths), an old schoolmate with a
zest for life.  The two become fast friends, and move to Sydney
together, but marriage is still foremost in Muriel's mind.  When an
opportunity does present itself, it forces Muriel to consider her
priorities carefully.
     Here is what is right with MURIEL'S WEDDING:  Toni Collette,
who walks the fine line between making Muriel sympathetic and
making her pathetic.  Collette gained over 40 pounds to play the
dumpy Muriel, but to her eternal credit she plays against Muriel's
physical appearance, letting the audience see the swan behind the
ugly duckling.  She does the most with her expressive mouth, as her
bouts of giddiness cause her to burst into a huge toothy smile,
frequently with her tongue stuck out through them.  Her performance
is by turns hilarious (her hysterical reaction to a date attempting
to remove her clothes) and touching (her wistful sing-alongs to
ABBA's "Dancing Queen").  It is a marvelous piece of work, made all
the more impressive because she never tries to inject any irony into
Muriel's decidedly un-liberated dreams.
     Here is what is wrong with MURIEL'S WEDDING:  Muriel is stuck
in an episodic story which doesn't add up to all that much.  The
sequences at the Hibiscus Island resort are pure raucous comedy,
highlighted by Collette and Rachel Griffiths (a dead ringer for
Juliette Lewis as Rhonda) doing a lip-synch performance of ABBA's
"Waterloo."  Then the switch to Sydney brings a tragic turn which
seems really inappropriate, followed by a bride-for-hire section
again focused on comedy.  Finally, there is yet another tragedy, and
a decision by Muriel for which the justification doesn't seem quite
right.  It is often difficult to get caught up in Muriel's story,
because it takes so many detours.
     She is also surrounded by characters who are mostly paper-thin by
comparison.  Griffiths has some nice moments as the brassy Rhonda, and
Jeanie Dryden has a couple of heart-breaking scenes as Muriel's
beaten-down-by-life mother.  But Bill Hunter is merely loud and
slightly oily as Muriel's father, and Sophie Lee leads a group of
stereotypically catty Barbie dolls who snub Muriel.  There is also a
strange bit by Matt Day as the young man who pines for Muriel then
disappears from the story.  I can understand the attraction--Muriel is
a splendidly crafted character, acted with a grace that made me care
about her life.  She deserved something more cohesive than this jittery
wedding.
