Title
Review for That Old Feeling (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Marty Mapes
*1/2 (out of 4) NOTE: THIS REVIEW CONTAINS ONE OR TWO OF THOSE WORDS
SOME PEOPLE GET UPSET OVER. READ AT YOUR OWN RISK.
Except for a few bright moments of good verbal comedy, That Old Feeling
is embarrassing to sit through.
Bette Midler and Dennis Farina play Lilly and Dan, Actress and Author,
once married, now violently divorced, and back together one last time
for their daughter Molly's (Paula Marshall) wedding. Lilly and Dan hate
each other passionately -- so passionately that they have sex at the
wedding and fall in love again.
Each ditches his or her current spouse of 14 years and runs off with the
other. Molly, married now only 24 hours, runs off in search of her
irresponsible parents while her husband Keith (Jamie Denton) tries to
console the abandoned spouses.
In Molly's search for her parents, she somehow falls in love with
Lilly's paparazzo Joey (Danny Nucci). Meanwhile, the newlywed Keith ends
up consoling Dan's wife Rowena (Gail O'Grady) in bed.
The audience I saw this with apparently thought that all the adultery
was hilarious. I'm no Dan Quayle, but I thought it was a bit creepy. The
message seemed to be "ignore your responsibilities unrepentantly and
have fun fucking who you wish." "Family values" aside, there's something
cruel about all this.
Perhaps this movie would have played well as a black comedy, but the
movie is a romantic comedy. We are supposed to be ROOTING for these
creeps.
Reiner and screenwriter Leslie Dixon tried to make it easier on us by
making the victims unlikeable. Lilly's husband is a new-age flake who
rambles about "emotional valet parking," so we can write him off as
irrelevant. Dan's wife is vain, manipulative, and jealous so we can
write her off as a bitch. Molly's husband is a career-conscious,
self-centered Republican politician who thinks she's too fat (and just
for good measure, he also fucked Dan's wife), so we can write him off as
a prick. Everyone else falls in love.
But still, that somehow doesn't justify the actions of the movie's main
characters. "He's a prick" or "she's a bitch" is no defense.
The movie is somewhat redeemed by some funny dialog -- often during heated
arguments -- and by above-average performances by Midler and Farina
(breaking out of his character-actor mold).
Other than that, it's a standard romantic comedy with a very substandard
gimmick.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Bette Midler is not the star of THAT OLD FEELING, and neither is
Dennis Farina.  Actually, that's not entirely true.  Midler _is_ a star,
which is why she gets lead billing, and Farina is at least a recognizable
face, which is why he gets second billing.  THAT OLD FEELING isn't really
about Midler and Farina, however, which is why is needs some kind of
warning for unsuspecting audiences.  Call it the A TIME TO KILL Memorial
Disclaimer:  "The big star getting lead billing is actually playing a
supporting role, and the previews are remarkably deceptive."  Instead of
getting a brassy broad starring in a brassy broad farce, viewers will find
a surprisingly mellow comedy starring someone named Paula Marshall.  It is
only because Marshall is so charming that THAT OLD FEELING doesn't fall
flat on its mellowness.
     Marshall plays Molly DeMauro, a young woman who has just gotten
engaged to aspiring politician Keith (Jamie Denton).  It should be a
blissful time for Molly, except that she knows the wedding will mean
getting her divorced parents -- actress Lilly Leonard (Midler) and
novelist Dan DeMauro (Farina) -- together in the same place.  Dan and
Lilly's divorce was anything but amicable, and the expected shouting match
causes quite a spectacle at the reception.  Unexpectedly, the shouting
becomes smooching, as the feuding ex-spouses find their animosity turning
into animal attraction.  This development causes no end of trouble, as
Keith fears the scandal will harm is Congressional campaign, and Dan and
Lilly's new spouses -- interior designer Rowena (Gail O'Grady) and
self-help author Alan (David Rasche), respectively -- fear they will
become exes themselves.  It is left to Molly, accompanied by a tabloid
photographer named Joey (Danny Nucci), to track down parents who have had
the nerve to commit adultery with each other.
     The first half-hour certainly fosters the expectation that THAT OLD
FEELING is going to be a tart-tongued parade of family quarrels,
exaggerated characters and physical comedy.  The opening scene trots out
the familiar "woman swallows her surprise engagement ring in a desert"
scenario (seen most recently in Woody Allen's EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU),
but it is still goofy fun.  The wedding gives the sniping Dan and Lilly
some clever insults, and also introduces the one-dimensional characters
of their second spouses.  David Rasche is particularly funny as the
incessantly jargon-spewing touchy-feely therapist, who talks himself
hoarse and makes terribly sincere pronouncements about how important it is
"to dialogue and to language."  Director Carl Reiner keeps all these
elements under control, never allowing scenes to degenerate into pie
fights or prat-falls, while still keeping THAT OLD FEELING lively and
sharp-witted.
     That sharp wit is dulled, however, once Dan and Lilly run off
together, drastically reducing the level of comedic tension and shifting
the focus to Molly's quest for her parents and for her own romantic
happiness.  The story ends up emphasizing Molly's ambivalence over her
marriage to Keith, but the script by Leslie Dixon gives us no reason to
expect any problems between them until the plot arranges to separate them.
THAT OLD FEELING needs to lay more foundation for their incompatibility --
more early scenes of Molly's playful streak, more sense of Keith's stuffy
careerism and hypocrisy -- so that we understand the story is really going
to be about Molly.  As it stands, THAT OLD FEELING often seems disjointed.
The reunion of Dan and Lilly has little meaning besides as a plot device
to get Molly on the road with Joey, and Keith's drunken seduction of
Rowena becomes an afterthought to justify our distaste for him.  There is
too little conflict for too much of THAT OLD FEELING as we wait for Molly
to make her choice between Keith and Joey.
     Thank heavens Paula Marshall is such a find.  She is the kind of
actress who seems to be comfortable in any kind of scene, combining an
intelligent sexiness with a willingness to look completely silly; the
single funniest moment in THAT OLD FEELING may be a depressed Molly
drowning her sorrows in a mouthful of spray whipping cream.  There are
some very nice scenes between Marshall and Danny Nucci, whose photographer
begins as a supreme annoyance but gradually develops an adorably scruffy
puppy-dog quality, and Molly's romantic dilemma becomes interesting only
because Marshall makes her such a flustered sweetheart.  While Bette
Midler goes about the business of playing Bette Midler (including singing
a song) and Dennis Farina enjoys the chance to play against career-long
type-casting as a hoodlum, THAT OLD FEELING quietly becomes a showcase for
a talented young performer.  If you find yourself entertained by THAT OLD
FEELING, it may not be in the way you expect, or by whom you expect.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THAT OLD FEELING 1/2 *. Directed by Carl Reiner. Written by Leslie Dixon.
Photography, Steve Mason. Editing, Richard Halsey. Production design, Sandy
Venetian. Music, Patrick Williams. Producers,Leslie Dixon & Bonnie
Bruckheimer. Cast: Bette Midler (Lilly), Dennis Farina (Dan), Paula
Marshall (Molly), Gail O'Grady (Rowena), David Rasche (Alan), Jamie Denton
(Keith), Danny Nucci (Joey) et al. A Universal Pictures Seagram release.103
minutes.PG-13.
Let's do grammatical justice to the memories of Marcello Mastroianni and
Federico Fellini. In "La Dolce Vita" (1960) Mastroianni was a tabloid's
reporter. His photographer was called Paparazzo, a name that spread
worldwide immediately as a common noun to designate tenacious snapshooters
of celebrities. Paparazzo is singular, paparazzi is plural. In "That Old
Feeling,"  Bette Midler refers to the young man whostalks her with his
camera as "a paparazzi," which is like saying "a men."
One does not expect culture from Hollywood, but one does expect quality
from Carl Reiner. As a jack-of-all-comedies (variously performer, gagman,
producer, etc.) he was a luminary of TV's "Your Show of Shows" and "The
Dick Van Dyke Show." He played in and wrote for movies, directed films that
include "Where's Poppa?,"" Oh, God!,"" The Jerk,"" Dead Men Don't Wear
Plaid,""The Man With Two Brains,"" All Of Me,"" Summer Rental,""Bert Rigby,
You're A Fool." As a father, he produced, with his wife's
help,writer-director Rob Reiner. Quite a record.
"That Old Feeling" is the worst movie Carl Reiner has directed, probably
the only bad one. With his writer he pathetically attempts to do a sort of
screwball comedy with old-fashioned tricks and modern morals, but keeps
driving in the wrong direction in a one-way street. And when streets
change, the turns are missed.
The picture tries to juggle three married pairs.Lilly (Midler) is a movie
star who can't stop acting. She divorced writer Dan (Farina) 14 years ago,
following his affair with Rowena (O'Grady), whom Dan then married. Lilly
remarried too, Alan (Rasche) a dimwit psychobabbling writer.The two women
loathe each other, keep referring to each other's abundant plastic
surgeries.At least Rowena tells Dan: "I'm not neurotic, I'm a bitch."
The "new" couples meet at the wedding of Lilly's and Dan's daughter Molly
(Marshall) and Keith (Denton) who is running for Congress. At the reception
Rowena and Lilly insult each other copiously. Then Lilly and Dan first make
a spectacle of themselves in a loud fight. But when  Molly exiles them to
the parking lot, they switch with irrational suddenness from curses to
desire and make love (mercifully off-screen) inside a car. Why a small auto
instead when so many large ones are available is another of the many
wet-firecracker jokes.
Tedious complications follow. Paparazzo Joey is added to the active list in
scenes which, even if you close your eyes, instantly telegraph that he will
replace Keith in Molly's affections. No surprises here or anywhere else.
In this terminally ill movie the cracks in the plot multiply and widen, the
verbal cracks are bloodless, unwitty and unmemorable. The pedestrian
dialogue goes, along with most situations and characterizations, from
vulgar to coarse. The slow action is unfunny, forced and colorless.
A romantic and/or screwball comedy cannot work without at least two
likable, charismatic, interesting or, at a minimum, amusing characters. No
one fills that bill.
There's one-half of a star worth  of nice oldies on the soundtrack. Among
them:  "Anything Goes, " "Our Love Is Here To Stay," "Call Me
Irresponsible," "That Old Feeling," "Where Or When," "At Last," "That Old
Feeling."
This film was not released, it escaped.

Author
Ben Hoffman
There are very few comedians I've admired more than Carl Reiner.
Personable, obviously a sweet man, a terrific sense of humor, he was a
wit and comedian.   His contributions to the Show of Shows and The Sid
Caesar Show cannot be topped.  But that was back some 25-35 years ago.
Of late he has given us directorial mediocrities such as Fatal Instinct
and Sibling Rivalry.   What happened to the humor in Oh God!  (1977),
The Jerk (1979),  All Of Me (1984) and the hilarious, outrageous (for
1970) Where's Poppa?
THAT OLD FEELING is a rehash of all the old "Romantic Comedies" so that
even such natural comedians as Bette Midler, aided and abetted by
Dennis Farina (GET SHORTY), can do little to spark the film. There are
some funny lines but the situations are so absurd that it is more of a
farce than a romantic comedy which it obviously intended to be. . .
and that is a pity.
Lily (Midler) and Dan (Farina)  have been divorced twelve years and
they are both happily enjoying their lives.  Lily is a movie star,  Dan
is a journalist. Lily has taken a new husband, Alan, (David Rasche)
who is an author of best-selling pop psychology while it is evident
that if anyone needs psychological help, he is a prime candidate.
Dan, too, has re-married.  His new spouse is the lovely Rowena (Gail
O'Grady).  So everyone should be happy, right? WRONG.  Lily and Dan
have a daughter, Molly (Paula Marshall), and Molly is about to marry
Keith (Jamie Denton), as boring as they come, who insists on a big,
formal wedding.  That means Molly's parents have to be invited but
when they get together they always fight and that will  play havoc with
the wedding Molly warns Keith.  And that is the setup for THAT OLD
FEELING.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Bette Midler, Dennis Farina, Paula Marshall, Danny Nucci, 
      Gail O'Grady, David Rasche, Jamie Denton
Director: Carl Reiner
Producers: Leslie Dixon and Bonnie Bruckheimer
Screenplay: Leslie Dixon
Cinematography: Steve Mason
Music: Patrick Williams
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     THAT OLD FEELING is a formulaic romantic comedy that doesn't have 
the decency to give us any real chemistry between the members of about 
five mix-and-match couples.  While it's generally expected that all but 
the top echelon of entries into this genre are going to rely upon stock 
situations and familiar plot turns, the difference between an enjoyable 
romantic comedy and a wearisome one is whether sparks are evident in the 
character interaction.  And, although THAT OLD FEELING features almost 
everybody with more than one partner, nothing ever clicks.  So we're 
left with a tired story that goes to sleep after only about twenty-five 
minutes.
     Of course, some of the matches aren't supposed to work.  Take, for 
example, the marriage of Dan (Dennis Farina) and Rowena DeMauro (Gail 
O'Grady).  Although these two have been together for fourteen years, 
anything more substantial than tolerance has long since drained out of 
their union.  Then there's Dan's ex, actress Lilly Leonard (Better 
Midler), whose second husband, Alan (David Rasche) is one of those 
whiny, feel-good therapists.  Finally, there's Molly (Paula Marshall), a 
twenty-something woman with no apparent career or direction in life, who 
has decided to marry would-be politician Keith (Jamie Denton), because 
he's the safe choice.
     In fact, Molly and Keith's wedding is where the "action" begins.  
You see, according to the bride, her parents hate each other with "a 
nuclear capability."  Sure enough, after a brief try at civilized 
conversation, their repartee devolves into a screaming match, which, in 
turn, leads to a heated kiss.  Soon, Dan and Lilly are steaming up the 
inside of his sports car.  Later, they sneak off together for a wild 
affair in New York City.  Horrified that her parents' behavior might 
hurt her new husband's election chances (he's running on a family values 
platform), Molly sets off in pursuit, but, the longer she follows them, 
the more she realizes how dull her own love life is.  Then, on top of 
that, she starts to fall for a tabloid photographer (Danny Nucci) who's 
helping her locate her delinquent mother and father.
     Part of the problem with THAT OLD FEELING is that the main story -- 
the reunion between Dan and Lilly -- can't sustain the movie.  Once 
they've stopped hurling insults and started kissing, that aspect of the 
film is dead-in-the-water.  There's no place for it to go, except back 
to insults, then to more kissing, like a yo-yo.  Hence,  in order to pad 
things out to feature length, we have the who's-Molly-going-to-end-up-
with subplot (as if we didn't know from the first moment Danny Nucci 
walks on screen).  This might have worked if the characters had been a 
little more interesting (she's boring; he's goofy, but not in an 
endearing way) or if the actors had connected.  While TV regular Paula 
Marshall and Nucci (CRIMSON TIDE, THE ROCK) look good, that's not 
enough.
     At least Bette Midler and Dennis Farina (GET SHORTY) have their 
moments, although Dan and Lilly seem better suited to be good friends 
than lovers.  Their arguments are forced and mechanical and their sex 
scenes are awkward, but they develop a genuine camaraderie while they're 
walking the streets of New York, slipping through a hotel lobby, and 
eating dinner.  Midler and Farina could probably be very good in these 
roles if the script didn't limit them so badly.  
     THAT OLD FEELING was directed by veteran Carl Reiner (father of 
Rob), who used to helm all of Steve Martin's feature projects, and 
hasn't done much of note since ALL OF ME.  Surprisingly for Reiner, 
who's a funny man, there aren't many laughs in THAT OLD FEELING.  In 
fact, had this film turned into the madcap, screwball endeavor it 
occasionally tries to be, maybe the numerous flaws wouldn't have been so 
obvious.  As it is, however, THAT OLD FEELING is just another example of 
a romantic comedy stuck using those old cliches in familiar and 
uninteresting ways.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The magic of FIRST WIVES CLUB stemmed from the utter enjoyment of
its stars.  So it is with director Carl Reiner's THAT OLD FEELING.  The
leads, Bette Midler and Dennis Farina, view their acting as a chance to
have a romp.  They don't work at their craft, they just kick back and
have fun.
     Carl Reiner, whose last film was the unsuccessful FATAL INSTINCT,
has some trouble channeling his stars' energy into a compelling whole.
Writer Leslie Dixon (MRS. DOUBTFIRE) throws most of the humor into the
film's opening act, but the film does not find its footing until midway
through, even though the show has a promising premise and likable
actors.
     The story starts with the marriage proposal of Congressional
candidate Keith Marks (Jamie Denton) to Molly De Mora (Paula Marshall).
Little known actress Marshall becomes the show's picture frame.  Her
talented acting is easy to overlook just as a good picture frame will
not call attention to itself, but will dramatically enhance the
portrait it encompasses.
     Molly attempts to reject Keith's plans for a formal wedding
because of her long since divorced parents' volatility.  "My parents
hate each other with a nuclear capability," she tells Keith as a reason
she could not even invite them to her wedding.  Better to just run away
together.
     Molly's mother, Lilly Leonard (Midler), tries to talk her out of
marriage.  "You know what the 20's are for?"  Lilly asks her
rhetorically.  "Having sex with all the wrong people -- not to get
married."
     At their big wedding, both sides of Molly's family comes.  Lilly,
who is an actress, brings her husband Alan Leonard (David Rasche), who
makes his living writing self-help books.  His profession engenders the
funniest lines in the film.  ("What people want in a marriage is what I
call emotional valet parking."   "It is important to dialogue and to
language with each other.")
     On the other side of Molly's family is her dad, Dan De Mora
(Farina), an author, and his interior decorator wife, Rowena (Gail
O'Grady).  Also at the wedding is a sleazy photographer, Joey Donna
(Danny Nucci), who specializes in selling photos to the tabloids.
     The story's delicious plot cranks up at the wedding party.  On
schedule, Lilly and Dan erupt.  The twist has them fighting, but then
humping in Dan's little red sports car.  They start an affair with each
other, and their adultery becomes contagious.
     The broad comedy's ultimate charm rests with the acting.  Midler,
who looks younger and more beautiful than ever, radiates good spirited
joy, and her comedic timing is right on the mark.  Farina, looking
handsome and debonair, complements but never overshadows Midler.
     Danny Nucci, who was the centerpiece of last year's excellent but
overlooked THE BIG SQUEEZE, starts off gratingly but ends up giving one
of the sweetest performances in the picture.
     The film's best small moment has Midler singing "Somewhere Along
the Way."  Most films today shy away from complete songs.  Excerpts are
fine, but leaving in an entire song, as editor Richard Halsey does
here, is quite unusual.
     THAT OLD FEELING builds to a predicable, but extremely satisfying
ending.  An uneven movie, but one whose stars eventually win you over.
Not a memorable film, but an entertaining one.
     THAT OLD FEELING runs 1:45.  It is rated PG-13 for language and
sexual situations.  The film is quite mild and would be fine for kids,
say eleven and up.  I give the movie thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Bette Midler, Dennis Farina, Paula Marshall, Danny Nucci, Gail
O'Grady, David Rasche, Jamie Denton Director: Carl
Reiner Screenplay: Leslie Dixon
A warning. The review you are about to read will feature mood swings
not too dissimilar to those expressed by Midler and cast throughout
this laborious labour of love (the movie).
HATE: is the basis. A failed marriage, divorce and a illegitimate
daughter (Marshall) fourteen years ago. The players. The author father
(Farina) who slept with the interior decorator before marrying
her. The movie star mother (Midler) who slept with the marriage
counsellor before marrying him. HAPPINESS: when newlyweds. The
illegitimate daughter is to wed a promising young congress man. This
is soon followed by FEAR: when she has to invite her parents to the
wedding. ANGER: at a photographer who keeps taking 'fat pictures' of
the movie star mother.  JEALOUSY: when the movie star mother keeps
making 'liposuction' jokes about the interior decorator with much
tit-a-tat.  RAGE: as the bride's parents attempt to strangle each
other at the wedding reception. LUST: when car-rocking sex occurs
between the bride's parents outside the reception. DISMAY: when the
adulterous pair run off with each other, leaving the interior
decorator and marriage counsellor to sulk. This is followed by more
LUST, HATE, ANGER, REJECTION, GUILT, LUST, HATE, LUST, LUST, RAGE,
RAGE, LUST, HATE, LUST, HATE, RAGE, RAGE - Hey are you all beginning
to feel the beat of the movie?
This movie is an overload of confusing, schizophrenic emotions. The
audience is not allowed to settle into any particular mood or feel for
the movie, because of the tumulus over the top, hysterical shift of
emotions displayed between Midler and Farino.  They are either
persistently yelling at each other or kissing each other; and the
scary thing is that you never now when the mood is going to swing from
RAGE to LUST. If the director Carl Reiner was intending to make the
movie unpredictable with these overly-exaggerated personifications of
character, he has missed the plot, and achieved the unthinkable by
making his characters REPREHENSIBLE.
I am a great fan of Midler's work, but her character in this movie is
purely loud, without self-control. It is also partly the fault of the
script which lacks true witty dialogue. I don't know much about
Farina, but it is suffice to say he's a loud Italian. However, some
charm and redemption was brought to this movie by the petite,
delightful performance of Paula Marshall as the confused daughter. I
mean who wouldn't be confused after witnessing your parents display
such ABHORRENT shifts of temperament.
So which of these overused 'Old Feelings' could this movie possibly be
referring to? Could it possibly be LOVE? Well if memory serves
correctly - this is the one feeling mercifully forgotten by the
moronic handlings of director, cast and crew involved with this
pathetic fiasco of emotions. If you failed to get the 'feeling' of my
words, I was attempting to express great DISPLEASURE.
Comment: Air these negative, bottled up feelings somewhere else.
Feeling Scale: 0% *PAINFUL* / Indifference / Love 100%
