Title
Review for Meeting Venus (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     MEETING VENUS is a film directed by Istvan Szabo, produced by David
Puttnam, and written by Szabo and Michael Hirst.  The film stars Glenn
Close and Niels Arestrup.  Rated PG-13 for sexual themes.
     MEETING VENUS is a witty film about grand opera, in this case the
mounting of a new production of TANNHAUSER in Paris for a live and a
television audience.  The director is the Hungarian Zoltan Szendo,
played by Niels Arestrup, who is getting his first big break in the
West.  The political dimensions of opera have never been thrown into a
clearer light as Szendo not only has to contend with unions and
"democracy," but also the lingering effects of World War II, the Spanish
Civil War, and the Cold War on the attitudes of the singers, musicians,
administrators, and everyone else involved in any way, however
tangentially, with producing TANNHAUSER.
     Szendo wants to talk about the passion of the music.  Everyone
around him wants him to sign petitions, cancel rehearsals, take sides in
the internal politics of l'Opera Europa, the fictive production company.
Then, on top of all his other frustrations, the great diva Karin
Andersson, played by Glenn Close of all people, sails into rehearsal one
morning a week late and promptly snubs him.  Miraculously (in a literal
way) and inevitably, TANNHAUSER does get produced and the movie ends
with a smashing, greatly moving, and unrehearsed version, but the road
to that point is what makes MEETING VENUS so satisfying and so much fun.
     The script has a certainly inevitability to it, but Szabo and Hirst
do fill the script with any fine smaller moments, such as the improvised
duet between Szendo and Andersson about "cheesy Swiss" and all the other
national antagonisms of united Europe.
     Arestrup, a newcomer, as far as I know, is a wonderful screen
presence.  His appearance is not conventionally handsome, but he
projects so much energy and concentration that he is quite overwhelming.
His interpretation of Szendo is perfect and intense as the artist
clinging to the one steady rock, Wagner's music, in this new and
confusing world of private enterprise, private art, and the chaotic,
messy politics of democracy, all of which appear to care not one whit
about the music for which he is prepared to sacrifice anything.  When he
finally asserts himself, it is to assert the primacy of the music above
all else, and it is an exciting and dramatic moment.  Arestrup was
capable of keeping up with Close, who, although not a scene-stealer, is
such a powerful presence herself as to be always the focus of any scene
she's in.
     Glenn Close is, of course, wonderful.  I'm aware that Close has her
fans and her detractors, inexplicable as the latter is to me.  I think
she is one of the two best screen actresses of her generation in
American films today -- the other being Meryl Streep (I think they're
rough contemporaries).  She is mercurial -- one moment, the imperious
diva passing out air kisses like dukedoms, the next moment, the lover
slick with the sweat of love-making and her anger, one moment obsequious
and mocking at the same time, the next radiant and exultant.  The only
thing that keeps her from being a perfect diva is her physical size
which -- despite her relatively high lip-synching skills -- prevent us
from ever fully accepting the power of Kiri Te Kanawa's voice emanating
from that thin, tiny body.
     The other cast members constitute a charming ensemble miscellany of
delightful character actors: the little dumpy man from Dresden who
matches a glorious voice with the meanest of small minds, the passionate
and hefty singers as much in love with pasta as with each other or
Wagner, the seductive younger singers who want to cuddle up with a new
genius, the politicking and adversarial bureaucrats.  The only cavils I
have here are that the lip-synching skills of some of the singing roles
were not as strong as they ought to have been and that (once again) I
have to protest the exclusively flaky homosexuals.
     No one in opera, the move seems to say, is what we the audience
would call normal, but the gay men in the opera world are abnormal even
by opera's standards.  There's the production designer who dresses and
looks like the leather queen of Elm Street and whose reaction to stress
is decidedly off the wall; there's the American singer who is big, tall,
butch, and ineffectual; there's the choreographer who is simply a bitch.
I'm not buying and Szabo shouldn't be selling it: not every queer in
show biz is out of his mind.
     Szabo has got to be one of the great directors of world cinema.
His Mephisto trilogy (MEPHISTO'S WALTZ, COLONEL REDL, and to a less
extent HANUSSMAN) ought to settle that for some time to come.  By
contrast with MEPHISTO, MEETING VENUS is a much lighter-weight
entertainment.  This latest Szabo film is very funny all the way
through.  It has some serious things to say about democracy and about
art and love and making choices (and the freedom to make those choices).
However, the comedy and romance are so delightful, and the glorious
music so completely charming, that I leave the theater feeling uplifted
and relaxed MEPHISTO or REDL never would have let me.
     I don't know if you will get a chance to see MEETING VENUS in your
area, but if you can I recommend that you do so and not worry about the
ticket price.  This movie is is worth.
     One note: if necessary, you might want to bone up on Wagner's
TANNHAUSER a little.  It will add to your enjoyment and understanding of
the movie.
