Title
Review for Sophie's Choice (1982)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Bitter experience often taught us that Hollywood stardom and
great acting doesn't have to go hand in hand. Bitter
experience also taught us that Academy Awards often end in
the wrong hands. However, one of the rare instances when
Hollywood star indeed was the great actor and when the
Academy Award was truly deserved happened in 1983. In that
year Meryl Streep received her "Oscar" for her heart-
wrenching role in SOPHIE'S CHOICE, 1982 drama directed by
Alan J. Pakula.
The plot of this film is based on the best-seller novel by
Joseph Styrone and begins in 1947 when young and aspiring
Southern writer nicknamed "Stingo" (played by Peter
MacNicol) comes to New York in order to begin his literary
career. He finds an apartment in Brooklyn where he meets
neighbours - a couple of two fascinating individuals in
romantic relationship. One is Nathan (played by Kevin
Kline), Jewish biologist prone to violent mood swings;
another is his girlfriend Sophie Zatkowska (played by Meryl
Streep), Polish immigrant and Auschwitz survivor. As he
befriends them and begins chronicling their stormy
relationship, Stingo becomes fascinated with Sophie's life
story and slowly begins unravelling well-hidden secrets
about her traumatic past, including terrible choice she had
to make. Stingo gradually starts falling in love with
Sophie, but the tragedies of the past will begin to reflect
in the tragedies of the present.
SOPHIE'S CHOICE is a film that gives a rather thankless
choice to any reviewer who tries to rate it. On one hand we
have a single performance which is as close to perfection as
any actor or actress had done in the history of the seventh
art. On the other hand, if we rate a film as a whole, we
might do injustice to the said performance. Simply, Meryl
Streep's role in this film is so overwhelming that she
outshines everything else and makes the whole film crumbling
under such weight. Based solely on Streep's role, SOPHIE'S
CHOICE is a masterpiece - rarely we have an opportunity to
watch an actress which is ready to employ every last bit of
her talent to give the detailed, total and moving portrayal
of multidimensional and complex character which we see in
different incarnations through different time periods.
Streep's efforts in this film can never be praised enough -
she doesn't just changes her physical appearances from young
Polish girl, pathetic concentration camp prisoner, mortally
ill immigrant or seemingly healthy and glamorous woman at
the end; she does everything in her power to make those
character transformations as accurate and believable as
possible. This is most notable in the way she excels in
skills beyond the grasp of most of her American colleagues.
While the average Hollywood actor or actress can't master
any accent other than Californian, Meryl Streep here cruises
through the segments that require her character to speak in
Polish, German and broken English. She masters those lines
and those languages flawlessly, never allowing us to imagine
that the actress hasn't grown up in Poland or Germany. After
this marvellous display of talent, it is quite
understandable why Meryl Streep earns "Oscar" nominations
almost every year.
First casualties of Meryl Streep's triumph were the roles of
her two partners. In some other circumstances, Kevin Kline's
film acting debut in the role of Nathan could have been seen
as a superb display of talent - especially the easiness in
which Kline manages to swing between various emotional
states. In the context of this film, this role looks over
the top, in the same way character of Nathan is less
interesting than character of Sophie. Kevin Kline's
performance would also seem less effective to those who had
encountered this actor in his latter, more comedic roles,
like A FISH CALLED WANDA. Meryl Streep does disservice to
Peter MacNicol too; this actor does a very fine job in
playing young and innocent intellectual, and uses a more
sublime technique to switch his character between
expressions of awe, lust, fear and confusion; yet his
character seems somewhat unworthy of the story that is most
effective as one-character study. His role also suffers from
director's decision to split his role between on-screen
character played by MacNicol, and narrator with the more
mature and suggestive voice of Josef Sommer.
Strength of Meryl Streep's performance creates another, more
serious problem for SOPHIE'S CHOICE. Nobody could accuse
Pakula of creating a bad film, since he covered all the
bases - plot develops nicely, multiple flashbacks explain a
lot about characters, and, finally, excellent photography by
Nestor Almendros uses two different sets of film in order to
guide viewers through different time periods. But whenever
SOPHIE'S CHOICE drifts away from Sophie and her story, it
becomes a less of masterpiece it was supposed to be and the
viewer begins to find its shortcomings. First of all, the
film is slightly overlong, with some episodes that serve no
purposes and that could have been left on the cutting room
floor (and that includes even the conversation between
Sophie and Hoess' daughter). Character of Nathan is, despite
Kline's good performance, underwritten and his big secret
gets revealed too late in the film; the authors did the bad
job when they tried to draw parallels between Sophie's and
Nathan's shortcomings.
However, SOPHIE'S CHOICE deserves to be recommended not
solely due to Meryl Streep's role. A great part of it deals
with World War Two and its most macabre yet most fascinating
element - Nazi death camps. Unlike many other Hollywood
films, SOPHIE'S CHOICE doesn't try to simplify this grim and
depressing subject and put it solely in the context of
relations between Germany and Jews. SOPHIE'S CHOICE shows
that the nations other than Germany had their own forms of
anti-Semitism with genocidal potential (which is later
hinted in Spielberg's SCHINDLER'S LIST). The movie also
shows that the people other than Jews also became victims of
Nazi genocidal policies. Therefore, even those who might not
get affected by the strength of Meryl Streep's performance
should watch this film, at least in order to grasp tragedy
that happened to Europe in the middle of 20th Century.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 
