Title
Review for General, The (1927)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"The General" is a silent film starring Buster Keaton.
It is his most ambitious work, and probably his best.
"The General" takes place during the Civil War.  Keaton
is an Southern engineer who has two loves: his steam train 
and his girlfriend.  Because of his occupation, he is
refused conscription.  He loses his girlfriend, as her
family considers him a coward.
One day, Northern agents steal his beloved train.  In a long
chase scene, he follows the agents North in a second train.
He later manages to recapture the train and begins the
journey back South, but this time he is being chased, by
Northern soldiers in their steam train.  Keaton also gets
involved in a Civil War battle fought over a bridge.
All the Keaton hallmarks are in "The General."  He plays
an ordinary man forced by events to perform heroic feats
to win his true love (who, by an amazing coincidence, has
been taken hostage by the same Yankee agents who swiped
his train).  There are several excellent gags (my favorite
has Keaton having all sorts of problems loading lumber
on a train car) and one magnificent stunt (a steam train 
collapses a burning bridge).
But there are differences between this and other Keaton
films.  There is fine cinematography of steam trains
and Civil War armies in the field.  Keaton's love of
trains and railways is evident.  The extended "chase"
scenes build dramatic tension and are fascinating in
the multiple obstacles that Keaton's character must
overcome.
Some people consider Keaton to be as important a silent
film director as Chaplin.  I can't agree with this.
Several Chaplin films were clearly better than 
"The General". Chaplin's tramp character is more 
charismatic and had greater emotional range.  Also, 
Chaplin had a greater social awareness: he was trying to 
make a statement as well as to make you laugh.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
Oh, this was fun.  "The General" opened Film Forum's Buster Keaton
festival on Sunday.  I saw the screening with the live piano
accompaniment, the way silent films should be seen.  If this wasn't the
first full dose of Keaton I've seen, this is certainly the first one I
remember.  Sure, we've all seen clips, and various modern masters of
physical comedy have been compared to Keaton, but seeing one of these
old movies is something that really has to be done.
Briefly, "The General" has Keaton playing a railroad engineer in the
Civil War.  Northern spies hijack his train and abduct his girl.  He
chases them, saves her, saves the day.  On this plot, Keaton hangs
wonderful comedy, more elegantly executed and as thought out as anything
seen today.  We see his puzzled look, as the scenery changes while
Keaton is distracted, and his cringe as he realizes his girl is hidden
in the boxcar that's being piled high with heavy boxes.  We see this
wonderfully funny sequence as Keaton has trouble with a cannon his
train is pulling.  Double-takes are not exclusive to the late 20th
Century.  Gross-out jokes aren't necessary to make us laugh.  And, of
course, there's Keaton's physical comedy, his dexterity and charm, all
working splendidly.
I'm too used to modern film making ability to deliver visual spectacle.
Almost anything that can be imagined can be put on film nowadays: big
boats sinking, airplanes crashing, New York City being leveled over
and over again.  I've perhaps forgotten that spectacle is not a
monopoly of the computer graphics age, that good film makers could
deliver impressive scenes without the aid of armies of programmers and
designers.  "The General" is a good cure for this misconception.  There
are shots of Civil War-style armies on the march, which can't be done
anymore without the aid of computer processing because that many warm
bodies can't be found to march up and down a field.  There's a
spectacular -- and funny -- train wreck that puts anything in "Die
Hard" or "Speed" to shame.
Anyway, the Keaton series continues on Mondays through November.
http://www.filmforum.com/keaton.html
Bloody stupid coincidence: I'm taking swimming classes Monday evenings
(so, if I find myself on a sinking ocean liner, I won't drown
immediately), so I'm going to miss a lot of these.
