Title
Review for Jumanji (1995)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I was not expecting big things from JUMANJI.  The coming
attractions make it look like taking the basic concept of HELLRAISER--
the plaything that releases a world of horror--and crossing it with
something like THE ZEBRA IN THE KITCHEN, where animals on the loose
cause havoc.  And in the final analysis perhaps that is not too
inaccurate a description.  But there is considerably more wit and a
whole lot more style to this tale.  After an opening scene in the 1860s
with two children trying desperately to rid themselves of a mysterious
box, it is rediscovered in 1969 by Alan Parrish.  Parrish (played by
Adam Hann-Byrd) has problems enough.  He is bullied by his peers and
dominated by a dictatorial father who seems to run much of the town and
cannot relate to a child.  But young Alan does not know trouble until
he plays the game and on his first move is sucked into "the jungle"
where he remains for twenty-six years.  Only it really is a jungle and
twenty-six years really does pass.  The disappearance remains an
unsolved mystery.  And with a whiff of IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE, much of
the town has degenerated as a result.  Now a new family has moved into
the house, Aunt Nora (Bebe Neuwirth) and the recently orphaned Judy
(Kirsten Dunst) and Peter (Bradley Pierce).  The two children
unwittingly start the game again and release (among other things) the
missing Alan (now played by Robin Williams).  Unfortunately, each roll
of the dice also releases some safari hazard into the real world.  Most
of these dangers escape the house and into the town.  Like the towns in
GREMLINS or NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD, it is slowly to coming to realize
that something strange and very dangerous is happening.  And the only
way to save the town is to finish the game so all the horrors can
return to the game board.  Yet with each roll of the dice some new
disaster escapes the game into the real world.  Each might be bad, but
the cumulative effect is startling.
     The visual effects from Industrial Light and Magic are impressive
but not altogether realistic.  The digitized animals are clearly just
that and in addition, the monkeys look more like Curious George than
real monkeys.  They are never totally convincing but as storybook
safari dangers they work just fine.  This is a film in which many
scenes involving the magic of the game have a very nice look.
     The visuals could overwhelm the characters, but the script by
Jonathan Hensleigh, Greg Taylor, and Jim Strain, based on the book by
Chris Van Allsburg, never lets that happen.  After a shaky start with
Robin Williams looking like the castaway from "Monty Python's Flying
Circus," he gives some real humanity to his role and does not indulge
in the usual Williams schtick.  Kirsten Dunst is fairly good but
JUMANJI must be child's play after her meaty performance in INTERVIEW
WITH THE VAMPIRE.  Bebe Neuwirth manages some nice touches as Aunt
Nora.  It is the kind of role that usually goes unnoticed--friendly
adult supervision in a film for children--but someone in the script
department was looking out for her.  Joe Johnston was a good choice for
director with a sense for integrating human performances with visual
effects.  He was the art director for visual effects on THE EMPIRE
STRIKES BACK and RETURN OF THE JEDI.  As director he made HONEY, I
SHRUNK THE KIDS and the underrated ROCKETEER.  He manages very well
here, though his direction was weakened for me by some slapstick late
in the movie.
     Parents should be warned that just the horror touches that will
delight ten-year-olds will be strong stuff for five-year-olds.  Adults
are warned not to not to leave children at the theater or they may miss
out on the fun.  I give this one a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jeff Pidgeon
        "Jumanji", ILM's latest effects-soaked extravaganza, is yet another 
example of how important story really is.  Taking a visual cue from ILM's 
magician logo, the screenwriters seem to be content with pulling set pieces
from out of thin air.  One can imagine the pitch meeting for this film sound-
ing something like, "it'll be like the T-rex attack in 'Jurassic Park' -- for
the whole movie!!"
        Where "Jurassic's" story wasn't exactly material for "Masterpiece 
Theater", it did make the initial premise -- a dinosaur game preserve/theme
park -- seem initially wonderous and exciting, to the characters and the aud-
ience.  Only later do we realize, "Oh, right, unless everything went perfectly,
not only would it not be great, it would probably be extremely dangerous."
The majority of "Jurassic" is a pretty exciting illustration of that realiza-
tion.
        In "Jumanji", however, not only do we have no idea why the game was
ever created, we additionally have no convincing reason given to us why anyone
would want to *play* it.  The squares are conveniently blank -- if anyone were
actually aware of the tropical travails generously strewn along the game path,
as well as the fact that each square's caption will really happen to you --
most folks would blow the game into a million pieces and scatter the remains
amongst the four corners of the globe. 
        Ostensibly the main character begins playing to escape his uncaring
parents and bullying peers. The script, while furnishing needs for its hero,
apparently forgot that the game doesn't ever fufill any of them.  One would
think that initially the game would make his life better, and later reveal a
deadly price. "Jumanji", however, is one nasty, powerful game; giving anyone
who plays it nothing but abuse.  Still, three sets of children fall prey to
its seductively hand-carved board and jungle rhythms that (apparently) only 
they can hear.
         Additionally, there's no evidence given that any of the threats re-
leased by the game can only be resolved by the game's finish.  We're left with
that sinking feeling that the only reason the game continues is that it is the
sole force of motivation in the plot, and not a paticularly strong one at that.
         The characters aren't paticularly strong as written, and the perform-
ances can't take up the slack.  Most of the gags in the movie are of the post-
"Gremlins" variety of people freaking out over the goings-on, and various jun-
gle beasts creating chaos.  An odd response to the havoc is that the majority
of the townsfolk begin looting once the game's effects are felt.  The computer-
generated effects, while polished and lively, aren't always very convincing 
when presented as real animals.  I got the same feeling here that I got when I
saw "The Mask" -- enjoyment of a lively effects sequence, followed by impa-
tience for the next effects sequence as I sat through a rather arid plot.
        As the film (and game) reached a conclusion, the viewer is thrown a
curve ball -- the game resolution is of a back-to-square-one quality that, 
while appropriate for a board game, was unsatisfying for me as it allowed more
than one character to fix mistakes made earlier in the film.  I've never liked
this device all that much, and coupled with the generally uninvolving proceed-
ings, really ended the film poorly.  I felt the film was ultimately saying 
that you have to meet your parents more than halfway when things aren't going
well; after all, they love you even if you never see it.  Not recommended.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        While I was watching this video, my mom walked into the 
room to get something. She looked at the screen and asked, 
"JUMANJI?" I replied, "No thanks, I just ate." I have no idea what 
that's supposed to mean, of course, but it sounded nice enough. 
And so did this movie, from the pictures and copy on the back of the 
box. But when I actually watched JUMANJI, I found out it was far 
from perfect. Jumanji is some kind of magic board game (not the 
one where you take turns stacking blocks until they fall over -- that's 
Jenga, soon to be a major motion picture) that lures children into 
rolling the dice, by which point the only way to rid yourself of the 
game's consequences is to finish.
        Alan digs up the game outside his dad's shoe factory and 
plays it one night his friend Sarah. It turns out when you roll the 
dice a really bad poem comes up on the board. That's torture enough, 
but after Sarah rolls, a couple hundred bats fly out. Alan rolls and 
gets sucked into the game. Sarah runs away, screaming, and spends 
the next twenty-six years of her lvince 
herself the event never happened.
        Then, in 1995, two kids who have just moved into the 
mansion with their Aunt Lilith (Bebe Neuwirth, who could probably 
help Sarah with the therapy) discover the magic of Jumanji. Judy 
(Kirsten Dunst) rolls and three giant mosquitoes attack them. Peter 
rolls and a bunch of computer-animated monkeys materialize to 
destroy their kitchen. The kids then find out the rule about 
having to finish the game and are therefore forced to continue 
playing.
        On the next roll, out comes a lion. Next comes Alan himself 
(Robin Williams), now a fully-grown savage with a long beard and a 
bushier mane than the lion. But he isn't homefree yet, he still has to 
finish the game he started back in 1969, along with psychic friend 
Sarah (Bonnie Hunt). That's when the real fun begins, as the game 
spits out an English bounty hunter, a stampede, a monsoon 
and -- worst of all -- a card reading "Go Directly to Jail; Do Not 
Pass Go, Do Not Collect $200." That Uncle Pennybags is a 
bastard, ain't he?
        JUMANJI is a fairly decent action film weighted down by a 
few key factors. First of all, Robin Williams shows none of his usual 
manic charisma, playing with laughable seriousness the role of 
someone trapped in a board game for over a quarter of a century. 
Second, the special effects are just so damn fake-looking. In a 
movie like this, as in JURASSIC PARK or TWISTER, the effects 
are the main draw. Computer animation hasn't been this obvious 
since that "Money For Nothing" video.
        Finally, the ending is a complete sell-out. They spend at least 
fifteen minutes trying to establish the happiest possible ending to the 
game, one which involves time travel and knowledge of the future. If 
the BACK TO THE FUTURE trilogy has taught us anything, it's that 
changing past events screws up the future, and the glaring 
obviousness of the JUMANJI ending raises hundreds more 
questions about the outcome of its characters than it answers. 
I guess it's my fault for actually _thinking_ during the movie.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     After electronically surveying friends and coworkers about whether
JUMANJI would scare the daylights out of my son Jeffrey (soon to be 7),
we finally agreed it was time to give it a try.  The voting before we
went was running about two to one that we should take him, but there
was a vocal minority warning us that since Jeffrey can frighten easily,
we should not get anywhere near the show.  Since Jeffrey is a big movie
buff like his Daddy, in the end he decided to go, so the whole family
went on President's Day.  Five minutes into the movie, Jeffrey was in
my lap declaring, "We should have gone to MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND."
Notwithstanding his periodic fear during the film, we all three loved
it immensely.  It is a great mixture of action, humor, special effects,
and poignancy.
     As JUMANJI starts, it is a dark, foggy, and spooky night in New
Bedford, Massachusetts in the year 1869, and the coyotes are wailing
away.  Two children are burying a box.  A hundred years later, a boy
named Alan Parrish (Adam Hann-Byrd), finds this box and inside is a
board game called Jumanji.  He and his friend Sarah (Laura Bell Bundy)
decide to play the game.  When they throw the dice, the pieces move by
themselves so Sarah figures "it must be magnets".
     Soon the game turns out to be pretty terrifying.  After each turn,
ferocious jungle animals come out to attack them.  After one turn, Alan
gets the message, "In the jungle you must wait until the dice read five
or eight."  He is thereupon sucked into the game, and Sarah runs
screaming out of the room since she is now scared out of her wits.
     The story skips ahead to 1995.  The old abandoned Parrish house is
being occupied by a new set of young children, Peter (Bradley Michael
Pierce) and Judy (Kirsten Dunst), along with their Aunt Nora (Bebe
Neuwirth).  The kids find Jumanji, and again, the pieces move by
themselves which causes Judy to comment "it must be microchips."  Soon
however, all hell is unleashed on the town, but at least the first
throw of the correct number frees Alan (now played by Robin Williams).
To save the community from the destruction, they have to finish the
game and to do this they must find Sarah (now played by Bonnie Hunt)
and get her to play too.
     The logo for this show should have been a whirlwind.  Getting
sucked into the game is pictured as a whirlwind, and the frantic and
marvelous pacing by director Joe Johnston sweeps the audience in as
well.  A wonderful roller coaster of a good time at the movies to use
another metaphor.  And funny.  The script by Jonathan Hensleigh, Jim
Strain, and Greg Taylor, which is based on the book by Chris Van
Allsburg, is naturally hilarious with great sight gags.  Among my many
favorites were the monkeys driving the police motorcycle and the one of
the flood, but there were many more.  The beauty of the story itself is
that it naturally sets an horrific pace.  Be sure and take everyone to
the bathroom before entering, you will not be able to miss a minute of
this.
     After the story, the director is the one who deserves the most
credit.  He had his actors in control and everything set up perfectly.
He knew exactly what he wanted to do and executed precisely.  The
cinematography (Thomas Ackerman) with the dark and shadowy interiors
was excellent at evoking a far away jungle.  Usually extraordinary
special effects, as these are, dazzle the audience and focuses the
audience's attention on the mechanics of the effects.  Here, the
special effects, i.e., all of the animals, were great, but they
complimented the story rather than dominating it.
     All of the actors were fine albeit not on par with the story or
the directing.  My favorite was Kirsten Dunst's performance of the
little girl who told one tall tale after another.  Robin Williams was
well cast as a serious and sad character, and the director keep him in
control so that Williams did slip into his comedic role.
     JUMANJI runs a blazing fast 1:40.  It is rated PG for violence,
e.g., a stampede of rhinos, but no one gets killed in the show.  There
is no sex, nudity, smoking, etc.  Except for the violence, and that is
a big except, this would have been a G rated show.  There are no swear
words in the show, a minor miracle today.  Jeffrey says he would
recommend it for kids 5 or 6 and up, and he enthusiastically gives it
two thumbs up.  His dad recommends the movie, but still would caution
parents of kids under 10 that the special effects can be terrifyingly
real.  What if you walked into your bedroom now and a real lion roared
at you from your bed?  Would you be scared?  Finally, I award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Thomas Wheeler
     Some of this review bounces off a few points made by a reviewer in
my local newspaper, but I also saw the film for myself today.  Any such
points are strictly comparative.
     The local reviewer was comparing it to TOY STORY, and actually
preferred it.  I enjoyed JUMANJI well enough, but it was no TOY STORY,
which I consider the best movie of the season, and I really don't see
it as a major classic in years to come.
     It's amusing enough, though.  But it has some major faults.  First
off is a general lack of enthusiasm from most of the performers.  Not
even Robin Williams gets to really cut loose.  I'm sure everyone in the
movie is a capable actor or actress -- it just seems like they go
through the movie not entirely sure what's going on -- and that
unfortunately comes across in the movie.
     There were some high points.  The local reviewer cited the
drubbing that New-Age pop psychology takes on the part of the adult
woman (whose name now escapes me), and he's right.  And it's a much
needed drubbing, too.  Also the make-up on the young boy later in the
movie was a lot more effective than the special effects -- and we get
another amusing scene in the movie when the boy is experiencing a
certain discomfort. (I make it a point never to blow significant plot
points of a movie in reviews like this).
     The special effects are unfortunately not terribly impressive.
Toy Story wasn't trying to be anything other than computer animated.
Fortunately, it had strong enough characterization, good performers,
and a storyline that worked with the basic premise, so that the movie
was wonderful.
     Granted, it's hard to get characterization out of a troop of
berserk monkeys and stampeding elephants and rhinos.  But one
comparison I read, likening them to JURASSIC PARK, was way off base.
Perhaps it was because these were computer-generated images of living
animals, as opposed to extinct ones, but I was not convinced.  There is
the scene in which some computer-generated elephants stomp a car, which
has been seen in repeated previews, but while the car most surely gets
stomped, the elephants still look more than a bit phony.
     The ending of the movie was, not really confusing, but certainly
anti-climatic.  Ultimately, it rendered all the chaos of the previous
hour and a half pointless, for the most part.  That's no way to end a
movie.
     To be fair, as I said, it's an amusing enough film, and kids will
probably enjoy it who don't mind a good bit of cartoonish action and
chaos and not a whole lot of storyline.  I didn't really dislike it.
But I suspect it could have been a lot better if there had been more
depth to it, which was certainly possible.  The origin of the game
itself is never explained, for starters.  Such considerations were
obviously sacrificed in favor of the special effects.
     I should point out that I haven't read the book upon which the
movie was based, but one other local reviewer, who absolutely despised
the movie, made the point that the movie takes some very substantial
liberties as far as the source material is concerned.
      I wouldn't build it up as much as much as Toy Story, which didn't
need to be as deep as Jumanji should have been.  There's no way I would
equate those two movies.  Actually, they're sufficiently different that
a comparison is really very difficult.  And Jumanji itself, while it
could have been better, isn't really all that bad if you have some idea
of what to expect.

Author
M. Doyle
     It is a board game.  A board game with supernatural powers.  A
board game that carries a terrible curse.  Those who play it must
complete the game or never see an end to the jungle perils it unleashes
upon them.
     The movie, JUMANJI, starts on a rainy night in 1869 as a pair of
brothers bury a chest a mile outside of a small New Hampshire town.  As
they throw the dirt upon it, jungle drums beat from within the chest,
calling to them.  They persist, but when done, the younger asks the
older, "What if someone else unearths it and plays the game?" The elder
says, "Then may God have mercy upon his soul." [Lightning crash!]
     Flash forward to 1969, when Alan Parrish, a boy of eleven or so,
hears jungle drums at a construction site.  He uncovers the chest and
retrieves Jumanji.  The game is so beautiful - a case of carved wood
and with ivory pawn paths, animal-shaped tokens of carved onyx.  What
kid wouldn't want this game? (See note at end).  He brings it home and
shows it to his friend, Sarah.  They settle in to play the game and
when Alan rolls the dice, he is sucked into Jumanji.
     Flash forward once more to 1995, when Judy and Peter move into the
abandonned Parrish family home.  No sooner do they settle in than they
hear jungle drums coming from the attic.  No sooner do they investigate
the attic than they find themselves playing Jumanji.  The game
unleashes jungle terrors upon them, but it also sets free the vanished
Alan Parrish - who has grown up inside the game.  The three come to
realize the only way to end the madness Jumanji has wrought is to
finish the game that was started 26 years ago.  But that, of course,
means facing all the perils Jumanji has to offer head on.
     (This is a lot more exposition than I normally do, but I found the
trailer confusing when I first saw it and the commercials aren't much
better.  As far as you can tell from them, this movie concerns a wild
man, a board game and animals running amok.)
     JUMANJI is a demolition derby.  There is more smashing, crashing,
blasting, and crunching in this movie than in any I've seen this year.
The utter mayhem of JUMANJI makes SPEED look as if it were directed by
Felix Unger.
     Do you remember those moments in JURASSIC PARK when your mouth
just hung open and your eyes felt like they were coming out of their
sockets?  JUMANJI has a bunch of these (albeit not quite as many).  The
most magnificent was the stampede sequence.  I was prepared to be
unimpressed, but was completely blown away.  You could almost smell the
elephant droppings.
     The sound was critical in working this effect.  Industrial Light
and Magic did a great job spawning a jungle of digital creatures, but I
wasn't as impressed by the cyber-beasts as by the sound design.  If I
may indulge in Oscar speculation at such an early stage, I think
JUMANJI will nab this year's Academy Award for Sound Effects Editing.
     JUMANJI is not a character-driven movie.  There is a dab of
character development thrown in - enough to keep the story from being
flat as a board game.  It is not a movie for small children.  Take kids
six years old or under to JUMANJI and I guarantee they will want to
crawl into bed with mom & dad until they are 18.  There were some kids
in the audience at tonight's screening, and they seemed no worse for
wear, but they all seemed to be eight or older.
     JUMANJI is not an actor's movie, but there were no bad
performances.  Robin Williams plays the grown-up Alan.  Kirsten Dunst
(the vampirette of INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE) plays Judy.  Bebe
Neuwirth (Lilith from TV's "Cheers") is Judy and Peter's aunt.  David
Alan Greir (of TV's "In Living Color") plays a cop who's spends the
movie trying to get to the bottom of the weirdness.  And Bonnie Hunt
plays the grown-up Sarah.  Bonnie was the mother in the BEETHOVEN
movies and the best friend to Marisa Tomei's character in ONLY YOU.  I
like her - she's funny.
     JUMANJI draws a lot of laughs both from witty scripting and roller
coaster excitement.  But the emphasis is on the roller coaster.  This
movie is Busch Gardens, not the Comic Strip.
     If you are at all inclined toward seeing this kind of movie, see
it and see it on the big screen - preferably fifth row from the front
in a theatre with digital sound.  You'll have a blast.
Note:
     When I first saw the trailer for JUMANJI, I said to myself, "How
shameless! They're making a movie to promote a new board game.  I
wonder which will be greater, the box office receipts or the toy store
receipts."  But having seen the movie, I now wonder how they expect to
sell the board game?  What good is it if a kid rolls the dice and
nothing comes smashing through the walls?
--
Michael Doyle
maeldun@i-2000.com
To join "Mike's Midnight Movie Reviews" send a message to listproc@vidkraft.com
with no subject and the words "subscribe m3review" in the body.

Author
Christopher Null
     If nothing else, JUMANJI is the most unfortunately titled film of the
year.  And if you haven't turned on your television in the last month you
may still be among the few who don't know what it means.  For the
uninitiated, Jumanji is an ancient board game set in the spooky jungle. 
When the game is played, it causes supernatural things to happen,
including the creation of a horde of monkeys, earthquakes, a monsoon
(indoors), and a stampede through the suburbs of the New England town in
which JUMANJI is set.
     The story begins some 26 years earlier, when young Alan (Robin
Williams) and Sarah (Bonnie Hunt) unearth the game and start playing.  On
Alan's first move, he finds himself sucked into the game as a prisoner,
only to be released when the game is continued in 1995 by Judy (Kirsten
Dunst) and Peter (Bradley Michael Pierce).  Unfortunately, the ill effects
of the game disappear only when it is finished, so the three track down
Sarah, who, after years of therapy, has finally come to grips with the
shock of seeing Alan vanish, and they continue where they left off.
     The rest of the film unfurls the wacky effects the game has on the
players and the town, until the climactic conclusion is reached. 
Unfortunately, along the way, the film fails miserably at building up any
semblance of suspense (it's pretty obvious how this thing is going to
end), and relies on melodrama to try to make us care about the characters,
resulting in a sloppy, over-dramatic plot that doesn't really get going
for half an hour.  Even the precocious kids are basically annoying.  While
much of the film is funny and pleasant to watch, the overall result is a
middling success.
     But you don't go to a movie like this for the gripping plot, and
everyone's question is, "How are the effects?"  Well, they're not so
great.  Compared to the groundbreaking TOY STORY, JUMANJI looks downright
embarrassing.  Few of the computer-generated animals, especially the
plastic-looking monkeys, come across as even remotely realistic, although
the filmmakers really seem to have tried their best.  Apparently, the
technology just isn't ready yet.
     In the end, JUMANJI looks like it wanted to be the next ROGER
RABBIT--a semi-animated film for the whole family.  But in taking things
too seriously, the movie lacks that ingenious, eye-opening "spark" that's
absolutely critical here, and it ends up being another film that's
basically just for kids.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robin Williams, Kirsten Dunst, Bradley Pierce, Bonnie Hunt, 
      David Alan Grier, Bebe Neuwirth, Jonathan Hyde
Director: Joe Johnston
Producers: Scott Kroopf and William Teitler
Screenplay: Jonathan Hensleigh, Greg Taylor, and Jim Strain based on the 
      book by Chris Van Allsburg
Cinematography: Thomas Ackerman
Music: James Horner
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     Apparently, the producers of JUMANJI wanted this film to be a 
JURASSIC PARK for 1995's holiday season.  If so, it's a badly misplaced, 
and ultimately futile, hope.  For, although no one would suspect Steven 
Spielberg's 1993 dino-picture of having a plot worthy of great 
literature, at least it had a storyline -- something this film is 
lacking.  JUMANJI takes approximately one-hundred minutes for four 
people to play a board game.  The result isn't much more fun or 
involving than watching a few friends play Monopoly.  Even the Robin 
Williams manic humor can't save JUMANJI, at least not entirely.
     The film's biggest claim to fame are its special effects.  
Unfortunately, they don't look as impressive in extended scenes on the 
big screen as they do in short clips on TV.  In fact, there are times 
when the sequences of charging rhinos, elephants, and zebras look 
downright cheesy.  The monkeys certainly aren't convincing and the 
LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS Audrey II-type man-eating plant would have been 
more effective had it broken into a song.  ("Feed Me"?)  JURASSIC PARK 
showed how amazing computer-generated creatures can be when properly 
handled; JUMANJI shows what happens when less care is given to the 
technology.
     The film opens with a brief segment in 1869, where two children 
furtively take a board game called Jumanji into the dark depths of a 
forest, where they bury it, uttering a quick prayer for the soul of 
whoever digs it up.  Switch to Brantford, New Hampshire in 1969, where 
with a boy named Alan Parrish is getting ready to run away from home.  
Before he leaves, however, he decides to play one round of a game -- 
called Jumanji -- that he recently found near his father's work site.  
So, along with his friend Sarah, he sets up the board, rolls the dice, 
then gets sucked out of this world into some dark elsewhere.
     Twenty-six years later, Judy (Kirsten Dunst) and Peter (Bradley 
Pierce) move into Alan's old house.  They find the Jumanji game and 
start to play.  Judy goes first, and her move causes surprise, real-life 
appearances by lions and monkeys.  Then, when it's Peter's turn, Alan 
mysteriously re-appears, much older and looking suspiciously like Robin 
Williams with a lot of excess facial hair.  A grown-up Sarah (Bonnie 
Hunt) soon joins the trio, so all the players are assembled.  From then 
on, it's a race to finish the game before rampaging safari rejects 
destroy Brantford.  
     The movie goes something like this:  someone makes a move, then the 
characters spend the next ten minutes running away from whatever animals 
they unleash.  Then it's the next player's turn.  And so on... until the 
game (and the movie) ends.  JUMANJI comes across more as a blueprint for 
some deluxe amusement park ride than a legitimate film.  It's a 
pointless trek.  The "adventure" is repetitive, he thrills are brief, 
and the moments of character-building drama are effete.  Only the comedy 
works, but there's not enough of it to justify an entire motion picture.
     This is the kind of embarrassing dud that results when Hollywood 
places special effects and a neat concept over a well-told story.  The 
children's book JUMANJI, written by Chris Van Allsburg, makes for good 
reading for a young audience, but it's hardly the sort of material upon 
which to base a major motion picture.  The men and women behind JUMANJI 
didn't just lose a turn; they lost their way.  
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Michael Redman
        A compelling board game, buried decades before, is found by a young boy in a
construction site and has more in store for him than a couple hours of parlor
fun. As he discovers when he and a friend begin playing, dice rolls result in
the appearance of jungle creatures. Worse yet, when the youngster lands on a
particularly fateful square, he is literally whisked away to a jungle where he
must remain until another player roles specific numbers.
        Twenty six years later, two more kids discover the game, unplayed since the
disappearance of our hero. They began playing, roll the magic number, and
Robin Williams, grown older in the jungle, materializes.
        The three then discover an overlooked rule. The effects of the game stay
around until the game is finished. With a horde of murderous tropical animals
and insects loosened upon the town, they find Williams' opponent (Bonnie Hunt)
from his childhood and vow to finish. With each roll of the dice, more animals
and disasters show up, but they must continue in order for them to disappear.
        Based on a popular children's book, the film is a lark. The action is
formulaic (roll the dice, monsters appear, run from them, set up the game
again, roll the dice again, and on), but not so much that it gets in the way
of the fun.
        What does detract from the movie is the computer animated animals. Maybe it's
just me, but I hate computer animation of familiar living things. The effects
in Star Wars are dramatic and remarkably successful partially because we
don't have a preconception of those space ships and aliens. They look real to
us because it is the first time that we are seeing them.
        But we all know what monkeys and lions look like. In order for a scene to be
successful, it must involve you seamlessly. You must think: `There's a lion;
it's chasing them and might hurt them'. It can't go: `There's a lion. Oh yeah,
it's computer generated and not a bad job. It looks mostly real, but doesn't
move quite right and has some quirks. It's chasing them and might hurt them.'
The acknowledgment of the existence of the effect pulls you back from the
story and reminds you that you are really just sitting in a theater watching a movie.
        Don't let my rants about the evils of using technology before it has advanced
far enough to actually work deter you from seeing Jumanji. It's an
exciting entertaining film, worth your time.
[This appeared in the 12/22/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
