Title
Review for Lost Weekend, The (1945)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Many films have been made about alcoholism, but surely one
of the best is "The Lost Weekend".  Billy Wilder directed
the drama, and Ray Milland played the lead.  Milland was
not the director's first choice, but several other actors
had turned down the part.  Milland himself was reluctant, for
the character is a detestable anti-hero: selfish, lying,
stealing, caring nothing except for getting another drink.
"The Lost Weekend" begins as it ends, with a camera pan
of the New York City landscape, then focusing on a whiskey
bottle hanging on a string from an apartment window ledge.
Milland has put it there to hide it from his brother
(Phillip Terry) and girlfriend (Reagan-ex Jane Wyman),
who have devoted the last few years of their lives in
a failed attempt to reform Milland.  Milland spins lies
to escape their watch, steals money from his brother,
and goes on an drunken binge, suffering endless humiliations
and nearly getting arrested.
The story is incredible in the depths that Milland will
sink to for his next drink.  Wilder leaves little hope that
a drunk can be reformed, despite a requisite happy ending.
One wonders how Milland's brother and girlfriend could
remain so loyal to him for the past few years, when he is such
a manipulating loser.  It seems that the only character who
can see him for what he is, is a bartender (Howard Da Silva)
who has seen the kind before.
My favorite scene has Milland watching an opera.  Butlers
are serving the characters, filling their champagne glasses
as they prepare for a toast.  As glass after glass is filled
and raised, Milland can't bear it anymore and must leave
the theatre.
"The Lost Weekend" is not an enjoyable movie to watch.
It faces truths about addiction without sugar coating.
But sometimes the best films are those that sacrifice
entertainment for quality, in this case exploring the
character of a drunk without softening it to make him
more likeable.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
