Title
Review for Adrenalin: Fear the Rush (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Justin Felix
ADRENALIN: FEAR THE RUSH (1996)
A "Turkey of the Week" film review by Justin Felix
Copyright 1998 Justin Felix
Written and directed by Albert Pyun
Starring Christopher Lambert, Natasha Henstridge
Rated R (contains violence and profanity)  76 minutes
Synopsis:  A maniac, crazed by virulent microphage, slaughters more than
twenty people, including a street gang and heavily-armed troops, with a
small knife.  Even with a handgun, however, he can't take out the two cops
who are after him, despite having shot one of them a total of seven times.
Comments:  The most notable aspect of ADRENALIN: FEAR THE RUSH is that it
marks a striking career move for Natasha Henstridge.  Not only does she
manage to keep all her clothes on (her trademark in earlier films such as
SPECIES and MAXIMUM RISK was to strip naked as often as possible), but she
actually puts on even more clothes as the film progresses.  This will
probably disappoint many Henstridge fans, but I welcome the change because
Henstridge is an attractive, capable actress who deserves less exploitative
roles (though, I admit, it doesn't show in this mess).  Henstridge, just
like every other actor in the film, delivers a wooden performance in this
monumental turkey.  (The cast also includes Christopher Lambert, who has
appeared in the HIGHLANDER and MORTAL KOMBAT films.)  How on Earth this
movie got two big-name stars to appear in it is beyond me.
ADRENALIN: FEAR THE RUSH is set in Boston ten years in the future (2007).
Boston has changed dramatically in those ten years.  It is now home to a
bunch of interred foreigners and policed by cops who drive around in small
cars with "policia" printed on their doors.  Some guy has a really bad
virus, and he's killing people because of it.  So, the brave good guys
(Lambert and Henstridge) go after him.  That's it.  76 minutes never seemed
so long.  This is a drawn-out chase scene through dimly-lit abandoned
buildings turned into an entire movie.  The plot development is nil; we
learn absolutely nothing about Lambert's character and very little about
Henstridge's character.  The dialogue is littered with unnecessary
obscenities and concerns mindnumbingly idiotic arguments over who will go
down the next dark corridor/tunnel/airduct next and who will carry the
flashlight.
A subplot does exist involving Henstridge's character's illegal attempt to
get her son out of Boston.  In her opening monologue, a monologue which
sounds as though Henstridge was reading from cue cards, we learn that she
has gone to great lengths to secure a fake passport for her son.  Twenty
minutes into the film, I wondered if the movie would have been better if it
focused on this plot.  In a defining scene of the movie, however, I changed
my mind.  This fake passport drops to the ground.  Lambert's cop
immediately recognizes it as a fraud from six feet away.  Must not have
been a good fake.  This emphasizes another fault with the film.  Things
just defy common sense.  Lambert's cop, for instance, is shot seven times,
yet he is still able to talk and slide about.
ADRENALIN: FEAR THE RUSH ends in a trite manner that doesn't seem to even
fit the mood that the filmmakers were trying for.  I found myself rather
bored with this film, which will disappoint both sci-fi/horror fans and
fans of Henstridge and Lambert.  Don't fear the rush.  Fear the movie.
Watch something else.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Christopher Lambert, Natasha Henstridge, Elizabeth Barondes, 
      Xavier Declie, Norbert Weisser, Craig Davis
Director: Albert Pyun
Producers: Tom Karnowski, Gary Schmoeller 
Screenplay: Albert Pyun
Cinematography: George Mooradian 
Music: Anthony Riparetti 
U.S. Distributor: Dimension Films
     With the title of ADRENALIN: FEAR THE RUSH, I wasn't quite sure 
what to expect from this film, but it certainly wasn't the newest entry 
onto my "worst movies of all time" list.  Even the presence of wooden 
actor Christopher Lambert (one of only a few performers in Hollywood to 
rival Steven Seagal for lack of discernible acting talent) and 
writer/director Albert Pyun (the man who gave us, among other immortal 
films, BRAINSMASHER... A LOVE STORY) didn't create expectations of a 
motion picture that sinks to such memorable depths.
     I have no idea how this film got its title, or why the word 
"adrenaline" is misspelled.  (Actually, the fact that the movie was made 
in Slovakia probably has something to do with the error.)  There's 
certainly nothing in here that's likely to jolt anyone, and even the 
typical, cheesy scares offered by low-budget horror flicks are ruined by 
Pyun's heavy-handed direction.  If anything, even at only seventy-five 
minutes in length, the movie is more apt to put viewers to sleep than 
keep them awake.
     The tired premise, which uses a recycled post-apocalyptic scenario, 
involves a bizarre psycho mutant killer on the loose in 2007 Boston.  
Following some sort of radiation leak in the former Soviet Union, a 
plague-like contamination has spread throughout Europe, eventually 
reaching the United States via immigrants.  In an attempt to contain the 
disease, the U.S. government has segregated all newcomers into 
concentration camps.  Over a few short years, as the population of these 
camps has ballooned, they have developed into small cities, complete 
with governments, police forces, and overwhelming poverty.
     Of course, this is all background.  The real story is about a group 
of four intrepid cops in Immigrant Boston chasing a homicidal mutant 
through sewers, air vents, and dank, disused prison corridors.  This 
chase, which generates absolutely no tension, comprises the entire 
movie.  There are no tangents, interesting variations, or anything else 
to break the monotony.  In fact, there's not even much dialogue, and 
what little there is makes the tripe from Sylvester Stallone's DAYLIGHT 
seem like Shakespeare.
     Attention to detail is not exactly ADRENALIN's forte, either.  All 
of the police cars in Boston look like Yugos and have the word "Policia" 
stamped on them.  Why "Policia" instead of "Police"?  Who knows.  Who 
cares.  One character apparently comes back from the dead without a word 
of explanation.  Other characters are still around, alive and kicking, 
after getting riddled with about a dozen bullets.  If I tried to list 
all the holes, inconsistencies, and other obvious problems with this 
movie, it would take me the rest of the week to write this review.
     A few words have to be said about this particular bizarre psycho 
mutant killer, who is perhaps the most lame bizarre psycho mutant killer 
ever to grace the big screen.  This guy looks like Quasimodo on a bad 
day.  "Awful" doesn't even begin to describe the makeup job; Disney's 
recent Hunchback looked better, and he was a cartoon.  And, on top of 
that, we're expected to believe that this creature, with only a hand 
blade, has the ability to snuff out dozens of men and women, some of 
whom are armed?  Of course, considering the intelligence (or lack 
thereof) of the characters we're exposed to, maybe that's not such a 
farfetched concept.  
     I realize that aficionados of this genre don't expect much from 
their films, but ADRENALIN takes ineptness to new levels.  Christopher 
Lambert fans (are there such people?) aren't likely to be happy, since 
he doesn't get much of a chance to act heroic (he grunts, groans, 
shouts, gets shot, then grunts and groans some more).  Natasha 
Henstridge fans will probably be equally disappointed, since, unlike in 
SPECIES, she keeps all her clothes on.  In fact, I'm hard-pressed to 
think of anyone who will appreciate this movie, unless it's someone who 
adores really, really bad movies.  Thus far, 1996 hasn't given us 
anything else that's in ADRENALIN's category.  Hands down, I nominate 
this as the worst movie of the year.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
