Title
Review for Last Man Standing (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     A brilliant failure.  Director Walter Hill, who was in much better
form last year with his little-seen WILD BILL, has remade YOJIMBO not
once but *twice* in the same film.  First, as a dusty, dry- throated
Western (been there, done that, in A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS) and, secondly,
as a hard-boiled Prohibition-era thriller complete with fedoras, tommy
guns, and Model-A Fords.  The age-old plot again involves a wandering
stranger who happens upon a violent rivalry and promptly pits each side
against each other.  Sound familiar?  This time, it's a pair of Chicago
gangs competing for Mexican booze in a nearly-deserted Texas town.  Film
fans could devote an entire evening to discussing why this movie fails
from the get-go.  Here's my initial impression:  we want the central
character (Bruce Willis, miscast) to be a mystery man, which he can't be
as long as he's narrating the damn thing.  Our eyes see Sergio Leone,
but our ears hear Mike Hammer.  If you will.  For anyone who needs more
than just gunplay to ground a movie, it's a confounding waste of time.
We left and asked for our money back.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
A. S. Lenahan
        LAST MAN STANDING is essentially a rehash of Kurosawa's YOJIMBO with
some additional western-film cliches and fanciful cinematography thrown
in for good measure.  That said, I found LAST MAN STANDING a thoroughly
entertaining means of wasting two hours.  There's more than enough
gunplay and visual stimulation to wash away any empty feelings left by
the cookie-cutter script.  If you don't take this film seriously (no
easy task when planning to write a review), you'll likely find yourself
enjoying it, as it does get more interesting towards the climax. 
Through a critical eye, however, LAST MAN STANDING is a fun but
forgettable mixed bag.
        The film's biggest downfall is the plot, pulled right from the
Hollywood recycling bin.  A remake of YOJIMBO, but borrowing heavily 
from every western and gangster film ever made, the script offers
little or no new ideas.  The story is simple:  in a typical lawless
town on the Texas/Mexico border in 1931, two rival gangs face off to
control the illegal liquor trade.  In this town, the line between good
and evil is eternally blurred, and the very streets fester and ooze
with police corruption, moonshining, and prostitution.  Sound vaguely
familiar?  It's been used in nearly every western since the days of
John Wayne.  The seedy bar (yes, even in the prohibition), the cheap
hotel, the dusty, beaten street, the sheriff's office... all echoes of
films past.  The film begins when common picture-show tough-guy Bruce
Willis drives into town, not expecting to stay.  Some local thugs smash
up his car, and he sees a girl walk by (love at first sight, of
course).  As any vigilant viewer can predict, Willis sticks around to
rescue his damsel-in-distress and get revenge on the bullies who
damaged his precious automobile.   It doesn't take a psychic to know
how the rest of the film goes.  In fast, LAST MAN STANDING probably
sets a record for film predictability: it's the only one I've seen yet
where the ending can accurately be predicted simply by hearing the
title.  Of course, there are some plot twists, but ultimately there's
nothing new to be seen here.
        The actors all try hard, with some success.  Willis is truly adept at
these roles.  In some recent efforts (PULP FICTION, the third DIE
HARD), Willis' tough-guy aesthetic is so natural and believable, he
scarcely seems to be acting  at all.  Soon, he won't even need a
script.  Willis adds some much-needed life to this film, certainly. 
The other most notable actor is Christopher Walken, playing his usual
over-the-top nut job role, this time as Chicago gangster Hickey. 
Hickey has a big scar running down his face (call the cliche police...)
and sometimes shoots his tommy gun for no apparent reason.  The rest of
the cast is mostly average, although I did enjoy seeing the underrated
R.D. Call as Joe McCool, another of the Irish gang.  The other gang is
Italian (at least LAST MAN STANDING can't be accused of political
correctness), but too stereotypical to be either realistic or
interesting.  The performances are among the film's high points,
though.  The dialogue was very well written, too, considering the
script.  LAST MAN STANDING contained some excellent stunts as well. 
        Another good point is the cinematography and direction.  Every scene
has a life and kinetic movement all it's own, a trait not shared by
most earlier genre entries.  The way gunshots go off in a dark room, a
roadhouse burning to the ground with people trapped inside--the camera
works with a certain artistry and grace that adds most of the
excitement and freshness to this otherwise stale movie.  A certain
flourish and verve exists in all the visual elements of LAST MAN
STANDING.  The principal visual element is dust, which adds to the
atmosphere and visual style of the film.  Some of the sets are stunning
as well, especially the abandoned church.  Visually, the movie is
colourful and interesting.
        The music is atmospheric and highly appropriate, but not really
anything special.  Needless to say, a soundtrack is available, but why
anyone would buy it is beyond me.  The sound effects are well done,
especially the gunshots (and there certainly are quite a few of them). 
Both the music and sound are passable efforts helping to save the film
from being below average.
        I maintain that LAST MAN STANDING is, despite a lackluster plot, an
entertaining and enjoyable movie experience.  The pace is fast enough,
and the action is nearly constant: there seems to be a deadly gunfight
in nearly every other scene.  The acting is good, and the plot is...
familiar.  Although the film is not among the best of the year, or even
the best of the movies currently in theatres, it provides suitable
entertainment for its running time.  Ultimately, the unoriginal plot
does not haunt the viewer in every frame of film... the visual style
does.

Author
E.J. Winner
    In the middle '20's, Dashiell Hammett (best known as authro of "The Maltese
Falcon") wrote two unrelated novels, "The Glass Key", about Ned Beaumont an
alcoholic gambler who uses duplicity to save his mob boss from taking a murder
rap for a corrupt politician (all thw while fending off a rival mobster), and
'Red Harvest", in which a nameless private eye (also alcoholic, a status shared
by many Hammett heroes) is hired to clean up a small town kept in fear by two
warring boot-leg mobs. 
I believe "Red Harvest" did make it to film in the '30's, but I haven't
been able to track that down and never saw it.  "The Glass Key" was first made
into a (not too successful) film in 1935, and then re-made in 1942.  The remake
concerns us here.  Directed by Stuart Heisler in a style that compounds the
typical crime film briskness of the '30's with the shaded undertones of the
then developing 'noir' genre, it is actually quite a good film, and in a number
of ways daring for its period.  True to the novel, literally everyone in the
film is corrupt in some way, and especially fascinating is the appearance of
William Bendix in a minor role of an overtly homosexual sadist of a thug. Alan
Ladd plays Ned Beaumont as a true anti-hero, cold, calculating, true to no
ethic but his own - a type Hollywood at that time was having problems
presenting, since the strong ethics of the character undercut all the
assumptions of sociopathy of such types popular at the time. The film finally
betrays itself with a "kiss-and-make-up" final scene that completely undercuts
the ethical problematic of the novel (in which Beaumont finally betrays his
boss by running off with the boss' fiancee).  But until then, the movie moves
towards its dark "who-dun-it" revelation rapidly and filled with tension.
There is a scene dead center in "The Glass Key" where Beaumont is captured
by the rival mob boss and tortured by the sadistic thug (which is from the
novel), and filled with Freudian undertones due to the homosexuality of the
torturing thug (Bendix) (also implicit in the novel).  I think it was Japanese
cinema expert Donald Ritchie from whom I remember an anecdote that it was this
scene that fascinated Akira Kurosawa to such an extent that he felt compelled
to make a film based on a Hammett novel.  Interestingly, he did not do a remake
of "The Glass Key", however.  Instead, he transposed "Red Harvest" to the Japan
of the civil wars of the 1860's, rewriting the nameless private eye as an
equally nameless wandering samurai played (played with exquisite panache by
Toshiro Mifuni), while at the same time parodying the typical *chambara*
(swordfight film) popular in Japan.  I refer of course to "Yojombo" (1962). 
Nonetheless, the the torture sequence is lifted from "The Glass Key" and
interjected as a pivotal scene in "Yojimbo".  A couple of subtractions and
additions need be noted here:   Kurosawa strips the Freudian subtext out of the
torture sequence completely, so that the torture becomes a study in the what
Hannah Arendt referred to as the "banality" of evil" - the torturers are just
doing a job.  This fits neatly with the critique of capitalism implicit in the
film, and which is equally implicit in the Hammett original, so the loss of
Freudian content goes by unnoticed.
On the other hand, Kurosawa and Mifune add an earthiness to the nameless
hero lacking in Hammett's tension filled original: Mifune's samurai is always
scratching, eating, cringing or sneering.  Perhaps this is to make up for the
subtraction of the element of  alcoholism that was the chief weakness of
Hammett's anti-hero.  But it also has the effect of rounding out the character
so that he becomes human to us in a way Hammett's anti-hero is not.        
In 1965, a fledgling Italian director, Sergio Leone,  was hired to do a
typical "spaghetti western" of the era.  Instead, hje remade 'Yojimbo" (without
giving credit to the original, by the way) as "A Fistful of Dollars".  The
failure to credit "Yojimbo" as inspiration raises some ethical questions - but
it must be noted that Kurosawa himself made no reference to Hammett in the
credits to "Yojimbo"! 
In any event, "A Fistful.(...)" is a young director's film, full of flaws;
but it has an undeniable black-humor and is crisply directed, with some
striking visuals that seem to come out of  nowhere, given the genre context in
which the film is made.  The nameless hero is played with a particular coolness
by Clint Eastwood, which undercuts the earthiness- the scratching and
scruffiness - that remains from the Mifune version - Eastwood's anti-hero
rarely eats, and never cringes or sneers.  The pivotal torture scene remains,
as defined by the Kurosawa version, given a peculiar brutality by the addition
of  a pan of the expressionless faces of the onlooking outlaws.
Eventually we want to get to Walter Hill's 1996 remake of "Yojimbo", "Last
Man Standing", but we first have to side-track into an uncredited remake of
"The Glass Key", the Coen Brothers'  1991 "Miller's Crossing'.  This is in a
number of ways an astounding film, (certainly one of the Copen Brothers' most
tightly knit, narratively), full of black-humorous quirks, such as the
marvelous set-piece of Albert Finney as the crime boss turning tables with a
tommy-gun on would-be assassins in a car which he calmly follows on foot until
at last the car crashes and explodes, while a classic rendition of "Danny Boy"
plays over the soundtrack.  The Coen Brothers' also take a minor scene from the
Hammett text - where Ned Beaumont drunkenly gambles away his hat and then has
to go hunting for it after he sobers up -  and turn it into an over-arching
metaphor for the emotional emptiness the anti-hero (marvelously played by
Gabriel Byrne) struggles with throughout the narrative and which Hammett left
as merely implicit.  They also return the ethical bleakness to the finale,
without actually duplicating Hammett's - now it is the crime boss who gets the
girl and the anti-hero who is left to ponder the ruin of his friendship with
his former boss.  It should also be noted that the Coen Bros. return the
alcoholism to the anti-hero, thus further problematizing an already
difficult-to-grasp character.
This actually brings us at last to Walter Hill's "Last Man Standing",
since the nameless anti-hero by now is a raging alcoholic who has a whiskey
glass or beer bottle in his hand half the time he's on screen. Continuing the
bizarre history of plagiarism and mis-crediting that surrounds these films,
"Last Man Standing" is openly credited to Kurosawa's "Yojimbo" . 
Unfortunately, Hill isn't re-making "Yojimbo", he's remaking Leone's "Fistful
of Dollars" (!), including Leone's additions and subtractions to the "Yojimbo"
story - as well as adding touches of his own, such as a scene of a visit to a
prostitute by the anti-hero (well played by Bruce Willis in what may be his
best starring performance) that not only exhibits the character's unfailing
preparedness for violence (he is attacked while copulating and without
hesitation grabs his guns and kills the attackers) but also in the long run
reveals his uncharacteristic sympathy for women (he finally bails the
prostitute out of jail and pays for her bus-fare out of town).  This becomes
the explanatory "weak-link" that finally brings him to ruin (as Bruce Dern's
corrupt sherriff remarks, "when you go down it'll be over a skirt").  Hill is
an odd director; with the right cast and crew, he produces miracles; with a
group of hacks he hacks with the worst of them (ala "Red Heat").  Fortunately,
"Last Man Standing" has all the right crew and cast at the right time and
place.  Hill turns the Hammett-Kurosawa-Leone black comedy into a darkly
gothic, gory gangster movie.  The humorous becomes simply absurd, and the
anti-hero survives, not by his wits or even by his skill with a gun, but simply
because he hasn't died yet (although as he drives away, bullet in his guts, he
remarks voice-over "something would turn up; it always does").
All of these films are highly recommended.  They leave a trace along the
history of cinema of the Modern era's attempt to find some ethos in a
captialist world where all that matters is the achievement of  wealth and power
and the skills necessary to attain these.  Both the anti-hero and his enemies
are professionals, but the question recurrs: at what point does the profesional
at last allow his humanity to show? in his sadism (as with the villains) or in
his ethics (as with the anti-hero)? Both Hammett's texts and their various film
versions wisely leave the question open, something for the audience to take
home and ponder, rightly disturbed.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Let's create a high concept movie.  First, we will get
quintessential action writer and director Walter Hill (48 HRS., ANOTHER
48 HRS., ALIENS, ALIEN 3, and WILD BILL among others).  Now we need
that high concept.  Viola, let's remake Akira Kurasawa's 1961 classic
YOJIMBO (THE BODYGUARD), but here comes the great twist.  We will make
it in the style of Sergio Leone's 1964 cheap spaghetti Western FISTFUL
OF DOLLARS.  Westerns don't sell anymore so we will switch it to the
Texas border during Prohibition.  And if that isn't enough, for the
piece de resistance, we'll cast Bruce Willis as the Clint Eastwood for
the 90s.  We need a name that tells the story, so LAST MAN STANDING it
is.  Okay, now stand back and watch the dollars roll in.
     By now, you are probably either thinking that this is one of the
stupider ideas you have heard recently or that this could be a lot of
fun.  Well, the truth is that this highly atmospheric piece of
cinematic nonsense is fun albeit not that much.  Back in 1964,
Eastwood's invulnerability was original enough to be hokey
entertainment.  Here watching Willis as outlaw John Smith gun down
scores and scores of people before getting hit is so derivative that
the film quickly bogs down.  Nevertheless, the show may be worth
watching for the atmosphere and the images.
     The film starts with hired gun Smith riding into the Texas town of
Jericho run by Sheriff Ed Galt (Bruce Dern).  There are two rival
Chicago gangs - an Italian one run by Fredo Strozzi (Ned Eisenberg) and
an Irish one by Doyle (David Patrick Kelly) - that have run almost
everyone out of town.  When they aren't killing each other, the gangs
earn a living shipping illegal booze from Mexico.  Smith is a
freelancer who alternates sides and slowly kills off each gang.
     The town looks just like the Western town in FISTFUL OF DOLLARS.
There is even a dead horse in it to remind you of the linkage.  The
cinematography by Lloyd Ahern (WILD BILL) and the sets by Gary Wissner
(SEVEN, THE ABYSS, and WYATT EARP) are certainly the best and most
imaginative parts of the film.  They paint a beautiful homage to the
Western towns in Eastwood's films.  The most effective atmosphere is
the blowing sand reducing visibility to about ten feet, but there are
also large rain storms and blinding rays of sun to enjoy.
     Soon John Smith gets paid by one side and then the other to go
guns blazing to wipe out a few more bad guys.  The costumes by Dan
Moore (WILD BILL) are all hats, suits, vests, big pistols, and Tommy
guns.  In the many Tommy guns massacres, I kept looking for Bonnie and
Clyde to appear at any moment.
     Hill's script is populated with terse dialog in pure Eastwood
style.  Doyle tells Smith, "I figure you as the kind of guy that always
goes to the highest bidder."  Smith refuses his offer with, "I may be a
gun for hire, but I'm not exactly an assassin."  Got that distinction
partner?
     Actually, Doyle already has in his stable a shooter named Hickey
so evil that he slit his father's throat, and then when he was sent to
an orphanage, he burned it down with all of the kids in it.  This
meanest of the mean is played with subtle gusto by Christopher Walken.
     Hill tries to make Smith into some kind of introspective
philosopher, but this unbelievable silliness is laughable.  Doyle has
an imprisoned mistress named Felina (Karina Lombard star of WIDE
SARGASSO SEA) who confesses to Smith that, "My fear is my curse.
What's yours?"  He retorts, "I was born with a conscious."  Later when
he goes out on a limb for someone and his killing prowess suffers, he
laments, "You can know the rules and still do the wrong thing."
     Still our philosopher killer is not perfect.  In one of his
aphorisms, he reflects that, "I always like sinners a lot better than
saints."  He also shares with us the tautology that, "Everybody ends up
dead.  It's just a matter of when."  This justifies his slaughter of
another dozen guys.  By an hour into the picture the audience is
totally anesthetized to death.  People with large holes and flowing
blood become nothing more than targets in a video game.
     In a completely predictable show, I thought there was going to be
a mildly surprising ending.  Sad to say, it was not to be.  As soon as
you hear the plot, you can write the rest of the script yourself and
save your seven bucks.  Of course, if you do you will miss out on some
great atmosphere.
     LAST MAN STANDING runs about 1:45, but I am not sure exactly how
long since there was no press kit at the screening which was held just
before the film opens.  This is usually a sign that the studio thinks
the film is in trouble, which is a surprise since I think this film
will a box office success.  The movie is rated R.  There is no nudity,
but there is a little sex, some bad language, and lots of blood and
gore.  I think the film will be fine for most teenagers, but it depends
on their sensitivity to violence.  Although I did have some fun at the
screening, Willis's portrayal of Eastwood got tiring after a while.
I'd rather have the real Eastwood than an ersatz one so I give the
picture a mild thumbs down and award it **.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 17, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Bruce Willis, Christopher Walken, Bruce Dern, William Sanderson,
David Patrick Kelly, Ned Eisenberg, Alexandra Powers, Karina Lombard,
Michael Imperioli Director: Walter Hill Screenplay: Walter Hill based on
the story by Ryuzo Kikushima and Akira Kurosawa
Two rival mobster gangs vie for dominance in a small town along the
Mexican Border. Come Bruce Willis, a free lance, fast gunslinger for
hire to the highest bidder. He plays each gang to his best advantage,
swapping from side to side until he develops a handy conscience towards
the end of the movie; that's if helping two dames and killing everyone
else, can be considered developing a conscience?
Boys will be boys. However, when the measure of each boy's manhood
depends on the size of his toy gun, the "last man standing" will also be
the most childish. Bruce baby, the biggest boy with the quickest toy gun
gets to shoot the most bullets. The other boys get their far share of
gunfire, but all must resign to being shot by this boy, before the movie
ends. The gunfight scenes reminiscent of "Desperado" (without the
excessive ketchup/blood), can be described as "boy walks into saloon and
guns everyone and everything down". This makes good target practice, but
is nonetheless senseless. In which case it becomes meaningless for the
victims to raise their weapons in resistance; and in fairness the lines
"Please shoot me I'm over here!" should be added to the script for every
man downed.
Bruce Willis plays a wry, stone faced gunner who attempts to stare every
victim down before he executes them. This cool, expressionless glazed
stare is amusing to begin with; but becomes monotonous and confusing,
when used without discretion on the mob, the dame and the dame's boss.
It's the same look he gives to the mob before a gunfight, and to the
dame before bedtime. The only time we are mercifully spared the stare,
is when Brucy's face is beaten and bloodied; even then he develops an
annoying squint. It's a no win situation, so perhaps we should just
follow the precedence of "Darkman", and hide the man behind the hood.
Director Walter Hill has decided to use a yellow filter screen, to give
the movie the same feel as a wild west frontier "Outlaw/Wanted" poster.
As my young cousin commented "This movie looks too yellow!" My reply,
bless his heart, was "It's not yellow, it's just jaundiced."

Author
Scott Renshaw
(New Line)
Starring:  Bruce Willis, Christopher Walken, Bruce Dern, William
Sanderson, David Patrick Kelly, Alexandra Powers, Ned Eisenberg.
Screenplay:  Walter Hill.
Producers:  Walter Hill, Arthur Sarkissian.
Director:  Walter Hill.
Running Time:  100 minutes.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, sexual situations)
Grade:  D+ / Skip It
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Depending on your degree of cinematic acumen, LAST MAN STANDING is
either a) a Prohibition-era remake of Akira Kurosawa's 1961 classic
YOJIMBO; b) a Prohibition-era remake of Sergio Leone's 1964 classic A
FISTFUL OF DOLLARS; c) a Prohibition-era action drama with a completely
original story-line.  New Line is certainly counting on the fact that
there are far more potential viewers in category (c) than in the other two
combined, much as the recent remakes of DIABOLIQUE and THE VANISHING
counted on avoiding such comparisons.  The fact is that there is yet
another way of looking at LAST MAN STANDING, which is as the first film
version of the story which nods to the _real_ source material, the
Dashiell Hammett novel _Red Harvest_.  It also shows that Kurosawa and
Leone knew better what to do with that material than Hammett himself.
     This time around, The Man With No Name is played by Bruce Willis, a
fellow with a shady history of an undefined nature who rolls into the
Texas border town of Jericho one day on his way to Mexico.  By all
appearances, Jericho is well on its way to becoming a ghost town, with the
few remaining inhabitants generally belonging to one of two bootlegging
operations fighting for control of liquor coming over the border.  One is
headed by an Irishman named Doyle (David Patrick Kelly); the other is run
by Chicago-connected Italian mobster Strozzi (Ned Eisenberg).  Calling
himself John Smith, the man decides that there is money to be made from
the conflict, and hires himself out as an enforcer to Doyle's side.  But
Smith's allegiance is as uncertain as his name, and he begins to play the
two sides against each other while trying to stay one step ahead of both
of them.
     Viewers familiar with both previous incarnations of this story will
find virtually nothing radically changed from a plotting standpoint, and
that alone should make LAST MAN STANDING somewhat more respectable than
other recent Hollywood remakes-cum-bastardizations.  There is the happily
ineffectual lawman (Bruce Dern), the unhappily detained object of one of
the bosses' affections (Karina Lombard), the barkeep who becomes our
anti-hero's only friend (William Sanderson), suspicious lieutenants
(Christopher Walken and Michael Imperioli) to question the bosses' trust
in Smith, a brutal beating, and a big fire.  Director Walter Hill gives
the proceedings his usual injection of steroids, including a pair of guns
for Willis which have the ability to propel an assailant backward with
sufficient thrust to achieve escape velocity, but at least he doesn't try
to turn the story into a slasher film or a buddy picture.
     What he _does_ do is nearly as big a mistake, and that is to provide
a running voice-over narration by Willis which rings of the standard
hard-boiled style of pulp detective fiction.  Yes, that narration is full
of cliches, but those are are not particularly troubling.  The problem is
that both YOJIMBO and A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS succeeded largely on the
inscrutability of their lead characters.  They were a mystery, to the
other characters in the film and to the audience, their motives never
entirely clear even after they have acted, and that quality contributed to
their almost mythical status.  With John Smith's voice chattering on in
the background and allowing us into his every thought, he becomes more
mundane, just another tough guy trying to stay alive.  It feels like a
Hammett novel, all right, and Hill can plead faithfulness to his text for
his choice, but it simply doesn't work.  The narration allows The Man With
No Name to take us into his confidence, and The Man With No Name takes _no
one_ into his confidence.
     Even if you walk into LAST MAN STANDING as a blank slate, I can't
imagine it being much more than a heavily armed minor distraction.  Willis
tones down his macho swagger as the taciturn Smith, but there is still a
level on which he always seems like he is counting on being tougher than
everyone else rather than smarter than everyone else.  Christopher Walken
plays Doyle's brutal henchman as a slight variation on his gallery of
soft-spoken psychos, and there isn't another single character whom makes
even the slightest impression.  With no compelling antagonist for Smith,
there is no build-up towards the expected showdown, and when it does come,
that showdown is over so quickly you wonder what all the fuss was about.
Cinematographer Lloyd Ahern (who also did the only noteworthy work on
Hill's 1995 flop WILD BILL) creates some nifty sunburned vistas, but his
work is only to keep the eye distracted between the spurts of gunfire and
the next bit of counter-productive narration.  Sometimes when someone sees
a lackluster remake of a revered original, they'll wonder what all the
talk was about.  In the case of LAST MAN STANDING, it is those who know
the originals who will wonder what all that talking was about.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Bruce Willis, Christopher Walken, Bruce Dern, William Sanderson, 
      David Patrick Kelly, Ned Eisenberg, Alexandra Powers, 
      Karina Lombard, Michael Imperioli
Director: Walter Hill
Producers: Arthur Sarkissian and Walter Hill
Screenplay: Walter Hill based on the story by Ryuzo Kikushima and 
      Akira Kurosawa 
Cinematography: Lloyd Ahern
Music: Ry Cooder
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     A number of words come to mind when considering Walter Hill's 
latest directorial effort, LAST MAN STANDING.  One is violent.  Another 
is excessive.  A third is unnecessary.  This exceptionally bloody film 
probably features more gunshots than all of Bruce Willis' DIE HARD 
movies put together.  The atmosphere is so thick and pointlessly "artsy" 
that it threatens to choke the viewer.  And, since this story has 
already been filmed twice before, in much better versions (Akira 
Kurosawa's 1961 YOJIMBO and Sergio Leone's 1964 A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS), 
the audience is left wondering why Hollywood felt the need to do it 
again.
     The basic idea of LAST MAN STANDING is to transfer the samurai 
sword epic YOJIMBO from Japan in the 1860s to a small United States town 
in the Old West.  However, since that's exactly what A FISTFUL OF 
DOLLARS did, the film makers felt compelled to add a prohibition-era 
flavor to the mix.  The result is a bizarre mixture of western and 
gangster genres that doesn't really work.  Tommy guns and tumbleweeds 
don't make for a perfect marriage, and the site of Bruce Willis, dressed 
in a crisp suit and fedora, striding through a dust storm towards the 
local saloon causes us to wonder if the costume and set designers didn't 
get their wires crossed.  
     Willis is "John Smith", The Man With No Name who has previously 
been essayed by Toshiro Mifune and Clint Eastwood.  And, whatever other 
problems LAST MAN STANDING may exhibit, the lead actor's performance 
isn't among them.  Laconic, tight-lipped (except during an irritatingly 
unnecessary dime-store novel voiceover), and grim-faced, Willis is right 
for the part.  Smith is a mercenary and a mystery, and Willis keeps us 
curious about his history and what he plans to do next. 
     Smith arrives in Jericho, Texas (population: 57) on a hot, windy 
afternoon at the height of the prohibition era.  The town is controlled 
by two gangs with their roots in Chicago (the question of why Chicago 
gangs would war over run-down Jericho is never satisfactorily 
explained):  the Irish, led by Doyle (David Patrick Kelly), and the 
Italians, run by Strozzi (Ned Eisenberg).  Smith's car undergoes some 
heavy damage when he is caught looking the wrong way at Doyle's girl, 
Felina (Karina Lombard).  This pulls Smith into Jericho's unstable 
political situation.  He learns that the sheriff, Ed Galt (Bruce Dern), 
is a crook, and there's not much difference between Doyle and Strozzi, 
except that Doyle has a sadistic henchman named Hickey (Christopher 
Walken) who kills for the sheer joy of it.  Soon Smith, looking to make 
as much money as he can, is playing both ends against the middle, and is 
always one step away ahead of death.
     Hill goes way overboard with atmosphere, incorporating elements of 
everything from traditional western and gangster motifs to film noir 
cliches.  Almost every outdoor scene features a dust storm and every 
indoor sequence is heavily shadowed.  At times, the blowing dust bleeds 
out color, leaving us with shots that appear to be almost black-and-
white.  It's a clever conceit, but totally superfluous.  Atmosphere is 
supposed to be a background element, but Hill forces it into the 
foreground, as if attempting to overcompensate for structural and 
plausibility problems in his script.  Then there's Ry Cooder's hard rock 
score, which seems vastly out of place for this sort of period piece.
     Over-the-top, cartoonish violence is a big part of LAST MAN 
STANDING.  The body count is way up there, and there's one instance when 
it takes approximately forty bullets to kill one man.  Hill is not Sam 
Peckinpah, however, and, as a result, much of the bloodshed comes across 
as gratuitous rather than stylized.  Sure, there are a lot of people we 
want to see killed, but this sort of wholesale carnage is more 
repetitious than satisfying.
     Aside from Willis, the best acting job is turned in by Bruce Dern 
as the pragmatic, crooked sheriff of Jericho.  Christopher Walken is at 
his maniacal best as Hickey, although, at this point in his career, I'm 
beginning to wonder if he can play anything other than a psycho.  Most 
of the rest of the cast, including Karina Lombard (WIDE SARGASSO SEA), 
is unimpressive at best.  Worse, the secondary characters are a poorly-
developed lot, with motives that vary from incomprehensible to merely 
unexplained.  
     As a shallow tale of conscienceless bloodshed and revenge, LAST MAN 
STANDING is reasonably effective.  But as an updated version of the far 
better-realized YOJIMBO, it's an unqualified failure.  LAST MAN STANDING 
is a surface picture -- it looks good, sounds good, and moves quickly -- 
but there's no depth whatsoever.  In the past, Walter Hill has done some 
great work (SOUTHERN COMFORT, 48 HOURS) and some less-than-great work 
(GERONIMO).  LAST MAN STANDING falls closer to the latter category than 
the former.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1996) * - C:Bruce Willis, Christopher Walken, Bruce Dern, David Patrick
Kelly, William Sanderson.
"Last Man Standing" is a remake of Akira Kurasawa's classic "Yojimbo" from
1961. It was remade once before in 1964's "A Fistful of Dollars", a fairly
entertaining spaghetti western which boosted Clint Eastwood to stardom. It
should not have been remade again.
Movies have to have some sort of target audience in order to make money. I
have no idea who writer/director Walter Hill was targeting here. "Last Man
Standing" has no drama, no humor, no suspense, no romance, and no action
(unless you consider action to be short bursts of gunfire every 35 minutes).
Willis stars as John Smith, a gunman for hire during Prohibition times who
wanders into the town of Jericho, Texas and is immediately thrown into the
middle of a war between two rival gangs. The gang war has caused almost all
the people in town to pack up and move and now the two gangs are fighting to
control illegal shipments of alcohol from Mexico. That's where all the
clarity of the story ends.
As soon as we are introduced to these gangs, 800 different character names
are immediately thrown at us and the audience is instantly lost. Then, as
you try to catch up with the film, it gets so boring that you just don't
care anymore. Also, these two gangs are fighting for control of a town which
isn't any bigger than a shopping mall. They have their headquarters two
minutes apart from each other. One five-minute gunfight would determine
ownership.
Out of all the characters presented in the film, not one is even remotely
interesting or likable. The main reason I wanted to see the film was for
Christopher Walken, who despite his second billing doesn't show up until
almost an hour into the film. He has maybe ten lines of dialogue and no more
than fifteen minutes of screen time. He does fine with what he has to do,
but it's just not enough. If I had not been there with a friend, I would
have been the "First Man Leaving" the theater that was showing "Last Man
Standing".
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Lax Madapati
Cast: Bruce Willis, Christopher Walken, Bruce Dern, Alexandra Powers, David
      Patrick Kelley, William Sanderson, Karina Lombard, Ned Eisenberg, Michael
      Imperioli, Ken Jenkins
Director: Walter Hill
Screenplay: Walter Hill, Ryuzo Kikushima, Akira Kurosawa
Cinematography: Lloyd Ahern
Music: Ry Cooder, Elmer Bernstein (score rejected)
        Last Man Standing retells the story of the classic Kurosawa samurai 
film Yojimbo (1961) (which also 'inspired' another film for the Western genre
A Fistful of Dollars (1964)), with a little updating for the '90s. This one is
set in the 1920's prohibition era where rival gangsters fight each other to 
take complete control over liquor smuggling in Chicago. The film itself is set
in a small dysfunctional town Jericho, somewhere in Texas, near the Mexican 
border. 
        The story involves a mysterious stranger going by the name John Smith 
(Bruce Willis) who enters Jericho in his rundown car and decides to stay in 
town to make some fast money soon after the first incident involving him makes
him realize that there are rival gangs here fighting for control over the
liquor smuggling from across the border and redirection to the 'bosses' in 
Chicago. Pitted against each other are two gangs, one led by Doyle (David P
Kelly) and Hickey (Christopher Walken) and the other led by Strozzi (Ned 
Eisenberg) and Giorgio (Michael Imperioli). The film is about how John Smith 
eliminates the two gangs with a little help from some town folks like the 
crooked Sheriff (Bruce Dern) and a bartender who provides him lodging.
        There are a few subplots in the story one of which involves Strozzi's 
girlfriend Lucy (Alexandra Powers) who switches allegiance to Smith after 
being ill-treated by Strozzi and plays a role in the downfall of Strozzi's gang
and another subplot which involves Doyle's 'property' Felina (Karina Lombard)
who Smith emancipates from Doyle's clutches and in the process, gets badly
beaten up. Some interesting and atmospheric scenes involve the undertaker of
the town who always acknowledges Smith's big hand in the town's body count.
        A film so inspired by the classic Yojimbo will suffer from comparisons,
fair and unfair. Whereas the original had a wicked sense of humor and plays 
most scenes with dramatic effect, this one does not. The subplot involving 
Felina shows the only sign of weakness of our protagonist Smith ('when you go 
down, it will be over a skirt' says the Sheriff to Smith!) and Smith's weakness
for women is the only sign of character we come to know, apart from the
obvious things like his unending thirst for whiskey and beer and his taciturn
and reticent nature. The only other character that stands out is that of Walken
which he plays brilliantly. The reviewer felt that Walken will always make a 
great Bond film villain but was too young when chosen to play Max Zorin in A
View to a Kill (1985), resulting in not too good reviews of that performance.
        Hill directs the film with gusto and panache, with a lot of slow-motion
sequences of violence and stylish camera as is his wont and forte but falls
short in the narrative side which he makes up with a lot of atmosphere and 
visuals. We even have a slight touch of comedy in the film - a little from
Smith's cynicism and a lot from the ever-happy undertaker. Right at the start,
Hill shows a nice contrast between a dead fly-infested horse on the streets
and a dead gangster all decked up in a nice suit and entrenched in a coffin.
Willis is right on target as Smith and the gangsters are adequate. There are
a few loose ends like why inspite of killing some of their own men, Hickey's
gang still want to 'employ' Smith if Hickey and company could completely gut
out Strozzi's hideout and wipe out their gang in one big attack, towards the
end. Also, Doyle and Felina's relation is never explained and if Doyle felt
so strongly about Smith's emancipation of Felina, why didn't he just kill Smith
? The film would have had a better impact had it actually been set in Chicago
and not in some vague Texan town.
        Ry Cooder, who is a Walter Hill regular, having previously scores 
Hill's Streets of Fire (1984), Crossroads (1986) and Johnny Handsome (1989) 
among others, comes up with yet another remarkable score in his inimitable 
style of fusing elements of jazz, blues and rock guitars with a few classic 
Western elements thrown in and makes it all blend well with the film's visuals
and mood. The heavy distortion he uses on the guitars in the scenes that lead 
to the dining table massacre by Smith to rescue Felina is very effective. The
record label Varese will be releasing Elmer Bernstein's rejected score to this
film. The editing is crisp and snappy. Camera work is very good for the most 
part except for the excessive use of light filters, giving some of the scenes
in the film a very glossy and polished look, which is unsuitable when filming
scenes of gritty violence and machismo. 
        There is a high body count in this film and some of it is quite un
necessary. All in all, it is a fair enough film that keeps the viewers engaged
first to finish without really doing anything more. But then, it wouldn't be 
wise to expect more than that from a Walter Hill film.
Rating: On the SuperNova Scale ***/*****
