Title
Review for Twister (1996)
Number of Reviews
22

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
        I found TWISTER to be an exhilarating and extraordinarily
entertaining film, but one that features both major successes and
major flaws.  As initial reviews are already reflecting, TWISTER is
going to be a film that is going to be enjoyed by many but shunned by
others.  Depending on your tastes and expectations, this is a film
that could be either a very enjoyable experience or a frustrating
one.
        The visuals are absolutely remarkable, frequently presenting
the audience with images that are unlike anything ever seen in any
movie before.  All of the tornado sequences are absolutely convincing
and  well-designed, with enough variation in the look that the
sequences never seem repetitive.  This film is certainly another
triumph for Industrial Light and Magic.
        The very dynamic and exciting sound design also plays a major
role in creating the impression that the film is really taking you
into the path of a tornado.  This is a movie that absolutely >must

        TWISTER is also an incredibly well-shot and well-directed
film.  As he did with SPEED, Jan De Bont once again shows an
incredible flare for creating inventively staged and frantically
paced action sequences.  The film certainly keeps moving and De Bont
is often successful at creating major tension >without

        Unfortunately, the film's plot and characterizations fall way
short of the visuals.  The story is little more than a series of
cliched situations simply used to string together one spectacular
storm sequence after another.  The script is credited to Michael
Crichton and his wife Anne-Marie Martin.  Reportedly, such top
writers as Joss Whedon and Steven Zaillian did uncredited rewrites. 
It is surprising that such a top-notch group of writers failed to
bring more originality to the script.
        The film's plot primarily depend on well-worn cliches of this
genre, but it frequently doesn't even bother to play them out
completely. The story is centered on husband and wife scientists
(Bill Paxton and Helen Hunt) thrown into one last adventure together
before signing the divorce papers.  Oddly enough, though, the film
spends so little time on the relationship that it never even bothers
to tell us why they split.
        Another element of the plot involves a rival team of
scientists (led by Cary Elwes) racing with the heroes to deploy a
revolutionary research instrument that was invented by Paxton and
Hunt and stolen by Elwes.  Again, this rivalry is never fully
developed, with the conflicts never amounting to much more than
sequences of the two groups passing one another on the highway while
chasing down the same tornados.
        While the characters are mostly cliches, the actors manage to
do a great deal to flesh them out.  I'm sure the studio (or actually
studios, this is a co-production of Warner Bros. and Universal) felt
they were cutting costs by not using big name stars.  In reality, it
worked out for the best since they ended up with a number of actors
that are more talented than famous.
        The women in the film fare far better than the men.  Helen
Hunt, best known for her good work on the TV sitcom "Mad About You",
manages to bring a great deal of personality to her character. 
Through facial expressions and body language, she is able to convey a
facination and awe for the natural phenomena that she has dedicated
here life to studying.  She also conveys much of her feeling for
Paxton's character in the same manner.  Hunt's acting skill fills in
a lot of blanks in the characterization that aren't filled in by the
dialog or situations.
        An unexpectedly effective performance is given by Jami Gertz
as Paxton's new fiance, who ends up being dragged along when he goes
after the tornados.  This is a character that could have easily been
very irritating, but instead Gertz manages to create a very
sympathetic and believable character while also serving several
necessary functions.  In a few scenes she provides some welcome comic
relief as a therapist who occasionally is trying to council patients
on her cellular phone while driving into the path of a tornado.  On
other occasions, she provides the required non-expert so that other
characters can explain scientific details needed by the audience. 
Both Gertz and the writers are to be commended for avoiding the easy
temptation to make this character unpleasantly unsympathetic.
        Bill Paxton's performance is competent, but unlike Hunt and
Gertz he is never really able to rise above the writing.  The film
does leave quite a bit of his motivation somewhat hazy and he doesn't
make much of an attempt to fill in the blanks.  His chemistry with
Hunt is not non-existent, but it isn't spectacular either.  Cary
Elwes comes off even worse, with a role so thinly drawn that you
often forget he is even in the movie.
        There are some recognizable faces in the supporting cast, but
none are ever allowed to make much of an impression.  Hunt and
Paxton's team is made up of a number of familiar types, but nobody is
ever really allowed to create a distinctive personality.  This is
something of a disappointment after the unexpectedly well-defined
supporting characters in De Bont's SPEED.  This difference is
particularly well-illustrated by Alan Ruck, who appeared in both
films.  In SPEED, he had some of the film's best lines in his amusing
role of a tourist who was a passenger on the bus.  In this film, he
is one of the scientists and never has anything more to do than
simply shouting road directions into a radio.
        In the long run, I found that the flaws in TWISTER really just
didn't matter that much.  The film is tremendously enjoyable and
truly showed me sights that I had never seen before.  If you manage
to get into tune with the film's strengths, as I did, the weaknesses
will ultimately seem to not be that important.
-- 
Jeffrey P. Graebner
Columbus, Ohio

Author
Allan Toombs
What puts Twister ahead of this year's crop of big action movie's is the
joie de vivre it brings to you. I found it emotionally compelling not just
because of the awesome forces our heroes face but because of the sheer
delight in normality we share with the stormchasers.
        The stormchasing phenomena is very recent; made possible by
affordable mobile communications, modern weather prediction and a certain
fin de ciecle craziness. A cast of (for me) unknowns realisticly portray the
kind of motley crew that are probably out there in Tornado Alley right now.
You quickly start to care for every one of them. Rebels with a
meteorological cause they are united by the need to share information in
order to witness storms, in particular tornadoes.
        Against this band of semi-academic nomads is a corporate sponsored
fleet with the same goal but superior technology. This is, as yet, an
invention, as far as I know. Stormchasing is usually composed of long boring
waits, grinding driving and a few brief moments of adrenaline. Too
unpredictable for anyone other than mavericks and fanatics. However this
strand of rivalry is peripheral and the downtime is there as the team stop
over at Bill's beautifully eccentric Aunt and a drive in that chose a bad
night to show THE SHINING. These two sojourns denote the breaks in a classic
three act Hollywood structure.
        Beyond the mechanics of our audience response there is an inner
journey to this movie and despite an excellent performance from Bill Paxton
it belongs to Helen Hunt's character Jo. Her look is right, you can believe
this woman would camp out in a field with weather obsessed geeks, her acting
talent tells you how much she still loves Bill. Against this she is
demonised by a childhood trauma that motivates her need to research whirlwinds.
        If the chases will have you whooping like an adolescent then the
love triangle at the films heart is soberly adult and should have you
guessing if Jami Getz or Helen Hunt will retain Paxton's affections. Ms.Getz
is another new name to me and conveyed a sophisticate terrified by and
relishing the storm chase. I wondered if her city girl would embrace the
stormchaser's stripped-down lifestyle as an alternative to Jo's
self-destructive energy; that's how much the film involved me.
        There's nothing too fanciful about the plot, the people are drawn
from life, the tornadoes don't need to be made larger than life and Bill's
dilemma is all too typical. The soundtrack is superlative with great use of
pop music, a classical score that doesn't intrude and a scorching end
credits piece by the Van Halens. 
        This film could make weather following alot more converts but the
winds have always been there, a natural destructive force that appears
amidst the flat boredom of the Mid-West landscape. The makers have shown us
our world in an exciting new light, which is one of the best things that can
happen at the cinema. See it on the big screen while you can!
 Directed by Jan De Bont, produced by Kathleen Kennedy,
 Ian Bryce and Michael Crichton. Executive producers are Steven
 Spielberg, Walter Parkes, Laurie MacDonald and Gerald Molen.
 Written by Michael Crichton & Anne-Marie Martin.
"A lie is halfway round the world before truth gets it's trousers on."
 mailto:toombs@cityscape.co.uk
http://www.cityscape.co.uk/users/bt18/atoombs.html
 Copyright 1996 Allan Toombs, email me to negotiate permission.

Author
Scott Mendelson
        In short, Twister is a perfect summer flick.  It's acting is adequate,
it's character are 1/2 dimensional, it's sub-plots are silly, but boy,
oh boy is it FUN!!!!
        The Plot:  Tornado chasers Helen Hunt and Bill Paxton duel with mother
nature while trying to rekindle their marriage and fend off a rival
chaser(Cary Elwes).
         The film starts out with a truly chilling bang.  Beginning in 1969,
the film starts with a family of three(four, if you count a dog that,
probably not coincidentally, looks a lot like Toto, from Wizard of Oz)
running from their home to an underground shelter, after a surprise
storm hits the town.  The little child, having never seen a tornado
before, is amazed at its power and can hardly believe her eyes when it
blows the shelter door to pieces and takes her father with it.  
        This scene is frighteningly effective in the same way that the opening
scene of Cliffhanger was(and is probably the only reason, why you would
question taking a young child to this film).  It builds tension by
delaying the inevitable, because we know what will happen, but hope that
it doesn't.
        Of course, the special effects are truly eye-popping(I gave them top
billing; they are the REAL stars of this flick).  There tornadoes are
frighteningly convincing, and so is the damage that it does.  All
through the movie, we wonder: what will we see in midair next(my
personal favorite are the flying cows, which bellow out a frightened
"MOO" as they fly through the air).
         As said before, the film is fun.  Aside, from the scary opening scene,
the film's "scares" are more of the "ooh, Ahh, oh no" variety as opposed
to truly horrific scenes of destruction(it helps that the body count is
kept to a bare minimum).
        OK, I wasn't exactly expecting the level of quality that went into the
characters of Jaws(the movie to which all other revenge of
nature/science  movies will be measured against, and rightly so). 
Still, director Jan De Bont did get great performances out of Keanu
Reeves, Sandra Bullock, and(especially) Dennis Hopper in Speed.  Of
course, Hopper and Co. actually had distinct personalities to play off
of.  Hunt, Paxton, and Ewles are given very little.  Hunt plays the
tough chick, Paxton plays the ex-husband, and Elwes plays the other
tornado chaser.  
        I feel particularly bad for Ewles.  He is a great actor.  Yet, he can't
seem to get respect.  Let's see, in The Princess Bride, he was great,
but was overshadowed by Mandy Patankin.   In Glory(the greatest film
ever made about an American war), he was great, but was overshadowed by
Matthew Broderick, Morgan Freeman, and Denzel Washington.  In Robin
Hood: Men in Tights, he was great but was overshadowed by the fact that
the movie sucked.  In Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book, he was great
but was overshadowed by Jason Scott Lee, and all the lions and tigers
and bears(oh, my!).        
        Michael Crichton(who wrote the screenplay) is known for injecting much
scientific knowledge in his(great) books.  In Twister, we get many
scenes of people in "weather watch"-like stations, with lots of fancy
looking, computer animated programs for tracking the weather.  Yet, no
one bothers to explain what any of the screens mean, or explain the
scientific dialogue that goes along with it.  Gee, and we could have
learned something too...
        OK, now, that all is said and done. 
As said before, it's silly, occasionally stupid, and it's characters are
ill-defined.  But, it's a great time at the movies.  If you want
quality, wait till fall.  If you just want a good time, then summer is
the season.  Twister is a summer movie.                        "B+"

Author
Robin Redcrest
The URL of this review is 

http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/twister.html
Ladies and gentlemen, start your engines - the summer
blockbuster season has begun!
And, begun with a bang and a flourish and big gust of wind,
courtesy of the team of Stephen Spielberg, Kathleen Kennedy
and Michael Crichton.  Been a while since a movie has made
me sweat, but I walked out of "Twister" with sore muscles
from clenching the armrests, and some unsightly stains on
the underarms of my sweatshirt.
I've heard it said that the special effects are the stars
of this movie.  No question but what they are spectacular,
and a large part of the reason for the nail biting
suspense.   But a lot of the credit for the intensity of
this film has to go to Helen Hunt.  Willing to ride right
into the eye of the storm, it's her intensity, bravery and
ability to look life square in the face that takes you
places a movie doesn't normally go.
Usually, if a woman is a hero in an action film, she's an
Amazon.  Grace Jones comes to mind - a not quite human
woman, and therefore a cinematically acceptable hero.  Hunt
has none of that.  You learn at the beginning that she's
motivated to be a storm chaser because of seeing her father
swept out of the family storm cellar during a tornado in
the mid-60s.   She's got a core of sadness, but she's
driven and focused and passionate about her work.  Now
that's a reasonable motivation.
Her mission is to lead a motley band of other scientists to
make the first tornado sensor designed to be sucked up into
the funnel for precise data gathering.   The rest of her
team, are guys, who seem to have not one ounce of angst
about working for a woman.   It's clear that they'd rather
be working for her than for the well funded, souless male
competitor who's vans all match and who hogs all of the TV
cameras in his efforts to beat her to the punch.  I don't
blame them.  I liked her.  They obviously do too.  No big
deal.
Enter the sub plot of the fact that she co-invented this
wonder device with her soon to be ex-husband, the highly
appealing Bill Paxton.  He comes to get her to sign the
divorce papers and stays to help her launch the sensor. 
Paxton is equally - and I truly mean equally - as strong a
character.  It's clear why they a) really love each other
and b) have a tough time living together.  Two people who
are this smart and this dedicated have to run into power
struggles.
But the struggles are real.  They aren't some trumped up
guys versus gals type of thing that has to end in the woman
capitulating to the man's sensitive ego.  They're the
struggles of two human beings trying to figure out where
they each belong in life and caring so much about each
other that confronting their lack of ability to work it out
hurts way more than just separating.
Here's a switch - what causes this to work is Hunt's
combination of brains and fearlessness and Paxton's
instincts.   Thanks to Spielberg and his camp for giving us
a female hero with brains and a male hero with intuition. 
And for making that part of the movie no big deal, just
part of a really good story.
It's well written, (mostly) and well acted, by folks it's
very easy to care about.  See this movie for a fabulous
story about people with heart achieving the impossible and
winding up winners.

Author
Scott Marcus
Review for the MTV-generation: Great effects, adequate story, and some
good performances make TWISTER an enjoyable ride. Caveat: Make sure to
see it on the big screen, because much of the power of the film will
undoubtedly be lost when it comes to video.
Two groups of tornado-chasers (it's hard to believe that anyone would
be crazy enough to go looking for tornadoes, let alone *two* groups of people)
are racing to try to deploy a bunch of sensors into the heart of a tornado.
The purpose is to learn enough about these storms to predict their paths.
If this can be done, people in danger will be able to get fifteen minutes
warning before one strikes.
TWISTER is just about what you'd expect, and what the ads promise. The
tornado effects are awesome. The F/X people on this film did everything they
could to bring the awesome destructive power of tornadoes to the audience,
short of actually creating one in the theater. Whenever a twister is on
screen, I was completely captivated; completely caught up with the characters
who were placing themselves in the path of these beasts of nature.
The question remains, though, what about when the effects stop, and the plot
and characters and screenplay take center stage? After all, two hours of
tornadoes might be enough to sell videos for the weather channel, but it's
no way to make a film.
The answer is, more or less, that the rest of the film is worthwhile. Two
of the three leads are excellent -- Bill Paxton and Helen Hunt. Both are in
top form, Paxton as the tornado-chaser turned reluctant weatherman, and
Hunt as the tornado-obsessed scientist. The rest of the rag-tag band of
chasers is also good, with several familiar faces from TV. They are more
reminiscent of a college fraternity than of a group of scientists, which
helps lighten the mood effectively.
The other lead, Jamie Gertz, as Paxton's current fiancee, is drawn a little
lightly. I'm not sure if the problem is the actress or the part, but
whichever, the character has too little substance. And the other somewhat
sour note is the rivalry between Hunt's amateurish group, and a
well-financed group of storm chasers led by Cary Elwes. Elwes is a former
associate of the college group, but has gone pro, as it were, by getting a
lot of money through corporate sponsorship. The film would have been tighter 
without this unnecessary plot device.
Overall, though, the effects are what will bring people to the theater, and
the effects are what will be remembered as they leave.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     "We sure been havin' a lot of weather lately."  It is a line from
an old comedy, somebody trying to make conversation.  But the last few
years that line seems to have taken on new meaning with record storms,
hurricanes, high temperatures, heavy snowfalls, and cold winters.  So
Amblin Entertainment (by way of Warner Brothers and Universal Pictures)
thought that the time was right to make a film about the most violent
weather they could.  And that, of course, is what they did.
     This is a sort of a monster movie in which the monster is not a
giant lizard but something a lot less tangible, but a lot more deadly-
-a sort of spirit of tornadoes.  Back in 1969 the monster came and took
Jo Harding's father, and Jo is going to have her vengeance on the
beast.  And, like with many monster movies, the film lives when the
monster is on the screen and the rest of the film is just waiting for
those scenes.  There are some good action sequences when that tornado
(or actually one of several tornadoes) is on the screen.  The rest of
the story is actively bad as a collection of warmed-over cliches from
other films.  In addition to the cliche of the vendetta that Jo has
against tornadoes, there a love triangle with Jo competing with
psychologist Melissa for the affections of Jo's soon-to-be-ex-husband
Bill.  Bill is himself a former tornado hunter, but now he has decided
to give all that excitement up and become a docile TV weatherman.  Jo
leads a whole group of idealistic young tornado hunters who will win
their victory against tornadoes if they can launch a homemade probe
into a raging cyclone.  Now you would think that a set of angry
tornadoes would be opponent enough.  But there is also a human enemy, a
team of evil tornado hunters who stole the idea of the probe from Bill
and have made their own with (gasp!) corporate funding.  And while the
good guys are a free-thinking ragtag lot who dress casually and chase
their tornadoes in mismatched cars and vans, the bad guys have their
own armada of vans--all black--they all dress in matching designer
outfits, and they steal their ideas and their plans from the idealists
every chance they get.  And to top it all they bask in television
publicity while the good guys are unsung in their heroics.  Each team
is set on wresting from tornadoes the secret that will let people
predict where a tornado will strike fifteen minutes in advance of the
hit rather than the current three minutes.  The good guys have to get
the secret data before the bad guys get it and give it to some
corporation.
     Because a single tornado lasts for only a few minutes the film
contrives to have a series of tornadoes forming over Oklahoma, each
larger than the last, to put our two teams in ever increasing danger as
they try to jockey themselves into the paths of the storms in the hopes
of getting their probes picked up and picked up and spun by one of the
deadly funnels.  Just how the data can be used to make the tornado more
predictable is never explained.  This is an odd failing considering the
script was co-written by Michael Crichton (and by Anne-Marie Martin,
a.k.a. Mrs. Michael Crichton).  Crichton likes to explain (and often
slam) scientific investigation and it would have been worthwhile to get
his explanation for how the data would be used.  There is a little
scientific exposition, but it is more descriptive than explanatory.  We
learn, for example, that tornadoes are measured on the Fujita Tornado
Intensity Scale (see discussion after review) of the light gale F1 to
the incredibly deadly F5 that of all the tornado hunters only Bill has
actually seen.  An F5 is called "the finger of God."  (Now what do you
think they would use for the finale of this film?)
     This is the second film ex-cinematographer Jan de Bont has
directed, the first being SPEED.  And he directs like a cameraman.  The
most memorable characters of TWISTER are all the very visual tornadoes.
There is, however, what seems like it might have been an unexpected
problem.  Action scenes require moderate close-ups.  Like an
expressionist painting, a tornado looks great from a distance and not
so good in a close- up.  It is a huge finger sticking out of the sky
which is an awe-inspiring sight.  Get close enough to it to see it
giving our characters' trouble and the tornado no longer looks so
impressive.  In close-up it looks more like just a big, unimpressive
dust cloud.  It helps to have it pick up heavy objects and whirl them
around, but it is not easy to make a cloud of dust look dramatic.
Still, the acting honors go to dust.  Spencer Tracy said all that is
necessary for acting is to remember your lines and do not bump into the
props.  Playing tornado hunters Jo and Bill Harding, Helen Hunt and
Bill Paxton remember their lines and wait for the props to bump into
them.  Neither pulls in a whole lot of interest on the screen.  As the
hapless fiancee of Bill, Jami Gertz fairs a little better, but she is
given some really sappy comedy relief lines like explaining to someone
who has called her on her cordless phone, "This is not a good time for
me," as she rides into the path of a raging tornado.  Cary Elwes has
little to do as the evil tornado hunter, and the most memorable human
in the film is Lois Smith as Aunt Meg who makes wind-driven lawn
ornaments and who proves she is a good person by cooking up huge
quantities of good-looking food, almost all protein and cholesterol.
     A friend has suggested that the script might better have been
titled HOWLER.  Without much loss, TWISTER could be edited down to
twenty minutes of great action scenes, and then it might have gotten
better rating than a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     We are really just tiny and frail creatures living in a huge sea
of atmosphere.  The forces that we can create, with the possible
exception of nuclear forces, are small compared to some of those
routinely--but luckily rarely in our time scale--unleashed by nature.
This ocean of atmosphere that we live in can at times have currents
that become deadly, and one of the deadliest and most focused forces it
can unleash is a tornado.  Perhaps lightning has more impact per square
inch and a hurricane may last longer and dissipate more force overall,
but nothing combines the focus and the sheer power of a tornado: a
finger of spinning wind with speed that can uproot trees and swing
trailer trucks like they were toys.
     Because air is invisible, we can rarely see how much chaotic
motion there really is in the atmosphere around us.  But unequal
heating can cause powerful updrafts of air, as much as 100 miles per
hour.  With all that air going up in the air, a low pressure area is
formed and surrounding air has to rush in to replace it.  That air can
go straight into the partial vacuum, but sometimes, like an object in
decaying orbit around the earth, it instead spirals in.  As it spirals
in faster and faster, it pulls more and more air with.  The air rushes
around the low pressure area faster and faster until it is traveling at
speeds of up to 300 miles per hour, rushing in to the center to get
pulled up the chimney.  Along with the air being pulled up comes
anything and virtually everything that gets in its way.  When this
happens over water, a huge spout of water is formed.  But when it
happens over land what it picks up can be solid objects which get
carried along at the same high speeds.  The reason we can see the
funnel shape of a tornado is that it is picking up dust and dirt from
the ground and pulling it into the updraft.  Often the color of the
tornado is just the color of the soil under it.  In the funnel we are
also seeing water vapor condensing from the cooling effect of in-
rushing air.  Colliding with air at the speeds that the air is swirling
is deadly, colliding with water is worse, colliding with something
solid is incredibly destructive.  And a wind this powerful can pick up
and whirl around a train locomotive.  As the low pressure area moves
the deadly finger can move along the ground at speeds from 20 to 70
miles per hour, carrying destruction with it.
     As they said in the film, the intensity of tornadoes is measured
by the Fujita scale (see below).  There can be as many as 1000
tornadoes a year over land, almost always over flat countryside as
there is in Kansas, Missouri, and Texas, and especially Oklahoma.  Many
of these have funnels less than 100 feet wide and last only a few
minutes, but tornadoes a mile wide or lasting as long as an hour are
not uncommon.  Sometimes you can have funnels forming around not around
the entire low pressure area but at its edge. And when that happens one
can get several tornadoes forming around the same low pressure area.
March 18, 1925, there were seven funnels from one low pressure area in
the Midwest (especially Illinois) with a resulting death toll of 689.
     THE FUJITA TORNADO INTENSITY SCALE (provided by the National
Weather Service)
   - (F0) Gale tornado (40-72 mph)
        - Light damage. Some damage to chimneys; break branches off
          trees; push over shallow-rooted trees; damage sign boards.
   - (F1) Moderate tornado (73-112 mph)
        - Moderate damage. The lower limit is the beginning of
          hurricane wind speed; peel surface off roofs; mobile homes
          pushed off foundations or overturned; moving autos pushed off
          the roads.
   - (F2) Significant tornado (113-157 mph)
        - Considerable damage. Roofs torn off frame houses; mobile
          homes demolished; boxcars pushed over; large trees snapped or
          uprooted; light-object missiles generated.
   - (F3) Severe tornado (158-206 mph)
        - Severe damage. Roofs and some walls torn off well-constructed
          houses; trains overturned; most trees in forest uprooted;
          heavy cars lifted off the ground and thrown.
   - (F4) Devastating tornado (207-260)
        - Devastating damage. Well-constructed houses leveled;
          structures with weak foundations blown off some distance;
          cars thrown and large missiles generated.
   - (F5) Incredible tornado (261-318 mph)
        - Incredible damage. Strong frame houses lifted off foundations
          and carried considerable distance to disintegrate; automobile
          sized missiles fly through the air in excess of 100 meters
          (109 yards); trees debarked; incredible phenomena will occur.

Author
Alex Christensen
_Jurassic Park_, but like, it doesn't suck
4 of 4 stars; only the stuffy would complain
The pitch: "It'll be like _Jurassic_Park_ meets Speed!"
        I did not go into _Twister_ with unreasonable expectations. I 
just wanted to be entertained. Then the picture came up on the screen, 
the wind blew me back in my seat, and I embarked on the greatest 
thrill-ride of a movie since _Speed_ or _Natural_Born_Killers_. 
_Twister_ is so real and powerful and, above all, entertaining, that to 
complain that the story is a little hokey or the characters said cliched 
lines is a fundamental misunderstanding of the film. It's tornadoes, man!
        Comparing _Twister_ to _Jurassic_Park_ is very valid. Michael 
Crichton wrote both films, and they both feature "stars" who were 
completely computer-generated. Steven Spielberg produced both films, as 
well. There was a lot which disappointed me about _Jurassic_Park_, 
however. For one thing, all of the characters were so annoying that I 
kept wishing for them all to die. Also, and I know this is a completely 
nonsensical thing to say, but I just could not appreciate the effects 
much at all. Sure, they were impressive, but I mean, so is a Van Gogh; I 
do not want to spend two hours sitting in front of a movie screen with a 
Van Gogh on it. There has to be an emotional involvement and an 
effective visual use of effects to really impress. For instance, I 
thought the most effective use of effects in _Jurassic_Park_ was when the 
cow is lowered into the cage and is ripped apart offscreen. The noises 
were great. They conveyed everything that needed to be conveyed. Another 
good scene was when Wayne Knight's character, attempting to smuggle DNA 
off the island, was killed by the poison-shooting dinosaur. I think that 
was an animatronic dinosaur, though. So why was I watching a movie? I 
could have been home on my couch listening to the radio or watching 
"Muppets Tonight!" I wished I was home on my couch listening to the 
radio or watching "Muppets Tonight!" Maybe tonight I will stay home on 
my couch and listen to the radio or watch "Muppets Tonight!"
        Or maybe I will go see _Twister_ again. Because, brother, does Jan 
de Bont, the director who brought us _Speed_, and the cinematographer who 
brought us _Cujo_, _Die_Hard_, and _The_Hunt_for_Red_October_, know how to 
make a movie that is exciting, gripping, and roundhouse-punch 
scary. When I saw _Speed_ for the first time, I was actually dodging and 
jumping in my seat and swearing out loud. (This can be very annoying to 
those seated around you. Be forwarned. _Twister_ is such a panic-inducing 
movie.)
        Jack N. Green, _Twister_'s cinematographer and Clint Eastwood's 
for the gorgeous _Unforgiven_ and _Bridges_of_Madison County_, pulls off 
some truly amazing helicopter shots and shots that require expert 
timing. He also photographs nature with such an unerring eye that you 
see the movie as a landscape of plains which intersects in an eerily 
beautiful way with the deadly power of nature as manifested by the 
tornadoes. You always feel that what is happening on screen is moving 
toward you, like your feet are on the ground with the characters, as well.
        I guess I will give a brief plot summary. The plot does not 
really matter. The plot is just an excuse for a bunch of tornadoes and 
destruction. This is a good thing. I do not want to be bothered with 
emotional baggage or following the intricacies of some loser's backstory. 
I want to see something get knocked over. de Bont comes through for me. 
So anyway, there are these storm-chasers, see, they want to find out how 
a tornado works, because nobody really knows, so they design "Dorothy" a 
machine that enters the eye of a tornado (they have to place it the 
tornado's path, of course) and releases hundreds of tiny sensors, which 
then record and transmit detailed information back to the scientists' 
computers. Bill (Bill Paxton) designed Dorothy, but he has left the 
project, and his wife Jo (Helen Hunt) for a new job as a weatherman and a 
new life with his fiancee, Melissa (Jami Gertz). Of course, on a trek out 
to get Jo to sign the divorce papers, Bill gets sucked back in with the 
old crew. Yadda yadda yadda, blah blah blah. Then there is this evil 
corporate storm-chaser, Jonas (Cary Elwes), who has stolen the design of 
Dorothy and is looking to get his findings completed before the other 
group. A rare storm configuration has presented some unique opportunities 
for study, so the race is on between the two groups to place and operate 
their machine first. Sound stupid? It is. Don't think about it too much. 
Unlike in _Jurassic_Park_, de Bont has the good sense to treat the human 
characters like what they are: bit players. There is almost no 
manipulative crap to try and get you to care while you are just waiting 
for the next cool effect.
        Who can think anyway with a big tornado barreling toward you, 
swirling and roiling with debris and dust and who knows? hellfire and a 
kind of cruel intelligent mindlessness that Spielberg wishes his dippy 
velociraptors had had for one second? Who needs to? Probably some idiot 
movie critic. But if you are looking for a movie that is a movie in every 
full, complete sense of the word, the kind of movie you can watch with 
popcorn on Saturday afternoon, _Twister_ is it. It is a four-star action 
picture, a four-star disaster picture, and that adds up to a four-star 
picture.

Author
Christopher Null
     The first film is an eye-popping, jaw-dropping action/adventure, a
study of tornadoes and the carnage they create wherever they land.  A story
of two maverick "stormchasers" who try to launch a data-gathering probe
into the heart of one of these twisters and risk life and limb in doing so.
     The second film is a lifeless character drama, a tired old story about
a couple going through a divorce, the man with his prissy wife-to-be, the
woman still pining for their old relationship.  It is also the story of a
second, group of cartoonishly "evil" stormchasers who compete to launch
their own probe into a tornado.
     The first film is fantastic.  The second film is awful.  And they are
both called TWISTER.
     Never before have I experienced a picture that could have been so good
and that had so much going for it, that blew it so badly.  TWISTER's
groundbreaking effects carry it a *long* way.  These include, but are not
limited to, a tractor dealership being sucked into the air, a semi dropped
from the sky, a house rolling across the plains (which is driven through on
its side), flying bovines, and of course, lots of faux tornadoes.  I can't
remember how many times I muttered "Oh my God..." during the screening.
(Thanks go to SPEED director Jan de Bont.)
     I likewise can't remember how many times I started to doze off during
the predictable, shopworn, boring "character development" scenes, *none* of
which are effective.  You'd think that in an hour of development, we'd
learn more about the leads, all of whom can be fully described in 15 words
or less:  Bill (Bill Paxton), leaving the stormchasing world (and his wife)
for more peaceful conditions; Jo (Helen Hunt), Bill's maniacally devoted
wife, driven to near-madness by a tornado trauma as a youth; Melissa (Jami
Gertz), Bill's hollow and uptight girlfriend (and Chicagoan Gertz looks
ridiculous made-up as a Southern belle); and Jonas (Cary Elwes), the
stormchaser who "sold out" by getting (the horror!) a corporate sponsorship
(and Brit Elwes is even more ridiculous as a Southern beau).  There's even
an Aunt Meg (Lois Smith)!  Welcome to Oz, folks.
     The film follows a pattern more predictable than a Tyson fight:  a big
tornado scene, then a boring talking scene, then a big tornado scene, then
talking...and on and on.  After two hours, the tornadoes go away and so
does the talking.  Thank God for the latter.  And fortunately, the action
scenes are much more memorable than the drama scenes, and they serve to
sway this critic into the recommend side of the ratings scale.
     Now you know what you're up against when you see the film, and like
its precursor, JURASSIC PARK, you *should* see it on the big screen, or
else you'll be wasting a video rental.  I think TWISTER might mark the
first time where the only real response the heroes have against the enemy
(the tornadoes) is to run away, and we cheer for them to do so.  It's also
the first time since HIS GIRL FRIDAY that an estranged leading couple were
so obviously perfect for each other.
     And as for tornado-knowledge, this is what I got:  if you're in a
tornado, just hold on to a big metal pole in the ground and everything will
be just fine.  Promise.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com
-Screenwriter-Producer  /  Novelist-Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Chad Polenz
Twister
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, PG-13, 117 minutes [1 hour, 57 minutes]
[thriller]
starring: Bill Paxton (Bill Harding), Helen Hunt (Jo Harding), Jami Gertz
(Melissa), Cary Elwes (Dr. Jonas Miller), written by Micheal Crichton,
Ann-Marie Martin, produced by Michael Crichton, Kathleen Kennedy, Ian Skye,
directed by Jan De Bont.
If we told you once, we told you a thousand times - movies are not roller
coaster rides! "Twister" has to be one of the prime examples of the typical,
cliche, summer action movie with lots of stunts and special effects to keep
an audience in awe every step of the way.
In the spirit of "Jurassic Park," Michael Crichton has produced another
blockbuster extravaganza flick with so many special effects it's unreal. And
that's where the problem to this film lies: it isn't believable. You don't
have to be an experienced critic to realize how trite this film is. 
We start out in the 1960s and witness a small farming family have their home
destroyed and father killed by a tornado. We then cut to the present as Jo
(Hunt), the little girl whose family was destroyed by the tornado, has grown
up to become a professional "tornado hunter." She and her
soon-to-be-ex-husband, Bill (Paxton), have invented a device that will allow
scientists to study a tornado from within the funnel. One this particular
expedition, Bill has brought along his fiancee Melissa (Gertz), and hopes he
and Jo can finalize their divorce. Melissa is the typical, fragile, female
character who has no idea what is going on. Even though little has happened
by the time all these factors come into play, the film is already very
formulated, you wonder if it could get any worse?
Apparently Bill and Jo have some competition, and just like all those old
sci-fi movies, it's a mad scientist, only updated for the 90s. Cary Elwes
co-stars as Dr. Jonas Miller, a scientist working for a commercial
corporation who has invented the same device as the Hardings (how does anyone
profit from tornados?). Of course there's an immediate definition of a
rivalry between Miller and the Hardings. Now this is all nice and good, but
it's just a petty excuse at characterization and storytelling. Who cares? We
want to see the cool computer-generated special effects and stunts! 
And so we get those effects and stunts, and as lame as the film is, it does
deliver on its promise to impress us. The tornados here look real, and the
whole point of making a film about people chasing them is to actually show
them running away from them. And yes, the supposedly suspenseful scenes do
kick in full gear, but it's hard to care when you don't know why these idiots
are risking their lives in the name of "science."
Thrillers with scientific (read: "sci-fi") overtones like this are usually
interesting to watch because we learn about the reality of the situation and
thus it seems more believable, and even scary in a way. But we learn
absolutely nothing about tornadoes here. There are some scenes of
destruction, but they are isolated incidents. We really don't learn how much
damage a tornado can cause. It's almost as if the tornado is an intelligent
monster chasing our heroes (a la "Jaws"). I never thought weather had an
agenda!
"Twister" has all the makings of a suspenseful action movie, but its cliches
and cheesy storylines and sub-plots are just so distracting it's hard to care
what happens - and isn't that really what makes for fun at the movies?
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Helen Hunt, Bill Paxton, Cary Elwes, Jami Gertz, Lois Smith,=20
      Alan Ruck, Philip Seyman Hoffman
Director: Jan De Bont
Producers: Kathleen Kennedy, Ian Bryce, and Michael Crichton
Screenplay: Michael Crichton & Ann-Marie Martin
Cinematography: Jack N. Green
Music: Mark Mancina
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     As movie-goers, we expect different things from big-budget summer=20
blockbusters than we do from "normal" films.  Considerations of theme=20
and character become secondary to action and mind-numbing excitement. =20
The plot is expected to be very basic -- only complex enough to frame=20
the spills and chills.  JURASSIC PARK is a perfect example of this sort=20
of thing, as is last year's DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE.  This year's=20
first entry is the eye-popping, ear-blasting TWISTER, Jan De Bont's=20
violent weather follow-up to SPEED.
     TWISTER, which follows a team of tornado chasers as they track down=20
storms, is exciting, if a little shallow.  This particular disaster=20
movie, which pits man against an implacable, unstoppable enemy, owes as=20
much to GODZILLA and JURASSIC PARK as to THE TOWERING INFERNO and THE=20
POSEIDON ADVENTURE.  It's a perfect motion picture roller coaster --=20
fun, fast, and furious=85 as long as you don't think too hard.
     In real life, violent weather can be both terrifying and=20
exhilarating.  There's nothing quite like standing in the path of a=20
monster storm, even if it earns you the label of having a death wish (in=20
fact, it's the possibility of death that gets the adrenaline pumping). =20
TWISTER tries, with limited success, to capture that sensation.  There=20
are times when the tornado strikes seem a little too "glamorized" by the=20
special effects gurus, but, in general, these ILM-fashioned monsters=20
generate enough awe to make us feel that we're watching the "finger of=20
God."
     In real life, tornado chasing has a higher percentage of misses=20
than sightings, so the fact that every expedition in TWISTER unearths a=20
powerful storm comes across as a too-obvious-to-miss plot contrivance. =20
Not that we really care.  De Bont keeps things moving, and, except for a=20
few feeble character-building scenes, our heroes are on the road=20
speeding after, or away from, spinning devastation.
     TWISTER opens with a short prologue in June 1969.  It's one of the=20
film's most effective sequences, as a family of three flees into a=20
shelter to escape an oncoming storm.  The father is killed, sucked into=20
the vortex while his wife and five-year old daughter, Jo,  watch.  More=20
than twenty-five years later, that little girl has grown up to be a=20
tornado chaser.  Played by Helen Hunt, Jo is obsessed with increasing=20
the pre-storm warning time.  Accompanied by her old partner and soon-to-
be-ex-husband, Bill Harding (Bill Paxton), her usual crew, and Bill's=20
fiancee (Jami Gertz), Jo is about to try out "Dorothy", a specially-
built instrument designed to spit out data from inside the vortex.  So,=20
in the midst of "the biggest series of storms in 12 years", Jo and Bill=20
hit the road, vying with a rival scientist (Cary Elwes) to reach each=20
new storm first.
     Apparently, nature doesn't make a good enough villain, so the=20
writers of TWISTER decided to add some nasty human rivals. =20
Unfortunately, Cary Elwes' character is both unnecessary and irritating;=20
the tornadoes are enough.  Equally superfluous are the romantic=20
complications in the relationship between Jo and Bill.  It's a rather=20
boring subplot, and, if these two had been together from the beginning=20
(they are married, albeit almost divorced), we would have been spared=20
the presence of Jami Gertz'  unappealing character.
     Author Michael Crichton, not relying on one of his ultra-popular=20
bestsellers, dips into his bag of tricks to come up with a completely=20
artificial plot.  Without De Bont's energetic direction, the seams in=20
Crichton's script (which was co-written with his wife, Anne-Marie=20
Martin) would have been more apparent.  Fortunately, the film's fast=20
pace and stunning audio/visual elements camouflage the deficiencies. =20
And it helps that both Helen Hunt and Bill Paxton, while not "major"=20
stars, are likable and share a pleasant camaraderie.  They're our guides=20
through tornado territory, and we need their stability with De Bont=20
throwing everything at us -- including the kitchen.
     TWISTER is peppered with bits of information about how to react if=20
a tornado approaches, how dangerous the storms can be, etc.  Despite=20
these snippets of safety-conscious advice, the movie doesn't function as=20
a public service announcement, nor should it.  TWISTER doesn't have any=20
pretensions.  It is what it sets out to be:  an effective piece of big=20
money, early summer entertainment designed to blow viewers away.

Author
Brian Koller
"Twister" is a surprisingly entertaining blockbuster, with
terrific special effects (e.g. tornadoes), a frantic plot,
and a love triangle.  It is also unintentionally a comedy,
adding another dimension to the sometimes overdone dialogue
and action scenes.
Bill Paxton tracks down estranged wife Helen Hunt to get her to sign 
divorce papers, so he can marry sex therapist Jami Gertz.  Hunt does
not want the divorce, and manipulates Paxton into chasing tornadoes
with her.  They soon encounter one tornado after another,
risking their lives under the pretense of gaining scientific
knowledge.
It is almost too easy to poke holes in "Twister".  So many
tornadoes, so many close calls, with Paxton always knowing where
to head the car so that their lives can be risked again.
Tornadoes hit them while they watch a drive-in movie, then
wreck their beloved Aunt's house.  Fortunately, the only
casualties from all these funnels are the plagiarizing,
richly financed rival storm chasing team.  When Paxton and Hunt
are chased by the final, most menacing twister, it never
seems to gain on them, just like a proverbial train approaching 
a beautiful woman tied to the railroad tracks.
Gertz is present to add urgency to Hunt's machinations,
and to ask layman questions so that the storm team's actions
can be cogently explained to the audience.  Paxton and Hunt
overact (Paxton gets physically angry when teased about his 
weatherman stint).  None of these "flaws" keep the film from 
being good, however.  Something else is going on, and that is 
the film may actually be a comedy, an unintentional but thankful 
result of energetic director Jan de Bont.
The storm chasing team is similar to a wolfpack.  Paxton is the
alpha male, Hunt the alpha female.  Gertz becomes the beta female,
and quits because she "can't compete."  They roam the
countryside looking for a kill (a tornado) and celebrate
afterwards.
"Twister" can be viewed at many levels: as an entertaining
spectacle, as a formula for a blockbuster, and as a latent
comedy.  However you choose to accept it, it is worth seeing.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(WB)
Directed by    Jan De Bont
Written by     Michael Crichton and Anne-Martin Martin
Cast           Helen Hunt, Bill Paxton, Cary Elwes, Jami Gertz
MPAA Rating    "PG-13" (for "intense depiction of very bad weather")
Running Time   117 minutes
Reviewed at    Wynnsong 10, Durham, NC (10MAY96)
     Auntie Em!  Auntie Em!  The summer-movie season has officially blown 
into town with TWISTER, the first must-see movie of the year.  Though
both underwritten and lacking the momentum of his last film, SPEED,
director Jan De Bont's take on Oklahoma storm chasing still impresses
with some of the most spectacular special effects ever seen on screen.
Industrial Light and Magic (ILM) has blended the authentic with the
computer-generated to create a series a storms the likes of which
Dorothy and Toto never saw.  You'll marvel at the dark, swirling clouds
of debris and other matter-- flying cows and tractors and houses, oh my!
A tanker-truck that drops out of the sky is a sight, though my favorite
is the splintering screen of a doomed drive-in that's showing THE
SHINING.  The FX also get better as they go.  De Bont wisely rations the
thrills, saving the best for last.  (I could've done without the
continuity gaffes, though.  Just how *does* a red truck stay shiny after
riding through a storm?)
     The effects are great, but the script is a *mess*.  Blame Michael
Crichton, Anne-Marie Martin, and a host of script doctors for, oh,
predictable plotting, dumb drama, and characters as corny as Kansas in
August.  The non-star cast does what they can with the material.  Helen
Hunt and Bill Paxton, playing soon-to-be-divorced scientists, are very
sincere shouting lines like "Come on!", "There's no time!", and "Take
cover!" (Did the MST3K gang also do a rewrite?)  Other cast members
include Cary Elwes as a rival storm chaser, Philip Seymour Hoffman as a
tie-dyed metalhead who is particularly fond of the meteorological-by-
way-of-MTV term "Suck Zone", and Jamie Gertz as Paxton's character's
fiancee.  (Ms. Gertz plays a "reproductive therapist," if you can
believe it.  She's there to scream, ask questions, and provide comic
relief.  That is, until she predictably can't take it anymore.)
     There's a lot going on in this movie and, unfortunately, very
little of it makes (focused) sense.  The central character motivation is
a geeky combination of science and thrill-seeking; these guys love to
take risks because they love to study storms.  De Bont attempts to
inject other elements into the film, but they don't work as written.
For example, we could do without the tragic fate of Hunt's character's
aunt.  She exists to reinforce the Very Noble goal of better weather
predicting, by showing that tornadoes often cause huge amounts of damage
and injury and often without warning.  No duh.  The sequence is a
melodramatic cheap shot and doesn't belong here.  Not in a movie that's
just out for thrills.  In fact, the "back stories" are all pretty bad,
but like most storm chasers-- or, if you prefer, most summer-movie
audiences-- we're in for the ride.  We certainly expect more than a few
lulls before we get to see a TWISTER.
     Finally, something should be said about the shameless inclusion of
pop songs on the soundtrack.  They're played too prominently in the
background, intruding for no other seeming reason than to sell something
else for Time-Warner.  The mix of musical genres and styles is often
distracting and certainly doesn't blend with the other accompaniment, a
windy orchestral score from composer Mark Mancina.  (The score is also a
bit much, I must say.  Must movie music be so overblown?  Is James
Horner teaching classes in this stuff?)  The exception is a short
sequence that combines Rainbow, Rossini, and Rogers and Hammerstein; it
happens early the film and is one of the few places on the soundtrack
that doesn't feel prepackaged.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Andrew Hicks
        There's one predominant theme I've picked up on in the 
multiple other TWISTER reviews I've already read in magazines, 
newspapers and even this newsgroup -- that, although it has 
some of the most incredible special effects ever recorded on film, 
the melodramatic scenes that tie those sequences together are 
laughable and unoriginal. And, after seeing it for myself, I have 
to agree, which makes me unoriginal while hopefully still 
laughable.
        Bill Paxton plays a former storm chaser who now wants to 
start over with a new wife, new career, even a new car. But when he 
brings the final divorce papers over to his wife, Jo (Helen Hunt), the 
signing is interrupted by the sighting of a tornado. So Jo and her 
colleagues pack up and drive after the storm and Bill has to follow 
along because, hey, Jo still has the divorce papers. Chasing the one 
tornado, and eventually being trapped right under it, is enough to get 
Bill back into the game, leaving his fiancee, Melissa, to ride in the van 
with a slob named Dusty while he and Jo go chasing afto deploy Dorothy, an
invention of Bill's that looks like one of those Regina Steamer Carpet 
Cleaners with a bunch of metallic bingo balls inside. The bingo balls 
are actually sensors which, when scattered around the inside of a 
tornado, will send back measurements of wind velocity, speed... and 
who the hell cares? It's just a plot device to get Bill and Jo underneath 
five separate tornadoes over a period of twenty-four hours. Most of us 
go through life without ever being witness to one tornado, but I don't 
mind idiots like these lowering the odds by taking five blows in the 
same day, and I'm not talking about [insert any oversexed stud's name 
here].
        So Bill, Jo and their entourage track down tornadoes all over 
Oklahoma in an attempt to get close enough to dump Dorothy in the 
tornado's path, which obviously won't happen until the very end. The 
whole while, evil scientist Jonas (Cary Elwes) has stolen Bill's idea by 
creating the DOT3, which does much the same thing except with 
cubed sensors instead of the more conventional round ones. How do 
we know he and his boys are evil? They drive black vans... and they 
have corporate sponsorship. "Jonas loves money, not science," Bill 
sneers, as if other people don't look down on rednecks who get off 
chasing tornadoes.
        The Jonas situation is supposed to bring some level of 
man-vs.-man conflict into the movie to offset the man-vs.-nature 
conflict, but it's sure resolved fast, and in a definite man-vs.-nature 
way. Then there's the constant annoyance of Bill and Jo, who fight 
for the required amount of time until the tornadoes come along to 
relieve them of their plot obligations, and then make out at the right 
time to conveniently tie up the plot obligations. All the subplots in 
the movie are lame and ridiculous, but we don't care. It's like the 
FRIDAY THE 13TH movies ( http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/friday.htm ) 
we sit through all the mindless crap to get to the good stuff.
        Luckily, the good stuff is indeed good. The filmmakers 
knew that humans are fascinated by natural disasters, and that 
enough special effects sequences showing those natural disasters 
could carry the movie, so that was the rule they followed. All the 
effort went into the tornado scenes, which is painfully obvious but 
easily overlooked and forgotten every time we do get to the good 
stuff. TWISTER is no JURASSIC PARK but it does offer genuine 
scares aing effects sequences. Unlike JURASSIC PARK, 
though, there is nothing entertaining outside of the intense action 
scenes.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Lewis Butler
Stars: Bill Paxton, Hellen Hunt, Cary Elwes, flying cow
Summary: Popcorn movie.  Grade B plot with grade A effects. 
I am always happy when a movie like TWISTER comes out because it serves to
illustrate just how good movies like TERMINATOR and APOLLO XII (usually
dismissed as "just" action movies) really are.  TWISTER is just an action
film.  Oh yes, there is a plot, of sorts.  It is flimsy and instantly
forgettable.  In short, there is nothing in this movie besides the special
effects to make the movie interesting.
The characters are likeable enough, if superficial and empty.  I can't
fault the performances of any of the actors, they just aren't given
anything to work with. One gets the feeling that Michael Chriton scripted
this one the night before shooting was to commence.
That said, the effects are marvelously done, and there's nothing exactly
BAD about the film, just nothing good beyond the work of Industrial Light
and Magic.
Grade: -1.5 on the old -4 to +4 scale (0 being average) overall, with a +2
on the effects work.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com
http://www.nyx.net/~kreme

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(WB)
Directed by    Jan De Bont
Written by     Michael Crichton and Anne-Martin Martin
Cast           Helen Hunt, Bill Paxton, Cary Elwes, Jami Gertz
MPAA Rating    "PG-13" (for "intense depiction of very bad weather")
Running Time   117 minutes
Reviewed at    General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh, NC (13MAY96)
     I went back for a second look at TWISTER and I wish I could report
better things.  The FX are still a gas.  Flying tractors, rolling homes,
and disintegrating barns; it's all there.  Director Jan De Bont, along
with Industrial Light and Magic, has effectively realized one of
nature's most primal forces and I'm not talking about Jesse Helms.  The
effects-related thrills are so complete-- so edge-of-your-seat
jaw-dropping-- that many may find themselves physically exhausted by the
end.  In that regard, TWISTER *works*.  It excites, therefore it is.  On
a second viewing, though, the movie becomes more of a bore.  The obvious
problem-- beyond the missing momentum, overscored music, and shameless
product plugs-- is the script.  As written, TWISTER rests somewhere
between the very bad and the very corny; somewhere between, say,
SHOWGIRLS and MR. HOLLAND'S ANUS.  (I'd call Richard Dreyfuss's Oscar
nomination a special effect, wouldn't you?)
     TWISTER opens on an Oklahoma farm, in 1969, where a little girl is
about to be scarred by a storm.  She'll endure the loss of Somebody
Special and then grow up to look *just* like Helen Hunt.  Cut to present
day, to a pick-up truck traveling on an Oklahoma highway.  Former
storm-chaser Bill Harding (Bill Paxton) and his fiancee (Jami Gertz) are
on their way to meet Jo (Helen Hunt), that now- adult little girl who is
Bill's almost ex-wife.  (Jo hasn't signed the divorce papers yet,
because she's been busy working on Dorothy, get it?, an invention to
study tornadoes.) Knowing how it all plays out, I think that we can
interpret this scene as the first of many mistakes.  Bill Harding isn't
the focus of what passes for the plot.  He's a strong presence, sure,
but he shouldn't be the first person that we lay eyes upon.  TWISTER, as
we learn, is about that little girl and the storm that she remembers.
Jo is the focus of this movie and *Jo* is the one who should be seen
accommodating Harding and his fiancee and not vice versa.
     The filmmaker's choice of a non-star cast-- a la JURASSIC PARK--
works well with regard to both Hunt and Paxton.  They are good actors
who exhibit a warm chemistry with each other, even as their dialogue
grows increasingly empty-headed.  Their light banter soon devolves into
incidental exclamations along the lines of "watch out!", "take cover!",
and "who wrote this crap?" (They're also very good at out-shouting each
other.) No, we never get a sense of who their *characters* are, but they
get an ample amount of screen time together and that's enough for most
summer movies.  Running from vehicle to vehicle and from storm to storm,
Hunt and Paxton are also very physical in their roles.  They finish the
film fleeing the best cornfield dusting since NORTH BY NORTHWEST.
     There's really enough story here, between these two characters,
that we don't need the other elements.  We don't need a team of rival
storm chasers, led by Cary Elwes.  (Cary Elwes?  What's he doing here?
If the script called for a "physically unthreatening opponent," then why
didn't somebody hire Paul Reiser?  He was very good in ALIENS, all those
years ago.) We don't need to put a supporting character in peril, to
either reinforce Jo's obsession or to put a "human face" on the
devastation.  (The scene involves a collapsed house and it just stops
the movie in its tracks.  What a waste of screen time.) And, we
*certainly* don't need Jami Gertz, who's character-- a "reproductive
therapist," Lord help us-- disrupts the tone about every eight minutes
or so.  She exists for comic relief (unnecessary) and to ask
unscientific questions, so the movie can explain to us, in "plain
English," what exactly "weather" is.  (Personally, I wish she had asked
about the radios and how these guys can simultaneously transmit on so
many frequencies at once.)
     As dazzling as the effects are, De Bont doesn't back them up with
the expert editing that he showed us in SPEED.  The storm sequences
often last too long and give us too much time to adjust to what we're
seeing.  (Familiarity breeds lack of fear.  A scene inside a car-garage
pit plays like a theme-park ride at Universal Studios.  Ditch it, but
not before explaining why the fools keep looking in the direction of the
flying debris.) Another glaring problem is that the film doesn't
communicate a sense of either distance or time.  We never know how far
the characters have been traveling or how long they've been chasing a
given storm.  When TWISTER *does* come together, the action is usually
on a smaller-scale.  Paxton and Hunt swerving to avoid falling farm
machinery; a tanker-truck that plops onto the highway in a burst of
flames; and, the piece de resistance, a drive-in theater that's showing
THE SHINING, with a screen that splinters while Jack is having his big
ax attack.  (Oddly, though, we're never shown any larger-scale
devastation.  No aerial shots of leveled towns, etc. etc.)
     If the scenes were confined to Hunt, Paxton, and the tornadoes, 
then TWISTER would work just fine.  Add their motley crew of 
assistants (Philip Seymour Hoffman, et al) for both comic relief 
and local color, and, viola, you've got a movie.  The director 
could do worse than to recut this mess.  Ditch the music, ditch the 
pop songs.  Cut as many scenes as possible with Elwes and Gertz.  
Cut at least half of the incidental dialogue.  Ditch the scene with 
the aunt and the collapsed house.  Tighten tighten tighten and we 
might have something here.  (And, since this is a Steven Spielberg 
production, maybe the idea of director's cut isn't *that* far-
fetched.  Are you listening Time-Warner marketing?)  For now, in 
its present form, TWISTER is just a lot of wind.  The FX are great, 
but, friends, outside of the funnel clouds, everything else sucks.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
John Robertson
Starring: Helen Hunt, Bill Pullman, Cary Elwes, Jamie Gertz
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for this film is a fan of action, a 
fan of Helen Hunt or Bill Paxton, and above all, a fan of jaw dropping special 
effects.  The Perfect Person for this film would probably give it a 8 out of 
10.
Twister tries to be Speed meets Jurassic Park.  I could just be saying that 
because it's directed by Jan de Bont (Speed) and written by Michael Crichton 
(Jurassic Park), but it's not just that.  Twister is a film that uses arguably 
the most amazing special effects of any film to try and put the viewer on a 
roller coaster that won't let them off - sound like a melding of the two 
films?  Well, Twister works well on one of the two levels it attempts, and 
fails on the other.  
There is no denying the power of the visual and audio effects in Twister. 
There were times that even though I'd seen the previews, and prepared myself 
for what the movie would throw at me, I just couldn't believe what I was 
seeing and hearing.  The film's use of computer generated effects, 
particularly the way they can take a broad landscape shot and insert a tornado 
and the carnage it creates was very impressive.  
The other thing that the film tried to accomplish, namely putting the viewer 
on a non-stop roller coaster, just wasn't accomplished.  When there were 
tornados on the screen, the action was the best around.  When the tornados 
were sleeping, so was the audience.  Bill Paxton and Helen Hunt turn in fine 
performances (better than I expected, to be honest), but the plot strung 
around the tornados, particularly the human plot, the characterizations, was 
very weak.
Helen Hunt is a tornado chaser, a scientist dedicated to understanding 
twisters, so families won't be destroyed by the sudden funnel of death that 
drops without warning and without reason.  Bill Paxton is her estranged 
husband, who used to work at her side, but left for some reason to become a 
weather man.  His return to obtain the divorce papers sets the plot in motion, 
as Helen Hunt's character is about to attempt to launch an experimental device 
into the next twister that will let scientists learn more about tornados than 
they ever have before.  
As tornado after tornado appears around the characters, scene after scene of 
energizing action occurs.  But when the tornados leave, we're left with Paxton 
and Hunt attempting to fill in the scientists personal motives, and the 
horrible acting of Elwes (the evil CORPORATE scientist) and Gertz (Paxton's 
new fiancee).
One thing that was amusing but puzzling was the array of NBC actors who had 
small roles.  Some, but not all, were the big guy from E.R, Cameron from 
Ferris Beuhler's Day Off (now on Mad About You), and Sam from The Single Guy. 
 Although none of these people put in a bad performance, you had to wonder why 
they were there at all, their roles were so small.  
One last piece of advice, if you're going to see this movie (and I do 
recommend it if you fit the Perfect Person description at all), is to see it 
in the theater, where the sounds and sights will hit you with the force they 
were intended to hit with.  
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson. Retransmit freely if unedited. My opinions 
are solely my own, and in no way reflect those of my employer. 
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to give the 
reader a new way of understanding my rating. Rather than give a film a score, 
either overall, or on several attributes, the Perfect Person Rating tries to 
identify the type of person would enjoy this movie the most. Since a reviewer 
is by nature someone with a great deal of experience in what they are 
reviewing, their experience may not be the same as someone who is less 
informed, less jaded, or more attuned to the subject. Hopefully the Perfect 
Person Rating will go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a simple 
rating scale. Comments are appreciated. 

Author
Michael Redman
As in so many other films, dynamic special effects combine with cardboard
people to create a movie that is as much fun to watch as a Twinkie is to eat
and just as fulfilling.
The all-winners squad of writer Michael Crichton ("Jurassic Park"), director
Jan De Bont ("Speed") and godfather Steven Spielberg (most of the big buck
films from the past two decades) have come up with a force of nature that is
destined to suck money from the pockets of effects addicts. Count me on board.
Bill Paxton and soon-to-be new wife Jami Gertz drop by the tornado chasers to
get Helen Hunt, soon-to-be ex-wife and former partner, to sign final divorce
papers. In what would be an amazing coincidence if this were not a movie, the
mother of all tornadoes is brewing on the horizon. Paxton can't resist one
last hunt.
The bad guys here (besides that evil Mother Nature of course) are a team of
corporate tornado researchers out to steal Paxton's thunder while traveling
around in brand spankin' new black vans. Guess those black helicopters were
all being used by the UN. You don't need to pay much attention to these men.
They don't exist for any reason in the film.
The supposed human drama is supplied by the triangle between man, wife and girlfriend.
The tornadoes from Industrial Light and Magic are overwhelming. Most of the
storms and debris look real, with the exception of a goofy cow that goes
flying by one of the trucks a couple of times. Scary and remarkably forceful
stuff. That yellow and green sky that we've all seen around here will never
look the same to you.
As with "Jurassic Park", the last blockbuster from Spielberg and Crichton, the
monsters are amazing, but the people barely exist. The redeeming factor is
that the action scenes are grand and the talking scenes mercifully short.
Hunt does have some type of odd screen appeal, but appears to have been chosen
for the part because she wears white t-shirts well. Paxton is well-casted as
the obsessive everyman. There is a bit of chemistry between them, but the
script doesn't take it anywhere. Gertz disappears into the background.
The only acting stand-outs are Lois Smith as eccentric Aunt Meg and Philip
Hoffman as one of the wacky storm-chasing team. There are a couple of good
moments with each of them, but only a couple and only moments.
If you're going to see this, make sure you _don't_ wait for the video. On a
small screen there will be nothing there.
[This appeared in the 5/16/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
T. Davis
I've seen a lot of bad movies before but never one this boring.  Bill Paxton is
pretty good as a tornado expert and some of the jokes are pretty funny but yet
this movie still sucks.  At the beginning of the movie, we are told that the
characters have four chances to get dorothy into the tornado.  How many times
does it take them?  Four chances.  Also at the beginning, the good guys are
supplied with a competitor.  What happens to them?  They get sucked up by a
Tornado instantly.  What was the point of the bad guys?  To show us the dangers
of a tornado?  Most of us have already seen tornado footage and know the
danger.  Or perhaps it was simply a showcase for the special effects?  We are
shown the tornado plenty of times.  Each time is dramactically less and less
interesting.  
I think that's the problem with disaster movies.  The directors never seem to
provide the volcano, tornado, asteroid, or whatever with any character.  If the
theme of disaster movies is man vs. nature why not give us more from the
nature's side.  The writer seems to be content with the characters studying it
electronically which is quite boring for the audience.  And what of the Helen
Hunt/Bill Paxton love subplot?  Dull and uninteresting.  This is a pretty
formulaic movie so we know they'll end up together.  Another problem with
disaster movies is that there's no suprise ending.  At least with a boring
drama movie there's hope for a suprise ending to make amends.
The movie also provides us with another supblot involving Helen Hunt facing the
Tornado.  Which she does about four times.  Even though the last one is pretty
strong.  Who cares?  They all look the same to me.
During this movie, I learned nothing about what a twister was.  Only about how
much a movie about a twister could suck.  

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Helen Hunt, Bill Paxton, Cary Elwes, Jami Gertz.
Screenplay:  Michael Crichton, Anne-Marie Martin.
Director:  Jan DeBont.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The makers of big-budget summer movies and those who attend those
movies appear to have come to an understanding, an understanding best
exemplified by an observation I made while watching TWISTER.  Several
times during the film, there would come a point where it would become
clear that the latest sequence showcasing Industrial Light & Magic's
computer-generated tornados was at an end (it usually coincided with the
dialogue once again becoming audible), at which point several members of
the audience would stand up and quickly make their way towards the
restroom.  They were probably rather secure in the knowledge that they
would not miss any crucial plot twists or juicy bits of character
development during these brief expository interludes, and even if they
did, they were not missing what they had come to the film to see.  Not a
penny of the money they had plunked down would be wasted if they missed a
couple of the characters engaged in conversation.
     It is this complicity which produces monotonous displays of
technological prowess like TWISTER, a film with a script that makes
JURASSIC PARK's look positively labyrinthine by comparison.  The shell of
a story involves a pair of daredevil meteorologists named Jo (Helen Hunt)
and Bill (Bill Paxton) who are about to finalize their divorce after years
of chasing storms together.  Bill is engaged to another woman (Jami
Gertz), and comes to collect the divorce papers just as Jo and her team
are about to set off in pursuit of a rare series of tornados.  Naturally,
Bill comes along as they attempt to deploy a device which will provide
valuable data for predicting tornados, just as a corporate-financed (and
hence evil) competitor named Jonas (Cary Elwes) is attempting to do the
same thing.  Also naturally, the device can only work if it is picked up
by a tornado crossing its path, which results in the scientists racing to
catch up with twisters so they can leave one of devices.
     I suppose you have to give the creators of TWISTER credit for coming
up with a premise which involves people trying their damnedest to get close
to tornados rather than trying their damnedest to get very far away; it
could have been even more tedious.  The problem is that it doesn't take
long before TWISTER starts to look like a loop film.  There are only so
many ways you can film a bunch of vehicles driving through fields, over
dirt roads, along highways before it becomes a chore to watch, and while
director Jan DeBont uses every swooping trick at his disposal, there is an
awful lot of nothing going on during TWISTER an awful lot of the time.
There may be more driving in TWISTER than there was in DeBont's debut
feature SPEED.
     Of course, SPEED had Sandra Bullock playing an actual character to
engage the audience; TWISTER has Helen Hunt playing producer and
co-scripter Michael Crichton's generically flinty female scientist
character.  Hunt is probably a better actor than Bullock, and certainly
provides the requisite cuteness factor, but Bullock's heroine was able to
comment on SPEED's improbability throughout the film with her priceless
reactions.  The trite love/hate relationship with which Hunt is saddled is
something no one could tunnel out from under, and neither she nor Paxton
has the big screen charisma to make the scenes without inclement weather
anything but a monumental bore.  Every single character manages the
astonishing non-Euclidean feat of being less than one-dimensional, with
characterization coming in such subtle forms as the fleet of identical
black mini-vans used by Elwes' corporate scientists (as though you
actually needed to see the three 6's behind his ear) or the Van Halen
tunes blasted by one of Hunt's more annoyingly quirky cohorts (Philip
Seymour Hoffman).
     Films like TWISTER are often defended with comparisons to amusement
park rides -- that they make up in thrills what they lack in drama.  I
don't think TWISTER even qualifies as a roller-coaster.  Yes, the visual
effects are impressive, but it is impossible to watch them with anything
but detachment, because as much as DeBont tries, he can't imbue a natural
phenomenon with a personality (he actually tries harder than he does with
his actors).  TWISTER is a surprisingly gloomy and inert experience, with
exactly two flashes of inspiration through its two hour running time.
When they come, they only serve to remind you what the rest of the film is
lacking:  any sense of the fun that summer movies are supposed to provide.  
Whatever one might think of the increasing mindlessness of effects-driven
blockbusters, you'd think they could at least manage to entertain, or to
give you a reason to come back when you get up to go to the restroom.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     From the director (Jan De Bont) of last year's best action movie,
SPEED, we have TWISTER about teams of risk taking meteorologists
chasing tornadoes.  Surprisingly, TWISTER is one boring movie peppered
with some nifty effects.  It was so bad that had it not been for
wanting to see all the special effects, I would have been ready to walk
out.  Since the characters are not believable, you do not care if they
come into harm's way, and hence the special effects, although
technically impressive, are never frightening.  As Melissa (Jami Gertz)
says in the show about another subject, "Funny thing is.  I'm not that
upset."  I felt that way about the tornadoes in the film.
     TWISTER is actually three movies for the cost of one.  First,
there is the love triangle between Bill Harding (Bill Paxton), his
about to be divorced wife Jo (Helen Hunt), and his new fiance Melissa.
Second, we have the race against the evil meteorologist team lead by
Jonas (Cary Elwes).  Finally, there are the special tornado effects
demonstrations by Industrial Light and Magic.
     The film starts with a big tornado in June 1969.  This is time we
left our home in the tornado country shown in the film to go to grad
school at Berkeley in earthquake country.  The film makes you think
that a lot of people living in the tornado belt have tornado shelters.
This is just not true.  I saw one in my entire life, and that was at
someone's house who was afraid the Commies were going to drop the big
one on him.  Also not considered in the film are the issue of warnings.
We got them all of the time.  So what.  What were we going to do?
Also, if you are warned all of the time, you soon learn to either
ignore it or just worry a lot.  All of this notwithstanding, I was able
to suspend disbelief, but the film is so bad it didn't help.
     Soon the movie switches to the present.  A team of ragtag
meteorologists lead by Jo is trying to place a measuring device called,
what else, a Dorothy, in the middle of a tornado.  They drive a bunch
of beat-up vehicles that look like they will fall apart at any moment.
Their pompous rival, Jonas, has stolen all of their ideas, and with
corporate sponsorship, the latest in technology, and a big fleet of
sinister jet black vehicles, is ready to smash Jo's group to get his
measuring device up first.  The subplot has Jo's soon to be ex-husband
and ex-partner Bill coming along one more time for the ride.  Bill
brings along his new fiance Melissa.
     Jo tells us that the "biggest series of storms in twelve years is
coming".  The original script by Michael Crichton is ridiculous.  He
should stick to books.  Jonas tells Bill, "Today we're going to make
history, so stick around.  The days of dirt sniffing are over."  Beside
the trite lines, the movie telegraphs every punch for some reason.
Aren't they supposed to be trying to scare us?  Consider just one
example.  For some reason the tornado chasers decide to stop at a
drive-in movie to get a cup of coffee while the drive-in is playing the
horror classic THE SHINING.  What do you think will happen?  The setup
is so contrived.
     Look, the special effects are just that, special in this movie.
They are technically brilliant, but without a good script and
characters that come alive, after a while I found the effects
repetitious and boring.  Technically brilliant certainly, but stuck in
a lifeless movie.
     Other than the technically impressive special effects, I liked
seeing Hunt and Paxton.  Hunt is so smart, tough, and sensual all at
once.  Paxton is a great minor actor I have enjoyed for a long time.
As much as I was glad to see them again, I never found their characters
in the movie believable.  The show is funny in parts as when a large
cow keeps flying by them as in THE WIZARD OF OZ.  Finally, kudos for
the nice computer graphics.  Realistic without being overdone.
     TWISTER runs 1:45.  It is rated PG-13.  There is no sex, no
nudity, almost no bad language and no violence other than the natural
violence caused by tornadoes.  The shots of the tornadoes trivializes
the human suffering and dwells mostly with flying objects and property
damage.  The film would be fine for any kid over say 8.  There is no
show; there are only special effects, and these are not enough for me
to recommend this disappointing film.  To be fair, I should point out
that my wife liked the film.  The large audience where I saw it was
pretty subdued, so I do not know how much most people will like it.  I
give the film * 1/2, but only for the special effects.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jack Choo
   Directed by : Jan De Bont
   Written by : Michael Crichton & Anne-Marie Martin
   Cast : Bill Paxton (Bill) Helen Hunt (Jo) Cary Elwes (Jonas) Jamie
   Gertz (Melissa) Lois Smith (Aunt Meg)
   Produced by : Universal Pictures / Amblin Entertainment
   Rating : **** out of *****
   Theatres : Everywhere in Singapore!
THE MAKERS OF JURASSIC PARK & THE DIRECTOR OF SPEED CONJURE UP A STORM!
(Reviewed at Eng Wah's new Jubilee Cineplex at Ang Mo Kio)
"Unlike earthquakes, their fury is precise. Unlike hurricanes, their
reach is unlimited. Unlike fires, there is no way to combat them.
Unlike floods, their terror is sudden." - excerpt from TWISTER
production notes
I'm sure many of us living in this part of the world have never seen
tornadoes (or twisters) before. I for one, have only seen the
devastating effects and footage of tornadoes from news reports on TV
and personally, I feel tornado-caused destruction comes no where near
the destruction caused by hurricanes and
earthquakes........that is until I saw TWISTER. The destruction caused
by twisters may be precise (not widespread but it moves very fast and
its path of destruction is unpredictable. It will suck in cars,
houses, livestock, etc..... basically anything in its path that is not
firmly rooted to the ground and in TWISTER, you'll get to see all this
- close up!
TWISTER tells a tale about a group of Storm Chasers. These people are
basically out-of-their-mind and for the sake of obtaining data on
twister-occurrences, they risk their lives by literally chasing
tornadoes, trying to get as close as they can.....that is if the
tornado does not suddenly decide to change its path towards them! Jo
(Helen Hunt) is the leader of this pack of kamikazes. While they are
gearing up for the mother-of-all-storms as predicted by satellite
recon, Bill (Bill Paxton), a former co- leader of the team returns to
settle some divorce papers with Jo. Apparently, Bill has left his
rogue-ish days for greener and more practical pastures - as a
television weatherman. He catches up with his old-self and follows the
pack like the good ole days, bringing his wife-to-be Melissa (Jamie
Gertz) along, a city-bred woman toting around with a handphone. Jo has
finally implemented Bills initial idea of a device called Dorothy
which measurement's of a twister may lead to a better understanding on
how tornadoes are formed so that a more reliable early-warning system
can be implemented. The problem is, the device has to be placed very
near the twister, and in its path (which is practically unpredictable)
of destruction in order for it to function. To add to their current
challenge, there is another group of Storm Chasers that is
corporation-funded led by Jonas (Cary Elwes) and they too have a
similar device. Thus begins the race; Jo's cheap government equipment
with beaten-up vehicles against Jonas's high-tech computers and
satellite link-ups with their sleek, black all-terrain vans.
Plot wise, there are not really anything to shout about. TWISTER is as
predictable as any summer box-office hit can get. There is the danger
of the twister, the competition with Jonas^Os more well-off team and
of course, the settling of differences between Jo and Bill (this part
gives the film its human substance). Helen Hunt, Bill Paxton and the
rest of the actors/actresses give only average performances and all of
them take back seat to the main thespian in this movie - the twister
itself! Thanks to the impressive digital effects by ILM (Lucasfilm's
Industrial Light and Magic), we get to see the terror and destruction
caused by tornadoes up close; from stripping barns and houses to
lifting up livestock!
Jan de Bont once again proves his visual abiility (thanks to
his years of experience as a director of photography for action films)
for action sequences. Like his previous film SPEED, the tornado
sequences (which are essentially THE action sequences) are well
visualised and edited. Audiences will be holding tight to their chairs
everytime a tornado comes on screen! The surround sound effects sure
does help a lot in stressing the terror of a twister! (The cinema must
at the very least support digital sound to fully appreciate this)
TWISTER is definitely an effect-dependent movie.
Now that ID4 fever has begun to reside, and people are getting bored
of watching Will Smith whoop ET's ass for the umpteenth
time......TWISTER is your sure bet of 7 bucks well spent! Watch it in
a good theatre...please.
THE FLYING INKPOT's rating system:
* Wait for the video.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.
___________________________________
This review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT
.">http://bizdir.com.sg/inkpot/>. We're inkier! We're pottier! We're
wordy! All flying bricks welcome.  Leave your penguin at the door.

Author
Jason Wallis
What in the hell is wrong with conteporary Hollywood? Don't they realize
that almost every single one of their big-budget blockbusters suck?
Obviously not, because they just keep on turning out the same, tired ol'
run of the mill formula flicks. I mean, just look at the last couple years.
This year, we had the latest "Batman" flick. What started out as a
brilliantly realized, stark, gothic series of great films directed by the
master of the macabre himself, Tim Burton, has turned into a franchise.
Then they ditched Burton and Keaton and came out with the sorriest excuse
for an action film I have ever had the misfortune of seeing. Now, they have
a better Batman (George Clooney, by the way), but some of the stupidest
villians in recent memory (though Poisen Ivy was great). Look at the kinds
of lines we got: "Ice to see you. Chill out." C'mon! And how can we forget
"Speed 2: Cruise Control"? They took what is very possibly the greatest
action film in the past ten years and spent, like, 170 million dollars (or
something like that) to make a crap sequel that did about 70 million at the
box office! And then you have the queen of them all: "Twister". 
Okay, don't worry. I'm done ranting and raving about how stupid Hollywood
is and I'm actually going to start talking about the "film". 
"Twister", like I said, is the queen of all crappy summer movies. It has
absolutly no character development, no plot twists (hell, it barely even
has a plot) and basically no script. This is an empty film. And what's sad
is that it doesn't even do what it was meant to do. Some of my favorite
movies are empty films. Just look at the films of Jackie Chan or Bruce Lee.
They have horrible acting and essentially no direction, but they thrilled
the hell out of me. Those are four star flicks. This is a travesty to the
art of film-making. 
Face it: this is not even a fun movie! Even "Independence Day", as bad as
it was, had at least some redeeming qualities. This has nothing. And what's
even more depressing is that they actually could have taken this somewhere
if they had just written a decent script. They FX are fantastic and you
have some of the best actors and actresses working in Hollywood: you've got
Bill Paxton ("One False Move", "Aliens") as the storm chaser turned weather
man; Jamie Gertz (who was great in "Sibling Rivalry") as his new fiance;
and finally Alan Ruck (very under-rated; just look at "Ferris Bueller's Day
Off") as one of the other chasers. With a cast like that, you should at
least have a two-and-a-half to three star movie on your hands. 
Well, Jan De Bont (fresh off of "Speed" - the film, not the drug) screws it
up royaly. I'm not even going to go into plot details 'cause you all know
what it's about and even how it's gonna end. It's that predictible. 
If you are looking for a good action/adventure film to rent tonight, please
look elsewhere. In fact, if you want a good action film, you're going to
have to go off the new release shelf and look into the older film of
yesteryear. That is where you will find the truly great action films:
"Aliens", "Lethal Weapon", "The Killer", "Enter the Dragon", "Jaws" or even
(dare I say it?) "Mortal Kombat". Any of these movies are better than this,
or anything else Hollywood has put out recently. Skip it. 
Check out Jason Wallis' Filmaholics Anonymous web page at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475
