Title
Review for Crucible, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Deborah Kelley-Milburn
I should begin by stating my prejudices.  "The Crucible" is one of my
favorite plays.  In my opinion  Nicholas Hytner is a gifted director and
Daniel Day-Lewis is the best actor alive.  When I discovered that they
were filming "The Crucible" practically in my back yard, I was thrilled,
and I have followed its creation with great interest.  Imagine my delight=
=20
when I was lucky enough to get a ticket for a preview screening last
Thursday.  However, my excitement quickly turned to trepidation.  I'd
heard a lot of Oscar buzz and the production has stellar credentials.
Were my expectations too high?  Would they blow it?  How could any film
live up to such anticipation?  Well, "The Crucible" lives up to the
highest of expectations and then some.  It is brilliant!
As you  probably know from high-school English class,  Arthur Miller wrote
the play in the 1950s when it was interpreted as a thinly veiled allegory
for McCarthyism. But the year is 1692.  A group of teenage girls are
caught dancing in the woods and to escape punishment they begin to cry
witch. One of the girls, Abigail Williams (Winona Ryder), has another
motive. She had a brief affair with the upstanding farmer John Proctor
(Daniel Day-Lewis) and she wants to dispose of his wife Elizabeth (Joan
Allen). Magistrates are brought in, lead by Judge Danforth (Paul Scofield)
to ferret out the Devil and hangings begin.  If accused, the only way to
save oneself is by confession.   Then the accusations reach the Proctors'
door...
The screenplay, written by Arthur Miller is very close to the original.
It retains the language and only adds a few scenes not in the play.  Thus
the essence of the play is intact.  Great pains were taken to ensure the
historical accuracy of everything in the film, right down to the actors'
underwear, but this is no historical set piece - you should leave your
high-school English expectations at the door.   Hytner has added a
pulsating, dynamic feeling to the film that carries the audience along
with the principals as they struggle with the exploding hysteria.   Hytner
and Miller aim to transcend  1692, and the 1950s for that matter, and they
succeed.
This film is so good in just about every way that it is hard to single out
specific elements or performances.  All the actors do a superb job, from
Daniel Day-Lewis all the way down.  I was worried that Winona Ryder might
not have the range to handle the role of Abby, but she is excellent.  She
endows Abby with an appropriate complexity.  She is strong, passionate,
intelligent and  - damaged.  In another place and time she might have been
a leader; in this piece she is quite believable as the ring leader of the
hysterical girls.  Then, all you have to do is take one look at Paul
Scofield and you know that he was born to play Judge Danforth.  He  looks
the perfect Puritan and he sounds it, delivering lines such as "And now we
will touch the bottom of this swamp!" just right.
But the film belongs to Daniel Day-Lewis and Joan Allen.    Day-Lewis is
restrained for the first half of the film, conveying in subtle ways John
Proctor's stature in the community.  He projects strength and sexual
magnetism along with the guilt for his sin.  Joan Allen has few lines but
makes the most of them as the wise but worried wife who loves her husband.
At the outset, their marriage is in trouble, and by the end they have
reconciled.  Their scenes together are some of the film's finest,
particularly one stunning scene shot on the beach where they ask each
other for forgiveness.  I had to restrain myself from sobbing; it is
positively heartbreaking, one of the most moving love scenes I have ever
seen.  Together, they create an unforgettable portrait of a marriage.
Miller and Hytner have shrewdly made the Proctors' relationship the
centerpiece of the film.   In doing so, they skillfully blend the personal
and the political.  Like another Day-Lewis film  "In the Name of the
Father" where the father-son relationship grounds the movie, we care very
much what happens to the Proctors.  Thus Hytner and Miller escape the fate
of some "political" dramas such as the recent "Michael Collins" that are
all politics and history without enough emotion.
In fact, all of the characters are multidimensional;  even the accusers
are not painted with a singularly dark brush.  We learn, for example, that
Abigail Williams witnessed the brutal slaying of her parents.  One of the
women who first cries witch, Ann Putnam, is made sympathetic by the
revelation that of her eight children all but one has died.  When her last
child is "afflicted" she is terrified and desperate for an explanation.
Why have all her children been taken from her???  Her fear and rage fuel
her accusations.
I've seen numerous articles which ask how "The Crucible" is relevant
today, focusing on modern day "witch hunts" such as the lurid child sexual
abuse cases. While there is one scene in the film where the girls get down
on their hands and knees and  call for Jesus,  evoking contemporary
evangelical Christianity,  I think to focus on specific parallels misses
the point.  I don't believe Arthur Miller was writing specifically about
anti-communism any more than he was writing specifically about witchcraft.
Rather, "The Crucible" is a chiaroscuro of human nature.  It's about fear,
pain and the need for scapegoats.  It's about corruption and the abuse of
power.  And ultimately it's about morality, justice, righteousness and the
power of truth.
Miller and Hytner have created a timeless modern masterpiece in  "The
Crucible."  It is not to be missed.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Arthur Miller's famous 1952 play "The Crucible" has been into a
movie by director Nicholas Hytner (THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE).
Although you may no longer remember it, you probably read the play in
high school or college.  Miller's play was intended to be a
denouncement of McCarthyism with the locale changed to Salem so that he
could get it produced.  The screen version is more obsessed with sexual
longing than politics.
     I have heard it said that "The Crucible" is Miller's most popular
play, but far from his best.  After seeing the film version with the
screenplay by Miller, I agree with this assessment.  The first part is
a confusing muddle.  The second part manages to provide the clarity the
first part lacks, and by the end, the story's powerful message comes
through.  Still, I remember thinking to myself halfway through that
this show was such a hopeless mess that I would be unable to recommend
it no matter how (sometimes overly) earnest were the performances.
     The film opens in the woods where a group of teenage girls are
innocently and foolishly using witchcraft to cast spells on their
would-be boyfriends.  Led by Abigail Williams (Winona Ryder), their
romp in the forest soon gets out of hand with animal sacrifices and
naked dancing.  They are observed by the Reverend Parris (Bruce
Davison), who is suitably scandalized by their behavior.
     After this, some of the younger girls in Salem fall into a trance.
At first the older girls are denounced as being witches.  Using the
adage that a good offense is the best defense, the older girls begin to
accuse others in Salem.  First, they say it was the slave Tituba
(Charlayne Woodard) who made them do it, and when that works, they
decide to incriminate everyone they do not like.  Since Abigail had had
an affair with John Proctor (Daniel Day-Lewis) and still has the hots
for him, she names his wife Elizabeth (Joan Allen) as a follower of the
devil.
     Daniel Day-Lewis is a heartthrob to many, and he will not
disappoint them in THE CRUCIBLE.  His costumes are done in a striking
black with a large brimmed hat that sets off his handsome physique.
His acting is always full of energy and conviction, and this film is no
exception.  Notice how effective the make-up by Naomi Donne is on him.
He is a farmer who spends his days in the sun, and his complexion is
suitably ruddy and sunburnt.
     Winona Ryder is great as the conniving little tart.  Claiming, "I
am but God's finger," she has effective control of the whole town.  She
will stop at nothing to get her man.  Her performance bears many
similarities to Glenn Close's in FATAL ATTRACTION.
     Joan Allen gives a stern and strong performance as a wife with a
heavy sense of what is right.  John expresses it as, "Oh Elizabeth,
your justice would freeze beer."  Elizabeth has a low opinion of
herself, explaining to her husband that, "I counted myself so plain, so
poorly made that no honest love could come to me."  Her make-up and her
clothes are so stark that she is homeliness personified.
     The village calls in a witchcraft expert, Reverend Hale (Rob
Campbell).  His work is actually quite easy as he explains, "The marks
of the devil are as definite as stone."
     When the witchcraft infestation seems to be getting more
widespread in the village, the highest judges in the colony come to
Salem.  The lead judge, Judge John Danforth, masterfully played by Paul
Scofield, tells the elders, "I assure you gentlemen that the government
has decided that the devil will not rule over any part of
Massachusetts."  The make-up for him has silver dollar sized bags under
his eyes to make him extra sinister.
     Although the acting in the film is excellent, the direction is
aimless.  The cinematography by Andrew Dunn is dark and ugly.  Combine
these with the choppy editing by Tariq Anwar, and the effect is
obscurity when enlightenment is needed.  A little humor would have
helped as well.  As presented, the material is too unrelentingly and
intensely serious.
     The excellent composer George Fenton (CRY FREEDOM and GANDHI)
provides us with majestic music.  The film builds to a powerful
conclusion, and his music adds greatly to its energy.
     THE CRUCIBLE is a film that grew on me but still left me
unsatisfied.  The acting is wonderful and certainly worth seeing, but
the screenplay is more obtuse than it should be.
     THE CRUCIBLE runs 2:05.  It is rated PG-13.  There is brief
nudity, sexual fondling, hangings, and mature themes.  There is no bad
language.  The film would be appropriate for kids say eleven and up.  I
recommend the show to you and suggest you not give up on it if you find
the first part as tedious as I did.  The second part is worth the wait.
I give the movie ** 1/2 for its ultimate power.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 11/27/96 (limited)
Running Length: 2:04
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes, brief nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Daniel Day-Lewis, Winona Ryder, Joan Allen, Paul Scofield, 
      Rob Campbell, Karron Graves, Bruce Davison, Mary Pat Gleason, 
      Peter Vaughan
Director: Nicholas Hytner
Producers: Bob Miller and David V. Picker
Screenplay: Arthur Miller based on his play
Cinematography: Andrew Dunn
Music: George Fenton
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     Arthur Miller's 1953 play, "The Crucible", was written during 
Senator Joseph McCarthy's House Un-American Activities Committee 
hearings (for which Miller was called to testify in 1956).  And, 
although the play is an historical allegory for the McCarthy period, its 
true power lies in its ability to be re-interpreted to fit any time 
period.  Indeed, its fertile themes -- the lure of power, the 
gullibility of those who believe they have a moral imperative, the need 
to accept responsibility for the consequences of all actions, and the 
nature of truth -- are universal in scope.  Events such as those 
depicted in "The Crucible" have recurred with alarming predictability 
throughout human history.
     Scholars can argue about which of Miller's two best plays ("The 
Crucible" and "Death of a Salesman") is the stronger work, but there's 
little doubt that "The Crucible" is the most accessible.  Oddly, this is 
the first English-language motion picture version.  With Miller handling 
the screenwriting, it comes as little surprise that THE CRUCIBLE is 
faithful to its source material.  Director Nicholas Hytner (THE MADNESS 
OF KING GEORGE) opens up the play, using location shooting and an 
impressively-detailed period setting to add a dimension not available on 
the stage.  Those unaware of the film's background may be surprised to 
learn that such a dynamic production began life in the theater.
     Miller has never claimed that his story is historically accurate, 
although many of the broader strokes correspond to events that actually 
occurred in Salem, Massachusetts during 1692.  In that year, a wave of 
superstitious terror gripped the Puritan town.  19 villagers were hung 
as witches.  Four died in prison.  One was pressed to death when he 
refused to answer questions.  It was an era, like that in America during 
the 1950s, when a mere accusation could doom a man or woman, and when 
justice often became secondary to saving face.
     The film opens with a seemingly-harmless event -- Abigail Williams 
(Winona Ryder), Mary Warren (Karron Graves), Mercy Lewis (Kali Rocha), 
and several other Salem village girls attend a secret voodoo ritual in 
the woods.  Tituba (Charlayne Woodard), a native of Barbados, presides 
over the ceremony, which involves drinking chicken blood, dancing naked, 
and casting charms to ensnare boys.  However, when the local preacher, 
Reverend Parris (Bruce Davison), stumbles upon the proceedings, and two 
of the girls subsequently fall into coma-like states, witchcraft is 
suspected, and an expert in the field, Reverend Hale (Rob Campbell), is 
brought in to investigate.
     To save themselves from the noose, which is the penalty for a witch 
who does not admit to consorting with the Devil, Abigail and her cohorts 
plead for their lives.  However, they not only confess to performing 
witchcraft, but name other townspeople as servants of Satan.  Soon, with 
the arrival of Judge John Danforth (Paul Scofield), the Deputy Governor 
of Massachusetts, the girls, now turned back to "the ways of God", are 
regarded as unimpeachable witnesses.  Those whom they condemn are 
arrested, and the innocent who refuse to confess are hanged.  Abigail's 
real reason for starting the charade is to eliminate Elizabeth Proctor 
(Joan Allen), the wife of John Proctor (Daniel Day Lewis), the man she 
loves.  But, although Abigail and John once had an affair, he will not 
abandon his wife for his former mistress, and his staunch defense of 
Elizabeth places him in jeopardy, especially when he accuses Danforth's 
court of "pulling down heaven and raising up a whore!"
     One of the most contemporarily relevant aspects of THE CRUCIBLE, 
the ease with which justice can be manipulated and perverted, is what 
Hytner and Miller have chosen to highlight in this adaptation.  A 
parallel-yet-integral theme relates to the thrill of power  inherent in 
being the manipulator.  Abigail enjoys playing God until the 
circumstances she sets in motion gain enough momentum to escape her 
control.  Late in the film, her eyes express the horror that she feels 
as the crushing ramifications of her masquerade emerge.  
     As thematically rich as THE CRUCIBLE is, it would be a dry and 
uninteresting piece if the characters and their situations were less 
compelling.  Indeed, the human interest and drama of the story are what 
distinguish it.  In THE CRUCIBLE, there are heroes and villains, but 
nothing is black and white.  Shades of gray permeate every action.  
Abigail is the spark that ignites the inferno of mistrust; however, she 
is guided not by malice, but by a misplaced, obsessive love.  John 
Proctor, the most upright man in the film, is an adulterer whose own 
actions indirectly lead to the tragedy.  He is noble only to a point, 
and his character faults make him easy to identify with as a human 
being.
     Much has been made of Winona Ryder's performance, but, while she 
does an excellent job fleshing out Abigail as more than a cardboard 
instrument of vengeance and evil, two other actors captured my attention 
more forcefully.  The first, perhaps unsurprisingly, is Daniel Day-
Lewis, whose John Proctor takes on the dimensions of a classically-
flawed tragic hero.  The second, a relative-unknown named Karron Graves, 
plays Mary Warren, a girl who is deeply disturbed by the morality of her 
false testimony.  Graves' interpretation is wrenching, and deserves to 
be recognized alongside the performances of Ryder and Day-Lewis.  Joan 
Allen (NIXON), as Elizabeth Proctor, and Paul Scofield (QUIZ SHOW), as 
Danforth, are solid in supporting roles.
     Whether on stage or on film, "The Crucible" is a powerful, thought-
provoking production.  This version illuminates the story's numerous 
strengths, resulting in a motion picture of surprising emotional and 
intellectual impact.  By re-interpreting this classic so effectively, 
Hytner has assured that at least one version of "The Crucible" will 
become a part of film history.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Eric Robinette
Now here's a tricky situation. Here's a film I really enjoyed and thought
was very well-crafted, and yet something about it somehow still seems to
be missing. What could it be? Let me go through the various elements.
The Story and Screenplay: Certainly little if any problem here.  The story
about religious fervor and wrongful persecution still packs a wallop in
this day and age, even though it maintains its Puritan-age setting, as
many have admiringly pointed out. That said, I'm not all that surprised it
worked; Arthur Miller remains a great writer. Maybe, just maybe, it might
have been a bit more challenging if in fact had moved the story to a
modern setting and perhaps kept the theatrical acting. Just a thought.
The Performances: Again, solid all around, though again that's not a
surprise with these actors. I especially liked Paul Scofield as the
imposing judge and Joan Allen as the wounded but strong wife. Winona Ryder
is also strong, if a bit overzealous in her role, as the catalyst,
Abigail. Only Daniel Day-Lewis is a little bit disappointing. Though
generally strong, he seems for the first time to be straining in certain
scenes, especially toward the emotionally intense ending.  Never a good
thing when you can "see" someone acting.
The Direction: Also very good. Nicholas Hytner avoids the "filmed play"
trap and very successfully opens up the action, and I especially liked how
his swooping camera suggest the "evil spirits." Only complaint: the
direction gets a little too busy and cluttered toward the end and confuses
the action, especially during that first multi-hanging.
So let's see. As it is, we have a film that's overall very powerful and
affecting, with distinct weaknesses in all the major areas. I guess the
main problem is the lack of surprises or any fresh devices in this movie. 
Many have marveled at  how effective the play is even in its historical
setting, but it always has been and always will be so long as irrational
fear and persecution exist. The menace doesn't have to be red, and there's
no news in that.
All in all, I expected a good retelling of a good play, and that's exactly
what I got. Nothing more, nothing less, and I was glad to have experienced
the film. But that lingering question remains--with a cast and crew this
talented, something even better might have been achieved. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Daniel Day-Lewis, Winona Ryder, Paul Scofield, Joan Allen,
Bruce Davison, Rob Campbell.
Screenplay:  Arthur Miller, based on his play.
Producers:  Robert A. Miller, David V. Picker.
Director:  Nicholas Hytner.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (brief nudity, adult themes)
Running Time:  125 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     To demonstrate my empathy with the themes of THE CRUCIBLE, I'm going
to engage in a bit of heresy of my own:  I don't think Arthur Miller's
play is particularly good.  I'm not suggesting that it is dated, as other
critics have done.  Irrational fear and extremism are alive and well in
1990s America; you only need to watch the recent documentary PARADISE LOST
for evidence.  The ideas in THE CRUCIBLE were never the issue, but those
weighty issues overwhelmed under-developed characters.  Productions of THE
CRUCIBLE have lived or died on the ability of the actors to invest the
material with feeling missing from the page, and this first
English-language film of the play is no different.  Fortunately, the cast
is very strong, and the conventions of cinema give the energy level a
much-needed boost.  Flawed as it may be, THE CRUCIBLE still has moments of
undeniable power.
     Set in 1692 in Salem, Massachusetts, THE CRUCIBLE begins with a
gathering in the woods where several young girls, led by Abigail Williams
(Winona Ryder) play at conjuring spirits.  The fun ends when they are
discovered by Reverend Parris (Bruce Davison), and the Reverend's own
daughter is frightened into a catatonic state.  To save themselves from
punishment, the girls begin accusing Salem's women of witchcraft, naming
names indiscriminately.  Abigail, however, has one specific name in mind:
Elizabeth Proctor (Joan Allen), wife of her former employer -- and lover
-- John Proctor (Daniel Day-Lewis).  As Salem becomes a town ruled by
paranoia, Judge Danforth (Paul Scofield) arrives to try the accused
witches, with only a few men like Proctor brave enough to challenge the
court.
     Miller's 1953 play is well-known as an allegory for the "red scare"
and black-listing of the 1950s, but Miller's own screen adaptation
attempts to make the story less specific to that era, while also making it
more visual.  The girls' ritual gathering, only described by other
characters in the play, is shown in graphic detail, including
blood-smeared faces and nude writhing; an incident where Abigail stabs
herself with a needle and accuses Elizabeth of hexing her is similarly
portrayed.  The scenes are not meant simply for shock value, but to
emphasize the active hypocrisy of the accusers.  They also make Abigail
less a creature of youthful spite and more a deeply disturbed young woman
caught up in the attention and admiration she receives for pointing out
the witches of Salem.  Winona Ryder does some of her best work ever in the
role, shedding the restrained quality of her previous period film
performances.  Here she lets loose like an animal -- desperate, haunted
and dangerous.
     Ryder is one part of a cast which gives its all to THE CRUCIBLE,
beginning with Paul Scofield as Danforth.  Scofield brings a commanding,
weathered presence to the role of Salem's Grand Inquisitor, and a
conviction that the judge's work is good and proper.  He also gives lines
a punch few other actors could muster; when he announces that he intends
to "touch the bottom of this swamp" of accusations and
counter-accusations, he utters the word "swamp" with a fearsome authority.
Joan Allen's steady, cool Elizabeth is just what the part calls for, and
she shows that passive-aggression is not a uniquely 20th century
phenomenon.  Surprisingly, the weak link in the cast is Daniel Day-Lewis.
Proctor is an under-written role, but there is too much self-righteous
heroism in Day-Lewis's reading.  When he delivers his final plea to avoid
a public confession, literally foaming at the mouth, he almost seems to
believe he deserves special consideration.
     Under-written characters and under-developed relationships are the
main faults of THE CRUCIBLE as a text; at times, it feels nearly as
plot-driven as a Michael Crichton novel.  The story is meant to provoke
the audience to outrage at the lives destroyed by false accusers and
complicit authority figures, but it only takes a couple of scenes to make
the point rather than the repetitive structure of the children's
accusations.  Still, there are a couple of scenes in THE CRUCIBLE which
can get any audience to hold its breath, notably a tense questioning of
Elizabeth for which there can be no correct answer.  Director Nicholas
Hytner (THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE) offers an interpretation which isn't
in the least iconoclastic, but he knows where to use George Fenton's score
or a lingering close-up to give a scene added weight.  THE CRUCIBLE is a
good (though not great) adaptation of a good (though not great) play which
still has the ability to cast its own spell.

Author
Walter Frith
Arthur Miller's play from the 1950's entitled 'The Crucible' was a very
timely play indeed in wake of the McCarthy hearings in the United States
designed to root out communists and which many of its critics termed a "witch
hunt."  The setting for this movie is Salem, Massachusetts in 1692 and the
root of this play is literally a witch hunt involving adultery, conscience,
betrayal and relentless evil.  Daniel Day-Lewis stars as John Proctor, a man
trying to save the honor and life of his patronizing wife (Joan Allen) who is
a woman of moral conduct and devotion to her husband.  An inquest conducted
by a British magestrate (Paul Scofield) in a chilling and commanding
performance which should snag him an Oscar nomination seeks to root out the
presence of Satan not only in Proctor's wife but presumably in the character
of a young woman (Winona Ryder) and other members of her group who meet in
secret ritual fashion.  The penalty for being convicted of any association
with Satan is death by hanging.  Ryder's character had an adulterous affair
with John Proctor and now seeks to destroy his marriage by aiding in the
conviction of his wife all the while trying to prove her own innocence.
 Director Nicholas Hytner ('The Madness of King George') fashions an
electrifying yet plain look to this film which is in keeping with Miller's
story and the entire cast shines with emotion and passion.  I was impressed
with the way this movie was able to avoid any pretentious conclusion as it
makes its point clearly and then exits appropriately.  One of 1996's most
well acted pieces. 

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
I find it odd that Nicolas Hytner's first two films both deal with mob
hysteria in less enlightened times - what a strange theme.
"The Crucible", like "The Portrait of a Lady," is very well acted, but
the standout performances come from the supporting cast.  Daniel
Day-Lewis and Winona Ryder are both solid in the lead roles.  Joan
Allen, however, could very well score another Best Supporting Actress
nomination (after last year's recognition for her Pat Nixon) as
Elizabeth Proctor, a  devoutly religious woman whose sexual coldness
has left the door open for her husband's infidelity.  Paul Scofield
turns out another finely shaded performance as the judge sent in from
Boston to attend to the witchcraft trials.  Rob Campbell (the young
gunslinger in "The Unforgiven") is a surprise as the investigator who
is the audience's representative - he's one of the few that begins to
devine the truth amid accusations.  Elizabeth Lawrence is Rebecca
Nurse, the community's conscience.  Peter Vaughan is strong as Giles
Corey, a neighbor and friend to the Proctors. Karron Graves makes an
impressive debut as Mary Warren, the teenage girl who dares to tell
the truth about Abigail Williams and her followers.
"The Crucible" was shot on Hog Island off the coast of Massachusetts
and painstaking attention has been paid to period detail, right down
to dental cosmetics.
Although Arthur Miller originally used the story of the Salem
witchcraft trials to criticize the McCarthy era, "The Crucible" is a
timeless story of corruption, greed, suspicion and religious
fanaticism.
I'm not a big play fan, but "The Crucible" is one of those few plays
that I have read a number of times. I love Arthur Miller's metaphor of
the Salem witch hunt for the other, Red-tinted, kind of McCarthyesque
witch-hunting that strangled the United States at the time of the
play's writing in the early fifties.
I was pleased to see, with Miller adapting his own play, that the
integrity of his indictment against misled tyranny, no matter how
just, remains intact in director Nicolas Hytner's telling.
Complementing  the excellent screenplay of "The Crucible", are a
number of good and better performances, especially in supporting
roles, excellent period costume and set design - an entire 17 century
Pilgrim village was built on location on Hog Island, about 45 minutes
from Boston - and photography. The tremendous attention to historical
detail is right up there on the screen and is some of the best I have
seen.
Stars Winona Ryder and Daniel Day-Lewis are solid, but not
outstanding.
Joan Allen gives a great performance as a woman who loves her husband,
but cant overcome her Puritan upbringing to give him the physical love
he desires, driving him, John Proctor, briefly into the arms of the
conniving Abigail Williams, played by Ryder. Allen, as she overcomes
her hurt and understands her husband's  love, gives ranges of emotion
and understanding that are palpable to the viewer.
Paul Scofield, as Judge Danforth, does a notable job as the jurist
assigned responsibility for stamping out the devil across "every inch"
of Massachusetts. He portrays an honestly religious, if misguided, man
of the cloth.
"The Crucible" is a solid, entertaining period piece that gets top
tech credits and has some exceptional acting, earning it a deserved
B+.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Period films based on literary masterpieces range from the superior ("Age of
Innocence," "The Remains of the Day") to the detrimental ("The Scarlet
Letter"). "The Crucible" falls somewhere in between and, although it is not a
great film, it is certainly a passionate, powerful film that does justice to
Arthur Miller's spectacular 1953 play. Its power has not been diminished on the
big screen. 
"The Crucible" is set during the 17th century when an array of witchhunts
began. mostly led by the teenage girls who were accused. Set in 1692, the movie
starts off with a devilish ceremony where a group of girls are ranting in the
woods of Salem, Massachussetts, performing an unholy ritual. Abigail (Winona
Ryder) is the master of ceremonies, and she drinks animal blood to destroy the
wife of the man she loves. This unholy practice is witnessed by Abigail's
uncle, Reverend Parris (Bruce Davison), and a witchcraft trial commences the
next day. And almost immeiately, the accusations, denials and name-calling
begins - Abigail and the others decide to fool everyone into thinking that the
devil is visible, but visible only to them.
Numerous innocent townspeople are accused, including John Proctor (Daniel
Day-Lewis), a farmer who had a brief affair with Abigail and is now married to
his strictly devout wife, Elizabeth (Joan Allen). Abigail's form of revenge is
to accuse the reverent Elizabeth of witchcraft - at this point, any of these
girls can accuse anyone in town of witchcraft no matter how false the claims
may be (they go through extreme measures to prove them, too). The trials
continue and destroy many lives (mostly by hanging). Paul Scofield plays Judge
Danforth who overlooks the trials, and decides that if the accused confess to
their demonic ways, they will not be hanged. He presides over the trial with
doubts but is inclined to believe that demons of another kind have infiltrated
this town. 
"The Crucible" is a startling, alert interpretation of the Miller play, which
should come as no surprise since Miller wrote the screenplay himself. The
performances by the young actresses are over-the-top but necessarily so, to
establish the lengths of their insane accusations. Winona Ryder is effectively
hateful as the angry, vengeful Abigail (a far cry from her role in "Little
Women"), a frail, demonic child ready to pounce. Daniel Day-Lewis is also
superb as the brave, decent Proctor who simultaneously finds his soul being
eaten away by Abigail and his love growing stronger for Elizabeth. Joan Allen
("Nixon") gives the most understated performance as the seemingly frigid
Elizabeth, and her final scene with Proctor is heartbreaking to witness. And
let's not forget the overpoweringly magnetic Paul Scofield ("Quiz Show"), a
delectable presence whenever he's on screen spouting his lines with gusto and
verve. Another Academy Award nomination is in order for this grand actor of the
cinema, in addition to the whole cast.
If "The Crucible" falls short of greatness, it is because director Nicholas
Hytner ("The Madness of King George") plunges us into a sea of excess right
from the start, giving us little time to catch up with the story or the
characters (Ryder's portrayal of Abigail is nutty and vicious from the
beginning). Still, this beautifully mounted version summons the rage, hatred
and madness of those rough times with knowing cinematic skill, and doesn't
commit the fatal flaw of becoming a static, filmed play.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Michael Redman
Arthur Miller's fifties stage play turned nineties film may have a few
problems, but appearance, intensity and mood aren't among them. Foremost
in the intensity arena is star Daniel Day-Lewis.
Brooding Day-Lewis is developing a reputation for his extreme method of
getting into character. For this movie, he lived on isolated Hog Island
for two months getting to "know the land" and helping build by hand the
cabin his character lives in. By the time filming began, he had acquired
a deep farmer's tan, heavily callused hands and an immense 17th century
knife that he used to pass the time during breaks. Apparently he didn't
just get into character, he __became__ character.
After the movie was completed, he married Miller's daughter.
The play was written in 1952 at the height of the anti-communist
McCarthy hearings where entertainment figures, among others, were
pressured into "naming names". Once the names were public, the blacklist
began and public clamor took over. Miller testified but refused to turn
in his supposed comrades and as a result was held in contempt, refused a
passport for five years and almost jailed.
The play, about the Salem witch trials but a thinly veiled allegory
about the McCarthy turmoil, took 45 years to hit the big screen.
In 1692, the Puritans of Salem were gripped in mob hysteria and accused
many of their fellow townspeople of witchcraft resulting in the public
hanging of 19. The film is not very accurate in terms of historic facts,
but certainly captures the feel of those irrational times.
Day-Lewis is John Proctor an upstanding member of the community whose
life is tragically destroyed as the result of an indiscretion with young
Abigail Williams (Winona Ryder).
As the film opens, we see a group of teenage girls and Tituba, a slave
from Barbados, in the forest gathered around a caldron casting love
spells for the objects of the girls' affections. The relatively innocent
scene gathers some steam when Williams kills a chicken and drinks it's
blood and another girl dances nude in the woods -- something you might
not expect in Puritan society.
Their ritual is disturbed when the town minister happens upon them.
Everyone scatters except two young girls who fall into "comas". Certain
that the devil has slipped into Salem, a town meeting is called. The
girls reluctantly admit their activities but point to others in league
with Satan in order to get off the hook.
At first they accuse the most likely: the black slave, midwives and
village eccentrics. But then, infused with power, the girls point to
upstanding citizens and the community elders believe them. Williams sees
this as an opportunity to get rid of her rival, Proctor's wife (Joan
Allen) and eventually implicates Proctor himself.
The sexual heat between Day-Lewis and Ryder isn't as apparent on the
screen as it should be in order for this obsession to work.
(Historically, Proctor was in his sixties and Williams, her mid-teens.)
Aside from this, the film is a wonderfully crafted warning.
[This appeared in the 1/9/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at mredman@bvoice.com

Author
Froilan Vispo
Forgive the fevered criticism but the fervor of THE CRUCIBLE infects.
Set in 1692 at Salem, Massachusetts, THE CRUCIBLE opens with a group of
teenage girls passionately singing and dancing around a boiling cauldron
in the middle of a forest under the glow of a full moon.  They beckon
the names of men as the targets of their love spells.  
Then one of the girls lets her hair down and sheds her clothes.  Not to
be outdone in her quest to regain the attention of John Proctor (Daniel
Day Lewis), Abigail (Winona Ryder) suddenly seizes a chicken, beats it
against the ground and smears her face and lips with the fresh blood. 
Taking even adolescent hormone surges into account, surely this
chicken-bashing bit is a bit excessive, especially for prim Puritan
sensibilities?  Surely to the Puritan eye this is as close to a coven of
witches as it gets?  
THE CRUCIBLE errs from the beginning and Arthur Miller's name should be
summoned for blame here for the addition of the above scene to his
screen adaptation of his play.  This is far from a harmless event, a bad
start to an already shaky morality tale.  
The play describes the film's opening scene during tense exchanges that
makes one wonder about the veracity of both accusation and reply, and
this adds to the play's charged atmosphere.   
In the film, the opening scene becomes an unintentional Pandora's box. 
Not only is credulity stretched but Abigail's obsession is unfortunately
spotlighted.  It positions THE CRUCIBLE more as a cautionary fable about
obsessive and malevolent women than against witch hunts; it will bring
back the memory of a rabbit boiling away in a pot.
Not surprisingly, the nighttime forest frenzy does not go unnoticed and
when two girls fail to wake the following morning, witches are invoked
by those eager to blame.  When the girls are questioned, their
confession of guilt is accompanied with an announcement of their return
to God and they are thereafter converted to immaculate witnesses, led
lustfully by Abigail.  With alarming synchronicity our
hormonally-advantaged girls zealously gesture and point accusing fingers
at innocents, constant reminders that Abigail's passion sets all this
into inexorable motion.  Abigail seizes on this opportunity to rid
herself of her rival for John Proctor's love, his wife Elizabeth (Joan
Allen), by including her among those accused of witchcraft.  
Appropriately narrow-waisted and equipped with a distractingly white
smile (watch his teeth deteriorate much too quickly to a murky yellow),
Day Lewis plays the dashing moral hero with an over-earnestness that
longs to be watched.  Director Nicholas Hytner is guilty of encouraging
Day Lewis' foaming-mouth fervour with shots where we stare up at Proctor
as if he was mounted on a pedestal for our admiration.  Otherwise,
Hytner's direction is unremarkable. 
Ryder's performance as Abigail is as consistent as her mood swings.  Her
fits of frenzy are energetic enough but the quieter moments are less
successful.  Abigail supposedly revels in her newfound power, but Ryder
fails at being convincingly haughty although there is much haughtiness
to spare here.  Paul Scofield is fine as the overzealous Judge Danforth,
but the incessant moral posturings of all the characters along with the
recurrent histrionics of the young girls pricks at the nerves. 
Probably because she is the only refuge of restraint amidst all the
huffing and puffing, Allen's Elizabeth comes out as the most sympathetic
character.  A scene near the end featuring a private conversation
between the imprisoned Elizabeth and John is undeniably powerful because
for once we are given a reprieve from the moral bantering and the human
consequences are revealed.  Unfortunately, when John's audience again
increases to more than one his urge to pontificate returns and the human
urgency of his situation is lost.  
It is clear that Miller meant well but I do wish he did it with more
delicacy and fewer diversions.  His screenplay is an imperfect creature
with the distractions coming out as loud as the message.  The result is
a clumsy muddle - I felt like the chicken from the opening scene, head
ceaselessly banged with piousness too heavy-handed to be wholly
believable.  When the gallows beckoned, it was sweet release indeed.  
Far from bewitching, THE CRUCIBLE tests the patience.  
Review completed January 28, 1997.
Address e-mail for Froilan Vispo to: vispo@bigfoot.com

Author
Ben Hoffman
Arthur Miller is surely one of the great American authors of our time
having written Death of a Salesman, All My Sons, After the Fall, The
Price, and The Incident at Vichy, among others.    The Crucible dates
back to 1953 and deals with the red-baiting of the McCarthy era,   The
play has since been performed all around the world including China.
Miller wrote the play because, he said, "I was being surrounded by a
feverish flood of accusations od Communism coming from everywhere.
There was no way to deal with that in ordinary conversations because if
you cast any doubt on the veracity of the accusations you might well be
linked to the Devil, which at that time was Communism.  In The
Crucible, Miller turns to our own Salem witch hunts where a mere
accusation that you were in league with the Devil was enough to ruin
your life, to have you executed.  As with McCarthy and the House
Un-American Committee, no proof was needed; a point of the finger
sufficed to ruin lives.
Today, with witches and Communism no longer the "threat," there are
still the religious Fundamentalists, the mis-named Moral Majority,
orthodoxy on college campuses.  Says Director Nicholas Hytner, "These
are our contemporary  Salems."
The story is that of Abigail Williams (Winona Ryder) who has had an
affair with John Proctor (Daniel Day Lewis).  When he realizes that he
has committed a sin, a great injustice to his faithful wife, he rejects
Abigail and returns to his wife, Elizabeth (Joan Allen), his real
love.  Abigail, however, will not let him off that easily.  In the
climate of  Salem she is able to accuse his wife of witchcraft as the
whole Massachusetts goes Devil-crazy.
Excellent acting by everyone (notably Paul Scofield as Judge Danforth)
brings a reality to the film and an understanding of what it is like to
live in a world where a mere accusation can destroy everyone.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     THE CRUCIBLE is the story of the Salem witch trials, but it is a
lot more than that.  It is an examination of a society that through
fear gives unquestioned authority and power to a select few supposed
defenders.  The result is an exercise in power far worse than the
threat it was intended to curb.  The House Un-American Activities
Committee hearings, chaired by Senator Joseph McCarthy were the
inspiration for Arthur Miller's original play, but the parallels he
draws can be applied to any situation where the public allows itself to
be ruled by fear rather than reason.  It is a ready-made and fully-
formed analogy that some can apply to the "political correctness"
argument, others to the firearms debate or political issues with
religious implications. The term "witch hunt" has come into common
usage as any campaign against dissension, perhaps in large part because
of this play.
     The setting is Salem, Massachusetts in 1692.  This is a community
committed to an extreme devotion to its religion and what it sees as
service to God.  And if the Bible says that such things as witches
exist, then witchcraft must be a very real and very present threat to
the community.  Several adolescent girls, led by Abigail Williams
(played by Winona Ryder), are caught in the act playing the voodoo-like
game of "conjuring boys."  Williams has taken things a step further and
has tried to use the magic to kill a woman she considers her enemy.  At
first she denies that the game had anything to do with witchcraft, but
quickly discovers that she has happened onto what seems to her a good
thing.  The first suggestion that any of the people of Salem have
engaged in witchcraft seems to bring down the wrath of the whole
community.  And the people of Salem, many already involved in minor
conflicts with their neighbors, seem all too ready to accept and
exploit witchcraft accusations against their enemies.  Soon there area
dozen or so girls making accusations and basking in the celebrity their
accusations bring them.
     Drawn into the situation are John Proctor (Daniel Day-Lewis) and
his wife Elizabeth (Joan Allen).  John had had a short dalliance with
Abigail, but now wants to remain faithful to Elizabeth.  It is a
situation that Abigail, with her new-found power, discovers she can
change.  To investigate the accusations come first the Reverend Hale
(Rob Campbell) and then the esteemed Judge Danforth (Paul Scofield),
Deputy Governor of Massachusetts.  Hale is a moderate man as likely to
find an accused witch innocent as guilty.  Judge Danforth, on the other
hand, is a religious zealot who couches his actions in legalisms.  At
heart, however, he is deeply afraid of witchcraft himself and can no
longer accept any possibility of innocence.  He sees the girls'
accusations as God giving him the tools to root out the Devil in Salem.
Eventually the witch hunt will take on a life of its own and will get
beyond even his control.  Caught in all of this is John Proctor who
still has some affection for Abigail but sees first hand the evil that
Abigail is wielding.
     Daniel Day-Lewis and Winona Ryder each seem acceptable by
themselves, but somehow do not seems to have much dramatic chemistry
together on the screen.  Day-Lewis is made up with considerably more
realism than is Ryder.  He, like many of the people of the story, show
the sign of a hard life with scars and with rotted teeth.  Even making
allowances for Ryder's youth, a similar hard life seems to have done
little more than ruffle her hair.  Ryder appears out of place and too
well cared-for considering the look of most of the other people in the
film.  Joan Allen, who previously played Pat Nixon in NIXON gives a
subtle uprightness to the role of Elizabeth Proctor.  Paul Scofield
playing another judge will surely bring memories of A MAN FOR ALL
SEASONS.  He brings a lot of the same magnetism to this role as he had
in that, perhaps presenting another side of the same character.
Familiar faces in less pivotal roles include Bruce Davison, Jeffrey
Jones, and George Gaynes.
     In some senses this production is a little too polished to feel
accurate.  The opening sequence shows a voodoo-like ceremony in the
woods complete with mystic chalk symbols drawn on ground, and Tituba
chanting a perfectly recorded version of the Yanvalou Chant.  It was
very theatrical but not very realistic. Some may find the film a little
hard to follow, particularly in the first half hour.  The viewer is
introduced to a large number of characters speaking in the manner of
17th Century English.  A word should be said about the accuracy of this
film to the historical fact.  It is not much beyond the names of some
of the people. Abigail Williams was an eleven-year-old and John Proctor
was sixty, so much of the Miller's tale of sexual revenge does not work
as history.  However I am willing to give Arthur Miller more latitude
to play with the facts in this film than I give Gibson for BRAVEHEART.
Robert Bolt in A MAN FOR ALL SEASONS or William Shakespeare with JULIUS
CAESAR is doing a lot more than just telling an adventure tale.  Miller
is a writer who can tell a story of complexity with some profundity.
If THE CRUCIBLE is not historically accurate, it transcends that.  I
personally hold BRAVEHEART more accountable for historical accuracy
than I do THE CRUCIBLE.
     THE CRUCIBLE is a powerful play on stage, but it has been made
available to mass audiences only twice before, once as the 1957 French
film LES SORCIERES DE SALEM and then again in 1967 as a play performed
on CBS.  With the exception of the latter, no non-live version has ever
been available to American audience until now.  It is something of a
service that it is available now.  I give it a +3 on the -4 to +4
scale.
