Title
Review for That Thing You Do! (1996)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
The Flying Inkpot
THAT THING YOU DO, Tom Hanks' first writing and directing effort as
well as his ticket into the Hollywood realm of Actor-Directors, is a
sunny, soul-less psuedo-look at a one-hit band from smallsville and
their meteoric rise to fame.
In Erie, PA., a garage band lead by vocalist and songwriter Jimmy
(Jonathon Schaech) enter and win a local talent contest. This is
entirely due to sit-in drummer Guy (Tom Everett Scott), who joins at
the last minute when their regular drummer breaks his arm, and their
original, catchy ditty that is also the film's title song, "That Thing
You Do!" An appliance salesman at his father's store, Guy digs jazz
rhythms rather than the monotonous, mindless time-keeping that the
three-chord band requires. He increases the song's tempo at the last
minute, and the faster speed energizes the tune enough to get the whole
dancefloor shaking and, erm, twisting, I guess.
The win lands the band a gig at a nearby pizza restaurant near the
airport, and, like all airport restaruant gigs, this obviously leads to
Bigger Things. They make a record for fun, play more gigs, and sign
with a otherwise tacky agent who manage to get the local radio station
to play their song.
*This* then leads to their meeting with a Big-Time Play-Tone Records
agent, played by Tom Hanks, Mr White. White is kind of like those
slick, snakey agents that all successful entertainers in TV-Movies have
to meet and lose their careers to before they learn to value The
Important Things In Life. Once he signs them with Play-Tone, he starts
moulding them. He dresses them all in matching suits ("You look good in
gold, have I told you that? Very good") but develops their individual
"trademarks" (Guy gets a pair of sunglasses), changes their name to the
easier-understood "Wonders" and puts limits on the type of songs they
write.
Meanwhile, they've joined the Play-Tone state-fair tour, with groupie
girlfriend Faye (Liv Tyler) coming along as their costume mistress,
their single is soaring up the billboard charts, and each performance
is increasingly mobbed by the hordes of screaming teenage women that
I've only seen in black and white on Beatles' documentaries.  The
Wonders' popularity eventually leads to the ultimate big-step: their
national debut in a television broadcast.
It's at this point that things, which are  already fraying at the
seams, fall completely apart. Lead singer Jimmy, already prone to
throwing his increasingly esoteric and artistic temper about, abruptly
severs his relationship with the gorgeous Faye (a sure sign that he's
mad) and finally quits the band. Lenny, the most easy-going of the
four, takes off for Vegas and doesn't come back, and the last band
member runs off with newly-found Marine friends to Disneyland. Guy is
left alone in the first "real" recording studio he's ever been in on
the day of taping their new song.
Of course it doesn't end that way. In the same breezy vein that has
navigated the narrative from having The One-ders in their tacky
small-town environment to becoming The Wonders in their tacky big-time
glitzy showbusiness outfits, Guy ends up meeting Del Paxton, a jazz
soloist whom he revers, and makes a studio recording with him. Well
sure, that's what all drummers from Beatles-imitation bands long to
do.
Structurally, THAT THING YOU DO is a string of well-timed punchlines set
to sixties' musical drivel and a couple of more sophisticated riffs.
It's hard to believe that drummer Guy is good enough to replicate
professional jazz solo recordings and jam intelligently with his jazz
idol Del Paxton (Bill Cobbs), yet tolerates and enjoys his mundane
participation in The Wonders' success. Nor is it easy to believe that
the two Wonders bassists, whom Hanks takes pains to point out as finding
the song's basic chords difficult to follow when Guy picks up the tempo
at the contest, easily tread smooth, complicated basslines in the many
variations of the song that follow as The Wonders develop. 
As though to qualify the story's chosen hero, Guy, Hanks has made him a
jazz-lover, someone who goes on to higher musical things once the pop
fantasy diversion is done with. For heavens' sake, we are actually told
that he eventually founds and teaches jazz composition at a music
school. 
Like this outcome, nothing else in the film really makes sense.
Characters enter, and leave, and situations occur without any real
motivation, and the one serious scene in the film where Faye confronts
Jimmy is fraught with maudlin nonsense that undercuts her previously
likeable, sharp yet easy-going character. In the end, there's nothing to
care about in THAT THING YOU DO! because nothing bad, or good, has
actually happened. Like the title song, THAT THING YOU DO! is a shallow
briefing on the so-called lives of teenage pop stars that doesn't bother
with the heavy stuff, and disposes of them in the fastest possible way. 
Still, I guess there are many reasons to like THAT THING YOU DO! Liv
Tyler, who seems to be spreading a little, is probably one of them, and
the catchy, guiless title song is another. I saw this film more than a
week ago and the tune is *still* spinning around in my head. Another
plus is the sheer casualness of everything: like the guiless,
self-contained theme song That Thing You Do! everything in the film is
mostly light-hearted dissin'. No Francis Ford Cuppola (WHEN PEGGY SUE
GOT MARRIED) or Oliver Stone-type angst for Hanks. This movie has got to
sing!
I think this film is worth $7, especially for those who want a little
more believability than local film ARMY DAZE (and much higher production
values), are sick of cop-slash-robber movies with flat jokes like
BULLETPROOF, and aren't all that into the "real-life" suspense of
RANSOM. THAT THING YOU DO! is a happy, happy film.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
Rebecca">href="mailto:rebecca@cyberway.com.sg">Rebecca Wan is a full-time
turnip at the famed Jardin Des Vertes.


Author
Andrew Hicks
        Tom Hanks is one of Hollywood's few genuine success 
stories, an actor the public continues to love even after turkeys like 
Bonfire of the Vanities, Turner and Hooch and Joe 
vs. the Volcano. His preformances are subtle and low-key, yet 
he's won two Oscars. It's his everyman, Jimmy Stewart-like appeal 
that is responsible for his success and makes you like him whether 
he's a gay man with AIDS or an idiot with a heart of gold.
        If this affable, charming personality of his could be 
personified as a movie, THAT THING YOU DO would be it, no great 
coincidence considering Hanks scripted and directed it himself. 
The movie is likeable, mild entertainment that makes you smile 
more than laugh and never offends, like Hanks himself. It is a 
nostalgic story of a fictional 60's band, the Wonders, and their 
rise and fall from stardom. The story is predictable and pretty much 
writes itself, but Hanks should still be congratulated for stumbling 
upon a topic of interest and fascination and coordinating it in an 
entertaining way.
        As THAT THING YOU DO begins, the band's drummer 
(Corey from "My Two Dads" in his first acting gig of the 90's) has 
broken his arm and their friend Guy (Tom Everett Scott) is called in 
as a replacement for their show in a talent competition. At the show, 
Guy speeds up the tempo of lead singer Jimmy's (Johnathon 
Schaech) ballad "That Thing You Do" to match the dance pop 
sound of the Beatles. Suddenly, it's the latest teen sensation and 
the band is playing a local bar / pizza parlor.
        The road to fame continues as they record a single on 
some church equipment, get a manager who works out of a camper 
and play a Pittsburgh rock show. That's when they hit the big time 
and trade off their old manager for a slick Hollywood version, 
played by Hanks. His small role in the movie is the only thing that 
reminds us we're watching a big-time Hollywood movie. The rest is 
acted out by people we've never heard of like Scott, Schaech, Steve 
Zahn and Ethan Embry as "The Bass Player." Liv Tyler, playing 
Jimmy's girlfriend, is the only other link back to Hollywood. Liv 
doesn't do too much in the movie, but she is definitely getting 
more beautiful with each movie she appears in.
        There are a lot of scenes on the way to fame that are more 
cute than funny, the most effective of which is the scene when the 
band members hear "That Thing You Do" on the radio for the first 
time. Liv is mailing some letters when she hears it and begins 
screaming and jumping up and down. She breaks into a run, 
heading for the department store Guy works in, and meets another 
band member on the way. By the time they reach the store, two 
other band members pull up in a car and jump out. Hanks handled 
the whole scene incredibly, capturing the mixture of triumph and 
joy a moment like this would bring a band.
        He handles the last part of the movie with much less skill. 
By the time everything falls apart, we know it's going to fall apart 
and we pretty much know how it's going to fall apart. The Wonders 
seem to be an Americanized one-hit version of the Beatles so we 
know it's only a matter of time before Liv Ono inadvertently breaks 
them up. But it's a fun ride while it lasts, and a definite strong 
showing for Hanks in his directorial debut. Even the song, "That 
Thing You Do," which we hear played eight or nine times 
throughout the course of the movie, is catchy and fun.
        THAT THING YOU DO doesn't have the big laughs or 
thrills of the usual Hollywood movie machine products, nor does 
it have the drama or vision of a low-budget arthouse movie. It will 
probably be a big hit anyway, though, because it has the same 
innocent, family-friendly quality Hanks himself has been bringing 
us for years, even if his role in the movie is small. The Guy 
character, though, is obviously patterned after Hanks, with the 
same personality and many of the same mannerisms. It's no 
coincidence that his name is Guy -- he's the plain old average 
guy we know and love.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
That Thing You Do! seems a lot like the story of the Beatles.  The truth is,
That Thing You Do! is a lot better than the Beatles movies, and some of the
music on the soundtrack is almost as good as Beatles music.  The only
explanation for this is that That Thing You Do! must be a lot like the story of
the Beatles, and this is true.  Jimmy Mattingly, played by Johnathon Schaech,
is a very serious musician.  He is in a group with no title at the time, which
consists of Lenny played by Steve Zahn, the "bass player", played by Ethan
Embry, and Chad, played by Giovanni Ribisi.  The four are teenagers growing up
in the sixties, heavily influenced by music.  Their band performs music similar
to the style that was popular back then, especially the Beatles.  Faye, played
by Liv Tyler is Jimmy's girlfriend, and she also helps out the band when she
can.  
After Chad is injured before a huge contest, the group is desperate to find a
replacement drummer.  They end up picking up Guy Patterson, the appliance store
working drummer, played by Tom Everett Scott.  Guy adds a lot to the group,
including the group's new name, The Wonders.  At the night of the contest, Guy
speeds up the drum beat a lot on the song they are performing, entitled "That
Thing You Do."  The song sounds much better faster, and the crowd responds very
positively to the song.  They win the contest, and now the Wonders are headed
for stardom.
After winning the contest, more and more gigs open up for the group.  Mr.
White, played by Tom Hanks, has taken interest in the group's music.  Mr. White
is associated with Playtone Records, one of the biggest record companies
around.  Therefore, the Wonders start to be heard all over the world.  They
produce a single that sells millions.  The Wonders have gone from being a group
who performs at the bar on the corner to rock and roll shows across the
country.
The acting in the film is great on almost every second of the film.  There are
times when the acting is a little off or unrealistic, but for the most part it
is great.  Liv Tyler and Tom Everett Scott's performances stuck out the most in
the large cast, even more than Hanks's. The acting is one of many things that
contributed to the greatness of the film.  The way it was filmed, plot,
characters, setting, and sound all added a whole lot.
Other than Tom Hanks, at the time of the film, the other stars were barely
known by people around the country.  Since That Thing You Do!, Johnathon
Schaech has starred in Hush and Welcome To Woop Woop, Tom Everett Scott has
starred in the Academy Award nominated One True Thing, Dead Man On Campus, and
American Werewolf In Paris, Liv Tyler has starred in Armageddon and Inventing
The Abbots, Steve Zahn has starred in Forces Of Nature and Out Of Sight, Ethan
Embry has starred in Can't Hardly Wait and Vegas Vacation, and Giovanni Ribisi
has starred in The Mod Squad and The Other Sister.  That Thing You Do!
certainly launched every one of these young people's careers.
The soundtrack in That Thing You Do! is amazing.  There are various different
slow, fast, and catchy songs that are fun to listen to included in the film. 
The right songs were played at the right times to get you in the mood for the
scenes about to take place.  The soundtrack in a film is a very important
thing, and the makers of That Thing You Do! surely succeeded in this area of
the film.
The Bottom Line- Congratulations Mr. Hanks.    

Author
John Robertson
Directed by: Tom Hanks 
Starring: Tom Everett Scott Steve Zahn, Charlize Theron, Johnathon Schaech, 
Ethan Embry, Liv Tyler, Tom Hanks 
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for this film is someone who wants 
a toe-tapping, no complications, feel-good movie.  I mean all of the previous 
descriptives literally.  If you want SOME complications, you won't like this 
movie.  The Perfect Person for this movie would probably give it a 10 out of 
10. See the review below for more information. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------- 
That Thing You Do is, as you are all aware by now, the pet project of Tom 
Hanks, probably the most likable guy in Hollywood.  I can just picture the 
scene in Hollywood, as Tom proposed this picture to "the studio people", and 
they all bent over backwards to let him make it.  I'm glad he got the chance, 
because although That Thing You Do isn't exactly high cinema, it's certainly 
better than most things that Hollywood spits out, and it's nice to see nice 
guys finishing where they belong.
That Thing You Do is set in 60s Erie Pennsylvania, home of Guy Patterson, a 
wannabe jazz drummer, and a garage band called the "One-ders".  The One-ders 
are about to enter a talent competition, and when their drummer hurts his arm 
jumping over a parking meter, they call on Guy, the town's only beatnik, to 
help them out.  At the competition, Guy starts their big song, "That Thing You 
Do" much faster than they are used to, but what do you know?  The crowd loves 
it and the band's career is launched.   The song is pretty special, and you 
would have to really not like music to not get your toe tapping to it.
That's about all you need to know about That Thing You Do.  The rest of the 
movie follows their career to the top, and in a way, it's a refreshing story 
never told before.  Their agent lives in a motor home and doesn't seem to have 
two dimes to rub together, but he doesn't exploit them, betray them or do 
anything except make them famous and turn them over to a record exec, who 
doesn't exploit them, betray them or do anything except make them MORE famous! 
 Does that sound surprising to you?  It was to me!
In a way, this movie was almost like a thriller, in that I couldn't predict 
what going to happen until it was all over.  We have been so programmed to 
think the worst of entertainment people, especially in the movies, that when 
everyone, and I mean everyone, is on the level, it seems like a daring plot 
twist.
It wasn't until That Thing You Do was over that I felt a little disappointed.  
I had a vague feeling of "Is that it?"  There is not very much in the way of 
conflict in this movie.  Jimmy, the band's front man, is sullen and 
argumentative, but seems to relent almost instantly.  The final couple of 
conflicts at the end seem almost implausible and completely manufactured -- 
but let's be honest, you needed some sort of conflict to bring this movie to a 
close, and they were in keeping with the overall tone of the movie.  
I think this is a good movie for the Perfect Person rating system, because  I 
think it will be VERY popular with most of the moviegoing public, but quite 
frankly, it will probably drive most reviewers crazy.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson. 
Retransmit freely if unedited. My opinions are solely my own, and in no way 
reflect those of my employer.  
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to give the 
reader a new way of understanding my rating. Rather than give a film a score, 
either overall, or on several attributes, the Perfect Person Rating tries to 
identify the type of person would enjoy this movie the most. Since a reviewer 
is by nature someone with a great deal of experience in what they are 
reviewing, their experience may not be the same as someone who is less jaded, 
or more attuned to the subject. Hopefully the Perfect Person Rating will go 
further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a simple rating scale. Comments 
are appreciated. 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tom Everett Scott, Jonathan Schaech, Liv Tyler, Steve Zahn, 
      Ethan Embry, Tom Hanks, Charlize Theron, Obba Babatunde
Director: Tom Hanks
Producer: Gary Goetzman, Jonathan Demme, Edward Saxon
Screenplay: Tom Hanks
Cinematography: Tak Fujimoto
Music: Howard Shore
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox 
     Some time after finishing APOLLO 13, Tom Hanks approached 
producer/director Jonathan Demme and inquired whether a little script he 
had written might make a good feature.  Demme read the screenplay and 
not only felt that the movie should be made, but that Hanks should 
direct it.  As a result, The Man Everyone Loves pitched the project to 
20th Century Fox officials, and, considering Hanks' amazing box office 
appeal, how could they refuse?  Thus was born THAT THING YOU DO!, an 
enjoyable-but-flawed look at the rapid rise and even more rapid fall of 
a pop group during the mid-1960s.
     Throughout the brief history of rock and roll, many bands have 
begun in garages.  Most of them have stayed there.  Not so with The 
Wonders (originally called The One-Ders), the pride of Erie, 
Pennsylvania.  Through a combination of good fortune and natural 
charisma (probably more of the former than the latter), this quartet -- 
singer/songwriter Jimmy Mattingly (Jonathan Schaech), drummer Guy 
Patterson (Tom Everett Scott), guitarist Lenny (Steve Zahn), and a 
nameless bass player (Ethan Embry) -- soars into the national spotlight 
when their debut song, "That Thing You Do!" starts a dramatic rise up 
the charts.  Managed by Mr. White (Tom Hanks) of Play-Tone Records (not 
RESERVOIR DOGS), the Wonders become a nationwide phenomenon with TV and 
movie appearances, but internal friction threatens to turn them into The 
One Hit Wonders.
     Although Hanks' film starts out strong, it finishes on shaky 
ground.  THAT THING YOU DO! is mostly a serio-comedy/fantasy whose light 
dramatic arc can't support the awkward and unnecessarily melodramatic 
ending.  For most of the movie, the first-time director lets things move 
forward in an unforced manner, but, as the running time approaches the 
ninety-minute mark, he appears uncertain how to wrap things up cleanly.  
The result is an imposed climax that doesn't ring true.  Two of the band 
members split on a whim and the lead singer decides that the 
commercialization of The Wonders offends his artistic integrity.  If the 
film had adequately built to this moment, it might have worked, but, as 
it is, it feels manufactured and artificial.  
     On the other hand, THAT THING YOU DO! contains its share of magical 
moments.  The sequence when the excited band members first hear their 
single on the radio is one (they run around an appliance store owned by 
Guy's father, shouting, dancing, and turning every radio on full blast).  
Another occurs when Guy's previously-doubting family clusters around the 
TV to watch his debut on the "Hollywood Television Showcase".  There's 
also a recording session that takes place in a church and a rather 
amusing takeoff of the '60s beach movies (with The Wonders making a 
background cameo in an Avalon/Funicello-type flick).  When Hanks pushes 
drama aside in favor of just having fun, things click.
     From a romantic angle, THAT THING YOU DO! is a disappointment.  For 
most of the film, Liv Tyler's Faye has little to do except tag along 
after the band offering support to her boyfriend, Jimmy, and silently 
longing after Guy.  Had this triangle been developed, it could have 
created the kind of believable tension necessary to splinter the band, 
but we never see much in the way of affection between Jimmy and Faye, 
and Guy doesn't really come into the picture until Jimmy is effectively 
out of it.
     Tom Everett Scott not only plays Guy like a young Tom Hanks, but 
looks the part.  Jonathon Schaech is perpetually sullen.  Despite a 
significant amount of screen time, his Jimmy rarely appears without a 
frown, and we never get to learn much about him other than that he's a 
"genius" songwriter.  Steve Zahn and Ethan Embry don't have well-
developed characters (Embry's bass player doesn't even have a name), and 
appear to be on board primarily for comic relief.  Finally, there's 
Hanks, who gives his least impressive acting turn since the forgettable 
BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES (maybe it's because he's only in a supporting 
role).  For a while, it looks like Mr. White is going to be an 
unappealing, no-nonsense business type, but Hanks, who seems incapable 
of playing an dislikable guy, softens White's most abrasive edges and 
makes him into something of a father-figure.
     Viewed as a playful survey of the ups and downs of the music world, 
THAT THING YOU DO! is somewhat more successful than the recent GRACE OF 
MY HEART.  But there's not a whole lot of musical variety here.  By the 
time you leave, you're likely to know all the words to "That Thing You 
Do!" since it's played, in whole or in part, about a dozen times.  At 
least the song, which was written by Adam Schleisenger, captures the 
sound of the era.  It doesn't take much imagination to hear the Beatles, 
the Spencer Davis Group, or some other popular '60s band covering the 
tune.
     As a movie, THAT THING YOU DO! adapts Tom Hanks' most recognizable 
public traits:  affability and inoffensiveness.  The problems, none of 
which are crippling, can be attributed more to Hanks the screenwriter 
than Hanks the director.  THAT THING YOU DO! is a credible first effort, 
but it will take a lot more time and effort before Hanks attains the 
same reputation behind the camera that he has in front of it.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** out of **** - 7.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Tom Everett Scott (Guy Patterson), Liv Tyler (Faye Dolan), Johnathon
Schaech (James 'Jimmy' Mattingly II), Steve Zahn (Lenny), Ethan Randall
(The Bass Player), Tom Hanks (Mr. White)
DIRECTOR: Tom Hanks
CERTIFICATION: PG (USA) 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1996
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Original Song
THAT THING YOU DO!, from first-time film director Tom Hanks, is an
enjoyable tale about a fictional band, The Wonders, that goes from a
garage band to the band with the fastest selling album in the country.
But, the question arrises, will the seduction of fame and fortune
corrupt the band and lead them to become just another one-hit wonder, or
will they stick together and become the next teen sensations?
The "Oneders", as they are originally known, have their first gig at a
very small-time contest. Jimmy, the lead singer, has written a catchy song
and intends to play it at the contest.  But, a short time before the
contest begins, the current drummer becomes injured and a replacement is
needed.  Enter Guy Patterson, skilled musician who currently works at his
father's appliance store and is looking to break free from the restricting
clutches that bind him.  He seems to fit in well, until the group takes
the stage.  When they begin to play, Guy's beat is much too fast and the
pace is way off for the intended song.  It looks as though the group is
doomed to failure.  But, the "new" song is a hit!  This leads to another
gig, and soon enough, the group has an agent.  He doesn't do too much for
them, but they do get their song played on the radio.  Eventually, Mr.
White of Playtone records approaches the group, and he informs them that
they want to release a record.
Before you can say "Billboard", the band is now renamed "The Wonders" and
the members are speeding their way to fame.  The gigs are getting better,
their fame is increasing, and they have the fastest selling album in
Playtone Records history.  The band is invited to appear in a feature
film, and, they then fly out to Hollywood to appear on television.  After
the appearance on television, things start to fall apart.  Two of the
members of the band pretty much disappear, and things are not working out
well between Jimmy and Guy.  Will the band work it out, or will they split
up and go on their own separate journeys towards success?
THAT THING YOU DO!, complete with a nifty original song that actually
sounded authentic, is a fun and enjoyable movie that, although it doesn't
become clear if it wants to be a comedy, drama, or romance, is a well-made
look into the world of music.  Tom Hanks' directorial debut was a good one
and should lead to more work for him.


Author
Ben Hoffman
          Tom Hanks says that he made the film to "protect my sanity."
He traveled all over the world promoting FORREST GUMP and it was
getting him down.  Wanting to do something different, he yearned for
"something creative" other than acting.   Having seen "The Compleat
Beatles" documentary, and being aware of the many, many band groups
back in the 1960s who had but one hit record and then disappeared, he
decided he'd like to write and direct a film about these "one hit
wonders."
          This then is a kind of compilation of many such groups as
Hanks saw them.  There is Guy Patterson (Tom Everett Scott) whose dull
life as a salesman in his father's hardware store is brightened by the
set of drums he plays after working hours.  This puts him in another
world.  When a group called The Wonders loses its drummer (remember
an ill Ringo being replaced temporarily with someone called Jimmy
Nichols?), Guy is ready to accept their offer to play the drums with
them.   Their identifying tune, "The Things You Do" shoots to the top
of the charts  and soon they are on their road to fame and fortune, or
so it would seem.
          Hanks uses some new actors to make up The Wonders.  There
are, in addition to Scott, Johnathon Schaech, Steve Zahn and Ethan
Embry.   The part of Faye, Jimmy's girlfriend, (Liv Tyler) is
portrayed by a very pretty blonde.  Guy's girlfriend, Tina, is played
by Charlize Theron.  Hanks himself has the role of an executive at a
record company (The Play-Tones) who manages the band.
       While the film is entertaining enough and does portray the
times, (the period of JFK being assassinated, of the VietNam war, etc.)
I found nothing special.  However, it does have some nice music and
it is recommended to anyone who lived through that era of the 60s.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     For those of us like this critic who were teenagers in the 60s,
there is no simpler pleasure that a trip down memory lane.  Musically
in the 60s one group dominated and that was the Beatles.  Girls swooned
in their presence.  I remember driving over to Dallas to see a bunch of
them camping out over night to get tickets for one of their concerts.
I liked the group, but calculated that the Beatles were not worth
sleeping on the ground.
     In his directorial and screenwriting debut, Tom Hanks recreates
the energy and charm of that era through the dramatic assent of an
American group with many similarities to the Beatles's career path.
The group known as the One-ders, and later as the Wonders when no one
realizes that they are supposed to be pronounced the same, is
discovered in an out of the way town in Pennsylvania.  Their fame comes
from a single song and that is also the title for the picture, THAT
THING YOU DO.
     In the Wonders is a singer named James "Jimmy" Mattingly II
(Jonathan Schaech), a guitarist named Lenny Haise (Steve Zahn), a guy
known only as "the bass player" (Ethan Embry), and the catalyst for the
group, a drummer named Guy Patterson (Tom Everett Scott).  Its one
groupie and Jimmy's girlfriend Faye Dolan (Liv Tyler) is later
christened their costume mistress so she can travel with them
everywhere.
     Just like you need to test a cleaner on a part of a garment to see
if it is safe before you apply it everywhere on it, let me suggest a
warning label for this film.  Listen to the song, "That Thing You Do"
before you see the movie.  You have probably already heard it in the
trailers or in the television advertisements.  If you find the song
irritating in small doses, do enter the theater playing the movie
version.  I counted them, and the song is done eleven times in the
film.  Now, I found the song upbeat and quite nice, but if you don't
like it, this picture will likely drive you crazy.
     The story is that the Wonders wins a contest with their song and
soon are asked to play a gig at the local pizza parlor.  The parlor
owner packs the house so he starts laying money down for them on the
bar saying, "You know what that is?"  The groups comedian, Lenny, says,
"Presidential flashcards?"  The owner answers with "a bonus."
     One day a guy looking like a hunter comes to town and invites them
into his old camper to sign a contract, but one of the group objects
saying he doesn't want to sign away his music.  Lenny gets upset and
says, "Are you crazy?  A man in a really nice camper wants to put our
songs on the radio."
     Soon Tom Hanks enters the picture playing Mr. White, an agent of
the famous Play-Tone records.  He promises the group that they will be
"one of the stars of the Play-Tone galaxy."  He becomes their agent and
mentor, but not their friend.  It is strictly business.  In one scene
he tells Jimmy that he is the boss and, "I don't want any of this
lover's lament crap.  I want something upbeat, something snappy."
     The group has great fun being one of those Play-Tone stars and
traveling with the other luminaries to state fairs.  While their record
is climbing the charts, the other star's careers are in steep descent;
nevertheless, the Wonders are in awe of them and treat them as
demigods.  This part of the show is quite cute and is complete with
go-go dancers in halter tops and skin tight polyester pants behind the
groups.  The costumes by Colleen Atwood (LITTLE WOMEN and PHILADELPHIA)
add to the show without overpowering it.  Similarly, the warm, almost
candlelit affect of the cinematography of Tak Fujimoto (THE SILENCE OF
THE LAMBS and SOMETHING WILD) give the picture a heavily nostalgic
feel.
     The show is almost non-stop music.  Although most of it is the
incessant playing of "That Thing You Do," the falling stars play other
songs as do some jazz groups.  The film is a musical feast albeit a
highly repetitive one.  It all makes for a high energy production and a
pleasant time at the movies.  Watch the credits at the end and count
how many of the songs were written by Tom Hanks.  I think it is about a
dozen.
     The acting by the group of unknowns playing the Wonders are all
nice, but none are particularly noteworthy.  Liv Tyler, on the other
hand, continues in the great tradition of STEALING BEAUTY from earlier
this year.  She spends most of her time looking beautiful with an empty
smile.  For variety, she sometimes changes to an equally meaningless
frown.  Her acting ability must be one of the better kept secrets in
Hollywood.
     THAT THING YOU DO is a fun movie of no consequence.  Other than
the theme song it brainwashes you with, the show has nothing memorable.
For the time you are there, it will be a completely pleasant
experience.  You will likely leave the theater feeling happy for no
particular reason.  I defy you to get that song out of your brain.  It
is stuck there forever I'm afraid.  Oh well, it sure beats those songs
from cigarette commercials that I have never been able to purge.
     THAT THING YOU DO runs a quick 1:50.  Amazingly, it is correctly
rated just PG.  There is no sex, nudity, violence, bad language, or
drug usage.  With most other writers there would have been profanity,
and probably a little dope smoking to show how cool the band was and
how much like the Beatles.  I appreciate Hanks's restraint.  The show
will probably only interest kids nine and up, but there is nothing to
offend or scare kids of any age.  I had nice time so I give the show a
thumbs up and award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Tom Hanks is a nice guy, the guy everyone in Hollywood likes, so you
figure that he didn't get his first gig as a writer/director by demanding
it.  Not that he would need to -- getting on the good side of one of the
most bankable good guys in movies is a pretty smart business move, so
someone was going to give him a shot.  It could only be a fringe benefit
for Fox if Hanks' debut effort turned out to be a good film or a
successful one, and it is entirely possible that they may have gotten
both.  THAT THING YOU DO! is a nice movie, and one which a lot of people
are going to like, even if it falls apart at its conclusion.
     THAT THING YOU DO! opens in 1964 in Erie, Pennsylvania, where young
Guy Patterson (Tom Everett Scott) is working in his father's appliance
store by day and polishing his skills as a jazz drummer by night.  When a
local rock and roll band loses its drummer to an injury right before a big
talent contest, the members recruit Guy to sit in, and he joins Jimmy
Mattingly (Johnathan Schaech), Lenny Haise (Steve Zahn) and the bass
player (Ethan Embry) in the newly christened the One-ders.  Not only do
they win the contest, but their catchy original song "That Thing You Do"
becomes a local sensation.  In a blur, the One-ders become the Wonders,
sign with Play-Tone Records and find themselves on a national tour under
the guidance of Mr. White (Tom Hanks).  Naturally, success proves to be
more complicated than the Wonders expect.
     There are plenty of places Hanks could have chosen to take the
conflict in THAT THING YOU DO! -- Guy's father resisting his son's music
career, the deposed drummer growing bitter over missing the boat -- but by
the time we reach a scene in which both dad and drummer are gleefully
enjoying the Wonders' success it has become clear that Hanks is not
interested in that kind of melodrama.  THAT THING YOU DO! is intended
almost entirely as a playful romp, and for quite a while it succeeds.  Tom
Everett Scott, who bears more than a passing resemblance to Hanks, is a
charming protagonist as Guy; Steve Zahn, who bears more than a passing
resemblance to Hanks' former "Bosom Buddies" co-star Peter Scolari (who
himself makes a cameo appearance as a TV variety show host), is hilarious
as mischievous, wise-cracking Lenny.  THAT THING YOU DO! does a fine job
of capturing the exhilaration of newborn celebrity, nowhere better than in
a wonderfully crafted sequence where the band members hear their song on
the radio for the first time.  With so many films about real-life rock and
roll stars focused on the destructive nature of fame, it is a welcome
change of pace to find one which makes fame seem like so much fun.
     When Hanks finally decides that he does need some conflict, however,
he appears to manufacture it on the spot.  There is at least an attempt to
foreshadow Jimmy's ambivalence over the band's success, but he is such a
bland character compared to his bandmates that he barely even registers as
relevant.  Even worse served is the relationship between Jimmy and his
girlfriend Faye (Liv Tyler).  Though it had been little more than
wallpaper for most of the film, it suddenly becomes the defining crisis,
and you are likely to wonder if you missed something when Faye goes into a
tearful denunciation of Jimmy's inattentiveness.  There is not a single
scene between Jimmy and Faye to give us a sense of where their
relationship stands, nor is there a scene between Faye and Guy to provide
a foundation for the miraculous attraction which appears in the final five
minutes.  Hanks doesn't seem to know how he wants to end the story, except
that he wants it to end happily, and the effortless good humor of THAT
THING YOU DO! crumbles as soon as he tries to impose a structure.
     The strange thing is that even though Hanks bungles the big moments,
he does so many things right with the small moments that it is easy to
walk away with a smile, beginning with a great title song which actually
seems to deserve to be a hit.  Scenes at a rock and roll show (with Kevin
Pollak as a catch phrase-prone disc jockey/promoter) and a TV variety show
capture the glorious phoniness of early 60s show-biz, and Hanks evokes
HELP!-era Beatles with a montage of photo-op silliness.  Hanks himself
does solid work in the role of the all-business White, proving he's still
a much better actor than he is a director, and a considerably better
director than he is a writer.  THAT THING YOU DO! is clumsy but lovable,
the work of a nice guy who is far from finishing last as a film-maker,
even if he has a way to go before finishing first.

Author
Christopher Null
     When you're a star as big as Tom Hanks, you can do whatever the
hell your heart desires.
     Such is the lesson to be taken away from THAT THING YOU DO!,
Hanks's screenwriting and directorial debut.  And just what is THAT
THING YOU DO?  Well, if you don't know, you must live in a cave, and a
small one at that.  The title refers to the one and only hit song of
"The Wonders" (get it?).  It is a song that is repeated throughout this
film... over and over... in full or in part, a total of *11* times.  I
counted.
     Hanks's ridiculously simplistic tale follows a couple of months in
the lives of a small-time band from Erie, Pennsylvania, who almost by
accident hit it big with their titular single.  The cast is spearheaded
by Tom Everett Scott, a young man who looks, sounds, and acts exactly
like Hanks, and even has the same first name.  Scott plays Guy, aka
"Shades," the group's drummer who is somehow alternately nerdy when he
isn't being supercool.  Add on moody frontman Johnathon Schaech, who
looks down-right frightening, plus wisecracking Steve Zahn, and you've
pretty much got the band.  (Hanks plays the group's manager in later
scenes.)
     THAT THING YOU DO! takes The Wonders from playing talent shows to
pizza parlors to getting a manager to a record deal to Billboard
magazine to getting go-go dancers on stage with them, which is, I guess,
as high as a music career ever gets.  Then the band breaks up and the
movie is over, and then you get to go home and go to sleep with the
comfort that this is not a movie that's going to keep you up at night
wondering about plot twists.
     Without any bulky plot to get in the way of his perfectly linear
story, Hanks is free to do what he does best -- crack jokes like he
learned on "Bosom Buddies" with then-co-star and THAT THING cameo-man
Peter Scolari.  It's funny in the same way that the aforementioned show
was funny -- not witty, but good for an occasional laugh when someone
falls down.
     Yes, everything is funny in this Tom Hanks world of peaches, cream,
and racial harmony (this is supposed to be 1964).  I don't know if you
can blame Hanks alone for this senseless and totally obvious film that
is devoid of emotion, but I hope that Hollywood takes from this the
lesson that a big movie star does not a talented writer/director make. 
But I doubt they will.
     In all fairness, THAT THING YOU DO! is a pleasant film perfect for
a brain-dead matinee, and the theme song is a catchy tune that gets your
foot tapping quickly.  And while the movie, like the song, has a nice
beat and you can dance to it, why settle for this single when you can
get a double CD's worth of fun or intrigue in the theater next door?
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Ben Hoffman
          Tom Hanks says that he made the film to "protect my sanity."
He traveled all over the world promoting FORREST GUMP and it was
getting him down.  Wanting to do something different, he yearned for
"something creative" other than acting.   Having seen "The Compleat
Beatles" documentary, and being aware of the many, many band groups
back in the 1960s who had but one hit record and then disappeared, he
decided he'd like to write and direct a film about these "one hit
wonders."
          This then is a kind of compilation of many such groups as
Hanks saw them.  There is Guy Patterson (Tom Everett Scott) whose dull
life as a salesman in his father's hardware store is brightened by the
set of drums he plays after working hours.  This puts him in another
world.  When a group called The Wonders loses its drummer (remember
an ill Ringo being replaced temporarily with someone called Jimmy
Nichols?), Guy is ready to accept their offer to play the drums with
them.   Their identifying tune, "The Things You Do" shoots to the top
of the charts  and soon they are on their road to fame and fortune, or
so it would seem.
          Hanks uses some new actors to make up The Wonders.  There
are, in addition to Scott, Johnathon Schaech, Steve Zahn and Ethan
Embry.   The part of Faye, Jimmy's girlfriend, (Liv Tyler) is
portrayed by a very pretty blonde.  Guy's girlfriend, Tina, is played
by Charlize Theron.  Hanks himself has the role of an executive at a
record company (The Play-Tones) who manages the band.
       While the film is entertaining enough and does portray the
times, (the period of JFK being assassinated, of the VietNam war, etc.)
I found nothing special.  However, it does have some nice music and
it is recommended to anyone who lived through that era of the 60s.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The writing and directing debut of Tom Hanks is very much like his
screen persona:  pleasant, witty, and entirely inoffensive.  THAT THING
YOU DO!  is about a fictional '60's pop band (from Erie, PA) who find
fame and fortune with their first recorded song.  (That song they do,
which you'll soon love to hate, is played at least ten times during the
movie.  Or is it eleven?) Most of the story (about 90 minutes worth) is
devoted to the *rise* of the band and, once that's over, what happens
afterward is all but ignored.  No problem!  The obvious intent, here, is
a feel-good, everybody's happy period piece with lots of freshly
scrubbed faces and plenty of upbeat, uptempo, up up up music.  Few
frowns are allowed, thank you very much, which I guess means a movie
better suited to Beatles people than Elvis people.  (Somewhere you have
to make a choice.) And, if you winced at the modern-sounding soundtrack
of GRACE OF MY HEART, be prepared for more canned music.  Damn slick,
like every- thing else.  Frankly, I didn't like this movie.  Despite the
honest laughs, an appealing cast, and a couple of very personal cameos,
it was just too nice for my tastes. 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
mrbrown@ucla.edu
That Thing You Do! (R) *** (out of ****)
        Tom Hanks's screenwriting and directorial debut, That Thing You Do!,
has all the qualities you would associate with the most beloved screen actor
of the moment: fun, lively, and oh-so-nice.  It is the latter quality,
however, that becomes a hindrance, for this '60s nostalgia trifle is so nice
and sweet that it teeters on becoming bland milquetoast.
        That Thing focuses on the Wonders, a teen rock band from Erie,
Pennsylvania that is suddenly thrust into the national spotlight in 1964
when they score a major dance hit called, of course, "That Thing You Do!"
The group's members are, naturally a diverse group: there's brooding lead
singer and songwriter Jimmy (Johnathon Schaech); girl-crazy Lenny (Steve
Zahn), the lead guitarist; a goofy, geeky type known only as The Bass Player
(Ethan Embry); and the film's center, Guy (Tom Everett Scott), the drummer
who has aspirations in jazz.  Along for the Wonders' ride to success is
Jimmy's perpetually neglected galpal, Faye (Liv Tyler).
        Hanks proves to be a capable writer-director, deftly recreating the
innocent spirit of 1964, which Hanks calls "the last innocent year."  The
spirit is not only reflected in the period clothes and settings but also in
the music, which, like the other recent period music film, Grace of My
Heart, was expressly written for the film; Hanks himself had a hand in
writing four of the tunes--but not the infectious title cut by Adam
Schlesinger, which is guaranteed to stay in your head long after the end
credits have rolled (it's still playing in my mind as I write this).  It
should come as no surprise that Hanks the director works well with the
actors, eliciting charming, likable work from the entire cast, most notably
Hanks lookalike Scott and Tyler, who is remarkable in delivering the film's
biggest and best dramatic moment.  The work of the young ensemble is so
natural that they truly convince as teens of the early '60s; they do not
appear to be '90s grungers playacting "retro."
        Yet for all the light, frothy charms of That Thing You Do!, it's
nearly nice to a fault.  While this unbridled innocence in film is a
refreshing change from all the sinful cinema around these days, there is not
enough conflict to keep things consistently interesting.  Everyone is so
happy, basking in the glow of overnight success, marvelling at it
all--except toward the end, but even then the tone quickly reverts to
sweetness, ending on an appropriately feel-good note.  There isn't much of
an edge throughout That Thing--the only thing that is remotely edgy is
Hanks's turn as the Wonders' manager--and thus becomes in danger of being so
nice it's bland.
        But a little niceness goes a long way these days, and there's no
denying the entertainment value of That Thing You Do!; it's just about
impossible to hate.  It's an inoffensive, enjoyable piece of nostalgia that
is sure to leave audiences smiling and humming, if not singing, "That Thing
You Do!"--quite possibly for days.  To paraphrase a passage from the song:
Though I try and try to forget that song
It is just so hard to do
Every time they play "That Thing You Do!"

Author
Jeffrey R Moore
"That Thing You Do!," the new movie written and directed by Tom
Hanks, is the kind of movie that you would love if you rented it, and
merely like if you went to the theater to watch it.  It has great
characters, a fun story line, fine acting, and even a guest
appearance by Hanks himself.  And yet it feels as though something's
missing, something is just not there that should be.
The story revolves around a band who is struggling to make it out of
Erie, Pennsylvania.  The drummer accidentally hurts his arm right
before a show, so the other members of the band ask a mutual friend
issing, something is just not there that should be.
The story revolves around a band who is struggling to make it out of
Erie, Pennsylvania.  The drummer accidentally hurts his arm right
before a show, so the other members of the band ask a mutual friend
issing, something is just not there that should be.
The story revolves around a band who is struggling to make it out of
Erie, Pennsylvania.  They have come up with a "groovy" name (The
"One-ders," which everyone eventually mispronounces as the Oneeders,)
and a love song appropriately titled "That Thing You Do."  However,
es around a band who is struggling to make it out of
Erie, Pennsylvania.  They have come up with a "groovy" name (The
"One-ders," which everyone eventually mispronounces as the Oneeders,)
and a love song appropriately titled "That Thing You Do."  As the
band prepares to play an evening show at a diner, the drummer
accidentally hurts himself and another friend has to stand in.
During rehearsals, he seems bored and distracted, so at the actual
performance he decides to jazz up the beat to the tune, catching his
band mates off guard.  They struggle at first, but then the crowd
starts responding, and pretty soon the song is ending to thunderous
applause and calls for an encore.  Thus begins the "One-ders" ascent
to stardom, with Tom Hanks eventually entering the picture as their
guard.  They struggle at first, but then the crowd
starts responding, and pretty soon the song is ending to thunderous
applause and calls for an encore.  Thus begins the "One-ders" ascent
to stardom, with Tom Hanks eventually entering the picture as their
new record and tour manager.
Of course, as the movie progresses, and even the audience watching
the film becomes tired of the once catcy, quickly annoying title
tune, the eventual downfall of the group become evident.  The sudden
ing the picture as their
new record and tour manager.
Of course, as the movie progresses, and even the audience watching
the film becomes tired of the once catcy, quickly annoying title
tune, the eventual downfall of the group become evident.  The sudden
ing the picture as their
new record and tour manager.
Of course, as the movie progresses, and even the audience watching
the film becomes tired of the once catcy, quickly annoying title
tune, the eventual downfall of the group become evident.  The sudden
ing the picture as their
new record and tour manager.
Of course, as the movie progresses, and even the audience watching
the film becomes tired of the once catcy, quickly annoying title
tune, the eventual downfall of the group become evident.  The sudden
ing the picture as their
new record and tour manager.
Of course, as the movie progresses, and even the audience watching
the film becomes tired of the once catcy, quickly annoying title
tune, the eventual downfall of the group become evident.  The sudden
ing the picture as their
new record and tour manager.
Of course, as the movie progresses, and even the audience watching
the film becomes tired of the once catcy, quickly annoying title
tune, the eventual downfall of the group become evident.  The sudden
new record and tour manager.
The band's rise to stardom is fun to watch, from their first
appearance on a local radio station to a televised concert featuring
their song.  The actors all appear to be having fun, and Liv Tyler
gives an incredibly restrained and honest performance as the
girlfriend of the lead singer.  Everything about the movie was fine
from the beginning until the bittersweet, somewhat predictable
ending.  However, I would still have to recommend it with some
reserve.  You'd have to be a big fan of the 50's/60's rock era to
enjoy all the "concert with wild fans" scenes.  Plus, you'd have to
be able to endure multiple playings of the title song.  (Warning, it
IS catchy at first, but after 8 or 9 times it starts to get
annoying).  All in all, on video you could easily fast forward any of
those scenes and get back to what makes the movie good:  acting, not
ndure multiple playings of the title song.  (Warning, it
IS catchy at first, but after 8 or 9 times it starts to get
annoying).  All in all, on video you could easily fast forward any of
those scenes and get back to what makes the movie good:  acting, not
ndure multiple playings of the title song.  (Warning, it
IS catchy at first, but after 8 or 9 times it starts to get
those scenes and get back to what makes the movie a good movie:  the
acting.  Not the singing.  For anyone who remembers what it was like
to live through such an exciting time when rock and roll really was
new and revolutionary, or for anyone who wants to experience that
feeling, then this movie will deliver the goods.  For anyone who gets
tired of hearing "That Thing You DO!" on your local radio stations,
you might want to wait a while...

Author
dx@netcom.com
(Soundtrack) - That Thing You Do - Play-Tone/Epic EK 67828
If someone sat down to write a song that would lodge itself in my brain
FOREVER, they would have a hard time topping Adam Schlesinger's title tune
from Tom Hanks new film.  Picking up its inspiration from the Beatles,
Searchers, Beau Brummels and all the other great harmony beat groups of
the '64-'65 era, Schlesinger has penned a killer hook, and the musicians
and producers have fashioned that hook into one of this year's greatest
pieces of ear candy.
On one level it's simply a tribute to the era, but on another I think it's
a true work of pop music art - something that either would have been a huge
hit in 1964, or would have appeared on a Rhino comp in '96, leaving us all
to wonder why it *wasn't* a huge hit when it was released.
The film plays the song over and over, in full and in fragment, perhaps 10
or 11 times.  I *never* got tired of hearing it.  I ran to Tower Records after
seeing the film so I could get the soundtrack as soon as possible.  It's
the sort of single that had me thumbing up and down the radio dial in '65
trying to hear it just one more time.  The sheer exuberance of the performance
is something we just don't hear too much these days.
That said, this soundtrack album is anything but a one-hit wonder.  Hanks and
his crew have fashioned an album full of songs that evoke the era - capturing
a good part of the breadth of music that was on the charts at the time.
Starting with The Norm Wooster Singers', the film sets the stage for the second
re-emergence of rock 'n' roll, with British and American bands pulling us out
of the doldrums of teen idols and Mitch Miller inspired sing-a-longs.  Norm
Wooster's "Loving You Lots and Lots" brilliantly sounds out the inanity that
was much of popular music after the fade of rock's pioneering 50s acts.
Puting this introductory track back-to-back with the Wonder's incindiary
"That Thing You Do" lets Schlesinger's triumphantly happy tune wipe the dead
wood of Norm Wooster's marching beat out of your head.  Four more Wonders'
tracks follow, including the Marshall Crenshaw-esque "Little Wild One", the
bluesy dance number "Dance With Me Tonight", the ballad "All My Only Dreams",
and the reprise "I Need You (That Thing You Do)".  Each captures the soul of
60s pop (chiming guitars, bass string solos, effortless harmonies,
unforgettable hooks) more than I'd ever expect from "mere" soundtrack music.
Also included is "She Knows It", a single from The Heardsmen (the fictional
follow-on to the Wonders) that features some ahead-of-its-time phasing effects;
"Mr. Downtown", Freddy Fredrickson's ode to Peter Gunn; "Hold My Hand, Hold
My Heart", the Chantrellines salute to Phil Spector; The Saturn 5's surf-space
instrumental "Voyage Around The Moon"; Diane Dane's "My World is Over" - with
the sound of Petula Clark or Dionne Warwick; the early-60s harmony car rock of
The Vicksburgs' "Drive Faster"; the Beach Party rock of "Cap'n Geech and the
Shrimp Shack Shooters"; and the West Coast jazz of Del Paxton.
Who sang these?  The Wonders' vocals remind me a lot of The Rembrandts.  Anyone
know for sure.

Author
Cooper Redwine
Starring: Tom Everett Scott, Liv Tyler, Johnathon Schaech, Steve Zahn,
Ethan Embry, 
Tom Hanks, Bill Cobbs, Rita Wilson. 
Director: Tom Hanks. Screenplay: Tom Hanks. 
MPAA Rating: PG (for some language). 
Running Time: 108 minutes.
THAT THING YOU DO! is a good-natured, simple-minded movie that has a
few magic moments. I really wanted to like it, but I couldn't. It's too
boring. Despite the presence of charismatic screen personalities like
Tom Hanks and Liv Tyler, the film is not very funny, not very dramatic,
and not very romantic. And for a movie about youth, the film is
surprisingly lethargic. There may have been enough material here for 88
minutes, but the movie drones on for another full hour beyond that, and
even the music eventually becomes tedious.
The basic story is a promising basis for an entertaining film: In 1964,
four charming young men from Erie, Pennsylvania, form a rock group.
Luck is with them for a while, and their signature song "That Thing You
Do!" becomes a big hit. But success brings internal dissension that
finally causes the group to break up.
In my opinion, the best thing about the film is its evocative sense of
time and place, which I suppose should be credited to Tom Hanks as
director. On the other hand, the music in the film is disappointing
since it relies too heavily on playing "That Thing You Do!" over and
over. The song is fun the first couple of times, but it started to
grate long before its eleventh playing near the end of the film.
The actors who play the young rockers are fine in their roles, and Liv
Tyler is well cast as the pretty and sweet girlfriend of one of the
musicians. Tom Hanks plays the supporting role of the record executive
who becomes the rock group's manager, and I must say that I found this
usually reliable actor rather unconvincing here.
However, my main criticism of Hanks is in his capacity as
screenwriter.  There is too little conflict in the film for it to be a
good drama, and there is too little that is funny in the film for it to
be a good comedy. The maddening thing is that the core of a very good
movie appears to be present in THAT THING YOU DO!, but what seems to be
needed to bring it out is more pathos, faster pacing, and less
monotonous music.
Even though I didn't like this movie, I recognize that people who think
Tom Hanks can do no wrong, people who are nostalgic about the early
1960s, and people who enjoy fantasies set in the recent past will
probably think that THAT THING YOU DO! is pretty good.  However, for
those not falling in any of the above categories, this film is at best
something to have running off videotape in the background while doing
unpleasant chores.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THAT THING YOU DO *** Written and directed by Tom Hanks. Photography,Tak
Fujimoto.Editing,Richard Chew.Production design, Victor Kempster. Music,
Howard Shore. Cast: Tom Everett Scott (Guy Patterson), Steve Zahn (Lenny),
Charlize Theron (Tina), Johnathon Schaech (Jimmy), Ethan Embry (the bass
player), Liv Tyler (Faye Dolan), Tom Hanks (White), Jonathan Demme
(Director), Phil Horace (Chris Ellis), Lamarr(Obba Babatunde), Bill Cobbs
(Del Paxton), Rita Wilson (Marguerite) et al.  A 20th Cent.Corp. release.
110 min. Rated PG.
The appealing, sure-footed debut of Tom Hanks as writer and director takes
us on a trip that follows the quick rise and disbanding of a rock group
from Erie, PA. It's a sweet picture that is in keeping with the movie
persona of Tom Hanks, though not necessarily with his role in this work.
It is February 1967, when the Beatles appeared on the Ed Sullivan Show and
revolutionized pop music. Guy (Tom Everett Scott), far more devoted to his
drums than to humdrum work in his father's appliance store, is recruited by
a garage-band for a one-night gig as replacement for the member who broke
an arm. They play "That Thing You Do," composed by guitarist Jimmy. Guy's
vigorous beat  is a decisive factor in making the group win first prize.
The One-Ders foursome have a fifth member who is no fifth wheel.  Jimmy's
cahrming girlfriend Faye (Liv Tyler) is always around, helping
enthusiascticcally, while bimboesque blonde Tina, Guy's girl, is more
concerned with her looks than with the band. Later, smitten with her
hunkish new dentist she will part from Guy. She is played by Charlize
Theron, unrecognizable from her very different role as the Norwegian
accolyte in "2 Days in the Valley."
The band goes on to local fame, gets more provincial celebrity after
stranger Phil Horace, a small-time promoter, becomes their manager and puts
their signature song on the radio. Then, realizing that he did all he
could, Phil passes them on to Mr. White (Hanks) of Play-Tone Records.
Rebaptizing them "The Wonders," Mr. White takes the boys on to bigger and
better things.
That the movie has a slight subject cannot be argued, but this is no big
deal  since Hollywood makes so few think-films, hardly ever  probes into
Big Themes, and, except for special effects, makes pictures (from comedies
to blockbuster actioneers) that are slight in content.
What's interesting about "TTYD" is the accumulation of details that don't
shout at you, that may not even be noticed, yet build up to a very good
debut of Tom Hanks as writer-director.
In no hierarchical order here are some good points scored by Mr. Hanks:
1) The music. The audience takes a nice shower in 60's groove music--not
great but typical and right for the group. Guy's brief jamming with his
idol Del Paxton (a black jazz pianist) is delightful.The title song, much
repeated in different settings, gets increasingly better and more
energetic. The songs are all original (some are by Hanks) and sound like
authentic 60s, not pastiches.
3) The period look of the film. It is well-studied to plunge us into the
mid-60s, from overall ambiance to details of artifacts. The Patterson
Appliance Store is a cunning way to show us refrigerators, stoves, clock
radios, TV sets, rabbit-ears and such. There's minute attention to items
from dresses or "diamond"-studded eyeglass frames. Unlike films that lean
too heavily and colorfully on period recreation, this one handles visuals
discreetly,with no overkill.
4) The smitten audiences. Again, cleverly but not broadly weighed are the
details about them. Note especially the excellently sketched flirtatious
girl early on.
5) Tom Hanks himself. A real pro as the Play-Tone company man and as
manager, he is forceful but not dictatorial, friendly but not gushing, cool
but not cold, knows all about promotion. Calmly, without caricatural
cynicism, he is upfront about his function, which it to make money for
Play-Tone.
6) Un-cliched editing. In their first major appearance, in Pittsburgh, the
band, subject to jitters, falling mike stands and sound-system glitches,
fails in the afternoon performance. It's after this that Mr. White takes
over. He sends them off to the evening session with advice not to get
rattled if they don't do well. We don't see that performance which, in most
films would be included as a small triumph. Instead, the movie says nothing
but cuts to the next concert, in Columbus, Ohio.  Also, the eventual new
twosome of Faye and Guy is not heavily telegraphed.
7) The tour and California. A good montage parallels the Wonders' rise on
the Billboard and carefully dosaged details of the boys' sartorial looks,
self-confidence, character differences, and performances with back-up
singers.
8) Hanks again. He does not try to catch the spotlight but by keeping his
role to exactly what's necessary in relatively little screen-time, he
manages the tour-de-force of being a big, functional presence--and to make
himself quietly likable.
9) The cast. All are good. Guy (who does remind one somewhat of a younger
Hanks) and Jimmy are interestingly handsome. Well sketched bits of
personality and behavior. Jimmy may be the nominal leader of the group, but
it is Guy who has the brains and is in the discreet limelight. Which brings
me to...
10) Ringo's Revenge. Among the Beatles, Ringo Starr was less visible,
adulated and important than the other three. Here it is the drummer who is
central to the band.
11) Liv Tyler. In all her films, from many angles she bears an eerie
resemblance to Ava Gardner, down to a miniscule strabismus that lends
women's faces a touch of dreaminess: Karen Black, Madeleine Stowe,Jane
Greer, etc.
12) The supporting cast and nice touches. In Erie, the first manager may
make you think for a moment that he is out to exploit the group, but he
turns out to be a good guy. At the L.A. hotel, African-Amercian doorman
Lamarr is a humorous, sharp and debonair fellow whose short appearances are
perfect. In the lounge, note the gentle, sly irony when waitress Marguerite
starts telling her life story. Or one of the players who, having joined the
Marines, naively does push-ups before uniformed soldiers. Note also the
Play-Tone boss who is realistically coarse and not exactly pretty in pink.
13) Contrasts. As "artistic" Guy performs, his disapproving father reads
the ad of a rival store: "Telemark. They got barbecue kits for $7.89. Open
Sundays 12 to 6. What kind of world is this when you can't stay with your
family on Sunday!"
There's more, like the movie's good, fast but not hectic pacing.
There's a fantasy side to the film. The young people are very clean-cut,
their milieu seems free of booze, drugs, sex or four-letter words. Faye and
Jimmy have been going together for two-and-a-half years, yet apparently
only kissed a lot. All that adds a 50s tone to a movie set in the 60s,
which may be anachronistic but adds to the film's charm.

Author
A. S. Lenahan
        THAT THING YOU DO! is the latest Tom Hanks film (meaning that it
will more than likely be box-office gold).  Past that, it is a good,
but not great, musical comedy.  It is entertaining, fun, a
crowd-pleaser, but also unoriginal and ultimately unmemorable.  The
largest stumbling block is the weak story, but the music, acting, and
sets/costumes make THAT THING YOU DO! an enjoyable evening at the
movies.  However, I doubt any of that matters... this film will do
well because of the involvement of  Tom Hanks as writer, director,
contributing songwriter, and actor.
        The plot is simple and eternally familiar.  Set in 1964, a talented
group of young musicians form a band, win a talent competition, and
(what else?) rocket to instant stardom.  A movie based on this
formula comes out every two years or so, so if you miss this one,
dont fret (although youll also miss Tom Hanks! Horrors!).  The
script is so reminiscent of so many other films, one wonders if
screenwriter Hanks might have used some kind of fill-in-the-blanks
screenplay template... sort of a Hollywood "Mad Libs".  The band is
named the Oneders (later the Wonders), the four lads play a catchy
tune called "That Thing You Do", and the song is recorded as a
record.  Along the way, we learn all the expected lessons: music
producers are sleazy, all glory is fleeting, the film industry is
shallow, etc.  Surprisingly, the film spares us the moral about
eating all our vegetables, but not by much.  All the characters are
based on others from some other film or television show.  The Wonders
are the Beatles (the movie itself even hints at this).  Theres a
typical over-emotional girlfriend (played by Liv Tyler).  The role
Hanks wrote for himself is surprisingly unglamourous: hes a sleazy
music producer, loosely based other similar shady charactersfrom
other films.  Theres even a philosophical Jazz musician, surely
familiar to anyone who remembers Bleeding Gums Murphy from "The
Simpsons".  Actually, the plot is not a bad one, but certainly not
original or fresh by any means.
        The acting is quite good, despite the small number of big names in
the cast.  All four of the Wonders have individual personality, and
are all very likable.  When I saw TTYD! in a theatre, the audience
applauded after every big musical number, a good sign for a film
obviously intended as a crowd-pleaser.  Hanks gives a fine
performance despite his stiff, unemotional character.  Tyler is
suitably whiny as well, but her character doesnt really become
important until the end, although a better script could have changed
that.  On a trivial note, vigilant viewers may be able to spot the
guy from the "Aaron Burr" milk commercial as a fan.  Collectively,
the acting adds a lot to the enjoyability of this movie.
        The most important aspect of TTYD! is the music.  The title tune
sounds as though it were pulled from some mid-sixties vinyl record. 
Its a catchy, memorable tune, so the audience might find it running
over and over in their head even after the credits roll.  The rest of
the soundtrack is a mixed bag; the pop music might take you back, but
the stilted, plastic jazz will leave any fan cold.  Oddly enough,
some of the music credit goes to Hanks (Im surprised he didnt try
to be the gaffer or key grip as well...).  TTYD! is a music film, so
the expectations are high, but the movie never disappoints.   
        Where the true charm of TTYD! lies is in the great nostalgic sets
and costumes.  Although the flashiest sets are the television studios
and hotels later in the film, my favourite was the electronics store
where it opens.  The authenticity of that set alone enhanced the
movie experience, at least for me.  The glistening pastel appliances,
the props, advertisement displays, even the overall washed-out
look--if that scene doesnt take you back to the mid-sixties, nothing
will.  The costumes are equally well-crafted, although perhaps less
spectacular.  The visual look of TTYD! has a certain realness rarely
seen in other period piece films.
        Obviously, TTYD! is not for those who demand a brilliant plot, but
it remains a fun and engaging movie.  Its intended as a fun film,
and accomplishes just that.  If only the plot offered *something*
new.  Anything...

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Tom Everett Scott, Jonathan Schaech, Liv Tyler, Steve Zahn, Ethan
Embry, Tom Hanks, Charlize Theron, Obba Babatunde Director: Tom Hanks
Screenplay: Tom Hanks Music: Howard Shore U.S.
Some of us carry the burden of two jobs in our life time - the job we do
for a living, and the job which we wished we were doing for a living.
Then there are those who find the two are actually one and the same -
how blessed are they.
So it is not surprising when a talented drum player (Everett Scott),
locked in the confines of a stuffy hardware store, doomed to follow in
the footsteps of his father the owner, breaks free of his paternal
chains to seek his life long dream - playing music. Dreams become
reality and soon the band 'The Wonders' is formed. Their one hit 'That
Thing You Do' climbs the record charts at a record-breaking, phenomenal
rate. This song is repeated so many times during the movie, that you
will either be jumping up and down on the dance floor with the 'Go Go'
dancers, or tearing your hair out with utter insanity.
Tom Hanks in his directing debut, has chosen a movie piece well suited
to his genre. He seems to relish and thrive on anything 60'ish. Namely,
the chocolate eating, mother loving 'Gump Man', or plummeting rockets of
the 13th attempt which both fall somewhere on the JFK timeline. So where
does 'That Thing You Do' fit into this picture - well probably some
where between Vietnam and the Moon.
Hanks has decided to fill his movie with youth, colour and music. These
new faces Everett Scott, Tyler, Schaech and Zahn makes the most of their
opportunity to display their talents in 'That Thing You Do'. Knowing
full well that this 'make it' or 'break it' movie could terminally label
them as 'One Hit Wonders' or 'Multi-hit Contracts'.  An adventurous
directing effort by Hanks, who also contributed to the musical score of
this movie.
Whatever caused the ultimate destruction of the 'Beatles'? Some people
will say Yoko Ono, others will say anti-psychotic medication. Who knows?
Maybe they just got tired of each other. In this movie, it only requires
the selfish ambition of one individual, to destroy the web of friendship
which was in truth the basis of this band's success. A pleasant movie at
any level, but unfortunately, 'That Thing You Do' doesn't quite do it
for me.
Pop Feel Scale: 0% Madonna / *THE WONDERS* / The Beatles 100%
