Title
Review for Homeboy, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
THE HOMEBOY (2000)
Rated R; running time 95 minutes
Genre: Comedy
Official site: http://www.thehomeboy.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0160370
Written by: Rick Kronberg
Directed by: David Gebroe
Cast: Dave McCrea, David M. Wallace, Downtown Julie Brown,
Benjamin J. Cain Jr., Soby, Keith Hunter, Victoria Rong, Ben Wang,
Audrey Mar
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamshomeboy.html
When reviewing independent flicks, especially those where I was asked to
honestly critique them, I'm always concerned about how my review might
impact negatively on that filmmaker's career.  Not to brag on myself - I
haven't ruined any careers yet (I think) - but I sure don't want to be
the one responsible for squashing the next [insert name of Great
Director, here].  Then again, I also don't want to be responsible for
unleashing the next [insert names of abominable directors of
MONKEYBONED, STUPORNOVA, LAME TAME WEST, UNLUCKY NUMBERS, et al, here].
Still, I worry about the fine line between giving my honest opinion, and
wanting to promote films outside of the mainstream.  The big studio-paid
boys and girls, I figure, can take care of themselves; I reserve the
bulk of my wrath and disdain for them with no hesitation.  But, I'm
getting ahead of myself.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**)
After a three year drought following his breakout hip hop CD, rapper
MC*2 [uh, Squared, as in "that Einstein sh*t"] (Dave McCrea) finds
himself teetering on the precipice of "Beyond The Music" status; things
are so bad for Squared in his suburban New Jersey home, that he only has
club soda to offer his guest with their cheeze doodles and caviar.  Even
Squared's prize kitchen sink - er, sorry; Wentworth - no longer loves
him.
With the help of agent Don (Soby) and producer Jarvis Alley (Benjamin J.
Cain Jr), Squared does an interview with entertainment reporter Tallulah
Jones (Downtown Julie Brown), who doesn't take kindly to the White
rapper calling Jarvis "nigga" - a phrase which she objects to as "ugly"
and "despicable", but that Jarvis himself seems more tolerant of hearing
come from long-time friend Squared.  "After all," the men reason, "it's
'nigg...A'".
Upset after Jones threatens to expose what she implies is Squared's
latent racism, Square is surprised to find out that the sink...er,
sorry; Wentworth...repairman is not mild-mannered Wendell Everyman, but
is instead Squared's childhood icon, White hip-hop legend Hoolie
Hooligan (David M. Wallace).  The question is, is Wendell ready to give
up his low-key life and become a Hooligan again?
The Upshot:
With a lead like the one above, I bet you thought I'd spend the next few
paragraphs apologizing for what I perceive to be a bad movie.  Guess
again.  I can't, in good conscience, call THE HOMEBOY a *good* movie,
but with one notable exception, it did manage to keep me interested, and
entertained; and it even provoked a few laughs and an AMEN! or two along
the way.
Since I mentioned a "notable exception", let's get him out of the way
first.  David M. Wallace, as Wendell/Hoolie, did absolutely nothing for
me.  Bad enough that his accent was far more indicative of
Australian/New Zeland origins than his purported British citizenship -
and that either way, I could barely make out a thing he said throughout.
No, Wallace's true crime is that he played Hoolie much too Large, to the
point where his irritation factor extended far beyond the reaction
Hoolie was *supposed* to induce in the viewing audience.  I found myself
extremely grateful for those moments when Hoolie would shuthell up; his
every utterance made me want to thrash him with that huge spanner.  A
little less Hoolie, or even just a wee bit more subtle Hoolie, would've
worked better for me (yes, I know: "Hooligan".  There's that Subtlety
thingy again...)
With Wallace playing Hoolie like there's no tomorrow, there wasn't room
enough for me to despise Downtown Julie Brown (the oldschool MTV-jock
most in need of a duct-tape-to-mouth operation).  She was used just
sparingly - and effectively - enough to keep my "must beat down Downtown
Julie Brown at every possible occasion" tendency at bay.
Actors I have Issues with aside, I was pleasantly surprised by Dave
McCrea's portrayal of Squared.  The big gold chain on the video's back
case cover should've clued me in that his would be more of an old school
rapper portrayal than a more modern day bile-spilling Eminem-wannabe
(though Squared got checked on his paradoxical statements quite nicely;
and conversely, Eminem isn't given a break, considering that he's more
complex than the media prefers to portray him.  But that's Another Issue
For Another Time).
McCrea was well-matched by Benjamin Cain's calm, sensible producer,
Jarvis Alley.  Actor Soby (huh?) threatened to work my last nerve, but
he had some of the best lines in the movie (with no sense of context to
go on, you'll just have to trust me that "oh jesus...it's with a 'k'!"
is one of them).  And in true "imitation is the best form of flattery"
fashion, director Dave Gebroe's decision to follow in Kevin Smith's
footsteps by having Keith Hunter play Beatbox as a Silent Bob-like
character (even more humorous, considering a beatbox is anything *but*
silent), worked well for me.
But you know what, Gebroe?  I *really* could've done without that nasty
toilet scene.  Fo' real doe.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
   Two "Ethnic Factors" for the price of one:
Though the whole bit with Squared falling hard for a Chinese Chick
(played by Victoria Rong) was way out of control, adding very little of
consequence to the rest of the movie [except the nasty toilet scene, for
which Gebroe needs an old-fashioned butt whuppin], the reaction of Lin
Chan's mother (Audrey Mar) and father (Ben Wang) to the new couple, was
great, both as mere entertainment, and as a quick peek into the politics
of mixed marriages.
And of course, the central Issue of the movie - namely, who can, and
cannot, use the term "nigga/nigger" - was handled well here.  In fact, I
would've been just as happy if Gebroe and company had concentrated
exclusively on this issue, excising Hoolie Hooligan altogether.  Still,
I applaud Gebroe for the way he addressed, and ultimately "resolved",
the "nigga" conundrum.
[and, for the record, I don't go for *anyone* using that term.  ya dig?]
Bammer's Bottom Line:
It's easy to judge a videotape by its cover.  In the case of THE
HOMEBOY, with its thug-lite posing White rapper and friends lingering in
the background, that prejudgement would be a mistake.  Uh, except for
that Hooligan character.  He was pretty much the way he looked on the
cover.  Ooh, what a weirdo.  But if weirdo characters in the vein of
Kevin Smith's creations don't turn you off, or if you're more into
Vanilla Ice than Eminem (assuming you even know who either is), THE
HOMEBOY might be worth a look-see.  My props to producer/director Dave
Gebroe for defying my expectations...but you might suggest to Mr. McCrea
that that snarl of his isn't the best way to cruise chicks, eh?
THE HOMEBOY (rating: flashing yellowlight):
Well, that was...strange.  I can't say that I liked it; it'd be more
accurate to say that I found it intriguing, bizarre, "Dogma"-like in
spots - and quite truthful, in its way.  And yeah, strange.

Author
Christopher Null
Imagine what would happen if Vanilla Ice showed up to fix the sink at
Eminem's house, and you've pretty much got the gist of The Homeboy. 
Dave Gebroe's wacky comedy gives us fading rap star MC2 (Dave McCrea),
who slowly figures out that his British sink repairman is in actuality a
faded rapper named Hoolie Hooligan (David M. Wallace).  "Squared" finds
he's on a similar trajectory, so naturally he recruits the once-huge
Hoolie to help him mix it up.
But when Hoolie gets smashed on 40's and the other trappings of the
modern gangsta, things get a bit hot, and Squared sees his minor empire
crumble before his eyes.
It's all played for laughs, thank God, and this little indie film has
plenty of them (when you can hear the jokes, that is; bad sound is a
perennial problem for indies).  Wallace (who has no other screen credits
but looks just like Billy Connolly) is often hilarious -- my favorite
moment being when Hoolie puts a chopstick in a pencil sharpener to
invent the "sharpstick" -- both eating utensil and deadly weapon.
The same can't be said for McCrea, who is supposed to be a pitiable
semi-loser despite his triple platinum stature but is really just an
unlikeable cad who you want to see get his comeuppance.  Unfortunately,
Gebroe puts Squared in a hero's boots -- even taking us down one
ill-advised path that has the guy falling in love with the waitress at a
Chinese restaurant and then trashing her parents' bathroom.  Those
expecting a Wayne's World type kung fu showdown with dad will be let
down.
The lone "star" in the film is MTV's Julie Brown ("Downtown" Julie
Brown, not fat Julie Brown), who essentially plays herself with a
different name and working for a different music television channel. 
Her subplot, which involves her anger over Squared's use of the N-word,
goes on for a looooooong time ultimately to get paid off by a small gag
from Hoolie in the end.  But like the Chinese family arc, it doesn't
really make it.
Thanks to Wallace's scenes -- and I wish there were more of them -- the
film is watchable and often enjoyable.  It'll take some doing to get
this indie into a bunch of theaters, but should you stumble upon it on
cable one drunken night, give it a go.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
