Title
Review for Blessed Art Thou (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Norm Schrager
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/06577663ed95e8618825695d00660958?OpenDocument
I'm usually a sucker for a Disney movie.  Blessed Art Thou, screened at
the Boston Film Festival, is a Disney movie of sorts, but this ain't no
Little Mermaid.  The only Disney involved here is Tim Disney,
writer/director of this tale of theology, faith, and the sexes.  The
plot alone could make his great uncle Walt thaw out, and this
live-action film as a whole is appealing, gentle, and hopeful, despite
its weaknesses.
At a quiet monastery on a vineyard, Brother Anselm (M.E. Hackett) claims
to have witnessed a true miracle.  He purports to have seen the angel
Gabriel himself descend to Earth and initiate a sort of "connection"
with Anselm, one that Disney smartly keeps vague.  There's further
confusion in that Disney actually shows us the encounter, a strangely
homoerotic visual that might have worked well in a dream sequence in the
Village People's Can't Stop the Music.  Toss in the Brother's
androgynous look, and Blessed Art Thou is an exciting little mystery
right from act one.
The older, superior brothers (played by a crew of character actors led
by Bernard Hill, Captain Smith in Titanic) question Anselm's reports. 
But then Anselm's meeting with Gabriel seems to motivate another, well,
miracle.  Some reviewers have chosen to give this one away, but I do
believe the plot point to be a spoiler, so I won't.  It's enough to say
that it tests the faith of every member of the small order, in one way
or another, and creates infighting within the previously peaceful
monastery.
Disney, working from a story by Rachel Ingalls, does a fine job giving
the narrative its due time to evolve and develop, but the script peters
out where it counts the most -- at the end.  The big finale that we hope
we'll get doesn't have the passion and humility of the rest of the film,
and it wraps too abruptly.
But Disney's first effort (he is credited, by the way, as a contributing
writer to 1988's Oliver and Company) is filled with pleasing details --
that of a monk's life, of the workings of a vineyard, of the
conversations that emerge between two men who have different
interpretations of faith.  That kind of attention makes a small project
like this an entertaining endeavor.  (Perhaps the biggest kick I got out
of a film with such a sweet religious bent was that it was playing two
doors down from The Exorcist.)
The director also works in an editorial of his own, commenting on the
politics of such a place, where a person of free will may join for the
love of God, but is given commands by a higher ranking human.  Visually,
there is a strong connection through Disney's lens between the cell of a
monastery and a prison cell.
But for all the heavy commentary, it's surprising how light and easy
Blessed Art Thou feels.  Depending upon your point-of-view, that could
be a strength or a weakness, but at a minimum, I expected a bit more
punch at the finish.  The film doesn't necessarily demand your 90
minutes in a theater, but, for a thoughtful, eyebrow-raising story, it
works.  You may now return to associating the Disney name with plush
toys.
Director: Timothy J. Disney
Producers: William Haney
Writers: Timothy J. Disney
Starring: M.E. Hackett, Bernard Hill, Paul Guilfoyle, Daniel von Bargen,
Naveen Andrews, Joe Spano
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Steve Rhodes
Writer/director Timothy J. Disney's BLESSED ART THOU, set in an old
California monastery that produces fine wines, relates the story of a
miracle.  (To describe the exact nature of the event would diminish your
enjoyment of the picture, so I will not elaborate further on it.  But be
careful because I suspect many other reviewers will feel it necessary to
tell you more than you strictly need to know and will spoil the movie
for you.)
The film is a drama that only begins to introduce substantial comedic
elements once it has set a reverential tone.  My audience was full of
uneasy laughter as it seemed that many viewers didn't quite know what
behavior was expected of them -- rather like not being sure when it is
acceptable to laugh in church.
In the film's opening sequence, a monk, Brother Francis (Paul
Guilfoyle), is making his confession.  "I have failed to love," he tells
his confessor.  Guilfoyle and a host of other known supporting actors
worked for scale on the production according to the director, who was at
our screening.
The monastery is racked with controversy with some believing that a
miracle has occurred and others remaining skeptical even in the face of
dramatic evidence.  The problem with the movie is that, although it
isn't a one-joke movie, it is essentially a one-idea one.  As a short
film, it would have made an intriguing half-hour story.  But as a
full-length motion picture, it quickly runs out of ideas, forcing it to
fall back on clichéd conflicts.
"They are all running in circles about scandal, reputation and
theology," Brother Anselm says.  Indeed they are.  I wished the film had
been able to make me care more about the conflict, but it left me
finding it all to be little more than a cute stunt.  I will give them
this.  Within the confines of the thin storyline, the actors did their
best.  But sometimes even your best isn't quite enough to save the day.
BLESSED ART THOU runs 1:30.  It is not yet rated but would probably be
PG-13 for brief nudity.  The film would probably not interest those
under 13.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 
