Title
Review for Cowboy Way, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
     At some point, when our collective back was turned, Woody
Harrelson became a box office draw.  All right, I'm not saying people
flocked to WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP or INDECENT PROPOSAL thanks to his name
above the title.  Nevertheless, Harrelson has demonstrated an enviable
talent for picking hits, even if that has been the only thing he has
really demonstrated in his fledgling big screen career.  THE COWBOY WAY
is in for a much harder ride towards success, facing stiff summer
competition, but whatever its box office take, there might be more in
it for Harrelson to be proud of personally than any of his previous
films.  Given the challenge of carrying a film for the first time, he
takes a tedious formula picture and singlehandedly makes it at least
moderately endearing.
     THE COWBOY WAY stars Harrelson and Kiefer Sutherland as Pepper
Lewis and Sonny Gilstrap, two New Mexico rodeo champions and longtime
friends.  That friendship is currently strained at best due to Sonny's
lingering resentment over a championship event at which the gleefully
irresponsible Pepper was a no-show.  The two reluctantly re-connect
when an old friend disappears and the trail leads to New York City.
There Pepper and Sonny encounter Stark (Dylan McDermott), a shady
character running a coyote operation bringing in illegal immigrants and
forcing them to work in garment sweat shops.  Among the victims is the
daughter of Pepper and Sonny's friend, leading the two and their
newfound friend on the New York police force (Ernie Hudson) to try to
save her the cowboy way.
     I could easily name fifty variations on this particular theme
which have graced the screen since I have been a regular movie-goer;
fish-out-of-water comedy is as venerable a genre as the Western
itself.  We all know the required elements: a plot point landing the
hero in the strange locale (usually a kidnapped or murdered friend); a
few scenes of the hero interacting with the locals, oblivious to his
own faux pas; a patient local to befriend the hero; a hissably arrogant
bad guy.  THE COWBOY WAY fits every one perfectly creating that
comfortable familiarity filmmakers seek much more frequently than
originality.  The tweaks to that formula THE COWBOY WAY incorporates
run from the obvious (the friendly cop has a romance with cowboy
mythology) to the mildly interesting (Dylan McDermott's insecure
villain), but let's be frank.  THE COWBOY WAY does not, nor was it
meant to, dazzle with its inventiveness.  In fact, there are long
stretches when it's a crashing bore.
     The showpiece here is the energetic performance of Woody
Harrelson, who has a great deal of fun with the lovably oafish Pepper.
In many ways, THE COWBOY WAY plays like little more than a series of
setups for Pepper to do something stupid, which could have been a
nightmare if so many of those stupid things weren't so funny.  His
motor-mouthed cross-country commentary, interrupted by a long silence,
is a delight; Pepper's brazen advances towards a cellist in a posh
restaurant is even more so.  Harrelson makes Pepper an eager-to-please
puppy of a guy, his every movement an ill-fated attempt to impress.
There is even a great throwaway moment near the climactic chase when
Harrelson gets out of Sutherland's pickup truck and asks, "Lock up?"
then proceeds to push the button down through the open window.  As long
as Harrelson was on the screen, THE COWBOY WAY kept me smiling.
     If only there was one interesting person for him to interact
with.  Kiefer Sutherland continues to show that screen presence is a
recessive Sutherland family trait, reading every line as though he had
something on the stove that he really needed to get back to.  Sonny is
supposed to be level-headed, but Sutherland interprets "level-headed"
as "comatose," much as he did in last year's THE THREE MUSKETEERS.
Marg Helgenberger of TV's "China Beach" has a pointless role as a New
York socialite who drags Pepper to a party straight out of MIDNIGHT
COWBOY, and poor Carlos Guzman adds to his resume of hoods.  THE COWBOY
WAY is a tired premise filled with tired-looking actors, but Woody
Harrelson was able to lasso me by the neck and take me along for the
ride.  I'd like to see a home video version where the plot is edited
out entirely; it just ends up getting in Harrelson's way.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The former bartender of TV's "Cheers" is the *sole* reason to
watch this clunky action/comedy about a pair of rodeo-riders roaming
the Big Apple to find their missing friend. When they discover that
said friend is dead, they take their own approach to solving the
crime.
     COOGAN'S BLUFF it ain't, but this clunky caper comedy has about
forty-minutes of wit worth watching. The best bits have Harrelson
stealing scenes with lines like "I wouldn't throw a bucket of water on
your ass if it were drowning." The price of admission also buys the
viewer a chance to see (a) Woody with a crew cut and (b) Woody wearing
nothing but his hat.
     The rest of the rest is a lame-brain sweat-shop subplot that stops
making sense after about an hour. The finale is an absurd horse/subway
chase that's calmed by the sight of Harrelson and Sutherland riding
horseback through The City. Remember when they still made movies
there?
     Oddly, THE COWBOY WAY has much more cruelty than the rating (of
PG-13) suggests. The demise of the villain, in particular, is quite
disturbing and parents should be wary.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Howdy, pardner.  Saddle on up, and join me on a little ride.  And,
along the way, if you spy a theater showing this new Woody
Harrelson/Kiefer Sutherland flick, THE COWBOY WAY, just keep goin'.  It
ain't worth the bother of stabling the horse.
     Well, perhaps that's a little cruel, but this movie really isn't a
whole lot better--or fundamentally a whole lot different--from Eddie
Murphy's recent BEVERLY HILLS COP III blunder.  Both pictures try to
mix action and comedy, and end up doing neither well.  Perhaps someone
this summer will come out with a picture that's both exciting and
funny, but it hasn't happened yet.
     Pepper (Harrelson) and Sonny (Sutherland) are New Mexico rodeo
champs who spend their days roping calves and riding broncos.  Despite
a friendship that goes back to boyhood days, they hardly ever talk
because of a transgression committed by Pepper a year ago.  Fate forces
conversation, however, when their buddy Nacho (Joaquin Martinez)
disappears in New York while on a quest to buy his daughter Teresa
(Cara Buono) illegally into the United States.  Hopping into Sonny's
pickup (rather than riding a couple of horses), the pair heads east for
the big city and a little motel called the Waldorf Astoria.
     The real enjoyment of any "fish out of water" motion picture
comes from watching the lead characters react and adapt to the unusual
setting.  This is what made CROCODILE DUNDEE and STAR TREK IV:  THE
VOYAGE HOME such fun experiences.  Add violence and traditional bad
guys, and you get the DUNDEE sequel, which was, at best, a huge
disappointment.  THE COWBOY WAY not only has the guns and crooks, but
long chase scenes as well.
     One of the chief problems with THE COWBOY WAY is that it spends so
little effort detailing the characters' reactions to their
circumstances and so much time attempting to craft a thriller.  There
are a lot more punches than punchlines, and the feeble comedy quickly
takes a back seat to all sorts of action-based genre staples.
     The plot is exceptionally thin (not to mention dumb), and
obviously had to be padded out to feature film length.  As a result,
there are a number of pointless scenes that serve no purpose other than
to eat up running time.  The entire "relationship" between Pepper and
Margarette (Marg Helgenberger) is pointless and distracting.
     Woody Harrelson doesn't really act his part.  Instead, he struts,
thrusting out his chin and exposing his posterior.  Kiefer Sutherland
is more relaxed and natural, but his laid-back portrayal gives his
co-star too much of the spotlight.  Dylan McDermott plays the head
villain with a typical bad guy attitude that's supposed to make the
audience hate him.  The only supporting performer worth mentioning is
Cara Buono, who makes a convincing damsel in distress.  Too bad her
role wasn't slightly more meaty.
     THE COWBOY WAY is just another in a long line of summer motion
pictures that hopefully won't amount to much at the box office or
elsewhere.  As far as I'm concerned, these guys should ride off into
the sunset and forget coming back for anything--especially a sequel.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
