Title
Review for Balto (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BALTO is a cartoon movie for kids.  Although I was bored silly by
it and think it contains unacceptably poor quality animation,
nevertheless, my son is a testament to the fact that young kids may go
for it regardless.
     BALTO is based on a true story.  It starts and ends as a live
action film in New York City's Central Park where a Grandmother (Miriam
Margolyes) and her granddaughter are looking for a statue of the real
Balto who was an animal half dog and half wolf who saved many people
during an Alaskan blizzard in 1925.  Quickly the movie shifts to a
cartoon version of the tale.
     Being a half-breed, Balto (voiced by Kevin Bacon) is not very
popular in the little isolated settlement of Nome, Alaska.  His only
friends are his sidekick, a Russian snow goose named Boris (voiced by
Bob Hoskins), as well as two polar bears named Muk and Luk (both voiced
by Phil Collins).  He does have a blossoming romance with a pedigreed
husky called Jenna (voiced by Bridget Fonda).  This romance is a take
off on the one from LADY AND THE TRAMP, but like most of this highly
derivative movie, it is a pale imitation of the genuine article.  Jenna
is being wooed by Steele (voiced by Jim Cummings) who is the current
leader of the sled dogs.
     The first part of the movie has Balto upset because he is not a
full blooded dog.  Boris reflects that, "He only knows what he is not.
If he could only see what he is."  Jenna's owner is a little girl named
Rosy (Juliette Brewer).  Rosy gets diphtheria, and as she is "the
eighteenth case this week", the doctor is all out of diphtheria
antitoxin.  Planes and boats try to get through to Nome, but as they
are over six hundred miles away in a blizzard, nothing can make it.
Finally, a train goes a little part of the way, but they need a sled
dog team to go six hundred miles to pick up the antitoxin for Rosy and
all of the other now sick inhabitants of the town.  The movie is about
Balto's bravery and his clash with Steele who would rather see people
die than Balto get the glory.
     Many heroic scenes follow and Balto muses, "since when do you need
a pedigree to help someone".  Still he has his doubts, but Boris is
always by his side with words of encouragement like, "Let me tell you
something Balto.  A dog can not make this journey alone, but maybe a
wolf can."
     So why was I bored with such an inspiring tale of the original
Iditarod sled race?  Well, I have three main criticisms of the movie.
First, if you have seen most of the old Disney feature length cartoons,
you will see little new here.  Almost every scene is one you will swear
you have seen before.  As one of many examples, the sled goes over a
breaking bridge, and Balto has just enough strength to pull the sled up
when the bridge collapses and the sled starts sliding into the canyon.
I have seen scene this many times before.
     Second, thanks to poor direction (Simon Wells), the voices have no
life to them.  None.  Compare this to any Disney film especially to
LADY AND THE TRAMP which this movie most closely resembles.  Every
character there came alive with distinctive, interesting, compelling,
and believable voices.  Here they speak in dull tones.  There is not a
single character that was believable, the worse being Steele.
Moreover, the script (Elana Lesser and Cliff Ruby) has almost no
laughs.  One of the few times I heard much laughter in the theater was
when one character hit another with a snowball.  Now, if that scene,
which is duplicated in a hundred other movies, is the best the writers
can come up with, you know the movie is in serious trouble.
     Third, the animation is pathetic and has a two dimensional stick
figure feel to it.  After the recent Disney cartoons (POCAHONTAS, LION
KING, and TOY STORY), the bar has been raised.  The quality of the
images here pale (pun intended) in comparison.  Let me give some
examples.  The colors are all washed out and the characters, see
especially the grizzly bear, are not drawn with sufficient detail and
colors.  The cels look like they have been sitting in the son too long
and the color has been bleached out.  This was not just some problem
with the print I saw because the live action part was full of rich
colors.  Take as another example the lights in the cartoon.  Lights in
BALTO are usually done as a ball of light that is bright for two feet
and then the light disappears entirely.  There is none of the natural
tapering off of real light.  Compare this to the realistic lighting
effects that are common today in feature length cartoons.  Finally,
there are a lot of falling snow scenes.  None of the animals get even a
speck of snow on them during these snow falls because I guess that
would make them slightly trickier to draw.
     BALTO drags on for only 1:14.  It is rated G and would not offend
anyone.  My son Jeffrey (age 6 1/2) gets frighten easily, but almost
nothing scared him in BALTO except for the brief grizzly bear scene
which was a good excuse for a trip to a local lap.  I think BALTO is
fine for kids of any age.  My ever agreeable son has given a thumbs up
to all of the 18 different movies we took him to this year, and this
movie was no exception.  I can not recommend that anyone waste their
time with BALTO - better to see TOY STORY for a third or fourth time.
Since Jeffrey did like the film and never got scared, since there is
nothing in it to offend anyone in it, and since we are supposed to be
big hearted during the Christmas season, I am most generously awarding
BALTO * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring the voices of Kevin Bacon, Bridget Fonda, Bob Hoskins, 
      Phil Collins, and Jim Cummings
Director: Simon Wells
Producer: Steve Hickner
Screenplay: Cliff Ruby, Elana Lesser, David Steven Cohen, and 
      Roger S.H. Schulman
Music: James Horner
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     Aside from the obvious discrepancy in animation quality, there's 
one very big difference between BALTO and films like BEAUTY AND THE 
BEAST, ALADDIN, and THE LION KING.  While the men and women at Disney 
pen their scripts with audiences of all ages in mind, the four 
screenwriters for BALTO have aimed their film strictly at the under-
twelve crowd.  This movie isn't likely to sicken adults, but it 
definitely isn't meant for them, and that's one of the reasons why 
BALTO's take at the box office is going to be dramatically less than 
what a corresponding Disney release could rake in.
     The animation is serviceable, although not eye-popping.  There are 
some scenes, mostly during snowstorms, that look impressive, but these 
are offset by a number of pedestrian, Saturday morning cartoon-like 
sequences.  BALTO certainly isn't a visual treat.  There aren't any 
show-stopping tunes, either.  With the exception of the closing song 
("Reach for the Light", performed by Steve Winwood), there's not a 
musical number to be found, which, more than anything else, accounts for 
the short running time.  For good or ill, songs tend to pad out animated 
motion pictures.
     BALTO opens and closes with short live-action sequences featuring 
Myriam Margoles and Lola Bates-Campbell.  95% of the film, however, is 
animated -- a colorful, if unspectacular, rendition of the tale told by 
Margoles to the young Bates-Campbell.  (BALTO is very loosely based on a 
true story.)  The action takes place in 1925 Nome, Alaska, where a 
diphtheria epidemic has struck.  With bad weather encroaching, the only 
way to retrieve life-saving medication from Anchorage is by dog sled.  
BALTO tells of how a half-wolf/half-dog struggles through blizzards and 
treacherous terrain to save the life of one little girl, while finding 
puppy love along the way.
     The vocal talents employed for BALTO are adequate, although not 
standouts.  Kevin Bacon has the title role.  Bridget Fonda is Jenna, 
Balto's dog girlfriend.  Jim Cummings, who was last heard in THE LION 
KING as one of the hyenas, gives voice to Balto's rival, a sort of 
canine Gaston.  Then there are the requisite comic sidekicks:  Bob 
Hoskins as Boris the goose and Phil Collins as a pair of jolly polar 
bears, Muk and Luk.
     BALTO isn't a great animated feature, but, Disney's computer-
generated TOY STORY aside, it's the only one of its kind this holiday 
season.  Well-paced, politically correct, and undemanding, the movie is 
good for children.  Its appeal for parents is another matter altogether, 
however -- but at least most of them won't hate it.  Or so Universal 
Pictures and Amblin Entertainment hope.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
John Paul Powell
Once upon a time, there was a real Balto. While cosmopolitan city folk raised
their glasses to the roaring twenties, a catastrophic epidemic cloaked the top
of the world.  
Diphtheria. Highly communicable bacteria which infiltrates the human body. 
Potent toxins saturate the bloodstream. Air passages are progressively 
obstructed. If antitoxin isn't administered, the victim can suffocate and die. 
Savage blizzards assailed the North. Helpless citizens of Nome, Alaska, held
vigils at their children's bedsides. The much-needed antitoxin couldn't be
transported by boat, train or airplane. Mother Nature had scrapped that plan.  
Sled dog "musher" Gunnar Kaasen hooked up his dogs (Balto as the lead), braved
the treacherous weather, completed the final leg of the relay and delivered 
the medicine. The "Great Race Of Mercy To Nome" succeeded. The children were
saved. To this day, an annual race is held to commemorate the altruistic 
actions of man and beast.  
Balto, the animated adventure, reinvents history. Half-wolf and half-dog, 
Balto is an outcast. The residents don't trust his unpredictable nature. They
fear he will let the wolf in him assume control, gobble up their children 
and drink from their toilets when they're not home. About as popular as TV's 
Central Park West, Balto lives in a wrecked ship on the outskirts of town. He 
ain't got cable but he's got pals: two cuddly polar bear (Muk and Luk) and 
Boris the goose (who Balto asserts is the reason the other geese fly South).  
Balto falls head over tails for Jenna (Bridget Fonda's yap). Eyes meet.  
Tails wag. Noses nuzzle. Dreadful news pours cold water on their tender
courtship. Jenna's owner (Rosy) has contracted diphtheria and the sled dog
team is MIA. Rosy's chances of surviving are slimmer than an anorexic 
attending Weight Watchers. Balto won't play dead. He's determined to 
locate the missing team and lead them home.  
It is abundantly evident that the producers were mindful of their audience. 
The Northern terrain tests Balto's endurance. Avalanches, blinding snowstorms
and frigid temperatures pound our hero. Fearsome foes test his wisdom and 
relay a profound message to children. Early on, Balto is set upon by an 
irrational, gargantuan bear. Back against the wall, Balto defends himself. He
does however attempt a peaceful resolution when his arch-nemesis Steele (Jim
Cummings' pipes) won't hand over the antitoxin.  Steele slaps him down 
over and over. Balto absorbs the blows, appealing to Steele's conscience. 
Kids don't have to be Little Man Tates to connect the dots.  
The British animators commissioned to work on Balto bring something old, 
yet new to the sketch board. Most commercial animators these days are 
cranking out high-tech polished work. The idea is to fool us into 
thinking we aren't watching a series of moving drawings. The settings in 
Balto emulate this pervasive notion. They are gloriously rendered, 
airlifting us to the heart of Alaska. What differentiates Balto is the 
characters truly look like illustrations. The simple drawings are 
curiously attractive.  
For a long while, kiddie flicks have been appallingly depressing. As 
chipper as a funeral in the rain. As uplifting as a six-storey F on 
yesterday's homework assignment. Babe. Pocahontas. Toy Story. Balto.  
Hollywood has come to its senses. Better late than never, I suppose.  
Lucky us. Let's keep our fingers and toes crossed.  
Balto is rated I for Inspirational. Gorgeous scenery + one snowball fight 
a tune sung by Steve Winwood x one bad ass bear + a live-action wraparound 
sequence x no annoying, cute musical numbers + one doggy make out scene = a 
furry role model for children.  
