Title
Review for Hol volt, hol nem volt (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Seth Bookey
(also known as Hol volt, hol nem volt; Hungarian with English subtitles,
black and white) 
I read a description of this film in 1989, and I had dreamed of seeing it
ever since. So, I was very excited to see the movie on the Walter Reade
Theatre's schedule for *Somewhere in Europe*, a festival of Hungarian
films from a variety of decades.
The problem with a dream come true is that the dream is often better than
reality, and that you are better left with your illusions. 
*Hungarian Fairy Tale* is the story of Andris, a boy whose father is
absent and whose mother is tragically killed in a street mishap. Andris
Orban "knows" his father's name--but it is the name that a bureaucrat
chose for him. According to the director (who was present at the
screening), there actually was a law in Hungary that demanded a fake name
be given to children conceived out of wedlock when the father was unknown
or unnamed. As is often the case in the old Eastern bloc, lies have a way
of ripening and coming to term when you least expect them to. So, upon the
death of his mother, Andris decides to seek out his father in the small
town where his birth certifcate says he can find him. This seems a better
idea than being sent to a state-run orphanage.
The film starts out strong, with dreamlike scenes of the first moments of
romance between Andris's parents. They meet at a performance of the Magic
Flute, where she has just sung her solo. The black and white scenes of the
couple walking around Budapest at night are really spectacular.  Also, the
scenes of Andris hiding out inhis apartment, and hoping his mythical
father will show up there are very stirring and tense.
But then Andris goes to the small town where his father is supposed to
live. He winds up hungry, and holds up a woman in her own home for food. 
Meanwhile, the bureaucrat who signed Andris's certificate is having a wee
nervous breakdown, and starts collecting all the papers he processed and
burns them.
It is possible that cultural differences have made this highly allegorical
film difficult to understand and enjoy. The significance of a bureaucrat
and his victim in communist Hungary is probably more potent for a native
audience. However, the big problem, I think from any standpoint, is the
odd finale. Why the three principal characters wind up together is not
easy to figure out. Also, the really awful special effects at the symbolic
ending really mar the film. It's almost like watching two different films
when you contrast the chase scenes at the end to the romantic, richly
photographed finale. 
The best performance is clearly that of David Vermes, who plays Andris.
Maria Varga performance as his mother Maria is also very touching and
loving.
Add a star if you know Hungarian; half a star if you really are familar
with Hungarian 20th Century history. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Peter Reiher
     A HUNGARIAN FAIRY TALE harkens back to those halcyon days of foreign film 
intellectualism, the 1960's, when no self-respecting intellectual would be 
found without an opinion on the latest Godard film, or a preference for either 
Fellini or Bergman.  Those were the days of really foreign foreign films, films
which challenged the intellect and amazed the eye.  They also had a certain 
heaviness, sometimes to the point of indigestibility.  At their best, they 
were bold and challenging.  At their worst, they were dull and pretentious.
     A HUNGARIAN FAIRY TALE is reminiscent of that sort of film, but
unfortunately, not in the best sense.  It's obscure, but not very deep.  It has
the requisite  level of difficulty and heaviness for a 60's European film, but
it isn't very  satisfying.  Director Gyula Gazdag has taken an interesting
premise, started  out on a cinematic journey, but then taken a dive into
shallow, but murky,  intellectual waters.  The resulting film has some fine
moments, but fails to  move or provoke.
     The premise of the film derives from a Gilbert and Sullivan-style
Hungarian law, still on the books.  All Hungarian children must have an
official father.   If no father is known, one is created.  Thus, some
illegitimate children have  fictional fathers, with fictional addresses and
occupations, on their birth  certificates.  Gazdag looks at such a child, and
examines what might happen if  he suddenly lost his mother before discovering
that his supposed father doesn't  exist at all.
     In some senses, this is a terrific premise.  I can easily imagine a fine
comedy, or suspense film, taking its starting point from here.  Taking the film
in one of these directions would not lead to much depth, but could  be fun.  On
the other hand, this premise could equally well serve as a jumping  off point
into a serious examination of the nature of reality, or into  totalitarian
suppression of truth, or into the roles of fathers and sons.  Or  one can
imagine a realistic social drama of a child on his own in a difficult  society.
     At first, this latter appears to be what Gazdag is up to.  But the
continued intercutting of the boy's plight with the activities of the clerk who
originally invented his father indicates that something more is going on.  This
clerk suddenly decides to destroy all of the records of children who he has
supplied fictitious fathers to.  We see a bit of the boy's story, told in a
fairly realistic manner, then some rather odd behavior from the clerk, then
we're  back to the boy.  Eventually the stories come together, and the movie
comes apart.  Gazdag suddenly breaks into surrealistic symbolism and confusing 
fantasy.
     Perhaps all of this symbolism and oddity makes sense to Hungarians.  It
made little sense to me.  Its only value seemed to be unpredicatability.
Surprises and twists are all well and good, but they work best when, in
retrospect, they make sense.  Those in A HUNGARIAN FAIRY TALE do not.  They
seem  arbitrary, suggesting a writer who didn't know how to end his script.  
     In many ways, A HUNGARIAN FAIRY TALE goes downhill.  The opening sequence 
features excellent photography, both technically and artistically.  The last 
shot is a standardly composed, poorly executed special effect.  The story-
telling is initially unusually elliptical, yet logical.  By the end, the 
method has become quite conventional, while at the same time displaying no 
logic worth mentioning.  The use of music from Mozart's THE MAGIC FLUTE early 
in the film is much more effective than its overuse at the end of the film.
     One element that remains strong throughout the film is the performance by
David Vermes as the boy.  Vermes had never been in a film before, but he 
delivers a strong performance.  As other writers have mentioned, he looks 
remarkably like a young, blond Marlon Brando, and he has some of the intensity 
of Brando, as well.  The other performances in the film are capable.
     One point in the film's favor, for me at least, is that it is in black and
white.  Black and white photography can achieve some remarkable effects, and
has a mood all its own, that even the best color photography cannot duplicate.
A HUNGARIAN FAIRY TALE has very fine photography, especially in the early part
of the film.  Cinematographer Elemer Ragalyi composes and lights shots
beautifully.  Unfortunately, by the end of the film his creativity was either
exhausted or suppressed.
     Gazdag has said, as have many other directors, that his films should speak
for themselves.  A HUNGARIAN FAIRY TALE mumbles, or perhaps speaks only
Hungarian.  In its more coherent moments, it has great beauty.  Its decline
into  incomprehensibility is thus all the more regrettable.
