Title
Review for Pandaemonium (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Nobody would blame you for thinking a film about two real-life poets would
be a real snoozapalooza, but Pandaemonium is actually quite entertaining,
thanks to fine direction from The Filth and the Fury's Julien Temple  Set in
the late 18th and early 19th centuries, Pandaemonium tells the story of the
strange relationship between William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge,
the latter of whom made a name for himself by creating some beautiful,
opium-induced poems.
The film opens in London, where Wordsworth (John Hannah, The Mummy Returns)
is hosting a gathering of the top poetic minds.  Even though Wordsworth is
considered to be dull and boring by contemporaries like Lord Byron and
Robert Southey, he is the top candidate to become the country's Poet
Laureate.  Suddenly, Coleridge (Linus Roache, Wings of the Dove) appears,
bent out of his mind and barely able to speak as he attempts to pay tribute
to his longtime friend.  A glass of wine is knocked over in slow-motion, and
Pandaemonium flashes back to the genesis of their friendship.
Years ago, in pre-revolution France, Coleridge and his wife Sara (Samantha
Morton, Jesus' Son) attempted to create a rural Utopia in which everyone
called each other "Citizen" (including their first child, who was known as
Citizen Baby).  The Coleridge clan was joined by Wordsworth, his sister
Dorothy (Emily Woof, Velvet Goldmine) and wife Mary (Emma Fielding).
Coleridge and Wordsworth seemed to inspire themselves, even though most of
their work seemed to revolve around tedious subjects like domestic life.
They dreamt of writing experimental poetry in an attempt to abandon the
stuffy prose of the time.  Then Coleridge started taking opium for a
toothache, as many of us do, which led to the haunting style by which he
made his name.  Some of the poems, like "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner,"
disturb Coleridge to the point of insanity, which is how "Kubla Kahn" was
born.  In the meantime, as Coleridge's drug-addled success grows, Wordsworth
becomes increasingly jealous, and his writer's block leads him to come up
with memorable lines like "I wandered lonely as a cow."
Pandaemonium is livened up by Temple's style, which is highlighted by odd
scene transitions that include modern conveniences like airplanes and cell
phones.  Writer Frank Cottrell Boyce, who penned the story of two creative
women in Hilary and Jackie, does a good job at establishing the relationship
between the two poets, especially in making Coleridge as addicted to
Wordsworth as he was opium.  The acting leads do well, especially Roache,
who should be getting a lot more feature-film work that he currently does.
And make sure you stick around for the closing credits, which dissolve into
a music video for the song "Xanadu."  Or perhaps you should flee the
theatre.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 USA Films/BBC Films
 Director: Julien Temple
 Writer:  Frank Cottrell Boyce
 Cast: Linus Roache, John Hannah, Samanatha Morton, Emily
Woof, Emma Fielding, Andy Serkis, Samuel West, Michael N.
Harbour, William Scott-Masson, Clive Merrison, Dexter Fletcher,
Guy Lankester
   Groovy?  A period piece about poets who are allegedly not even
studied in colleges that have dispensed with dead white males? 
Yep.  Remember that this picture was made by Julien Temple,
whose claims to fame include "The Great Rock and Roll Swindle,"
a 1980 take on Sid Vicious, a cynical doc about the
groundbreaking punk-rock band Johnny Rotten and the Sex
Pistols.  Among the high points of that charmer is an education in
marketing: specifically, how Malcolm McLaren put the group over
on the public.  This time, Mr. Temple did what he could to shuck
the traditional Merchant-Ivory mold of gauze-informed comeliness
to show that Samuel Taylor Coleridge and William Wordsworth
are not dead white males at all but rather are our contemporaries. 
Shut out their names and you'd think you were watching a
modern version of, say, singing groups who get together, accuse
each other of betrayal and fall apart. Think of Dean Martin and
Jerry Lewis among a host of others who start out with stars in their
eyes and end up with back-stabbing perfidy.  
   When we learned about the English Romantic poets we were
taught nothing about their lives.  While some say that what writers
create should speak for itself, "Pandaemonium" shows how much
their lines would be enriched if only we knew what the human
beings behind their invention were like. You'd discover that they
were not so different from us.
   Take Coleridge, for example. As portrayed with wide-eyed
ferocity and bemusement by a vibrant Linus Roach, he is both a
warning against drug addiction and an plug for its use.  How so? 
When Coleridge took a spot of laudanum, or opium, with water--a
drug which was apparently legal in the England of the early
1800s--he saw visions, hallucinations not unlike those
experienced by users of LSD.  In one nightmarish revelation he
spotted a ship returning from a tragic voyage, all its sailors dead of
thirst from their inability to reach shore, since their vessel was "as
idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean," and realized that
the misadventure occurred when one of its mariners shot an
albatross.  Since the albatross was a bird of good will, the death of
this creature was an attack against nature.  Nature fought back
and won, compelling the killer to tell his tale to people he met--
obsessively, compellingly.  (In a dramatic flash-forward to the
present, Temple shows us a quick vision of a seagull, maybe even
an albatross, sinking into the muck--a victim of humankind's
current rape of nature: Dubya, are you listening?)  In yet another
drug-soaked dream, Coleridge conjures up Kubla Khan, an
emperor from the mystical land of Xanadu, who not only does a
stately pleasure dome decree but who makes Coleridge a famous
man indeed.  Could Sam have done this 
without the dope?  I don't think so.  On the 
other hand, the opium does its best to destroy
him.
   This tale of friendship, loyalty, betrayal and creativity focuses
most intensely on the relationship between a half-crazed
Coleridge--who could almost be a being created by the vivid
imagination of Ken Russell--and the shy, reticent William
Wordsworth with whom he collaborates intending to publish an
anonymous book of poetry which eventually gets published as
"Lyrical Ballads."   Both poets are enraptured by nature, by the
sights of England's Somerset which surround them.  Wordsworth
would eventually put his feelings onto paper with lines such as
"The sounding cataract/Haunted me like a passion: the tall
rock/The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,/Their colors
and their forms, were then to me/An appetite."  Yet this man, who
could in the same "Tintern Abbey" write in 1798 "That best portion
of a good man's life/His little, nameless, unremembered acts/Of
kindness and of love," would deceive his naive partner.
Wordsworth comes across more like a modern-day capitalist than
the communistic idealist who, in the aftermath of the French
Revolution, was all for creating a utopia with goats and cows and
sheep held in common by the citizenry.
   Temple photographs events surrounding this unusual
relationship, an affiliation in which Wordsworth's sister Dorothy
(Emily Woof), a would-be feminist for her time, makes a big play
for Coleridge--notwithstanding's the latter's marriage to Sara
(Samantha Morton) and their young child Hartley.
   The principal defect in the film is its jaggedness. We get the
occasional feeling that we're watching a series of trailers for the
movie, but then this is Temple's modus operandi from his "The
Great Rock and Roll Swindle" to his most recent "The Filth and
the Fury."  That cavil aside, Temple portrays the world at the turn
of the century as in many ways like today's world in the
technological and political changes illustrated by experiments with
balloons, electricity and in the case of France with the toppling of
the monarchy.  In an almost Dogme 95 fashion, he captures the
indoor scenes with only the candlelight used by the characters,
but when he steps outside, we see the pristine glory of Somerset's
hills, whose beauty belies the dirty politics engaged by
Wordsworth against his friend and colleague.
   Samantha Morton does not have all that much to do as
Coleridge's wife and though the villain is supposed to get the best
lines, the movie is dominated by Linus Roache's intensity.  Emily
Woof gets the dominant woman's part in what could be, I
suppose, considered villainous, as a Judith-Nathan style family
breaker.  An bizarre epilogue takes us to the year 2001, an urban
center portrayed with a modern, pop soundtrack in contrast to the
classical themes throughout the film--yet a final reminder that the
more things change, the more they remain the same.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 123 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
