Title
Review for My First Mister (2001)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
Leelee Sobieski delivers the best performance of her career in Christine Lahti's
MY FIRST MISTER.  Both funny and touching, Sobieski plays Jennifer -- she
prefers to be called simply J -- a character who's the complete opposite of the
leader of the math nerds she played in NEVER BEEN KISSED.  Like the highly
acclaimed GHOST WORLD, MY FIRST MISTER concerns the world of rebellious teens. 
But for my money, MY FIRST MISTER is a much more accessible and successful
film.
J is an angry and lost teen without friends of any age.  Our first glimpse of
Sobieski is a shock, since we think of her as the sweet girl-next-door type. 
She is dressed from head to toe in black, has most of her body pierced and
metalled and is covered in tattoos.  With a pair of binoculars, she uses them to
spy with one end and to distort and make fun of her world with the other end.
Having long since given up on life, 17-year-old J finds her salvation in a
clothing store owner, Randall (Albert Brooks).  She calls him "boss man" and
"sir" at first but later goes with just R.  With great chemistry together,
Brooks as the supportive straight man and Sobieski as the needy and sarcastic
jokester, they form a relationship that's more than paternal but less than
lovers.  Certainly everyone, especially those at her favorite coffee place
(Bourgeois Pig), figure that, at 49, he must be her father.  She has a wacky
mother and a taciturn stepfather (Carol Kane and Michael McKean) as well as a
freeze-dried hippie, biological father (John Goodman), but she's never been able
to communicate with any of them.  
When R gives J a job in his store, he forces her to make herself more
presentable.  After a painful sequence watching her remove her body metal, we
witness J's transformation from heavy metal rebel to a bit more sedate teen. 
Costume designer Kimberly Tillman is careful to give her a black look that shows
she has changed but far from completely or necessarily permanently.
Jill Franklyn's script is sharp and dead-on in its humor and its pathos.  "I'm
old.  I'm George Burns," R tells J when he tries to convince her that he's too
old for her.  "Who's George Burns?" she asks in reply.  In truth, J and R are
soul mates.  Neither has any friends, and both have been miserable until they
formed their bond.  Other than the age and clothes, the main difference between
them is that J contemplates suicide and engages in self-mutilation.  
Lahti has a gifted touch with her material.  We sympathize with both J and R,
but we never feel manipulated by any cheap theatrics.  You will laugh, you may
cry and you will certainly be touched by this unusual story of these two, new
best friends.
MY FIRST MISTER runs 1:49.  It is rated R for "language and some sexual
material" and would be acceptable for teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 12, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
When Jennifer 'call me J' (Leelee Sobieski, "Joy Ride") loses her job
at a fringe goth/punk shop, the pierced and tattooed teen heads for the
local mall.  Amused by watching an older man decorate the window of a 
men's shop, J asks about his 'Help Wanted' sign.  Randall (Albert Brooks, 
"Out of Sight"), appalled by her appearance, suggests she return without
her face jewelry.  Both are surprised when she does. J and R fall into an
unusual relationship in debuting director Christine Lahti's "My First
Mister."
J is the typical, alienated, friendless teen.  Even Randall guesses she
has a copy of Sylvia Plath's "The Bell Jar" by her bedside (along with
plenty of Anne Rice).  As the credit's role, J's writing suicidal goth
poetry and decorating it with her own blood.  Her mom (Carol Kane, "Addams 
Family Values") is a chirpy, oblivious type remarried to a man J thinks
is named Bob (Michael McKean, "Best in Show").  She rebuffs any interest
shown to her in school and informs us 'I don't think of myself as a girl
or a woman, just the opposite of a boy.'  J frequently imagines exaggerated
features on the people around her as she zones out on their words, just
like 'Ally McBeal.'
Randall, whom J dubs R, is a fifty-ish guy sleepwalking through the routines
of life.  Yet Randall is a truth teller not afraid to confront J's subversive
nature.  Believably, they intrigue each other, with J drawn to R's dry 
sense of humor ('I'm usually home by 9.'  'What happens at 9?'  'I turn into
the same person.').  When J spies Randall speaking to a woman of his own
age (Mary Kay Place, "Girl, Interrupted") outside the store, she throws a 
jealous snit by creating an inappropriate window display.  After a 
confrontation over trust, J and R draw closer together, with J revealing her 
self-mutilation and R confessing his phobic fears.
Leelee Sobieski simply shines as J, coming to life once she's picked her
oddball partner.  This young girl can really make love beam from her eyes,
just as withdrawal and scorn flashed from them in earlier scenes.  As she
loses her outer goth trappings (she asks R to pick out work clothes for 
her then yells 'I look like a Republican!' in horror), her carriage becomes
more erect, her head held higher.  Brooks is almost as good as a man who
temporarily takes one foot out of the grave.
But both are let down by Lahti's direction and television writer Jill
Franklyn's script.  This pair, initially reminiscent of the Thora Birch/Steve
Buscemi pairing of "Ghost World," are never allowed to explore the sexual
nature of their relationship.  Instead, just as things reach that stage,
we're thrown into a Lifetime television movie full of every cliche imaginable.
The store, where the pecking order gave shape to the relationship,
is forgotten.  By film's end, family new and old is gathered around
a dinner table, presided over by Brooks on one end, and Sobieski, made
up by this time to look like, I swear, an Eastern European matriarch.
John Goodman, as J's real dad, looks like the Halloween version of a hippy.
The film's further undone by an execrable score that doesn't even have the
wit to skewer the elevator music it so resembles.
Usually, fine performances can elevate a film, but not this time.  Lahti
has undermined her stars and delivered dreck.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten 
 Paramount Classics 
 Director: Christine Lahti 
 Writer:  Jill Franklyn 
 Cast: Albert Brooks, Leelee Sobieski, Mary Kaye Place, John 
Goodman, Michael McKean, Desmond Harrington 
 Screened at: Broadway Screening Rm. NYC 10/9/01 
   While relationships between older men and younger men are 
de rigeuer in the movies--considered far more acceptable than 
the reverse--when the age difference is more than, say, twenty 
years, a quirky kind of poignancy can result. This is the case with 
Christine Lahti's "My First Mister," which may be yet another 
story about two lonely people who find themselves by finding 
each other, but despite its undeserved sugary ending is 
effectively heartwarming and heartbreaking in equal measure. 
The presence of the wonderful Albert Brooks insures that the 
comic angle will not be ignored, and this time our Mr. Brooks, 
once Eddie Cantor's sidekick, is endearing as he was in his self- 
directed "Mother."  Ms. Lahti, better known to the New York 
public as a stage performer with roles in "The Heidi Chronicles" 
and "Little Murders," uses Jill Franklyn's story effectively to bring 
out a quietly humorous and ironic side of the whimsical 
comedian. 
   Lahti opens on a teen who is alienated to the point of self 
destruction, the type of young woman we often seen in urban 
thoroughfares with pierced body parts and tattoos, but who in her 
suburban surroundings stands out as a Fellini-esque freak.  As 
Jennifer, or J as she calls herself, Leelee Sobieski is 
recognizable more by her Helen-Hunt voice than by her physical 
resemblance to that celebrated actress.   With jet black hair and 
rings on just about part of her head except, notably, her ears, 
Sobieski performs in the role of an outsider in her school, in her 
home and in her community.  Surprisingly she is the only one in 
her English class with the punk attire and bejeweled 
physiognomy, her long sleeves covering a series of self-inflicted 
cuts that rest just above bold tattoos.  Possessing a mother, Mrs. 
Benson (Carol Kane), who jabbers and does not listen to her only 
child, a cipher of a stepdad (Michael McKean), and hostile stares 
in a conservative shopping mall, she is the type of person who 
can be saved only if she could somehow run into a like individual- 
-which she does in the guise of mild-mannered but amusing 49- 
year-old clothing store owner, Randall (Albert Brooks).  Though 
Randall's first instinct is to chase her out of his store, he 
apparently sees something in this girl that allows him to hire her 
first as a stock-room clerk only to move her up to salesperson 
after he gets her to dispense with her confrontational makeup. 
   "My First Mister," which opened the Sundance festival in 
January 2001, treats these soul mates as people attracted to 
each other by both their differences and their affinities.  He 
dresses conservatively, not only to please his customers but to 
keep a low profile as though announcing to the world that his life 
is stable but sad.  She announces herself as heavy metal, attiring 
herself to fit in with a young urban crowd but despite her hangout 
at a punk coffee shop known as The Bourgeois Pig, she is 
ignored by everyone her own age, not excepting the kids in her 
class with "pretentious names like Ashley."  As they meet during 
business hours, they begin to work on each other's flaws, she 
determined to loosen up the haberdasher, he bent on bringing 
out her natural good looks.  Most important, both see themselves 
as needing the warmth and comfort of friends and family, 
providing both until they can go out into the larger community to 
make their way. 
   Tension is generated as the audience ponders the limits of their 
affiliation.  Obviously friendship is involved but what about the 
sexual attraction that lies just under the surface?  As she is a girl 
with no friends her own age, we can hypothesize that the plump 
forty-nine year-old who is blessed with empathy as well as a solid 
sense of humor can appeal. When he invites her to his home and 
both simply lie back to catch a few winks, she at one point places 
his hand under her blouse.  The film would be fine were we to 
examine a bond between two people of diverse generations, 
each serving alternately as mentor to the other.  What make the 
film work big time is the barely expressed sexual tension which 
provides much of the spark in the connection. 
   John Goodman's brief and not credible role as the girl's natural 
dad, a unreconstituted hippy in his early fifties, is the film's only 
weak point.  Otherwise, Carol Kane is fine as the not-so-atypical 
mom, existing on the fringe of her daughter's life, not really 
knowing how to listen and give forceful guidance to her suicidal 
daughter.  "My First Mister" is delightfully quirkly, providing smiles 
and tears and while it is marketed as an arty work would at no 
time be inaccessible to a broad film audience. 
Rated R.  Running time: 109 minutes.  (C) 2001 by 
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
