Title
Review for Orphans (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
David N. Butterworth
        While watching "Orphans," a Scottish film from 1997 currently being
shown as part of the Shooting Gallery film series, I was reminded of a
sketch by Derek & Clive, the fictitious--and excessively profane--duo
conceived by comedians Peter Cook and Dudley Moore.  The sketch is one in
which Derek delights in telling Clive (or vice-versa) how he kicked the
crap out of a bloke who had the unmitigated temerity to say "Hello" to him
one day.
        "Orphans" often times parallels that conceit, with one of its leads
on such a violent bender that you flinch every time a minor character
approaches.  The crude language in the film, too, is as constant and
difficult-to-stomach as it is in a Derek & Clive skit: "Orphans" features
working-class stiffs from Glasgow, after all, and few niceties are spared
when it comes to telling it like it is.
        John, the "college boy" who flips out when a taxi soaks him to the
skin, flips out when a bus almost runs him over, and flips out when a bunch
of scruffy teenagers call him rude names, is bent on revenge Big Time.
Why?  To avenge the recent stabbing of his big brother, Michael.  And how
come Michael took a shiv to the ribs?  Well, he started a brawl in a pub
when some of the locals started laughing at his big brother, Thomas.  And
why were they laughing at Thomas?  Because he burst into tears while
singing a Hollies' song he'd dedicated to their recently-departed mother.
        "Orphans" often--and always--comes back to their recently-departed
mother.  In the film's opening scene, the three lads and their paraplegic
sister Sheila bestow their respects by cutting off locks of their hair and
laying them in their mother's coffin.  In the film's final act, Thomas
places flowers on her grave before trotting off with his sibs to grab a
curry.  Sandwiched between these, the insurmountable horror of finding
themselves motherless, alone in this lonely Scottish city, on the eve of
their mother's funeral, hits each grown family member and hits them hard.
        Thomas (Gary Lewis) insists on keeping vigil by his mother's side,
even if it means ignoring everything about those left living.  Michael
(Douglas Henshall) finds escape in the bottle.  John (Stephen McCole) looks
to a psychotic friend for a gun and bullets--they share a tortuous scene
that recalls the rape in "A Clockwork Orange" without the Ludwig Van.  And
Sheila (Rosemarie Stevenson), tired of waiting by Thomas' side, heads home
in her mechanized wheelchair only to encounter a cheerful girl with a smile
and a party invite.
        Sheila's is about the only good fortune to be found on a night in
which a gale force wind tears the roof off the parish church.
        "Orphans" is the feature directing debut of Peter Mullan.  If that
name sounds at all familiar it's because Mullan made a bit of a splash
playing the title character in Ken Loach's 1998 drama, "My Name is Joe."
While "Orphans" avoids Loach's rabid political agenda, it does bear some
gritty similarities to the British director's work--the pessimistic,
working-class protagonists; the attention to detail afforded its
characters; and above all, the accents of its cast of unknowns, accents
thick enough to require subtitles.  To be fair, the dialects aren't as
heavy as in Loach's "Riff-Raff," for example, but the on-screen
translations add an appreciable level of comfort.
        There *are* moments of humor in this dark, disturbing "comedy" but
they are few and far between.  "Orphans" may be brutal in its unfailing
depiction of the pain of loss but it's also brutally honest; these are
tortured, tormented souls who, for no other reason, just want their Mammy.
And that's what makes sitting through the film worthwhile, even if the
getting there isn't always easy.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Scott Renshaw
ORPHANS
(The Shooting Gallery)
Starring:  Douglas Henshall, Gary Lewis, Stephen McCole, Rosemarie
Stevenson, Frank Gallagher.
Screenplay:  Peter Mullan.
Producers:  Paddy Higson and Frances Higson.
Director:  Peter Mullan.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes, sexual situations)
Running Time:  97 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     You can't quite prepare for the possibility that your enjoyment of a
film will hinge on subtitles. Those translating captions are truly a mixed
blessing for the worldly cineaste. On the one hand, they're infinitely
preferable to wretched dubbing that sucks the life out of performances. On
the other hand, they can be undercut by techical ineptitude (fuzzy white
text that gets lost in white backgrounds) or linguistic laziness (opting
to translate only about every fourth word). Then there are the oddest
cases, where English is translated back into English due to concern over
the intelligibility of thick accents: TRAINSPOTTING, MY NAME IS JOE and
the 1997 Scottish comedy-drama ORPHANS, just now making its way to
American screens.
     There's some pretty interesting stuff going on in ORPHANS. I only
wish the subtitling hadn't distracted me virtually every minute of the
film. The bulk of the story takes place in the 24 hours before the funeral
of a Glasgow mother of four. Over the course of one long night and
morning, the four siblings deal with radically different responses to
their mother's death. Eldest son Thomas (Gary Lewis) keeps a vigilant,
self-sacrificing watch over the casket at the church after an emotional
performance at a karaoke bar. Michael (Douglas Henshall) copes with a
knife wound sustained in a fight with a man who mocked Thomas' teary song.
John (Stephen McCole) sets out with his pal Tanga (Frank Gallagher) to
kill the man who injured Michael. And Sheila (Rosemarie Stevenson) --
wheelchair-bound with an unspecified condition, perhaps cerebral palsy --
simply wants to avoid the funeral altogether.
     The siblings' adventures are entirely episodic, and therefore -- not
surprisingly -- of widely varying quality. Most compelling are the
misadventures of John and Tanga, including their stop to torment a
customer who stiffed Chinese food deliveryman Tanga on a tip and a
startling moment after John finally confronts the man he's sworn to kill.
Michael's quiet encounter with his ex-wife is also a winner, leaving so
many things unsaid that it says virtually everything. Less effective are
Sheila's troubles after her chair's power runs out, and Thomas'
over-the-top interpretation of his responsibility as number one son. The
tone varies radically as well -- I don't know what twisted flight of
writer/director Peter Mullan's fancy inspired Michael's run-in with an
ill-tempered pub owner -- but on balance the stronger segments and the
solid performances make ORPHANS well worth watching.
     Unless, of course, the subtitles make you want to apply the palm of
your hand to your forehead in a disco beat. It's not just that the
accents, though thick, seem fairly understandable without any visual aids.
It's not just that the subtitler seeks to prove that point by arbitrarily
opting to let several lines of dialogue stand on their own. No, it's
really the cringe-inducing job the subtitler does of not merely
transcribing, but translating (eliminating contextually obvious colloquial 
expressions in favor of their blander synonyms). And not just translating,
but editing (the subtitler steadfastly refuses to place a certain magic
four-letter word on screen, and often substitutes "damn" for "f***ing").
The result is an art house film experience that's intellectually
insulting: a movie delivered to a theatrical audience as though it were
the airline version.
     You can't blame Mullan for such a godawful decision; in fact, I feel
sorry for him. He's made a film which, while flawed, has some provocative
things to say about grief and family, wrapped up in turns of plot and
character that are downright Shakespearean. That should have been the film
American audiences were allowed to see, not this bizarre approximation in
which the subtitles are wrapped around the film like a strip of paper on a
hotel room toilet, sanitizing it for your protection. If this is what
subtitle purists are going to get for their buck, maybe it's time to
reconsider hiring Americans to do a dub job. I can listen to a botched,
scene-ruining translation just as easily as someone I can read it.

Author
Vince Yim
   As the film opens up, we are shown an agonizing mise-en-scene in
which three brothers and their sister pay their respects to their
recently departed mother. This somber scene barely even sets the tone
for what we are about to see: a wild romp through the night in the lives
of Thomas, John, Michael, and Sheila Flynn, all of whom are separated
after a scuffle in a bar.
   An impressive feature debut by Scottish director Peter Mullan (best
known for a role in Trainspotting), Orphans tells the tale of each
individual character as they try to make their way to their mother's
funeral the next morning. Each character is given distinct
personalities, goals, ambitions, and lives. Thomas (by Gary Lewis) is
the strict catholic that refuses to leave his mother's side. John (by
Stephen Cole) the younger brother, seeking vengeance against the one who
wounded his brother Michael (by Douglas Henshall). Sheila (played by
Rosemary Stevenson) is the disabled sister, who tires of Thomas' vigil
and leaves, only to have her motorized wheelchair break down in the
middle of nowhere. Michael is the `normal' one in the bunch, trying to
reconcile with all the family members and bring them back together for
the next day's funeral.
   While the premise lends itself to an unmarketable state (which led to
its dropping by Film Four studios), each character goes through some
very absurd moments, many breaking past the reaches of dark comedy.
Before leaving in a huff, Sheila causes Thomas to break a statue of
Mary, which he is frantically trying to piece together (his efforts are
eventually rendered moot). On one of his vengeance seeking tirades,
John's friend finds out the hard way why he shouldn't bother a man while
he masturbates (and you thought that the `hair gel' scene in There's
Something About Mary was bad). And then there's the scene where Michael
finds himself in the worst bar in Glasgow.
   Scenes like these effectively break up the somber narrative, although
a Tarantino weaned audience would with to see more of the dark and
comedic stuff. Still, the solid characterization more than makes up for
what audiences otherwise expect. With vivid clarity, this is an amazing
portrayal of a family in obvious turmoil. Michael is slowly bleeding to
death. John is about to make the biggest mistake of his life. Thomas
doesn't even care and just wishes to watch over his mother's body. And
the three of them have no idea where their sister is.
   The film also deals with some heavy religious allegory. As well as
representing various biblical figure (Thomas, as the faith-shaken
apostle; John, possibly the apostle that slices a guard's ear off prior
to Jesus Christ's arrest; Michael as an angel of sorts), there are
interesting metaphors. One such involves vengeance seeking bar patrons
chasing the evil bartender through the streets, with one of them
dropping a large stone as soon as Michael sees this (I'll let you figure
that one out). Things like these only enhance the storytelling.
   With some of the most solid acting that you'll see in a while and a
well written storyline, Orphans is easily one of the best films I've
seen in a long time. While some may lose patience with the buildup, the
payoff is ultimately worth it.
--
