Title
Review for Sinnui yauman (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One of the things I like to do occasionally in my film reviews is to
make reference to some very good film that I doubt most of my readers have
heard of and that I would like to call some attention to.  There are a lot
of decent films, and a handful of very good ones, that at this point may
exist only in the film libraries of obscure television stations, and when
these few prints disappear the films will be gone.  I would like to generate
some interest in four of these films, if not to help save them, at least to
alert people that if you do get a chance to see these films, it is a rare
chance and you should give them a try.
     Of course, there are a lot of obscure films that are showing up on
videotape today, many of them very poorly-made films, and it is ironic that
some terrific films are being over-looked, but in each case I think I can
understand why some producer would think the film would not sell well on
tape.  There are three science fiction films and one horror film.  However,
none of the film has special effects.  Particularly for science fiction,
people have come to expect visual effects.  I guess they feel that if they
do not really enjoy the story then at least there will be something
interesting to watch.  These films are just actors in front of a camera,
perhaps with a very rudimentary make-up effect thrown in (but very little).
Three of the films are in black and white and unfortunately that is also
considered to be a strike against a film.  I still recommend these films
highly to watch for.
     This film combines Cold War thriller elements with science fiction and
a compelling human story.  A scientist working on sensory deprivation
commits suicide and is discovered to have been passing secrets to the
Soviets.  Was he to blame or could his mind have been twisted while under
the influence of the sensory deprivation tank?  The government decides to
experiment to find out.  Another scientist working in the same field (played
by Dirk Bogarde) is very devoted to his wife and family.  Can they change
that in his personality while he is in the tank?  This film is well-acted,
enthralling, and atmospheric.
     A secret project is working on space exploration right in the heart of
London.  The approach to exploration is a novel one.  Rather than sending
the whole human into space, they are working on a sort of technological
out-of-body experience.  Project your mind to another planet and there have
it take on physical form ... invasion by mental projection.  The rub is that
scientists on the project are being killed in some mysterious way involving
super-high energy.  And the wives of some of the scientists seem to have no
background that project security can trace.  The script is tense and the
acting is quite good, with a cast that includes John Neville (A STUDY IN
TERROR, THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN) and Jean Marsh (UPSTAIRS,
DOWNSTAIRS).  (This film is so obscure that Leonard Maltin's usually very
complete MOVIE AND VIDEO GUIDE overlooks it.)
     This film is only 59 minutes long and originally was intended as a
television pilot, but was released to theaters to play with films such as
William Castle's I SAW WHAT YOU DID--which it far out-classed.  Leslie
Nielson plays a detective in late 19th Century San Francisco whose foppish
appearance hides a man very knowledgeable and adept in matters of the occult
and the supernatural.  A series of unsolved murders and a friend's blackout
spells may be connected and have some occult significance.  Mark Richman and
Werner Klemperer also star.  The latter, best known as the gullible
commandant from HOGAN'S HEROES, does a terrific job in a sinister role.
     This film is loosely adapted from the short story "Random Quest" by
John Wyndham.  Colin Trafford (played by Tom Bell) is a  leading scientist
at Britain Imperial Physical Institute when one of his experiments goes
wrong.  Suddenly he finds himself in a parallel London in a parallel Britain
that has not been to war since the Great War in the early part of the
century.  Trafford here is not a physicist, but a popular playwright.  He is
also now married to a beautiful woman (played by Joan Collins) whose life he
has made miserable with his selfish ways and his philandering.  Can Colin
convince the world he is the playwright while convincing his new wife that
he is different?  Then there are plot complications that lead to a fast-
paced climax across parallel worlds.  Denholm Elliot also stars in the story
which is part science fiction adventure and part love story.
     Of these four films only the last is in color.  At present, the only
one available on video, UNEARTHLY STRANGER, is offered only by a tiny
specialty house, Sinister Cinema.  Of the four, only QUEST FOR LOVE has
played on New York area television in the last fifteen years.  I would much
like to get my hands on copies of THE MIND BENDERS or DARK INTRUDER.
     Director F. W. Murnau is better known for NOSFERATU, but there is a lot
of good visual fantasy in this film version of the famous play by Goethe.
There is a terrific image of the Devil spreading his cape over a village,
and many other visual surprises throughout.
     The story could be better, but Conrad Veidt is terrific in the role of
a man whose face is carved into a huge involuntary grin.  Veidt conveys a
full range of emotions through his eyes alone.  The grinning Veidt was the
visual inspiration for Batman's foe The Joker.
     At times this is very slow but also at times a very effective horror
film.  This was a low-budget film done in Yiddish.  The "Dance of Death"
scene had become an eerie classic.  The story deals with a man's soul
returning from the dead to possess the woman he loved.
     Other Val Lewton films get more attention but this film is blacker and
bleaker than anything every done in film noir.  This is a solid mood piece
that stands above Lewton's other films.  A woman searching for her sister
runs afoul of murder and Satanists.
     This film has gotten some attention because of an allusion in a song in
the ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW but it is rarely seen.  That is a pity because
it is quite a nice little supernatural thriller.  It suffers a little from
showing the audience too much too soon, but it still is suspenseful and
well-written.
     When Richard Matheson and Charles Beaumont co-write a screenplay based
on a novel by Fritz Lieber, you just naturally expect a good thriller.  This
story about an empirical college professor discovering that his wife and
several other professors' wives around him are actually witches is very
well-produced.
     This is a wildly uneven film, but it has many very good moments.  There
have been several attempts to do the stories of ventriloquist dummies who
have lives of their own.  This is the most intriguing treatment of the
theme.  For once the secret of the dummy is not a let-down.
     The first and last ideas of this film are pretty silly, but in between
this is a fairly exciting super-disaster film.  Some of the visuals are
spectacular.  There is also some complexity to the characters.
       QUATERMASS AND THE PIT (a.k.a. FIVE MILLION YEARS TO EARTH) (1968)
     This film is finally getting a cult following and some recognition.  It
is much better known in Britain.  The model of what a science thriller
should be, it unfolds like a science fiction detective story uncovering a
discovery that has greater and greater implications about the nature of
mankind.  This is one of the great idea films of science fiction cinema.
     Richard Matheson's adaptation of the black magic novel by Dennis
Wheatley takes a science fiction-like approach to Satanism.  It is fast-
paced and at times fairly intelligent.  Also worth seeing is Hammer Films'
other adaptation of Wheatley black magic, TO THE DEVIL A DAUGHTER.
     A vital and well-made historical fringe-horror film about one of the
great villians of English history, Matthew Hopkins.  Even Vincent Price does
a reasonable acting job.  The original musical score is actually quite
beautiful, though there is a version with an entirely different and much
less enjoyable score.
     In some ways an imitation of the style of WITCHFINDER GENERAL.  A 17th
Century English ploughman turns up the remains of a demon and the artifact
exerts satanic influence on the children of the region.  This is a very
atmospheric film with an authentic historical feel.
     This low-budget horror film redefined the concept of the vampire.  As a
reaction to the staid, hypnotic, and slow vampires of British horror films,
this film makes most vampires fast moving predatory deadly animals who hunt
in packs.  At the time this was pretty scary stuff and the film still has a
lot of its impact.
     Two mutually alien intelligences in the beginnings of a serious war.
It is really more about how each side collects information about the other
and uses its physical differences against the other.  Ants somehow develop a
gestalt mind and prepare to make themselves the masters of the world.
Visually very impressive with direction by visual artist Saul Bass (best
known for creating striking title sequences for other directors' films).
There is also some terrific insect photography.
     This fairly accurate adaptation of Algis Budrys' novel had film stock
problems (!) and could not be released to theaters.  That is a genuine pity.
Cold War story of its near future has a scientist important to military
defense in a bad accident.  The East Germans get ahold of him and return him
to the West more prosthetic than living matter.  Now the problem is, how do
you prove that he is who he says he is?
     Australian Peter Weir build his reputation on this strange, mystical
film about a lawyer who finds he might be the fulfillment of an Aboriginal
prophecy.  Images of nature out of balance and an intriguing story make this
story a real spellbinder.  This is a hard film to pigeon-hole and the
intelligence of the writing never flags.
     Lots of films try to do Medieval high fantasy, but this is probably the
best.  With the death of a great magician, his young apprentice must see if
he has mastered enough of his master's art to destroy a terrific dragon who
is ravaging the countryside.  There are lots of nice touches in the script
and the dragon is the best ever created on film.
     George Romero says he got this out of his system and never has to make
another film like KNIGHTRIDERS.  What a pity!  This was one of the best
films of its year.  Superficially this is the story of a traveling
Renaissance Fair that features jousts on motorcycles.  But it has some
terrific characters and a theme of the struggle between integrity and
commercialism and between idealism and practicality.  And late in the film
the viewer realizes that the film has also been doing something else all
along.
     Very few fans are willing to look beyond the naked woman and the
zombies to see what is one of the most bizarre and audacious concepts for
any science fiction film.  Vampires, we learn, are really beings that leak
lifeforce into the atmosphere like a tire with a slow leak leaks air.  They
must replenish the force regularly or they die.  Much as we put bacteria
into milk to multiply and make yogurt or cheese, some huge,
incomprehensible, amoral, alien race seeds earth with vampires.  The numbers
of these numbers will increase exponentially, leaking more and more
lifeforce into the environment so the aliens can vacuum it up.
     Hong Kong is making their own horror film movement for their own
audience.  There films are fast-paced, usually liberally laced with comedy
and martial arts, but also having some interesting horror concepts.  No one
such film is all that terrific (at least among the films I have seen so far)
but some are astonishing and full of unexpected touches.  Look for the
CHINESE GHOST STORY films, WICKED CITY, and MR. VAMPIRE (which must have a
different name in China since it is really about Chinese "Hopping Ghosts").

Author
Jeff Meyer
     I've been trying to figure out how to describe the sheer fun I had at this
film.  I haven't seen anything that mixed this many genres and kept me this
hooked since ALIENS; I hear the VILLAGE VOICE said it "combined the best
elements of THE PRINCESS BRIDE and EVIL DEAD II," and recommended that no
amphetamines be taken before viewing it.  This is a *wise move*.  A CHINESE
GHOST STORY has more energy in it then last year's entire summer film season
(with the lone exception of ROBOCOP), and a damn site more adventure than the
last four LucasFilm entries.  It also combines romance, horror, adventure,
martial arts, comedy and satire and does each one well.  I think you'll have
the time of your life there, frankly; this is BUCKAROO BANZAI-style
genre-mixing, if you know what I mean and I know you do.
     Well, what we got?  We got a foolish young tax collector whose in bad with
the local yokels and decides to spend the night at a haunted shrine.  We have a
beautiful young thing he falls in love with but who has a terrible secret.  We
got a bad-ass old samurai who's sharing the shrine with the lad; he bounces off
of trees, fires rays from his hands, does a rap number right in the middle of
the film, and gets to say the kind of great things that Warren Oates always got
to say in his films.  We got zombies, ghosts, hags, stupid warrior types and a
40-foot animated tongue.  Ho-boy!  This is my kind of neighborhood!
     Damndest thing is, it works great as a love story, as a folk tale, and as
an adventure.  The plot and the samurai add a real tongue-in-cheek feeling to
the works, and the martial arts sequences takes those leaping-forty-feet-in-
the-air sequences you see on Channel 61's Hong Kong Theater every Sunday
morning and jacks them up about 400%.  I really got to caring about whether the
lad and the sweet young thing were going to make it.  This is great stuff!
Good photography, though on a budget, and a lot of the sub-titles are
misspelled, but that kinda adds to the flavor.  (first sub-titled film I've
been to where you'd hear people asking "*What* did he say?")
     Rating:  Faded if not seen on a weekend night.  However, worth every penny
of $5 if seen at midnight movie, preferably with cronies and munchies.
Wouldn't be bad on video, either.  Leave the diet pills *at home*.
