Title
Review for Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country (1991)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
[I am posting five reviews of STAR TREK VI.  I could easily swamp the group
with reviews of this movie, so I will probably not post any more unless
they say something very different than those posted here (e.g., a review
of the fashions in STAR TREK VI :-) ).  Followups are directed to
rec.arts.startrek to keep the discussion in the appropriate group.
-Moderator]
Starring William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy, DeForest Kelley, James Doohan,
         Nichelle Nichols, Walter Koenig, and George Takei
Also Starring Kim Catrall, Christopher Plummer, Michael Dorn, and
              David Warner
Directed by Nicholas Meyer
     I'm glad I waited.  STAR TREK VI does not disappoint its fans.
This supposedly last installment of the STAR TREK movies is a worthy
ending to the saga that is STAR TREK.  And although it is not better
than STAR TREK II (my personal favorite), among all six I would rate it
as the second best in the series.
     STVI (or, as I like to call it, the apology for STAR TREK V) is a
effective blending of elements of episodes from the old STAR TREK and
elements which have made the movie series so successful: adventure,
sensationalism, humor, a good plot, and an overall good time.  It is
also a huge metaphor for what is going on the world today.  Anyone who
goes to see this movie can quite easily recognize which character
represents who in today's world.  Captain Kirk and General Chang (played
by Christopher Plummer) can be construed as the hard-liners, while
Captain Spock and Chancellor Gorkon (played by David Warner) could be
seen as Reagan and Gorbachev.  There are a lot of parallels in this
movie towards the Soviets, and it makes me think that they couldn't
think of a good plotline, so they used what's happening in the world
today.  But don't let that phase you--it's still a good movie.  In this
movie as in today's world, there are those who would lose by peace, and
would do almost anything to protect the prospect of imminent war.  But
despite the hidden message and likeness to today's goings-on, this movie
is still a romp through space, where we meet and see all kinds of races
and places.
     But back to the "blending" part.  I won't tell you exactly what
goes on, but I can tell you there are elements in this film from old
STAR TREK episodes like "Whom the Gods Destroy" and "Court-Martial," and
things from the previous movies, like Meyer as a director (he directed
STII, for those of you who don't know); ILM doing the special effects
(not those cut-and-paste effects of STV), which where damn good, as
always; Leonard Nimoy as a writer; and other than the technical aspects,
the basic (and not fabricated and abused) spirit of the STAR TREK
series.
     The only thing I was apprehensive about was the addition of Kim
Catrall as Lt. Valeris.  But she does a pretty good job, and was, in my
opinion, fairly convincing.  Christopher Plummer and David Warner have
established themselves too solidly as human actors instead of alien
actors, so I didn't really see them as Klingons, but they still manage
to do a good job acting like them.  There's even a surprise cameo, but I
won't tell you who it is of course.  As for the rest of the crew, they
all did a fine job (now that they had a solid script).
     All in all, if you like STAR TREK, go see this movie.  You'll have
a good time, and most of all, you won't be disappointed.

Author
Mark Santora
[I am posting five reviews of STAR TREK VI.  I could easily swamp the group
with reviews of this movie, so I will probably not post any more unless
they say something very different than those posted here (e.g., a review
of the fashions in STAR TREK VI :-) ).  Followups are directed to
rec.arts.startrek to keep the discussion in the appropriate group.
-Moderator]
     Okay, so the last(?) Star Trek film has opened.  Well to start off 
with something like, it's better than TREK V would be kind of be like
saying TREK II was better than I.  Anyway, it opens, and  deserves to
open big.
     We start approximately three years after TREK V, or at least three
years since Sulu took over command of the Excelsior.  Anyway, a Klingon
moon explodes and this sets the stage for the Klingons coming to the
Federation for help, and peace.  Then Spock volunteers the Enterprise
and Kirk to go to meet the Klingons.  However, when the Klingon ship is
attacked, Kirk is blamed.  Bones and Kirk beam over to help the wounded
and are accused of killing the Klingon Diplomat.
     Plot-wise, the story moves quickly in TREK VI.  This I give credit
to the wise mind of Nicholas Meyer.  Meyer has had his hand in the two
biggest successes in the TREK movie series (II and IV).  His direction
is obviously geared toward the intensity of the scenes.  He also manages
to capture a little of the claustrophobic feel that space and the
Enterprise has.
     The sets, even the redressed Next Generation ones, are quite good.
There is one I must take issue with, however.  The design of the 
Klingon "Hoth" planet prison.  I found it very human.  It lacked any of
the feel that would be associated with the Klingon Empire that we have
seen before.  I would also like to take this time to make point with
the fact that I found the time spent on the planet too short.  It in
fact just managed to get by.  There was not a lot of time associating
it to any real prison.
     Michael Dorn in TREK VI is wasted.  He is on the screen for a 
matter of minutes.  It is not that his character was bad.  It was just
that all of the sudden he was there.  There is no background for WHY he
is there.  I guess it was left on the cutting room floor.
     The special effects, which I took heavy issue with in TREK V, are
top-notch ILM effects.  There are the standard effects, including a
great one of the Enterprise getting whipped by a photon torpedo.  But
there are also some great shots when some imitation Federation Marines
go around killing Klingons and their floating blood, which by the way is
computer-generated.
     The Music: No film review would be complete without a quick listen
to the music.  Anyway, the music by Cliff Eidelman is very good.  It
takes off in a new direction from the previous scores by Jerry
Goldsmith, James Horner, and Leonard Rosenman.  Remember that it was
Meyer who brought on Horner who composed, I believe, my favorite music
from the STAR TREK series (II and III).  My only problem with the score
for TREK VI, was the fact that the traditional fanfare that is *always*
before the opening of the films was curiously absent.  The score would
have been greatly enhanced by the use of it.
     Overall, I find STAR TREK VI: THE UNDISCOVERED COUNTRY to be
a worthy of the fandom that Star Trek has created over the years.
While I find it to be lacking sometimes, all films do.  This is 
not the best of the series--see STAR TREK II for that--this
is high up there.  And to paraphrase one of my favorite quotes
from another Trek film, "...they'll never be gone, as long as
we remember them."

Author
Mark R. Leeper
[I am posting five reviews of STAR TREK VI.  I could easily swamp the group
with reviews of this movie, so I will probably not post any more unless
they say something very different than those posted here (e.g., a review
of the fashions in STAR TREK VI :-) ).  Followups are directed to
rec.arts.startrek to keep the discussion in the appropriate group.
-Moderator]
     Dearly beloved, we are gathered for the final adventure of the original
crew of the starship Enterprise.  The remote control has been passed to a
new generation who are less and less interested in seeing swash-buckling
heroes the age of their grandparents.  And if the truth be known, Captain
Kirk, Scotty, and Uhura are all sporting spare tires around the middle these
days.  Bones looks old.  Spock seems to be ageing the best of the original
crew and comes the closest to still being dashing.  I guess on at least some
level that is not surprising.  We always knew there was something very
different about Spock and it just sort of rubbed off on Leonard Nimoy.
     So what sort of adventure is the final outing?  The title implies that
the plot in a major way involves "death--the undiscover'd country, from
whose bourn no traveller returns," an allusion to the "To be or not to be"
speech from Act III, Scene 1 of HAMLET.  So did the filmmakers have the
courage to kill off someone we loved and make that death meaningful, or did
they find some way to cop out?  Well, that would be telling!  In any case,
the main story is an end-of-the-Cold-War thriller, much like THE PACKAGE but
reset in the "Star Trek" universe.
     When the film opens, a Klingon Chernobyl incident has convinced the
evil empire that the time has come for perestroika.  On each side there are
hard-liners who still live with the paranoia of the past, and new-liners who
want to see a reconciliation and a new universe order.  One Federation
hard-liner is that crusty old Cold Warrior, Captain James Kirk (played
somewhat against type by William Shatner).  One of the new-liners is an old
associate of his, Commander Spock (played this time around by Leonard
Nimoy).  The plot then proceeds to set up a fairly intriguing mystery and
puzzle.  An incident occurs that seems totally inexplicable.  Kirk is framed
to appear to have sabotaged the peace.  This is the high point of the film.
Unfortunately, the mystery's solution is very unconvincing.  It is nearly as
bad as the strategy puzzle in STAR TREK II: THE WRATH OF KHAN.  That one was
solved by the scriptwriter saying, "Oh, didn't you know?  The Enterprise has
the power to shut down the shields on other federation ships!"  The solution
to the puzzle here is not as bad as that of the WRATH OF KHAN problem, but
it is bad.  I will explain why in a spoiler after the review.
     Other touches were irritating, like repeated allusions to both
Shakespeare and Sherlock Holmes.  It is a strange and unlikely touch that
Klingons revere William Shakespeare and even claim him as a Klingon.
     With the exception of one violent scene in zero gravity the special
effects are not particularly new or creative, though many of the exteriors
in space are still quite beautiful.  Occasionally narrow-angle shots were
used when showing a new locale on a planet.  This was probably to save on
the creation of sets since less would be within the range of the camera, but
it is a stark contrast to earlier chapters.
     Two problems in casting were minor problems.  The first was an
unaccountable resemblance between the Klingon David Warner played in STAR
TREK VI and the kidnapped diplomat he played in STAR TREK V.  Also,
Christian Slater plays the kid who has won a contest and got to play in a
scene of a real "Star Trek" movie.  He has one brief, no-talent-needed
scene.
     Spoiler: For two reasons I think that the solution to the mystery
torpedo problem is bad.  First, it assumes a new piece of technology to come
along at a perfect but unlikely moment.  That is possible but it seems a
plot contrivance.  What bothers me more is the geometry of the situation.  A
photon torpedo travels in a straight line.  If that line does not intersect
your torpedo tubes, it was not your torpedo.  It would be hard to position
another torpedo tube so the trajectory could be close enough to fool the
bridge.  Ideally the attackers would want to be in front of your torpedo
tubes, but they could not because of the instantaneous loss of cloaking.
Their would have to position themselves so that their torpedo would fly in
just the right plane.  Even then, if the trajectory was observed from
elsewhere on the Enterprise, the jig would have been up.  If the victim ship
were watching the Enterprise, they would have seen an impossible torpedo
trajectory and also, for an instant, the ship that was firing on them.
     Question: if a shape-changer wanted to prove she was a shape changer,
wouldn't she just change her shape?  Evelyn asked this one.

Author
Randall Rhea
[I am posting five reviews of STAR TREK VI.  I could easily swamp the group
with reviews of this movie, so I will probably not post any more unless
they say something very different than those posted here (e.g., a review
of the fashions in STAR TREK VI :-) ).  Followups are directed to
rec.arts.startrek to keep the discussion in the appropriate group.
-Moderator]
     The latest (and perhaps the last?) chapter in the Star Trek saga
stars the usual crew of the Starship Enterprise, along with a notable
performance by Christopher Plummer as a Klingon war general, and even a
cameo appearance by Christian Slater as a starship crewman.  Of all the
Star Trek films, this one is the most like a plot from the 1960's
television series, and will probably be the most interesting and
exciting of the six films to "Trekkies" and the general public.
     With the recent collapse of the Soviet Union, the topic of the film
is very timely.  Due to the upcoming destruction of their own planet due
to environmental mismanagement, the hated Klingon empire decides to make
peace overtures to the Federation.   Thanks to the naive instigation of
Spock, Captain Kirk is sent on a diplomatic mission to escort the
Klingon chancellor to a peace conference.  The story then unfolds like
a Sherlock Holmes murder mystery (Holmes is quoted by Spock during the
film) as a plot to sabotage the peace process is uncovered by Spock,
Scotty, and the usual crew.  
     The special effects are spectacular as usual, but they are not as
important to the film as the interaction of the characters or the
message of the story.   The acting is superb throughout; this is
probably Shatner's best and most believable performance ever, and
although they may be getting a bit old, the rest of the crew's
performances are fresh and lively.  The screenplay is very well done,
and it is spiced with intriguing philosophy and humor, particularly when
the Kingons and humans conflict in an expected clash of cultures.  ("You
haven't read  Shakespeare until you've read it in the original Klingon
language.")
     I found myself enjoying the film and getting quite wrapped up  in
it; unfortunately, it ends rather abruptly and expectedly.  It was as if
someone said, "Well, we've got to get this move finished by Christmas,
so we'd better wrap it up now."   After such a good buildup, the ending
was a bit disappointing because is was not as well thought-out as the
rest of the film.
     I do, however, highly recommend this enjoyable and intriguing film.
I recommend seeing it at a 70mm theater with a good sound system, as the
special effects are more exciting.  

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
[I am posting five reviews of STAR TREK VI.  I could easily swamp the group
with reviews of this movie, so I will probably not post any more unless
they say something very different than those posted here (e.g., a review
of the fashions in STAR TREK 6 :-) ).  Followups are directed to
rec.arts.startrek to keep the discussion in the appropriate group.
-Moderator]
STVI: science fiction adventure, building on previous Star Trek adventures.
Plot kickoff: The Federation and the Klingon Empire try to have a peace
conference.
Characters/acting: Not much new here, except I really liked Kim Cattrall
as the new Vulcan, Valeris (violates the naming convention, hmmm).  Good
Vulcan.  I also liked McCoy better than in the last couple of movies.  I
would have liked to see more of Captain Sulu.  The humor wasn't as
stupid/out of character as in STAR TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER.  However,
next to the Shakespeare-quoting Klingons; the humans seemed pathetically
ignorant of Klingons and ethnocentric to boot.  Look quick for
Communications Officer Janice Rand.
Cinematography/FX: Good space battles (nothing new), other FX are better
and newer, especially the null-G blood.
Score/Sound: rehash of other ST themes.
Violence/language: null-G blood, mostly Klingon.  Some shootings, and a
couple of handfights.  Some curses, not all that much.
Analysis: People who haven't watched much Star Trek in the past may not
pick up on the flaws (see below), so they may like it better than many
regular fans.  Regular fans may like it because it's not as bad as STAR
TREK V was.  Overall mildly enjoyable, some pretty good moments, but
annoying in other spots.  My order of fanship of ST movies: 2, 4, 3, 1,
6, 5, ...  on some days I might put 6 ahead of 1.
Complaints: characters acting in ways they wouldn't have, saying things
they wouldn't have, doing things they wouldn't have.  Too numerous to
list.  Massive insubordination, some in front of junior officers, some
for no reason other than personal whim.  Court martial these sorry
excuses for Starfleet officers.  Why didn't they just beam the gravity
boots into space?  Yet another conspiracy.  Getting old, especially to
TNG watchers.  Pretty predictable.  Would Federation officers really be
dopey enough to conspire with Klingons on assassination attempts?
Non-working Universal Translator.  Kitchen.  Unrealistic last 10 minutes
-- come on, would the conference delegates really have believed Kirk
etc., busting in like that?  All shiny happy people?  I don't think so.
And what did Kirk mean, "And you have restored my son's [faith]?"
Howzzat?  Lack of adherence to IDIC (speciesist/ethnocentric).
