Title
Review for Muse, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE MUSE (1999) **3/4. Directed by Albert Brooks.Written by Brooks
and Monica Johnson. Photography, Thomas Ackerman. Editing, Peter 
Teschner. Production design, Dina Lipton. Music, Elton John. Produced 
by Herb Nanas. Cast: Albert Brooks (Steven Phillips), Sharon Stone 
(Sarah), Andie MacDowell (Laura Phillips), Mark Feuerstein (Josh 
Martin), Jeff Bridges (Jack Warrick), Steven Wright (Stan Spielberg), 
Mario Opiniato (The European),  cameos by Cybill Shepherd, Lorenzo 
Lamas, Jennifer Tilly, Stacey Travis, Rob Reiner, Wolfgang Puck, 
JamesCameron and Martin Scorsese (themselves). A USA Films/October 
Films release. 97 minutes. PG-13.
   What fun a movie database is! Under "Brooks" as a last name, I 
found 140 actors, 112 actresses (including the legendary Louise 
Brooks), 10 composers. There are 21 directors, of whom 4 are biggies 
as well as writer-directors: Albert, Mel, James L. and the late 
Richard. The first three are also actors (with James L. only 
occasionally).
I really don't know what the significance of all this is, except that 
the four Brooks are brothers in talent. And that I like all of them A 
lot.
Albert Brooks was born to the radio comedian Harry Einstein, who 
thought it would be funny to name his son Albert.  Albert-now-Brooks 
has been all over the big and the small screen. The Muse is the sixth 
film he has directed -- after Real Life, Modern Romance, Lost in 
America, Defending Your Life, and Mother.
He is a funny man, an artist and "auteur" who, somewhat like Woody 
Allen, variously puts his neuroses and insecurities on the screen, 
along with a sort of pessimistic view of fellow humans, society, 
values and all that, as his titles indicate.
The Muse fits well into Albert's "oeuvre," but adds the problems of 
an aging man. Brooks (now 52) plays Steven, a Hollywood screen writer 
married, with children (wife Laura is played by Andie MacDowell), 
With at least 17 scripts to his credit and a single Oscar nomination, 
this makes him only a mid-tier success, but in showbiz it still means 
a lot of money.
Having received a Humanitarian award which he does not take too 
seriously (he explains to his youngest daughter that it's what they 
give people who have no Oscars), the writer, who puts a lot of faith 
in his latest script, is shocked to hear from his producer that he, 
Steven, has "lost his edge." This translates into becoming a pariah 
in Tinseltown.
The first part of the movie, with Steven's bewilderment and growing 
despair, is a familiar but still colorfully clever expose of the film 
business shallowness, stupidity, cruelty, fake friendships, 
hypocrisy, opportunism, etc.  Unlike most older, traditional satires 
on this theme, The Muse, in keeping with today's trends, brings out 
the true fact of studio executives being younger than ever ( 
practically "kids"),  ignoramuses with no brains, judgment, 
experience, knowledge of film, its past, its history.
This is an aspect that could and should have been expanded, but 
Brooks, instead of going for the jugular, decided to switch from 
realism to fantasy. He had a gimmick.
Helpless and panicky Steven goes to true pal Jeff Bridges for help. 
The latter avows that his recent success (look at his manor house!) 
came from having a Muse, a true descendant of ancient Greece's 
mythological daughters of Zeus.
Since Hollywood people will believe anything, Steven contacts her. 
She is Sarah (Sharon Stone), a chic and weirder than weird creature 
whom prospective clients must approach with outrageously expensive 
gifts from Tiffany's. "Beware of Greeks bearing gifts" gets a nice 
twist here.
How Sarah works her magic is not really explained. Somehow she does 
it by simply being there and occasionally correcting some ideas 
pitched by filmmakers. As a muse, she inspires, but she's also like 
mythology's Pythia who delivered pithy oracles.
Sarah, at first, second and subsequent sights, feels like an 
air-head, a capricious, spoiled beauty. She charges no fees, but 
Steven absolutely must cater to all her many whims, starting with her 
moving from a guest house which now bores her to the Four Seasons 
Hotel. She specifies what and where her suite must be, that she needs 
a limousine, and other extravagances. Of course Steven foots this 
bill ($1,700 a night) and the rest, becomes her errand boy and must 
obey all of her eccentricities.
His finances suffer, as does, initially, his marriage, until his 
suspicious wife  believes the unbelievable, in fact makes friends 
with Sarah who, in another move, invades the couple's home. The next 
invention comes when, on Sarah's advice, Laura becomes her own 
capitalist. In the meantime, Sarah's presence has given Steven a 
bright idea (actually dumb but with box-office potential) for a new 
film.
Brooks the actor can be maniacal, as here, which may or may not be 
your cup of tea.  It is, for me, even though his Steven is not 
especially likable.  Brooks the writer-director is a 
balloon-deflator. The Muse is no exception. Sharon Stone, in a 
wonderful --if one-tone--performance, plays her mysterious self to 
the hilt. Is she a devilishly clever, inventive gold-digger or what? 
An answer comes near the end, but it neither satisfactory nor 
convincing.
The fakeness and crassness of Hollywood are, I repeat, not given 
enough play, except for some comic and/or funny-painful bits. No 
longer persona grata at a studio, Steven forced to park his car where 
the proles do sweats out miles on foot for his appointment with Mr. 
Spielberg -- who turns out to Steven Spielberg's know-nothing cousin. 
It is a hilarious scene.  Or else, at  a reception at Spago ( 
Wolfgang Puck's super-trendy eatery), Steven and an European with 
impenetrable English have a discussion that would enchant Groucho 
Marx.
There are many walk-on roles or cameos by movie celebrities, some of 
them Sarah's clients. Note the constant plugs for Spago. Confusions 
and mixups a la Feydeau work well. Some details are clever, such as 
Steven's not being tanned as so many others are.
The message of the movie has to be that if you're down and out in 
Beverly Hills, the very fact of believing that a muse can help you 
makes you help yourself.

Author
Nick Lyons
  Albert Brooks saves the day, just in the nick of time. With a very poor
summer for movies, Brooks is just what audiences were looking for to cheer them
up, and does so in a positive way. While this may not be his finest work, "The
Muse" still shakes up some delightful humor.
  In Albert Brook's latest comedy, he tells a story of a troubled screenwriter
(Brooks) who's losing his edge, as his business partners say. In desperation,
he goes to see his friend Jack (Jeff Bridges), who has been a very successful
screenwriter in the past. He asks Jack for some help, and recieves word of a
real life Muse, that has helped him and many other directors throughout their
career. So Brooks seeks the muse named Sarah (Sharon Stone), and is suckered
into buying her expensive, food etc. as a sort of payment. The real punch line
however, doesn't come until the end. It really makes you wonder, how
screenwriters really get their ideas, could it simply be from a friend or a bum
in the street? The idea itself is provoking and Brooks does it in a  hilarious
manner.
  Speaking of Brooks, he was absolutely hysterical as a screenwriter. Every
time he graces the screen, I can't help but start laughing. Albert has a very
unique sense of humor that makes him a very likeable character . The real
problem with the film lies with Sharon Stone. She wasn't likeable at all.
Brooks had the right idea with her occupation, but she never pulled through. In
a way, she drained energy from the once funny atmosphere and left it bleak.
Luckily Brooks could clean up the mess, and cover for Stone's mishap. It was a
shame that the film went slightly downhill after her appearance, because "The
Muse" had the potential to a be a very authentic comedy. On a brighter note,
Andie Macdowell was also charming as Brook's wife. She is always a nice
addition as a supporting actress, because she has that charisma that seems to
complete the atmosphere to any film she's in.
  The funniest moments in "The Muse" in my opinion were the cameos by James
Cameron and Martin Scorsese. I mean imagine, Brooks seeing these big named
directors in his back yard seeking Sharon Stone for advice, like it was
something out of the ordinary. It was just plain hilarious. It just adds to the
satire joke, of how Directors get ideas. Brilliant move by Brooks.
  As I mentioned before, the film is a satire much like it's proceeder
Bowfinger, which came out a few weeks before. Unlike Bowfinger, this is not a
mean spirited film that's desperate for jokes, it's rather a witty and humorous
look at Hollywood. "Bowfinger" had it's moments, but had quite a few problems
that were never worked out, but "The Muse" still managed to keep the laughs
despite a bit of a detour.
  By the end of the film, you're glad to see a good hearty comedy come out of
it. For once I'm not fully disappointed, because the film didn't slow down, it
kept moving, even with some flaws. Thumbs up to Brooks for his brave effort. I
think he'll still manage to keep his edge around well into the future.

Author
Steve Rhodes
A few days ago screenwriter Steven Phillips (Albert Brooks), the winner
of a humanitarian award for his life's work, was on top of the world.
Now, a studio executive -- who proudly owns the sofa used in SAVING
PRIVATE RYAN -- tells him that he's lost his edge and should be changing
careers.
THE MUSE, directed by Brooks and written by Brooks and Monica Johnson,
plays like an in-joke to Brooks himself, since he clearly seems to have
lost some of his edge in crafting it.  A writer and comic who's the best
when he's the nastiest, Brooks creates for himself a character that's
way too accommodating and sweet.
At its high points, as in its numerous cameos, the movie can be quite
funny.  Between these islands of laughter, however, lie too many deserts
of blandness.
Steven falls back on the custom of turning to someone famous when you
need a favor.  Since he met Steven Spielberg two decades ago, he tries
to set up another meeting with him.  After an incredible ordeal, he
finally gets a 5-minute audience with Spielberg.  His time alone with
cinematic royalty doesn't turn out to be quite what he expected.  He
talks with Steven Spielberg's cousin Stan (Steven Wright), who doesn't
do anything other than offer advice about future movies.  "Just
remember, make it in color," Stan says.  "People like color."
In order to rejuvenate his creative juices, Steven decides he is willing
to try anything including a crazy idea from his Oscar-winning friend
Jack Warrick (Jeff Bridges).  Jack suggests Steven give his muse (Sarah)
a try.
Unless you've hired one before, you probably have no concept of the
enormous cost involved in hiring a muse.  Sharon Stone, who normally
takes herself way too seriously, plays Sarah with uncharacteristic,
child-like playfulness.  A world-class spendthrift, Sarah demands a
$1,700 a day suite at the Four Seasons Hotel and a refrigerator stocked
with special food.  She also expects Steven to be constantly at her beck
and call as her personal gofer.
Sarah doesn't tell her clients what to do.  She just inspires them.  Her
resume includes being the uncredited creative force behind THE TRUMAN
SHOW and THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT.  For Steven, she assists him in coming
up with a killer idea for a great summer comedy.  He proposes having Jim
Carrey inherit a troubled aquarium in which the fish die.
After Sarah bonds with Steven's wife, Laura, she starts helping the wife
and ignoring the husband.  As a would-be Mrs. Fields, Laura is played in
an awkward and wooden performance by Andie MacDowell.  In a movie that
needs more drive, MacDowell functions as the production's black hole,
sucking the energy out whenever she appears.
Hollywood's brightest stars drop by to get Sarah's advice or to pay her
tribute for past suggestions.  We learn that it was because of her that
Wolfgang Pung took only 30 seconds to decide it would be goat cheese,
and not mozzarella, on his famous pizzas.  James Cameron comes knocking
at her door wanting advice.  "I just don't see you going back to water
anytime soon," she counsels him briefly before sending him on his way.
Martin Scorsese has less luck when he comes by seeking her thoughts on
his remake of RAGING BULL using a really thin guy.  A caffeine-stoked up
Scorsese bounces away when she turns out not to be there at the time.
Where is a muse when you need one?  Let's hope Albert Brooks locates one
before his next film.  He's a national treasure who deserves all the
muses he needs.
THE MUSE runs 1:37.  It is rated PG-13 for brief nudity.  It would be
fine for kids 9 and up, but they would probably need to be teenagers to
enjoy it.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Redman
Those damn Muses. The children of Zeus and Mnemosyne are some of the most
infuriating of the gods. They are supposed to provide artistic inspiration but
they're so demanding and just when you need them, they are busy elsewhere.
You sit in front of a glowing computer screen or stand at your easel and
there's nothing there. No words. No brushstrokes. You dig deep inside and come
up empty. You can't hit the zone that disengages your mind and allows your
hands to take on a life of their own.
The Muses require a heavy toll. Artists, writers and musicians have varied and
often opposing methods of paying tribute: drugs, alcohol, sex, abstinence,
solitude, nature, meditation. Many of these are played to the extreme and are
often self-destructive, but the Muses demand the artist leave the realm of
everyday to receive their messages.
Once you get into contact with them, you're on fire. Everything flows.
Manuscripts are written, pictures painted, poems composed. You don't even
notice hours have passed and the morning birds are singing. The gods are in
their universe and all's right with the world.
Steven Phillips (Albert Brooks) is a lucky man. He's dealing with Sarah
(Sharon Stone), a living breathing real-life Muse who is helping him with his
screenwriting slump. Well, maybe he's not so fortunate: Sarah is something of
a bitch goddess.
Steven is a successful writer. He has 17 screenplays to his credit, one an
Oscar nominee. But the day after receiving a Humanitarian award, the studio
dumps him. His work has lost its edge. He's past his prime.
Desperate for help, he visits his buddy Jack Warrick (Jeff Bridges) who
reluctantly turns him on to Sarah. She has helped him before and is quite the
Hollywood deity about town.
Steven is overjoyed to work with the Muse until he discovers her requirements.
He must bring gifts -- jewelry from Tiffany's. When she gets it, she casually
tosses it into a large pile of other boxes in the same pale blue wrapping
paper. Homage from other clients. She insists he put her up in a $1,700 a day
suite in the Four Seasons. She calls in the middle of the night with a yen for
Waldorf Salad. He brings it to her, but she's fallen asleep and doesn't want
it anymore.
He's willing to put up with all of this because he can write again. When he
stalls, she's too busy helping his wife Laura (Andie MacDowell) start a cookie
business to give him much attention.
It gets worse as directors parade to her looking for help. She advises
"Titanic" director James Cameron not to do a sequel ("Stay away from the
water"). Martin Scorsese needs to talk to her about a re-make of "Raging Bull"
with a thin guy ("Not just a thin guy, but a _really_ thin guy"). Steven can't
get any time.
Surprisingly, Sharon Stone is the hit of the film. Sarah is a perfect
combination of sex goddess and artistic inspiration who arrives at just the
right time to save Steven's sanity. Stone has a comedic flare and perfectly
captures the flighty irresistible Muse used to having men cater to her every
whim. She abuses them and they come back for more because she has what they want.
Brooks also directed the film and mostly hits the target. He does miss
occasionally and this gives the movie an odd pacing. Just when everything is
going fine and the audience is captured, an ill-conceived scene brings it all
down. Then he salvages with another hilarious bit. Perhaps he should have hung
out with Sarah a bit more.
Bridges is outstanding in his small but pivotal role. His natural assumption
of the character makes you wish he were around for more screen time. MacDowell
is a charmer, but her performance seems flat.
The ending is a bit out of left field and undermines the charm of rest of the
film. Perhaps because I fell under Sarah's spell, I have to wonder if the
gray-bearded doctor is exactly who he says he is. The Greek gods are often tricksters.
This isn't a blockbuster and won't pull in the big bucks, but it's an
enchanting fairy tale and Sarah is enthralling.
(Michael Redman has written this column for 'bout 24 years. Muses can email
tales of inspiration to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 9/2/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]

Author
Jamey Hughton
The Muse is 3/4 of a great film. For the majority of Albert Brooks'
newest satire, the comedy is vibrant and funny, the situation is
amusing, and the stars are immensely likable. And then, without warning,
the film abruptly switches gears into sheer stupidity.
I suppose the 80 minutes of running time before it tumbles over into
idiocy is worth giving The Muse a (very) minor recommendation. But I
just can't help wondering what the film could have been if the formula
hadn't derailed in the last dying minutes. To be sure, there are some
big laughs and clever moments to be found. Unfortunately, the few
crucial twists toward the end leave a sour taste in your mouth.
Brooks, directing himself once again, plays screenwriter Steven
Phillips. As the movie opens, Steven is receiving a Humanitarian award
for his contribution of over 17 Hollywood scripts (one of which was
nominated for an Oscar). He ends his speech by stating `I'm the King of
the room!', a punch line that no one finds amusing. Steven's co-workers
and friends agree, even though the talent is still there, that he has
`lost his edge'. This is when good friend and fellow writer Jack (Jeff
Bridges) tells him the secret of his success: a muse. As the story goes,
they are daughters of Zeus, and are able to inspire creativity. Steven,
of course, doesn't believe it at first. So he coaxes Jack into setting
up a meeting with his so-called `muse', and he can judge for himself
whether she is for real.
Sarah (Sharon Stone) is this goddess of creativity. She has worked with
such directors as James Cameron, Rob Reiner and Martin Scorcese, and can
claim responsibility for The American President and The Truman Show. She
requests a room at the Four Seasons hotel, where she is open to
unlimited room service, and for a limousine to transport her everywhere
she goes. Steven doesn't know quite what to think of this, but figures
all this incessant spending is worth it if he is able to regain `his
edge'. He laughably attempts to describe the situation to his wife Laura
(Andie MacDowell), especially when Sarah calls at midnight requesting a
salad and bobby pins to be delivered to her hotel room.
Part of the fun in The Muse is seeing what lengths Steven will go to,
even if Sarah only claims to be what she is. Is she actually able to
inspire her clients, or is she just masterminding an incredible hoax?
There is proof of the first query, presented in a nice subplot about
Sarah helping Laura to realize her dream of becoming the next `Mrs.
Fields' (translation: a masterful cookie queen). And Steven does start
to write a screenplay involving Jim Carrey and an aquarium, but he
insists that was his idea. Sarah continues to milk him for every penny,
Laura begins to enjoy her company and inspiration, and so basically
Steven is in hell.
Fans of Brooks' low-key humor will likely enjoy his latest effort. There
are a couple of great gags - one involving Steven's conversation with a
man who can hardly understand the English language - and some nicely
placed Hollywood humor. And in the center of it all, there is Sharon
Stone's wonderful performance as the snotty title character. Lord knows
what Brooks was thinking when he capped off this otherwise engaging
comedy with an ending straight out of the Twilight Zone.
Up until everything goes awry, I really enjoyed myself. To be fair, I
did a large amount of smiling, perhaps... even chuckling. So I was
personally pretty bummed out after watching all of these amusing events
transpire, only to see them discarded in favor of a hopefully `clever'
twist. If I were writing Brooks himself, it would go something like
this: `Albert: I quite enjoyed your latest offering. But, WHY??'

Author
George Lau
In, "The Muse" Albert Brooks plays Steven Phillips, a Hollywood screenwriter
who after winning a Humanitarian Award for his work is dumped by his studio.
They claim that he's lost his edge and his agent is quick to agree with them.
He knows that he needs to write something fresh and original and quick or else
his career will be over. So he turns to his "best" friend, Jack (Jeff Bridges)
another screenwriter who's enjoyed success after success. On the way over to
Jack's house Steven sees Jack helping an attractive woman (Sharon Stone) into a
cab and begins to think: Is he having an affair? When confronted, Jack
relunctently tells him that this mystery woman is, in fact, a muse, a
mythological figure who is believed to have inspired all creativity, and has
helped him garner his success.
"She doesn't do any actual writing," he is told, "but inspires you." Steven is
excited by what he's hearing and asks Jack to call her up to see if she'll take
Steven on as a new client. Jack arranges a meeting between the two and suggests
that Steven bring her a present, preferably something from Tiffany's. After the
meeting the muse, Sarah decides to take on Steven, but at a price: She wants a
suite at the Four Seasons and wants Steven to perform odd tasks for her (like
bringing her salads in the middle of the night.) Steven's wife (Andy MacDowell)
sees him at a food store and questions him about why he has tampons in his
wagon. Steven confesses everything and, although at first suspicious, she later
allows Sarah to move into their guest room and eventually into their life. The
only question for Steven is if the muse is worth all the trouble he's going
through for her. And that's a question only time will tell.
"The Muse" is Albert Brooks' sixth film as writer/director/actor (he co-wrote
with Monica Johnson) and although it's a good movie it's not up to the level of
his best works ("Defending Your Life" and "Mother"). The problem lies in the
script, and for a movie that relies on its dialogue for its humor, there aren't
nearly as many laughs as they are chuckles despite a few good one-liners. It
has a great premise but doesn't deliver up to it's full potential. 
But, I like Albert Brooks in this film and I think that we can all identify
with Steven Phillips a little bit. He may whine and complain, but he just wants
to support his family and be happy. And I like Sharon Stone in this movie too;
it's a nice change of pace for her. And I also enjoyed the cameos featuring the
likes of Rob Reiner, James Cameron and Martin Scorsese. And although "The Muse"
doesn't have as much to say about Hollywood as Robert Altman's "The Player" I
still left the theater feeling good. And that's something I wish I got out of
more movies.
Visit my homepage "Thoughts on Film" at
http://members.aol.com/videolau/ThoughtsOnFilm.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Albert Brooks.
Cast: Albert Brooks, Sharon Stone, Andie MacDowell, Jeff Bridges, Mark 
Feuerstein, Martin Scorsese, James Cameron, Jennifer Tilly, Rob Reiner.
1999 - 97 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for mild profanity and brief, partial nudity).
Reviewed August 28, 1999.
Writer-director Albert Brooks continuously makes sharp, meticulously-written 
comedies, and that he has refused to reform over the years to "potty" humor 
in the vein of Jim Carrey or Adam Sandler is a commendable decision. Brooks 
can't win 'em all, though, as proven by his latest picture, "The Muse," a 
Hollywood satire, which lacks the warmth and human interest of 1996's 
"Mother," the zany entertainment of 1985's "Lost in America," and the 
whimsical aspect of 1991's "Defending Your Life." Sloppy and superficial, 
"The Muse" has some sizable laughs in its 97-minute running time, but midway 
through it veers off-course and becomes repetitive, with a final twist at the 
end that is completely unjustified and a strong sign of last-minute 
reshooting and tinkering. If the last ten minutes are the way Brooks 
originally wrote and envisioned them, then my question to him is: "What were 
you thinking?!"
50-year-old high-profile screenwriter Steven Phillips (Albert Brooks) is at 
the end of his ropes. A past nominee of an Academy Award, right after winning 
the Humanitarian Award for his career he is told by a harsh studio executive 
(Mark Feuerstein) that his past couple scripts weren't very good, and that he 
has "lost his edge." Talking with his friend, Jack (Jeff Bridges), a thriving 
fellow screenwriter, Steven is told about his secret for keeping successful: 
he has a muse, supposedly one of the actual daughters of Zeus, whose job is 
to inspire the customers she takes on. Jack convinces the muse to take on 
Steven as her next major client, and before they even meet, Steven is 
instructed to bring her a gift from Tiffany's wrapped in a blue box. The muse 
in question happens to be Sarah (Sharon Stone), a greedy, pampered woman who 
nonetheless is likable in her absolute straightforwardness, and who really 
does begin to inspire Steven concerning his next script, a comedy to star Jim 
Carrey set in an aquarium. When he is caught by his concerned wife, Laura 
(Andie MacDowell), buying a present at Tiffany's and shopping for groceries 
(including Tampons), she is reasonably apprehensive when he says he has a 
muse, but before long, she and Sarah have met and immediately hit it off, 
with Sarah even convincing Laura to go into business as a cookie baker. And 
by the time Sarah has moved into his home and taken over his bedroom, Steven 
finds his life ultimately being overrun, and starts to question if Sarah 
should stick around for much longer. 
"The Muse" would have made a fast, enjoyably smart 45-minute short film, but 
at over twice that length, its story is so thin that the film begins to go 
through the worn-out, repeated motions, until it reaches the point of no 
return in the last few scenes, which become too contrived to be believed for 
a second. It's as if the movie was written and directed by Brooks, but 
through the post-production process, an evil editor with dastly designs for 
Brooks decided to cut off his ending and replace it with something so 
ludicrous and messy that it would destroy his film as a whole and leave a bad 
taste in every audience member's mouth.
For awhile, the film really works well. The satiric moments about Hollywood 
are winning and sometimes hilarious, as when Steven goes to Universal Studios 
to have a meeting with a guy named Spielberg, but is only allowed into the 
lot if he walks. "That's like nine miles from here!" Steven remarks to the 
security man at the front gate. "Yeah, it is pretty far," he replies. A cameo 
by actress Jennifer Tilly (playing herself) is also very funny, with a sly 
one-liner concerning her last film, "Bride of Chucky." And it was amusing to 
see such filmmakers as Rob Reiner, Martin Scorsese, and James Cameron make 
walk-ons and make "all-in-good-fun" jabs at themselves. These jokes, of 
course, would work better if you know a lot about film and Hollywood, in 
general, because if you aren't sure what Cameron or Scorsese look like (or, 
saddeningly, if you've never even heard of them), their scenes will go 
straight over your head. On the basis of similar movies that make fun of the 
same subject matter, "The Muse" at least works better than the decade's worst 
major motion picture, the laughless, inane 1998 stinker, "Burn Hollywood 
Burn: An Alan Smithee Film."
The highlight of "The Muse" is easily Sharon Stone's winning, spunky 
performance, who hasn't really ever appeared in a big comedy before. Her 
comic talents have been proven somewhat with 1984's "Irreconcilable 
Differences" and 1999's "Gloria," but it is here that Stone goes all out and 
runs with her showy role, which is possibly an Oscar-caliber effort. As 
Sarah, Stone mostly remains a figure throughout, rather than a 
three-dimensional creation, but this is important since the motives of the 
character are supposed to remain mysterious. With perfect comic timing and a 
stunning presence, this is Stone's strongest turn since 1995's "Casino."
Albert Brooks, as usual, plays the same type of character he always plays, a 
neurotic, insecure man that spits out clever one-liners like they're going 
out of style. He was more likable, however, in his last film, "Mother." Andie 
MacDowell is fine as Brooks' wife, Laura, but tellingly, is not given much to 
do, and her relastionship with Steven is never satisfactorily portrayed or 
written. At least she does something, which isn't the case with Jeff Bridges, 
so much better in July's "Arlington Road," who is criminally wasted in the 
role of Steven's best friend. Bridges shows up every once in awhile, recites 
a few ho-hum lines, and makes his exit without much of a chance to make any 
sort of impression.
The clear potential that "The Muse" possesses only makes the final product 
even more of a disappointment. As with his character of Steven, Brooks has 
finally run out of steam in his screenplay for this film, and the ending, 
which doesn't really solve or wrap up anything, leaves you questioning what 
the whole point was. Some jokes work wonders, other fall flat (Bridges' 
tennis scene comes to mind), and all the while it is Stone who walks aways 
unscathed. That final twist that the film concludes on, though--it is an 
outrage, and it is a cheat.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman.
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Steven Phillips' career is at a crossroads.  Although the script writer
for seventeen films (including 1993 Oscar nominee McCormack Place) has
just won a humanitarian award, he has been told that he has `lost his
edge' by his friend, his agent and his studio  the latter strongly
suggesting that he be off Paramount property by 5:00.  So Steven does
what every other married, white, forty-something male does when they
have a mid-life crisiswell, actually he doesn't.  Most guys would
probably have an affair with some high-school-age bimbo, get caught and
lose half of their crap.
Instead, Steven (Albert Brooks, Mother) turns to friend and fellow
Hollywood screenwriter Jack Warrick (Jeff Bridges, Arlington Road), who
reluctantly admits that his recent success has been due to working with
a muse.  For those of you that don't remember your Greek mythology, Zeus
had nine daughters that were responsible for all creativity.  Jack's
muse, Sarah (Sharon Stone, The Mighty), a direct descendant of the
original nine, has also worked wonders for other Tinseltown dignitaries
(male and female) and many make cameos in this film - James Cameron,
Lorenzo Lamas, Wolfgang Puck, Rob Reiner, Martin Scorsese and Jennifer
Tilly, among others.
Jumping at the chance to revitalize his sagging professional life,
Steven is thrilled when Sarah tells him that she can begin working with
him immediately.  Mind you, she doesn't actually write for him or even
offer suggestions, but will supposedly make Steven more creative by
simply being near him.  Sarah also insists on having a suite at the Four
Seasons (on a high floor), a limousine, and a fridge stocked with
expensive health foods.
Initially trying to hide Sarah from his wife Laura (Andie MacDowell,
Just the Ticket), Steven eventually comes clean and tells his spouse
about the muse.  Any other woman might be suspicious of their husband
spending so much time with another lady, but Laura believes her
husband's honest intentions after witnessing Sarah make Steven fetch her
a Waldorf salad and bobby pins in the middle of the night.
Not happy with her posh surroundings at the Four Seasons, Sarah firmly
requests that she move into the Phillips' Pacific Palisades home, where
she works Steven's last nerve and motivates Laura to pursue a career in
cookie-making.  Oh, yeah  she also helps Steven come up with a great
screenplay that he tries to sell to Steven Spielberg.  Instead, in a
very funny scene, he ends up taking a meeting with Stan Spielberg
(comedian Steven Wright), a cousin of the Oscar winner.
The Muse is a comical success, with Brooks' dry delivery as potent as
ever (he also directed and co-wrote the film with the Oscar-nominated
Mother scribe Monica Johnson).  My only complaints are that Steven
believes in the muse way too easily and that his wife is too quick to
believe that he isn't putting the stones to Sarah.  But those are very
minor objections in a film this entertaining.  (1:37 - Rated PG-13 for
brief nudity)

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Muse (1999)
Albert Brooks, Sharon Stone, Andie MacDowell, Jeff Bridges, Mark 
Feuerstein, Steven Wright, Bradley Whitford, Mario Opinato, Dakin 
Matthews, Concetta Tomei, James Cameron, Bobby Edner, Lorenzo Lamas, 
Wolfgang Puck, Rob Reiner, Martin Scorsese, Cybill Shepherd, Jennifer 
Tilly, Stacey Travis, Steve Valentine. Music by Elton John. Screenplay by 
Albert Brooks and Monica Johnson. Directed by Albert Brooks. 97 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 2.5 stars (out of five stars) 
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
To best enjoy "The Muse," you need to get into the proper state of mind. 
First, forget the blurbs from quote whores proclaiming the film 
"hilarious" and "a laugh riot." It isn't. "Amusing," "pleasant" and 
"generally enjoyable" would be more appropriate terms. Second, lower your 
expectations. Because comedian-writer-actor-director Albert Brooks ("Lost 
in America," "Defending Your Life," "Mother") is held in such high regard,
 people tend to forget that while even the slightest of his films 
contains moments of comic genius, there are always numerous dead spots as 
well, even in the best of his works. And "The Muse" is not Albert Brooks 
at his best.    
Directed and co-written by Brooks, this shaggy dog story is more low-key 
than his usual offerings, with many flat stretches. Still, there are 
rewards here, notably jabs at Hollywood mentality; well-placed cameos 
from Martin Scorsese, James Cameron, Wolfgang Puck and others; Sharon 
Stone's fizzy performance in the title role; and, as always, the 
satisfaction of watching Brooks do wonderfully slow burns as his 
exasperation grows, building inevitably to deliciously juvenile outbursts.
This time around, Albert plays Steven Phillips, a screenwriter with 17 
scripts and an Oscar nomination to his credit. After receiving a 
humanitarian award at a gala dinner, with his wife Laura (Andie 
MacDowell) and young daughters watching in pride, he goes into the studio 
the next morning, only to have his world crash around him. A smarmy 
junior executive casually informs Steven that he has lost his edge. Not 
only is the studio rejecting his current script, it has decided to 
release him from his three-picture deal. 
In a panic, Steven races to the home of friend and fellow writer Jack 
Warrick (Jeff Bridges) for counsel. Moved by Steven's desperation, Jack 
confides the secret of his success. He is a client of Sarah (Sharon 
Stone), a genuine, daughter-of-Zeus Muse. Muses inspire creativity and 
Sarah is a hot commodity in the film community. After considerable 
badgering, Jack finally sets up a meeting between Steven and Sarah. In 
short order, Steven has his own Muse who lives up to her billing, but 
provides nonstop headaches along with inspiration. 
The concept is solid enough, but the execution falters. After a juicy 
opening, the story meanders and the aimless feel is enervating. The witty 
vignettes that pop up every few minutes are welcome, but they also 
underline the weakness of the main plotline. 
Part of the problem is Brooks himself. The comic actor always plays self-
absorbed, self-pitying types (his film persona is essentially the West 
Coast equivalent of Woody Allen, minus the creepiness), but his Steven 
Phillips appears haggard and speaks in pessimistic terms even when things 
are going well.
While Brooks' zeal seems muted, he still delivers a number of sharp one-
liners, particularly during his temper tantrums. Albert is a master at 
reacting to annoying characters, and he gets some world-class irritants 
here. He has some terrific exchanges with an oily Paramount exec (Mark 
Feuerstein) and a European partygoer (Mario Opinato) who twists the 
English language like a Bavarian pretzel.
There is a lot of old-fashioned shtick in "The Muse," as celebrities pop 
up for cameos tweaking their own images. "Titanic" director James Cameron 
has a cute bit and Martin Scorsese is a riot, babbling like a hyperactive 
loon about his insane concept for a "Raging Bull" remake. 
Comic vignettes aside, it's the women who keep the film going. Andie 
MacDowell gives one of her most likable performances to date as Laura 
Phillips, who starts realizing her own potential while spending time with 
the Muse. As Sarah the Muse, Sharon Stone proves quite adept at comedy, 
deftly creating a character who is at once demanding and ditzy. Stone is 
clearly having the time of her life playing such an off-beat type, and 
her enthusiasm is most appreciated.
If only the film had as much energy as Stone. It starts off strong and 
has a clever ending, but oh, does the midsection ever sag. Were I a Muse, 
I'd have strongly suggested that Brooks and his longtime writing partner 
Monica Johnson do another draft or two, because even the languidly paced 
"Mother" looks perky compared to this. 
After watching "The Muse," I'm reminded of the scene in which Steven is 
told that, while his script is serviceable, it lacks edge. That is 
exactly the trouble with this movie. "The Muse" is amusing, pleasant and 
generally enjoyable, which would be enough for most filmmakers, but from 
someone of Albert Brooks' caliber, we have a right to expect more.

Author
Frankie Paiva
Steven Phillips (Brooks) is sitting in a posh restaurant with a young studio
executive that says he's lost his edge. "What can I do to fix it?" Brooks asks,
but he says it's beyond fixing. "But I just got the Humanitarian Award!" he
fires back, "Oh come on, everyone gets that." The Muse is a perfect example of
the way that young Hollywood stars and executives are shaping what type of
movies that we see in the next millennium. It also shows what this young
movement does to the aging workers who've been there awhile.
When Steven sees a mysterious woman getting into a cab when he comes to ask his
friend Jack Warrick (Jeff Bridges) for advice he at first begins to think that
he is having an affair. But in his desperation, Jack feels sorry for him and
tells him that she is a muse. A muse is a child of Zeus and is supposed to
inspire all creativity. (Just a little update for those of us who didn't pay
attention in history.) Steven decides to consult the muse, (Stone) who turns to
want more than anybody in Hollywood are paying for their services.
Decked out in a Four Seasons suite, she makes him be at her beck and call, in
exchange he's starting to form an idea about a Jim Carrey comedy in a water
park. She also helps inspire Steven's wife Laura (Andie McDowell) to become the
next Mrs. Fields. She two investigators of a local mentor hospital show up at
the front door looking for her...they begin to wonder.
The film turns in a great performance by Stone. Her wackiness reminded me of
some of her craziness scenes in Casino. Albert Brooks also turns in a fine
screenplay that constantly moving and funny. But the film also raises the idea
of what will happen when the Sarah Michelle Gellar's of today turn 30? What
will happen to the industry then? If your looking for a fun film to see, go out
and see The Muse which gets *** stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains a brief view of Sharon Stone's butt. Good Age
7 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In his new film Albert Brooks plays a screenwriter who can still
write funny material but is losing his "edge."  He does not know what
it means to be losing his edge, but he is losing it nonetheless.
Sadly, the script of THE MUSE itself is often very funny, but Brooks
seems to be losing his own edge.  The Albert Brooks edge was to be able
to write dialog that is both funny and true.  In LOST IN AMERICA when
his wife gambles away "the nest egg," part of the punishment that
Brooks thinks of on the spur of the moment is she is no longer allowed
to use the words "nest" or "egg."  She must order fried THINGS for
breakfast.  If she sees a bird's home she must call it a round STICK.
This is very funny material because it is so ridiculous and at the same
time so possible.  But that very real sort of humor is missing from THE
MUSE.  In this film that kind of dialog is lost in all the sarcasm.
     Stephen Phillips (Albert Brooks) is a Hollywood screenwriter who
may be just getting to be past his prime.  When his latest script is
rejected he starts worrying about how to feed his family.  He goes to
his friend, the fabulously successful screenwriter Jack Warrick (Jeff
Bridges).  But who is this beautiful woman kissing Jack good-bye?  It
isn't his wife.  This is a side of Jack that Stephen has not seen
before.  Eventually Jack admits reluctantly that this woman is not his
mistress but really his muse.  Literally she is a muse.  She is one of
the nine daughters of Zeus.  If you treat her like a queen she will
inspire you to your most creative ideas and your best work.  Stephen
decides that he has nothing to lose and decides to make her his muse.
Her name is Sarah.
     Stephen starts seeing the Sarah (Sharon Stone) and taking up the
responsibility of keeping her happy.  Things that appeal to her tastes
do not come cheaply.  It costs tens of thousands of dollars a week to
keep her in the style to which she expects to live.  But she apparently
is the real thing and Stephen starts getting story ideas that may all
be worth the effort of keeping the pampered, spoiled, conscienceless
brat happy at all hours of the night with expensive snacks.  He will
indulge her even if it wrecks his marriage.  And it nearly does as his
wife Laura (Andie MacDowell) foolishly jumps to the conclusion her
husband is having an affair and then (surprise!) she very cleverly
realizes that explanation does not explain the strange behavior.  Again
the film parallel its own story when Stephen complains that his new
screenplay is lacking a third act and then he chooses one that seems
tacked on.  The ending is clearly the weakest part of the film.  Brooks
ties things up, but not in at all a satisfying way.
     Sharon Stone clearly is enjoying herself behaving pampered and
spoiled the way most people secretly would like to be.  Brooks is his
usual irritable character, but he has played this character too often
before.  He has also arranged an impressive lineup of familiar film
personalities to flesh out his story.
     What is unfortunate about THE MUSE is that Brooks walked right by
the best use of his concept and he never even noticed it.  The real
story is not the Muse's relationship with Stephen Phillips.  The story
to tell is how does a Muse establish herself in a cynical town like
Hollywood.  How does she make her first conquests?  How is her
reputation established?  This may be a story more in the realm of
Thorne Smith, but it is certainly where the interesting ideas are.  THE
MUSE is rated PG-13 for language and a moment of totally pointless
gratuitous nudity that apparently is present only to avoid a PG rating.
Speaking of rating, I give THE MUSE a 5 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Actor/writer/director Albert Brooks teams up with several other well-known
directors, Scorsese, Cameron, Reiner, as actors, to create a magical film
about gorgeous actress Sharon Stone, and cute-as-a-patootie actress Andie
MacDowell, spending a night together naked in bed! Well...okay...not
exactly, but the point is, it almost happens! Anyway, on to my review...
PLOT:
A veteran Hollywood screenwriter gets his writing contract terminated when
everyone in the industry deems him to have "lost his edge". After querying
his successful producer friend for help, he suddenly finds himself hooked up
with a modern-day "muse", who is ready to stir up his creativity...but at a
price! You see, the "muse" likes to inspire at her own pace, loves
extravagance and has a "thing" for expensive gifts.
CRITIQUE:
A very original fantasy tale strung along with plenty of funny lines, a nice
pace, a couple of twists and turns, a surprising ending, cameos galore,
Hollywood in-jokes, and a spectacular performance from Sharon Stone as "the
muse". I've given Sharon a hard time over the past few years, with her
trying to get all serious and shit, but she is perfect in this role, funny
as heck, cute as ever, and man-o-man...what a great ass! :) Albert Brooks is
someone whose humor is either appreciated by one or not, much like Woody
Allen, and if you haven't liked any of his previous films, you probably
won't like this one either. Fortunately for myself, I love Woody Allen, and
respect Brooks' unique brand of humor, despite his tepid acting range
leaving much to be desired. This film had me laughing out loud for the first
thirty minutes or so, but did take a little dip in the second half, with
little spurts of humor buoying me afloat.
Having said that, the plot itself always kept me interested, while Sharon
Stone and her engaging performance, locked me in for good! Don't get me
wrong, I also liked Albert Brooks' character, and he certainly hogged all
the best one-liners to himself, but Stone stole the show for me. MacDowell,
on the other hand, does little but float around in this one, adding very
little to the mix, and Jeff Bridges, well, he acts with his tan, and does a
mighty fine job at it, if I say so myself! Scorsese's walk-on and a couple
of other big scenes have giant laughs, but on the whole, the film is cute,
and fluffy, and fun, and well, entertaining. Surely my own bias as a
screenwriter might be shining through a little here (Just so you know where
I'm coming from :), but Mrs. JoBlo has no interest in the Woods of Holly,
and she was also spurting out laughter throughout. Take it as you will, but
do appreciate the fact that there are plenty of Hollywood jabs in here,
humor which treks heavily through the sardonic, and Sharon Stone is goddamn
delicious! Any questions...? And no...I haven't sold any of my scripts
either. Anyone know of any cheap muses running around?? Anyone? Bueller?
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Albert Brooks was born and raised in Los Angeles, Brooks is the son of radio
comedian Harry Einstein, known as "Parkyakarkus". Brooks' real name is
Albert Einstein. His brother is the infamous daredevil "Super Dave"
Osbourne, whose real name is Bob Einstein. Albert turned down the lead in
WHEN HARRY MET SALLY... (10/10) because he thought it was too much like a
Woody Allen script. Albert himself has been described as a West Coast Woody
Allen.
Sharon Stone's first (albeit fleeting) film appearance was as the blond
goddess glimpsed by Woody Allen on a passing train in Allen's STARDUST
MEMORIES. Stone's first major film role was as the conniving young actress
girlfriend of Ryan O'Neal in the comedy IRRECONCILABLE DIFFERENCES. She is a
member of MENSA, with an IQ of 154. She once auditioned for the Cathy
Moriarty role in Martin Scorsese's classic 1980 film RAGING BULL, the Glenn
Close role in FATAL ATTRACTION (8/10), the Kim Basinger role in BATMAN
(8/10), and the Madonna role in DICK TRACY. She also speaks Italian.
Andie MacDowell's full name is Rosalie Anderson MacDowell. In 1988, she
became a member of the New York City Church of Christ, a local affiliate
with a cult known as the International Churches of Christ. She left the
group shortly thereafter, when she was forbidden to take part in the film
SEX, LIES & VIDEOTAPE by the leadership.
Jeff Bridges met his wife, Susan in 1975 while filming RANCHO DELUXE. She
was working as a maid on a dude ranch, and as of 1999, they're still
married.
Cameos in this film include directors James Cameron, Martin Scorsese and Rob
Reiner, actors Lorenzo Lamas, Cybill Shepherd and Jennifer Tilly, and famous
restauranteur Wolfgang Puck.
THE MUSE marks the sixth collaboration between screenwriter Monica Johnson
and Albert Brooks. Their previous films together were MOTHER, LOST IN
AMERICA, MODERN ROMANCE, and REAL LIFE (all of which starred and were
directed by Brooks) and THE SCOUT (which only starred Brooks).

Author
Christopher Null
     Albert Brooks, who last gave us a wryly cynical meditation on
mother-and-son relationships with MOTHER, turns now to a wryly cynical
meditation on Hollywood and inspiration with the aptly titled THE MUSE.
     Brooks plays Steven Phillips, a moderately successful Hollywood
screenwriter who suddenly finds he's lost `his edge.'  In desperation he
turns to friend Jack (Bridges), who introduces him to a girl named Sarah
(Stone), whom Jack claims is a muse.  Or rather, one of The Muses, a
source of divine inspiration.
     And Sarah seems to be the real thing inspiring greatness in
Bridges' character (he wins an Oscar) and a dozen really big celebrities
who make cameos throughout the picture (which becomes half the fun, so I
won't spoil their identities).
     Steven's wife (MacDowell) even gets in on the action, as Sarah
inspires her to bake cookies and eventually open a bakery.
     Of course, Brooks is typically hilarious here with humor that is at
once dry and at the same time over the top.  But he lost with me with
the end product that Sarah helps him create  an idiotic comedy script
that sounds like a cross between ACE VENTURA and `The Beverly
Hillbillies.'  It is even designed to star Jim Carrey.  I should hope
that if I get a muse, she brings me a better script than that.
     Any Albert Brooks fan will enjoy his latest.  It's not the home run
that say, DEFENDING YOUR LIFE, is, but it's a classy film in an era of
low-class projects.
     Let me add the ironic footnote that Brooks himself ended up
distributing this picture through teeny outlet October Films, just as
his character is nearly forced to do in the movie.  You see, in the real
Hollywood, the greater your artistry, the lower on the totem pole you
have to go to find work.  That's how it really works.
Director: Albert Brooks
Producer: Herb Nanas
Writer: Albert Brooks, Monica Johnson
Starring: Albert Brooks, Sharon Stone, Andie MacDowell, Jeff Bridges
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:        Albert Brooks, Sharon Stone, Andie MacDowell, Jeff Bridges, etc.
According to the dictionary, a Muse is one of nine nymphs generally
represented as young, beautiful, and modest virgins, distinguished as the
peculiar protectresses of the fine and liberal arts.  There is another
definition: A loophole; a means of escape.  I'm not sure which definition
applies here.
This is certainly an Albert Brooks film.  He stars in it.  He directed
it.  And, he wrote it with Monica Johnson.   I'm surprised that he didn't
try to portray the Muse, as well.  Luckily, he didn't because Sharon Stone
gives a delightful performance as the title character.  Is Sarah really a
Muse?   Is she a lunatic who imagines she is a Muse?  Is she a con artist
pretending to be a Muse?   To Steven Phillips (Brooks) and all the other
`blocked' writers who cross her path, is she a gift or an albatross?  I
got the feeling that Jeff Bridges, as writer Jack Warrick, was `palming'
her off to his pal, Steven, so that he could get out from under the
expense of satisfying her costly and unrealistic demands.  Bridges (and
his character) deserved much more screen time.  Steven's wife, Laura,
(McDowell) is justifiably amazed that her husband can be so gullible and
is unbelievably tolerant of his behavior.  However, the bedroom scene
between the two women is one of the funniest of the movie.
The numerous cameos throughout the film were wonderful but they lost
their impact when they were showed over and over in the television
previews.  Although the rating is PG-13, it's not a movie for youngsters,
because they wouldn't enjoy it, not even with the brief nude scene that
gives it that rating.  I probably won't even watch it again when it gets
to television.   I'm being generous giving it a C.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Albert Brooks has always been a filmmaker who couldn't resist a great
high concept.  In his debut feature REAL LIFE, he parodied the pioneering
PBS documentary "An American Family;" in LOST IN AMERICA, he sent a yuppie
couple on an ill-fated attempt to drop out of society; in DEFENDING YOUR
LIFE, he imagined the afterlife as a spiritual courtroom; and in MOTHER,
he moved back in with Mom to figure out his relationship troubles.  An
inspired, outrageous situation has provided Brooks with the spark to show
his characters -- notably himself -- coming to terms with themselves and
finding a little dignity.  His concepts fueled the gags, but he never
forgot to tell a story.
     In THE MUSE, Brooks makes a mistake he's never made before:  he
starts with a situation comedy, then never moves beyond the situation.
Brooks stars as Stephen Phillips, a successful Hollywood screenwriter at a
career crossroads.  Dumped from a studio deal for writing scripts with no
"edge," a depressed Stephen seeks counsel from his friend and fellow
writer Jack (Jeff Bridges).  Jack offers Stephen access to what he claims
is the secret of his own success:  an actual, straight-out-of-mythology
muse named Sarah (Sharon Stone).  Though initially incredulous, Stephen
finds that his collaborations with Sarah are firing his creative juices.
Unfortunately, he also finds Sarah's services much in demand, including
from his own wife Laura (Andie MacDowell), who finds herself inspired to
pursue her own creative dreams.
     THE MUSE seems to have been born as yet another Hollywood satire,
poking fun at the insecurities of movie folk and ther fascination with the
latest insta-cure for what ails them personally or professionally.
Brooks, uses the opportunity to toss in cameos by other filmmakers who
have been Sarah's "clients" (James Cameron thanks her for TITANIC; Martin
Scorsese proposes a remake of RAGING BULL, "but with a really thin guy"),
which are good for a couple of smiles.  The insider gags, unfortunately,
are about the only ones that work.  More often, THE MUSE is a comedy in
search of something, _anything_ funny to say.  Sharon Stone's finicky diva
is an idea that never quite takes off, and the supporting players often
look vaguely bored with their lines.  Even Brooks' usually reliable
persona can't jump-start the film, because it doesn't turn into a
sympathetic character.  He's just an annoyed privileged guy whose
annoyance at his slightly lessened privilege makes him just plain
annoying.
     Brooks' lack of a character is part of the over-riding problem with
THE MUSE: a lack of anything substantial past the thin premise.  The film
occasionally looks like it could be leading Stephen towards a little
growing up, whether about his career neuroses or his retro-breadwinner 
agitation at Laura's growing financial success as a cookie-maker.  There's
even the faint hope that Brooks could be offering a light-hearted look at
the shove people require just to believe in their own talents.  Then the
film ends, and it becomes evident that there's not a shred of actual story
to THE MUSE.  There's no improved mutual understanding in the Phillips'
relationship, no one grows, no one learns a thing -- there's not even the
satisfaction of Sarah explaining her own turns of character.  The whole
thing just fades to black, leaving a shallow collection of industry jokes
in its wake.
     There are a few decent laughs to be found in Brooks' validation of
William Goldman's line about how "nobody knows anything" in Hollywood.
Mark Feuerstein has a nicely understated role as a tactless studio
executive, and Steven Wright appears briefly as the nepotistically-
advantaged Stan Spielberg.  But much of the acidic humor leaves a sour
aftertaste once it's clear that it's all little more than a chance for
Brooks to vent.  His character spends much of the film in search of a
third act for his screenplay, which is ironic when you consider that THE
MUSE is in desperate need of a third act of its own.  It's even more
ironic that in the middle of a Hollywood satire, the protagonist's
brilliant script -- the one he's inspired to write after being told he has
"lost [his] edge" -- is a wacky high-concept vehicle for Jim Carrey.  If
the lesson Brooks wants us to learn is that a writer's goal in life should
be coming up with yet another mass-market yuk-fest, then maybe he's the
one who has lost his edge.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Sharon Stone is an irresistible comedienne in Albert Brooks'
slightly surreal send-up of the motion picture business. Taking a
whiny cue from Woody Allen, Brooks plays a skewed version of himself -
a neurotic middle-aged screenwriter, comparing his job with "a eunuch
at an orgy - except that the eunuch can, at least, watch, while the
screenwriter is not even allowed on the set." When he receives a
Humanitarian Award, he facetiously describes a "humanitarian" to his
daughter as "someone who has never won an Oscar." But when he's fired
by a weaselly studio exec who claims he's "lost his edge," even his
agent agrees. Desperate to save his career, he consults his successful
buddy (Jeff Bridges) who admits he owes everything to a Muse - that's
Sharon Stone. As a daughter of Zeus, she gets people in touch with
their creativity. But she's a pampered muse - demanding a suite at the
Four Seasons Hotel ($10,000 a week), limo, and dutiful attendance to
her desires. Frantically, Brooks tries to satisfy her capricious whims
- as does his wife, earnestly played by Andie MacDowell, whom the Muse
encourages to pursue her cookie dream of being the next
Mrs. Fields. And it's funny as Martin Scorese, James Cameron, Rob
Reiner, and Wolfgang Puck pay Tiffany tributes to the divine
diva. Albert Brooks ("Mother," "Defending Your Life," "Lost in
America") is an acute and adept observer of the nutty, ruthless
Hollywood scene, skewering its self-absorption and gullibility, but
his ironic concept fizzles out as he misses some screwball
opportunities with the Muse's legendary use of the magical power of
sex - and his riff on Steven Spielberg falls flat. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Muse" is a droll, satiric 7. It's wryly
amusing, pointing out that people are who you think they are.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
I love L.A. Despite the traffic, L.A. is the best place to live if
you're looking for a casual lifestyle. Los Angeles has been a major
player in films from "Chinatown" to "Short Cuts", perhaps because all
the major players in film reside there; the city translated as "city
of angels"(how ironic; I guess all they all moved away). An overlooked
aspect of Albert Brooks' terrific comedy "The Muse" will be the way
Brooks' presents L.A., as a paradise-like city where you could sit
home during the day, write a bit of your new action screenplay, and
make enough so that your family could live in a Palisades estate.
"The Muse" is Woody Allen territory, both in the way the film business
is presented and in the slightly supernatural mystical
storyline. However, what "The Muse" will gain its notoriety for is for
being Sharon Stone's return to comedy(her last one was
"Irrenconcilable Differences", her first major film role) after years
of forgettable dramatic performances("Casino" being an
exception). Although her role as the title character won't recieve an
Oscar, her natural charm shines through and she is surprisingly
likable.
"The Muse" is the story of Steven Phillips(Albert Brooks), an
Oscar-nominated screenwriter who is told by his boss that he has lost
his edge. He is subsequently fired and turns to his more successful
friend(Jeff Bridges) for he advice. He tells him about Sarah(Sharon
Stone), who is a real Muse, the daughter of Zeus, who can inspire
creativity.
Steven decides to give this Muse thing a try, when he realizes that
the Muse has absolutely no concept of money. Sarah will inspire you,
but in return you must give her everything she wants. So Sarah ends up
moving in to Steven's home, and as well as subtly inspiring Steven,
she inspires Steven's wife(Andie MacDowell) into becoming the next
"Mrs. Fields".
A lot of the fun in "The Muse" comes from watching different
celebrities admit to using the Muse.  Rob Reiner thanks her for "The
American President", James Cameron thanks her for "Titanic", Martin
Scorsese thanks her for inspiring his remake of "Raging
Bull"(hopefully a joke), and Sarah claims that she did "The Truman
Show".
The only real flaw in "The Muse" is a slightly unsatisfying ending
which doesn't live up to the comic genius which preceeded it. But
Albert Brooks has created a very funny comedy that entertains at
Hollywood's expense. What could be better?
"The Muse" also proves that real inspiration can only be found within
yourself, which is something that writers of all kinds need to
learn. I, myself, have started work on a few screenplays, only to give
up after 5 or so pages. Creativity is certainly not an easy
trait. Well, at least Albert Brooks is in top form, proving that he
won't be needing a muse for a very long time.


Author
Eugene Novikov
 "You have to turn around, park in the lot and walk to the building. You
don't have a drive-on."
"Excuse me?"
"You don't have a drive-on, you have a walk-on."
"Is that the worst a person could get or is there like a crawl-on?"
Starring Albert Brooks, Sharon Stone, Andie McDowell, Jeff Bridges.
Rated PG-13.
The movie is about Muses: descendants of the Gods said to be able to
inspire artists. I think Albert Brooks is a God. He hasn't made a bad
movie in his entire career (granted, a 6 film career, but six good films
in a row is a streak any filmmaker should be -- and is -- envious of).
At their worst his films are funny; at their best they are masterpieces
of comic precision and intelligent, tasteful humor.
The Muse, his new film, is a delightful experience. Charming, hilarious
and very Brook-ish, it is a worthy addition to what has been an
inordinately successful 20-year directing career. Brooks handles his
tricky material perfectly, cooking up an impeccable combination of the
supernatural, the off-beat and the Hollywood inside jokes.
Our protagonist is Steven Phillips, a heretofore successful screenwriter
who has just been fired. Why? Because he has "lost his edge".
Understandably Steven asks what that means. I began to wonder myself.
You hear that so often in the movie, tv and book business that it has
become a staple phrase and yet I don't know what the "edge" is and how
one can "lose" it. That is what everyone tells Steven when they read the
latest script and yet nobody is able to explain what it means. They all
advise that he take a year off work, get that mystical "edge" back.
That's not an option for him because he's no billionaire and he has a
family to feed. He's left up the creek without a paddle; he has no idea
what's wrong with his work or, more importantly, how he can fix it.
He pleads with his enviably successful screenwriter buddy Jack (Jeff
Bridges) for help. Jack divulges that he employs the services of a Muse.
That's right -- a Muse -- the mythical woman said to be able to breathe
inspiration into anyone with writer's/painter's/actor's/author's block.
The Muse's name is Sarah, and she's a tough cookie. First you have to
get her to "take your case", mainly by showering her with lavishly
expensive gifts. If she does decide to take you on you have to obey her
every command in return for alleged inspiration. She takes Steve on. She
orders that he put her up in a suite at the Four Seasons, run countless
errands for her and attend to her every wish. If he does, she insists,
he'll write a script that will make him so much money he may neverh ave
to write another one again.
The relationship between Steve and sarah gets weird. Brooks, bless his
soul, never lets The Muse develop into a romantic comedy. What he does
do, however, is have Sarah move in with Steve. At that point, various
guests come to Steve's home looking to use the Muse; people like Martin
Scorcese (who wants to remake Raging Bull with a really thin guy) and
James Cameron (no Titanic sequel for him, poor fella) all showing up
seeking inspiration. As if that wasn't enough, Sarah decides to assist
Steve's wife (Andie McDowell) in starting her own "Mrs. Fields" style
baking business, a fact which deeply troubles Steve.
The film's biggest commodity, of course, is the jokes, the jokes, the
jokes. They keep a-flyin', and the amazing thing is that they all work.
Well, almost. As a matter of fact, the ratio of gags to laughs rivals
that of Brooks classics such as the untouchable Defending Your Life.
This one may not be as profound or emotionally affecting as that film,
but it is at least just as funny.
Its claim to fame, however, is Sharon Stone as the leading lady in one
of her only comedic roles. And make no mistake, she is wonderful as the
mysterious title character. I doubt she will become a top-billed
comedianne anytime soon, but "this will do" wouldn't do her performance
justice. Equally successful is Andie McDowell, whom I didn't appreciate
as an actress up until this movie. Albert Brooks is as good a comic as
he is a director: his performance is typical but also typically
effective.
Unlike most other Albert Brooks films there is not much of substance in
The Muse, but that doesn't mean that it isn't good. It's even better if
you know your movies: the countless Hollywood inside jokes can be easy
to miss if you don't get them. Even if you're not an insider you can
still enjoy this fluffy light comedy, a hilarious ode -- not a spoof but
a tribute -- to Hollywood; a film that emphasizes that there's no
business like showbusiness.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Jerry Saravia
The cinema of the 1990's will be remembered for two things: Quentin Tarantino's
revolutionary "Pulp Fiction" and its slew of rip-offs, and the spate of films
about filmmaking. It is no surprise that since "The Player," we have become
bombarded by several films about making films in many different avenues. We
have seen low-budget independent filmmakers (Living in Oblivion),
fillmaking-on-the-fringes (My Life's In Turnaround), bad low-budget filmmakers
(Ed Wood), porno filmmaking (Boogie Nights), Hollywood filmmaking (The Player),
mob-financed filmmaking (Get Shorty), low-level Hollywood filmmaking
(Bowfinger), and so on. I greeted Albert Brooks' latest film, "The Muse," with
delight because of its stellar cast and because of the cynical edge of Brooks.
I am happy to report that "The Muse" is among his funniest, lightest works,
always tinging with delectable wit from start to finish. 
Albert Brooks stars as Steven Philips, a comedy screenwriter desperate to sell
his latest script after winning a humanitarian award ("It's an award you win
when you don't win an Oscar."). The next day, he is anxious and meets with a
stiff, humorless studio exceutive, Josh Martin (Mark Feuerstein), and is told
none too subtly he's out of a job. "You've lost your edge. Take a vacation,"
says Martin. Steven is torn since writing for films is his life, and realizes
his office will be occupied by Brian De Palma. He tries to get an idea that
could reestablish him in the realm of Hollywood, as well as continuing to
support his wife (Andie McDowell), an ambitious baker,  and his two kids. 
Steven finds a surprise in the form of a woman in glittery blue dresses named
Sara (Sharon Stone) - she is introduced by Steve's friend Jack (Jeff Bridges),
a writer. Sarah turns out be the resident Muse of La-La Land - "I...inspire!"
declares Sara. 
Steven is faced with a barrage of responsibilities to keep Sara as his Muse. He
has to rent a luxurious room at the Four Seasons Hotel for her, provide
round-the-clock food and car service for her immediate needs such as a "Waldorf
salad," and he must always bring a boxed trinket from Tiffany's to her. And
this is all for her to provide inspiration for the struggling writer. I
question a comedy writer coming up with a half-baked idea like an aquarium run
by Jim Carrey, but that is of little consequence. 
"The Muse" coasts along Brooks's typically cynical, neurotic edge, Sharon
Stone's comic sparkle, and the relentless number of inside jokes that will
tickle people from Hollywood and movie trivia buffs. There are humorous cameos
by film luminaries such as James Cameron, Rob Reiner, Martin Scorsese, Jennifer
Tilly, Cybill Sheperd, Lorenzo Lamas, and several others. I enjoyed Scorsese's
frenetic moment when he announces he's making a remake of "Raging Bull" with a
thin, angry guy. Jennifer Tilly's bit is especially cute when Brooks refers to
her as a "doll like Chucky." Tilly was of course in "Bride of Chucky." 
The biggest, most sensational surprise is Sharon Stone, who I always believed
had a gift for comedy but was never allowed to utilize it. Outside of her small
comic parts in "He Said, She Said" and "Diary of a Hitman," this marks the
first time she is allowed to sparkle in a bigger supporting role based her
ability to deliver a bouncy charm. She sports a hairdo with bobbypins, wears
long blue "New Wave"-style flowing dresses, and makes do like a spoiled brat
who needs to be pampered. Of course, this Muse is not all she's cracked up to
be. 
Brooks has great fun lampooning Hollywood and its obsessive nature towards
making big bucks on big ideas. The difference is that in an era where gross
humor of the "Austin Powers" variety reigns supreme, audiences are not likely
to be susceptible to Brooks's low-key charm and natural evolution of character
progression, or in this case, aggression. He takes his time, and still has not
learned how to end a film with a major bang. Here it ends all too abruptly, as
it did in "Real Life," Brooks's first film. But that is a minor carp. 
I am still not clear of Brooks's point - a muse inspires a writer to choose the
muse within him or herself? Can't he seek that same inspiration from his close
friends or family? Unless we are led to believe that writers don't have friends
in Hollywood when they are considered washed-up and edgeless. 
Despite a few flaws, "The Muse" is amusing and has some showstopping laughs and
one-liners along the way. Brooks is a master builder of comic setup and payoff
- he knows that the art of comedy is allowing the audience to experience the
buildup before the punchline, and boy, the punchlines are smartly written and
pungent. Too many comedies rely on gross humor and repetitive gags left and
right with no rhyme or reason. Not Brooks, and he has not lost his edge.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at
Faust667@aol.com 

Author
Ross Anthony
By Ross Anthony
Albert Brooks plays a screenwriter "passing his prime." Having "lost his
edge" he entrusts the inspiration of a mythical muse (Sharon Stone) who's
prone to very expensive whimsy.
In traditional Albert Brooks style, his character is the sharp-witted, yet
droopy eye-browed whiner who just can't believe so many things are going so
absurdly off from the norm. He's perfectly amusing anyway. In fact, he
delivers a few whammy lines that knocked my socks off. For instance, when
wife (Andy MacDowell) rhetorically asks, "You're not going to walk on the
kitchen floor all covered with paint are you?" Brooks responds, "I'm not an
astronaut, I have to walk on something."
However, apparently due to weak direction and/or quickly shot scenes, a few
times Andy MacDowell and even Sharon Stone, look like they're relaxing on
the sofa at home reading the script for the first time. I felt embarrassed
for them.
Though consistently fun in an Albert Brooks kind of way, this film drags its
feet with the business of building to a climax. You might find more to muse
over if you wait for the video.
Starring Albert Brooks, Sharon Stone, Andy MacDowell.
Directed by Albert Brooks and Monica Johnson.
Produced by Herb Nanas at October Films.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B

Author
James Sanford
         For 20 years, Albert Brooks' movies have been acclaimed as some
of the funniest and smartest comedies around, although the general
public has always been less appreciative of his efforts than the
critics.
 Instead of expressing bitterness about his lack of commercial
appeal, however, Brooks has turned the situation into the premise for
"The Muse," in which he plays a screenwriter named Steven Phillips who's
so desperate for a hit, he's willing to spend every dime he has -- and
probably several he doesn't -- for the services of Sarah (Sharon Stone),
a vivacious blonde said to have the power to inspire marketable scripts.
Although she charges no fees upfront, Sarah does require a good deal of
pampering and placating: a $1700-a-night suite at The Four Seasons and
trinkets from Tiffany's are barely enough to hold her interest.
 Trekking through some of the same territory covered by
"Bowfinger," "The Muse" lampoons Hollywood's tendency to accept
everything and everyone at face value. No one bothers to question
Sarah's credentials; they just look at her client list.
 Similarly, the young studio executives Steven has to contend
with may be brainless and amoral, but they look smart and stylish, which
may mean more to their bosses than possessing any sense of tact or
taste. One, who turns out to be Steven Spielberg's cousin Stan (a
brilliant cameo by Steven Wright), helpfully tells Steven to make his
movie "in color, people love color."
 But though "The Muse" is a more consistent satire than
"Bowfinger," it's not a prime example of Brooks' talent. The wild
imagination he demonstrated in the hilarious "Defending Your Life" is
tempered here, and the jokes, while generally clever, don't have the
sting of his writing in "Lost in America" or "Mother." It's almost as if
Brooks shared with Steven the desire to create something that wouldn't
create ripples in the mainstream.
 The movie's big accomplishment turns out to be giving Stone an
opportunity to display her previously unseen lighter side, a challenge
the actress eagerly accepts. She's serenely confident as Sarah, who
would be insufferable were it not for her disarming smile and upbeat
attitude. It's easily Stone's sharpest and most impressive work since
her Oscar-nominated turn in "Casino."
 As Steven's wife Laura -- who gets a little inspiration of her
own from the muse -- Andie MacDowell is quietly charming, but the scene
stealers here are the directors Brooks coaxed into participating
onscreen. Martin Scorsese's hyperactive rant about his proposed remake
of "Raging Bull" ("with a thin guy, I mean a real thin guy") is funny
enough, but James Cameron's appearance is almost enough to make you
forgive him for that "king of the world" remake at the 1998 Oscars.
James Sanford

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
Through Get Shorty we learned that to make it in Hollywood, you have to be
not of Hollywood. That way all your 'foreign' methods of doing things will
be just new enough to work. The west coast was a cakewalk for Chili Palmer
and his in your face, loan-shark approach. It's similarly easy for Sarah
Little (Sharon Stone), the muse of Albert Brooks' The Muse, not to be
confused with Mighty Aphrodite, though the reflective brand of humor in both
targets more or less the same audience and both are organized around the
continual dilemmas of a neurotic/sardonic male lead and his associations
with a mysterious women. Unlike Mighty Aphrodite, however, this is LA,
meaning that Lorenzo Lamas is in the diner, Rob Reiner's at the aquarium,
James Cameron is at the doorstep, Martin Scorcese's desperately seeking
Starbuck's. As in The Player, too, this long string of cameos is just part
of the behind-the-scenes- of-Hollywood Hollywood movie, pulling back the
curtain on the machinery which makes the magic.
What The Muse does to that machine, though, is make it magic as well. Sarah
Little claims to be the daughter of Zeus, you see. Which makes her
significantly more foreign than Chili Palmer (Olympia vs. Florida). And more
than claims: she has all the big-name producers and directors at her beck
and call, everyone dependent upon her for inspiration. Enter
'past-his-prime' screenwriter Steven Phillips, (Albert Brooks, same
character as always, different name) just let go by a major studio because
he's supposedly lost his edge. Edge or no, though, he has a family to
support, meaning soon enough he's just desperate enough to believe in
earthly deities, divine manifestations, whatever it takes to get his 'edge'
back, make him a commodity again.
The thing is, though--as he finds out--muses are high-maintenance, requiring
ideal conditions to sleep, midnight salads, spontaneous daytrips, limousines
etc, all of which harry Steven to the point of exhaustion, strain his
marriage in the usual, comical ways, all that. Which is satisfying. To add
to the mix he even has an advisor, Jack (Jeff Bridges, not playing Jeff
Bridges, which, in a cameo-heavy show, is initially confusing), who's also
dependent on Sarah for inspiration. In a movie founded in myth, though, of
course the main character will have an advisor. And of course Jeff Bridges
pulls it off with grace; his tennis-serving scene is one of the two
high-points of it all.
The second high point has to be at a cocktail party, when Brooks really lets
go with his signature ability to spool dialogue line on top of line, and
somehow keep it all at least peripherally pertinent. Every time you think
the back and forth is over, it's not, which is definitely his strength. It's
why everyone quotes Broadcast News. But The Muse isn't just about
underbreath conversation (though it does start slow and hushed, until Sarah
gets on-screen). As expected, it's a touch intellectual as well, even going
so far as to toy with the foundational myth-structure, or, to foreground
what's usually repressed in these divine-intervention mythic cycles: the
host/parasite dynamic. The way Sarah is at least as dependent upon Steven as
Steven is dependent upon her, which is something of a wry comment upon
religion, perhaps, or at least upon a culture always looking over its
shoulder to Greece. But quiet enough not to get in the way, too.
This is, after all, a movie about the moviemakers, or, the realization of a
screenplay about a screenwriter. It has to hold itself to a higher, more
self-conscious standard. Is it Skin Deep or Barton Fink, though, right?
Well, it has elements of both--even a surprise Coen-ish ending, minus the
John Goodman serial killer--but the laugh-a-minute pacing pushes it perhaps
a little more in John Ritter's direction, which isn't at all a bad thing.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones
for more like this, check out http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 USA Films
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Director:  Albert Brooks 
 Writer:   Albert Brooks & Monica Johnson
 Cast: Albert Brooks, Sharon Stone, Andie MacDowell, Jeff
Bridges, James Cameron, Bobby Edner, Mark Feuerstein,
Wolfgang Puck, Rob Reiner, Martin Scorsese, Stacey Travis,
Steve Valentine, Steven Wright
   Coincidentally, the New York Times Circuits section that
came out on the day of the critics' screening of "The Muse"
highlighted a directory of software that can be used by
screenwriters.  The software includes Plots Unlimited, which
gives the writer logical options among 5,000 situations;
WritePro, which takes the user through essential rules for
creating well-written material; John Truby's Blockbuster, for
brainstorming a plot; and DramaticaPro, which advises the
scripter about motivations, inner thoughts, moral dilemmas
and courses of action.  I'd guess that whoever actually does
get a play onto the screen using computer help is going to
receive critical notices that call the movie "apparently written
by a computer."
   If computers are not the answer, just how does a dramatist
get ideas that are saleable?  Chances are most who are
successful at this difficult and highly competitive trade have
the knack, the talent, the genius at knowing what will come
across to an audience.  For some gifted people, the notions
for new movies pop into their heads annually.  Look at
Woody Allen, for example, who no sooner finishes one work
than he is busy filming another.  Others need inspiration:
they're the kinds of people who may go for a decade or so
without a single good idea and suddenly become enkindled. 
"The Muse," which is directed, co-written, and stars Albert
Brooks deals with the latter situation.  Brooks, performing in
the role of Steven Phillips, a screenwriter who has lost his
edge, has just been fired by Paramount Studios and doesn't
know how he's going to feed his family of four.
   "The Muse" is an imaginative yarn, yet another movie
following closely on the heels of "Bowfinger." Like that vehicle
for Steve Martin and Eddie Murphy, this one sends up the
unique culture which is Hollywood--a town filled with a small
number of successful studio department heads, producers,
writers and directors and afflicted as well with many times
that many wannabees and has-beens.  Brooks, one of our
most talented and successful comics who has done great
work in "Defending Your Life" (considered by one critic to be
"imperfect, like all of Brooks's movies, but hard to dislike"),
and "Lost in America" (co-written, as is this one, by Monica
Johnson, a send-up of yuppies), is true to form with a movie
having a sit-comish design.  Brooks, who was a regular on
TV programs hosted by Ed Sullivan, Johnny Carson and
Merv Griffin, frames his comedies around punch lines,
presumably to be judged by how many sequences draw the
laughs or chuckles and how many fall flat.  Happily, most of
the gags this time around can be appreciated, especially by
an audience of regular moviegoers who are hip to Hollywood
society with its celebrity chefs, producers who do lunch with
their talent, and actors who consider themselves princes and
princesses deserving all the benefits of a world enamored of
American cinema.
   Brooks's character, Steven Phillips, has just received the
"humanitarian" award at a dinner presided over by Cybill
Shepherd, who announces that the man has written
seventeen films, "some of which are about the human
condition."  At home with his wife, Laura (Andie MacDowell)
and his two daughters, he is asked what the award means
and explains that this is what is given to people who do not
win Oscars.  Much of the humor throughout the 97-minute
movie are of this self-deprecatory nature as Brooks runs
through the role of a slightly neurotic and anxiety-ridden
author. (This is sort of role that could have been played as
well by Woody Allen.)  Phillips's friend, Jack Warrick (Jeff
Bridges), advises him to consult an actual living muse--
explaining that the muses in Greek mythology are nine
children of Zeus whose role is to inspire people in the arts. 
Phillips consults with Sarah (Sharon Stone), the alleged
source of inspiration, hoping to get back on track.  He soon
finds that Sarah is more a princess than a god, insisting that
if she is to do her job properly she must be put up in the
city's most expensive hotel, be treated to expensive gifts, and
even given the run of Phillips's home.  At various points in
the film, Sarah is visited by the grateful people whom she has
inspired, including Martin Scorsese (who does an amusing
job as a motormouth who seems to have overdosed on
Starbucks), Wolfgang Puck, Rob Reiner, and James
Cameron--all playing themselves.
   If Brooks successfully performs in the role of an annoying
pest, constantly sniveling about the hand he's been dealt by
unappreciative producers, Sharon Stone is even more notable
in her portrayal of a woman who exploits her godlike position
to extract expensive gratuities.  
   The point to "The Muse" is that the creative people in
Hollywood are on a different planet, one which has furnished
the chic set nationwide with such benefits as bottled water,
arugula, sun-dried tomatoes, and in this case, the world's
best cookies.  The picture has even broader implications in
portraying Hollywood as a dream factory which produces utter
fantasies (such as the belief in living muses) that allow us to
leave behind our real lives for a couple of hours each week. 
If some of the jokes fall flat, chalk those sections of the movie
up to the periods that writer-director Albert Brooks's mentor
was out to lunch.  Fortunately, there's enough good fun in
this yarn to make us believe that the highly talented Brooks
has spent most of his creative time in the presence of his
muse.

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Muse_ (PG-13) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
"I've hit the wall," proclaims Albert Brooks's character toward the
beginning of _The_Muse_, and one may feel the same about the
writer-director-star after seeing his latest, which ends in a most
lackluster fashion.  But before the film hits that creative obstruction,
Brooks is able to get in a number of jabs at Hollywood, and elicits some
nice performances from his cast--that is, once he settles into a
comfortable comedic rhythm, which he takes his sweet time to establish.
That rhythm is established with the arrival of the title character,
played--in her neverending quest for respectability--by Sharon Stone, who
does fare well in this, her first major comic role.  Her mysterious Sarah
Little claims to be a bonafide daughter of Zeus, bearing the divine gift
of inspiration.  Boasting a long and illustrious list of satisfied
customers--including James Cameron, Rob Reiner, and, in the film's best
comic performance, Martin Scorsese--it takes fairly little to convince
jobless veteran screenwriter Steven Phillips (Brooks) to employ her
services.
Stone obviously has fun sending up her high-maintenance diva image as
Sarah, whose gifts come at a steep price; Steven must pay for all of her
ridiculous extravagances, such as a deluxe suite at a four-star hotel to
late night gourmet snacking food.  The laughs arise from these situations
are as soft as can be expected, and while there are a few pieces of
dialogue where Brooks's famously caustic wit shines through (particularly
in Steven's scenes with pompous Hollywood industry types), the film's
sense of humor is characterized by a certain gentleness.  This makes for
pleasantly witty, smile-worthy viewing, but not necessarily gut-busting
hilarity, such as the prominent subplot where Sarah inspires Steven's
wife Laura (Andie MacDowell) to start up her own business while Steven
himself remains bereft of story ideas.
And that's what ultimately happens to Brooks and writing collaborator
Monica Johnson.  Hard answers about Sarah inevitably must come, and when
they do, _The_Muse_'s low-fi energy begins to wane.  That did not
necessarily have to be the case, however, if the explanations propelled
the story into a new direction.  Instead, though, Brooks and Johnson
paint themselves into a corner that they obviously had no idea how to get
out of, resorting to a twist ending that is as unsatisfying as it is
contrived.  Appropriately enough, it seems that Brooks and Johnson needed
a muse of their own to really make this film work.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Dennis Schwartz

MUSE, THE (director/writer:Albert Brooks; screenwriter:MonicaJohnson;
cinematographer: Thomas Ackerman; cast: Albert Brooks (Steven Phillips),
Sharon Stone (Sarah, the muse), Andie MacDowell (Laura Phillips), Jeff
Bridges ( Jack Warrick), Catherine MacNeil (Anne), Mark Feuerstein (Josh
Martin), Bradley Whitford (Hal), 1999)
An uninspiring film about a muse (Sharon Stone) in Hollywood helping a
writer (Albert Brooks ) who was stuck without a good idea for a script.
This is a dull, unfunny film, lacking an edge to it, as if the
screenwriter is past his prime and maybe should take a year off to
re-gain his touch.
Albert Brooks' (Modern Romance, Defending Your Life, Mother) latest film
deals with his critique of Hollywood's taste, as it results in Brooks
turning out the same kind of film he is railing against. This sitcom
film is actually worst than most sitcoms seen on TV; it should have come
with canned laughter. In the theater I saw it, no one laughed; and,
watching a comedy without hearing any laughs gives me a creepy feeling.
The film lacked the kind of comedy expected for a satire. Even if the
story never took off, I at least expected the film to have some snappy
things to say about those who are part of the Hollywood establishment
and not to mirror it so closely with the Hollywood scene that it can't
even be considered a parody anymore. I thought Brooks mailed this script
in. All the cameo performances-Rob Reiner, Cybill Shepherd, Martin
Scorsese, James Cameron, Lorenzo Lamas, Wolfgang Puck, and Jennifer
Tilly- were for no avail, they added nothing to the story.
It was hard to think of Brooks as a victim of Hollywood when he was
surrounded by so much wealth and the only thing he strove for was to
become even wealthier. He never asked the muse to inspire him to write a
great classic, only for some "summer script" he can sell to the studios
as a blockbuster movie. If he was trying for a parody (which I assume he
was), he just didn't succeed. All he succeeded in showing was that there
is some bitterness in him and that he's part of the "fat cats" who make
up the Hollywood scene, too complacent to make a real satire with some
bite in it. The affluent Hollywood milieu of the film took away any
chance but for us to see him fit right into the upscale lifestyle of
those who frequent the tennis courts, swimming pools, and live in those
mansions with guest houses. But I think the main problem with the film,
besides the fact that it's a one idea film, is how that idea was weak
and never developed.The Brooks character never spelled out why he was so
desperate in the first place and he never showed us how good a writer he
was. It was difficult to see what was his problem, especially when he
has a lovely wife (Andie MacDowell) whom he loves and two sweet
daughters, a splendid home, drives a Mercedes, is an established
Hollywood writer after 17 years in the business, has good contacts
there, and is rich.
I feel I must question the film's intent: Why should I feel sorry for
Brooks? What is this edge that he is supposed to have lost? Where is the
comedy in the film? What is this nonsense about getting a live muse
supposed to mean? What kind of statement is he making about creativity?
Should I really believe that someone would have the chutzpah to make a
film about a screenwriter who lost his touch and pays for a muse so he
can get that touch back and makes a film that is so flat and uninspired?
Is he trying to tell me that people in Hollywood will believe in
anything and so should I?
The Muse opens with Brooks winning a Humanitarian Award. His daughter
asks him, "what is a humanitarian?" And he responds, "It's someone who's
never won the Oscar." And there you have the funniest line in the film
and it comes right in the beginning of the film. After a meeting with a
studio executive (Feuerstein), who tells him his script is no good,
Brooks then turns to his successful writer friend, Jeff Bridges, who
suggests he contacts the same muse who helped him. A muse being any one
of the nine mythological Greek daughters of Zeus who are divine sources
of inspiration, but in this case it is the mentally unstable Sharon
Stone.
What goes for comedy in this film, has to do with his whiny relationship
to the muse. The muse is demanding gifts from Tiffany's from him and
must be placed in an expensive hotel suite, later on she will occupy the
bedroom of his house, with him forced to sleep in the guest house. He
also must run errands for her and cater to all her whims. She in return
helps him out by suggesting he go to the aquarium in Long Beach and find
something there to use for an idea. That dumbness prevails, and he comes
up with a lame idea for a film in which he wants to have Jim Carrey star
in, is supposed to be his way of saying that Hollywood doesn't know
what's good from what's crap, or doesn't care. His wife will also be
inspired by the muse, she will go successfully into the cookie business,
a source of some more whining comedy on his part. This is "I LOVE LUCY"
kind of humor.
That this film is about making money being tantamount in Hollywood to
creativity, is a theme that has been often done and this film has not
touched on any new ground with that concept. If you make a satire, it
better be funny, or if it is a more serious film, it should try to have
a script with some characters who are profound and perceptive. To have a
satire with nothing to dig into is unfortunate, as Brooks chose to go
for his laughs by having his character be a whiner, grousing about the
demands of his muse, the attention she gives to his wife instead of him,
how Steven Spielberg snubbed him, and how cruel it is to be in Hollywood
if you are a creative person. This slight aim at comedy turns this film
into a slight film. If you really had to see this film, the only reason
I could think of doing so, was to see the attractive Sharon Stone as a
muse.  Even though the script did not provide her with material that was
funny, she did show by her facial expressions and body language that she
has a penchant for comedy if given a chance. At least she was more
lovable than any one else in the film was.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
