Title
Review for Robinson in Space (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Martin Rich
'Robinson in Space' is an off-beat, literary, view of England - with a 
very brief excursion into France and Belgium - through the eyes of two 
men taking part in a curious, enigmatic, survey.  It's hardly 
mainstream cinema, but is a very perceptive account of England's 
changing landscape, or what might be termed a post-industrial economy.
Its director Patrick Keiller established the style with the film 
'London' three years ago.  As with 'London' the two characters are the 
explorer, Robinson, and an un-named narrator, and as before we see 
neither of them and only hear the voice of the narrator, played by Paul 
Schofield.  Robinson, formerly an art lecturer, is now teaching in 
Reading; we are never quite told the reasons but his first survey 
apparently made him enough enemies to drive him out of London.  
Robinson is preoccupied by literary references - especially those to 
Daniel Defoe: presumably the name Robinson is derived from Robinson 
Crusoe.  Early in the film, the references to writers comme thick and 
fast - along with a few other topics such as world-war 2 aicraft, and 
the substance Buckminster-Fullerine.
Robinson has a keen eye for the surreal, and for signs of a country no 
longer the industrial power that it once was.  Early in the film we see 
customers waiting outside a record shop to meet Adam Ant.  Later, the 
Queen is opening a new plant - built by the Korean company Samsung.  
Coal, once such an important natural resource, is now imported from 
South Africa.
True, there are times when the narrator appears too preoccupied with 
the facts and figures of Britain's industrial decline - and some more 
literary allusions would lighten the tone.  But it's a 
thought-provoking and very individual film - essentially a documentary 
but one which gently draws us into its own view of life.
But maybe it's not as literary as it seems, and maybe the name isn't 
really taken from Daniel Defoe.  Robinson and Keiller (the director's 
name) are both makes of marmalade.  Surely this is no coincidence...
-- 
Martin Rich  Phone(0171) 477 8627  Fax(0171) 477 8628
Lecturer in Information Management, City University Business School     
Frobisher Crescent, Barbican Centre, London EC2Y 8HB, UK  M.G.Rich@city.ac.uk
http://www.city.ac.uk/martin
