Title
Review for Striptease (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Edwin Jahiel
STRIPTEASE ** 1/4  Written and directed by Andrew Bergman from the 
novel by Carl Hiaasen. Photography, Stephen Goldblatt. Editing, Anne 
V.Coates. Production design, Mel Bourne. Costumes, Albert Wolsky.  
Cast: Demi Moore (Erin Grant), Burt Reynolds (Congressman David 
Dilbeck), Armand Asante (Detective Al Garcia),  Ving Rhames (Shad), 
Robert Patrick (Darrell Grant), William Hill (Jerry Killian), Paul 
Guilfoyle, Jerry Grayson, Rumer Willis, et al.  A Castle Rock release. 
115 minutes.  Rated R (stripping, language)
Occasionally, ignorance can be bliss. I have not read any books by 
Carl Hiaasen, so that I cannot join those who find "Striptease" vastly 
inferior to its course novel. I did find the early parts of the film 
fairly dull, but things picked up rather nicely and while the plotting 
and continuity were pretty incoherent, the movie was overall 
entertaining.
In  a Florida Court, divorcee Erin Grant (Demi Moore) is desperate.  
The judge gives custody of her little girl Angela (Rummer Willis, 
Demi's real life daughter) to husband Darrell who is scum and jobless. 
But the judge remembers Darrell's football-playing days. To appeal 
this decision, Erin needs money, so this ex-secretary at the FBI 
resorts to stripping at the Fort Lauderdale Eager Beaver topless bar.  
When outrageously dumb, horny and soused  Republican Congressman 
Dilbeck (Burt Reynolds) watches Erin's convolutions on the stage, he 
wants her badly. He also gets into a fracas. Though incognito with wig 
and dark glasses, he is recognized by Jerry Killian, a regular who 
worships Erin. Killian plans to blackmail Dilbeck so as to have the 
Congressman help Erin's case. But Killian is found floating in the 
lake adjoining Detective Garcia's vacation cabin. From here on out the 
story involves the strippers, Darrell who is a dismissed FBI informer 
and wheels his daughter, all bandaged up, in wheelchairs to steal  
them  from hospitals and rest homes. Erin's efforts to get (by hook or 
crook) her daughter result in kidnapping. The venal Congressman who 
must be reelected to continue doing dirty work for a sugar company, 
keeps pursuing Erin, offering her two $2,000 for one hour's private 
striptease in the huge yacht of sugar barons (he ups the ante to 
$5,000 for Session Two). There is also the imposing, dignified 
African-American bar bouncer Shad (Ving Rhames),who is Erin's friend 
and self-appointed protector. (He has his own scheme of a fraudulent 
lawsuit that involves cockroaches in yogurt). 
The gallery of characters includes the sugar people who run the 
Congressman,  watch him warily, provide thuggish bodyguards; Darrell's 
lowlife sister and her cop husband; and of course, the owner of The 
Eager Beaver, the strippers, a cute monkey, a predictable python, its 
unpredictable replacement, and so on. 
Years ago, male audiences would  have flocked to see someone of  Demi 
Moore's stature "au naturel," and in general many people would have 
been shocked by the idea. Not today. Even so, those  patrons who do go 
for Moore voyeurism may be disappointed. Not because her callipygous, 
tirelessly exercised (and siliconed?) figure is not excellent, but 
because you only get few glimpses of it.  Furthermore, Moore's 
gyrations are athletic rather than erotic. As for the other strippers, 
they have a kind of inoffensive nudity, all in the line of duty.  
I don't know whether the book, reputedly quite funny, explored the 
issues of stiptease or viewed them from a pro-feminist point of view. 
The film does not. It merely goes its merry and outrageous way. Demi 
Moore, the central character, is a nice person whose main flaw is to 
have married so incongruously. She is sweet, educated and civilized. 
Why she took as a husband the  trashy, gross, illiterate hick Darrell 
is a mystery that nagged this viewer all through the film. 
What, on the other hand, gives appeal to the movie, is that so many 
people in it are nice. Killian is nice. The strippers are nice. The 
club owner is nice. The big, muscular bouncer is very nice--to all 
those who are nice. Assante, who in some films can be overbearing or 
irritating, is also nice. What's more, no one is nice in a pointed, 
saccharine way.
The funny bits come mostly from the contrasts between the Nice and the 
Bad, the latter, of course being  Darrell and the Senator's entourage 
and patrons. Moore, rightly avoiding to do comedy, becomes, in a sense 
, the straightwoman  for Reynolds, who is making a real and comic 
comeback on the big screen. His exaggerated part goes beyond political 
satire and into outrageous lines, clownish appearance and behavior. 
It's hard to resist his absurdism, as when he goes from his room, 
where he is ridiculously undressed, vaselined and sniffing lint from 
the laundromat machine that  Moore had used,  to outside the room. He 
is correctly suited as he steps out among a banquet crowd of  Young 
Christians whom he addresses on family values. 
Reviews of this film have been negative, partly, I think, because the 
movie doesn't warrant Moore's 12.5 million dollars paycheck. True 
enough, but if you ignore this outrage, the movie can be quite 
entertaining.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     "It's not SHOWGIRLS" one trailer for STRIPTEASE bluntly announces,
capping off a marketing campaign which may be the first in recent memory
to attempt to convince the movie-going public that a new film is _nothing_
like a previous film.  Sure, it works the other way all the time, thanks
to pre-fabricated critical blurbs like "This year's FORREST GUMP" or
reminders of the director's previous successes, but the stink of SHOWGIRLS
is such that it threatens to contaminate anything featuring a pelvis and a
pole.  Of course, if you remembered that writer-director Andrew Bergman is
behind such comedic gems as THE IN-LAWS, THE FRESHMAN and HONEYMOON IN
VEGAS, you'd know not to expect SHOWGIRLS.  The real question is whether
you'd expect STRIPTEASE, a film as inconsistent in its tone as it is
occasionally hilarious.
     Demi Moore stars as Erin Grant, a Miami woman forced to extreme
measures when her pill-popping, police-informant ex-husband Darrell
(Robert Patrick) is granted custody of their 7-year-old daughter Angie
(Rumer Willis, Moore's real-life daughter).  To earn the necessary money
for the appeal, Erin takes a job dancing at the Eager Beaver, a topless
bar which counts Congressman Davey Dilbeck (Burt Reynolds) among its
regulars.  One night, Dilbeck is caught on film assaulting another patron
at the bar, a fact which deeply concerns Dilbeck's staff and corporate
supporters.  When the photographer and another man turn up dead, homicide
detective Lt. Garcia (Armand Assante) begins an investigation which draws
Erin and her daughter into a nasty mess of sleazy politics.
     Moore received the surprising sum of $12.5 million to bump-and-grind
her way through STRIPTEASE, and at the very least the producers should
take solace in the fact that she picked up dancing a heck of a lot faster
than she has picked up this whole acting thing.  There is something both
smug and overly earnest about Moore's standard screen pose, as though she
never wanted there to be any doubt that she felt deeply about whatever her
predicament might be, but also that nothing could stop her if she set her
mind to it.  In STRIPTEASE, that is a major problem.  This is supposed to
be a frisky comedy, but Moore's deadly serious performance acts like ankle
weights on a swimmer.  There are scenes between her and Armand Assante
which seem to come from a second-rate TV-movie -- "Baring Her Soul: The
Erin Grant Story."
     That's a real shame, because there are plenty of moments in
STRIPTEASE where Bergman's wonderfully weird sense of humor gets to shine
through.  Ving Rhames has a great role as the Eager Beaver's put-upon
bouncer Shad, a man looking for the get-rich-quick scheme which will allow
him to get out of the bouncer business; he gets one of STRIPTEASE's best
moments as he impresses a couple of thugs with tales of his
responsibilities "auditioning" topless dancers.  Burt Reynolds is
completely over the top as Dilbeck, a pathetic, fetishistic drunkard who
coats himself in Vaseline and sniffs Erin's dryer lint before addressing a
Young Christians' conference, and there is something improbably enjoyable
about the way Reynolds doesn't even pretend to modulate his performance.
Bergman makes fine use of oddball supporting characters, and seasons
STRIPTEASE liberally with his trademark unpredictability, like a priceless
scene during the film's climax involving Erin's daughter, two well-endowed
dancers and a jump-rope.
     There are plenty of laughs in STRIPTEASE, enough to make it
moderately entertaining, but the reason STRIPTEASE isn't a better movie is
that they're the wrong _kind_ of laughs for the material.  Based on Carl
Hiaasen's novel, the story demands a darker edge in its political satire,
a sense of irony that the topless dancer is one of the few characters in
the film with any morals.  That simply isn't Andrew Bergman's style; his
comedy may be wild, but it's always good-natured.  When Burt Reynolds'
Congressman is as absurd a character as the general played by Richard
Libertini in THE IN-LAWS, it's tough to extract any biting commentary.
The result is a film which is moving in several different directions at
once:  the source material is trying to make it dark, Bergman is trying to
make it silly, and Moore is trying to make it serious.  When it's silly,
STRIPTEASE is super, but a lot of the time it's not clear _what_
STRIPTEASE is.  Except, of course, that it's _not_ SHOWGIRLS.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
      This one gets my vote as Worst Movie of the Year.  Robert Patrick
(TERMINATOR 2), of all people, gives the most consistently credible
performance.  He plays the white-trash husband whose costly custody
battle has forced his wife (Demi Moore), a former FBI clerk, to start
stripping as means to meet ends.  At least, that's why we *think* she's
doing it.  Incredulously, the director-- Andrew Bergman (HONEYMOON IN
VEGAS), adapting from the novel by Carl Hiaasen -- simply cuts from the
courtroom to the dressing room!  Moore mumbles something about "needing
the money" and that's all we get in the way of character motivation.
Period.  Robert Patrick is pleasantly distracting for a while, as is
Ving Rhymes' occasionally scene-stealing bouncer-of-few-words.  Ms.
Moore, on the other hand, gives an intensely coarse performance that's
probably too serious for what this movie had in mind.  She's no fun to
watch.
     How an ordinary Miami mom ends up with such a buffed bod is never
explained, either.  (Perhaps she is working to pay off her trainer and
plastic surgeon, as well?) There's also the small matter of Burt
Reynolds' corrupt congressman.  Slurring his way through a bad Brando
impersonation, Reynolds embarrasses himself more than any bad toupee
ever did.  Ugh.  Who knows what this unwatchable mess looked like before
the test audiences got hold of it?  (A reshot ending bumped the movie
from a planned Memorial Day release.) If nothing else-- and as Ms.
Moore's rote bumping and grinding can attest to-- STRIPTEASE proves one
point, conclusively:  that even SHOWGIRLS star Elizabeth Berkley can do
something better than the highest paid actress in Hollywood.  Bless her
heart. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Andrew Hicks
        About 14 months after its original release, I finally got 
around to seeing STRIPTEASE and, let me tell you, I could have 
waited at least another 14 months. There's good news and bad news 
about STRIPTEASE. The good news is that a lot of this movie is 
completely different from what it was marketed as -- Demi Moore Gets 
Topless. The bad news is that there is still a lot of focus on the Demi 
striptease motif which, as far as that goes, is nothing but a tease. As 
highly publicized and compensated ($12.5 million) as her nudity is, 
you get good, unadulterated glimpses of her breasts for maybe 12.5 
seconds, which adds up to a million bucks a second. Even I'd get 
naked in a movie for that kind of money.
        STRIPTEASE was adapted from a comic novel by Carl 
Hiaasen that made light of the skin trade and its patrons, and a lot of 
the comedy still shines through. Every character but Demi's is played 
for laughs, but it just doesn't work to have her dropped in as the one 
serious character, the one who sees her "dancing" as a form of art and 
expression, and a way to make an honest living. There's a moment 
early on where she holds up a cocktail napkin with a nude female 
silhouette and tells the owner of the club, "Get rid of these. They're 
tacky and they objectify women." Come on, Demi, those are the 
cornerstones of your career. That and a telling lack of any sense of 
humor. Think about it -- when have you ever seen Demi be anything 
but dead serious in a movie? Then why is it I keep laughing so hard at 
her whenever I watch one of her movies?
        If not for Demi, STRIPTEASE could have been a good, fun 
movie. If they'd cast someone who could play the character for laughs 
to fit in with the others, it might have worked. Instead, painful steps 
are taken to make Demi into the single parent martyr of the strip 
industry. Before the dust has settled on the opening credits, Demi has 
already been screwed over by the male power establishment, as a 
bastard judge awards custody of her 7-year-old daughter to her 
husband (Robert "T-1000" Patrick), a redneck scam artist who makes 
a living stealing wheelchairs.
        Demi has to take solace in her dancing, as we see in at least 
six stripteases, only three of which she shows brief glimpses of each 
$6.25 million breast. She dances to more Annie Lennox songs than I 
knew existed, but I do have to give her props for doing a striptease to 
Prince's "If I Was Your Girlfriend," making it an even trilogy of 
Prince-teases in 1995 and 1996, from "Erotic City" in GIRL 6 to "319" 
in SHOWGIRLS (which I never saw, by the way, Mom). Actually, we 
see more of the other dancers' skin than Demi's, especially silicone-
enhanced snake dancer Pandora Peaks.
        The plot is more wacky and clever than Demi deserves. 
It involves a Demi-obsessed fan (William Hill) who tries to help her 
get custody back by blackmailing perverted Congressman Burt 
Reynolds (in his lamest hairpiece yet) with pictures of him attacking 
one of the strip club customers to protect his "angel," who of course 
turns out to be Demi. After Hill turns up dead, cop Armand Assante 
shows up to ask questions and investigate. It turns into a sex farce that 
could have been a decent comeback for Reynolds had anyone gone to 
see this movie.
        And I must give the Person Who Almost Saved This Movie 
award to Ving Rhames, who made me laugh every single time he 
turned up in STRIPTEASE . Playing a comic version of his toughass 
Marsellus Wallace character from PULP FICTION, Ving is the strip 
club bouncer and father figure to the dancers. Pure muscle at first 
appearance, he is more clever, literate and sarcastic than everyone else 
in the movie. Where Demi is too serious and Reynolds too wacky, 
Ving invigorates the movie with the same biting wit and satire 
Hiaasen intended for all the characters. Right now, I'd kill to see him 
in a decent comedy. One word of advice to anyone planning to adapt 
and film a Carl Hiaasen novel -- lock Demi up and pay Ving the $12.5 
million.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Demi Moore, Burt Reynolds, Armand Assante, Ving Rhames, 
      Robert Patrick, Rumer Willis
Director: Andrew Bergman
Producer: Mike Lobell
Screenplay: Andrew Bergman based on the novel by Carl Hiaasen
Cinematography: Stephen Goldblatt
Music: Howard Shore
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     First of all, let's get the obvious question out of the way.  Yes, 
Demi Moore does take off her top (on several occasions, in fact), 
although it takes half the running length for her to do it the first 
time.  However, while Moore's body may be the movie's primary selling 
point, the film tries to do more than just display naked breasts.  The 
heart of STRIPTEASE is a satirical examination of those who frequent 
strip clubs, and this makes it profoundly different from SHOWGIRLS, 
which embraced those aspects of American culture that STRIPTEASE 
lampoons.
     Unfortunately, STRIPTEASE's satirical bent, while aimed not only at 
the sexist attitudes of those who patronize topless joints, but at 
politicians, right-wing religious fanatics, and lawyers, is unfocused 
and lacks the requisite viciousness.  It's just one aspect of a muddled, 
overly-long motion picture that can't decide whether it wants to be a 
comedy or a drama.  Ultimately, the overabundance of ineffective 
dramatic moments hurts the movie. The situation is just too improbable 
and silly to carry any dramatic weight.
     Demi Moore plays Erin Grant, a former FBI secretary who now works 
as a topless dancer at the Eager Beaver Strip Club.  She needs to earn 
enough money to sustain a prolonged custody battle for her 7-year old 
daughter, Angela (Rumer Willis, Moore's real-life offspring).  Among the 
Eager Beaver's sleazy regulars is Congressman David Dilbeck (Burt 
Reynolds), the perpetually-drunk, womanizing, election-day choice of 
Christian groups.  One night, Dilbeck makes a scene at the strip joint, 
lunging for Erin and hitting another patron over the head with a bottle.  
Someone captures this on film, and a game of blackmail and murder 
ensues.  Meanwhile, Erin snatches her daughter from her criminal ex-
husband, Darrell (Robert Patrick, doing his best Gary Oldman 
impersonation), and solicits the help of a Miami cop (Armand Assante) to 
keep the little girl.
     One of the supposed comic elements of STRIPTEASE is Burt Reynolds' 
offensive, fatuous character.  Unfortunately, there's something sinister 
about this ignorant drunk (in fact, before some re-shooting was done, he 
attempted a rape) that diminishes any humor associated with him.  This 
is an unsavory man, and Reynolds plays him in a creepy, unsettling 
manner.  But, if it's difficult to laugh at Reynolds, the same can't be 
said about Ving Rhames.  In his role as Shad, the Eager Beaver's 
bouncer, Rhames' deadpan, matter-of-fact style (similar to the one he 
used in PULP FICTION) is consistently hilarious.  He is STRIPTEASE's 
high point.
     Moore is fine in this role, although more attention will be paid to 
her physical attributes than her acting.  She supposedly studied hard to 
be a stripper, and her on-screen, on-stage act is believable.  She's a 
little out of her depth in the dramatic sequences, although that's only 
one of the reasons they don't work (the script being the primary 
culprit).  Young Rumer Willis, who received a lot of notoriety before 
she was born as a result of Moore's VANITY FAIR cover, displays some 
promise with her unaffected performance. 
     Despite being designed to mock those who leer, STRIPTEASE does some 
leering of its own.  Several lengthy topless dance sequences are shot in 
an energetic and provocative manner.  It's easy to be cynical about this 
film's motives, especially considering how drastically Andrew Bergman's 
script has watered down the most biting aspects of Carl Hiaasen's novel.  
STRIPTEASE is a curious mix of eroticism, comedy, and drama that, 
instead of blending into a pleasing whole, has a tendency to separate 
and curdle.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Jason Overbeck
Striptease is supposed to be a funny, sexy film that offers the goods --
Demi Moore's goods.  It fails on all levels but one, and that level
barely regesters.  This film does offer looks at Demi's chest and
g-string clad butt on a few ocasions.
That is all the film has to offer.  Most of the acting is terrible (Ving
Rhames survives best), the jokes are lame and very lame (I didn't laugh
once).  Demi has a straight delivery on her jokes, and that is wrong for
the part, surrounded by colorfully dreadful characters who overact, and
sometimes try.  So what is a film that just offers looks at Demi's body?
At least Showgirls wasn't as terrible as this film.  We had
unintentional laughs with that one.  This films a miracle.  It can't
even get me to laugh accidently.  Some bad films can be good, thanks to
camp, look at The Substitute or Barb Wire.  
The story of Striptease has Moorelosing custody of her child to a
no-good ex-husband, becoming a stripper at the Eager Beaver (ha-ha) to
earn money for a court appeal.  She meets many colorful characters, the
highlights being: a congressman (Reynolds), and a bouncer (Rhames).
I've meantioned that the film has hardly any appeal and thus not much to
talk about in terms of "comedy."  What you have left is Demi Moore's
naked body.  This is impressive, and somewhat voyueristic watching a
bigtime hollywood celebrity prance her pretty self up on the screen,
amidst the dreck. 
Even Moore's nude and semi-nude scenes aren't even what they've been
cracked up to be.  Articals about her addiction to showing skin, a
somewhat sexy Late Night apperance, teasing trailers, even the title
promises SKIN.  This movies doesn't even deliver on that promise, the
way the public wants.  Lets be honest, I say public because people who
see or saw Striptease aren't going to see a good movie, they will see
Demi in next to nothing.
12.5 million dollars is the sallary Demi got paid to do this film.  That
was a large steping stone (and deserving one) for women actors in
hollywood.  Yet signing that paycheck to do this movie is a slap in the
face to women.  I see Demi's choice of this film in two ways.  Either
she wants the public to be aware of the curves of her body, in ways that
only Bruce Willis knows OR she was trying to lose all inhibitions about
her body by public nudity, like Madonna did with her book SEX.  Moore's
is a very good actress, in some movies.  First rate in pivital role in A
Few Good Men.  In Striptease all she wants is for us the public to know
what her butt looks like in a thong and what her chest looks like
without minus bra and shirt.  She took it all off and will leave you
with less money and an empty feeling.  What a waste!

Author
David N. Butterworth
A film review by David N. Butterworth
Copyright 1996 David N. Butterworth/The Summer Pennsylvanian
Demi Moore is proud of her body and, in her latest movie STRIPTEASE, it shows.
She has every right to be proud--this thirty-three-year-old mother of three
obviously works hard to stay in shape.  But there's little of her in
STRIPTEASE that we haven't seen before, and only hardcore Demi-lovers and
voyeurs are likely to savor this crummy piece of entertainment.  It is
sleazy and humiliating while half-heartedly attempting to present strippers
in a kinder light.
Moore "burns up the screen" as Erin Grant, a former FBI clerk who is forced
to work as an exotic dancer (read: stripper) in order to raise money to
appeal a custody decision that placed her seven-year-old daughter Angela
(Moore's real-life daughter Rumer Willis) with her small-time crook of a
husband (played by Robert Patrick).
Surely Erin could have found another job as an executive secretary.  Or
flipped burgers at McDonalds.  Or even applied for a loan!  But no.  Exotic
dancing (read: stripping) it has to be.  The money is much better--novelist
Carl Hiaasen, on whose book the film is based, claims that there are
waiting lists for these jobs--but it seems a peculiar career choice for a
single mom trying to impress a conservative judge.
The "action" takes place at the Eager Beaver, a topless bar (read: strip
joint) in Fort Lauderdale where Erin bumps and grinds the night away in a
variety of easy-off outfits.  One night, an intoxicated Congressman David
Dilbeck (Burt Reynolds, unashamedly gleeful in a degrading role) staggers
onto the stage where Erin is being admired a little too closely by one of
the customers.  The senator swings a champagne bottle, a flashbulb goes
off, and all of a sudden you've got more peripheral plot than you care to
deal with, with blackmail, murder and sugar cane politics fleshing out the
unfolding domestic drama.  And you just came to see Demi nekkid!
After last year's disastrous NC-17 SHOWGIRLS, the advance press for
STRIPTEASE made damaging comparisons.  Believing that American audiences
were not ready for another sleaze-o-rama, the publicity machine for
STRIPTEASE switched gears, suddenly promoting the film as a wacky comedy.
The film does have it's amusing moments, often involving Shad, the
nightspot's beefy bouncer (played by the appealing Ving Rhames), or
Reynolds' over-sexed Congressman Dilbeck who, with his bleached white rug
of hair, is confused for "the guy from F-TROOP" and "the guy from THE PRICE
IS RIGHT" by characters in the film.
These moments of humor aside, STRIPTEASE remains a choppy, schizophrenic
mess.  The tone jackknifes from tear-jerking mommy melodrama to Ace
Ventura-style slapstick and back again.  Similarly, the "dignity of
stripping" issue is clouded and confused.  On the one hand the filmmakers
want us to believe that stripping is a wholesome occupation, yet their
central character is clearly bitter about having to do this kind of
work--she wants to lead a "normal, fully-dressed life."  The deepest
observation about the objectification of women is a scene in which Erin
tells the Eager Beaver's owner that he needs to get rid of the napkins
which bear the club's logo, a sassy cartoon rodent swinging around a pole.
"It's degrading to women and to beavers," she tells him.  The endless
scenes of Moore going through her paces are more embarrassing than
degrading, but none compare to a titillating topless routine with a hair
dryer-it's somewhere between Annie Oakley and Annie Lennox.
Unlike her character Erin, Demi Moore has no reservations about stripping
for money ($12.5 million in this case) or having her daughter witness the
spectacle.  Moore may be proud of her stretch marks, but the top-heavy
STRIPTEASE gets a double-D for effort.

Author
Michael Redman
The advertising campaigns for this are at least as interesting as the 
movie itself. First it was a "nekkid Demi Moore shaking her hooters" 
film with the previews demonstrating the two compelling reasons to see 
it. Having captured the male audience, the commercials began a "mother 
fighting for her daughter" approach to appeal to women.
Now it's a "comedy where you least expect it", grasping for yet another 
audience. Among the split personalities, "Striptease" has also been 
touted as "not 'Showgirls'!" Talk about damning with faint praise.
Moore's latest sure-to-be-blockbuster is all this and _less_. 
Erin Grant is a ex-FBI secretary (fired because she made a poor choice 
in husbands) turned stripper in order to win back custody of her 
daughter. The logic in that plan typifies the confusion of the entire 
film.
Among the colorful characters at the Eager Beaver, the club where she 
dances, is a fan who promises to help get her daughter back. He has the 
misfortune to end up floating in a nearby lake. Coincidentally this 
happened just after he tries to blackmail a US congressman sighted at 
the club.
More people associated with the representative end up dead and you begin 
to get the idea that everything may not be on the up and up. Golly! It 
turns out you were right and the Florida congressman is controlled by 
the evil sugar empire.
An almost unrecognizable Burt Reynolds turns in one of the oddest roles 
of his career as the drunken congressman David Dilbeck. Played for 
laughs, the character is occasionally hilarious, but the murders, his 
genuine sleaze and general worthlessness as a human being make it 
difficult to evoke much laughter.
Ving Rhames ("Pulp Fiction", "Mission: Impossible") is one of the few 
actors that come out of this looking good. As Shad, the strip club 
bouncer with a thing for roaches and yogurt, he shows a talent for dark 
comedy. Robert Patrick as Grant's ex livens up the screen: first as a 
frightening total jerk in his encounters with Moore and their daughter 
and then as a farcical total jerk as he mixes canine morphine and 
alcohol and flops from scene to scene.
Moore can act although certainly not well enough to deserve her highest 
paid actress in Hollywood status. Here she and everyone else struggle 
with a butchered script from a reportedly great book. The film moves 
from slapstick comedy to sordid and deadly political scandal to 
heartbreaking mother and daughter scenes without much finesse or 
success.
Despite its shortcomings, this film will surely make the big bucks as 
audiences flock to attend if for no other reasons than to discuss how 
many implants Demi has.
[Note: this appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana, 
7/4/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Every actor and actress has their specialties.  For Demi Moore it
is her willingness to take large sums of money to play in movies no
matter how terrible the script.  As proof of this thesis, simply
consider her recent bombs at the box office and with the critics.  THE
SCARLET LETTER and THE JUROR immediately come to mind, but there were
probably others.  To add to her collection, she reportedly was paid
over $12 million dollars to star in STRIPTEASE.  In short, it is
actually even worse that its title might lead you to believe.  It is so
bad that one begins to think it must be a parody of something, but
what?
     In the opening sequence, Erin Grant (Demi Moore) is in court being
lectured by a cliche of an unreasonable judge.  I am not going to use
the word cliche again in this review since it applies to every single
character in the show so whenever I talk about a character, just insert
the word cliche.
     Erin is told that since she does not have a job, she has lost
custody of her seven year old daughter Angie (Rumer Willis who is Moore
and Bruce Willis's real-life daughter) to her ex-husband.  She pleads
that she was a secretary at the FBI until recently when they fired her
over her husband's dealing drugs.  She points out that he, being a drug
dealer and user, is not fit to raise a child.  His attorney says his
client has reformed.  The husband is now a paid informant to the drug
enforcement authorities.  Suspension of disbelieve of this magnitude is
impossible.  This show raises implausibility to new heights. Yes, I
know it is very loosely based on a true story, but as shown in this
film, I do not buy a minute of it.
     As you have guessed by the title, she takes a job as a stripper in
order to make the money and have a job so she can get her kid back.
The club she finds is called the "Eager Beaver".  Her fellow strippers
include one woman who literally has breasts the size of bowling balls.
I am not making any this up.
     Congressman Davey Dilbeck (Burt Reynolds) and his bodyguard
frequent the place as do a lot of other characters.  Ving Rhames
(MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE) plays a bouncer named Shad who keeps a monkey on
his shoulder, and who is not a very good bouncer since he spends his
time reading The Wall Street Journal rather than paying attention to
business.  Also in the show is Armand Assante as Al Garcia.
     Now, I know what some of you are thinking.  If the movie is bad,
at least it will be erotic what with a semiclad Moore and all of those
other naked bodies doing stripteases on the screen.  Well, forget it.
This is one of the least erotic and most distasteful movies to come by
in a long time.  Remember the energy and love that Jennifer Beals and
all of the other dancers put into FLASHDANCE?  Well, this show is not
that much different but here the dancing/stripping is gritty, demeaning
and repulsive.
     The film is horribly misdirected by Andrew Bergman.  The real
travesty however is the script, also by Andrew Bergman and based on the
novel by Carl Hiaasen.  Like a game of poker where the lowest hand
wins, the actors try to outdo each other seeing who can deliver the
most pathetic performance.  It is a close call, but I think Reynolds
beat out Moore.  His acting reaches new levels of embarrassment.  Once
he was an okay actor and then he went downhill - fast.
     STRIPTEASE runs 1:55, but it will feel like a millennium.  It is
rated R for nudity, violence, bad language and sexual situations.  I
strongly suggest that this film is not suitable for a human being of
any age.  Avoid this picture like the plague.  I am in a generous mood
so I will give the film 1/2 of a star for the sweet smile on Rumer
Willis's face since she is a dead ringer for my son's good friend
Allison.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
