Title
Review for Enemy at the Gates (2001)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Bob Bloom

 Enemy at the Gate (2001). 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Jude Law,
Rachel Weisz, Joseph Fiennes, Ed Harris, Bob Hoskins, Ron Perlman and
Gabriel Marshall-Thomson. Written by Jean-Jacques Annaud and Alain
Godard. Directed by Annaud. Rated R..
 Enemy at the Gates opens with scenes of stark brutality that try to
match the ferocious realism of Steven Spielbergís Saving Private Ryan.
 In this scenario, a group of Soviet soldiers are being transported
across a river to take up arms in the defense of Stalingrad. Their boats
are attacked by Nazi aircraft. Ships are blown out of the water and
unarmed men, who are packed in like sardines, are machine gunned.
 Those who jump overboard to escape the carnage are shot down by their
own officers.
 Things get worse once the troops land. They are rushed into battle, but
only every other man gets a rifle. Facing overwhelming German odds, many
of those who survive the onslaught attempt to retreat and are ó again ó
mowed down by their own officers for cowardice.
 This is the setting for an often compelling, but sometime frivolous,
World War II drama based on the real-life exploits of Vassili Zaitsev, a
celebrated Russian sniper who emerged as one of the heroes of the siege
of Stalingrad.
 Enemy at the Gates, which was co-written by Alain Godard and
Jean-Jacques Annaud, who also directs, falls into the Hollywood trap of
foisting an unnecessary love triangle into a story that is compelling
enough to stand on its own.
 The main focus of this drama is the war-within-a-war fought by Vassilli
and a German sharpshooter, Major Konig (Ed Harris), sent from Berlin for
the express purpose of stopping him.
 Vassilli (Jude Law) is an unassuming rural lad who merely performs his
duty with extraordinary skill. But the Soviet propaganda machine óled by
Danilov (Joseph Fiennes) ó  use him as a rallying tool to boost morale.
The Soviet press publishes his daily kill count.
 Where Enemy at the Gates excels is portraying the cat-and-mouse duel
between Vassilli and Konig, as each tries to learn about the other and
anticipate each others moves.
 The rubble of Stalingrad serves as a broken chess board in which these
two marksmen play a deadly game of hide-and-seek.
 This would be enough to sustain this wartime drama, but for some reason
a love interest is added in Tania (Rachel Weisz), one of the many women
soldiers fighting to save her city. She falls in love with Vassilli,
Danilov falls in love with her and their various passions fracture the
close friendship that has grown between Vassilli and Danilov.
 Why this hokum is needed is beyond explanation. The story stands well
enough on its own. If anything, it degrades the heroics and sacrifices
displayed in the movie, merely using the war as a backdrop for a clichéd
situation that has been filmed thousands of times before.
 Yet the Vassilli-Konig scenario is so strong, it even overshadows this
banal subplot.
 As Vassilli, Law is quiet, self-effacing and modest. He does not
consider himself a hero, but a soldier doing his duty. This young
killing machine displays a boyish innocence.
 Fiennes is pragmatic, ambitious and self-serving as Danilov, who wants
not only to help save Stalingrad, but help promote the Soviet message of
communism.
 Harris is calculating as the German marksman. He shows a low-key warmth
and weariness that hides a deadly ruthlessness. He is a noble character
who admires his prey while continuing to hunt him.
 Weisz, unfortunately, is pretty, but bland, and adds nothing to the
proceedings.
 Worth noting is Bob Hoskins as Nikita Khrushchev, sent by Stalin to
oversee the cityís defense, and save it at any cost ó including
sacrificing every soldier under his command. Hoskinsí Khrushchev is a
raw combination of charm, maliciousness and savagery.
 Enemy at the Gates is an interesting experience. How true to history it
is, of course, is questionable. But it would have been much improved if
the filmmakers had shown the courage of Vassilli and jettisoned the
familiar subplot and concentrated on the hunter and the hunted.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier. in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database site: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Homer Yen
Originally, this film about a legendary showdown
between two snipers during a pivotal WWII event was
going to be released in the late 2000 movie season,
with the hope that it would capture the attention of
Oscar voters.  Luckily, the studio decided to nix that
idea.  It would have been bombed had it gone up
against such late-year gems as "Thirteen Days" or
"Crouching Tiger."  However, against the current
dearth of good films, "Enemy at the Gates" may emerge
with only a flesh wound.
That's not to say that this is a good film.  It's
quite mediocre and frequently dull.  The only 'award'
that this film deserves is the 'most awkward and
laughable sex scene.'   In a bunker while resting
between battles, our hero and heroine share a romantic
moment.  But they're covered with grime while dozens
of snoring soldiers lie next to them like sardines. 
Who wants to watch that?
Set during 1941, the brutal Nazi juggernaut was
swiftly advancing towards Moscow.  A key offensive in
the city of Stalingrad would help to determine the
fate of this country.  Morale among the Russian troops
was waning.  To reinvigorate their forces, propaganda
officer Danilov (Joseph Fiennes) thinks that writing
about Vassili Zaitsev (Jude Law) would provide that
needed boost.  He's someone with whom most Russians
could relate.  He comes from a poor family, lived his
young life as a shepherd boy, and loves his
motherland.  Moreover, he's a gifted marksman. 
Danilov's stories resonate among the soldiers while
Zaitsev continues to record more and more kills.
The Nazi's take notice and send Major Konig (Ed
Harris), a decorated sharpshooter, to track down and
kill Zaitsev.  Our hero is earnest, humble, and
struggles with his daily survival.  Meanwhile, Konig
is a cunning tactician.  This encounter should be one
of the most suspenseful components of the film.  But
there's little interaction between the two, diffusing
much of the tension.  Instead of hunting each other
down, they prefer to hide and await a clear shot. 
There is only one exciting sequence where they square
off in a factory.  But most of the time, it's either
Zaitsev or Konig looking for each other through the
scopes of their guns amidst grim battlefields of
fallen warriors or the bombed out remnants of war-torn
buildings.  Konig is sadly underdeveloped, and the
role is essentially wasted on the gifted Harris (who
is a Best Actor contender at this year's Oscars). 
This chess match promised more than it could deliver.
More interesting was that Zaitsev was not just waging
a military battle but a personal one as well.  He is
ill-equipped to handle the weight of his expectations.
 Meanwhile, with Konig looking for him, he jeopardizes
the lives of his comrades.  Some, including another
sniper that tries to set a trap for Konig and a very
young boy who gets to know both snipers, are
memorable.  They both want to help but can't fully
appreciate the looming dangers.  However, his romantic
interest for a fellow female soldier (Rachel Weisz)
was distracting at best.
Unfortunately, it's a film that's epic in thought but
somewhat ignoble in deed.  The battle sequences were
somewhat murky and confusing, the romantic subplot was
needless, and the cat-and-mouse chase between the two
snipers lacked zip.  War, sometimes, is truly Hell.

Author
SSG Syndicate
     Beware of any W.W.II movie in which you find yourself
rooting for the murderous Nazi! Because of unfortunate casting
choices, that's what happens in this otherwise impressive epic set
during the bloody battle of Stalingrad in '42 and '43, the pivotal
confrontation between Hitler's invading troops and the overpowered,
under-equipped Russian Army. When an overwrought Nikita Krushchev (Bob
Hoskins) demands a victory for Stalin, an enterprising propagandist
(Joseph Fiennes) turns a young shepherd boy-turned-sniper, Vassily
Zaitsev (Jude Law), into a national hero, thus changing an atmosphere
of hopelessness into optimism. Vassily has a brief romance with a
plucky comrade (Rachel Weisz) before an expert German marksman, Major
Koenig (Ed Harris), is sent to eliminate him. Pitting the country lad
from the Urals against the aristocratic nobleman is, of course, the
essence of class struggle. Staging the battle sequences, director
Jean-Jacques Annaud and co-writer Alain Godard lift liberally from the
combat-intensity of Steven Spielberg's Normandy landing in "Saving
Private Ryan," but their less-than-compelling story is further
weakened by mediocre acting. Jude Law is handsome but vacuous, while
Joseph Fiennes flounders in caricature. Only Ed Harris with his steely
blue eyes and soft speech, smoking gold-tipped cigarettes, delivers a
riveting performance. He's a cruel villain but, with the protagonists
so uninteresting, his dogged persistence ignites the screen. In
addition, the distracting accents of the polyglot cast are ludicrous
and James Horner's blatant musical score is downright intrusive. So,
on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Enemy at the Gates" is a
flawed 5. And, if you want to know more about this historic battle, I
suggest renting "Stalingrad."

Author
Steve Rhodes
In ENEMY AT THE GATES, by director Jean-Jacques Annaud (SEVEN YEARS IN 
TIBET), the battle for Stalingrad in the Autumn of 1942 is hell on earth 
for the Russian soldiers fighting the onslaught of the Nazi hordes.  The 
Russian officers carefully provide a rearguard for their troops -- not 
to support them but to shoot them when they retreat.  
In a time of rifle shortages, the Russian officers have a perfect 
solution -- skip giving a rifle to every other man.  Vassily Zaitsev 
(Jude Law, Oscar nominee for THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY), a young, 
sharpshooting shepherd boy from the Urals, is one such weaponless other 
man.  It is his job to pick up the rifle when the rifleman he is 
shadowing is killed.  Trained since he was a young lad by his 
grandfather in the ways of stealth shooting -- "I am a stone.  I do not 
move." -- Vassily becomes so famous that he single-handedly inspires the 
whole Russian army to turn from cynicism to optimism.  His actions 
become the turning point for the entire world war, or so the movie would 
have us believe.  Joseph Fiennes plays political officer Danilov, 
Vassily's friend, mentor, and personal PR machine, who convinces the 
troops of Vassily's near immortal powers.
Like the famous flying aces of World War I, Vassily is challenged by 
Germany's best marksman, an aristocrat named Major Koenig, played by Ed 
Harris in a pensive, reserved performance.  Major Koenig, who lives and 
breathes strategy, is sent by Berlin solely to take out the Russian 
people's hero.  An almost salivating Danilov sees it "as the essence of 
class struggle."
What's the missing ingredient in most war movies?  Why sex, of course.  
Rachel Weisz shows up to play Vassily's love interest, Tania.  Will they 
or won't they?  What do you think?
The actor having the most fun is pudgy-faced Bob Hoskins, who gets to 
chew up the scenery as Khrushchev.  Sent there by Stalin to save his 
town, Khrushchev turns out to be a bloodthirsty but effective leader.  
Khrushchev helps the Russian commander in Stalingrad "cut through the 
red tape" by supplying him with a gun to kill himself rather than having 
the report of his failure transmitted to Moscow.
In contrast to the battle sequences, which approach the intensity of 
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN, the action behind the lines is a mixture of realism 
and hokum.  The worst of these is the claim that the Russian fighters, 
rather than being exhausted at the end of a hard day of battle, came 
back to their bombed-out camps to sing, dance and party the night away, 
since they were thankful to have survived another day.  
After a brilliant beginning, the movie begins to bog down like the 
battle itself.  The director falls too much in love with his picture and 
includes many superfluous scenes that would have better been left on the 
cutting room floor.  A trimmed up script would start with the entire 
elimination of Tania, an unneeded diversion.  But, regardless of the 
film's flaws, it's still a fascinating piece of history and an 
intriguing picture.
ENEMY AT THE GATES runs too long at 2:08.  It is rated R for strong 
graphic war violence and some sexuality and would be acceptable for 
older teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Pictures/Mandalay
 Director: Jean-Jacques Annaud
 Writer:  Jean-Jacques Annaud, Alain Godard
 Cast: Jude Law, Joseph Fiennes, Ed Harris, Rachel Weisz,
Bob Hoskins, Ron Perlman, Gabriel Marshall-Thomson, Eva
Mattes, Matthias Habich
 Screened at: Loews Kips Bay, New York
   When I was in high school I had a choice of trying out for
the rifle team or the cross-country squad.  The former
seemed like a less taxing option, so I took careful aim at the
target and fired.  So did my fellow sophomores, who were
also out to get a varsity letter for what was called for
purposes of the school yearbook a sport.  I didn't make the
rifle team, but I did make the running squad and to my credit,
I finished every race on the 3-1/2 mile course, over inclines
and knolls.  But to this day I don't understand the rifle bit. 
What did it take to hit the bullseye like half of my
competition?  I didn't drink, smoke, or do drugs and had
20/20 vision corrected.  My hand was steady, my motivation
unimpeachable.  Now, let's a telescopic sight to the gun
--such as existed even in the days of ancient history (World
War II)--and you can spot the enemy in the cross hairs. What
could be easier? You have steady hands and a penetrating
blue eyes.  What makes one guy a sniper first class while the
rest of us miss a target the size of a large head?  This
question is unanswered in Jean-Jacques Arnaud's strikingly
photographed story of the Battle of Stalingrad, involving
combat that would change the course of the war and lead to
the ultimate victory of the Soviet Union over Germany--in
much the way the Battle of Saratoga was the turning point of
our own War for Independence.  According to the story jointly
scripted by Alain Godard and the director, the entire course
of the war was decided High Noon style, but a single bullet
from the gun of a distinctly hawk-eyed sharpshooter.  
   What gives "Enemy at the Gates" a particular distinction is
not only that it's about World War II, a subject that Steven
Spielberg revived with his far superior and more involving,
realistic and non-mushy "Saving Private Ryan," but that no
Americans are involved in the action.  (Will a stateside
audience be drawn to the box office? We'll see by Sunday.)
   In an attempt to appeal to women and to youthful filmgoers
who might consider this a date movie, Annaud throws in a
love triangle that leads the guy who never had a chance to
erupt in a jealous rage that could have cost the West the war
but who, we expect, will redeem himself soon thereafter. 
Leave out the romantic slush and Annaud could have cut the
movie's 131 minutes to a fast-paced 95 while giving
heartthrob Jude Law a chance to play a Soviet Gary Cooper
to the Third Reich's most illustrious gunman.  The movie
merits an audience for two of its motifs: one showing the
horrors of the battlefield, particularly the opening shots of a
Soviet led, suicidal, "Gallipoli"-like charged against well
protected and heavily armed German forces; the other an
intriguing chess game between two shooters of about equal
ability and cleverness.
   As for the story behind the dramatic activity: Vassili (Jude
Law), an almost illiterate shepherd from Urals who as a kid
was trained by his dad to shoot wolves preying on the flock,
develops remarkable skill with his rifle and, once baptized by
the fire of the big war he gets the attention of a political
officer, Danilov (Joseph Fiennes) for picking off five Germans
in the midst of battlefield anarchy.  The poetic Danilov proves
that the pen deserves a place next to the sword by writing
about this hero in terms that could embarrass even a film
publicist--thereby reviving the morale of the entire Soviet
Union.  Vassili, an aw-shucks guy who simply does not have
the confidence ascribed to him by the journalist, knocks off
five Germans, becoming the pride of Nikita Khruschev (Bob
Hoskins), prompting the Germans to send their own best
marksman, Major Konig (Ed Harris), to take him out.
   The latter half of the film is taken up by a cat-and-mouse
game between the two people, each respectful of the other's
abilities, each using his wit as much as his shooter's eye to
corner the other and release him with a single bullet.  An
eight-year-old Russian kid, Sacha (Gabriel Marshall-
Thomson), wise beyond his years, is the only human being
who knows both marksmen, as he has been shuttling back
and forth giving away secrets to the German major in return
for chocolate.
   While the women around me said that they couldn't take
their eyes from Jude Law, Ed Harris is the real prize with a
controlled performance as a Nazi major.  Harris's Konig
shows his humanity in his conferences with the kid,
superimposed by a steely determination to win the war
singlehandedly for the Fuhrer.  Rachel Weisz as Tania, a
Russian-Jewish combatant with a fluent knowledge of
German, is courted by the Jewish Danilov as well as by
Vassili--but by never at any point giving Danilov a chance to
win her heart, Annaud strips away the possibility of surprise.
The focus changes from the gunplay to the courtship, even
tossing in the obligatory sex scene--that takes place amid the
mud and slime of the barracks at Stalingrad with the two
lovers surrounded by grunts (while adding their own).
   The war is shown in part as a battleground between two
ideologies, Nazism and Communism--which as practiced by
the century's two most notorious butchers, Stalin and Hitler,
are alike in many ways.  Two Soviet combatants, Koulikov
(Ron Perlman) and Danilov, wax cynical about Stalin's vision,
insisting that there's no such thing as The New Man which
Communism is supposed to engender, nor can an individual's
talents and jealousies be uprooted by some government-
imposed dogma.  Amen to that.  Lose the romance. Save the
picture.
Rated R.  Running time: 131 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Robin Clifford
In 1942 and '43, during the bloody battle of Stalingrad, a new kind of hero
arose from the ranks of the Soviet army. Vassily Zaitzev (Jude Law), a
simple shepherd from the Urals, is thrust into the limelight when he guns
down five Nazi officers, from a distance, with just five shots. As he
continues to rack up kills against the German invaders, a master sniper is
sent by Hitler to kill the young hero in "Enemy at the Gates."
Jean-Jacques Annaud directs this epic-scale story of the private war that
takes place between Vassily and German sniper par excellent, Major Konig
(Ed Harris), with the murderous battle for Stalin's namesake city as its
backdrop. Jude Law stars as the young Red Army soldier whose shooting
skills come under the scrutiny of Danilov (Joseph Fiennes), a political
commissar who sees Vassily's enemy-killing potential as a morale booster
for the beleaguered Russian troops.
As Vassily's reputation for killing Nazi officers rises on both sides, the
Germans send their own expert marksman, Konig, to Stalingrad to gun down
the young Russian hero. This begins a battle of wits in a cat-and-mouse
game as the hunters, themselves, become the hunted. As the war rages on
between the two great armies, Zaitzev and Konig each try to best the other.
Danilov uses this personal fight as a propaganda tool to elevate Vassily to
hero status in the eyes of the Russian people, soldiers and civilians
alike.
Meanwhile, both Vassily and Danilov are attracted to a beautiful
American-educated Russian woman, Tania (Rachel Weisz), and a love triangle
begins. This is where "Enemy at the Gates" runs into trouble ? the battle
of the snipers takes a back seat to the love story and the film suffers for
the change of focus.
Director Annaud and cowriter Alain Godard use the real-life story of
Vassily Zaitsez as the basis of their tale. The duel of the snipers,
Vassily's rise to hero of the Soviet Union, and Tania's presence during the
private war are all based on fact. The scripters, in their research of
facts and legends, take liberties with the true-life yarn, introducing the
conflict between Vassily and Danilov in their pursuit of the beautiful
Tania. This tangent takes the focus away, considerable, from the taut
battle between the Zaitzev and Konig.
Where "Enemy at the Gates" excels is in the depth and breadth of the
battlefield production. The film begins with an old-fashioned map of Europe
where, suddenly, the Nazi blight spreads across the face of the continent
with the roving camera eye closing in on Stalingrad! With that, we're
thrust into the war from the point of view of young recruit Vassily. He and
his comrades must cross the Volga River through a murderous barrage of
bullets and bombs to reach the front. These untrained conscripts are
prodded kicked, even shot by the political commissars to get them to fight.
These action sequences, especially the battle itself, is stunning in its
depiction of the savagery of war.
The casting and acting, for the most part, is serviceable, but without
distinction - with a couple of exceptions. Ed Harris gives an expected
excellent performance as the aristocrat hunter turned sniper master sent to
stalk and kill Vassily. He carries himself with the assured air of a man of
means and stature, used to having the best in all things. Harris
neutralizes his American accent, giving it a slight Teutonic clip in
keeping with his character. The rest of the cast doesn't make such an
effort so we get an odd mix of mostly British accents from the rest.
Notable among the cast is young Gabriel Thomson as little Sasha, a Russian
kid who becomes a pawn in the battle of wits between Konig and Vassily.
When he gazes at Vassily with a look of admiration, he almost glows. The
relationship that develops between Sasha and Konig, as the boy plays double
agent for Danilov, is palpable. It is so much so that the break between the
two, when it finally comes, did not sit right with me. Jude Law, a young
actor whom I've grown to like, is vacuous as Vassily. The tentativeness he
first displays is never lost even as he is supposed to become a battle
hardened veteran. Rachel Weisz is pretty as the love interest, but is
mostly just window dressing. Fiennes is wooden and unconvincing as the
power hungry political commissar who sucks up to Nikita Khrushchev (Bob
Hoskins), sent by Stalin to oversee the battle.
Technically, "Enemy at the Gates" is a superb achievement. The battle
sequences are wrought with shockingly realistic action as the two armies
collide. The computer-generated  F/X, like the squadron of Stukas
dive-bombing the troop boats or Junker 88's carpet bombing the ruins of
Stalingrad, are seamless.  The wide panoramic of the battle sequences are
richly detailed with specifics, like tanks, weapons and uniforms, given a
great deal of attention.
"Enemy at the Gates" tries to be two very different films and isn't really
a success at either. It tries to be a compelling war drama of a duel to the
death between two sniper masters. At the same time, it poses as a romantic
drama with the war as a backdrop. I didn't get enough of one - the sniper
battle, of course - and thought there was way too much of the other. It's a
brilliant production, though, and I give it a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom

 Enemy at the Gate (2001). 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Jude Law,
Rachel Weisz, Joseph Fiennes, Ed Harris, Bob Hoskins, Ron Perlman and
Gabriel Marshall-Thomson. Written by Jean-Jacques Annaud and Alain
Godard. Directed by Annaud. Rated R..
 Enemy at the Gates opens with scenes of stark brutality that try to
match the ferocious realism of Steven Spielbergís Saving Private Ryan.
 In this scenario, a group of Soviet soldiers are being transported
across a river to take up arms in the defense of Stalingrad. Their boats
are attacked by Nazi aircraft. Ships are blown out of the water and
unarmed men, who are packed in like sardines, are machine gunned.
 Those who jump overboard to escape the carnage are shot down by their
own officers.
 Things get worse once the troops land. They are rushed into battle, but
only every other man gets a rifle. Facing overwhelming German odds, many
of those who survive the onslaught attempt to retreat and are ó again ó
mowed down by their own officers for cowardice.
 This is the setting for an often compelling, but sometime frivolous,
World War II drama based on the real-life exploits of Vassili Zaitsev, a
celebrated Russian sniper who emerged as one of the heroes of the siege
of Stalingrad.
 Enemy at the Gates, which was co-written by Alain Godard and
Jean-Jacques Annaud, who also directs, falls into the Hollywood trap of
foisting an unnecessary love triangle into a story that is compelling
enough to stand on its own.
 The main focus of this drama is the war-within-a-war fought by Vassilli
and a German sharpshooter, Major Konig (Ed Harris), sent from Berlin for
the express purpose of stopping him.
 Vassilli (Jude Law) is an unassuming rural lad who merely performs his
duty with extraordinary skill. But the Soviet propaganda machine óled by
Danilov (Joseph Fiennes) ó  use him as a rallying tool to boost morale.
The Soviet press publishes his daily kill count.
 Where Enemy at the Gates excels is portraying the cat-and-mouse duel
between Vassilli and Konig, as each tries to learn about the other and
anticipate each others moves.
 The rubble of Stalingrad serves as a broken chess board in which these
two marksmen play a deadly game of hide-and-seek.
 This would be enough to sustain this wartime drama, but for some reason
a love interest is added in Tania (Rachel Weisz), one of the many women
soldiers fighting to save her city. She falls in love with Vassilli,
Danilov falls in love with her and their various passions fracture the
close friendship that has grown between Vassilli and Danilov.
 Why this hokum is needed is beyond explanation. The story stands well
enough on its own. If anything, it degrades the heroics and sacrifices
displayed in the movie, merely using the war as a backdrop for a clichéd
situation that has been filmed thousands of times before.
 Yet the Vassilli-Konig scenario is so strong, it even overshadows this
banal subplot.
 As Vassilli, Law is quiet, self-effacing and modest. He does not
consider himself a hero, but a soldier doing his duty. This young
killing machine displays a boyish innocence.
 Fiennes is pragmatic, ambitious and self-serving as Danilov, who wants
not only to help save Stalingrad, but help promote the Soviet message of
communism.
 Harris is calculating as the German marksman. He shows a low-key warmth
and weariness that hides a deadly ruthlessness. He is a noble character
who admires his prey while continuing to hunt him.
 Weisz, unfortunately, is pretty, but bland, and adds nothing to the
proceedings.
 Worth noting is Bob Hoskins as Nikita Khrushchev, sent by Stalin to
oversee the cityís defense, and save it at any cost ó including
sacrificing every soldier under his command. Hoskinsí Khrushchev is a
raw combination of charm, maliciousness and savagery.
 Enemy at the Gates is an interesting experience. How true to history it
is, of course, is questionable. But it would have been much improved if
the filmmakers had shown the courage of Vassilli and jettisoned the
familiar subplot and concentrated on the hunter and the hunted.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier. in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database site: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 ENEMY AT THE GATES (director/writer: Jean-Jacques Annaud;
 screenwriters: Alain Godard/inspired by the books "Enemy at the Gates"
 by William Craig and "Vendetta" by Derek Lambert; cinematographer:
 Robert Fraisse; editors: Noelle Boisson/Humphrey Dixon; cast: Joseph
 Fiennes (Danilov), Jude Law (Vasily Zaitsev), Rachel Weisz (Tanya),
 Bob Hoskins (Khrushchev), Ed Harris (Major Konig), Ron Perlman
 (Koulikov), Eva Mattes (Mother Filipov), Gabriel Marshall-Thomson
 (Sasha), Mikhail Matveyev (Vassili's Grandfather), Matthias Habich
 (General von Paulus); Runtime: 133; Paramount Pictures/Mandalay
 Pictures; 2001)
"Enemy at the Gates" is a big-budget WW11 story that begins with the
Nazi invasion of Stalingrad in September of 1942 and takes us to the end
of that six month battle where there were supposedly around two million
casualties. The outcome of that battle in favor of the Soviets changed
the course of the war. The opening battle scene is chaotic and bloody
that begs for comparison with the realistic way "Saving Private Ryan"
opened its film. It then becomes a typical Hollywood unrealistic,
clichéd war film, as its focus is on a cat-and-mouse game between two
expert snipers, the Russian, Vasily (Jude Law), who is a shepherd boy,
barely literate, self-effacing, from the Ural Mountains who learned to
shoot wolves who preyed on his family farm from his grandfather, while
the distinguished Nazi, Major Konig (Ed Harris), is a well-educated,
supremely confidant, middle-aged Bavarian nobleman. Their personal duel
takes place in the ruined buildings and factories of Stalingrad, as the
Nazi becomes the hunter, always one step ahead of his opponent, and the
Russian becomes the prey.
This old-fashioned type of hokey heroic war film, which since the
Vietnam War has been out of fashion, should be praised for its realistic
gory opening battle scene and for its Hollywoodish personal gun duel at
the end, which was as thrilling as the one in "High Noon." The problem
with this supposedly true story about a genuine Russian hero, was that
the long middle part was bogged down by an unmoving love triangle and a
lot of empty political rhethoric that slowed down the action and took
away from the suspense of the two snipers matching wits with each other.
It also took away credibility from the overall truth of this real war
story.
The film opens by showing the desperation of the Soviet soldiers who are
being sent into a battle they cannot win, as they are ordered by their
officers to charge the enemy or else if they retreat the Russian
officers are ordered to kill them. The frightened soldiers are caught
between a rock and a hard place. In this battle arena, by a fountain
surrounded by dead soldiers, there remains two Russians, Vasily and a
political officer Danilov (Joseph Fiennes). Vasily will prove his skill
as an expert marksman by killing five Germans in succession with five
bullets from a far distance. Danilov will see this as an opportunity to
make Vasily into a Russian hero of that battle, as this will be an
opportunity to raise Russian hopes which is at a low point, as he
receives permission from Nikita Khrushchev (Hoskins), the Soviet leader
of Stalingrad, to do this by printing a leaflet praising the heroic
shepherd boy. The two become partners linked together in the Russian war
effort, with Vasily becoming part of an elite sniper team that picks off
German officers and Danilov writes those stories in the official Soviet
newsletter of how many Germans Vasily kills each day.
The publicity works in building Russian morale, as fan mail pours in and
workers want to name their coal mine after him. The Germans respond by
sending their legendary sniper sharpshooter Major Konig to Stalingrad in
order to kill Vasily.
The local shoeshine boy Sasha (Gabriel Marshall-Thomson), a boy of
around eight years old, is so pleased that his mother is cooking a meal
for the Russian hero and to have met Vasily, that he is willing to take
on the dangerous assignment of spying on the German major for Danilov,
as he treks mysteriously across enemy lines to give info that Danilov
supplies him to give to the major.
A love triangle develops among Vasily, Danilov and a pretty
university-educated militia fighter, who studied at Moscow University
German literature and is eager to avenge the murder of her parents by
the Nazis, Tanya (Rachel Weisz). She is a neighbor of Sasha's, who
earnestly defends her hometown civilians as a sharpshooter. What adds to
the dilemma of the story, is that both Tanya and Danilov are Jewish, and
that Danilov has fallen in love with her but she has fallen in love with
Vasily, as Danilov proves how cunning and treacherous he could be in
trying to keep them apart. His role comes pretty close to being an
anti-Semitic caricature, which is odd for a film where the forces of
freedom are fighting the Nazi demons who are trying to wipe the Jews off
the face of the world.
But it is this love triangle that saps away from what the film was
about, which even more than the war story itself, is about two men
trying to see who is better at what they do. This could have just as
easily have been the theme for a sports film, therefore the politics
feels superfluous. When director Jean-Jacques Annaud (Seven Years in
Tibet/In the Name of the Rose) gets away from this main story and goes
into artificial subplots, the film sinks, but when he returns to the
final payoff scene of the battle between the two elite snipers with
different personalities and idealogies, the film works very well as an
action spectacle.
The trouble with the film, is that it didn't work well for stretches
that were too long, and the only performance I found interesting was Ed
Harris's. He had a quiet physical way of drawing out his character that
shows how cold his intelligence and sense of being was, as he hides a
monster behind his chiseled stoic features and icy blue eyes. Jude Law
played his role like a matinee idol in the old days of Hollywood war
films would, which was to look good under all the war grime and be the
good-hearted hero without a flaw. His performance did not hinder the
film, but on the other hand, it didn't seem special to me. But the
performance I found the most wanting, was Joseph Fiennes's, which I
found belabored with muddled Marxist speeches that made no sense. In
fact, his role never added up, as I have no idea what he was supposed to
symbolize. If he stops believing in the Marxist cause because a girl
rejects him as is indicated in the film, then he has to be a more
shallow character than the director intended him to be. His performance
woes could be blamed entirely on an inadequate script.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
ENEMY AT THE GATES
Written (with Alain Godard) and Directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud
     World War II is back with a vengeance.  On May 25th Pearl Harbor 
will be bombed at a theater near you.  In August, Captain Corelli's 
Mandolin will strike up its tune.  And Santa Fe screens this week 
feature two takes on that war from a Russian perspective.
     Incomparably the better of the two is Elem Klimov's 1985 classic 
Come and See, one of the most harrowing war movies ever made.  Set in 
Byelorussia in 1943, it experiences the horrors of that war through the 
eyes of young Florya (Aleksei Kravchenko) who joins the partisan 
resistance against the Nazi invasion.  The Germans conducted a scorched 
earth campaign in Byelorussia, destroying 638 villages and massacring 
their inhabitants.  "Inferior races carry the microbe of communism," 
sneers a German officer.  "Your nation has no right to exist." 
     What begins as almost a game for Florya, searching on a beach for 
guns with a friend, evolves into horrors so great that the boy suffers a 
trauma-induced progeria, aging decades in a few months.  "I ended up 
filming a lightened-up version of the truth," Klimov has said.  "Had I 
included everything I knew, even I could not have watched it."  There 
are also scenes of lyrical beauty.  A remarkable montage at the end of 
newsreel footage run in reverse suggests that if we could only go back 
far enough maybe we could discover what went wrong and set it right.
     Jean-Jacques Annaud (Seven Years in Tibet) has reconstructed the 
battle of Stalingrad, winnowing it down to a couple of ace snipers (Jude 
Law for the Russians, Ed Harris for the Boche) duking it out as if their 
respective armies had agreed to let the war's outcome be decided by 
their duel.  Law plays Vassili, a sort of stepped-down Sgt. York, a 
country boy with a sharpshooter's eye.  He's built up, sports 
hero-style, by Danilov (Joseph Fiennes), the army political officer who 
writes pamphlets about him. Both of them fall in love with 
fellow-fighter Tanya (Rachel Weisz), and there is never a moment when we 
care about any of this. The production, with its ruined city and 
wall-to-wall dead bodies, is impressive, but Annaud lacks the breadth of 
visual language that made Spielberg's vision of Armageddon so 
devastating.  The characters and the story never engage the imagination. 
 Annaud shows a weakness for the truly bad scene which casts a pall of 
suspicion over his better moments. 

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
It's 1942 and Hitler's German army is making their way across Europe and
Russia. The city of Stalingrad is now in play and the Russians are losing
soldiers in droves. But along comes a young Russian sniper who starts
dropping German leaders like peanuts. The Germans worry and bring in their
own top sniper to whack out the Russian. The two men square off in a beaten
down city as the war rages on around them.
CRITIQUE:
A very tense, cold, authentic-looking movie, featuring an engaging
mano-a-mano battle between two captivating characters and stars, Ed Harris
and Jude Law, many stunning artillery sequences and enough unpleasantries to
turn anyone off to war forever. Here's a movie which takes place during the
second world war, but isn't really about the war at all. This film focuses
solely on the smaller battle within the grander fight for Stalingrad,
featuring two marksmen searching for one another amid the greater chaos. A
concept which might not sound too exciting on paper but once you're in the
theater, this film pulls you in and dropkicks you across enemy lines. It
starts with yet another awesome combat sequence a la SAVING PRIVATE RYAN,
planes dropping bombs, soldiers getting drilled by bullets, pandemonium all
around, but quickly, the story's foundation is revealed to you. Here are the
Russians getting their asses whupped by the Germans and along comes a small
town dude with an ability to strike things down from afar. Is he the hero
needed to boost the morale of the Russian troops? You bet, and the film
really gives you that sense of despair, that lack of leadership and that
much needed fighting spirit required from the Russians. And then of
course...there's Jude Law. What else could a film as such ask for?
Here's a great looking man, admired widely by both sexes, oozing more of his
on-screen persona in this film and then upping the ante with a solid showing
as the sniper who may not be the person that everyone believes him to be.
Here's a character shown to be human with weaknesses of the heart and the
soul. A man caught up in something larger than himself, but able to come to
the forefront and do the things which he believes will help his country win.
Kudos to Law for holding up his end, Joseph Fiennes for coming through as
his nerdy comrade, and the ever-stoic Ed Harris for keeping his eye focused
and standing firm as Law's persistent adversary. This is also a film of
moments. As you might expect, a film focusing on two snipers is likely to
have a few scenes featuring guys staring each other down. And this one does
have plenty of those. But because of the strength of its characters, the
believability of its surroundings, its sheer grandness and its tight story
line, you cannot help but be truly engaged in every second of this film's
suspenseful moments. This movie might not have the grand scope of a SAVING
PRIVATE RYAN, the deep message of a PLATOON, or the poetry of the depressing
THE THIN RED LINE, but it does succeed in telling an interesting story and
delivering on various fronts of entertainment as well. There is also a wide
richness of detail in the film, a superb score which resonates way past the
film's unique credit crawl and some across the board eye-opening
cinematography.
This film was a definite treat for me, especially in the year of crapola
movies thus far. Here's a picture that gives you lots to look at, lots to
pay attention to and lots to care about. And yes, they've even added a small
romance angle for the ladies, which thankfully didn't take up much of the
film's runtime and is, for the most part, credible and touching. A grand
movie filled with suspense, impressive visuals and an absorbing story line!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Patriot (7/10) - Platoon (9/10) - Saving Private Ryan (8/10) - The Thin
Red Line (5/10)

Author
Ross Anthony
1942, A trainload of young Russian soldiers (Jude Law among them) spills 
out into the Volga River to Stalingrad; German bullets ripping through 
the chests of the brave ones, Russian bullets piercing the backs of the 
cowards. Law somehow survives, his amazing marksmanship witnessed by an 
enthusiastic Russian writer (Joe Fiennes) who delights in fighting the 
Germans with propaganda instead of gunpowder. Fiennes makes a war hero 
out of Law, "We need examples, yes, but to follow, not fear." A fine set 
up to a film where the war itself becomes the backdrop to an indecisive 
focus between a love story and a one-on-one of dueling snipers. 
After an opening sequence reminiscent of "Saving Private Ryan," the 
newspaper black and whites of Jude Law with his rifle and those award 
winning eyes piercing through the print and the depression lifts the 
hopes of those fighting to save Stalingrad. They'll make your heart 
swell, too. 
Law and Fiennes become fast friends, and then of course, in walks a 
woman soldier, Rachel Weisz -- well educated, but tough. Law is 
embarrassed by his lack of proper literacy. Later, unfortunately too 
much later, jealousy and desire provide the ammunition for a climactic 
ending. But with the timing off, the supply of ammo loses its potency 
while the passion misfires, missing targets it should have hit. 
A brash barracks love scene graces the picture, but ought to have 
occurred twenty or so minutes prior in order to set up believable 
intentions - namely the picture cutting exercise. A few other improbable 
progressions snag what essentially is a very nice piece of work. 
That opening sequence not only compels, but takes firm hold of your 
heart, only to slowly lose its grasp with a third act nearly as chaotic 
as war. Strong direction (aside from story telling difficulties), solid 
acting (especially from Law - he's awesome), tremendous set design and 
cinematography. The positives create a stronghold; though taking 
casualties, this fort of a film still stands. 
Perhaps a better title: "Snipers in Love" 
Enemy at the Gates. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Jude Law, Joseph Fiennes, Rachel Weisz, Bob Hoskins and Ed 
Harris. 
*  Directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud 
*  Written by Alain Godard & Jean-Jacques Annaud 
*  Produced by John D. Schofield & Jean-Jacques Annaud at 
Mandalay/Paramount. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Frankie Paiva
2001  Germany/Ireland/UK/USA
Director: Jean-Jacques Annaud
Starring: Jude Law, Joseph Fiennes, Rachel Weisz, Ed Harris, Ron Perlman, Bob
Hoskins
In `Enemy at the Gates', Jude Law is a gifted Russian sniper made hero by a
political officer named Danilov (Joseph Fiennes) who uses him in a propaganda
newspaper to raise the hopes of the soldiers and people of Stalingrad. It's
World War II, and the Russian-German standoff in town could determine the
outcome of things for the motherland. Law's Vassili is the Russian's top pawn to
victory. Lots of war stuff happens. An older, German version of Jude's character
played by Ed Harris shows up halfway into the proceedings. He's equally
talented, and the two men play a cat and mouse game trying to kill each other.
They constantly switch roles, as the war fades far into the background. The cast
also includes the terrific Rachel Weisz as a love interest for both Vassili and
Danilov
The set-up is decent, and so are the production values. Boasting a wide range of
grimy locales, greasy hair, and tattered costumes, the art direction prospers.
The actors, however, suffer the problem Matt Damon had in `Saving Private Ryan'.
Either their eyes, teeth, skin, or a combination of other features looked too
white and clean. With dirt and blood all around, the blinding teeth or bright
eyes of these actors divert attention from the action. That said, the players
are mostly good in their roles, although I don't think Ed Harris was really
trying. Maybe he realized his role struck a difficult chord in one-notedom.
While the film is technically about snipers, there are far too many predictable
sniping scenes. Director Jean-Jacques Annaud expects us to view each tense
situation with Jude and some cohort in a tight spot as edgy and exciting, but
after about the sixth time, in which we realize that Jude is not going to die,
it's relatively pointless. We get that he's talented, okay, let's move on.
That's the problem with `Enemy at the Gates'; it just doesn't know when to stop.
Witness the wasted seventeen minutes that could have been spent elsewhere.
Reestablishing his title as the most beautiful (and often talented) man on film,
Jude Law carries the movie. Without him, this costly production would have gone
into the ground. The story and acting are of good quality, but there's never a
sense of authenticity or reality. Something about this war movie is undeniably
modern, and it loses its feeling. Strange enough, the screenplay is based on the
true story of a real Russian sniper.
Read more reviews at www.moviepie.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The most expensive European film ever made (reportedly $95 million) kicks
off with a 20-minute battle scene in which Russia's Red Army unsuccessfully
tries to drive Hitler's troops out of 1942 Stalingrad.  If Enemy at the
Gates had been released, oh, say, two and a half years ago, this opening
would have been downright shocking, but in our post-Saving Private Ryan
world, it feels blasé.  Is it horrifying?  You bet, but it still pales in
comparison to Ryan's graphic icebreaker.  We see the Volga River strewn with
debris that includes arms and legs, and a little Braveheart is thrown in for
good measure when the Russians charge toward their demise.  Of course, Ryan
and Braveheart weren't saddled with James Horner's unnecessary heavy-handed
score, either.
Set against the backdrop of the Battle of Stalingrad, Enemy is about a young
sniper from the Ural Mountains named Vassily Zaitsev (Jude Law, The Talented
Mr. Ripley), who, as we learn from the film's prelude, was educated in
marksmanship by his grandfather.  After the Germans wipe out most of the Red
Army in Enemy's opening scene, Vassily and a Russian political officer named
Danilov (Joseph Fiennes, Shakespeare in Love) meet while hiding out in a
pile of dead bodies.  One has a rifle, and one has five rounds of
ammunition, but before you can say "Texas Book Depository," Vassily has
scored five nice head shots on a group of nearby German officers.
The incident propels Vassily to hero status in Russia, thanks mostly to
Danilov's cunning in the production and distribution of a Russian war
newspaper that sings the praises of the Russian Davy Crockett (he killed him
a wolf when he was only five, as the legend goes).  Vassily's story
invigorates his homeland, which then proceeds to dig in their heels and push
the Germans out of their country in what became one of the key turning
points of World War II.  Danilov is Colonel Tom to Vassily's Elvis, making
him a larger-than-life figure, a national hero and a real thorn in Hitler's
side.
But the bulk of Enemy is comprised of a cat-and-mouse game between Vassily
and a German sniper named Koenig (Ed Harris, Pollock), who was brought in to
Stalingrad to eliminate his Russian counterpart.  It might sound exciting,
but a 15-minute set piece about two snipers can get pretty tiring.  You
could easily be on the edge of your seat for the first five minutes, lose
interest, and then fall asleep for the last five.  There's a lot of lying
around and remaining very still.  It takes a special director to pull this
off, and I'm not sure Jean-Jacques Annaud (Seven Years in Tibet) is the
right guy. This is a typical David vs. Goliath battle that plays like the
Wachowski brothers' Assassins meets The Bad News Bears (with Sunshine's
Rachel Weisz playing the Tatum O'Neal role).
Weisz plays Tania, an educated Russian Jew who volunteered to fight the
Germans after they killed her parents.  Because she knows German, Danilov
wants Tania to stay behind the scenes with him to interpret intercepted
messages, while Vassily prefers she focus her rage on physical battles. The
men end up playing tug-of-war with Tania's skills and heart, which puts them
at odds with each other.  She prefers Vassily (the two share an extremely
laughable but really hot sex scene - it was so Vas-silly), so Danilov is
faced with the option of selling out his comrade for the chance to hit that
thang.  This all could have been left out to help Enemy's pacing.
In addition to putting American audiences in the unlikely position of
rooting for the Krushchev-led Russians, Enemy takes the unfortunate route of
having each character speak with a British accent (even the ones who
actually sound German).  It's a regrettable copout made by too many films
(except Traffic).  Harris, who logs a very nice performance here, goes in
and out of a clipped German accent like he's got a split personality.  On
the more positive side of things are the lovely costumes (from likely Oscar
winner Janty Yates, Gladiator), the beautifully dark photography (Robert
Fraisse) and really terrific sets, which are mostly comprised of the inside
and outside of crumbling buildings.
Besides Harris' turn as the steely Koenig, Bob Hoskins (Felicia's Journey)
does extremely well playing Nikita Krushchev, although he's only on the
screen for all of two minutes.  Law, Fiennes and Weisz are all capable but
do nothing too spectacular with their roles.
2:11 - R for strong graphic war violence and some sexuality

Author
Laura Clifford
The WWII Battle of Stalingrad was the critical political battle of Hitler's
annexation of Europe.  Nikita Krushchev (Bob Hoskins) was sent in to ensure
a face-saving victory for Stalin when the Russians were overpowered in every
way.  Young propaganda journalist Danilov (Joseph Fiennes, "Shakespeare in
Love") sways Krushchev from his intimidation tactics towards building morale 
through hope pinned on a young heroic soldier, sniper Vassily Zaitsev (Jude 
Law, "The Talented Mr. Ripley) in writer/director Jean-Jacques Annaud's 
"Enemy at the Gates."
Annaud begins his based-on-fact tale of the heroic Russian sniper and the 
German officer sent to stop him (Ed Harris as Major Koenig) with 
a remembrance of Vassily as a young boy.  A dappled horse is tethered in a
snowy field as bait to draw wolves.  The shepherd's son, being taught how
to shoot by his grandfather, watches in horror as the wolf attacks the helpless
horse.  This metaphor for the sniper battle to follow is stunningly shot,
recalling Annaud's nature flick "The Bear."
As adult Vassily travels by train towards the fighting in Stalingrad, he
notices a lovely young woman (Rachel Weisz, "The Mummy"), but at their
destination, he's herded off the train to boats crossing the Volga to a city 
under bombardment.  This opening sequence recalls that of "Saving Private 
Ryan," as the Russians are mowed down before most can reach shore - even by 
their own officers if they attempt to flee the boats.  Once ashore, Vassily 
is greeted with the following orders, repeated over and over as one man
receives a gun and the next ammunition - 'The one with the rife shoots.  
When the one with the rifle gets killed, the one that follows picks up the 
rifle and shoots.'
Vassily (a holder of bullets) meets Danilov (who's retrieved a gun from a
corpse) when both are playing dead amidst scores of dead Russian soldiers
in a city square water fountain.  They're within shooting range of a high
ranking Nazi and his valet when an additional three Germans pull up.  Vassily
kills all five providing Danilov with a hero around whom he builds a legend.  
Danilov's newspaper for the Russian military reports on the extraordinary 
number of German officers Vassily shoots.  The Germans take note of this
Russian hero and we next see the elegant Major Koenig, the Germans'
best sharpshooter, arriving by train smoking gold tipped cigarettes and 
drinking champagne.
Danilov introduces Vassily to Mrs. Filipov (Eva Mattes, "Woyzeck") who 
provides an underground shelter and food.  Her young son Sascha (Gabriel 
Thomson) will become a resourceful go-between, trading information for 
chocolate from Major Koenig.  They also meet Tania, that beauty from the 
train, an educated Jew who wishes to fight the Nazis.  Danilov is smitten and 
insists her education be used at headquarters, but she wants revenge for the
murder of her parents and joins the sniper group.
Annaud and cowriter Alain Godard have taken the legend of Vassily Zaitsev,
his lover Tania and his German foe Koenig (whom the Russians have
documented, but not the Germans) and fashioned an intimate story of a lovers
triange (Danilov's character is their concoction and the weak point of the 
screenplay) and two man battle amidst an epic battle.  This first class 
production scores on almost every front, from Annaud's taut, suspenseful 
direction to the realistic recreation of Stalingrad under siege (production 
design by Wolf Kroeger, art direction by Steven Lawrence and Dominic Masters).  
The match between 'the nobleman from Bavaria who hunts deer and the shepherd's
son who poaches wolves' is like a life and death game of chess.  Annaud
also grittily turns up the heat between Law and Weisz with a uniquely
erotic lovemaking scene in the trenches.  Unfortunately, James Horner's 
("The Perfect Storm") emotionally obvious score plays down to the audience.
The stunning beautiful Jude Law looks the part of the young Russian peasant,
although his characterization doesn't go too deep.  Ed Harris is exemplary as
the German officer with piercing blue eyes.  Harris projects a wounded and
world weary aristrocrat.  Weisz is believable as the fiercely passionate
Tania.  Not so successful is Fiennes whose Danilov seems a reject from a
dinner theater production of "Fiddler on the Roof" while Hoskins is apparently
on a mission to protray as many tyrants as possible.  The film also features
Ron Perlman ("The City of Lost Children") as Koulikov, a student of Koenig's
on the Russian side and esteemed German actor Matthias Habich ("Beyond
Silence") as General von Paulus.
Many Americans may not be familiar with the events of the Battle of Stalingrad
(note that there's an even better film on this battle, told from the German 
perspective, "Stalingrad," available for rental).  Annaud's "Enemy at the 
Gates" is a rousing historical drama and worthy addition to the recent revival 
of WWII films.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
