Title
Review for No Looking Back (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Vallejo
  In 1995, THE BROTHERS McMULLEN, the feature film debut by filmmaker Edward
Burns, won the audience prize at the Sundance film festival and automatically
placed him into the limelight as one of the *hottest* young filmmakers,
virtually gearing him for a prosperous future. The film, a slight but
undeniably charming confection of three Irish Catholic brothers struggling
with their multiple rendezvous with women was a shrewd, cleverly written
account of the parallels between religion and morality.
  One year later, Burns crafted SHE'S THE ONE, a cloyingly cutesy comedy that
forced me to my bad side. It ran over similar territory, only this time it the
material wasn't as fresh, the acting was second-rate and the photography
abysmal. Furthermore, it made me question Burns' integrity as a filmmaker.
After all, it was his first "studio" film, one with higher goals and more
responsibilities.
 Edward Burns' latest venture is Irish Catholic-free, which could account for
his first female protagonist in the three films his made, odd, since all of
his films have been about women. NO LOOKING BACK is a flimsy, homespun
melodrama about nasty people acting nastily towards each other.It doesn't
avoid the conventionalities presented and instead embraces the meat-and-
potatoes values their characters don't embrace. 
  The film's humdrum setup stars Lauren Holly as Claudia, an attractive
waitress in an unnamed small East Coast town, who yearns for an alternate
existence that differs from the monotonous, draggy reality she experiences
with Michael (Jon Bon Jovi), her unimaginative and homey boyfriend whose
aspirations of marriage ultimately frighten Claudia. This hunger is further
accentuated by the return of Charlie (Edward Burns) her ex-boyfriend who left
the town to deal his cards in California, shortly after Claudia become
pregnant and opted for an abortion. Soon thereafter, Charlie abandoned her,
never really devoting himself to Claudia's full recovery. Three years later,
and with a part-time job at a gas station,  he's back with a vengeance, and
although he's informed she's "basically" engaged to Michael, his flirtation is
ceaseless. Predictably, this sets a dilemma as to wether she shall take a
chance with Charlie or maintain loyalty with Michael. 
  Jon Bon Jovi, once again proving he's more than a capable actor, and Lauren
Holly, in her first true role she can chew on, stand out above the rest of the
vacuous cast which includes Blythe Danner as the all-wise grandmother
suffering from grandpa's bitterness (years ago, he too left the family and
flew to Vegas), Connie Britton as the sister who renders valuable advice, and
yes, Edward Burns. Bon Jovi shines with an understated performance that
underlines the character's faithfulness in Small Town, USA. It's a very
poignant piece of acting, one that will make Bon Jovi more recognizable.
Holly, with her exquisitely golden smile, gives Claudia a sweetly ethereal
touch blending the impatience of a woman who can no longer stand the same
faces and the one native side that calls for a restraint to her choices. 
  Burns, however, clunks. Badly. Doesn't he realize, as a filmmaker and a
screenwriter, that he possesses the acting abilities of a dried-out turnip? He
casts himself, in a woefully written role, that mainly consist of charmless
smirks and witless wisecracks, designed for someone like, say, Stephen
Baldwin. "What wasn't okay?" he naively responds, after Claudia questions his
sudden departure. He constantly drinks, lies, and re-affirms his role as a
heartthrob by persuading a jailbait to rent a "motel," and letting everybody
know by displaying her at a bar at happy hour. I have no business objecting to
these moral choices, only when they interfere with the plausibility of
characters do I take a stand. And, idiotically, Claudia falls for this
routine. Which leads to an even more improbable conclusion. 
  NO LOOKING BACK more than any Edward Burns movie, exposes what he can and
can't do as a screenwriter. At times you want him to take a more harsh
approach to the situation, a la CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS. Why should we bother
to behave morally in a universe where God may not exist, and where goodness is
so rarely rewarded? But then again, this standpoint is anti-Burns. He stays
within the frames of his stories, letting the actors do the talking and figure
it out for themselves. 
  Despite its faults, NO LOOKING BACK isn't a complete failure. The
cinematography by Frank Prinzi is gorgeous. The film has moments of dramatic
intensity and Burns is refreshingly unpretentious and uncynical when it comes
to modeling his characters. But their trepidations, their goals, their dreams,
their "unhealthy" lifestyles are film-student cliches that Burns looked to be
done with in BROTHERS McMULLEN. But now, three years later, his self-pitying
is pitiable. (1:36)

Author
Matt Williams
Edward Burns tackles his third picture with No Looking Back, and like
his previous two, it is a working-class relationship picture.  However,
unlike his previous work, the film dwells on a more personal story, and
with a female protagonist.  And in No Looking Back, he stumbles, making
a slow, boring film without the spark that enlivened his previous work.
Claudia (Lauren Holly) is a small town waitress who is feeling stifled
by her life.  She's at a turning point in her life, and feels as if
she's going nowhere.  Her boyfriend, Michael (Jon Bon Jovi), is broke
and in a dead end job.  If she were to marry him, she'd never get a
chance to escape this town.
Enter Charlie (Edward Burns), Claudia's old flame.  He skipped town
several years before, without any explanations...even for Claudia. He
has come back to town to see her, and suddenly she is torn.  Should she
stay with stable Michael, and never escape her hometown...or should she
ignore her instincts and fall for Charlie again.
Part of the answer lies in the character of her mother (Blythe Danner),
who fell for the wrong man...and has spent her life pining for Claudia's
father to return.  Now it seems that Claudia is about to make the same
mistakes.
At only a little past ninety minutes, No Looking Back is rather short
for its genre.  Unfortunately, it seems much much longer.  The storyline
is simple and uninspired, and there's a lack of energy to the whole
proceedings, which makes the entire drama rather tedious.
Edward Burns makes a misstep by casting himself in the crucial role as
the egomaniacal old flame. There's no one to restrain his ego, which
reigns unchecked. He walks into the room and Lauren Holly swoons...yeah,
right.
Lauren Holly does what she can with her central character.  But we never
understand why her character makes such pathetically bad decisions...and
we never really care.
Bon Jovi is the only sympathetic character in the whole movie. His
acting talents are much greater than they might seem, but he is given a
mostly bland and ineffective role to work with.
There's not much to recommend in No Looking Back.  It's not that the
film is bad...it's simply boring.  There's no zest in any aspect of the
film, and no reason to spend ninety minutes watching it.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1998
U.S. Release Date: 4/10/98 (limited)
Running Length: 1:36
MPAA Classification: R (Frequent profanity, sexual situations)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Edward Burns, Lauren Holly, Jon Bon Jovi, Blythe Danner, 
      Connie Britton, Jennifer Esposito, Nick Sandow
Director: Edward Burns
Producers: Ted Hope, Michael Nozik, Edward Burns
Screenplay: Edward Burns
Cinematography: Frank Prinzi 
Music: John Delia
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     The working title for NO LOOKING BACK was LONG TIME, NOTHING NEW, 
and rarely has there been a more apt name for a motion picture.  Even 
though this movie clocks in at a relatively skinny 96 minutes, it seems 
to run long enough to engulf two TITANICs.  Writer/director Edward Burns 
has trotted out a hackneyed storyline, the trajectory of which will be 
instantly recognizable to anyone who hasn't spent their life in 
seclusion.  Instead of tweaking the formula a little to invigorate the 
proceedings, Burns is content to allow the film to ramble aimlessly 
towards its irritatingly predictable conclusion, offering precious few 
momentary pleasures along the way.
     NO LOOKING BACK is dominated by three very dislikable characters 
whose constant presence on the screen is painful.  The most appropriate 
ending would have been a triple suicide, and the sooner, the better.  
Alas, that's not the case, and those who stick with this film for its 
entire length will be forced to endure the prolonged company of this 
wretched trio.  And, to further depress audiences, Burns has shot the 
entire film on cold, rainy days in a gray New York State beach town.  
Peeks of sunshine are few and far between.  No wonder the characters are 
all so miserable.
     First of all, we have Charlie (Burns), a Generation X slacker who 
abandoned his girlfriend three years ago after she had an abortion, then 
spent some time bumming around in California before deciding to come 
home.  That girlfriend is Claudia (Lauren Holly), and, after picking up 
the pieces of her life following Charlie's departure, she has moved on, 
shacking up with one of Charlie's old school buddies, Mike (Jon Bon 
Jovi).  The two have a comfortable relationship, but it's apparent to 
even a blind person that they're not right for each other.  Claudia 
years for some spice in her life; Mike wants to settle down and have 
children.  Then Charlie re-enters the mix.  So who, if anyone, will 
Claudia end up with?
     Who cares??  NO LOOKING BACK goes to extraordinary lengths to make 
sure that we're not especially interested in the outcome of the romantic 
triangle.  So what if no one finds happiness -- these characters don't 
deserve it anyway, especially after wasting 90 minutes of our time.  
They aren't real people -- they're a writer's construct stumbling 
through a too-obvious storyline.  They should know the ending as well as 
we do.  And Burns should have given his audience more credit and 
presented them with a plot that at least offered a surprise or two.  
     Another frustrating thing about NO LOOKING BACK is that Burns has 
populated the film with a group of potentially-interesting supporting 
characters.  Blythe Danner is solid as Claudia's housebound mother, 
Connie Britton is suitably high-strung as Claudia's neurotic sister, and 
Jennifer Esposito is eye-catching as a bartender in search of a little 
romance. Sadly, all we get is quick glimpses into their lives, although 
a movie about any of them would have been far more intriguing than the 
story Burns has chosen to tell.
     None of the lead performers are going to wow critics with their 
thespian attributes.  Edward Burns is pushing the edge of his limited 
range here.  Jon Bon Jovi shows more acting ability than one might 
reasonably expect from a singer branching into a different career, but 
he could still use a little polish.  The worst case is Lauren Holly, who 
presents a completely bland Claudia.  As portrayed here, she's hardly 
the kind of woman who would inspire even a moment's interest, not to 
mention undying love.  Burns' ex, the monumentally untalented Maxine 
Bahns, would have been hard-pressed to do a less inspired job.
     When he released THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN, Edward Burns was revered as 
the wunderkind of the 1995 Sundance Film Festival (Robert Redford has 
apparently stuck with him -- the aging actor/director executive produced 
this mess).  Two films and three short years later, the luster has 
faded.  Some movie makers have only one good film in them.  With back-
to-back duds like SHE'S THE ONE and NO LOOKING BACK to follow the 
delightful BROTHERS, Burns is beginning to look like a member of that 
undistinguished club. 
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Jamie Peck
NO LOOKING BACK
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The movie takes place in a cold, grey, working-class New York town, 
beautifully photographed (especially in the opening sequence, set to 
Sheryl Crow's "Home") by Frank Prinzi. Claudia (Lauren Holly) has a 
simple life that seems to suit her well -- she spends days waiting 
tables at a local greasy spoon and nights with her live-in boyfriend 
Michael (rocker Jon Bon Jovi). But Claudia's ex Charlie (Burns), who 
upped and left her with a broken heart some time ago, suddenly 
resurfaces with hopes to pick up where they left off. It certainly 
doesn't help that Charlie and Michael were once best friends, and that 
the former's presence awakens an urge in Claudia to realize her dreams 
and follow them -- even if they include neither man. 
While Burns the director and actor are fine, Burns the screenwriter is 
to blame for the movie's lack of ignition. Even though some of the 
dialogue is vintage Burns, No Looking Back truly goes nowhere; watching 
it is like listening to a piano player strike the same key over and over 
again. The skinny stories of "The Brothers McMullen" and "She's the One" 
look like "L.A. Confidential" by comparison. With the possible exception 
of Charlie (who's a regular S.O.B.), none of these characters are very 
interesting, so it's hard to get deeply involved in Claudia's dilemma, 
and we really need to for the movie to work. And at a slim 96 minutes, 
the movie feels too long, probably due to that distinct lack of 
involvement and the umpteen musical montages that interrupt the film 
every five minutes or so. 
"No Looking Back" is, at the very least, an admirable performance piece. 
Holly gives a quiet, realistic spark to her first lead role; she is the 
truly is the "babe" that the entire cast always seems to refer to her 
as. Burns, who's cast himself as likeable cads in his other two films, 
shows range with the charmingly egotistic Charlie. Blythe Danner and 
"Spin City" co-stars Connie Britton and Jennifer Esposito do good work 
in various supporting parts. But perhaps most surprising of all is Bon 
Jovi, who has an acting career ahead of him if the music gig ever falls 
through. Speaking of which, his latest album is titled "Destination 
Anywhere," and anywhere is a better destination than the wasteland that 
"No Looking Back" finally occupies.

Author
Berge Garabedian
Edward Burns' third feature film after THE BROTHERS McCULLEN (6.5/10)
and SHE'S THE ONE. This one's also sprinkled with beers, Irish stuff
and beautiful and confused people dealing with  relationships.
PLOT:
Charlie (Burns) returns to his hometown after three years away, and
wants to patch things up with his ex-girlfriend Claudia (Holly).
Unfortunately for him, Claudia has been living with Michael (Bon Jovi),
a childhood friend of Charlie's, for those three years, and doesn't
know exactly what to do. The dilemma she faces is the crux of this
film.
CRITIQUE:
Nice little character study that revolves around the feelings of
friends, lovers and family. Enjoyable enough, but not enough meat in
which to grind your viewer teeth. The characters and actors in the
movie were all very believable and interesting to watch, with Jon Bon
Jovi beginning to show some real signs of a thespian in the making.
Holly had never really impressed me before, but does a decent job with
the task that she's been assigned in this film. 
The movie's plot is not the most original in the world, in that it
deals with people asking themselves the proverbial question or whether
or not they should leave their hometown for opportunities elsewhere,
and whether or not one could ever really come home again (done much
better in BEAUTIFUL GIRLS (8/10), but then again, Hollywood hasn't
exactly bent over backwards to conceive many new theatrical ideas over
the past few years. Other than that, the little town is very quaint and
shows extreme signs of "the comfortable life" for many of its satisfied
inhabitants, while also demonstrating the lack of ambition or foresight
in many of those same people.
The soundtrack was fine (but can someone please tell Bruce Springsteen
to stop playing on soundtracks!!), as was the length of the picture. On
the down side, no memorable scenes made it onto this cinematic menu,
and there was one too many montage shots with music in the background
(usually a sign of a weak script). Two little things did bug me a bit.
One, there is one major continuity error during one of the pivotal
emotional scenes, in which Holly is bawling her eyes out one second,
dry another, and then blubbering the next. Somewhat distracting. Also,
and much more irritating, was the fact that every single character
seems to be drinking a beer or taking a smoke in every single scene in
this movie. I mean, it's incredible!! Does anybody really drink a
Budweiser in a laundry mat, for God's sakes?!?! Oh well. 
Overall, the movie is nice to watch with your "significant other", so
that you could ponder the "what would you do's" after it's finished,
but not much more than that. 
Little Known Facts: 
Working title for this film was LONG TIME, NOTHING NEW.
Edward Burns worked as a production assistant on Entertainment Tonight
for four years.
Lauren Holly turned down the Courteney Cox role in ACE VENTURA: PET
DETECTIVE (7.5/10).
Blythe Danner is Gwyneth Paltrow's mom.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   There comes a time in the life a many a successful comedy
writer that he pursues greater depth than a feathery play or
film can expose, however competent the wit.  With Neil
Simon, who began his career with the lighter-than-air and
very funny "Come Blow Your Horn" the moment came with
the less fortunate "God's Favorite."  Woody Allen, whose
talent with words allowed him to pen even a comedy which is
completely sung hit his serious stride with "Interiors," equally
foiled at the box office.  Edward Burns got the itch to write,
direct, and act in a more somber work at an earlier age,
perhaps stung that his abundantly funny "The Brothers
McMullen" and "She's the One"--the former premiering at the
1995 Sundance Festival while the latter was released a year
later by Fox Searchlight Pictures--was dismissed by some
critics as mere sitcom.  What emerges, "No Looking Back," is
indeed a more poignant, less slap-happy look at life among
the working classes in one of Queens, New York's more
remote locations.  Filmed in Rockaway Beach with a blue
patina, "No Looking Back" is not without humor, but its sober
tone matches the rainy weather which more often than not
afflicts the vicinity. Starring Lauren Holly as Claudia, Jon Bon
Jovi as her live-in boyfriend Michael, and the writer-director in
the role of former beau Charlie, the movie traces a few days
in the lives of three young people at about the age of thirty
who are already in the throes of a mid-life crisis.
   Michael and Claudia seem content enough sharing a
ramshackle but decently furnished house overlooking the
beach, but something is missing.  Michael is ready and eager
to get married, but Claudia, despite the pressure of friends
and family, is holding back.  It's not that Michael is a bad guy:
just the opposite, in fact.  He has the typical outlook of people
of his social class.  He is ambitious enough, willing to work
hard to support a wife and kids, but he has no vision. 
Claudia, who works as a waitress in a prosaic diner, harbors
inchoate desires that stretch beyond the borders of Queens. 
We do not wonder that since the roguish Charlie deserted her
when she needed him most and fled to California months
after making Claudia pregnant, his return to Rockaway Beach
at first seems to dismay Claudia as much as it does her
current live-in.  But Claudia, who had given up her adolescent
dreams at the age of thirty now sees new hope for reviving
her fantasies.  Looking back, she warms to the attentions of
the cur.
   Well acted by all parties, who adopt working class
mannerisms as though these were second nature, Burns's
picture has a way of infusing into the drama the entire culture
of the community.  Little things like a young diner's leaving a
dollar tip inside the leftover food in his dish and calling the
waitress "sweetheart," a gas pump jockey's brown-bagging his
lunch at the station as though to announce that he had long
ago given up aspiration, Charlie's own mother's outward
hostility to the boy whom she considers a layabout whose
presence could stir up the neighborhood once again.  Men
and women in equal numbers lay back scotches at the
crowded bar; card games become the scene of macho
posturing; unrepressed women freely announce their sexual
wishes to friends and potential partners.  Burns slips in some
telling dialogue, single utterances being enough to stir up
memories and ignite old passions.  "I told you you'd be
cleaning his dirty underwear, didn't I?" cajoles Charlie as he
watches his former flame fulfilling his predictions.
   This is the sort of movie that makes good, upright, family
values people wonder whether they perhaps should become
more assertive, and most of all, more carefree and even
indolent.  Many a well-groomed, neatly dressed and awfully
proper young man has been dismayed to find the object of his
affections turn away and dart into the arms of a rascal,
shedding light on the real consequences of family values. 
"No Looking Back"--which features small but effective roles
from Blythe Danner as Claudia's forlorn but understanding
mom and Connie Britton as her cynical sister Kelly--is
obligatory viewing for fans of the talented Edward Burns, who
began his film career with a movie that paid back investors
400-fold and who has now moved into the generally
uncharted waters of Rockaway Beach with a trenchant piece
about hidden yearnings. Rated R.  Running time: 96 minutes. 
(C) Harvey Karten 1998
