Title
Review for Get Carter (2000)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Homer Yen
"My name is Jack Carter, and you don't want to know
me" says our brooding anti-hero (Sylvester Stallone). 
Take his advice!  To know this guy is as rewarding as
being thrown over a terrace.  And to watch this film
is almost as painful.  "Get Carter" is a gloomy
looking, unimaginative film that offers no joy.
Jack Carter is as tough as tough guys come.  He works
out of Vegas as a self-described 'financial adjuster'.
 Explaining his duties, he says, "people make promises
and break them.  I help them remember."  He has a
chiseled body full of tattoos.  He has the weathered
look indicative of a man who has seen his share of
hard times.  He speaks in a hushed but menacing tone
of voice.  In other words, this is Sylvester Stallone
acting like...Sylvester Stallone.  And like most of
his previous roles, his character is a shallow,
one-dimensional thug whose modus operandi is to talk
tough, hassle a few hapless people, find out what he
needs to know, and then dispense his own kind of
justice.  With the charisma of a pit bull, being tough
is all that Jack Carter knows.  
Yet, even tough guys know when to put family first. 
As the story begins, we learn that Jack's little
brother has died in a car accident.  The police
attribute it to heavy drinking.  However, Jack is
suspicious, believing that he was 'taken out'.  He
takes a break from his Vegas duties and tries to see
if he can find the truth.  As he pokes around, he runs
into several lowlife characters.  They include a shady
business partner, a prostitute, a dweebish millionaire
molded after Bill Gates, and an oily owner of a porn
website.  
Any one of them may know something about his brother's
death.  All of them have the means of carrying out the
deed.  But don't expect an exercise in sleuthing where
well-placed clues lead Carter to the truth.  He's all
brawn and no brains, so there are no epiphanies during
his investigation.  Instead, he uses intimidation to
muscle his way forward, cycling through this circle of
suspects.  Flustered with his lack of progress, he
cycles through them again and again.  This all gets
tiring fairly quickly.  By the time the film launches
into its final act, we're numb from its pedestrian
pace.
Oddly, as a tough-guy thriller, it starves us for
action.  Admittedly, there is one nifty chase
sequence, but this is related to a tangential and
needless plot (Carter's Vegas ties send thugs to
retrieve him).  The story also fails to generate any
kind of emotion.  Stallone has the personality of a
slab of stone.  And the look and feel of the film is
perpetually downcast.  The weather is constantly
overcast or rainy.  Meanwhile, most shots take place
at night, in dimly lit rooms, or in dark alleys.  It's
just impossible to get stirred about that kind of
atmosphere.  As a result, "Get Carter" amounts to
nothing more than a flat thriller, bereft of clever
moments and devoid of any excitement.  You're better
off leaving this guy alone.

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Stephen T. Kay
Written by: Ted Lewis (novel), David McKenna
Jack Carter (Sylvester Stallone) beats people up for a living. Or, as he 
says, people make promises and break them; he refreshes their memories (I 
still don't get that. They broke the promise, they didn't forget it. Oh 
well). When his brother dies in a car accident, Jack goes back to his 
hometown to find out what happened to him. He meets his brother's daughter, 
Doreen (Rachael Leigh Cook), who obviously doesn't like Jack, but confides 
in him that she doesn't think her father's death was an accident. He 
proceeds to question his sister in-law, Gloria (Miranda Richardson); his 
brother's boss, Cliff (Michael Caine); Cyrus, an old acquaintance who now 
runs a porn shop (Mickey Rourke); and a rich computer geek named Jeremy 
Kinnear (Alan Cumming). None of them will give him straight answers, so Jack 
decides to beat the information he needs out of anyone he can find. He says 
he's going to fix things, but as Gloria points out, Jack doesn't fix things, 
he breaks things.
Ahh where to begin. Let me start by saying that there is really nothing good 
about "Get Carter". I mean nothing at all. I hunted and searched endlessly 
for a good thing here, pinching myself occasionally to stay awake. Alas, it 
was all for naught. It's never a good sign when the car chases bore you, the 
story loses you, the jokes hurt you, and the nicest thing you can say about 
the movie is, "boy, that's a nice looking golf course." That was a very nice 
looking golf course by the way. Wish I could play there. It was nestled away 
on a mountain, perfectly kept, surrounded by a deep forest of evergreen 
trees. Beautiful scenery. Sorry, I just don't want to talk about the stupid 
movie. Still, I can't procrastinate any longer, so here goes.
Try to imagine getting deposited right in the middle of a film that makes no 
sense at all. When I first walked in, I thought I'd somehow missed half the 
movie since the characters were all talking to each other like we were 
supposed to know what was going on. Here's an example of the dialogue 
between Sly and one of the Bobs from "Office Space". Bob: "I've covered your 
a** for long enough Jack." Sly: "What are you talking about?" (my sentiments 
exactly) Bob: "Well, you know, people are talking about you and Gertrude (or 
something like that, I just remember her name started with a "G")." Sly: "If 
people are talking it's because you gave them something to talk about." Now, 
bear in mind, this is at the very start of the film. We don't know who 
Gertrude is, who Bob (that's not the character's name, but that's what I 
kept mentally calling him) is, what Jack's job is, what in the world is 
going on. Already I was starting to not really care all that much. None of 
these questions are ever fully answered (especially not the last one), and I 
never did start caring what was going on. I tried my best though dang it, I 
tried to get into this story, but I couldn't. It was too... too... what's 
the word I'm looking for? Stupid! That's it.
As for the actors, first up we have the great Sly Stallone. Sly's career has 
been on the rocks lately, and he... uhh.. line? Sorry, Sly's career has been 
on the rocks, and he needed a boost to rev-reval-revitilz... line? Sly 
needed this movie to revitalize his diminishing career, after box-office 
failures such as... uhh.. line? Forget it, take five. Sorry about that 
folks, but Sly's acting in "Get Carter" really is that bad. The man looks 
completely lost during half his scenes, and I'm willing to wager they took 
several hundred takes before he got it right. During a few of the so-called 
"dramatic" moments, he has long pauses during his varied speeches, during 
which he gazes into the distance for dramatic effect. I'm sorry, but it 
looks like he forgot his lines and is looking desperately for cue cards 
somewhere. Miranda Richardson ("Sleepy Hollow"), is wasted in nearly every 
movie she appears in these days, that trend doesn't change with "Get 
Carter". The great Michael Caine ("The Cider House Rules") is completely 
wasted as the brother's friend and boss. I didn't think it was possible for 
Mickey Rourke ("The Rainmaker") to be considered wasted (I'm usually fairly 
happy when he has limited screen time), but it was pulled off here. Robin 
Leigh Cook ("She's All That") plays Robin Leigh Cook to the hilt, looking 
vaguely like a deer caught in the headlights of a semi; and the less said 
about Alan Cumming ("Titus") the better off we'll all be. Don't ask me to 
explain Bob's (John C. McGinley) presence, or the character's significance 
in the story, because I can't.
I don't get it. How does a movie this bad get made in this day and age? 
Don't the studios read the scripts before green-lighting a film? Guess not. 
I'd like to say that in the hands of a more capable director this could have 
been something, but that's not the case. Still, the direction (if you can 
call it that) from relative newcomer Stephan T. Kay doesn't help matters. To 
start with, I like a movie that throws me right into the middle of the plot; 
a movie that skips all that often pointless exposition of plot that will be 
revealed again later on. What I don't like is a movie that throws us into 
the middle of things and never explains itself, and "Get Carter" is just 
that kind of movie. Kay seems to consider himself something of an Oliver 
Stone fan, since he's fond of quick cuts all over the place, sudden shifts 
to slow motion, and anything else he can think of to "dazzle" the eye. Yet 
while Stone's technique is irritating, Kay's is excruciating. I didn't think 
it was possible to mangle a car chase to the point where you could no longer 
tell who was driving what, or who just smashed into whom, but Kay manages to 
do it. Or how about this? Sly walks up the stairs, putting on leather gloves 
and getting ready to crack some skulls. Rather than just filming Sly walking 
up the stairs, Kay films Sly walking up the stairs in quick little bursts. 
First he's at the bottom, then half-way up, then at the top. Why was it 
filmed like this? Possibly to make the film look more artistic (heh), but 
your guess is as good as mine.
Next up we have the dialogue, which is amusingly bad at its best, painful at 
its worst. Here are a few examples: "You've got as much chance as a one 
legged man in an a** kicking contest." Gee, clever Sly, never heard that one 
before. Sly approaches Alan Cumming on that neat looking golf course. Alan: 
"Who are you?" Sly: "Tiger Woods." Wow, that was clever too. Mickey Rourke, 
referring to his eyes: "Are they still pretty?" Sly: "Yeah, pretty like cat 
urine in the snow." Now that was REALLY clever. One of my "favorite" lines 
from Sly was "We're going to take this to the next level." He only says it 
twice, but it was old the first time. Hey Sly, how about taking your acting 
to the next level? Didn't think so. The film's score, from composer Tyler 
Bates is grating, obnoxious, and fairly useless. "Get Carter" runs an unholy 
115 minutes, which should have been cut down to.. uh.. well it just should 
have been cut. I'd recommend the movie to those who think Stallone was 
jilted when he didn't get an Oscar nomination for "Judge Dredd", and give 
the film a much deserved one out of five stars. One last note, I know I had 
a full plot summary up there, but here's the real plot: Jack asks question, 
person won't answer, Jack threatens then with cheesy catch phrase or twists 
a limb till they cry uncle, person answers. What's the final threat of the 
movie? Possible sequel is hinted at. Uncle! Uncle!
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

GET CARTER (director: Stephen Kay; screenwriter: David McKenna/based on
novel "Jack's Return Home" by Ted Lewis; cinematographer: Mauro Fiore;
editor: Jerry Greenberg; cast: Sylvester Stallone (Jack Carter), Mirand
Richardson (Gloria), Rachael Leigh Cook (Doreen), Alan Cumming (Jeremy
Kinnear), Mickey Rourke (Cyrus Paice), Michael Caine (Cliff Brumby),
John C. McGinley (Con McCarty), Johnny Strong (Eddie), Gretchen Mol
(Audrey), Garwin Sanford (Les Fletcher); Runtime: 102; Warner Brothers;
2000)
Sylvester Stallone is Jack Carter, someone he tells us we don't want to
know, and you know he's right. This is a pointless B- film actioner, a
remake of the gritty 1971 British noir classic directed by Mike Hodges,
which had the good fortune to have Michael Caine be the star and to have
a story with an edge to it. This "Get Carter" features mindless
violence, an incoherent and uninvolving story, and most unfortunately
the humorless presence of the miscast Stallone as a Vegas mob enforcer,
going to Seattle for the funeral of his bartender brother he hasn't seen
for a long time. He is seeking revenge for his murder. His aim is to
find out who made his brother's death look like a car accident and make
them pay for it. He is dressed in a tacky bright blue suit, sports a
goatee, and speaks in a low voice. It is filmed amid some dazzling night
shots of Las Vegas casinos and shots of a rainy Seattle, though the rain
has no effect on Stallone's suit, it never gets soaked no matter how
much he exposes it to the elements. When Carter threatens someone, he
says it in a serious tone, "This is going to another level." It's a
cliché movie...so predictable, that if you didn't want to see the way
the sleazy bad guys were going to get payback for what they did, you
could have left the theater and figured out which way this macho stylish
film was going by yourself. You would have missed nothing, there is
absolutely nothing interesting about this film. It seems that Stephen
Kay has taken a perfectly taut original film, which was nasty and
unremitting to the core, and made a mess of the remake by trying to
clean it up, making it into a sleazy film, nevertheless, but one with no
redeeming features.
In this poorer version of "Get Carter" the women in Jack's family are
nice instead of the whores they were when they were last filmed in
Northern England. His sister-in-law (Mirand  Richardson) grieves for her
husband and doesn't understand what happened, but doesn't want revenge.
Her daughter Doreen (Leigh Cook) is a sweet girl, who is into being mod,
with pierced jewelry in her nose. She is the innocent girl who was raped
and unwittingly put on videotape by Eddy, someone whom she trusted
because he worked at the same bar as her father. Her father died telling
the mob he was going to the police about this. She is now being
comforted by Carter, who relieves her of all blame and assuages his
guilt for not being there for the family by vowing revenge. He tries to
give the film a moment of acting, hugging his niece in a warm embrace,
as behind her back he grimaces with obvious pain on his teary face,
assuring the audience to pay little attention to this human gesture,
they shouldn't worry, he hasn't gone soft, there's going to be a
payback.
The most disgusting role in the film is reserved for "gazillionaire"
computer geek Alan Cumming, he is the simpering coward, the most unmanly
and therefore the most unseemly one in the film. He plays the
over-the-top role of an obnoxious pansy who got involved in setting up a
porn empire for Cyrus Paice (Mickey Rourke) and is afraid such publicity
would kill his public image as a computer whiz entrepreneur. Cyrus is
pure sleaze (in other words, he's Mickey Rourke), but he's at least
manly in leather and dark glasses, with dumb broads draped around him
wherever he goes. He is the most dangerous and violent of all the
sleazes, the one who gets into a fatal fist fight with Carter. It could
have been built as the battle between the sleaze champ vs. the
egomaniac.
Michael Caine's role is as a lowly club owner of a small place. It's an
undeveloped role, but Caine is so good at getting credibility for his
character, someone who pretends to have nothing to gain from the murder,
who could therefore be honest about what happened, but is, of course,
somehow involved in the cover-up.
There are several other sleazes around, who have various things to add
to the story, such as more gratuitous violence and a seamy look at their
lives. The most noticeable one was from Carter's frenzied partner in the
enforcer business (John C. McGinley), who keeps warning Carter to take
care of business at home (Vegas), or the business will take care of you.
Since Carter fails to heed such warnings, these two will clash in
Seattle. Thankfully we have a car chase between the two besides the
traditional gunplay, which is a break in the relentless monotony of the
film. Anyway, no minor B-thriller should be without such a car chase.
The only positive spin I could put on this morose work, is to say that
it could have been a lot worse, Stallone could have talked in a loud
voice. This is just another in a long list of films since the 1980s to
try and resurrect Sylvester Stallone's "comeback." This picture won't
do. It lacks whatever suspense, character development, and ability to
involve the viewer, that is needed. It only features the ego of Stallone
plodding his way in a shallow story.
If you want to see "Get Carter," rent the 1971 video. It's a nasty
story, but it holds together in purpose and credibility, catching hold
of the downtrodden Newcastle atmosphere in a subtle way, something this
film was never able to realize for Seattle.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
Generic brands have revolutionized consumer products from drugs to 
cigarettes, so why not movies?  Maybe the multiplexes of the future will 
dispense with marquee titles in favor of generic packaging labels like 
Comedy, Romance and Action.   If so, GET CARTER would appear to be a 
trend setter, as you couldn't find a more generic action thriller than 
GET CARTER.  Its dialog is superfluous.  What little impact the movie 
has is due solely to its clichéd images.
The problem with this line of reasoning is that movies like GET CARTER, 
starring pricey stars like Sylvester Stallone, can't be made on a 
pittance, so the tickets have to be full price if there is ever to be 
any hope of recouping the financial backers' investments.  And, if 
moviegoers are required to pay about nine bucks a ticket for a bad movie 
like GET CARTER, why wouldn't they choose instead a great one, like 
ALMOST FAMOUS, for the same price?
GET CARTER, as you may know, is a remake of perhaps the best known film 
of director Mike Hodges (CROUPIER).  The original in 1971 starred 
Michael Caine as Jack Carter.  Caine, replaced by Sylvester Stallone, 
gets a cameo part in this version, which is directed by Stephen T. Kay 
(the writer of THE MOD SQUAD remake) and written by David McKenna (BODY 
SHOTS).  The recent résumés alone of the director and writer should give 
you pause.
As the story opens, Carter is attending the funeral of his estranged 
brother, who died under mysterious circumstances.  As a fossilized 
action hero, Stallone just stares and broods when he's not hitting 
someone.  
Mickey Rourke, an actor whose mere presence in a movie immediately 
raises a big red flag in my mind, plays Carter's nemesis, Cyrus Paice.  
Cyrus, with his ubiquitous dark sunglasses framed in iridescent green, 
shares a trait with Carter.  With their aging muscles and bulging veins, 
they look like a couple of old lifeguards who are about to OD from too 
many late nights at the gym.
The women are all given throw away parts, Miranda Richardson as Carter's 
sister-in-law, Rachael Leigh Cook as his niece and Gretchen Mol as 
Carter's love interest.  The important roles go to the boys with their 
toys, who get to chase in fast cars, shoot noisy guns and fight with big 
fists.  
The movie is set, incongruously, in that hotbed of crime, that notorious 
underworld city of latte lovers and dot-com darlings -- Seattle!  As a 
wiry and flagrantly wealthy software geek, Alan Cumming modestly informs 
Carter that "I'm the all powerful ruler of time and space."  See what 
excessive caffeine will do to your brain.
Before annihilating the first guy to get in his way, Carter tells him, 
"You really don't want to know me."  I completely agree.  You don't want 
to waste your time and money getting to know Jack Carter, especially 
when the movie in the next screen would have to be better.
GET CARTER runs a long 1:55.  It is rated R for violence, language, some 
sexuality and drug content and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Revenge seems to be a popular motif in films nowadays. Last year, Ashley
Judd pulled in over $100 million for her woman out for revenge flick
entitled DOUBLE JEOPARDY. 1999 also showcased Steven Soderbergh's nod to
revenge in THE LIMEY starring Terrence Stamp, which was about a man lookin'
to kick ass in the name of vengeance. And Quentin Tarantino is also rumored
to be scripting his next picture about a woman out for revenge. So what's
everybody so pissed off about? Not sure but after seeing this movie, I
wouldn't want to be caught on the wrong side of Sly Stallone's cranky
mood...brrrrr...
PLOT:
A professional "financial adjuster" (aka mob enforcer) comes home after
hearing of his younger brother's death and questions the drinking and
driving story which apparently killed him. The man suspects foul play and
goes looking for payback. He kicks a lot of ass, asks a lot of questions and
then kicks a little more ass. He also gets to know his late brother's
daughter a little better.
CRITIQUE:
Although not an action movie as portrayed in the hip trailer, this highly
stylized crime film worked for me despite its slow pace and somewhat
predictable story line, because of the sharp turn given by Sly Stallone, its
groovy tunes and its generally dark and gritty nature. I think that most
people who go in expecting a typical Stallone movie, or what the trailer
makes the film appear to be (an all-out brawl), will be disappointed. So try
to go in with an open mind and think about the film more in the realm of
last year's THE LIMEY, about a guy just looking out for his family...and
pissed! He goes from place to place, questions people, kicks a little ass
when he needs to, and moves on to the next clue. I enjoyed the movie on the
basis of style, soundtrack, the cool fight scenes and the 70s style car
chases. I also really liked the character that Stallone was playing, a bad
guy who despite his badness, wins our hearts because of the supposed good
that he's looking to do in honor of his brother's untimely death. Okay, so
he won my heart...he might not win yours! One definite problem that the film
does have, besides a mystery which to be honest, wasn't all that mysterious
in my eyes, is the supporting characters, who ultimately don't add up to
much. Miranda Richardson is given second billing but I have no idea why. She
is barely in the film. The same could be said for any of the other bit
characters, Mickey Rourke, Alan Cumming and John C. McGinley. Small roles
which don't really give you much insight.
Rachael Leigh Cook does get in the mix with Stallone a bit, and the
chemistry between the two was good, but the bottom line with this movie is
Stallone, Stallone, Stallone! If you dig the big lug, you will more than
likely enjoy this easy-paced dramatic turn for the puppy-eyed bastard!
(Bastard meant in a "good" way here, folks. No letters, please!). I was
personally very happy to see Sly up on the big screen again with some solid
acting on his part, palpable screen presence and plenty of cool one-liners
(And yes, despite most of the one-liners being good, some did fall flat).
This film is not for everyone, not sure if Jimmy Jack Corn will appreciate
the extreme darkness of the lead character, but if you're looking for a
tough, intense, gritty character...don't look any further than this dude,
Carter. He simply doesn't f**k around. Stay tuned for a particularly
effective scene of him and another guy in the woods...nuff said! So overall,
despite the film's predictability and underdeveloped side-characters, the
movie's got a lot of style, a great soundtrack, an awesome performance from
Stallone as the ultimate man on a mission and boy, does he look great in
those suits or what? Anyhoo...not a keeper but definitely one to check out
for all Stallone fans. Adriaaaaaaaaannnn!!!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Sylvester Stallone's middle name is Enzio. And yes, he has been MIA since
1997's COPLAND, a film which ironically landed him many an acting praise and
only $60,000 in salary. One of Stallone's earliest roles was as the "Subway
Tough Guy" in the 1971 Woody Allen comedy BANANAS. He did not have a line in
the movie. You may have also heard about his up and coming Formula One movie
which is scheduled to come out in 2001 entitled DRIVEN, but did you know
that other than starring in the film, Stallone also wrote the screenplay? Of
course, Stallone received an Oscar-nomination for writing 1976's ROCKY.
Stallone has an autistic son named Seargeo.
The man who wrote this film, David McKenna, also wrote one of the best
movies of 1998 entitled AMERICAN HISTORY X.
This is director Stephen T. Kay's second feature film, his first was 1997's
THE LAST TIME I COMMITTED SUICIDE starring Keanu Reeves. Sadly, he also had
something to do with the screenplay for last year's THE MOD SQUAD debacle.
He's known primarily as an actor with his many stints on TV shows such as
"General Hospital", "Party of Five", "Murder, She Wrote" and
"Thirtysomething".
This film is "based on" the 1971 film GET CARTER starring Michael Caine, and
not an exact remake. Caine played Jack Carter in the original and plays the
bar owner in this one. Both films are actually based on Ted Lewis' novel
entitled "Jack's Return Home".

Author
Chad Polenz
The job of the film critic is to see a movie and write a review of it that 
tells you what it's about and why it's good or bad. I feel kind of 
embarrassed to admit this, but I after having seen "Get Carter" I really 
can't tell you what it's about although I could go on and on about how and 
why it's a bad movie. 
"Get Carter" falls into that category of movies that continue to be made for 
reasons unknown to anyone outside of a Hollywood executive board room. You 
might call them the "Steven Seagal/Mickey Rourke/Jean-Claude Van Damme/Wesley 
Snipes School of Mediocre Action/Crime Thrillers." You know - the potboilers 
that are heavy on fistfights, shoot-outs and car chases but really light on 
plot and character development. They have stories where the so-called hero 
just keeps running into characters who have some connection to one of the 
other characters who are all antagonists without a reason for being in the 
movie other than to give the protagonist someone to fight, chase or shoot at.
Sylvester Stallone stars as Jack Carter, a Las Vegas-based mob enforcer who 
returns home* for his brother's funeral. He believes his brother Richie was 
"taken out" and didn't die from a DWI accident. Carter's one of the most 
cliche bad-asses ever captured on celluloid. His face alone is pretty 
intimidating and there's quite a few scenes in which he leans on both regular 
citizens and criminal lowlives simply by staring them down and speaking with 
confidence in his "Rambo-on-testosterone-therapy" voice. Stallone's 
performance in this movie is so forced and unnatural he doesn't realize he's 
mocking himself.
The actual story involves Carter's investigation into his brother Richie's 
death. He's in a town that's not his but somehow the local top dogs know him 
very well. Mickey Rourke co-stars as one of these characters, a sort of crime 
boss who has something to do with running a porno web site and blackmailing a 
young Internet tycoon (played by Alan Cummings looking and acting a lot like 
Pee Wee Herman). There's also another plot involving Richie's mistress, a 
secret CD-ROM with some convicting and disturbing evidence on it and 
something terrible involving one of Carter's still-living relatives.
I'm rolling my eyes just thinking about trying to critique all this in a way 
that could be remotely comprehendible. I could just rip the screenplay to 
shreds, plus the direction or the editing or the production values but that 
would require discussion of nearly every scene in order to explain it all. I 
don't like to put spoliers in my reviews either intentionally or accidentally.
Yes, "Get Carter" is just that complicated and complex. And what's worse is 
that it's not this intricate to make it seem smart like "The Usual Suspects" 
for example - just the opposite. You get the feeling whoever wrote this 
script did it in short intervals spaced far apart and they probably didn't 
remember what had already happened and didn't figure out how each scene would 
lead in to the next one or how the major plot points would work towards the 
climax.
All you really need to know is that most of the film is just scenes of Carter 
tracking down one scumbag or supposed witness after another, asking them what 
they know, getting information and then realizing that if he wasn't a 
complete idiot he could have figured it out in the first five minutes. 
Although the supporting characters are equally stupid themselves since they 
tell him everything which comes back to haunt them in one violent way or 
another.
Making a movie entirely about criminals doesn't necessarily mean they have to 
be unlikable and cliche cutout characters. Mel Gibson starred in "Payback" a 
few years ago that had a story not unlike this one but had such a good 
screenplay you couldn't help but like him even though he was just as bad a 
guy as Jack Carter. 
So ultimately "Get Carter" fails for pretty much every selling point it has. 
Carter is not a likable character and you really don't care if he gets 
revenge or not. The action sequences are not at all exciting or original. The 
enemies and their massive conspiracy are not threatening at all (c'mon, you 
know who's going to win every brawl and shoot-out and car chase). In the end 
you don't feel nearly satisfied with the results. The filmmakers did a good 
job in doing everything as unoriginal as possible.
* the city is never mentioned by name but I assume it's Seattle since all the 
cars have Washington license plates and it's always raining.
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-3A4E-B9887A8-39E4970C-prod1
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Jon Popick
Remember the Shaft remake from earlier this year?  The 1971 original was
updated and 58-year-old Richard Roundtree, the star of the first film,
was given a smaller role in the second to make way for a newer, hipper
lead.
But Shaft isn't the only remake from '71 to rear its head in 2000.  Get
Carter was originally a British flick based on Ted Lewis' novel `Jack's
Return Home' that starred recent Oscar winner Michael Caine (it also
became a 1972 blaxploitation movie called Hit Man with Bernie Casey and
Pam Grier).  Caine (The Cider House Rules) has a smaller role in the new
version, but he isn't making way for a newer, hipper lead.  In fact,
Carter's new lead, Sylvester Stallone, is only four years younger than
Roundtree.
The new adaptation updates the cheesy 70s music, clothes and hair,
while the story remains somewhat the same.  Vegas heavy Jack Carter
(Stallone, Cop Land) learns that his estranged brother has been killed
in Seattle and heads off to his old stomping ground to find out if the
accident was really caused by drunk driving or by more devious means.
For some reason, he suspects foul play and, like Terence Stamp in The
Limey, he's right.
When Carter gets to Seattle, he heads straight for his brother's
funeral, where he meets his sister-in-law Gloria (Miranda Richardson,
Sleepy Hollow) and niece Doreen (Rachael Leigh Cook, She's All That). He
begins to pester them with questions about the accident, but they see
his queries as an annoyance.  Doreen even tells Carter, `You're just a
picture on the piano,' despite the fact we see no pictures on the piano
in a later scene.  Probably just a figure of speech.
Once Carter hits the streets to investigate his brother's lifestyle and
death, we're introduced to a jumble of characters from which we must
figure out the pecking order of Seattle's crime food chain as he pummels
his way to the top.  You're supposed to be surprised by the kingpin, but
it's really quite predictable.  In that respect, Carter is kind of like
Mel Gibson's Payback.
The original version of Carter was much, much better and is widely
regarded as one of the finest British crime pics ever made.  It was
directed by Mike Hodges, who went on to make Flash Gordon and, more
impressively, the recent sleeper hit Croupier.  There are two fantastic
scenes in the first film that I was surprised to see omitted from the
remake.  One involved a steamy phone sex call between Carter and the
girlfriend of his mob boss back home.  It must have been pretty risqué
20 years ago, but by today's standards, it would be quite tame.
The other scene involved two thugs walking in on Carter while he was
shagging some bird.  He was able to turn the tables on the situation,
leading the men down the stairs and out of the house with a shotgun
while completely naked.  And, of course, the ending of the new film is
completely different.  Interestingly, there is a mysterious female
character named Geraldine (Rhona Mitra, Hollow Man) in the remake,
somewhat of a nod to the original role played by Geraldine Moffatt.
Even without the lackluster comparisons to the original film, Carter has
plenty of problems.  The film appears to be set just before Christmas,
but there isn't the slightest hint of chilly weather.  It is perpetually
gloomy and rainy in Carter's Seattle, which doesn't stop Jack from
sporting sunglasses most of the time.  Stallone's performance is
unremarkable in every way, unless you count the disgusting veins
protruding from his shoulders and arms, or the goatee that's supposed to
make him look younger.
Editor Jerry Greenberg (Duets), whose technique resembles the comedic
styling of Robin Williams after fourteen espressos, makes Carter's
action scenes more annoying and spastic than Armageddon.  The film was
directed by Stephen T. Kay (The Last Time I Committed Suicide and one of
the screenwriters of The Mod Squad) and adapted by David McKenna (Body
Shots).  Kay's direction is `highlighted' by a scene where the camera is
turned upside down in an attempt to show how Carter's life has gone
topsy-turvy.  Give me a break.
1:40  R for violence, adult language, sexual content and drug content

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/b62a62184652dd51882569770013523d?OpenDocument
Forget Get Carter.  Instead... get me a cup of coffee.
What the hell has happened to all good American action movies?  Did I
unknowingly miss a meeting somewhere?  When did all of the bad-ass,
kicking butt and taking names, gun-toting, crazed, vengeful characters
of the 1980's -- from such films as Commando, Cobra, Predator, Raw Deal,
First Blood -- suddenly turn into innocent, compassionate, sensitive,
teary-eyed knuckleheads.  The only place to turn these days for an
honest action film is towards the East -- and I don't mean New York
City.
Get Carter -- the latest masterpiece from uber-thespian Sylvester
Stallone -- is a prime example of large and in charge 80's action stars
trying to fit back into action roles they have long since outgrown. 
Stallone seems like that one uncle you have who tries to be cool with
his Members Only jacket and Izod polo shirt with the collar popped up.
A few years ago, Stallone made a movie that gave him the opportunity to
gracefully exit the roles that typecast him as an action monkey.  That
role was Sheriff Freddy Heflin in Copland -- a strange film about
redemption within a broken soul.  Stallone actually gave an amazing
performance and it seemed he had shaken off the past.  Too bad Get
Carter returns Stallone to action, but with the shiny paint rusted off
on the edges.
Get Carter is a simple story.  Stallone plays Frank Carter, a Vegas
bruiser for a loan shark (played with amazing gusto by the uncredited
voice of actor Tom Sizemore).  When Frank's brother gets himself killed
in a drunk driving accident, Frank, feeling all guilty and mushy inside,
thinks foul play is involved and travels to Seattle to set right all the
wrongs with the patented "Carter's Way".  He talks tough with his
brother's wife, lends a helping had to his brother's daughter Doreen
(Rachel Leigh Cook), and walks around Seattle in the pouring rain
dressed like a lost member of the Rat Pack with a really bad goatee.
Carter finds out that his brother was involved in some bad stuff with a
slimy porn king played by ultra-cool, McQueen-esque Mickey Rourke, a
multi-millionaire computer geek (Alan Cumming), and a strange foreign
guy (Michael Caine) who speaks in riddles and talks tough.  Carter
stalks all of them while trying to figure out who did in his brother and
how to extract proper revenge on the responsible parties.
What a minute!  This sounds just like another film I saw last year, The
Limey.  Better not tell Terence Stamp about Stallone ripping him off. 
Actually, Get Carter is a remake of the 1971 British production of the
same name, starring Caine in the title role (and what with his cameo
here, the cleverness is astonishing).
While Stallone still carries his own weight here, the movie lacks what
the original did as well: Purpose.  Throughout the film, Stallone looks
like an old guy trying to act tough, while nobody is taking him
seriously.  His one-liners fall flat, and he seems tired and uncertain
of all the actions, mental and physical, required of his character. 
There is even a strange homoeroticism between Rourke and Stallone that
lends a bizarre tone to their numerous conversations -- in both fists
and words.
The biggest surprise in Get Carter is that the best job done in the film
is by the versatile Mickey Rourke.  An amazing Method actor in the
eighties who fell into drugs, spousal abuse, a boxing career, and an
intolerable attitude towards not getting his way, Rourke still brings a
dangerous sense of purpose to his porn king character.  He may not win
any Oscars, but he still ranks highly in my book.
Get Carter has great directing, strong acting by Rourke and Caine, and
energetic car chases that would make William Friedkin proud.  The only
thing it lacks - as with most Hollywood productions -- is a good script
and proper casting.  Never mind that it should never have been made at
all.
Director: Stephen T. Kay
Writer: David McKenna
Producers: Neil Canton, Mark Canton, Elie Samaha
Starring: Sylvester Stallone, Miranda Richardson, Rachel Leigh Cook,
Mickey Rourke, Michael Caine, John C. McGinley, Alan Cumming
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Stephen Kay.
Cast: Sylvester Stallone, Rachael Leigh Cook, Mickey Rourke, Alan Cumming, 
Miranda Richardson, Michael Caine, Rhona Mitra, John C. McGinley, Gretchen 
Mol.
2000 - 102 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sexual situations, and blood).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 7, 2000.
"My name is Jack Carter, and you don't want to know me," says Sylvester 
Stallone in the opening line of dialogue from "Get Carter," a loose remake of 
the same-named 1971 film starring Michael Caine (who has a supporting role 
here). An hour and forty minutes later, it was safe to agree with him that, 
yes, I didn't want to know him, after all. "Get Carter" is a dimly lit, 
brooding film noir that is as technically stylish as it is utterly mediocre. 
With very little action to satisfy the appetites of die-hard Stallone fans 
(save for two boring car chases), and a premise that is older than stale 
bread, the film plays out in a way that more often than not causes the viewer 
to question if they have seen the same proceedings all before. And, 
unfortunately, they probably have.
Jack Carter is a violent, Las Vegas-based debt collector who has been 
settling scores and making loads of cash for many years. Although he has 
effortlessly adapted to his unconventional lifestyle, things change for him 
with the news that his brother, who lives in Seattle, has been found dead at 
the wheel of his car, the victim of an apparent drunk driving accident. 
Carter, feeling guilty over not staying in touch with him over the years, 
knows that his brother would not drink and drive, and suspects that he was 
murdered--but by who? In an attempt to not only seek vengeance on his only 
sibling's demise, but to also protect his apprehensive sister-in-law Gloria 
(Miranda Richardson) and teenaged niece Doreen (Rachael Leigh Cook), Carter 
sets out to find the truth about his untimely death.
In the depiction of a city where the sun never shines and the rain looms 
ominously over the heads of the inhabitants, Mauro Fiore's evocative 
cinematography is easily a highlight in the otherwise unextraordinary "Get 
Carter," which boosts little interest outside of its camera trickery 
(jump-cuts, overexposed lenses, etc.) and sparkling cast of familiar faces. 
It's too bad, then, that no one besides Stallone, Cook, Rourke, and Cumming 
make anything but a cursory appearance.
Sylvester Stallone, in his first return to the big screen since his 
well-received 1997 foray "Copland," inhabits a sense of irresistibly 
bad-assed coolness not seen since Mel Gibson in 1999's "Payback." While 
Stallone is unable to paint Carter with more than two or three shades 
throughout, he stands as a formidable symbol of how one should dress and act 
if in the same line of work as he. 
Everyone consistently plays second fiddle to Stallone, and some handle 
themselves better than others, based not only on their talent, but how strong 
(or ludicrous) the writing is at any given moment. Rachael Leigh Cook (1999's 
"She's All That"), as the distraught Doreen, quickly warms up to the 
appearance of Carter, who is not only her uncle, but someone whom she places 
as a sort of father figure to replace her own dad. Cook equips herself with 
finesse and clear signs that she is more than just a pretty face on the big 
screen, even when asked to do silly or ridiculous things. Mickey Rourke 
(1997's "The Rainmaker") is at his attractively slimy best as Cyrus Paice, 
perhaps the only man Carter knows who is any sort of match for him. And Alan 
Cumming (1999's "Titus," Broadway's "Cabaret"), as young millionaire computer 
aficionado Jeremy Kinnear, stands out in all of his sparse scenes, adding 
depth and memorable acting choices to a character simply vacant from the 
written script, by David McKenna. 
On the other end of the spectrum, the usually talented Miranda Richardson 
(1999's "Sleepy Hollow), as Gloria, is merely cashing a paycheck, briefly 
popping up only a handful of times and adding nothing to the film. The same 
goes for Michael Caine (1999's "The Cider House Rules") and an unbilled 
Gretchen Mol (1998's "Music From Another Room"), as Stallone's trophy 
girlfriend back in Vegas.
Amidst the appropriately gloomy atmosphere and Stallone's star turn, "Get 
Carter" is little more than a shallow retread of many, many movies gone by. 
Attempts at character-building moments mostly fail due to the usually 
lame-brained dialogue that screenwriter McKenna has ill-fatedly penned, 
leaving us to follow a perplexing lead character whom we never grow to care 
about, or even understand. Save for one mild surprise, the picture also 
remains painfully predictable, leading to a conclusion that does nothing 
except beg for a reason why anyone's time or energy was wasted making such a 
throwaway movie in the first place.

Author
Homer Yen
"My name is Jack Carter, and you don't want to know
me" says our brooding anti-hero (Sylvester Stallone). 
Take his advice!  To know this guy is as rewarding as
being thrown over a terrace.  And to watch this film
is almost as painful.  "Get Carter" is a gloomy
looking, unimaginative film that offers no joy.
Jack Carter is as tough as tough guys come.  He works
out of Vegas as a self-described 'financial adjuster'.
 Explaining his duties, he says, "people make promises
and break them.  I help them remember."  He has a
chiseled body full of tattoos.  He has the weathered
look indicative of a man who has seen his share of
hard times.  He speaks in a hushed but menacing tone
of voice.  In other words, this is Sylvester Stallone
acting like...Sylvester Stallone.  And like most of
his previous roles, his character is a shallow,
one-dimensional thug whose modus operandi is to talk
tough, hassle a few hapless people, find out what he
needs to know, and then dispense his own kind of
justice.  With the charisma of a pit bull, being tough
is all that Jack Carter knows.  
Yet, even tough guys know when to put family first. 
As the story begins, we learn that Jack's little
brother has died in a car accident.  The police
attribute it to heavy drinking.  However, Jack is
suspicious, believing that he was 'taken out'.  He
takes a break from his Vegas duties and tries to see
if he can find the truth.  As he pokes around, he runs
into several lowlife characters.  They include a shady
business partner, a prostitute, a dweebish millionaire
molded after Bill Gates, and an oily owner of a porn
website.  
Any one of them may know something about his brother's
death.  All of them have the means of carrying out the
deed.  But don't expect an exercise in sleuthing where
well-placed clues lead Carter to the truth.  He's all
brawn and no brains, so there are no epiphanies during
his investigation.  Instead, he uses intimidation to
muscle his way forward, cycling through this circle of
suspects.  Flustered with his lack of progress, he
cycles through them again and again.  This all gets
tiring fairly quickly.  By the time the film launches
into its final act, we're numb from its pedestrian
pace.
Oddly, as a tough-guy thriller, it starves us for
action.  Admittedly, there is one nifty chase
sequence, but this is related to a tangential and
needless plot (Carter's Vegas ties send thugs to
retrieve him).  The story also fails to generate any
kind of emotion.  Stallone has the personality of a
slab of stone.  And the look and feel of the film is
perpetually downcast.  The weather is constantly
overcast or rainy.  Meanwhile, most shots take place
at night, in dimly lit rooms, or in dark alleys.  It's
just impossible to get stirred about that kind of
atmosphere.  As a result, "Get Carter" amounts to
nothing more than a flat thriller, bereft of clever
moments and devoid of any excitement.  You're better
off leaving this guy alone.

Author
Steve Kong
It was the slick poster and the slick trailer of Get Carter that got me 
into the theatre to watch this film.  Had it not been for that, I probably 
would have waited for video to see this movie starring aging action star 
Sylvester Stallone.  So, was it worth the trip?
Jack Carter (Sylvester Stallone) is a brutal hitman who travels to Seattle 
for his brother's funeral.  When he gets to Seattle he finds that his 
brother's death may not be what it was said to be and Carter sets out to 
find the killer.  In Seattle, Carter returns to his old life where people 
fear him.  Where he is the local tough guy, the bad guy.  He meets his old 
bad buddies, like Cyrus (Mickey Rourke).  He meets his troubled niece 
Doreen (Rachael Leigh Cook) who somehow is connected to everything that is 
happening in the movie.  There is a thread about Carter's affair with his 
boss' wife but that never gets full treatment and feels tacked on.
Get Carter is a remake of the 1971 version.  I've not seen the original, so 
I can't comment on how the two compare.  But, looking at the credits it's 
nice to see Michael Caine who played Jack Carter in the original taking a 
larger role in this remake.  The story of Get Carter is nothing 
special.  It does have its twists and turns, but it sometimes lost me.  The 
film will also make you laugh with its subtle humor  Stallone delivers some 
of his lines with comedic perfection.
So, what's the hook of Get Carter?  Style.  The style that Get Carter is 
shot is so different that at points it distracts from the story.  But, I 
loved it.  The style in which Get Carter is shot gives the film a sort of 
charm that if it did not have, it would not have been so enjoyable.  Kudos 
to director Stephen T. Kay, cinematographer Mauro Fiore, and editor Jerry 
Greenberg for an injection of style into what would have otherwise been a 
bland film.
How's Stallone?  Perfect.  Stallone gives one of his best performances in 
recent memory.  Kudos to Stallone for one great performance.  The other 
good performance is Rachael Leigh Cook.  Mickey Rourke turns in a nice 
performance and is genuinely tough on screen.
Catch Get Carter, you'll be entertained throughout it's running time.
