Title
Review for Jean de Florette (1986)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jeff Meyer
Seen at the Seattle Film Festival:
JEAN de FLORETTE (French, 1986)
Director: Claude Berri
Screenwriters: Claude Berri, Gerard Brach; based on a novel by Marcel Pagnol
Cast: Yves Montand, Gerard Depardieu, Daniel Auteuil, Elisabeth Depardieu
Subtitled
     This is the first half of what is being described as a "French Epic"; it
is an adaptation of a fairly well-known French novel about the efforts of two
bachelor farmers, an older man and his rat-faced nephew, who covet the spring
on the land of their neighbor.  After the neigbor is killed by the older farmer
in an angry confrontation that is made to look like an accident, the two
farmers' plans are thwarted by Jean de Florette, the last heir of their
neighbor and a hunch-backed tax-collector who has moved to the farm with his
wife and young daughter to "return to nature" and start a farm.  Unfortunately
for them, the two farmers have hidden the spring on their land, and are working
behind the scenes to make their moves a difficult one.
     This film had several features of interest for me.  It is about men and
women who work the land, and thus needs a director and a cameraman who can
communicate the beauty and hardships associated with farming.  In that they
have succeeded admirably, using color to its full potential and employing wide
shots of the land.  It is also a reminder of how cruelty can be generated by
lack of actions as well as actions, and how villainy is frequent among the
petty, and for petty reasons.  The two farmers are not sadists or vice lords;
they remind us more of the comic foils one finds in a mild English comedy.
They are absurd and sympathetic--they are even worried about the neighbors
they are attempting to force out.  Yet the consequences of their meddling are
no less tragic.
     This is not a complex story, and it is somewhat long; but the
concentration on the land made it interesting to me for the majority of the
film.  I also want to see the sequel, MANON DES SOURCES, when it is released in
the United States.  An elderly French woman who sat next to me in the audience
said she had read the book when she was a child, and felt that the filmmakers
had been very faithful, so those of you who liked the book have a
recommendation other than mine.
     For those who didn't read the book (like moi), C+ ($3.50 movie).

Author
Wayne Citrin
     I'm surprised that nobody has posted a review of this excellent film,
which won the major award at Cannes this year.  [Actually, there was one by
Jeff Meyer, available as r.a.m.r./89.  -ecl]  JEAN DE FLORETTE is a vivid
adaptation of the Marcel Pagnol novel about peasant life in southern France
between the wars.  Papet (Yves Montand) wishes to acquire a neighbor's land in
order to establish his nephew Ugolin (Daniel Auteuil).  However, the neighbor
dies and his heir, Jean (Gerard Depardieu), a city dweller, arrives intending
to settle down and farm the land according to the systems described in his
books.  Papet and Ugolin conceal the spring on Jean's land (which is what makes
the land valuable in this dry landscape) and sit back to watch Jean fail.  They
hope that he will give up and sell them the land.
     This description does not do justice to this extraordinarily rich film.
Papet and Ugolin are not standard cardboard villains, but sympathetic
characters with understandable (though not necessarily admirable) reasons for
doing the things they do.  Jean is a sympathetic character, but also rather
pompous and ludicrous in his faith in his "manuals."  The film shows how
closed to outsiders village life can be, and how primitive life there was
before the war.
     All the performances in the film are excellent, and the photography is 
beautiful.  The script is intelligent, with many subtle motivations and 
connections between characters hinted at but not explained.
     JEAN DE FLORETTE is the first part of a two-part film.  The second part,
MANON DES EAUX (MANON OF THE SPRINGS) was released in France at the same  time
as JEAN DE FLORETTE, but I have heard that MANON DES EAUX will be released in
the United States around Christmas.  Although MANON DES EAUX is the natural
sequel (see the first film and you'll see what I mean), JEAN DE FLORETTE is
itself a self contained film and filmgoers should not go expecting an
incomplete, open-ended story.  I give JEAN DE FLORETTE 3-1/2 stars out of 4,
and eagerly await MANON DES EAUX.

Author
Pedro Sena
Every once in a while a great pair of films comes along.  JEAN DE FLORETTE
and MANON OF THE SPRING are just such a pair.
With a lot of the French dramatic slowness in these films, the story will
eventually grab you.  It won't be until the last thirty minutes of MANON
that you can quite understand what is going on, but until then you keep
wondering, where, what, and why are things happening the way they are.
There are some striking similarities between these films and the serialized
soap operas found on television.  In many ways, the twists and turns are all
the same, and the wrenches thrown in at various moments do not help the
characters very much.  They make the whole thing more difficult.
An educated young man, inherits a farm, and moves in from the city.  The
people who worked the farm before don't like the young man's ideas, and
proceed to do anything and everything they can to make sure he does not
succeed.  And they do it by making sure that the season's drought conditions
continue by plugging up the main well, which also feeds water to the town.
The young man is a hunchback, has a wife and two kids.  His fight for
survival is magnanimous on all accounts, but eventually it ends in tragedy.
He is the outsider, is ugly, is educated, and has no place in the country
telling the folk how to grow anything in their farms.  The young daughter
Manon, at the age of six or
seven, finds out that the old man and his accomplice have in fact plugged
the well, and are planning to wait for the verdict of the courts who will
decide to whom the property will go, and who will take care of it.  However,
the  girl is young, she's the black sheep, and her family is dead.
Gerard Depardieu is the city man and hunchback with many ideas, all which
work and are sensible, but he is the representative of the new order of
things, and the failed old order rejects him.
And Yves Montand is the old farmer, whose attitude is downright abusive, but
also charming.  He is as sneaky as he is nice to the young children, and the
town folk who admire him for being the best farmer, and at one time the best
lover.
This first part is innocent enough, though now something is established in
MANON.
Although a bit slow of a film and it has subtitles, this is an excellent
film and should be seen by anyone who appreciates great film making.  It is
similar in many ways ( to my eyes ) to a David Lean film, in that the shot
composition is pretty and nicely done.  And the country side is beautiful.
