Title
Review for This Is Elvis (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Released some five years after his death, "This is Elvis"
attempts to explain the rise and fall of Elvis Presley.
Part documentary and part dramatization, actual footage
of Elvis (from home movies, press conferences, and
performances) is mixed with re-enactments featuring
four actors portraying Elvis at various ages.  (One of
them, Johnny Harra, was a professional Elvis imitator.)
The Elvisian narration was by Ray Donner, who in 1961
had a top twenty pop hit covering Elvis' "The Girl of My
Best Friend".
Presley was born Southern 'white trash'.  A powerful,
emotive singer with good looks, he was became by far
the most successful recording artist of the 1950s.
A stint in the Army changed his image from dangerous
rebel to mainstream entertainer.  He starred in a series
of movies that became worse and worse, then resurrected
his career with a television special leading to a
series of concert tours.  He married and divorced
Priscilla Presley.  His health deteriorated, perhaps
due to his ballooning waistline and addiction to
prescription pills.  He died at age 42.  He remains
famous today, not so much for his performances, but
for the tragedy of his late career.
"This is Elvis" achieves its ambitious goal of covering
the whole of Elvis' career, with the dramatic recreations
plausibly explaining how he felt at each turn.  The
film does not shy from exploring Elvis' weaknesses:
his philandering, his insecurity, vanity and reclusiveness,
and his decline into an overweight, confused pill junkie.
If anything, the negative is stressed too strongly.
While his cultural impact comes across, as does his
ability as an entertainer, this film will not in itself
convince anybody that Elvis was the greatest American
singer (which he probably was).  Also, the frequent
interchanging of fake and real Elvii becomes distracting.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
