Title
Review for "McLibel!" (1997) (mini)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
This fascinating documentary records the longest civil trial
in England's legal history - a David and Goliath like struggle between
the multinational McDonalds corporation and two environmental
activists who had made some damaging statements about the company.
Dave Marsh and Helen Steel were members of an environmental
group.  In the early '90's they published a pamphlet entitled What's
Wrong With McDonalds, in which they alleged that the giant burger firm
used misleading advertising tactics, exploited children and their
young workers, and condoned cruelty to animals.  McDonalds spends some
$5 billion a year on advertising, and its golden arches are a more
recognisable symbol than the Christian cross.  The company is also
notoriously litigious, and quick to sue anyone who criticises it - as
the film demonstrates with a list of companies and celebrities who
have been forced to retract statements in the face of threatened legal
action.  But Marsh and Steel were a pair of battlers who had nothing
to lose, and stood firm.
McDonalds ultimately spent some $50 million in pursuing the
case, while Steel and Marsh defended themselves on money raised
through donations from supporters.  But they scored some major
victories against their more polished and highly trained legal
adversaries.  The pair eventually scored a comprehensive moral victory
over McDonalds as the judge decided that some of their allegations
were true.  But the whole case itself was something of a public
relations disaster for McDonalds, as it thrust the pair and their
allegations into newspaper headlines around the world.  A web site was
even set up to further broadcast the details of the trial.
This documentary following the lengthy trial and its impact
has been put together by Franny Armstrong, a novice film maker with no
experience, but plenty of passion.  Noted English director Ken Loach,
a champion of the working classes, helped direct the dramatic
recreations of the court scenes, and one wonders how much input he had
into shaping the overall structure of this intriguing 55 minute doco.
McLibel is fascinating stuff, and Armstrong and co certainly cram a
fair bit of information into the brief running time.  Armstrong is
aware of the absurdity of the case, and consequently the film is full
of a sly humour, most of it at McDonalds expense.
But the film is not without its flaws, many of them due to the
restrictions of working within an extremely low budget.  Objectivity
seems to have completely gone out the window, although, to be fair,
McDonalds management was approached to participate in the filming
process but declined.  Obviously they figured they'd already been
burned enough the first time around!
