Title
Review for Rear Window (1954)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Quick.  Name Alfred Hitchcock's masterpiece.  "Vertigo"?  "Psycho"?
How about "Rear Window"?  Yeah, that's it...
        Fifteen years after "Rear Window" enjoyed a mini-revival along with
four other "long-lost" Hitchcock treasures--"Vertigo," "Rope," "The Trouble
with Harry," and the remake of his own "The Man Who Knew Too Much" (the one
in which Doris Day warbles "Que Sera, Sera")--the director's most
accomplished film returns to theaters in a fully-restored print.
        The old-fashioned dying process used to restore the negative has
created a film version with richer, denser colors than we see in
contemporary film stocks.  Whereas these improvements might only be
noticeable to a film historian viewing the prints side-by-side, the best
thing about this restoration is that it gives moviegoers another chance to
see this magnificent film as it was meant to be seen: in the theaters.
        "Rear Window" is the one about the newspaper photographer (Jimmy
Stewart in one of his best roles) holed up in his Manhattan apartment,
confined to a wheelchair with a broken leg.  Here he receives daily
rubdowns by an insurance company nurse (Thelma Ritter, spouting more
one-liners in one film than Arnold Schwarzenegger has achieved in his
entire career), and occasional visits from his "perfect" socialite
girlfriend (Grace Kelly at her most luminous).
        With seven weeks to convalesce and the temperatures in the
nineties, Stewart's L.B. Jefferies (Jeff) is given ample opportunity to
observe the comings and goings of his neighbors since their blinds, like
his, are invariably left up.  Neighbors such as "Miss Torso," a
well-proportioned young woman who enjoys performing calisthenics in her
underwear; "Miss Lonelyheart," a depressed middle-aged spinster who
fantasizes about meeting Mr. Right; and an aspiring songwriter who taps out
compositions on his piano late into the night.
        Most intriguing, however, are the Thorwalds who live directly
across the way.  Since Mrs. Thorwald is an invalid, Jeff's curiosity is
aroused when he observes her husband making three mysterious trips very
early one morning.  The next day the blinds are drawn in the Thorwald's
bedroom and Jeff, now more than a casual voyeur, begins to suspect foul
play.
        The entire film is shot from the claustrophobic perspective of
Jeff's apartment with the only glimpse of the outside world supplied via a
narrow alley leading to the street.  The suspense unfolds within the red
brick confines of the rear of the buildings, with the neighbors' petty
dramas spilling out into the courtyard below.  Inside, the nosy threesome,
now joined by Jeff's old army buddy (played by Wendell Cory), discuss,
hypothesize, argue, and intellectualize about the possibility of a crime
having been committed.
        John Michael Hayes' dialogue--at times crafty, alarming, witty, and
never less than sparkling--is masterfully realized by a perfect cast.
Ritter is a hoot and the sexual tension between Stewart and Kelly just
sizzles.  What's remarkable about Stewart's performance is that he spends a
large proportion of the film simply observing, reacting--mostly with his
eyes--to the things going on outside his window.  A lesser actor could have
easily overdone this.
        With a playful score by Franz Waxman, stunning gowns by Edith Head,
and Hitchcock's brilliant direction keeping everything in sharp focus,
"Rear Window" is a near-faultless work that is as absorbing today as it was
some 46 years ago.  Don't be a mug and wait another 15 years to see it.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alfred Hitchcock
Writer: John Michael Hayes (from a story by Cornell Woolrich)
Starring: James Stewart, Grace Kelley, Thelma Ritter, Raymond Burr
Watching a movie, viewing a story featuring characters alien to you, is
a lot like voyeurism.  This is what Hitchcock's film, "Rear Window," is
claiming.  And like any bold statement, it backs it up with a suspense
filled story that drawls us, and the protagonists, into its web.  What
results is, in essence, one of the greatest films ever made.  I'm
talking top 10 or 20 here.  Of course, it's from the greatest director
of all time, Alfred Hitchcock, who made, maybe, one bad film in his 50
film career.
Anyway, the film deals with a photographer (James Stewart) who has
wounded himself in an accident and is confined to a wheelchair for a
couple months, whereas he has become pretty much attracted with watching
his neighbors from his back window for hours upon hours, since he has
very little to do.  He names some of the people who do several things,
like naming a woman who lives alone, and suffers a bad date "Miss Lonely
Hearts."
However, one thing he sees is shocking.  He spies on a husband (a young
Raymond Burr) and wife, the latter who has disappeared suddenly.  He
starts to suspect foul play as evidence keeps turning up.  But what can
he do?  He's a voyeur, which is illegal and everything.  But like him,
we're obsessed with the story, which is very intriguing.
Also in his life is his gorgeous girlfriend (Grace Kelley), who he has
come to ignore and put down, since she's not as interesting as watching
the people from his window.  Not until she goes ahead and ventures out
as part of the world from his window, does he take notice.  And when she
comes back, he's infacuated with her.  There's also his physical
therapist (Thelma Ritter), who warns him about the dangers of being a
voyeur, and eventually joins with him and Kelley in their fascinatoin
and obsession with the world from the window.
To be brilliant, Hitchcock shoots the entire film (save a small bit at
the end) from the inside of his apartment, not allowing the viewers to
see the people from any close shots, and with no sound.  We, like
Stewart, are in a seat watching the events form across the way like
we're in a movie theater.  The fact that he's a photographer is also
very intriguing.  This whole film is filled to the brim with symbolism,
so that while we're watching a satisfying suspense/thriller, we're also
intrigued by the meaning of the film.
Unlike "Sliver," this film shows voyeurism in an intelligent light. 
It's fascinating, and the film does not totally condone it.  It can get
us into trouble though, when we start having trouble differentiating the
real world from that of the TV world.  With people watching more and
more TV these days, this film shows us a bunch of sick people who have
an obsession with other people's more fascinating lives.
The acting is, of course, wonderful.  Come on, it's a Hitchcock film. 
Stewart (who sadly passed away recently...but you already knew that) is
awesome as usual.  And Kelley is fantastic, as, well, she always has
been.  She was a gorgeous woman, but she wasn't all just looks, but she
could act too.  And Thelma Ritter almost steals some of her scenes with
Kelley and Stewart.
Did I forget the awesome screenplay?  These characters don't have a lot
to do in terms of action wise.  They're basically watching and talking
about the people they see, kind of like an audience.  And the talking
they do is almost as fascinating as the things that go on in the lives
of the other people.
And, of course, the direction is near-perfect.  Not only does he create
a greatly intriguing film, and give it a great theme and message, but he
doesn't take a negative view of his protagonists, much like what another
lesser director would do.  These people are us, and we're watching
ourselves on screen.  They're just normal people, with a lot of time on
their hands.  Kind of like us, since we're taking 2 hours to watch
this.  If he were to put them down, they'd put us down.  Good man, that
Hitchcock.
I love Hitchcock's films, and this is probably his best work.  I'm not
saying it is, it can be argued it's another one as much as it can be
this one.  But anyway, "Rear Window" is an entertaining masterpiece, a
film of style AND substance.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Rhodes
Alfred Hitchcock, James Stewart and Grace Kelly. Hitchcock was a king
among directors, Stewart was an acting prince and Kelly would later
become a real-life princess. Together in 1954's REAR WINDOW -- now being
re-released theatrically in a beautifully restored print -- they made
one of the world's most beloved movies. (The film is just a few notches
away from the top 10 movies ever made according to readers around the
globe, at least as currently recorded in the definitive authority on the
world's movies, the Internet Movie Data Base.)
L.B. "Jeff" Jefferies (Stewart) is a magazine photographer who travels
extensively, visiting the world's most dangerous, inhospitable and
exciting areas. Because of a broken leg, he's now inconveniently cooped
up with only a wheelchair to get him around his apartment. The saving
grace of his locale is that his large rear window looks out onto a cross
section of humanity. The windows of his dozens of New York City
neighbors form a rich tapestry of bustling city life. All of the windows
face a central courtyard, and few of the shades are closed, given the
sweltering heat.
The circus in front of Jeff's eyes has many performers. There is Miss
Lonelyheart (Judith Evelyn), who may commit suicide if she isn't
successful in turning her pretend boyfriend in for a real one. Miss
Torso (Georgine Darcy) dances the day away, while doing her household
chores, and flirts the evening away, while playing queen bee to a flock
of eager drones. There's a newlywed couple (Rand Harper and Havis
Davenport), who are only seen briefly when they come up for air. In the
center ring is a jewelry salesman (Raymond Burr), who may or may not
have murdered his wife. Given that Jeff would love to find a mystery to
vanquish his boredom, he's not always sure that the salesman is guilty
of anything more than having a wife who has gone to the country for some
fresh air.
Stewart's talents can best be seen in his small mannerisms. He has an
itch that, because of his cast, he can only scratch through certain
contortions. Eventually with the help of a backscratcher, he scratches
the itch. The audience empathizes with him as his pained face turns to
bliss. Trapped in his apartment, he brings out the peeping Tom in all of
us as he struggles to find out what is going on without getting caught.
John Michael Hayes's script, full of delicate sexual innuendo, is quite
funny, and Hitchcock's staging is cute as well. For his spying Jeff uses
a telephoto lens large enough to be worthy of a small observatory.
Kelly, in one of the best performances she ever gave, plays Lisa Carol
Fremont, Jeff's high society girlfriend and would-be wife. She couldn't
be more different from Jeff, but she's a gal who used to getting what
she wants. Kelly is delightful as his self-described Girl Friday in his
mission to find  enough evidence to prove his neighbor a murderer. With
a soft-spoken voice and an alluring presence, she is nothing less than a
complete knock-out.
The rest of the supporting cast includes Thelma Ritter, as Jeff's
smart-mouthed, witty nurse, Stella, and Wendell Corey, as Jeff's
ex-service friend turned homicide detective, Lieutenant Thomas J. Doyle.
The Lieutenant is not a particularly willing participant in Jeff's
investigations.
Perhaps the best part of this most accessible movie is the sound. A
cornucopia of city noises and music fill the air, reminding one of a
Gershwin melody. Piano music flows out of the apartment of the
songwriter (Ross Bagdasarian). A couple (Sara Berner and Frank Cady)
talk on the balcony where they have gone to sleep to escape the heat.
These and other sounds mix with those of cars, radios and other
conversations to form a city symphony of sounds.
REAR WINDOW is a cinematic treasure. You don't want to miss your chance
to see this classic on the big screen. If you've only seen the movie on
a television screen, there is a lot of texture and activity that you've
probably never noticed before. When the picture comes to your area, go
immediately. It will probably have a highly limited run at one or two
theaters, and, if you procrastinate, you'll miss your opportunity to see
something wonderful.
REAR WINDOW runs 1:52. It is rated PG for mature themes and would be
fine for kids around 10 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Curtis Edmonds
The term "disability" is often used to apply to a certain set of people
who have severe impairments of one form or another.  It is, however, a
more common experience than you might think, and it's something that
most people have to deal with, sooner or later.  My disability
experience, if you can call it that, is limited to a few weeks in
midwinter, when my hometown of Austin, Texas is blanketed in mountain
cedar pollen.  Cedar trees grow wild all over the Hill Country north and
west of here, and the prevailing wind blows literally tons of pollen
into the River City every year. "Cedar fever", it's called, and lots of
people get it and feel miserable for weeks. Sneezing, congestion, red
eyes, the works.
Cedar fever is not the same as having a disability, of course, but if it
lasts long enough, you experience a little taste of what it's like for
some people.  Loneliness, sure, and depression, and if you're not well
enough to go to work, you get a degree of alienation and isolation to go
along with it.  
This is Jimmy Stewart's situation in Rear Window.  Stewart is laid up
with a broken leg, he's a risk-taking photographer who got a little too
close to a speeding racecar. You'll hear the phrase "confined to a
wheelchair" in most Rear Window reviews, which is a phrase that makes
real wheelchair users wince; they're not "confined" to their wheelchairs
any more than you're "confined" to your Toyota in rush hour. In
Stewart's case, though, the tired old trope is accurate. He sits in his
wheelchair as though  he were nailed there. (He'd have to navigate three
steps just to get out of his apartment, and I bet the doors to the
kitchen and bedroom are too narrow for his chair, and there probably
wasn't one single curb cut in New York City in 1954.)  He's feeling
isolated and depressed, much as you or I would.  
Anyway, we all know what happens next. (At least anyone who watches The
Simpsons knows what happens next; they did a wonderful satire.)  Stewart
gets bored to tears and starts looking out the window at his neighbors
as they live their lives.  (It's summertime, before air conditioning,
and everyone has their windows open.)  One's a composer, one's a
sculptor, one's a ballerina, one is severely lonely and depressed, and
one is maybe a murderer. Stewart picks up a clue here and a clue there
and concludes that the salesman on the second floor killed his wife, and
drags all of his friends into his obsession.
The plot ought to be familiar to all of you by now, and if you've not
seen it, then I won't spoil it for you, choosing instead to concentrate
on the overall excellence of the acting. For my money, Jimmy Stewart
turns in one of the most impressive acting performances of all time.
There's one scene where he's in his wheelchair, and Grace Kelly is in
his lap. They're kissing, but the script requires him to keep talking
about the murderous neighbor across the way. Stewart does this like it's
the most natural thing in the world, and is perfectly convincing as the
sort of man who could ignore Grace Kelly to concentrate on a pointless,
voyeuristic hobby. That's acting.
Kelly herself is no slouch in the acting department. The script really
doesn't require her to act, just lounge around Stewart's apartment in
those fetching Edith Head costumes and look like a knockout. But act she
does, and her breathy voice gets wrapped around some great lines. She
and Stewart trade dark one-liners back and forth at first, until she
becomes convinced of the neighbor's guilt as well.
The wonderful thing about the acting in this movie is that so much of it
is silent, that so much of it has to be transmitted through body
language and expressions and gestures. We only hear the things Hitchcock
wants us to hear, the rest is drowned out by the music from the
composer's apartment or other sources. All of the actors in the
apartment building across the  street do a wonderful job of letting
Stewart, and us, know exactly what's
going on.
For example, there's a newlywed couple across the way that keep their
blinds down. Every once in awhile, the husband will come out, stand by
the window, get some fresh air, and smoke a cigarette. This will last
three seconds, until his wife notices that she doesn't have all of his
attention. We see this in just one little tiny span of time, and yet his
body language and his expression speak volumes.
The actor from the other building who has the most to do is the
suspected murderer, Raymond Burr. (He looks for all the world the way
Russell Crowe did in The Insider, and has the same amount of bottled-up
rage.) The thing about Burr, throughout his work as Perry Mason, was his
voice, stern and authoritative. Most of the time he's onscreen, though,
we can't hear what he's saying, but he's compelling and good and
wonderfully ambiguous in his actions, which speak louder than even his
booming voice.
Of course, the main reason to see Rear Window isn't the acting, it's the
Hitchcock suspense. Actually, there isn't that much of it, most of the
suspense is concentrated in the last reel. What's there, though, is
first-rate, worthy of the master.
http://www.txreviews.com/
http://lonestar.epinions.com/user-curtisedmonds
____________NetZero Free Internet Access and Email_________
Download Now     http://www.netzero.net/download/index.html
Request a CDROM  1-800-333-3633

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
"Rear Window" takes place almost entirely in one room, yet Sir Alfred
Hitchcock envisioned it as "a purely cinematic film." It is his
ambitious vision that transforms tricky source material into a
timeless classic. To keep his vision intact, Robert A. Harris and
James C. Katz have restored the film from its original negative, and
this remastered version packs the same punch that the original did 5
decades ago.
Most of Hitchcock's films involve voyeurism, but "Rear Window" was
perhaps his most overt film on the subject. "Rear Window" is effective
because it portrays not only its protagonist as a voyeur, but the
viewer as well.
The opening pan shot of the film tells us everything we need to know
about L.B. Jefferies (James Stewart) without wasting a line of
dialogue. The man is a magazine photojournalist who became
wheelchair-bound after a racetrack accident. His girlfriend, Lisa
Fremont (Grace Kelly), is "perfect", yet L.B. is somehow afraid of
commitment, and marriage plans have been put off. He spends his days
solitarily confined in his Greenwich Village apartment, watching
people's lives through his rear window.
We never really hear the neighbors speak, yet each one is a
character. There is the ballet dancer who has to deal with a handful
of men, the lonely woman who longs for affection, and the newlyweds
who spend all day "indoors".
We accept Jefferies as a Peeping Tom perhaps because there is nothing
better for him to do.  However, this all changes when he witnesses
what he believes may be a murder in an apartment across his
courtyard. A strange man named Lars Thorwald (Raymond Burr, who later
on became TV's "Perry Mason") keeps returning to his apartment at late
hours of the night carrying suspicious items. His sickly wife has not
been seen for the past few days.
At first, Lisa thinks that L.B. has become paranoid from lack of
sleep, and scolds his "rear-window ethics". But as new evidence brings
her into the game, "Rear Window" begins to study the fine line between
paranoia and suspicion.
Up until the film's final minutes, nothing about the "murder" is set
in stone. Hitchcock lets the viewer watch the story unfold from
Jefferies' point of view, so that at times the audience feels like a
Peeping Tom. In this way, from the most uncinematic setup, Hitchcock
answers the age-old question of "Why do we go to the movies?" The
audience can sympathize with Jefferies because we know that we're the
true voyeurs, and that "watching the neighbors" is a human instinct.
"Rear Window" is not one of Alfred Hitchcock's most exciting films,
but it is definitely one of his tightest. It is his talkiest film,
which isn't a problem thanks to John Michael Hayes' dialogue, which is
witty, clever and very sharp. James Stewart and Grace Kelly showcase a
chemistry that is rarely seen in films today, and all the neighbors do
a superb job of silent acting.
"Rear Window" joins the ranks of "Lawrence Of Arabia", "Spartacus",
"My Fair Lady" and Hitchcock's "Vertigo" as films that have been
restored by the dynamic duo of Harris & Katz. They have done a fine
job with this film, making it look as modern as possible, even with
the fake Hollywood sets that in no way resemble New York City.
However, I did notice a couple rough spots with the sound, and the
final confrontation scene seems to be sped up. But it's a small price
to pay to see this masterpiece back on the big screen.
In 1954 "Rear Window" was first released. Now it is 2000, and The
Master Of Suspense is simply acknowledged as The Master. It is a
tribute to his everlasting legacy that more than a century after his
birth, he can still hold the viewer in the palm of his hand.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Cinema as an art form owes its popularity and very existence
to the fact that human beings tend to like experiencing
things, people and situations they are not likely to
encounter in their normal lives. That natural curiosity
becomes especially appealing in situations that don't
require physical contact nor have any direct consequences.
That lack of immediate contact or consequences is often
enough to turn some banal, ordinary images and situations
into interesting experiences. This psychological phenomenon
was until recently branded as nothing more than sexual
anomaly called "voyeurism". In modern world, success of
tabloids and reality TV shows like BIG BROTHER indicate that
voyeuristic tendencies have more universal appeal and that
they couldn't be brushed off as mere sexual perversion. One
of the cinema authors who understood that and based some of
his greatest films on it is Alfred Hitchcock. REAR WINDOW,
his 1954 thriller, often cited as one of the greatest film
ever made, could be seen as some kind of ode to voyeurism.
The film is based on the story by Cornell Woolrich and
screenplay by John Michael Hayes. Plot takes place in one
Greenwhich Village apartment, occupied by L.B. "Jeff"
Jeffries (played by James Stewart), adventurous photographer
who broke his left leg while trying to make an action shot
during the auto races. Now he is wheelchair-bound in his
little Greenwich Village apartment. The only form of
entertainment comes in the form of rear window, which
provides excellent view to the apartments surrounding the
courtyards. Because of summer heat and lack of air
conditioning, most of the windows are open and shades never
closed, so Jeff can watch private lives of his neighbours
almost all the time. This provides insight into many real
life dramas, including unhappy marriage between jeweller
Lars Thorwald (played by Raymond Burr) and his nagging bed-
ridden wife. That drama becomes most interesting after Mrs.
Thorwald disappears, and Jeff is soon convinced that her
husband murder had killed her and began disposing the body.
His old friend and police detective Lieutenant Thomas J.
Doyle (played by Wendell Corey) doesn't share Jeffries'
suspicions and demands more proofs before he could launch
the official investigation. On the other hand, Lisa Carol
Fremont (played by Grace Kelly), glamorous fashion
consultant and Jeff's love interest, and his nurse Stella
(played by Thelma Ritter) are more open-minded and volunteer
to help him in his gathering of evidence.
REAR WINDOW was made by Hitchcock during the zenith of his
career - 1950s and early 1960s - time when he became object
of worship among film critics and established cult following
he enjoys until this day. This film clearly demonstrates why
Hitchcock enjoys such reputation. Like in many of his
classic thrillers of that period, relatively simple mystery
plot is opportunity for Hitchcock to deal with some more
interesting topics like alienation or aberrant sexuality.
Actually, this film explores sexual themes with boldness
quite unusual for 1950s standards. Many of the real life
dramas that entertain the protagonist explicitly or
implicitly deal with twisted sexuality - newlywed young man
(played by Rand Harper) must deal with his wife's sexual
insatiability; Miss Lonely Heart (played by Havis Davenport)
can't express her own sexuality; Miss Torso (played by
Georgine Darcy) is an exhibitionist; couple who sleeps on
fire escape (played by Sara Berner and Frank Cady) uses
their dog as surrogate for children, implicitly suffering
from sterility; struggling songwriter (played by Ross
Bagdarasian) is suffering from writer's block which could be
read as metaphor for impotence. Even the protagonists have
problems that could be viewed as sexual - Jeff, apart from
his obvious voyeurism, is also faced with impotence, while
his glamorous girlfriend might be viewed as cold, distant
and frigid. Hitchcock, whose best film were dealing with
various forms of sexual aberrations, explored not single,
but many of such phenomena.
Another Hitchcock's trademark in his golden phase was
inclination towards experiment. REAR WINDOW represents
exactly one of such occasions when he decided to use
unconventional structure of film. Entire plot takes place in
a single room, and the audience is able to witness only
events seen and heard by the protagonist. To make an
interesting, exciting film in such circumstances might
represent unsolvable problem for any less experienced
director, but Hitchcock managed to produce not only one of
the best films of his career, but also one of the most
successful experiments in history of cinema. Secret of his
success was in superb use of editing and clever manipulation
of viewer's expectations - suspense is gradually increased
through seemingly banal events of everyday life. Voyeuristic
effect is increased with Hitchcock's wise decision not to
use Franz Waxman's original music except in credits. Such
music would be too distracting, and Hitchcock finds
alternative in radios which play popular 1950s songs in the
background - these songs sometimes can be used as ironic
comment on the plot, but they mostly add to the utterly
realistic atmosphere of the film. While today's filmmakers
would make this film cheap by shooting on location,
Hitchcock was fortunate to enjoy benefits of the largest
indoor set in history of Hollywood. Thus the film could be
meticulously planned up to the most insignificant detail,
and REAR WINDOW is therefore, in strictly technical sense,
one of the most perfect films in history of cinema.
Another Hitchcock's trademark is ability to extract the best
out of actors at his disposal. One of such actors was James
Stewart, then in the latter stage of his career, when he
successfully transformed his all-American on-screen
personality in order to play darker, imperfect and more
complex characters. His Jeff is just one of such characters
- when we meet him, he has already established himself as
irresponsible adrenaline junkie, and his reluctance to
burden himself with permanent relationship makes him even
less appealing. His actions in the film are at first caused
by boredom, but afterwards his crusade against potential
murderer is nothing more than an excuse to satisfy his more
down-to-earth voyeuristic impulses. Until the truth is
discovered in the end of film, we can't be sure whether an
innocent man might suffer because of Jeff's boredom,
voyeurism and too much imagination. Grace Kelly, another
great Hitchcockian actress, again shows that she could be
more than just a pretty face. Her role of stunningly
beautiful, glamorous, but distant and cold woman become more
complex when Lisa Fremont becomes infected with her
boyfriend's voyeurism and adrenaline addiction. It can be
said for Thelma Ritter, talented supporting actress whose
character of preaching nurse goes through similar
transformation. Wendell Corey as Jeff's sceptical friend is
also good, as well as Raymond Burr as down-to-earth but
therefore even more menacing figure of potential murderer.
The only possible argument against REAR WINDOW as perfect
film might be found in Hitchcock compromising his original
idea and allowing some scenes not to be shot from Jeff's
window. But this little and unnecessary nit-pick shouldn't
deprive REAR WINDOW of well-deserved position among the best
thriller ever made.
Review written on September 10th 2000
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Bill Chambers
Just days before the death of Jimmy Stewart, inspired by a half-baked
A & E Biography of Alfred Hitchcock, I decided to give Rear Window a
second glance. History has been kind to Hitch's fifties pictures: just
look at the resurgence of Vertigo, which was a box office and critical
bomb in 1958. But unlike that film, repeated viewings of Rear Window
reveal it to be somewhat shallow and lacking the stylistic flourishes
that have helped some of his other beloved pictures stand the test of
time.
Stewart stars as Jeff, a photographer with a broken leg who has one
week left before release from his "plaster cocoon". With nothing but
the view from his window to wile away the hours, he begins to follow
the stories of his neighbours' lives: there's the sexy woman who likes
to dance in her underwear; the elderly lady who seems lonely and lost;
the happy Newleyweds; and the husband and wife who always argue. Jeff
sees nothing wrong with his preoccupation: voyeurism as
time-killer. Then the real excitement kicks in: the angry husband's
wife suddenly disappears, and he may or may not be disposing of her
body piece by piece using suitcases and trunks.
Grace Kelly costars as Jeff's glamourpuss girlfriend; their bickering
is dated, but Kelly's first appearance in the film--she plants a kiss
on Stewart's forehead in slow motion-- remains one of the most
sensual, memorable entrances in movie history.
Rear Window is a talky film, not unlike Hitchcock's experimental,
underpraised Rope.  Characters chew endlessly over motives, hash out
theories, and generally blather on like so many egomaniacs, though the
dialogue is more often than not engaging.  Hitchcock really triumphs
in two areas: a setpiece involving Kelly's character sneaking into the
apartment across the street, which is essentially the climax, is
wholly suspenseful. And he somehow manages to tie up every single
sub-sub-plot in a satisfying manner.
Mixed emotions, to be sure, but definitely worthy of your attention.
More reviews to be found at the fascinating inept website:
"Film Freak Central"--
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Set/7504
Feel free to sign that ridiculous guestbook!
