Title
Review for Scarface (1983)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mike Watson
At one point during Brian De Palma's crime epic SCARFACE, the radiant
Michelle Pfeiffer turns to a ranting Al Pacino and pops a question
that the audience has no doubt been wanting to ask for themselves:
"Can't you stop saying 'fuck' all the time?"
Fucking good question, that.  It may not be an honour that instills
the filmmakers with pride, but as far as I can tell Oliver Stone's
script contains the said expletitive more times than any other film in
cinema history.
Yet it would be a shame if bad language is all De Palma's SCARFACE is
remembered for, because this is a damn fine gangstar flick.  The
overall structure is similar to Howard Hawks' 1932 original, but this
time the scene has switched to Miami, Florida and our anti-hero's
chosen vice is cocaine traffiking.  Pacino, sporting a thick Cuban
accent, gives one the best performances of his career (Golden Globe
nominated) as Tony Montana, a Cuban refugee with a criminal past who
flees Castro and comes to America to live the American Dream.
And live it out he does, with lashings of violence, abuse, murder and
the funny white powder.  From his earliest jobs as a drug runner for
various middlemen, Tony Montana makes it clear to everyone he meets
that he's not a man to be fucked (sorry).  Soon he's the king of the
cocaine heap, but his hot head and an increasingly out of control drug
addiction prove his undoing.  "Never do your own stash", warns one
character early in the film.  As sure as night follows day, the
Emperor Of Miami eventually falls.
Writer Oliver Stone and director Brian De Palma make an explosive
combination here.  Stone's script offers solid storytelling and some
fine character development.  Montana is fascinating; uneducated but
calculating, a straight shooter who speaks from the heart; an
ambitious, violent man yet one with a conscience.  A man fiercely
protective of his beautiful 20 year old sister, not wanting her to be
sucked into the glitzy, dangerous world which he inhabits.  Pacino is
dynamite, taking to the role with a brooding, bristling energy which
in his more recent films has often degenerated into just simple
overracting.
Pfeiffer also registers strongly as the gangstar mole with no inner
life.  Only once does Tony express real affection for her and his
desire to have children, and even then you sense all he really wants
is a regular screw and a beautiful object to show off to his friends,
and she's happy to oblige.  This isn't as meaty a role for Pfieffer as
Sharon Stone's was in CASINO, but its an effective one nonetheless and
she aquits herself well.
As director, De Palma sets up a number of dramatic scenes with his
typical stylistic brauva.  The escalating tension he creates in
various mob situations - a drug deal gone wrong, an assination attempt
- is often thrilling, and in this respect he is every bit the equal of
Scorese and Coppola.
Where he differs from, say, Coppola's Godfather trilogy is in his
overall treatment.  Coppola gives his crime sagas an operatic sweep,
whereas in SCARFACE De Palma opts for a grittier feel.  And it
perfectly suits the material.  The only major botch is Giorgio
Moroder's mostly crap synthesier score.  It's just not right, and
unfortunately compromises the impact of some otherwise good scenes.
As expected, SCARFACE is very violent at times, but you shouldn't be
watching gangster movies if that upsets you.  At over two and a half
hours in length it's a true epic, and if you're a fan of the genre
you'll love f**k-filled minute of it.

Author
Richard Matich
   A retro reveiw by: Richard Matich
I really did'nt like this Brian De Palma film very
much. It is a remake of the Howard Hawks film from
1932, and it is so dirty and violent that the shooting
and bombing become just a tactic to keep you from
turning away. The movie was so hyped at the time of
it's release that it does not live up to the praise
heaped upon it from wild eyed  Brian De Palma or Al
Pacino fans. At 170 minutes in length, the film is just
non stop brutal killing and screaming in Cuban accents.
De Palma directs himself a sleazy, cruelty ridden, and
cut rate Godfather. Palm trees, silk shirts, hit men,
cocaine, and bullets being sprayed at the drop of a
hat. Scarface is a movie that is absolutly desperate
for somebody's attention, and that is why you should
not give it yours!

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Al Pacino (Tony Montana), Steven Bauer (Manolo Manny Ray), Michelle
Pfeiffer (Elvira), Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio (Gina), Robert Loggia
(Frank Lopez) 
DIRECTOR: Brian DePalma
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for excessive language and violence 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1983
SCARFACE, a remake of the 1932 film of the same name, is a very gripping
and, as far as I know, a true-to-life story of how power and violence lead
to corruption.  Al Pacino, as Tony Montana (for whom the movie is named),
also provides a brilliant performance as a Cuban refugee who comes to
America with less than nothing and becomes one of the most highly
respected and feared drug lords in Miami.  Oliver Stone also penned the
screenplay in one of his earlier writing roles.
The film begins by disclosing the story of now Fidel Castro ordered
thousands of Cubans to set sail and head for the coasts of the United
States.  Many of these Cubans had criminal records, such as Tony Montana,
a cocky, fast-talking man who has the look of crime.  Nearly right after
his arrival in Miami, Tony is thrust into the gangster life when he
participates in a cocaine buy that goes awry.
Along with his friend and partner, Manolo (Steven Bauer), Tony rises in
the gangster ranks when he forms a friendship with Frank Lopez (Robert
Loggia), a high-roller in the organized crime field.  Tony also begins to
fall in love with Elvira (Michelle Pfeiffer), who at the time was Frank's
lover.  Of course, sooner or later in this industry, betrayal and
corruption amount into a force greater than anything else, and Tony is one
of the ones who fall victim to this force.  This is not before he becomes
one of the most respected, and often feared, men in Miami.  Tony gets to
the point where he cannot trust anyone, and everyone he knows basically
feels the same way towards him.  No one can trust him, and basically, no
one does.
SCARFACE, although incredibly violent, is one of the best crime films of
its time and stands out as another great performance for Al Pacino.
Although he did not receive any recognition from the Academy for his
performance, it truly is a very good one.  In fact, his accent and facial
movements alone are enough in my mind to win at least a nomination
(although he did get a Golden Globe nomination). 
Another element that stands out when someone mentions this film is the
profanity.  A figure tagged to the film boasts that the word "fuck" and
it's uses are uttered 206 times throughout the film, which is apparently a
record.  The thing is, the vulgarity fits rather well with the movie.  As
odd as it sounds, it's true.  In the end, SCARFACE is a very powerful film
that hits home hard.

