Title
Review for Last of the Mohicans, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
sun!megatest!jao (John Oswalt)
2 hours, R (violence)
Writers: Michael Mann, Christopher Crowe
Director: Michael Mann
Cast: Daniel Day-Lewis, Madeleine Stowe, Wes Studi, Steven Waddington,
      Jodhi May, Eric Schweig
     About twenty years ago I saw the Masterpiece Theatre series "The
Last Of The Mohicans," and loved it.  I went straight to the library and
read the book.  The current movie, which is a much looser adaptation of
James Fenimore Cooper's 1826 novel, suffers in comparison both to the
book, and to the PBS series.  (Or at least to my twenty-year-old
memories of them.)
     However, THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, 1992 style, is not all that
bad.  It is generally entertaining, and contains some beautiful scenery.
After the movie, my companion, having watched two hours of action set in
verdant forests with waterfalls at every turn, figured that the movie
was filmed in Hawaii or New Zealand.  Actually, it was filmed in North
Carolina.  It is good to know that there are such beautiful places left.
I am afraid that the West Coaster's view of the East coast is of
factories, endless cities, and acid rain denuded forests.
        I have a lot of quibbles with the movie.  The plot is very 
predictable.  When you see a party of red-coats marching through a
clearing in the forest, you just know that some Indians are going to
massacre them, as the European's ritualized formation fighting is
hopelessly outclassed by the guerrilla tactics of the Indians.  Just as
certainly, you know that the main characters will miraculously be
spared.
     I found myself frowning at a lot of the dialogue, which is full of
snappy one-liner comebacks common in today's films.  This is fine for
Dirty Harry, but is the antithesis of Cooper's flowery, wordy style.
(The San Jose Mercury News reviewer, Glenn Lovell, whom I generally
respect, approved of this change.  I suspect that does not have the fond
memories that I have of James Fenimore Cooper's books.  He describes the
book THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS as one which "many of us waded through in
high school and college.")
     It is amazing how clean the main characters' clothes and hair
remain considering all that they go through.  Natty Bumppo always has a
gun ready when he needs it, but we never see him reload.  The women in
the movie don't do much besides cower and swoon.  The fight scenes, of
which there are plenty, are toned down to preserve the R rating.  There
are scenes in which dozens of people get tomahawked, but no guts and
very little blood is shown.  Most of the movie takes place sneaking
around in the dense forest, or at night, or both, and things are a
little hard to see.
     This brings up a pet peeve of mine.  I have seen many Technicolor
movies made in the 30's, 40's, and 50's, and the color in them is far
superior to that in the movies made today.  I recently saw a restored
print of LEAVE HER TO HEAVEN, which was made in Technicolor in 1945.
When I compare that movie, which contains a lot of upstate New York
scenery, with this one, I just shake my head.  Why, Hollywood, did you
abandon a process which produces such beautiful true-to-life colors, for
the washed-out look of today?  With all the millions spent on movie
production you would think that they could use good film.
     However, these are all only quibbles, and considering the current
movie-making conventions and context, THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS is
pretty good.  It even overcomes a few trends.  It is an action picture
with no car chases.  Despite PC, the main bad guy is an American Indian.
There are no product placements.

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS is a film directed by Michael Mann, from a
script by Mann and Christopher Crowe.  It stars Daniel Day-Lewis,
Madeleine Stowe, West Studi, Russell Means, Eric Schwieg, Jodhi May,
Maurice Roeves, and Steven Waddington.  Rated R for graphic violence.
     THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS has proved to be popular story ever since
James Fenimore Cooper published the original novel in 1826, part of his
series "The Leatherstocking Tales."  It has been adapted as a movie at
least three times: 1920 version by Maurice Tourneur, one of the great
silent movies; the 1936 version with Randolph Scott; the 1977 version
for TV with Steve Forrest.  In addition, there is the loose adaptation,
THE LAST OF THE REDMEN, 1947, from Columbia.  There was also a serial
made in 1932 in twelve chapters of thirteen minutes each and a TV series
that I never watched.  It is my personal opinion that Cooper's novel is
unreadable today and mercifully it's been a couple of generations since
school children were required to slog through its overwrought prose and
romantic generalizations.
     This is retelling of the story of the white man adopted adopted by
age 2 or 3 by the Mohican Chingachgook and raised with his
foster-brother Uncas (the name of a prominent Mohican leader of the
previous century, by the way).  His involvement with a local but bloody
skirmish in the French and Indian War, an 1757 siege of a British
fortress, and his involvement with the commander's elder daughter has a
lot of bodice-ripper potential, and the Michael Mann and Christopher
Crowe script gives the otherwise masterful Hawkeye, aka Nathaniel, some
pretty turgid lines.  The only really important fault of the entire
movie, indeed, is its inability to develop Hawkeye beyond a macho
stereotype, the invincible, completely manly, mostly laconic man of
action, who values life and independence above all else.  This script is
based not on the novel, it seems, but rather on Philip Dunne's script
for the 1936 version.  Aside from the problems surrounding fleshing out
of Nathaniel's character, this newest script improves hugely on Cooper's
romanticized, simplistic paean to the noble savage.  The result is
impressive historical detail, exciting action sequences, and just enough
romance to fill in the slow parts.
     Much of the power of the film comes through its design and
photography.  The designer Wolf Krueger provides us with awesome
authenticity, while the cinematography of Dante Spinotti (and Kubrick
veteran Doug Milsome who was replaced half through production) exploit
the beauty of the North Carolina mountains and forests, as well giving
us a vivid impression of the horrors of 18th Century warfare in the
wilderness.
     Despite a lack of emotional impact, Daniel Day-Lewis, the
chameleonic star of MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE, THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF
BEING, and MY LEFT FOOT, enlightens his undeveloped part with ample
charisma and intensity that includes his physical preparation for the
role, which by all reports was detailed and technical -- learning to
reloading a musket on the run, to trap and skin, etc.
     As Hawkeye's love interest, Cora Munro is done great justice by
Madeleine Stowe (UNLAWFUL ENTRY).  Stowe infuses her role with a
spiritual and sexual strength as well as with great intelligence that
makes Cora the perfect mate for the free-living Hawkeye.
     These are supported by very accomplished cast.  Jodhi May plays
Cora's sister sliding into total collapse under the presure of the war
and its horrific aftermath.  Maurice Roeves is the girls' father, the
commanding officer of Fort William Henry; he is brave, but plays too
much by a book written for another continent.  Steven Waddington plays
the corrupted officer who is wooing Cora.  Russell Means (the American
Indian activist, whose presence lends the movie credence more or less by
default) plays Chingachgook and Eric Schweig Uncas; these are strong but
silent Mohicans, but the two actors project exactly the right strength,
love and mutual support to make them human beings.
     But most impressive of the supporting players is Wes Studi, the
Cherokee actor who plays the villain Magua.  Studi comes very close to
stealing the movie from some powerful star power through his near
perfect personification of evil, yet even his twistedness has one moment
of near tenderness; Magua's evil is not entirely without cause or
reason, making it all the more compelling.
     This version of MOHICANS departs widely from the original Cooper
novel, in which there is no romance between Hawkeye and Cora, and in
which Hawkeye is a good deal more cantakerous and rough-edged.  He
becomes a dreamy male sex symbol, which is fine with me, at least.
Michael Mann has remade MOHICANS into a lush, lavish production of
quickly moving scenes of natural beauty (I was particularly taken with
the "key-hole" bridge shot), exciting, bloody hand-to-hand battles,
thrilling spectacle (especially the night bombardment of Fort William
Henry), breathless, heart-bounding wilderness chases, treachery and
self-sacrifice, and just enough romance.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Michael Mann's LAST OF THE MOHICANS is
     finally available and while James Fenimore Cooper might
     cavil, this is still a film that teaches a lot about a
     little-dramatized chapter of history.  In some ways it is
     more intriguing in concept than the source novel.  Technical
     credits are good across the board including remarkable
     stylistic restraint coming from Mann.  Rating: high +2 (-4 to
     +4).
     I would say that I am fairly interested in history in general and in
military history in particular.  But not so much the War of the Roses.  That
war just does not strike my imagination.  Why not?  I think I cannot picture
the time.  I cannot picture how the war was fought or how people lived.
Mostly, I cannot remember off-hand seeing a good historical film set in the
War of the Roses.  So it is all just history.  This morning the same was
true of the French and Indian War.  I have even recently read James Fenimore
Cooper's LAST OF THE MOHICANS, but I just could not picture exactly what the
weapons looked like or the style of fighting.  But right now I have strong
visual images of the French and Indian War.  I can picture the cannons and
how they were aimed.  I am amazed at how remarkably quiet skirmishes in the
forests were.  Most of my impressions of the French and Indian War I got
today.  So THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS could be a terrible adaptation of the
Cooper novel--and in some senses it really is--and I would still highly
recommend the film.  And I do.
     Cooper's novel makes strange reading today.  It has the action and
adventure of a Republic serial told in the style of prose fit for an Oxford
economic treatise.  You want to read fast to find out what happens next, but
if you do not struggle you will miss what does happen.  Mark Twain wrote a
famous essay on how unreadable Cooper is.  And there is many times too much
plot in the novel to tell the story accurately in a film.  Michael Mann (who
also directed) and Christopher Crowe wrote a screenplay too close to say it
was only inspired by the novel, but not close enough to call an adaptation.
     The year is 1757 in what is now upper New York state.  The British and
the French are fighting for the continent and each is making alliances with
local Indians tribes.  The British send a small party, led by Major Duncan
Heyward (played by Steven Waddington) to take Cora and Alice Munro (played
by Madeleine Stowe and Jodhi May) to the fort commanded by their father.  As
a guide, they send the Mohawk Magua (played by Wes Studi).  But Magua is not
a Mohawk; he is a hostile Huron who is acting as a French agent.  He leads
the party into an ambush only to have his plot dashed when the Major, Cora,
and Alice are rescued by Hawkeye, Chingachgook, and Uncas (played by Daniel
Day-Lewis, Russell Means, and Eric Schweig, respectively).  In spite of
himself, Hawkeye is attracted to Cora.  So is the Major and so starts a
conflict totally absent from the novel.  A lot of the rest of this film is
about people rushing someplace or other through dangerous territory, but
under the protection of the valiant Hawkeye and his adoptive father and
brother, Chingachgook and Uncas.  The action is good; the love triangle is
not.
     One of my complaints about the often-shown trailer is that we do not
see the title character.  In fact, in the film the action pulls away from
Chingachgook and we do not see much of the character.  It is a combination
of a casting coup and an endorsement of the script to have Russell Means in
the role.  This is Means's first film, but it is far from the first time
that Means has been before the American public.  Means has been a creative
activist for Indian rights who has had a consistent policy of attacking
symbols rather than people in demonstrations.  In 1970 he captured the
Mayflower II on Thanksgiving.  The following year he occupied Mount
Rushmore.  In 1973 he occupied the site of the Wounded Knee massacre of
Indians by United States soldiers.  He is the co-founder of the American
Indian Movement (AIM).  Means castigated recent films such as DANCES WITH
WOLVES, which he found full of cliches and which had all the Indians
speaking the feminine language that only women spoke.  He has nicknamed
THUNDERHEART "South Dakota Burning" for making good guys out of the FBI.  To
have Means consent to appear in the film and to endorse the script is quite
impressive.
     When I think of films that Michael Mann has directed I think of flashy
but not very intelligent style.  I think of THE KEEP and MANHUNTER.  (I have
never seen an episode of his popular television series MIAMI VICE.)  Perhaps
his fans will be disappointed but there are no strange camera angles and no
unnatural use of color.  Many of his scenes come off surprisingly undramatic
but also very credible.  In one scene there is an ambush of a party of
British trooping through a clearing.  It could have been played for great
dramatic impact.  Instead it appears as a sudden commotion that could well
have just been confusing for some of the victims, at least at first.  The
scene is very believable and realistic, if less dramatic than it could be.
And that shows a real improvement in Mann's style.  This film is amazingly
better than anything else I remember seeing from Mann.  While these are not
the most beautiful landscapes in the world, cinematographer Dante Spinotti
plays the natural beauty for as much as is possible.  Trevor Jones and Randy
Edelman have composed a remarkably good score.
     For those familiar with the novel, there are a large number of
variations, some very obviously improvements.  Cooper had Hawkeye totally
loyal to unquestionably good British.  In this version, the British appear
as bad or worse than the French.  They are ready to betray the colonists for
their own ends.  Hawkeye, very reasonably, does not trust the British in the
film and will have more reason not to like them in the course of the story.
Heyward and Hawkeye are good friends in the book.  But the film has Heyward
attracted to Cora instead of to Alice and Hawkeye also loves Cora.  In the
book you have to read between the lines to see a relationship between
Hawkeye and Cora.  Certainly Cooper never had the close personal
conversations between Hawkeye and Cora.  They never talk in the book about
how they feel about anything, much less about each other.  Also, Magua is
very much a one-dimensional character to Cooper and is much more interesting
in the film.
     So in spite of the fact that Michael Mann's film does not work well as
an adaptation of the novel, it is a very good film to watch and from which
to learn a little history.  It lacks some of the dramatic and historic sweep
of this summer's FAR AND AWAY, but it may be the better historical film.  I
would rate THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
     I have it on good word that this is one of the most historically
accurate pictures made today (as far as the costumes, mannerisms, etc.
are concerned).  As the director, Michael Mann, was a stickler for
detail, it does not surprise me.  And although this may be an
essentially fictional story, it nevertheless is told with gritty realism
and passionate imagery.
     THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS is a remake/film version of the Cooper
classic of the same name.  The first film was made in 1936 and the 1992
version is based both on the book and the 1936 screenplay.  I have never
read the book, and, being a movie marauder, the movies kept me from
reading my history books back in high school, so when it comes to
historical accuracy or content, my reputation is a little lackluster.
But I went with a former history major to see this film, and she told me
that this movie was one of the best, historically speaking.  So I will
not attempt to analyze it from that perspective, just strictly from a
filmmaker's perspective (something I know a little more about).  
     Daniel Day Lewis was great.  Madeline Stowe, I am sorry to say,
could have been replaced by any good actress with the same physical
build, but don't get me wrong...she was good also.  (I guess I'm too
used to seeing Daniel Day Lewis charging up a hill in the
advertisements.)  But all the actors played their parts well, and the
foreign accents (which weren't foreign at the time) were executed with a
professional demeanor.  The war scenes especially took my breath away.
There is one scene where one army gets ambushed by another (I won't say
who gets ambushed) and the film doesn't change scenes for a stint.  It
is just long enough for you to realize that there is nothing the
ambushed army can do, or for that matter, is capable of doing.  Scenes
and situations like that in this movie are very well done.
     I can't say much for story, realistically.  It's a good story, but
I found it to be a little dry.  The movie also tries to both excite you
and take your breath away, but it falls somewhere in the middle, and
cannot be called either a spectacle or a gripping drama.  Whether that's
good or bad, I'm not sure; I guess you'll have to judge for yourself.  I
guess the action (or war) scenes were filmed with the intent of making
the audience sympathetic to the cause or plight of the particular
situation.  I think it went a little too fast for that.  A good example
of appeal-for-audience-sympathy would be GLORY, which was a very well
done civil-war epic.  And a good example of spectacle would have to be
LAWRENCE OF ARABIA, where your jaw drops to the floor in every scene.
THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS tries to combine elements of both extremes, and
while it is effective, I wouldn't say it was really remarkable.
     But don't take my ramblings for it; see it for yourself.  It is a
good movie.  I don't believe it will win any major Oscars, but I have
been wrong about that before.  Check it out...that's what it's there
for!

Author
Ellen Eades
     THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS was originally a novel by the execrable
James Fenimore Cooper (and was pilloried by Mark Twain in an
unforgettable essay titled "The Further Literary Offenses of James
Fenimore Cooper," in which he sharpens his sword of wit and his pen of
editing to razor's edges and has a great deal of fun).  This new
screenplay, based on the original 1936 screen-play, has been updated
for modern audiences considerably.  In my opinion, it's a huge
improvement.
     I was never able to plow through Cooper's novels as a child.  I was
riveted by the movie.  The cinematography alone is worth the full price
of admission; sweeping views of mist-covered rolling mountains, roaring
rapids, rocky pinnacles and virgin forest are the backdrop for an
impressively romantic storyline.  Far less grim and sophisticated than
BLACK ROBE, THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS manages to cloak its absurdities
in a reasonably historic style, where even villains have reasons and
heroes are capable of demi-godlike achievements of strength, endurance
and spirit.
     Daniel Day-Lewis stars as Nathaniel (Hawkeye in the novel), a white
orphan raised by the Mohawk, Chingachgook, alongside his own son.  This
trio seems as much a part of the Atlantic forests as the deer and the
cougar.  Also starring is Madeleine Stowe as Cora Munro, the daughter of
the British general commanding Fort William Henry.  Several other
supporting roles are very well done, among them Alice Munro, Cora's
sister; Major Duncan, Cora's suitor; and Chingachgook's Indian son.  A
special mention goes to the villain of the piece, Magua, a Huron Indian
who allies his war-party with the French general besieging Fort William
Henry to revenge himself on General Munro and his colonial and Mohawk
allies.  Far from being wholly evil, as in the novel, Magua by the end
of the movie is still brutal, vicious, and vengeful, but managed to 
evoke not a little sympathy from me.  
     Daniel Day-Lewis never fails to impress me, whether in MY BEAUTIFUL
LAUNDRETTE, MY LEFT FOOT, or THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS.  The man is
simply splendid, bringing a nobility to the character of Nathaniel which
even a jaded modern cannot fail to find humbling.  As Cora, Madeleine
Stowe manages to find a balance between strength, spirit, and the need
to make her character a believable woman of the 1700s.  But the true
strength of the movie is in the camera's eye and the magnificent
backdrop (filmed mainly in North Carolina's Chimney Rock State Park, but
beautifully evoking the Green Mountains of Vermont), against which the
heroic characters almost pale.
     Anyone with an interest in period films must see this movie; anyone
who admires native American history, early colonial history, or simply
loves the forests of the Atlantic seaboard, should go see this on the
big screen.  Pay what you need to.  

Author
Brian L. Johnson
140 min., R, Drama, 1992
Director: Michael Mann
Cast: Daniel Day-Lewis, Madeline Stowe, Wes Studi, Steven Waddington,
      Jodhi May, Eric Schweig, Colm Meany
     Daniel Day-Lewis plays Hawkeye, a colonist who lives with two
Indians.  He runs across a party that is being attacked by Indians.
Day-Lewis rescues Madeline Stowe from the attack.  The rest of the film
shows Day-Lewis escorting Stowe to her destination.
     The advertisements for this film said that "the Oscar race begins
here."  I don't agree with that at all.  I wasn't impressed with this
film at all.  THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS is based on the novel by James
Fenimore Cooper.  The movie has the basic idea of the book, but does not
follow the book very closely.  If you must see this film, I suggest that
you wait for the videocassette.  On a scale of zero to five, I give
LAST OF THE MOHICANS a two.  LAST OF THE MOHICANS is rated R for adult
situations and violence.
     The reason that I didn't like this film very much is the same
reason that I didn't like the book.  All the characters in the film are
flat.  I couldn't get myself to like, or dislike, anyone in the film.
To me, Hawkeye seemed to be just as bad as the evil Indian.  If the
characters had been rounded out, then maybe I would have liked this film
more.
     The scenery in this film is beautiful, especially on the ledges at
the end of the film.  The photography is excellent and enhances the
landscape.  The only reason to see this film in the theater is to see
the photography.  Other than that, I found this film to be rather poor
in quality.  The actors and actresses in the film all try hard but can't
do much with the script or horrible characterizations.

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
*THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS*:  Michael ("Miami Vice") Mann's tightened-up,
speeded-up version of the James Fenimore Cooper early U.S. adventure
classic, also partly based on a previous movie version's screenplay.
PLOT/KICK-OFF:        In 1757, Hawkeye, a hunter/trapper raised by Mohicans, gets
caught up in the French and Indian wars in upstate New York.  He and his
adoptive father and brother rescue (from Huron raiders) an English
officer and the two women being escorting to their father's fort.
CHARACTERS/ACTING: Daniel Day-Lewis, who won an Oscar for his
performance in MY LEFT FOOT, looks natural in his role as Hawkeye,
though unfortunately the script or director seems to have called for
overplaying a scene or two.  Madeline Stowe, recently of UNLAWFUL
ENTRY turns in a respectable performance as Cora, the intelligent,
courageous daughter of a British officer.  I liked the lesser-known
players better, particularly Jodhi May's portrayal of Alice, Cora's
younger, timid sister, and Eric Schweig played Hawkeye's adoptive
Mohican brother Uncas.  These two had hardly any lines, but they almost
stole the show regardless.  I would love to see what either could do
with a speaking role.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  Beautiful mountain wilderness scenes (filmed in
North Carolina), not as awe-striking as BLACK ROBE, but still mighty
restful to the eyes.  Parts of some fights in slo-mo.  Some rather
contrived shots (I can almost hear Michael Mann:  "Okay, now let's put
them in a cavern so they can kiss in front of a waterfall!").  On the
other hand, there were a couple of scenes that I thought were very well
done, which I will remember.  One in particular is a long shot of
Alice's face during a crucial moment, which I won't spoil, but it was
riveting.  That one scene raised the whole level of the movie for me.
SCORE/SOUND:  One of the things I liked about this movie was that we got
to figure out most things for ourselves, and yet, some of the dialog was
muffled and hard to make out, muting that same pleasure.  This didn't
happen too much, but enough to irritate.  Another problem I had (maybe
it's just me) is that I often find swelling symphonic music during
battle scenes to be in questionable taste, as well as a bit of a cliche.
But at least there were no Bryan Adams theme songs or other similarly
jarring anachronisms.
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  Hardly any blood or gore, considering, but
plenty of musket balls flying and bodies dropping, plus a scalping or
two.  A couple of mysteriously bloodless hand-to-hand combats with
knives and axes.  No profanity.
ANALYSIS:  In some ways a disappointment, but a pleasant surprise in
others (especially the interesting sub-plots and non-lead characters).
The pacing was good; it kept moving, but wasn't rushed.  Overall a
pretty good movie.

Author
Greg Bole
          Mini review: A stunning action picture with a love story
     weaving the epic framework together.  Breath-taking visuals,
     and pulse-racing brutality.  Day-Lewis immersed himself in
     the role with obvious vigor, and his co-stars rise to the
     occasion.  Not absolutely flawless, but vastly impressive.  I
     rate this film with 4 stars out of five.
     Nathaniel Bumppo, the first American hero, also known as Hawkeye,
Deerslayer, Pathfinder...a mythic figure of epic proportions.  The
screenplay by Christopher Crowe, with re-writes by the director Michael
Mann, manages to capture perfectly James Fenimore Cooper's most famous
character.  The considerable acting and vocal talents of Daniel
Day-Lewis were added to create one of the most stirring screen heros of
recent history.
     Hawkeye is an orphaned white raised by a native American,
Chingachgook, as a brother to Uncas ... those two being the "Last" that
the title refers to.  The intensity of Day-Lewis' performance must be
noted.  And was boosted by his noble stone-faced "family."  The role of
his Indian father was filled by activist Russell Means, adding another
link to the current respect paid to issues of native Americans.
     Mann's background in visual-oriented projects such as MIAMI VICE
and MANHUNTER is still very much evident.  The action of the film is
conveyed through many cuts and hand-held shots.  The beauty of North
Carolina's Burke County in the the Blue Ridge mountains stands in for
the headwaters of Lake Huron, and it is a sight to behold.
     The film moves along at a good clip, and has many intense battle
scenes.  The graphic nature of the conflicts serve as important a role
in this film as did the violence in such films as UNFORGIVEN and THE
DEERSLAYER.  (Allusion intentional)  :^)  The frontier is seen as a
brutal place and the combatants are each fighting strong reasons: greed
and survival.  Still a good deal of the bloodiest acts happen out of
the view of the camera, but the results can be shocking.  These were
hardy men that could survive under such conditions.
     Madeleine Stowe seems to have found a choice female role in Cora
Munro, and she gives a touching portrayal of this strong-willed
heroine.  Cora provides the personal focus that involves the viewer in
this sweeping epic.  Steven Waddington is also a wonderful addition as
the noble but close-minded English officer Duncan Heywood.
     There are flaws of logic and editing, but none that can't be
overlooked with a little dramatic license.  The only other problem was
that the story really picks up right in the middle of Hawkeye's life
with little explanation of who he is until later.  Personally I enjoyed
this because he *is* a cipher, especially to Cora, and we get to know
him gradually, thus creating a greater impact.  The plot is also a
little convoluted, but can be followed with the attention that it
demands.
     Excellent use is made of subtitling the language of the Native
Americans, and it adds a very realistic feel.  The bright orange print
is also helpful in making them "viewer friendly."  The obvious detail
paid to costumes, make-up, and props deepens the reality.
     This movie is a real Oscar contender.  Possibly a shoe-in for
costume and make-up.  (But we'll have to wait for DRACULA and 1492 to be
sure.)  And it will definitely garner nominations in both acting and
production areas.  Will Day-Lewis grab his second Best Actor statue?
I would not be in the least disappointed or surprised.
