Title
Review for Show, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chad Polenz
Rap has become a musical force to be reckoned with in the last 15 years.
Fans, and those in the industry know it is unlike any other form of music and
has unlimited potential. "The Show" is a documentary that doesn't try to
explain the history of rap music, instead, it is a deluge into the modern rap
world, showing how the artists behind the music, and environment behind the
artists. 
This film is basically geared towards GenXers, as it takes us on a
behind-the-scenes tour of many popular rap acts such as Warren G., Snoop
Doggy Dogg, The Notorious B.I.G., Naughty By Nature, Wu-Tang Clan, and even
legendary rappers Run-D.M.C. One of the opening sequences revolves around
Slick Rick's imprisonment, as we see producer Russell Simmons visit him at
Riker's Island Prison. Immediately, the dark tone of the documentary is set,
as it shows a worst case scenario. 
Throughout the film many of the rappers talk about their times in jail and
their involvement in gang activity. But they are able to show how the music
is a savior of sorts to them, because if they weren't making records they'd
be out on the streets, committing crime, and/or doing drugs. Their stories
are interesting, but at the same time disturbing when we realize they're
talking about America, not Bosnia.
Some attention is paid (although not nearly enough) to the "old school,"
such as Afrika Bambaata, Whodini, Run-D.M.C., and others who were making
records when the modern rappers were still children. They often vent their
frustration about the lack of respect they receive from both the press and
the "new school," and how phoney many rap acts of today are (i.e. Vanilla
Ice). 
My only real problem with this film is the lack of chronology. I was hoping
it would chronicle the history of rap, but instead, it just portrays it as it
is today. There are good and bad points to this: the good being that it stays
on top of things and makes us aware of what is happening today; the bad being
we don't get a sense of the true roots of rap, of the struggle for many years
to become as successful as it is today.
Documentaries are supposed to be educational material, and "The Show"
certainly does deliver. It is easier to follow and comprehend if you are
into, or have had exposure to rap, but if not, it's still entertaining. Rap
is an outlet for black youths to express themselves and it is an artform
worthy of exploration, hopefully "The Show" will be the first of many to take
that chance. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz
