Title
Review for Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom (1984)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
David Wilcock
Running Time: 118 minutes (1 hour 58 minutes)
 Starring Harrison Ford, Kate Capshaw and Ke Huy Quan
 Directed By Steven Spielberg
 OSCAR(R) Nominations: Best Music, Visual Effects (Won)
Steven Spielbergs headache inducing, if not pariculary exciting,
second Indiana Jones adventure. A prequel to Raiders of the
Lost Ark (1981), this film sees intrepid archaeologist/adventurer
Indiana Jones (Ford) plunged into a dark world of child slaves,
thugees and dark rituals. It's up to Jones, and his child friend Short
Round (Quan) and singer Willie Scott (Capshaw), to save the
kids, and stop the thugees from finding two diamonds that could
give them a lot of power.
Temple of Doom starts well enough with a well directed
performance of 'Anything Goes', performed by Willie. We then
have one of the greatest opening sequences ever when Jones
bargains with two Chinese over a diamond. Naturally, the
bargaining goes wrong, and the sequence turns into a slapstick
routine with Jones trying to find the diamond which is being kicked
all around a restaurant. It's a very well directed scene, and features
even more chaos than Speilbergs own 1941 (1979) jitterbug
scene. After this, there's an exciting plane crash. But after the plane
crash, the film starts to go downhill when Indy is set on his quest.
The main problem with the film is that it tries to out do Raiders of
the Lost Ark on every level. The film features more 'gross out'
gags, more stunts, more explosions and more gory deaths, but
strangely it all seems 'dead.' It all seems to be in there just for the
hell of it. Unlike Raiders, where all the big chases and stunts were
exciting, Temple of Doom piles on so many deaths, explosions
etc. it just cancels itself out. The film is trying so hard to make the
audience excited, it just falls flat on it's face.
Also, the heroine in this picture is pathetic. She just shouts and
screams, and points out the obvious. She seems to just ask 'What
is it?' questions, so Indy can explain to her, but mainly to the
audience, what is going on in the film. From the start, Capshaw is
terrible, just shouting and screaming and being really annoying. If I
were Indy, I would of tried to dump her as quickly as possible.
Had the screenwriters wrote her part better, her whining and
screaming could of been funny. However, like everything else in
this film, she is hugely exgrarated, and almost seems pointless in
this film. The child sidekick, though, is nowhere near as annoying,
and is good fun. He has some good lines, and even gets the chance
to kick some thugee butt. Ford, as usual, is fun, although he was
better in Raiders, and even Indiana Jones and the Last
Crusade (1989).
Spielberg's direction, however, is too frantic. The film belts along,
and never lets the audience catch up. He never gives the audience
a chance to enjoy a stunt, because the picture moves along too fast
to let the audience enjoy it. It's a shame, because there are some
good stunt scenes in there, including a amazing mine cart
sequence.  It's just on the first viewing, the audience will never
catch up on them. Also, the script is weak. It's mainly just
references to the first film (even though this is a prequel) and the
dialogue between Indy and Willie is dud. The script only really
works with scenes between Indy and Shorty, but they work more
on the strength of the actors than the script. Also, the film is a bit
too violent for young kids, the target audience. If your child can
stand watching hearts ripped out and men crushed by rock
crushers, they may enjoy this film.
It's not all that bad, though. Some of the action scenes are good,
and the film has a great sense of humor. Some of the scenes made
me laugh out loud. But, overall, it just isn't much fun. It's too dark,
too eager to excite us, and Indy has hardly any character in this
film. Temple of Doom, then, is disappointing, and the weakest of
the Indiana Jones trilogy.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Time can be very unkind to movies. In first few months and
years after the premiere, a movie might make record profits
at the box-office, earn multitudes of "Oscars" and generally
be regarded as one of the greatest contemporary films. But,
only after few years that same film gets utterly forgotten,
and future film scholars have a lot of trouble in explaining
its initial success. 1980s blockbusters seem to be very good
illustration of this phenomenon, and not even George Lucas
and Steven Spielberg, those two symbols of blockbuster
success, could save their films from such fate. INDIANA
JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM, their second instalment in
very popular adventure film trilogy, directed by Steven
Spielberg in 1984, is a good example - a very popular and
critically hailed film in its time, and now virtually
despised by contemporary critics, misunderstood by the
contemporary audience and practically disowned by their own
creators.
INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM is product of its era,
albeit somewhat unusual one. When screenwriter and producer
George Lucas begun working on the follow-up to his classic
adventure masterpiece RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK, he decided to
make prequel instead of sequel and set the plot in Shanghai
1935, one year before the events of the first film.
Archaeology professor Indiana Jones (played by Harrison
Ford) has located the remains of the first Manchu emperor
and he comes to luxurious night-club to complete the deal
with local gang boss Lao Che (played by Roy Liao). He is to
receive precious diamond in the exchange for the artefact,
but the deal goes bad and in the ensuing chaos he would have
to settle with clueless bar singer Willie Scott (played by
Kate Capshaw). Pursued by Lao Che's gangsters, they get to
the taxi driven by 9-year old Short Round (played by
Jonathan Ke Quan) who takes them to airport where they all
three would board plane for India. The flight is not the end
of adventure - plane crashes in the Himalaya mountains and
trio, barely escaping death, has to travel to Delhi. On the
way they reach small impoverished Indian village and the
local shaman (played by D.R. Nanayakkara) tells them about
evil Thugee cult whose minions took away the sacred Shankara
stone and all the children. Jones agrees to help them and
the trail lead him to Pankot Palace, place which used to
shelter Thugess many centuries ago but now seems to be ruled
by benevolent child Maharaja (played by Raj Singh) and his
Oxford-educated prime minister Chattar Lal (played by Roshan
Seth). Jones is still suspicious and soon he finds secret
passages that lead to the cave which was recently turned
into temple of goddess Kali and where the evil chief priest
Mola Ram (played by Amrish Puri) wants to gather all the
Shankara stone and thus get the magical power that would
enable him to rule the world.
Like many sequels of its era, INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE
OF DOOM had misfortune of being compared with its
predecessor, and in most of such cases predecessors happened
to be much better. In the case of this film predecessor was
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK, not only the first instalment in
trilogy intended to repeat the success of STAR WARS, but
also an undisputed classic of adventure genre. Lucas and
Spielberg were aware of this and they tried very hard to
make second instalment of the series as different as
possible from the first. They succeeded in that but those
changes weren't necessarily for the better and INDIANA JONES
AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM is almost universally viewed as much
inferior to the first film of the trilogy.
The most palpable change is in the screenplay, this time
written by Wilard Huyk and Gloria Katz. While the first film
had very basic, but still coherent plot, the second one is
nothing more than the series of action sequences and gags
loosely sawn together. Characterisation is even worse,
except in the case of Indiana Jones. His character has been
clearly established in the first part and screenwriters
actually don't need to experiment, but short episode with
his turning to the Dark Side seems refreshing. Harrison Ford
plays him very well, being equally convincing in tuxedo and
his legendary adventurer's outfit. Unfortunately, this is
not the case with his partners. Character of weak, stupid
and utterly useless female partner Willie Scott represents
spectacular departure from the high standards set for
Indiana Jones' girl in the first film. Her constant
complaining, crying and screaming is funny at first but
later gets repetitive and irritating; Kate Capshaw might be
the best actress around but she can't remedy the limits of
her character, which seems insulting to the female gender in
general, despite being modelled as a parody of dumb blonde
and damsel in distress stereotypes in 1930s movies. Bond's
9-year old sidekick Short Round looks much better in
comparison, although his character has opportunities to be
equally irritating. He was probably introduced to the film
in order to make it more attractive to the younger audiences
- those who were basis of Spielberg's commercial success in
1980s.
Unfortunately, Spielberg, in his effort to make this film
appealing to adolescent and pre- adolescent crowds succumbs
to infantilism that plagued many 1980s films. So, one child
among protagonists is not enough and the film must have
villains that use thousands of children for the slave
labour, sacrificing plausibility in the process. Such
infantilism, that plagued many films made in the mid 1980s
(like MAD MAX BEYOND THE THUNDERDOME), is compromised with
the heavy use of realistic violence. If spiders, bugs,
snakes, skeletons and decomposing bodies don't scare the
children in the theatres, people being ripped to pieces and
burned alive, all with appropriate amounts of blood and
gore, definitely would. Even the 1980s MPAA censors were
aware of this, and Spielberg used all his clout to create
compromise PG-13 rating that managed to save at least part
of his core audience. Of course, MPAA censors were, as
usual, more squeamish about sex than violence, so Spielberg
reduced eroticism for couple of weak double entendres,
leaving critics to interpret the Freudian meaning of the
tunnels that play important part in the second part of the
film.
Screenplay was weaker than the previous film, but at least
Spielberg kept his directing skills. From the opening, that
pays homage to 1930s musicals, to the end, movie is series
of excellent scenes. The action is always exciting and
rhythm very fast, never allowing the film the slow down;
which is perhaps a good thing, because characterisation and
plot problems would otherwise become even more obvious.
Photography of Douglas Slocombe creates good atmosphere, and
the production design in Pinewood studios is superb, as well
as Sri Lanka locations (which some of us might recognise
from THE BRIDGE AT THE RIVER KWAI). Special effects are also
very good and still look convincing, despite being made with
pre-CGI technology. Music by John Williams is very good, and
although not being particularly memorable (except in the
ritual scene), serves as perfect illustration for the events
in film.
There is another reason why INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF
DOOM enjoys much worse reputation today than sixteen years
ago. All the villains in the film happen to be non-white,
and even in 1984 British satirical show SPITTING IMAGE
accused this film for racism in a parody gag called
XENOPHOBIA JONES. We could only imagine how would PC police
of contemporary Hollywood react to the similar script today.
Because of that, INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM seems
quite refreshing compared with contemporary action and
adventure films. Spielberg is also one of the rare Hollywood
filmmakers who defies stereotypical negative portrayal of
the British Empire in historical films. This film not only
features British colonial troops in the role reserved for US
Cavalry in early westerns, but also references certain good
things the Empire did for its subjects.
All in all, INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM is deeply
flawed film that didn't age quite well, but most of those
flaws are well hidden by Spielberg's mastery. From our
perspective it is still a very good piece of Hollywood
entertainment, much superior to the more recent examples of
same genre.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
Sequels come and go but how many prequels have their been? A prequel is
basically a story that takes place before the events of the original film.
Spielberg's masterful "Raiders of the Lost Ark" was set in the year 1936.
"Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom" takes place in 1935, one year before the
events of "Raiders." Not that it matters because this entry retains the flavor,
if not the subtlety, of the original. "Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom"
remains the most exhausting action film ever made, building on one clever
surprise and predicament after another and never letting up for one second.
"Raiders" had momentum and moments where the audience could breathe. Spielberg
goes so over-the-top that it seems we are watching a manic cartoon on overdrive
where we can hardly brake for a single breath. 
The film begins with an explosive opening sequence set in Shanghai that
practically outdoes "Raiders" famous opening. We see Indiana dressed in a
tuxedo, entering a ritzy nightclub where he meets some nefarious Chinese
gangsters. Before you know it, Indiana is poisoned, seeking a vial with the
antidote, while evading bullets, a Chinese gong, dancers performing "Anything
Goes," balloons, rickshaws, and so on. It is a tense, almost spooky action
sequence in that the intensity level is so high that you feel you are in a
roller coaster that never ends. That is the spirit of the movie. Anyways,
Indiana leaves Shanghai almost unscathed from harm with a floozy singer in tow,
Willie Scott (Kate Capshaw), and a smart-mouthed Chinese kid named Short Round
(Ke Huy Quan) who wears a Yankees hat. They travel by plane until they discover
there are no pilots! Then we are in another tense sequence where Indiana tries
to fly the plane but fails, gets an inflatable raft (!) and off we go! Before
you can say "whew," our weary 
travelers are in India. It turns out that a small village is suffering thanks to
the loss of some precious, magical stones. Of course, Indiana has to travel to a
palace where the stones supposedly reside and bring them back to the village.
But isn't he a professor and shouldn't he be heading back to America? 
Inside the palace, it is discovered that a secret, ancient ritual is performed
where hearts are ripped out from unlucky villagers yet they still manage to
breathe! Yes, it is a gross moment among many. "Indiana Jones and the Temple of
Doom" has been criticized for its heavy, graphic violence and intense action
scenes. It was so intense that it led to the creation of the PG-13 rating (that
summer saw the mean "Gremlins" which also helped to create such a rating). The
film piles on the gross gags including the eating of monkey brains, oozing
liquids and other disgusting creatures in every single crevice of the
underground palace, whippings galore, beatings aplenty, abuse and some
occasional blood and gore. Some of it is layed on so thick that Spielberg feels
he may as well give it all - what the heck, audiences will eat up anything for a
sequel or a prequel. Some gags go a long way and others do shock, particularly
the infamous heart-ripping scene. 
Still, "Temple of Doom" is about doom, not "the temple of roses," as Spielberg
once said. For thrilling action and incomparable fright, nobody can do it better
than the Spielman. We have a room of collapsing walls with spikes, cavernous
hideaways, mine cars, waterfalls, planes, collapsing rope bridges, chains,
leather, whips, and so on. And our hero even repeats the old marksman versus the
swordsman joke only this time, there is no gun!
Ford plays it straight as usual, and is more muscular than before (thanks to
Body by Jake in the credits). Kate Capshaw remains a bore in the film, far too
whiny and insipid to inspire much sympathy. Still, she has a few bravura
moments, especially the "five minute" scene where she waits for Indiana to make
love to her. She has some pizazz and comedic energy but hardly enough, and is no
comparison to the feisty Karen Allen in the original. Ke Huy Quan is also a bit
of a whiner but also has his inspired moments (like the Buster Keaton gag of
climbing onto a mine car by using someone else's body) and a few good
one-liners. 
The dastardly villain is  Mola Ram (Amrish Puri), the leader of a Thuggee cult
who is determined to find the lost Sankara stones in the mines. He is
cartoonishly evil, lacking some of the depth and personality of the Nazi
villains from "Raiders" yet he is a formidable opponent for Indy. At one point,
after hearing of Mola Ram's plans to rule the world, Indiana exclaims, "What a
vivid imagination." Indeed. Nice bit of trivia: Mola Ram was also a villain in
the excellent "Gunga Din."  
Possibly the darkest film Spielberg has ever made, "Indiana Jones and the Temple
of Doom" hardly has the sunny disposition of "Raiders" but it is a fierce,
unrelenting often humorous action film that often parodies itself and "Raiders."
Its action scenes are so grim and of such a roller-coaster-ride mentality that
it gives new meaning to the word "breathless." 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com
