Title
Review for Kingpin (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     If you don't mind the sickly sentimental streak, an obviously
bloated running time, and an exceptional lack of comic timing, then this
Amish bowling comedy is, uh, right up your alley.  Directors Peter and
Bobby Farrelly, who made DUMB AND DUMBER, could have retitled this one
GROSS AND GROSSER.  No joke is too low for these guys.  With its endless
references to semen, urine, vomit, and bowel movements, KINGPIN plays
like a potty-mouthed update of THE COLOR OF MONEY.  Woody Harrelson is
the pro, a one-time, one-handed bowling legend who spies an Amish lad
(Randy Quaid) with the Gift.  The plot puts them on the road to Reno,
where they have to hustle to pay for gas, beer, and other necessities.
Despite the numerous laugh-out-loud moments, as well as a couple of
classic sight gags, KINGPIN suffers from an absolute lack of momentum.
(You might even fall asleep in the slower second half.) The timing is
off in most places and the movie has an annoying habit of calling
attention to it's own jokes.  No subtlety here, but, then again, how
many other summer movies would dare put Randy Quaid in drag, on stage at
a strip club, impersonating Elizabeth Berkley?  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Edwin Jahiel
**(1996)   Directed by Peter Farrelly and Bobby Farrelly. 
Written by Barry Fanaro and Mort Nathan. Photography, Mark Irwin. 
Editing, Christopher Greenbury. Production design, Sidney Jackson 
Bartholomew, Jr. Music, Freedy Johnston. Cast: Woody Harrelson (Roy 
Munson), Randy Quaid (Ishmael), Vanessa Angel (Claudia), Bill Murray 
(Ernie McCracken) and Chris Elliott (the Gambler). An MGM release. 114 
min. Rated R (crude language, situations and sex, violence)
In 1979, young bowling prodigy Roy Munson of Ohio (Harrelson) defeats 
the reigning Odor Eaters Championship title-holder Ernie McCracken 
(Murray). Ernie, older, rotten and a con man, sneakily disables Roy's 
car with sugar in the gas, so as to "rescue" Roy and use him for bowling 
hustles. In the last scam, the "victims" (themselves scammers) catch on 
and grind up Roy's fingers as Ernie runs off.
In 1996 we meet again Roy, a broken man, subsisting in Scranton, 
Pennsylvania under pathetic conditions. One day, however, he gets bowled 
over by the bowling of Ishmael (Quaid) and offers to make him into a 
pro, with hopes of sharing with him one million dollars at a 
winner-takes-all tournament in Reno. Ishmael, who is Amish and practices 
his avocation secretly, will have none of it.
Persistent Roy, in Amish garb and fake beard, joins Ishmael at his Amish 
settlement, makes friends, finally succeeds as the community is hit by a 
debt of half-a-million. The two men take to the road, hustling their 
sport.. In one of their adventures, a wealthy, sinister bowling addict 
goes after them. They escape, joined by the man's mistress-accomplice 
Claudia (Angel). In Reno whom does Roy encounter after 17 years but 
still- champion and still hustler Ernie?  
Q: Wasn't this movie made by the "Dumb and Dumber" fellows?
A: Yes. "D & D" was the first feature by Peter Farrelly who also 
scripted with brother Bobby and Bennet Yellin. "Kingpin" is co-directed 
by the brothers. 
Q: They didn't write it this time?
A: No. The writers come from TV (it shows in a thousand ways, from 
stuck-in jokes to disconnections). One (Nathan) is a Chicagoan with a 
B.A. in TV production from the University of Illinois. 
Q: Is "Kingpin" another dumb-dumber comedy?
A: Not quite. Ishmael does qualify and is incredibly otherworldly. At 
the start Roy is just young, naive, not wise to manipulation by Ernie. 
Ernie is a monster of duplicitous and hypocritical nastiness, and the 
essence of vulgarity.
Q: Doesn't the plot remind you of "The Hustler" and its sequel "The 
Color of Money?"
A: Of course, plus several other movies about hustles. But you said 
"plot" and there really isn't one.  The whole film is put together as a 
string of episodes whose connections are either dubious or illogical.
Q: Yet it's a comedy?
A: It is, but a dark one, with black humor worked into many broad, 
slapstick, cartoonish gags, almost all gross.
Q: How broad, how gross?
A: Just a few examples. Item: Roy, owing money to his landlady, invents 
a scam which makes her grateful. But he is soon caught and the woman 
exacts sex -- after which Roy vomits. Item: Passing for Amish, Roy is 
told to milk a cow. He "milks" a bull. Item: Asked to take the shoes off 
a horse he saws off its hooves. Item: Apparently the Amish don't know 
about modern conveniences, so Ishmael sits on an urinal to defecate. 
Item: Claudia works her sexual charms on people, but not on a farmer, 
who brightens up when given a sheep for carnal purposes. Item: In Reno, 
Ishmael in drag, as an exotic dancer (Don't ask). Item: Roy has the 
vision of a gay gambler offering one million bucks for one night with 
Ishmael. (Remember "Indecent Proposal?" which co-starred Woody 
Harrelson?) Item: Ernie promotes on TV his Fund for Fatherless Children 
while fondling lasciviously their pretty mothers. Item: A line from The 
Good People at the Tobacco Industry who protest "If you're dead, you 
can't smoke." Item: Jokes about Roy's metal fingers and the rubber glove 
that covers his hand. At the end he will do publicity for Trojan 
condoms. 
Q: Well, some of this sounds funny.
A: Some yes, but in a depressing way. The street rumor (what reviewers 
said) was overall "Bad film but kept me laighing." I laughed only a few 
times, and against my better judgment. But mostly I was aghast.
Q: At what?
A: At the cheap shots. At the jaundiced view of all people; at the 
misogynism (women are shown and photographed unflatteringly, in 
character and body parts); at the semi-ridicule of the Amish (in a 
reverse sort of "Witness"); at Claudia's morals; at the repulsive 
bowlers and audiences; and so on...
Q: Are there no OK gags?
A: Very few, but still misanthropic. Early on, Ernie in a restaurant 
imperiously ordering a waitress to return after she has removed her 
perfume. Or making a visual pass at one of the girls at a nearby table. 
One girl smiles back. "Not you" he says cruelly. 
Q: So nothing is subtle?
A: Nothing, unless you go for in-jokes. Ishmael comes from "Moby Dick" 
with the Reno prize as the whale. Roy Munson sounds like Charles Manson 
(the mass murderer) and refers you to Harrelson in "Natural Born 
Killers." He tells the Amish that his name is Ezekiel Maltin (or so I 
remember), Maltin being a TV movie critic and film guidebook editor.
Q: Are the actors good?
A: For the improbable roles they play, yes, in a morose fashion.
Q: To see or not to see?
A: Depends on the tolerance of your budget and I.Q. I certainly did not 
think highly of the movie, but I neither did I feel trapped by it.

Author
Julian Lim
Directed by: Peter Farrelly and Bob Farrelly  
Written by: Barry Fanaro and Mort Nathan
Cast :  Bill Murray, Woody Harrelson, Randy Quaid, Vanessa Angel
Produced by : Brad Krevoy, Steve Stabler and Bradley Thomas
Rating : * out of *****
Theatres: Shaw Cinemas 
        According to the publicity material, with this movie the directors "hope to 
restore good old-fashioned bowling to its rightful place in the mainstream of American 
consciousness." Hmm.  You never know, they just might be on to something.  What 
with the rise of geek chic, lounge music and Seventies fashion,  the ever-contrary kids 
of the nineties might just latch on to bowling as another terminally unhip bastion of 
Tackyana to claim as their own.  But then, I doubt if KINGPIN will have anything to 
do with it.  It's cheesy all right, but connoisseurs of bad taste will find this film 
exudes that bland smell of stale jokes rather than the invigorating stink of true 
kitsch.  
        That's a shame, because, in the first ten minutes or so the film promises 
to be a lot more. Woody Harrelson plays the hotshot bowler on the rise, Roy Munson.  
The movie opens in the Fifties with Roy's Dad dishing out the Reader's Digest/Gumpian 
wisdom in scoopfuls, shifting to the 70s for a hilarious spoof of Saturday Night Fever. 
The sardonic tone of the proceedings is much enhanced by the presence of Bill Murray, 
as the delectably slimy Big Ern Mcracken.  It's thanks to Murray that the first quarter 
of KINGPIN seems so good - he gives the wry, derisive edge to this otherwise rather 
unfocused comedy.
        McCracken dupes Munson into a hustling job, then abandons him to an angry 
mob who mangle Roy's hand.  Then it's fast forward 17 years later when Munson is a 
fat, balding loser with a prosthetic rubber hand.  He's hopeless until he meets Ishmael 
(Randy Quaid), an Amish amateur bowler that Munson takes on as protege.  So 
together they set out for the million dollar bowling tournament in Reno, picking up 
pretty hustler Claudia (Vanessa Angel) on the way. 
        With the exit of Bill Murray, the filmmakers seem to have only one direction to 
go, and that's ...  DUMB AND DUMBER.  Yes, indeed, KINGPIN is brought to you 
by those modern proponents of laxative humour,  Peter and Bobby Farrelly, the 
directors of the aforementioned Jim Carrey vehicle.  So, prepare for much slaparound 
comedy with flying rubber hands, distended nipples, ridiculous hair and bull semen.   
Get set for stock fish-out-of-water situations when city-boy Roy puts on a beard and 
tries to blend in with the Amish community, or when suaku straitlaced Ishmael takes 
on smoking, striptease and unChristian neighbour-socking.  
        Now, don't get me wrong, there's nothing wrong with cheap humour, and I 
had my fair share of lavatorial laughs with Woody and Randy.  The trouble is that 
these jokes aren't bold or funny enough to drive a movie that bumbles along without 
much sense of direction.  It lurches from sports movie to Amish-mocking to road-trip 
to sentimental melodrama, (pausing for a broadside spoof of  INDECENT 
PROPOSAL, and many shameless plugs for the accompanying pop soundtrack), never 
quite getting it all together.   Some gags fall flat from a lack of  build-up, while 
there are bits and pieces in the movie that simply don't do anything.  Why the long, 
unfunny fight in the car park?  Why TWO of these?  Why does that guy wear mascara, or 
that guy have a glass bowling ball with a rose in it?   The film is full of these 
half-thought-through ideas that give the impression of any old gaffer, grip or makeup 
artist throwing in random stuff and saying, "wouldn't that be funny?".  Well, no, 
actually.
        The actors don't do the movie much favours either.   Woody Harrelson comes 
off okay, plausibly acting dumb, smart, cynical or innocent when the implausible script 
calls for it, but Randy Quaid is a ceaseless ham, and Vanessa Angel has no talent (like 
Schwarzenegger, she seems more convincing playing a computer-creation than a 
human -- take the TV series Weird Science...please ).  Even Murray hams it up when 
he reappears in the movie's climax.
        All in all, a fairly useless attempt at comedy, and a certified no-hoper at 
kickstarting the Bowling Renaissance.  We'll have to look to a reinspired John Waters, 
or perhaps somebody from Down Under ("Strictly Bowling", anyone?) for the 
definitive bowling comedy.
THE FLYING INKPOT's rating system:
 * Wait for the video.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
___________________________________
This review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT
.">http://bizdir.com.sg/inkpot/>. We're inkier! We're pottier! We're
wordy! All flying bricks welcome.  Leave your penguin at the door.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Woody Harrelson, Randy Quaid, Vanessa Angel, Bill Murray,
      Chris Elliott
Director: Bobby & Peter Farrelly
Producer: Brad Krevoy, Steve Stabler, and Bradley Thomas
Screenplay: Barry Fanaro and Mort Nathan
Cinematography: Mark Irwin
Music: Freedy Johnston
U.S. Distributor: MGM/UA
     Movies have always used the "from the makers of--" line.  You know,
"a new film from the makers of LAWRENCE OF ARABIA" or "a new film from
the makers of GLORY".  KINGPIN employs this time-honored tradition,
except, in this case, it proudly claims to be "from the makers of DUMB
AND DUMBER."  And, while the 1994 Jim Carrey/Jeff Daniels comedy was far
from a modern cinematic classic, linking KINGPIN to it gives you a fair
idea of what to expect, at least as far as the level of humor is
concerned.
     Before attending a screening of this film, I had heard some
positive advance comments, so, although I was dubious about a Farrelly
Brothers movie, I went into the theater in anticipation of a constant
stream of coarse, lowbrow comedy.  I was primed to laugh.  I wanted to
laugh.  And, two hours later, I was still waiting.  Oh, I suppose I
managed a chuckle or two during some of KINGPIN's more outrageous
moments, but, joke-for-joke, this is a weak movie.  And I mean weak. 
You can see almost all the gags coming.  By comparison, DUMB AND DUMBER
was a veritable laugh-fest.  And the crowd I saw the movie with -- the
average, teen-dominated Friday night group -- didn't seem to be having a
whole lot more fun than I was.  Laughter, while present, was
surprisingly sparse.  And that, more than anything, indicates how
lackluster this movie is.
     KINGPIN ends up playing a little like ROCKY meets DUMB AND DUMBER. 
That's when it's not doubling as a shameless advertisement for ESPN (the
cable sports network covers the big bowling match at the end, and their
logo is everywhere).  The downtrodden hero is Roy Munson (Woody
Harrelson), a once-promising bowler who lost his hand in 1979 because of
a failed hustle orchestrated by his rival, Big Ernie (Bill Murray). 
Now, 17 years older and wearing a rubber hand, Roy is a burnt-out drunk
running small-time scams.  That is, until one day in Scranton when he
spies Ishmael (Randy Quaid), an Amish bowler who knocks down pin after
pin.  Suddenly, Roy has visions of managing Ish to a $1 million
championship, and finally avenging himself against Big Ernie.  So, after
a lackluster "comic" sequence on the Amish farm (featuring a grandma
with whiskers and the de-semination of a bull -- ha ha ha!), Roy and Ish
head for Reno.  Along the way, they pick up Roy's soon-to-be love
interest, a shapely woman named Claudia (Vanessa Angel), who happens to
be a mobster's girlfriend.
     I'll readily admit that I'm not the biggest fan of mindless humor,
but, when it's done right, it can be very funny (as in THE MONSTER or,
during certain scenes, Eddie Murphy's THE NUTTY PROFESSOR).  KINGPIN
never does it right.  This movie is a complete and utter waste of time. 
The running length may be one-hundred thirteen minutes, but it seems
like it takes about six hours to traverse the painful road from opening
to closing credits.  And the comedy, such as it is, isn't sufficiently
funny to provide more than an occasional, momentary diversion.  
     I could mention the parts of KINGPIN that work -- the list is short
enough that it wouldn't take up much space -- but I won't bother.  The
fact that this picture has been given its theatrical release in the
midst of the Olympics, when no one is going to the movies, shows how
little faith MGM has in its commercial potential.  I hope they're right. 
In a summer filled with disappointments, KINGPIN occupies one of the
lowest rungs.  And the really disgusting thing about this movie isn't
the crude jokes themselves, but how grossly unfunny they all are. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Robert Workman
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
The concept of enjoying a stupid comedy is best realized as keeping it
stupid, really.  Shift gears even once and the audience can be thrown
miserably out of control.  Sadly, that is the case with Kingpin, a film
directed by the Farrelly Brothers, the duo that brought us There's
Something About Mary and Dumb and Dumber.  Since the duo directed and
didn't write the script, I can assume that's part of the problem.
The story seems good enough: a pro bowler in the 1970's by the name of
Roy Munson (Woody Harrelson) is sitting on top of the world.  His
popularity has gone through the roof and he's getting his career off the
ground.  Then, however, he runs into Ed McCracken (Bill Murray), a rival
bowler with hardly any real consideration for, well, anything.  These
two form an ill-timed relationship that involves risky betting, and,
before Roy sees it coming, Ed's abandoned him and he's about to lose his
hand in a bowling ball machine.
Forward seventeen years later, where Roy has become quite the loser,
complete with mechanical hand, torn-up car, and, of course, the
occasional knocking up of the ugly-ass landlord to avoid paying rent for
a while.  However, he finds a glimmer of a hope upon a visit to a local
bowling alley, where he runs into an Amish kid named Ishmael (Randy
Quaid), who has quite the bowling arm.  With the kid's help, he figures
he can be known again, particularly at the biggest bowling tournament
rapidly approaching in Reno, Nevada.
Of course, the Amish kid needs some coaxing, particularly when you
consider, well, he's Amish.  This leads to some of the best comic scenes
in the film, such as Roy's process of removing horseshoes or milking the
cow.  Finally, the duo get on the road and, along the way, pick up an
additional helper- a beautiful hustler (played by the gorgeous Vanessa
Angel).
The main problem I had with Kingpin wasn't the fact it wasn't funny.  In
fact, it does have some rather hilarious scenes in it, such as the
aformentioned above and Roy's explanation of not having children
(something involving a cheese grater?).  But that's just it- scenes.
There's a couple of really serious scenes that throw off the entire
momentum of the movie, like the abuse Angel takes from her hustler
ex-boyfriend.  I mean, was this really necessary?  Couldn't have this
been handled just a bit wackier?  I mean, this is a comedy, why throw
ethics in?  Particularly in a Farrelly Brothers vehicle, where hair gel
can be easily mistaken?
That really ruined it, however, and that's too bad.  The acting is top
notch, especially from Angel and Murray, and the really funny scenes are
worth noting.  Still, if you're going to think dumb, think dumb all the
way through, OK?  At least the Farrelly Brothers got back on track with
Mary or I'd still be a little bit irked.

Author
Rich Meitin
Cast: Woody Harrelson, Randy Quaid, Vanessa Angel, Bill Murray
Director: Bobby & Peter Farrelly
Producer: Brad Krevoy, Steve Stabler, and Bradley Thomas
Screenplay: Barry Fanaro and Mort Nathan
Cinematography: Mark Irwin
Music: Freedy Johnston
Capsule review: Bathroom humor and sight gags, neither original nor well
done. Visually shoddy. A waste of talented actors.
This is a movie that has it all: Prosthetic gags, vomiting gags, bull
semen gags, kick-in-the-crotch gags, boob (as in female breast) gags --
lots and lots of them. There wasn't a trick too cheap or too embarassing
for Fanaro and Nathan to trot out. 
After listening to an astonishingly lavish and fawning review by both
Siskel and Ebert ("I can't wait to take my friends to see it, "easily the
funniest movie of the year," "laughed out loud all the way through," etc.)
I overcame my natural resistance to seeing a movie about bowling,
especially one with such idiotic posters and trailers. What a mistake. I
spent the first 20 minutes waiting for something funny to happen, and the
remainder of the two hours feeling thankful I had not asked anyone to join
me.
Harrelson plays a young, innocent, talented bowler who is corrupted
morally and destroyed physically (overnight, no less) through the actions
of Murray's cynical character. Years later, Harrelson tries to take
advantage of Quaid's character in a similar way, but Quaid's Amish-dweeb
is too goodhearted to buy into Harrellson's schemes ... until he is forced
into making money to save his family's farm.
The climax involves a re-match on the lanes with villain Murray. Harrelson
is inexplicably able to bowl again, in championship form, despite a
seventeen year layoff and the hook/rubber hand at the end of his bowling
arm. Angel is chiefly available for her looks, and for one of the nicest
bodies money can buy. Harrellson and Angel undergo a sort of moral and
romantic redemption at the end that is equally inexplicable. The story
elements are just a flimsy framework for a long list of sight gags, at
least twenty of which involved either Harrelson's rubber hand or Angel's
silicone breasts.
Broad, physical comedy has decades of genuinely funny precedent to draw
upon -- everything from the Marx brothers to Leslie Nielson. I don't
dislike silly movies. Just bad ones. It was poorly lit and shot. The
soundtrack was pinched and tinny. Even the opening credits of this film
were cheap and un-funny. 
One-half star awarded for several talented actors, who were up the
cinematic creek without a paddle. One thing about the Siskel/Ebert review
was true: This was a movie that would "do anything for a laugh."
Unfortunately, it just didn't do anything funny.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(MGM)
Starring:  Woody Harrelson, Randy Quaid, Vanessa Angel, Bill Murray.
Screenplay:  Barry Fanaro, Mort Nathan.
Producers:  Brad Krevoy, Steve Stabler, Bradley Thomas.
Directors:  Peter Farrelly, Bobby Farrelly.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Have you ever had an 11-year-old try to tell you a joke?  If so, you
will probably recognize a couple of typical qualities.  First, the
enthusiasm of the joke-teller far exceeds his mastery of the basic
principles of comic timing; second, the joke is almost certainly one
you've heard before, and probably one you told when you were 11.  Peter
and Bobby Farrelly (DUMB AND DUMBER) are still those 11-year-olds at
heart, and their sense of humor seems to have matured only marginally.  If
you laugh at their films, it is probably for the same reasons you might
laugh at the 11-year-old's joke:  their eagerness to amuse is endearing,
or there's a bit of the 11-year-old in you as well.  KINGPIN is often
disgusting, but that is usually when it is at its funniest.  It is also
often slow, and that is when it is an effort to get through.
     Woody Harrelson stars as Roy Munson, who was Iowa's State Bowling
Champion in 1979.  That year, as a rookie pro, he makes the mistake of
beating hot-shot Ernie "Big Ern" McCracken (Bill Murray), who turns out to
be a very sore loser.  McCracken sets Roy up during an attempted con, and
when Roy is found out the angry victims shove his bowling hand into the
ball return.  Seventeen years later, Roy is an alcoholic with a hook for a
right hand, but he sees a shot at returning to the big time when he spots
Ishmael Boorg (Randy Quaid) at the local bowling alley.  Roy offers to
train Ishmael for a $1 million pro tournament, but Ishmael happens to be a
devout Amish, with no interest in such things.  It is only when the Boorg
family farm is threatened by debt that Ishmael agrees to hit the road with
Roy, and misadventures ensue.
     KINGPIN is a film which tends toward the parody style of the
Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker (AIRPLANE!) films, with obvious homages to THE
NATURAL, THE COLOR OF MONEY, THE GRADUATE and INDECENT PROPOSAL among
others.  The operative word here is "obvious."  If obviousness were water,
KINGPIN would be the Pacific Ocean, giving each gag plenty of lead-up time
so you can anticipate the punch line and spend a moment groaning as it is
underlined for you.  When KINGPIN isn't obvious, it's sick.  Having
covered diarrhea, mucus and urine in DUMB AND DUMBER, the Farrellys move
right along their Bodily Emissions Hit Parade to vomit and semen.  And
when KINGPIN isn't sick, it's repetitious.  There are more individual
injuries to male genitalia in this film than in an entire season of
"America's Funniest Home Videos." 
     The thing about KINGPIN is that even when it is obvious, sick and/or
repetitious, it is still often very funny.  I will be very frank about
this:  it is funny in about as base a way as it is possible to be funny,
in a way that will be just plain unfunny to many people, or funny in a way
that might make you embarrassed to admit you found it funny.  It is funny
in that adolescent way that can't help but snicker at gags about hardened
nipples, farmers and sheep, or oral sex with a painfully unattractive
woman.  There are a few moments of inspiration in KINGPIN, particularly a
hilarious turn by Bill Murray as Roy's obnoxious rival which harkens back
to his smirking glory days, but this really isn't a film meant to operate
on an inspired level.  It is the kind of leering, slobbering, juvenile
comedy Mel Brooks is still trying to make, but appears to have forgotten
how to make, and it sneaks past your sense of indignation, into the most
primitive part of your backbrain, and gets you laughing.
     That said, KINGPIN still isn't particularly satisfying, mostly
because it makes the mistake of trying to create an actual dramatic
subtext.  At some point, the Farrellys and screenwriters Barry Fanaro and
Mort Nathan stop trying to parody THE COLOR OF MONEY and start trying to
_be_ THE COLOR OF MONEY, with Vanessa Angel as a streetwise lady playing
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio to Quaid's Tom Cruise and Harrelson's Paul
Newman.  Harrelson is left in the uncomfortable position of playing a
grotesquerie one minute and an ostensibly sympathetic loser the next, and
he isn't nimble enough to pull it off.  KINGPIN really crawls during its
final half hour as the Farrellys play up the redemption story, proving
once again that a scattershot comedy of this kind really has to pull in at
around 90 minutes.  Then again, lack of timing is just one more way the
Farrellys are like 11-year-old joke-tellers.  If you are over 21, KINGPIN
will probably be an erratic ride at best.  But if you are able to identify
with the 11-year-old in you, hold on to your sides.

Author
Chad Polenz
** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, PG-13, 113 minutes [1 hour, 53 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Woody Harrelson (Roy Munson), Randy Quaid (Ishmael Boorg), Vanessa
Angel (Claudia), Bill Murray (Ernie McCracken), produced by Brad Krevoy,
Steve Stabler, Bradley Thomas, written by Barney Fanaro, Mort Nathan,
directed by Peter and Bobby Farrelly.
"Kingpin" tries to cash in on the elements that worked in the Farrelly
brothers' first film, "Dumb And Dumber," this time with the generic sports
plot (the underdog versus the champion), and it doesn't work because it goes
overboard. The film focuses too much on plot rather than on jokes, and the
jokes we get are in questionable taste.
There isn't much to a comedy like this, it recycles every comedy formula: 1)
the underdog versus the world, 2) the idiots in the real world, 3) the
bombshell, 4) the road trip, 5) the monetary deadline, 6) and the villain.
The film stars Woody Harrelson as Roy Munson, a young bowler from Iowa who
attempts to make a career out of hussling bowlers along with the man whom he
narrowly defeated, Ernie McCracken (Murray). A lot of cartoony jokes and
storylines start to form, such as Munson being too stupid to notice what is
going on around him, and Ernie as the typical, wise-cracking antagonist. When
Ernie leaves Roy to a mob of angry gamblers, Roy finds himself deprived of
his bowling hand and of course his life is shattered. 
Fast forward to the present day as Roy is doing whatever he can to make ends
meet, even going so far as to sleep with his absolutely disgusting landlady
to avoid rent payment. Here the tone of the movie is set - we're going to get
a lot of poo-poo jokes that are original, but disgusting at the same time.
You laugh but you feel guilty afterward. 
One day Roy meets an Amish man named Ishmael (Quaid), who is the talented
prodigy with great potential, if only he'd let Roy coach him. And so Roy and
Ish start their cross-country journey from Pennsylvania to Reno to the
million dollar bowling tournament, because "the bank" has threatened to
foreclose on the Amish if they can not come up with $500,000. 
>From here on the story goes through the motions and only exists to make for
jokes - some funny, others not, which wouldn't be so bad if the pacing was a
little faster. We get many jokes about both male and female genitalia,
typical cartoony slapstick, and one-liners, but they are all pretty much
connected by the fish-out-of-water story. The jokes start to get a little too
lowbrow, relying on locker room humor and male fantasy jokes.
Guess how "Kingpin" ends? Actually, one element to it is surprising, but the
rest is pretty standard. Yes, this movie does yield some big laughs, but not
all big laughs. It concentrates too much on plot and comedy suffers. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Inane. Vulgar. Cheap. And sometimes very funny. Those 
are my main impressions on KINGPIN, the comedy that turns the 
pathetic, bloated world of bowling upside down. How do I know 
bowling is bloated and pathetic? Because it's the only sport I'm 
good at. And it's the only sport any of the loser characters in 
KINGPIN can claim talent in.
        First there's Woody Harrelson, the scatterbrained bowler 
who beats Bill Murray in the state championship. Murray lures 
naive Woody into participating in a bowling hustle with him, then 
ditches him there when the drunken bowlers want revenge. It's not 
clear exactly what they do to Harrelson, but he alternates between 
a hook and rubber hand on his right arm as a souvenir of that 
fateful night. He spends the next seventeen years drinking and 
pulling small-time hustles to earn money when he finds a new 
prospect.
        That's Randy Quaid, an Amish farmboy who sneaks off 
to the bowling alley and sports a 270 average (per fifteen frames, 
we later find out), whom Harrelson sees as his chance to win the 
million-dollar bowling tournament in Reno. But Quaid won't go 
until Harrelson wears him down by infiltrating the Amish 
community under the name Hezekiah. Quaid finally goes with him 
on the cross-country drive, which includes another bowling hustle 
to keep the cash flow up, after which they flee with the victim's 
girlfriend en tow.
        And that would be Vanessa Angel, USA's "Weird Science" 
babe, whose two requirements in the movie are to wear a lot of tight 
outfits and quarrel with Harrelson, the first of which she does very 
well. Angel is the only beauty in a very ugly movie, both visually 
and metaphorically. Besides having an overall grimy look, 
Harrelson and Murray both have some of the most absurdly-
dated wardrobes and disgusting hair in movie history.
        Metaphorically speaking, KINGPIN has a lot of repulsive 
moments. Cheap sexual innuendoes abound, along with some 
sickening visual gags, the most disgusting of which has Harrelson, 
during the Brother Hezekiah sequence, telling a farmer he milked 
their cow. He has a milk moustache and tells the farmer it took 
some priming the pump but he finally got it flowing, after which 
the farmer replies, "We don't have a cow, only a bull." Harrelson 
gets a disgusted look on his face and says he's going to brush his 
teeth. The movie is full of disgusting moments like that, split about 
half-and-half between funny and awful.
        KINGPIN is an uneven movie but has a lot of positives 
going for it. The cast shows a talent for comedy, and Bill Murray 
is especially funny here for the first time since GROUNDHOG DAY. 
Angel, besides being an indisputable beauty, can act. The Farrely 
brothers, who directed KINGPIN, have a talent for cheap humor that 
is actually funny, making this an appropriate follow-up to DUMB 
AND DUMBER. If the movie hadn't been so long and loaded with 
misfired gags, it would have been a good movie to seek out. Right 
now it's worth watching but not worth arranging your schedule 
around.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
