Title
Review for Cuba (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Once upon a time, the author of this review used to live in a country now
known as former Yugoslavia. It was a country based on compromise between
East and West, and in good old days of the Cold War it presented some kind
of interesting mixing of opposing ideologies, allowing its government and
people to thrive. However, for the rulers of that country, being left alone
wasn't enough - they wanted to belong to something bigger. So, former
Yugoslavia was the one of the founding members of Non Aligned movement and
their diplomacy spent enormous energy in order to please numerous Third
World countries, their leaders and ideologies.
CUBA, Richard Lester's movie dealing with Cuban Revolution, was on the
programme of Belgrade Film Festival in the early 1980s. Later, the movie was
in regular cinema distribution. However, in mid-1980s, when the movie had to
be aired on national television, something interesting happened. The Cuban
Embassy in Belgrade intervened and issued diplomatic protest, claiming that
the movie "offends the Cuban revolution and people". The same movie was,
however, banned by some Latin American governments for being pro-Castro, but
that didn't matter. Pressured by government, chiefs of Belgrade television,
despite having the movie listed in daily newspaper, decided to air something
else. The replacement movie was CAESAR AND CLEOPATRA (1943) with Claude
Rains and Vivien Leigh. This time the Egyptian Embassy was enraged and
issued its own diplomatic protest, claiming that the film presented
Egyptians as people "who bend to foreign invaders".
The moral of this story is clear: although followers of "political
correctness" preach otherwise, it is simply impossible for any artist to
make the work that couldn't offend certain group of people. Why do I mention
this anecdote in this review? Because the makers of CUBA made exactly the
same mistake.
There are too many examples of Lester trying to be nice to too much people.
His main hero, Major Dapes (Connery) is a professional soldier who very
unprofessionally turns against its employers, but he is basically a nice
guy. Alejandra Pullido (Adams), factory owner, is a bitch towards the
workers, but she is basically a nice girl. Her husband Juan (Sarandon) is
worthless playboy, but he is bacically a nice guy. General Bello (Balsam) is
corrupt scum, but he is basically a nice guy. Americans support dictatorial
and rotten regime, but they are basically nice guys. Fidelistas sometimes
machinegun down dozens of innocent people, but they are basically nice guys
etc.
In order to make all those people nice, Lester tries to portray them as
interesting human beings, thus slowing the pace of the movie. As a result,
nothing happens, at least not the things you could expect in a country on a
brink of revolution. Finally, when the inevitable takeover finally occurs,
Lester illustrates it with a totally gratitutios and highly implausible
scene of a tank battle. In order to make things worse, the end scene is one
of thousands of CASABLANCA rip-offs.
Acting is, however, nice. Sean Connery, although doing his usual action
routine in the end, happens to be very convincing romantic hero. Jack
Weston, on the other hand, is wasted as comic relief. Brooke Adams is
totally unconvincing as Latin beauty, but Chris Sarandon saves the day.
Other actors, playing NASHVILLE-like episodes, contribute a lot, making this
bore of a movie at least watchable.
CUBA is, basically, movie made a decade too late - it was more suitable for
1968 when the world's sympathies were definitely more on the left side.
However, it still can be a lot of fun.
