Title
Review for Fast and the Furious, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Homer Yen
Guys, here's a movie especially for you.  And if
you're still simmering over the fact that you were
forced to accompany your girlfriend to the endlessly
sad "English Patient" or some other unrelenting
tearjerker, here's a chance for you to exact some
payback.  
"The Fast and the Furious" is a movie that is fueled
with adrenaline and testosterone.  The men brim with
bravado and hubris, the women are beautiful and tough,
the soundtrack blares hard alternative rock music, the
supercharged cars are hot, and the racing sequences
are, well...fast and furious.  It's racing sequences
are so intense that after you leave the theatre,
you'll be tempted to drive 90 MPH out of the parking
lot, fit your engine with nitrous oxide boosters, and
then race against an oncoming locomotive through a
railroad crossing.
The plot revolves around the efforts of agent Brian
(Paul Walker) and the FBI to crack a brazen,
truck-hijacking ring.  These taut hijacking sequences
feature gang members that execute precision driving
techniques to surround and board an 18-wheeler at
highway speeds.  We feel an innate thrill as we watch
these stunts.  
Investigators feel that the mastermind is Dom (Vin
Diesel), an intimidating and streetwise racer who
advises his disciples, "It don't matter whether you
win by an inch or a mile - winning's winning." 
Currently, there isn't sufficient evidence to make any
arrests, and the ringleader could be anyone within the
racing underworld, including Dom's nemesis, Johnny
Tran (Rick Yune) who commands an Asian gang with whom
he competes for turf, respect, and cars. 
The police story, however, takes a backseat to a more
interesting facet: the street racing subculture
predicated on speed and brotherhood.  One particular
scene, a wild street race between Dom and three
competitors, ably encapsulates the allure of being
involved with this dangerous activity.  Within this
population of car enthusiasts, having a souped-up
machine commands respect from your peers and the
attraction of girls.  But, as one racer notes, "it's
not how you stand by your car, it's how you race your
car."  
Dozens of cars then converge on to an ad hoc strip of
road somewhere in the outskirts of Los Angeles. Cars
line its sides to prevent non-racers from entering the
course.  We see the racial cliques that root for their
particular driver as they compete for cash and pink
slips.  A follower listens to the police scanner and
barks out status reports.  And when the police finally
come, the multitude of cars scatter like cockroaches
away from light.
While the story holds our attention, it's the racing
sequences that provide the most thrills.  These scenes
are edited seamlessly and allow us to embrace the feel
of incredibly high speeds and the rush from street
racing's inherent dangers.  A botched attempt to
hijack an 18-wheeler and an edge-of-your-seat race
against a freight train were especially riveting.  Sit
down and buckle up.  It's going to be a wild ride.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Rob Cohen.
Cast: Paul Walker, Vin Diesel, Jordana Brewster, Michelle Rodriguez, Rick 
Yune, Matt Schulze. Ted Levine, Ja Rule.
2001 - 105 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for violence, profanity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 23, 2001.
Call me naive, but until I saw director Rob Cohen's "The Fast and the 
Furious," I didn't know there was a such thing as underground car racing 
gangs in the United States. Not being a mechanic or car aficionado, I also 
had no idea how cars could so quickly speed up to 140 mph. While the jury's 
still out on how realistic "The Fast and the Furious" is concerning its 
details on automobiles and racing, I, nonetheless, learned quite a bit from 
the film--more so than any usual moviegoing experience. I also learned that 
no matter how many slam-bang action scenes are put into a movie, the entire 
effort cannot work without a serviceable screenplay.
Set in the seedy world of street racing teams, Brian (Paul Walker) is an 
undercover cop who has managed to get in with one such group, led by Dominic 
Toretto (Vin Diesel). While his mission is to prove that they not only 
illegally race, but also hijack trucks on the side, Brian finds himself 
apprehensive of doing so when he not only becomes good friends with Dominic, 
but also falls for his sister, Mia (Jordana Brewster).
The plot of "The Fast and the Furious" is such a flimsy amalgamation of 
cliches and tedium that it not only remains wholly predictable from beginning 
to end, but also doesn't even find its premise until at least a half-hour in. 
Until then, we are treated to literally one scene after the next of people 
racing hot--no, make that very hot--cars. When the story finally shifts into 
high gear and we find that Brian is, indeed, a cop, the stakes are 
undoubtedly heightened. Unfortunately, this means that the pacing must slow 
down and the characters actually have to speak. They are not helped much at 
all by the underwhelming screenplay by Gary Scott Thompson, Erik Bergquist, 
and David Ayer. That it took three separate people to pen such a thin script 
is quite humorous, and just a little mindboggling.
The action sequences, by the way, are so thrilling that they almost 
single-handedly save the film from its countless flaws. The tight, precise 
editing aids in making each and every car racing sequence a high-throttle joy 
to behold, and a climactic scene involving a botched truck hijack is 
downright nailbiting. It's very easy to forget about such "frivolous" things 
as character involvement and story developments when your body is being 
overtaken by such rapid-fire images of excitement and danger. But once each 
scene has taken its toll, you are grounded back to the reasons why the movie, 
as a whole, is simply not finding the footing it should.
The cast is professional and attractive, but little else (with two 
exceptions). Vin Diesel (2000's "Pitch Black"), that of the muscular build, 
shaved head, and baritone voice, turns in another effective, highly modulated 
performance as the loyal Dominic. As his younger sister, Mia, Jordana 
Brewster (2001's "The Invisible Circus") is a strong actress with a brain to 
go along with her stunning beauty. While it would have been nice to see 
Brewster act as more than virtual wallpapering, at least she has more to do 
than Michelle Rodriguez (2000's "Girlfight"), as Dominic's sensual, 
hard-edged girlfriend, Letty. Who knows if Rodriguez is any good? All she is 
asked to do is make brooding, "I'm-so-tough" faces on cue. Finally, Paul 
Walker (2000's "The Skulls") gets his very first leading man role as 
undercover police officer Brian, and he doesn't impress. There just doesn't 
seem to be anything behind Walker's facial expressions, and so his character 
doesn't win the audience's sympathies as it should.
Despite several slow patches and an ending that doesn't know when to quit 
(yet still manages to leave characters and relationships hanging without 
closure), "The Fast and the Furious" offers mindless summer movie fun for 105 
minutes. If anything, the action leaves a cursory adrenaline rush. When the 
movie is over, though, don't expect to think about it again--because you 
won't.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/dustinputman.htm
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Going into THE FAST AND THE FURIOUS, about the world of illegal street racing, I
was hoping for some trashy fun.  Sometimes getting one out of two isn't good
enough -- all I got was the trash.  Perhaps it was the venue.  I didn't see it
at a drive-in, which is probably the only place that has any hope of doing this
movie justice.  As directed by Rob Cohen (THE SKULLS), it a made me yearn for
another recent stinker, Renny Harlin's DRIVEN, which at least contained a little
more stylish trash.
Made for young teenage boys whose interests are making the move from video games
to fast cars, THE FAST AND THE FURIOUS features automobiles that would be better
thought of as street rockets than hot rods.  Most of the cars have a button like
those on video game controllers that blast the characters into hyperspace.  In
the movie, the super speed button causes the car to switch to nitrous oxide,
which propels the driver ahead as fire shoots out the tailpipes.
Although the real stars are built of pure metal, the human supporting cast
includes Vin Diesel, Paul Walker, Michelle Rodriguez and Jordana Brewster. 
Computer generated actors would have sufficed.
Everything happens to such a heavy rock beat that the film frequently feels like
a long music video advertisement for some new cars aimed at the youth market.
At least the film never insults its viewers with any cheap moralizing.  Think of
it as the anti-message movie.  Big bosomed girls hang around the races to offer
free sex to the winners.  The story has the kids engage in activities that are
not only illegal but highly dangerous as well.  How many people, for example,
are killed every year trying to beat a train?  One of the movie's key adrenaline
rushes comes from a combination drag and train race.  Oh yes, seat belts? 
Forget it.  They're for sissies.
THE FAST AND THE FURIOUS runs 1:41.  It is rated PG-13 for violence, sexual
content and language and would be acceptable for kids around 12 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave it ***, saying that he liked the car racing and the
music.  He couldn't get to a racing video game fast enough after the movie.  
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Steve Kong
The Fast and The Furious (2001)
Reviewed by Steve Kong (Reviews@UltraMookie.com)
Copyright (c) 2001 Steve Kong
URL:  http://www.ultramookie.com/reviews.php?op=showcontent&id=2
When I first saw the trailers for The Fast and The Furious I grumbled at 
the thought of the movie. I mean, how much of a movie can someone make out 
of those annoyingly loud Rice Rockets that we see on the streets everyday? 
I wasn't even planning on seeing this movie in the theatres, it was at best 
a movie rental that I could fast forward through.
Am I glad that my younger cousins took me to see this movie in the 
theatres. This movie is everything that the Driving-Ms. Cage-Race-Movie 
"Gone in 60 Seconds" from last summer should have been. The adrenaline 
flows fast and with a wide open throttle in this film. There are only two 
reasons to see The Fast and The Furious: The cars and the stunts.
"What about the story?" you ask. There is one, but it's only really there 
to glue together some of the best driving stunt work I've seen in a long 
time. The story goes something like this: A cop (Paul Walker) goes 
undercover to infiltrate a gang of street racers lead by a guy (Vin 
Diesel). This gang leader could also be the leader of a gang of people who 
rob trucks full of electronic goodies in order to pay for car upgrades. 
There's also a love story that happens between the cop and the gang 
leader's sister. Not much story, but that's not really what's expected.
Is The Fast and The Furious a bad movie? It is, it's one of those bad 
movies that is so fun to watch that after awhile I feel bad for enjoying it 
so much : ) The comparisons between The Fast and The Furious and last 
summers Gone in 60 Seconds are expected. Whereas The Fast and The Furious 
moves at lighting speed, Gone in 60 Seconds crawls to the finish line. The 
Fast and The Furious is all about the cars and racing. Gone in 60 Seconds 
was self-conscious and wanted to tell and actually good story too. It's too 
bad that Gone in 60 Seconds didn't have a good story to tell. Sure there 
were exotic cars in Gone in 60 Seconds, but we hardly got to see them, 
except for some flashes near the end. And there were car chases in Gone in 
60 Seconds, but only one real car chase that featured a kick ass Shelby at 
the end of the film - not much of a pay off for sitting through a long 
laborious film, if you ask me. How does The Fast and The Furious compare? 
Like night and day. There are car chases throughout. We get to see the 
actual cars, which were pretty damn impressive, throughout the film (I 
loved the Toyota Supra the Dodge Charger at the end). The makes of The Fast 
and The Furious know they have no story, so they just pump us up full of 
action. And this strategy works!
Don't go see The Fast and The Furious for the story or the acting. See it 
for the cars and the stunts. You won't be disappointed.

Author
Robin Clifford
Dominic Toretto (Vin Diesel) owns the streets of L.A. During the day he
puts together high-performance racing cars. At night, he pilots his own
little pocket rocket and wins upwards to $10,000 if someone has the nerve
to race him. A young loner, Brian (Paul Walker), wants to hook up with the
outlaw motor maestro. Dom is suspicious, until a confrontation with a
ruthless gang leader, Johnny Tran (Rick Yune), changes his mind. But,
enough about plot. It's about racing in Rob Cohen's "The Fast and the
Furious."
Over the past year, we've had a couple of auto-based, adrenalin rush pics
with "Gone in 60 Seconds" and "Driven." Neither film had much in common and
neither was very good, but they both carried the central theme of a need
for speed. Helmer Cohen takes the hunger to drive fast to the streets with
his pop-culture look into that microcosm of Americana, Los Angeles.
The desolate nighttime streets of sections of L.A. become tribal territory
for the adrenalin junkies whose pride is in their hopped up imports. They
gather every night, monitoring the whereabouts of the police, and risk
their pink slips against their ability to drive fast. Dom is the leader of
this tribe, along with his team, and he rules the outlaw races. But there
is danger lurking on the horizon for those involved in a major hijack ring
and members of the clan of night drivers may well be involved.
Brian is a loner who comes into the scene with a desire to impress Dom and
his posse with his guts and ability. But, the young man has a hidden agenda
- he's an undercover cop and he suspects that the hijackers may be hidden
among the tribe. When he and Dom have a run-in with Johnny Tran's team, a
bunch of gun toting, motorcycle driving hotheads, it looks like these are
the bad guys the cop is searching for. Brian and his bosses jump the gun
and raid Johnny's operation, much to their eventual embarrassment.
At about this point, things start to sort themselves out as the real story,
one of honor and loyalty, kicks in. This is also where the film gets very
derivative of such action flicks as "Speed" and "Point Break" - is it
significant that Keanu Reeves starred in both of those films? But, derived
does not mean bad and "The Fast and the Furious" delivers its action bits
in tense portions. The racing that dominated the first half of the film
takes a back seat, so to speak, to the meat of the story and the
relationship between Brian and Dominic and his team.
"The Fast and the Furious" benefits from the charismatic presence of Vin
Diesel. The actor was one reason "Boiler Room" worked and he cuts a good
figure here. Diesel is so likable, though, that it is hard to get angry
with him for being a bad guy, too. Paul Walker is OK as the undercover cop,
but any good-looking actor could have filled the role. The folks making up
Dom's team - Michelle Rodriguez, Jordana Brewster, Chad Lindberg, Johnny
Strong and Matt Shulze - are all supportive, if a little bland. A love
interest between Diesel and Rodriguez simply does not work - not their
fault. Chad Lindberg, as Dom's brilliant, but dyslexic, mechanic, Jesse
gets to play up the troubled martyr role well enough. Don't look for Oscars
here though.
The screenplay by Gary Scott Thompson, Erik Bergquist and David Ayer is
action packed and has some slickly executed race scenes. The cars, ranging
from souped up Toyotas to NOS (nitrous oxide) boosted Volkswagen Jettas,
are what the teens and twenties are going to see, and we get some good,
though not great, racing.
The F/X are a combo of live action and computer-generated images and look
very good. You won't have tires and fenders flying off the screen at you, a
la "Driven," which is a very good thing. The CGI stuff is so convincingly
done the line between computer-generated action and live is agreeably
blurred and works well. The action-packed hijack, which is the showcase for
the flick, is straight out of "Speed," but is so tightly wound it keeps
your attention with slick car stunts and crash bang action.
"The Fast and the Furious" is B-movie entertainment that is ideal for the
drive-in on a warm summer's night - if you can find a drive-in still alive
and kicking. The tweenies will love it. In my town, the kids are planning
to meet, with their hot cars, and head to the theater en masse on the
opening weekend. Their exuberance will be well met. I give it a B-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Max Messier
Fast cars, scantily clad women, bare-knuckle brawls, and guns, guns,
guns!
What more could be expected from a guilty pleasure-ridden American
popcorn movie like The Fast and the Furious.  Nothing of substance or
intelligence is ever really expected from a summer movie, much less when
that movie bears a title akin to a bad porno flick.  The Fast and the
Furious was exactly how I felt leaving the theater: Hightailing it back
home, furious at how quickly the movie fell apart.  I mean, how the hell
could you screw up something as slam-dunk-awesome as souped-up
performance cars amidst the illegal street racing subculture of the L.A.
Basin?
Dominic Toretto (Vin Diesel) is the main bad-ass dude of L.A.'s illegal
street racing circuit.  He runs a performance car tune-up shop, along
with his colorful team of misfits and mechanical geniuses.  But is he
the guy responsible for the recent hijackings of big-rigs full of
performance car electronics?
Undercover cop Brian Spindler (Paul "Don't call me Keanu" Walker)
saunters to crack the case, showing up in a green Eclipse with enough
nitrous to blow up a city block.  His job is to infiltrate Dominic's
crew and find out who's pulling the hijacking jobs before his
stereotypical commanding officer eats up too much of his screen time. 
During his investigation, Brian is taken under the wing of Dominic and
into the underground world of illegal street racing, where he learns how
to avoid potholes and ignore plot holes.
Coo as Brian falls in love with Dominic's sister Mia (Jordana
Brewster)!  Watch as Brian leaps so gracefully out of the way of
ill-tempered Asian gangs with automatic weapons!  Feel the thrill when
Brian learns how to leave a Ferrari in the dust!  And ultimately, try to
hold back the tears as Brian begins to question his loyalty to the badge
versus the respect and honor of his newfound "racing family."  It's
Point Break all over again.
The first twenty minutes of The Fast and the Furious are a real treat. 
I even thought that hack director Rob Cohen (an old Miami Vice director
who was responsible for such classics as Daylight and The Skulls) could
have pulled this off with sweeping cameras angles and tight, tight
editing.  All Cohen needed to do was keep the action hot and heavy with
racecars flying by, chicks making out in hallways, and fists flying. 
Sadly, the studio wanted a PG-13 rating for the film in order to get the
kiddies in and ultimately homogenizes the movie into a regurgitated
episode from Starsky and Hutch.  A horrendous ending doesn't help.
Even Vin Diesel, a strong actor with great turns in such films as Pitch
Black and Boiler Room, spends half the movie trying to create a
sympathetic character while frantically looking for a way out of the
film.  Which he doesn't find until the credits roll...  See it or don't,
but remember one thing either way: a Honda Civic can't slide under a
big-rig trailer without bodily harm coming to all involved.
Director: Rob Cohen
Producer: Neal Moritz
Writer: Gary Scott Thompson, Erik Bergquist, David Ayer
Starring: Vin Diesel, Paul Walker, Michelle Rodriguez, Jordana Brewster,
Ted Levine, Ja Rule, Rick Yune
http://www.thefastandthefurious.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Fast and the Furious (2001)
Vin Diesel, Paul Walker, Michelle Rodriguez, Jordana Brewster, Rick
Yune, Matt Schulze. Screenplay by Gary Scott Thompson and Erik Bergquist
and David Ayer. Directed by Rob Cohen. 105 minutes
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Some of my fondest memories from childhood are of family trips to the
drive-in. Dad would slowly weave through the lanes looking for a spot
that afforded a good view of the screen with no neighboring carloads of
teen-agers. After ricocheting around the playground and visiting the
refreshment stand  seedy, vaguely threatening and always alluring  my
sister and brother and I would settle in for a few cartoons and at least
two, sometimes three, feature films. More often than not, the movies
were wholesome fare, but every so often my parents would select
something more risqué.
I remember Mom fretting over the appropriateness of such "trashy"
selections; convinced they would irreparably warp our little minds.
"Don't worry," my father assured her, "as soon as the kids eat and watch
the cartoons, they'll fall asleep." But I never did. Peering from the
back seat with saucer eyes, I drank in the lurid images of juvenile
delinquents gone wild: smoking, drinking, fighting, making out and
driving like hell-bent lunatics. Such glorious decadence! Even then, I
realized that the exploitation flicks were cheap, formulaic and, most of
the time, poorly acted. It didn't matter, though. In fact, it even
helped. The chintzy predictability was oddly comforting.
"The Fast and the Furious" is a throwback to the drive-in era. A
105-minute exercise in high-octane car chases and macho posturing, the
film is pure drivel, which is exactly why I enjoyed it. After sitting
through a seemingly endless steam of inept comedies and pretentious
action movies, it's refreshing to see a production so unrepentantly
cheesy. The movie simply is what it is, an instantly forgettable
diversion for those in the mood for cheap thrills, swaggering men, bad
girls and melodrama as aggressive as it is dumb.
Directed by Rob Cohen, the man responsible for the indefensible Ivy
League Secret Society thriller, "The Skulls," "The Fast and the Furious"
is set in Los Angeles, specifically the underworld of illegal street
racing. The story begins with a wicked-good truck heist, in which the
harpoon-equipped drivers of several souped-up cars relieve the trucker
of a great deal of electronic equipment. The increasing frequency of
such crimes has caught the attention of the LAPD and FBI, and the
authorities have a plan.
Their secret weapon is Brian Spindler (Paul Walker from "The Skulls" and
"Varsity Blues." Damn, what a résumé!), a pretty boy officer who
constantly looks as if he is recovering from a blow to the head from a
blunt object. Brian's job is to infiltrate the dominant gang in the
street-racing subculture and learn if they are involved in the rip-offs.
To do this, he employs a brilliant plan: After securing a job in an auto
parts shop, he goes to a convenience store/diner run by racing leader
Dominic Toretto (Vin Diesel) and, day after day, orders tuna sandwiches
on white bread (with the crusts cut off, natch) from the powerful man's
younger sister, Mia (Jordanna Brewster).
His chronic tuna-ordering leads to a confrontation with a gang member,
triggering another big-ass action scene incorporating grunting males
staking their turf, an encounter with Johnny Law and a wild car chase.
By the time all is said and done, Dominic admits Brian into the inner
circle, a move which infuriates the more hotheaded of his crew.
The rest of the movie goes just as you would expect it to go. Brian
bonds with Dominic and woos Mia (as with most male-oriented flicks, the
relationship between the boys is far more intense than the one between
the boy and girl), periodically slipping away to report to his antsy
superior officers. Brian bumps chests with alpha males threatened by his
easy acceptance, with Big Daddy Dominic stepping in to settle things
down. In-between the testosterone-fueled snarling, the flashy street
races continue, as do the heists. It all builds to a dandy climactic
action scene spiced with overwrought dialogue and lots of meaningful
glances.
While Paul Walker is laughably miscast as the undercover cop, Vin Diesel
anchors the proceedings as the charismatic Dominic. With a shaved head
and muscular frame, Diesel casts an imposing presence nicely tempered by
moments of tenderness. You've likely enjoyed Diesel's work before: He
was one of Tom Hank's troop in "Saving Private Ryan," he played the
mysterious tough guy in "Pitch Black" and he provided the voice of the
robot in "The Iron Giant." Diesel is destined for big things and who
knows, this may be the movie that does it for him. After all, any guy
capable of delivering lines like "I live my life a quarter-mile at a
time" with a straight face deserves to be a star.
Filled with action set pieces and oozing attitude, "The Fast and the
Furious" is trash, but it's my kind of trash. To best enjoy it, I
suggest you track down a drive-in (thankfully, there are a few left),
weave through the lanes until you find a spot that affords a good view
of the screen with no neighboring carloads of teen-agers, stock up on
junk food from the snack bar, then sit back and savor the stupidity.

Author
Eugene Novikov
"I live my life a quarter-mile at a time."
Starring Paul Walker, Vin Diesel, Michelle Rodriguez,
Jordana Brewster. Directed by Gary Troudsdale and Kirk
Wise. Rated PG-13.
How do I review a movie like The Fast and the Furious?
It accomplishes exactly what it sets out to do, which
is provide realistic, exciting car races, chases and
crashes. It does very little more. This presents a
dilemma: do I recommend the film on the basis of that
accomplishment, or do I give it a "thumbs down"
because it accomplishes nothing else? I don't know, so
I'm wimping out and going borderline.
The Fast and the Furious claims to take us inside the
underworld of illegal street racing. Brian (Paul
Walker), is a police officer assigned to expose the
racers and the smuggling ring they might be running
(this is the first movie I've seen where people
actually smuggle DVD players; I'd like to see it in 20
years). Vin Diesel, who came out of nowhere with
Boiler Room last year, plays Dominic, a revered,
respected street lord and racing champion.
Brian has trouble getting in, at first -- Dominic's
cronies start a fight, and he makes a bad impression
on the big guy's sister -- but he enters a race by
betting his new, loaded racecar, loses it, and gains
Dominic's favor. What follows is a predictable battle
of loyalties; will Brian betray Dominic by turning him
in, or will he become a criminal for the sake of his
new friend? We know, of course, that the movie will
somehow find a way to have its cake and eat it, too.
Director Rob Cohen, the Harvard graduate responsible
for The Skulls, last year's worst movie, has made
what's really a niche film (though the current
box-office shows that this is one hell of a niche).
Since it has made so much money, I won't say that it
will only be of interest to certain people, but it
should particularly appeal to car lovers and those who
watch NASCAR in their spare time (I never understood
what was so appealing about watching cars go around in
circles).
Make no mistake, The Fast and the Furious really does
do some neat things with cars. The movie has real
stunts, as opposed to the computer generated crashes
in Renny Harlin's Driven, and the chase and crash
scenes are extraordinarily good-looking. There's
little actual suspense because there's zero interest
in the plot once you get beyond the dubious appeal of
the actors themselves, but the racing -- whee, look
how fast they're going! -- is second to none.
If the filmmakers didn't intend to give up on the
narrative, which it looks like they did, their project
could have benefited from a better leading man; Paul
Walker is such a non-actor that his dull, idiotic
stare is almost funny to watch. Vin Diesel is a
terrific actor in the right role, but this movie
concentrates too much on his noble side and doesn't
let him do what he does best, which is be a badass.
And that's about it. If that doesn't interest you,
don't pay to see this movie. If you do, seek out the
best multiplex in town; I don't understand the
argument that The Fast and the Furious should be seen
at a drive-in with a bad sound system and an
obstructed view, but maybe I'm just too young. This is
a movie to be seen and occasionally heard. If you like
cars, that is. 
Up Next: A.I. Artificial Intelligence

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  FAST AND THE FURIOUS, THE (director: Rob Cohen; screenwriters: Gary Scott
Thompson/Erik Bergquist/David Ayer; cinematographers: Ericson Core/Jonathan
Taylor; editor: Peter Honess; cast: Paul Walker (Brian O'Conner), Vin Diesel
(Dominic Toretto), Michelle Rodriguez (Letty), Jordana Brewster (Mia Toretto),
Rick Yune (Johnny Tran), Ted Levine (Sergeant Tanner), Chad Lindberg (Jesse),
Noel Guglielmi (Hector), Ja Rule (Edwin), Matt Schulze (Vince), Vyto Ruginis
(Harry),  Johnny Strong (Leon); Runtime: 105; Universal Pictures; 2001) 
A thoughtless formula movie about street racers, that moves so fast from one
scene to the next it could be geared for those who suffer from ADD (attention
defecit disorder); it should give you a few jolts and cinematic thrills, but the
price paid is that logic is the first thing thrown out of the car window. It
seems as if it was made for those who worship drivers of souped-up, high-tech
cars (a billion dollar underground industry). The theme of this summertime movie
could be that there's little difference in morality between criminals and
undercover cops, and that's probably giving the film too much credit for
thinking about anything but the box office. It's all about racing cars that seem
like rockets when equipped with nitrous oxide; it's the driving scenes that keep
you from nodding off and since they use real cars, with real stunt riders,
that's what grabs your attention throughout and makes you a captive of this
meaningless but childishly fun tale. 
It starts off fast-paced with a colorful hijacking of a truck by a gang of
racers and ends fast-paced as the two antiheroes, their relationship being the
key to the story, Walker and Diesel, racing across a train crossing for no
purpose at all except to give the viewer one more cheap drag car thrill before
its amoral ending. 
The film's best attempt at dialogue goes something like this...first place racer
(Diesel): "It don't matter if you win by an inch or by a mile; winning's
winning." Evidently the losing racer (Walker) is left speechless over such a
powerful statement. But if you don't mind being taken for a mindless adrenaline
ride across the glittering blacktops of Los Angeles, this could be excused as a
guilty pleasure treat. 
Cheesy director Rob Cohen's ("Dragonheart"/"Daylight"/The Skulls) film is about
an undercover policeman who infiltrates a street racing gang to get those who
are hijacking 18-wheelers, and it's also about how groups of Asians, whites, and
blacks form street racing gangs, snarl at each other, bet against each other in
street races, and shoot at each other to maintain their rivalries. To keep
things swinging there are sexy girls strutting in leather pants around the
industrial site the racers congregate at, willing to give their bodies for a
good street racer. There are also swarms of Storm Trooper-like cops rounding up
these deviants. 
The young undercover cop, Brian (Paul Walker), gets tight after a bad start with
the top street car racer Dom Toretto (Diesel) by saving him from an arrest.
Dom's dysfunctional loser family of hijackers and racers include: his
mathematical genius high school flunk out engine man Jesse, his childhood pals
Vince and Leon, and his sexy Mexican girlfriend  Letty (Rodriguez-"Girlfight"),
who is as tough as anyone in the gang (she punches one guy out with a shot to
the jaw). There's also the nice girl sister of Dom's, Mia (Brewster). In this
flick she goes for being a nice girl, though it's a stretch considering she's
somewhat involved in the gang activities and her most joyous scene was racing
through the nighttime streets of L.A. on a joy ride. 
Not only does Brian hit it off with Dom, but he falls in love with the pretty
Mia. This romance leads to the conflict he has of turning over her brother to
the cops, as he becomes closer in spirit with the gang than with his colleagues.
The rogue undercover cop, who's not only under the command of local L. A.
Sergeant Tanner (Levine) but the by-the-book F.B.I command team, must learn how
to walk a blurred line between doing his job and reacting to his emotions. 
The gang mostly drives modified Honda Civics and fire crossbows with cables
attached by string at the truck's windshield, so that one of their members can
climb the rope and get in the truck when it slows down. They then overtake the
driver and hijack his goods; this should keep them in highly charged pistons
until the next truck heist. This was exciting but meaningless stuff; there was
no artistic accomplishment derived from this by-the-numbers action pic. The
acting can't be faulted, but it was left on the skidmarks on the road, as this
script was too inane to provide any realistic characterizations. The two women
had badly underwritten parts, Walker was forgettable in his role, and Diesel was
all high-octane energy, acting either angry or looking tough with his shaved
head while constantly flexing his musles. He gave this film whatever acting
charisma it had to have, so at least one human could look as good as the cars.
This was the kind of film where you could have walked in for the last 15 minutes
and would have had no trouble following the story. It's one of those bad flicks
that is irresistible because there's a charge to it that rides through its
mundane story and allows it to almost get away with its ludcricous dialogue. The
dialogue that made me crack my biggest smile went like this -- Dom to Brian: "I
live my life a quarter-mile at a time, for those 10 seconds, I'm free." 
If you are looking for a film about reality or one that has a philosophy, or one
that just makes sense, I would avoid this one. But if you want to see a film
about people whom you probably wouldn't like if you met them on the road in
real-life, but on film you can be tolerant of them and even might find this film
oddly enjoyable, then this popcorn movie might taste buttery to you. It has
those other recent car movies, Driven, Gone in Sixty seconds, and Grand Theft
Auto, beat by a city mile. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Poorly written, badly acted, completely stupid, but never once boring, The
Fast and the Furious has accomplished more entertainment-wise than Driven or
Gone in 60 Seconds could ever fathom (and it did so with considerably less
money and virtually no star power).  Any film about a gaggle of car-racing
buffoons immediately starts out in the hole as far as I'm concerned, but
with the popularity of the NASCAR thing, it's likely we'll get more racing
pictures shoved down our throats for a few more years (until the inbreeding
wipes the fans out).  But if they're all as fun as Furious, I say bring 'em
on.
Furious is set in and around the street-racing district of Los Angeles and
begins with a nicely staged truck heist, in which three cars and a harpoon
gun are able to procure a ton of stereo and television equipment from an
18-wheeler.  The truck-jackings are happening with increasing regularity,
which catches the eye of local police and the FBI, who send a dreamy,
blond-haired, blue-eyed boy undercover into the world of muscle cars and
monkey wrenches.
The cop is Brian Spindler (Paul Walker, The Skulls), and although we don't
know he's a cop at first, anyone with minimal brain activity will be able to
figure it out.  Brian decides to infiltrate the inner circle of LA's racing
kingpin - one Dominic Toretto (Vin Diesel, Pitch Black) - by sniffing around
the convenience store he runs with his younger sister, Mia (Jordana
Brewster, The Faculty), who seems to be receiving the majority of Brian's
sniffing. To show how painfully un-street Brian is, the script has him order
a tuna sandwich on white bread, with the crusts cut off, no less.  He also
lands a job at a high-end auto parts store in the racing district.
After a testosterone-bathed scene that depicts him earning his street cred
and the respect of Dominic, Brian is accepted into the in-crowd, which
includes, but is not limited to, characters played by October Sky's Chad
Lindberg, Get Carter's Johnny Strong and Girlfight's Michelle Rodriguez, the
latter of whom could probably kick the crap out of any of Furious' men.  The
scene also features a shot of Diesel running down the street at the speed of
a glacier.  Brian provides reports back to his boss (Silence of the Lambs'
dick-tucker Ted Levine) and an FBI suit (Thom Barry), neither of whom are
happy with the progress of the case.  But none of it seems to stop Brian
from flashing those blue eyes and pearly whites.  One might even get the
impression he's mildly retarded.
But the plot barely matters here.  It's all about the cars and the driving
scenes.  Heck, even the girls (even the unattractive ones, like Brewster)
have spoilers of their own.  Laugh, if you must, at the gearheads
inconspicuously traveling everywhere in packs of juiced cars.  It looks
cool, so it doesn't have to make sense. Come to think of it, I think that's
how we ended up with our President.
Diesel, who is a horrible actor but has somehow managed to land in three
underachieving films with decent buzz (like Boiler Room), logs in his
career-best at overacting (and that's quite an achievement).  Walker is eye
candy, and it looks like he could have been one of the sons on Home
Improvement, or maybe in one of the incarnations of Saved By the Bell, or,
at minimum, Mark-Paul Gosselaar's inevitable replacement on NYPD Blue for
the 2002/2003 season. Snow Falling on Cedars' Rick Yune plays The Bad Asian
Guy, and MTV tough-guy Ja Rule makes an appearance, too.  Yay!
Furious contains some of the worst dialogue ever written, and I'm saying
this less than two months after seeing Driven.  The highlight is Dominic's
elegant soliloquy, in which he bravely utters the line, "I live my life a
quarter-mile at a time."  Straight up, D?  That little gem, and all the
others, come courtesy of Gary Scott Thompson (Hollow Man), David Ayer
(U-571) and newcomer Erik Bergquist.  Furious was directed by Rob Cohen, who
recently directed Walker in The Skulls.
1:45 - PG-13 for violence, sexual content and language

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie trailers, check out http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A whitebread outsider joins a local LA street racing gang o' thugs and 
chicks, and falls for the sister of its leader. But it's all good, since 
the man in charge is now buds with the rookie as they race, drink and 
race some more. So what happens when someone from the crew is discovered 
to be an undercover cop? I'm sorry but you're gonna have to see the 
movie yourself to find that one out (giving you the minute 
spoiler-filled details of any film is obviously not my goal 
here...hehehe)
CRITIQUE:
I already said this once in my review of PITCH BLACK, but I'll say it 
again here...Vin Diesel rocks! Phew...and now that I got that out of the 
way, allow me to introduce you to a film that is ideally made for the 
summer season. A hoppin' soundtrack, cool cars, fast races, hot chicks, 
Vin Diesel, bad dialogue, an okay story and some rockin' stunts all add 
up to mucho fun and butter all over your popped corn. Forget about the 
sub-par acting jobs by some of the thespians in this film, put aside the 
fact that there's a dinky romance going on, ignore lines like "...if you 
need more time...buy the magazine!" and strap your ass to your chair and 
prepare to have your eardrums and eye sockets blown to bits! There ain't 
too many feelings better than going to a movie, forgetting about your 
stupid relationship problems, your friggin' boss who won't stop giving 
you shit at work, and delving right into a blast on the big screen! If 
you're looking for an escape from the real world...you've come to the 
right place. This movie delivers just what you're looking for, if what 
you're looking for is a good time. Plain and simple. But get this...not 
only did the movie entertain me, it actually added to that by "teaching" 
me a thing or two about street racing. That's right...I actually 
"learned" something from a summer movie! Wow, what's the world coming 
to...?
Seriously though, I dug the whole "street racing" underworld thang with 
the bets, the pink slips, the gang mentalities and the NOS, baby...the 
NOS!! (you'll get what I mean when you see the movie...ooooooh yeah!!) 
But I can't complete my positive review of this film without discussing 
the man who kept the fort down in this picture. A man whose name alone 
scares the shit out of people and here he is, in all of his glory, 
skinned to the head, buffed to the tank-top and ready to charm the pants 
out of anyone who isn't a fan of his already...the one, the only...Vin 
Diesel! By the way, if you're not a fan of his yet, watch this movie 
twice and call me in the morning. Okay, so maybe I'm exaggerating just a 
little bit, but Vin really did punch in yet another solid acting card 
here and certainly lifted the lesser talents of his surrounding players 
to a higher level. Sure, Michelle Rodriguez was also pretty good as the 
tough girlfriend with the attitude and some of the lines that these poor 
saps had to deliver were just awful, but all in all, I was still quite 
interested in most of the plights of these characters, and God knows, 
the stunts and car chases kept me rockin', so what else can I tell 
you...the movie entertained me, dammit!! I also liked the ending, some 
of the humor elements strung throughout the film, the camera tricks that 
Mr. Rob Cohen surprised me with and the scene where the two girls were 
making out at a party...oops, but that's another story altogether.
Actually, Dr. Drew, who joined me at this screening, noted that this 
film might've worked better if things had been moved into the world of 
the R-rating, and I must say that I agree with the man (he liked the 
film too, btw). A few swear words here and there, some gratuitous nudity 
and some of the "old ultra-violence" might've propelled this film 
directly into popcorn summer movie heaven, but alas, the film was still 
rock solid cheesy fun despite that. And by the way, I'm not "into cars" 
myself, in case you were interested, but damn, some of the stuff in this 
movie was just nitro without the seatbelts. So grab a cold beer, pump up 
your pecs before walking into the theater and don't forget to drop your 
brain off at the entrance. NOS, baby!! Oh yeah, and did I mention that 
Vin Diesel rocks!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Armageddon (8/10) - Deep Blue Sea (8/10) - Driven (5/10) - Exit Wounds 
(7/10) - Gone in Sixty Seconds (6/10) - Grease (8/10) - Mission 
Impossible 2 (7/10) - The Mod Squad (2/10) - Point Break (7/10) - Ronin 
(8/10)
