Title
Review for Man on the Moon (1999)
Number of Reviews
36

Author
Bob Bloom

 "Man on the Moon" (1999) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Jim Carrey, Courtney
Love and Danny DeVito. Directed by Milos Forman.
 "Man on the Moon" opens in black and white with Jim Carrey in character as
Andy Kaufman talking directly to the camera.
 Go home, he tells audience. This is a bad movie. Actually, he adds, it was
a bad movie until he got hold of it and cut out all the bad parts. This, he
says, is all that is left. Then the end credits begin to roll.
 Oh, that "Man on the Moon" had been as inventive as its opening.
 For those who knew the comedy of Andy Kaufman, "Man on the Moon" may be a
disappointment. Those who are not familiar with the late comedian, may
wonder, so what? What's the big deal?
 In truth, "Man on the Moon," directed by Milos Forman, brings no new
insights about Kaufman to light. You can learn just as much by watching the
pair of documentaries about the comedian that are continually rerun on
Comedy Central.
 And that is too bad. Kaufman was a unique comedian, a man who challenged
his audiences, tested their limits, pushed them to the edge - and then
sometimes shoved them over.
 Like "Chaplin" of a few years ago, "Man on the Moon" presents the story of
a comic genius, but fails to show the genesis of the spark that set the man
apart from others.
 And like "Chaplin," "Man on the Moon" is more of a highlights-greatest
hits narrative rather than an examination of the man himself and of what
drove him.
 After the rather intriguing opening, the movie flashes back to Kaufman's
childhood where he is seen playing alone in his room, making believe he's
on television and performing to his wall, which he imagines as his audience.
 His father comes into the room and tries to get Andy to go outside and
play normal games with the other kids. He also explains to Andy that to
really perform, you need an audience.
 Well, flash forward several years and there's Andy on the stage at a
comedy club bombing big time. After some friendly advice from the club
owner, Andy comes back with his Foreign Man character as well as his Elvis
impersonation and before you can say, Judd Hirsch, he has an agent and a
featured role on a new sitcom called "Taxi."
 The movie's main conflict revolves around Kaufman's philosophy of
performing. He does not consider himself a comedian. He sees himself as an
old-fashioned song-and-dance man.
 He enjoys playing with the audience's mind, fouling up their expectations.
 Of course, as in any good bio-pic, he is met with skepticism and
opposition until he finally gains popularity.
 "Man on the Moon" seems to race through Kaufman's life. He goes from
"Taxi" to concerts, and then into his infamous wrestling phase, which
features his "feud" with pro wrestler Jerry Lawler (who plays himself).
 A lot about Kaufman is left unexplained and unexplored. For example, Bob
Zemuda, Kaufman's creative partner is introduced in a scene backstage at a
nightclub where Kaufman, as overly obnoxious Vegas lounge singer Tony
Clifton, has just humiliated Zemuda, posing as a customer. The two are
gleeful that their gag has succeeded beyond expectations.
 Yet, nowhere do we learn where Kaufman and Zemuda met, nor how they
decided to work together.
 Like Athena from Zeus's head, it seems the pair merely sprung into being
fully grown and fully developed. Plus, since Zemuda is listed as one of the
movie's producers, did he or could he have exaggerated his contributions to
Kaufman's career.
 Carrey is eerie as Kaufman - the on-stage Andy at least - recreating some
of his most famous bits: the Mighty Mouse sing-along on the first "Saturday
Night Live," Clifton, Latka from "Taxi" and, of course, the obnoxious,
bad-guy intergender wrestling champion.
 Carrey's problem, though, is that when off-stage he continues to act like
Kaufman on stage; the hunched shoulders, big eyes. He fails to
differentiate between the public and private person.
 Carrey gives a wonderful impersonation, but a rather tepid performance.
Like Kaufman, he only comes alive when in front of an audience.
The supporting cast, which includes Danny DeVito as Kaufman's manager,
George Shapiro, and Courtney Love as Kaufman's fiance, are merely wasted.
They either act befuddled and exasperated by his actions or laughing and in
awe of his comic genius.
 "Man on the Moon" has been a movie much anticipated. Unfortunately,
especially for Kaufman fans, it is going to be a disappointing Christmas.
It's like expecting a Playstation and getting a pair of socks instead.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Thomas Hilton
Several years ago Milos Forman glorified the despicable Larry Flynt in
a move that was both phony and inaccurate. Now here we go again! Not
nearly as contemptible as Flynt, Andy Kaufman was a non-star and
manipulater and in many ways himself contemptible. But with Forman, who
cares about facts when he has a movie and agenda to get across?
Andy Kaufman made occasional guest appearances on Saturday Night Live
in the Seventies; he was not a guest host. A few of his routines were
mildly amusing such as the Mighty Mouse lip synch or the Elvis
impersonation coming out of the Latka character. He then went on to a
small role on the "Taxi" TV series as Latka - a one-note semi-joke
built into a character, and that was contrived. After that he did
appearances elsewhere.
Perhaps the most infamous of those appearances was on ABC's "Fridays"
in 1981. That show was a very good Saturday Night Live clone that was
unfortunately killed for Ted Koppell's program; that clearly was
cost-cutting by ABC. Kaufman guest hosted and did all he could to screw
things up by blowing lines, ad libbing in inappropriate places and
generally making a jerk of himself. The cast looked embarrassed and
producer Jack Burns (formerly part of a comedy team) attacked him on
air. There was subsequently a running deal about Kaufman apologizing on
air and coming back, ad nauseam.
There may be some question if the cast of "Fridays" was in on this, but
Burns pulled his punches and clearly WAS in on it. And I have that on
video. All Kaufman was doing was deliberately and with great
calculation jerking around the audience and viewers with this phony act
of chaos. AND THAT WAS KAUFMAN'S SPECIALITY.
He played mind games on audiences again and again, and the second most
notorious piece of his schtick was boasting about beating women in
wrestling - and then doing so. He once took on an extremely athletic
Playboy centerfold named Susan Smith - and Andy needed a quick count
from the ref to get a win. More mind games. When he took on a
professional male wrestler he got pile-driven head first into the mat -
and then walked around whining with a collar on for an allegedly
damaged neck. By then Kaufman had zero credibility.
His playing with the audience's head ended with a rare form of lung
cancer that killed him; he didn't smoke. The jerking around of the
audience may have been an "in" joke to some - those who knew it was an
act - but even at that level it had worn very thin. For other viewers
it was cheap manipulation; style over substance. Kaufman was usually
booed, and when smacked in the face by the wrestler who allegedly
"injured" him on late night TV people cheered.
But now Forman has tried to make him some sort of inspired hero ahead
of his time, in the Lenny Bruce mold. But he and Bruce were minor even
in their own times.
Clearly Jim Carrey feels an affinity to Kaufman as they both have the
same birthday. But Carrey, who often mugs and overacts painfully, is
far more talented and accomplished already than Kaufman ever was.
Perhaps people need to find idols and icons.
The movie itself features all of Kaufman's "comedy" bits well
impersonated by Carrey. It jumps from one to another and is itself
style over substance. I never did figure out why Kaufman did what he
did. Were the mind games that he thought of a form of comedy and
entertainment - or a substitute for creativity and talent? He may have
thought them creative; most people at the time did NOT. Why did he feel
the need to play with people's heads at all? The question was never
answered for me.
If you were that minority of people from two decades ago who liked
Kaufman you will love this movie. If you are gullible enough to believe
the Forman version of facts and think Kaufman's stylistic antics were
truly creative, well, you'll like the film too - and I'll bet they
could also be sold the Brooklyn Bridge.
* Sent from RemarQ http://www.remarq.com The Internet's Discussion Network *
The fastest and easiest way to search and participate in Usenet - Free!

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "MAN ON THE MOON" (Universal Pictures)
  Don't miss the beginning - it's the most imaginative and
hilarious part. Facing the camera, Jim Carrey establishes immediately
that he's completely captured the eye-bulging essence of the late
comedian Andy Kaufman. His impersonation is nothing short of
brilliant, even Oscar-worthy. That having been acknowledged, the movie
itself leaves a lot to be desired. First, it's not really a
movie. It's simply the embodiment of an objectionable character whom
people either adored or loathed. Director Milos Foreman and
screenwriters Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski, the trio who did
The People vs. Larry Flynt, don't attempt an analysis or even offer
psychological insight into the complex, enigmatic nature of this
definitely unhinged, obviously neurotic, and perhaps psychotic
performer. Instead, we simply watch his progress from comedy clubs,
like the Improv, to Saturday Night Live, to TV's Taxi along with his
relentless self-destruction, aided and abetted by his writer/sidekick
Bob Zmuda (Paul Giamatti). Danny DeVito's superb as his agent,
observing: "You're insane - but you might also be brilliant." Kaufman
meets his girlfriend (Courtney Love) in a wrestling challenge but she
too is a cipher. They have only one revelatory moment together when he
whines, "You don't know the real me." And she replies, "There isn't a
real you." And then, at age 35, cancer strikes. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, Man on the Moon is a strange, shallow 6. Who was
this Andy Kaufman - and why did he love to provoke people? That's
never answered in this uneven, two-hour compilation of comedy
shtick. Even DeVito asks, "What's the point?"

Author
Dennis Schwartz

MAN ON THE MOON (director: Milos Forman; screenwriters: Scott
Alexander/Larry Karaszewski; cinematographer: Anastas Michos; editors:
Christopher Tellefsen/ Lynzee Klingman; cast: Jim Carrey (Andy
Kaufman/Tony Clifton), Danny DeVito (George Shapiro), Courtney Love
(Lynne Margulies), Paul Giamatti (Bob Zmuda/Tony Clifton), Gerry Becker
(Stanley Kaufman), Leslie Lyles (Janice Kaufman), Jerry Lawler
(Himself), Vincent Schiavelli (ABC Exec); Runtime: 118; Universal
Pictures; 1999)
An alluring biopic about the provocative comedian Andy Kaufman that
couldn't go futher than to provide an entertaining look at the
entertainer. If one was looking to find out who Andy Kaufman was, this
film would be of little help. The point of the film being that there was
probably no difference between the performer and the person off-stage,
therefore it believes by telling the story through only his performances
should give one a good enough idea of who Andy was. Every other
character besides Andy in the film seemed wooden, whose only purpose was
to look up and stare at him as if he were a God or sneer at him as if he
was the Devil. The Kaufman role was tailor-made for Jim Carrey and he
comes through with flying colors in a virtuoso performance, as this
fictionalized biography of Kaufman, shows his odd personality,
obsessions, and mind-set.
The film seemed flat in the parts when Carrey wasn't performing and his
story seemed superficial. I didn't feel as if I knew him any better
because of this film than I did before, though, at least, the film
didn't try to answer something it couldn't. But "Man on the Moon" was
entertaining, even for someone like me who has never been impressed by
his comic talents.
The film about 'the king of negative energy' starts with a prologue,
where Jim Carrey says, "Hello ... I am Andy." He then convinces us
without a doubt that is exactly who he is. He first shows us his
abnormal childhood, where he would play alone and perform his act before
an imaginary audience in his room rather than play with other children,
greatly upsetting his parents. He is raised in the affluent Long Island
suburb of Great Neck, but before we can gather anything else about his
childhood and his relations with his parents and his sister, we are
quickly whisked from here to Andy as a young adult doing an unfunny act
at a nightclub, where we have no trouble seeing how he would be fired,
which is indeed what happens. Suddenly he turns up doing an Elvis
impersonation at a comedy club attended by super-agent George Shapiro
(DeVito) and he's taken on by the agent who thinks he might have
discovered a comic genius, and soon he becomes a star on 'Saturday Night
Live.' From there he lands a starring role in a new sitcom, 'Taxi,' and
is allowed to make a number of demands from the producers in order to
land him, as he always tries to push the limits on what he can do. This
might be the way it happened, but it made for bad cinema since he wasn't
seen as being funny and his immediate rise to fame lacked credibility as
it was filmed, even though we know it evidently did happen.
The heart of the film and indeed what keeps it lively, is watching
Carrey go through his repertoire in a flawless comic manner. He seems to
have all of Andy's top acts down pat, as he has the ability to do
impeccable imitations of Kaufman as an impersonator, such as the buggy
wide-eyed immigrant Latka; the confrontational wrestler bullying the
women he fights with in the ring; his ongoing scripted spat with the
wrestler Jerry Lawler which appealed to the crowds baser instincts;
performing a reading of the entire "The Great Gatsby" to a bored college
audience; performing as the obnoxious Tony Clifton (his alter ego), who
is a lounge singer who goads his audience on in a hostile manner; and,
acting childish while doing lip-syncs to a phonograph record of the
"Mighty Mouse" theme song, as he would sing out "Here I come to save the
day!" He thrived in his short-lived career in the 1970s, until his death
from cancer in 1984 at the age of 35, on being unpredictable, presenting
a stand-up act that was hard to define because of his uniqueness.
Milos Forman's uneven film is missing the true craziness of Kaufman in
the entirety of the story. He gets that ingredient not from the
conventional way he tells the story but only from Jim Carrey's
expressive performance, as the film went from bursts of great energy
with Carrey doing Andy to dullness in storytelling.
The most jejune part was reserved for Courtney Love as Andy's girlfriend
Lynne. Her part was so underwritten that there weren't even hints of
where the romance or sex in it was, and there appeared to be no intimacy
between them. She just seemed to be Andy's prop, who looks delicious on
the screen but was given nothing to do, but one turn on the wrestling
mat.
What we are left pondering, is if Andy is weird and gimmicky enough to
invite a whole audience out for milk and cookies after he played out his
dream of appearing in Carnegie Hall, could he also be capable of faking
his own death. I can't help thinking, that aside from Carrey's masterful
performance, there's not much in this film to take away with you. The
film seems to be an unadultered homage to Kaufman, looking on the rosy
side of his lunacy and not getting at anything else. Kaufman seemed to
always be searching for something, whether in studying Transcendental
Meditation, looking for a psychic cure for cancer in the Philippines, or
a way to push the limits of comedy to a further degree, and what we see
in the film, is that he never quite found what he was looking for, in a
career that was far too short for a man of his energies and stated
talents.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Man on the Moon (1999)
Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Courtney Love, Paul Giamatti, Vincent
Schiavelli, Peter Bonerz, Jerry Lawler, Gerry Becker, Leslie
Lyles. Screenplay, Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski. Directed by
Milos Forman. 118 minutes.
Rated R, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com 
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott 
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests
to ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com
with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
When I first learned Jim Carrey would star in a film based on the life
of performance artist Andy Kaufman, a number of questions sprang to
mind. Would Carrey be able to pull off a credible impression of the
late performer? Would the film accurately capture Kaufman's peculiar
appeal? And, most importantly, was this movie really necessary?
The answers turn out to be yes, yes and no.
Andy Kaufman first reached a mass audience on the debut of "Saturday
Night Live," with a hilarious bit where he lip-synched one sentence
from the "Mighty Mouse" theme song. After a number of additional "SNL"
appearances, he reached stardom on "Taxi" as Latka Gravas, the lovable
immigrant mechanic whose halting English was supplemented by long
streams of Latka's deliciously odd native language.
Always the provocateur, Kaufman periodically turned up in another
persona, that of Tony Clifton; an extremely obnoxious lounge lizard
type. Kaufman also became obsessed with wrestling women, alienating a
large segment of his fans along the way. After "Taxi" completed its
run, his controversial behavior led to a call-in ballot on "SNL,"
where the audience voted by a large margin to ban the performer from
the show forever. Later, when it was announced that the 35-year-old
was dying of cancer, many wondered if this was yet another put-on.
In "Man on the Moon" (the title comes from the wonderful tribute song
by R.E.M.), Jim Carrey does a startlingly accurate impersonation of
Kaufman onstage. He really nails him; sounding, moving and even
looking like the off-the-wall entertainer. His Kaufman impression is
as good as Kaufman's legendary Elvis impression. But that's not enough
to justify a movie. I wanted to learn more about what made Andy tick,
or at least see some juicy behind-the-scenes material. Instead, "Man
on the Moon" is content to merely reenact oft-seen Kaufman
performances. Comedy Central frequently runs two thorough
documentaries on Andy Kaufman, and E!, MSNBC and A&E have all done
competent biographies on him. Why watch an impersonation when footage
of the actual man is so accessible?
They could have done more. Bob Zmuda, Kaufman's closest collaborator,
was intimately involved in the production of the film. Why didn't we
get the story of how the two got together, or some scenes of them
working as a team, plotting out the various stunts? Zmuda often played
the heavily made-up Tony Clifton in Kaufman's absence. How about a
little explanation on how the character was cooked up?
Continuing my rant, how about an explanation about the wrestling with
women business? In the film, people repeatedly ask Kaufman why he
persists in pursuing such a career-damaging bit, but answers are never
provided. In addition to Zmuda, Kaufman's manager and girlfriend were
also involved with the making of the movie. It's hard to believe that,
over the course of years, he never gave them any answers.
As good as Carrey is during the onstage segments, he seems lost when
the spotlights go off, geeking it up excessively during personal
moments. I've seen interviews with Kaufman and he didn't spend every
waking moment looking at people with bug-eyed expressions. I suspect
Carrey did the goon routine in the intimate scenes because he didn't
have anything else to work with.
I also suspect the filmmakers wanted it that way. I think they believed it would be clever to keep the film as cryptic as Kaufman's various personas. The hook of the movie is that he created so many characters that the real Andy Kaufman got lost along the way, but that feels like cheap pathos to me, and I expect more than that from a director of Milos Forman's caliber. After all, this is the man behind "Amadeus" and "The People vs. Larry Flynt." 
Forman starts the film off in style, with Kaufman addressing the
audience in his foreign man character, complaining about how his story
was handled and then running the closing credits while shooing us out
of the theater. But after this promising surreal beginning, the
production turns into a series of obvious vignettes depicting Andy's
greatest hits.
The low point comes late in the film, when a desperate Kaufman goes to
the Philippines in search of a cancer cure from "psychic surgeons,"
con men who claimed to be able to prod a person's stomach with their
hands and miraculously remove tumors without an incision. In the real
world, these scam artists fooled thousands of cancer patients before
their trick was finally exposed. But in the movie, Andy glances down
and immediately spots the deception. The camera then comes in for a
close-up of Kaufman smiling wryly; the prankster fooled by another
group of pranksters. How tragic. How ironic. What a crock.
I'm glad that "Man on the Moon" has sparked a revival of interest in
Andy Kaufman, but the bottom line is this. As much as I admired
Kaufman's impersonation of Elvis Presley, I would much rather watch a
documentary of the genuine article. And as much as I admire Jim
Carrey's impersonation of Andy Kaufman, I'll skip future viewings of
this superficial recreation and catch one of the numerous
documentaries featuring the real man on cable.

Author
John Carroll
MAN ON THE MOON, starring Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Paul Giamatti, Courtney
Love, Jerry Lawler, David Letterman, Paul Shaffer, Judd Hirsch, Marilu Henner,
Norm McDonald, Lorne Michaels, Jim Ross, Christopher Lloyd and Carol Kane. 
Directed by Milos Forman.  1999.
   If you have seen any advertisements for Man on the Moon, you have probably
seen this tag line, whether it be the poster, soundtrack or other memorabilia
for Man on the Moon that you have seen.  Either way, I figure it is fitting for
this review.  Andy Kaufman, despite what people may think about him, is revered
among comics as one of the greatest of all time, rivaling the likes of Buster
Keaton.  Man on the Moon takes a look at his wild life, where the performance
began and never stopped.
   Andy Kaufman not only had a complex performance on stage, but had a complex
life in general.  And even as Lynne Margulies (Courtney Love) says to Andy,
"There is no real you."  And if you are looking for Man on the Moon to answer
the questions Andy always brought to the table, then you are in for a shock. 
Aside from one or two surprises, Man on the Moon just sticks to pure Andy, and
still stays just as entertaining.
   Documentary-type movies always get made based on the subject at hand. 
People will be much more intrigued by a documentary surrounding a celebrity
than a two-bit low life.  Based on that, I definitely will not be looking
forward to The John Carroll Story.  That being said, back to Man on the Moon. 
The story is obviously about comic-legend Andy Kaufman.  Kaufman is played by
Jim Carrey, who is regarded as the comic legend of the 1990s.  The resemblance
between the two is uncanny.  Carrey not only gets the look down cold, but all
of the mannerisms as well, even Kaufman's trademark "Tenk you veddy much." 
Also adding to the nostalgia is the cast of "Taxi", save Tony Danza.  All in
all, the movie accurately captures the Kaufman persona.  It has a five minute
sequence about Andy's childhood, other than that, it jumps right into Kaufman's
comedic life.
   The movie starts off like Andy Kaufman would have wanted it.  In a year with
so many innovative endings, Man on the Moon has both an innovative introduction
and a very intriguing finale.  I will not ruin them for you, but they are very
Kaufman-esque and set the standard for the entire film.
   Jim Carrey got snubbed last year for The Truman Show.  Granted, there was no
way he would have won the Oscar against the likes of Hanks and Benigni, but he
definitely deserved to be there on Oscar night.  Considering that, and the
absolutely amazing performance he gives in Man on the Moon, it would be an
absolute catastrophe if Carrey does not recieve the nomination for Man on the
Moon.  The buzz for the past few months is that Carrey IS Andy Kaufman.  It may
seem cliche', but once you see Man on the Moon, you will be saying to yourself,
"CARREY IS KAUFMAN."  The presence becomes so natural that Carrey creates
Kaufman to the extreme.  Jim Carrey gives his best performance of his career,
and could ultimately be the performance he is remembered for twenty years down
the road when he recieves some sort of Lifetime Achievement Award.  Kudos must
go to Carrey for this unbelievable talent.  Anyone who thinks The Truman Show
was a fluke will definitely be converted after witnessing Carrey in Man on the
Moon.
   Andy Kaufman is the center of this film, and due to his profession, is
probably one of the funniest dramas you will ever see.  The writers, Scott
Alexander and Larry Karaszewski, diligently stick to Kaufman's career,
recreating the comic's funniest- and most extreme- antics.  Kaufman's career
becomes much a part of the movie as does Carrey's wonderful performance.  His
on-screen presence is so demanding that the supporting cast has to fight for
screen time, but luckily, they utilize it.
   The main supporting cast that has been billed for Man on the Moon has been
Danny DeVito, who plays Andy's manager, George Shapiro, and Courtney Love, who
plays Lynne Margulies, Andy's girlfriend.  However, the most important
supporting role- and surprisingly absent from the ads- is Paul Giamatti's role
as Bob Zmuda, Andy's writer and best friend.  Giamatti gives a great
performance as the equally wacky Zmuda.  He further brings Kaufman's persona to
life as the two partners in crime continuously deviate over how to pull one
over on the crowd and to stay "one step ahead of them."
   Milos Forman, who directed such critically acclaimed hits as Amadeus and One
Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest, helps bring Kaufman to life and Carrey to a
terrific performance.  Forman quickly moves into Andy's life and never stops. 
Just like Andy, he stays one step ahead of the audience as he intricately
swirves through the life of Andy Kaufman.
   Despite all of the supporting performances and the man behind the lens, Man
on the Moon ultimately succeeds with Jim Carrey.  Carrey is almost always on
the screen, and from this Man on the Moon benefits.  As the film progresses,
things seem out of place.  That one loose tie needs to bring everything
together.  And as Andy goes to the Phillipines to seek his "miracle," he has
the ultimate hoax played on him.  And he laughs.  And at that point, Andy
Kaufman becomes apparent.  He was not a comedian, or even a "song and dance
man" as he claimed to be.  He was an artist who was there to entertain himself,
and always do the wild, not the obvious.  But, on the final note, as Tony
Clifton belts out his version of "I Will Survive," we get hit with one more
dose of Kaufman, and despite how weird it may seem, it is a fitting ending to a
great film.
The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Nick Lyons
  Milos Forman (Amadeus, One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest) has always been a
favorite director of mine. When I heard he was doing a biopic about Andy
Kauffman, it sounded promising, especially with Jim Carrey aboard. While Man On
The Moon captures Andy Kauffman perfectly, the film feels as staged as some of
Kauffman's acts.
 The story follows the late Andy Kauffman (Jim Carrey) throughout his career.
We see him singing the MIghty Mouse tune, doing Elvis impressions, as well as
performing a strange foreign character, later named Latka. Latka of course was
Andy's most famous character on TAXI, but he believes otherwise. In fact, that
was Kauffman's greatest struggle, coping with the fact that Latka was his
greatest comedic act with audiences. Of course not everybody liked him. Some
people hated him, others thought he was a genius, but either way no one
understood him. That's what made Kauffman so appealing to an audience, his
originality. He does go overboard by wrestling women, but he just wanted to
entertain people in a different fashion.
  This is indeed a very informative movie about Andy Kauffman. Jim Carrey is
absolutely flawless as he potrays the comedian. Every facial expression and
voice tone is right on the money. Carrey obviously did his research. He
undoubtedly deserves an Oscar nod, especially since he was the only one keeping
the film alive. It's unfortunate to see Carrey's talented wasted on a somewhat
dull biopic. Sure it's interesting, but the pacing is dull. It's hard to get a
feeling of realism here, because it's too staged, like many of Andy's acts.
It's quite frankly better to watch a real documentary to get a sense of why he
did what he did. There really was no point for Milos Forman to direct this,
because it's well pointless. If Andy himself saw this, he would probably be
laughing. It's more like an ode to Kauffman, so we can try to understand him a
little better, but it doesn't work. Nothing is explained as to what drove him
to be so different. Even as a child we see him performing to his kid sister,
but why? Everything's a mystery here, and it leaves us puzzled. There's far too
many unanswered questions that leaves viewers furious and flat out irritated.
There's just no reason for making this film period.
  As I said earlier, Jim Carrey was great. He really showed us what Kauffman
was like up close and personal, but the writers didn't give him enough depth.
That's not his fault at all, but he would have easily been handed an Oscar if
that occurred. The rest of the cast (including Danny De Vito, Courtney Love)
did their jobs, but everyone and everything is outdone by Carrey. Even director
Milos Forman felt as if he were awed by Carrey. Speaking of Forman I have no
idea why he choose this movie. It seems so simple for his type of tastes, but I
guess he needed a hit after his last dude (The People Vs. Larry Flynt).
  Another honorable mention is the soundtrack. R.E.M fans will especially be
pleased, that the song Man On The Moon is more meaningful than ever. You will
never hear the song, the same way again. Good stuff. R.E.M's score is also
great as well. It's possibly the best score this year, right behind Red Violin.
It fits perfectly.
  Man On The Moon isn't a great picture, but it is somewhat empty. It needed
more than just a brilliant performance by Carrey. Maybe next time a biopic
comes out, it won't feel as staged or at least have a decent story constructed
around facts.
Grade: B- to a C+

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Milos Forman
WRITTEN BY: Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski
CAST: Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Courtney Love, Paul Giamatti
"[...] All of the most important things in my life have been changed
out and mixed up for dramatic purposes. So I decided to cut out all of
the baloney. Now the movie is much shorter..In fact this is the end of
the movie. Than you very much [...]"
Quick facts on front: this is a review that may contain some
information that will certainly spoil your evening if you were
planning to watch this movie. Second: though this picture is about the
tragic life of a comedian / performer, comparisons to films such as
"Lenny" are useless, because this film is mostly not like anything
else. The director of this motion picture is Milos Forman, a man who
has lived under the totalitarian regime and escaped it with his life
and talent perfectly intact. That is probably why he showed a
particular interest in people that dared to be different, that had the
courage to go against the stream -- against the system. This devotion
for the brave and original can be observed in Forman's films, most of
which slightly fictionalized biographies that deal with men who are
regarded as mavericks by society ("One Flew Over the Cokoo's Nest",
"Amadeus", "People vs. Larry Flint"). Andy Kaufman fits perfectly into
that description. Although we know very little about this man, we know
one thing: he was not like everybody else. So who was Andy Kaufman?
Andy Kaufman was (and still is) a man of mystery. He was not a
comedian, not an actor, not a musician, but he was certainly an
artist. The man that dared to be different. The man that dreamed about
becoming the biggest star in the world and became exactly that. He
provoked the audience, tricked and deceived us. This was his
profession and his gift. He could provoke real emotions. Andy Kaufman
was the most loved and most hated man in the 70s. A man that nobody
really knew or understood. The world and everything in it was
Kaufman's playground until he died of a sudden cancer at the age of
35.
This information is certainly not excessive. It proves that we do not
know much about this man. And the film was going to make it all more
clearer, since it is Forman's tribute to Andy Kaufman and his work. Or
at least it is supposed to be. What it is, is simply a duplication of
Kaufman's most famous performances. It begins in a bizarre and
unexpected way as Jim Carey approaches the screen -- looking and
acting like Andy Kaufman, saying in the famous Latka-voice "Hello. I
am Andy. Welcome to my movie". You have to admit that it is an
original innovation. Regrettably from that moment the film enters a
certain trance as we are forever stuck as audience members in
Kaufman's show, not able to come closer to him as a person. First he
creates the insecure and stiff foreigner (who is better known as Latka
from TV-show "Taxi"), then he does an Elvis Presley imitation, then he
starts wrestling with women, then he invents another character and it
goes on and on and on. In addition to the Taxi and SNL bits, many of
Kaufman's public appearances are resurrected, including an infamous
guest spot on David Letterman's show. This is all very entertaining,
because of Jim Carey performance (which by the way truly elevates the
film to a new level), but it is also deluding and confusing. We long
to finally get behind the masks and illusions -- to the real Andy
Kaufman. Unfortunately Forman seems to be much more interested in
Kaufman's career than his personality, and all we get is a couple of
sentences like: "The world is an illusion" and "We shouldn't take our
selves too seriously". Of the two hours that the film goes on, 1 hour
and 30 minutes are practically an endless Kaufman show. It's not that
it is not interesting or funny. It certainly is, and it may very well
be that there is no body who have seen "the real" Kaufman; that he
never completely revealed himself to anyone. There is in fact a moment
in the film where Kaufman becomes so adept at the art of deception and
illusion that, when he discovers he has terminal cancer, no o n family
views it as the latest in a series of cruel practical jokes and
believes that his doctor is a paid actor. Like the boy who has cried
wolf once too often, Kaufman must struggle to convince those around
him that, for once, he is serious. This is something that happens at
the very end, and is a territory that is never quite explored. Forman
doesn't even try. To me it was the biggest disappointment. However
there are moments when the screen gets simply positively radiant, when
Forman creates pure magic. When the film is moving to the end and
Forman decides to "cut out all of the baloney", then some very
interesting things start happening. In the end "Man on the Moon"
manages to generate emotions, be that laughter or tears, and it never
seems to push for either. You might wonder about how it is possible,
if indeed I am right and most of the film is just jokes and scams. It
is difficult to explain, but I believe that the original material was
created by Andy Kaufman himself, who could touch our hearts and
provoke reactions and emotions, and I think that Jim Carey manages to
do the same. He completes the transition from off-the-wall comedian to
serious actor that he began in The Truman Show. Not only does Carrey
imitate Kaufman almost perfectly (including matching his trademark
"Thank you very much"), but he employs this mimicry in the service of
a compelling performance. The forcefulness with which the film conveys
Kaufman's character is as much a function of Carrey's portrayal as it
is of the script from which he is working. This is a role that Carrey,
a lifelong Kaufman fan, wanted desperately, and, once he got it, he
poured every ounce of his talent into his work. It would be a disgrace
to not nominate Carrey for an Academy Award this year. As for the film
itself, it never seems boring or disappointing in any way, and it
certainly pays enough respect to the artist that Andy Kaufman
was. "Thank you very much"

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Manchester)
Released in the UK by UIP on May 5, 2000; certificate 15; 119 minutes; 
country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Miloš Forman; produced by Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, Stacey 
Sher.
Written by Scott Alexander, Larry Kawaszewski.
Photographed by Anastas Michos; edited by Linzee Klingman, Christopher 
Tellefsen.
The comedian Andy Kaufman was perpetually aware that a performance was not 
just a piece of material, but an event, happening in a time and place. He 
wanted his audiences to have an experience; to know they were in the room, 
watching somebody putting on a show. People didn't always applaud his 
outrageousness as they watched it, but he always got laughs somehow. Maybe 
they would laugh AT him. Or chuckle afterward, in disbelief. Or make their 
friends crack up by telling them what he did. The sheer lunacy and audacity 
of his acts was hilarious; maybe not first-hand, but certainly in concept, 
when you stopped to think about them.
After all, Kaufman is the guy who once went onstage, read "The Great Gatsby" 
in its entirety, then walked off. Whose act once consisted of standing in 
silence through the "Mighty Mouse" theme song, except for the "Here I come to 
save the day!" line, which he'd mouth along to. And who, to close a concert 
in the gigantic Carnegie Hall, took all the spectators out for milk and 
cookies. Kaufman was always pulling gags you had to experience, even if that 
required you to be the butt of them. When he died of cancer in 1984, many 
thought it was just another practical joke.
There are of course those who hail him as a genius. His detractors find him 
confounding. Future generations can make up their minds by watching Miloš 
Forman's "Man on the Moon", a film which some have described, unfairly, as a 
sort of Greatest Hits compilation reel. Yes, the film has a straightforward 
structure in chronological order, and is mostly made up of its hero's onstage 
appearances. But it is therefore a faithful and successful presentation of a 
very interesting character, leaving us to love or hate him at will. The 
surprising thing is that so many of Kaufman's antics are amusing in 
themselves, and not just as ideas. This is a very funny picture.
It's also a deeply moving screen biography, following years of success right 
through to times of pain, and made by some of the masters of the bio-pic 
genre. Forman, the director, was also the helmsman on the Oscar-winning 
Mozart epic "Amadeus" (1984), as well as "The People Vs. Larry Flynt" (1996), 
a movie about the controversial publisher of "Hustler" magazine. The 
screenwriters, Scott Alexander and Larry Karszewski, wrote both "Flynt" and 
"Ed Wood" (1994). And Jim Carrey is a terrific choice for the starring role. 
It's his second performance as a dramatic lead, and he proves that his turn 
in "The Truman Show" was no flash in the pan, letting his eyes and voice 
become possessed by his character. His appearance always seems a little odd, 
but that's kinda the point. Anybody who knew Andy Kaufman will tell you that 
he was always "on"; his mind was always pushing something new up his sleeve, 
he made you keep your guard up. "There is no real you," one of the characters 
tells him. That character is his wife.
Of course the essential problem with any film about this man is that it 
explains somebody who refused to be explained. Figuring out what Kaufman was 
up to was part of the fun. Then again, on his deathbed he did ask for a movie 
to be made about his life. Maybe he did think it was important to be 
understood. He just thought that speaking for himself would be a cop-out.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Eugene Novikov
 Starring Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Courtney Love, Paul Giamatti.
Directed by Milos Forman. Rated R.
Despite hopes by many, myself included that the new "biopic" Man on the
Moon might shed some light on the enigmatic existence of comedian Andy
Kaufman, the man remains a mystery. This is less of a biography than it
is a series of reenactments. Director Milos Forman, the man responsible
for superb films like One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest and The People
vs. Larry Flynt delivers a film startingly lacking in insight, less of
a look at a comedy legend than a quick fast-forward through his career.
Andy Kaufman wasn't a performer. He didn't just perform his act, he
lived it. Though he himself stated that he wasn't a comedian, the whole
world , including his audience, was a joke to him. He didn't so much
aim to make people laugh as to garner some sort of reaction, whether it
be shock, resentment or disgust. He pulled stunts like wrestling women
and reading "The Great Gatsby" in front of an audience of college
students until they all left the theater. Sure, some of his schtick was
funny -- the "Mickey Mouse" lip-synch was hysterical -- but a lot of
the stuff he did was considered obnoxious. More than anything else,
that's what he was to people: obnoxious. And he liked it.
This movie very briefly chronicles Andy's relationships with his
manager George Shapiro (Danny DeVito), his girlfriend (Courtney Love)
and his favorite writer Bob Zmuda (Paul Giamatti). These relationships
are shown abbreviated and watered down in order to make room for the
elaborate reenactments that take up a good 80% of Man on the Moon's
running time.
I have to admit that I enjoyed parts this movie, especially Jim
Carrey's virtuoso "performance", but the whole time I wondered why it
was ever made. I could have grabbed an Andy Kaufman highlight reel and
watched it with the same exact result. Kaufman's Mickey Mouse and
wrestling routines are redone with striking attention to detail, but
for what purpose? Did Forman decide to pull a Gus Van Sant and film a
shot-by-shot remake of Kaufman's career? What, exactly, is the point?
Jim Carrey is dead-on amazing in his impersonation of Kaufman, from the
eye-rotations and the voice down to the most minute movements of the
body. He is fun to watch as an impersonator rather than a performer
almost like we're watching a feature-length mockery rather than a
movie. I don't suppose that's a fair statement, even though Man on the
Moon cheesy feel can, at times, make it seem like a mockery. I believe
that the movie was made with the best intentions at heart. It works as
a celebration of Andy Kaufman's life (after all, imitation is the
sincerest form of flattery) and it works as a method for Jim Carrey to
show off his acting chops (though as far as I'm concerned his snubbed
performance in last year's sole masterpiece The Truman Show was much
better).
I dunno. Maybe there was more here than I chose to analyze. It's
doubtful. I look at the glee with which the highlights of Kaufman's
career are recreated in this movie and it doesn't make sense to me. We
get a cursory look inside his life -- his attitude towards his insanely
popular sitcom Taxi, his relationships with his girlfriend and co-
workers -- but Milos Forman refuses to go any further. There is nothing
about what made this oddball personality tick. What were his
motivations? Considering the high expectations so many people had for
Man on the Moon, this overblown highlight reel is even more of a
disappointment. At one point in the movie, Kaufman's girlfriend tells
him "There is no real you," to which he responds "Oh yeah, I forgot."
Any biography of this man had damn well better either challenge or
explore that statement. Man on the Moon does neither.

Author
Jamey Hughton
`Jim Carrey is Andy Kaufman in Man on the Moon'.'
You may think Universal has intended this tagline, which has been
attached to the poster and commercial advertising campaign of the new
Andy Kaufman biopic, merely to reveal the role Carrey is playing. But
there is more to it than just that. Carrey doesn't settle on a simple
recreation of the late comedian, he inhabits the role - climbing right
into Kaufman's skin -  to deliver a triumphant performance so borderline
accurate that many will find the comparison to be frightening. This is
one of the most dedicated and remarkable performances I've ever
witnessed on screen. Carrey is already a dead ringer for the daring
comic, but he also envelops every ounce of his character to such a
startling degree we believe that this could be out-takes of the real
Andy Kaufman.
Now, if you've heard that Carrey is essentially the entire show, you've
heard right. But he's just so damn entertaining. Watching the gifted
comedian reenact all of Andy Kaufman's comic shenanigans - the
wrestling, the stand-up, the Latka - is truly an astonishing spectacle
to admire. `Man on the Moon' charts, with a sure-footed approach,
everything from Kaufman's rise to fame on the sitcom `Taxi' to his
sudden death from lung cancer in 1984. Is there really any exploration
into Kaufman's character, or some indication given of his aspirations as
an out-of-control comic? No. For the most part, director Milos Forman
leads us through `Man on the Moon' from the perspective of a curious
outsider. Andy Kaufman was hilarious to some, offensive and obnoxious to
others....and his actual nature remains a mystery to many (including the
filmmakers).
The film opens in a thoroughly ingenious and side-splitting manner, as
Carrey makes his first appearance as Kaufman on a black-and-white
backdrop. He explains that the movie actually sucks because many
significant details of his life have been edited and removed. He then
adds he has since edited the movie to meet his approval....and,
strangely enough, the film is now completely over. Carrey watches from
the sideline as the credits begin to roll, impatiently rolling his eyes
and swinging his arms - until the screen goes black. After an extended
moment of silence, which may cause slight confusion for some audience
members, Andy's head pops into the screen and explains he was merely
showcasing his unusual brand of humor. And then, the biographical side
of the movie commences.
This is the one and only time we see a flashback of Andy as a child, and
then Forman abruptly skips ahead to the introduction of agent George
Shapiro (Danny DeVito), who is impressed by Andy's stand-up routine and
offers him a stab at showbiz. From here, Andy's trails lead him to a
musical guest spot on `Saturday Night Live', where he mouths the words
to the `Mighty Mouse' theme song (to the audience's subsequent delight).
The chance of a lifetime knocks at the door when Andy is offered a role
on the sitcom `Taxi', where he is to translate his Foreign Man character
(previously seen on `Hollywood Squares') into an immigrant mechanic
named Latka. Andy sees sitcoms as the lowest form of humor, and demands
a few additional requirements; namely four separate guest spots for
Vegas lounge singer Tony Clifton - who (unbeknownst to many) is actually
Andy's obnoxious alter ego. Carrey's introductory appearance as Clifton
- a chubby, ill-tempered jerk layered with prosthetic makeup - receives
gales of laughter. The actor's immeasurable talent comes in handy in
imitating the absurd and shocking lengths Kaufman would go to for the
purpose of humor.
Both DeVito and Paul Giamatti (playing writing cohort and buddy Bob
Zmuda) are kept at a distance, but with their undeniable talent and
admirable restraint, they deliver adequate performances. A similar fate
is dealt to Courtney Love (who previously appeared in Forman's `The
People Vs Larry Flynt') as love interest Lynn Marguiles, an outsider who
is baffled by a great majority of Kaufman's outrageous (and prolonged)
acts. Love is terribly under-used, but her scenes with Carrey strike a
certain poignancy, and minor details of their relationship are charming.
There are amusing cameos from the former cast of `Taxi' (including
Christopher Lloyd, Carol Kane, Judd Hirsch and Marilu Henner), but this
is strictly Jim Carrey's turf. Even close friends and relatives of Andy
have been astonished by his dead-on portrayal. The research process
Carrey must have gone through is almost unfathomable.
Forman directs in a wise, entertaining manner - but do we truly realize
who Andy Kaufman was and what he was striving for? `Man on the Moon'
lacks the answer to a few vitally important questions, but at the same
time, it celebrates Andy Kaufman's life with more dedication and proper
acceptance than any other recreation could. Perhaps the true inner being
of Andy Kaufman was best left to Kaufman himself - but his story is
certainly an entertaining one.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Man_on_the_Moon_ (R) ** (out of ****)
_Man_on_the_Moon_ is one of those films where you walk out of the
auditorium completely flummoxed as to why you feel so empty.  All the
pieces are in place in Milos Forman's biography of the late comedian Andy
Kaufman; it's a polished, well-cast, well-performed, and technically
well-made piece of work.  Upon deeper reflection, however, the initially
mysterious reason is actually quite simple: while those pieces fit
together, the resulting picture is wrong, for _Man_on_the_Moon_ is less
about Kaufman than it is his portrayer, Jim Carrey.
That statement would appear to be a half-step away from a quote one
would find blaring from a newspaper ad or TV commercial:
"_Man_on_the_Moon_ is all about Jim Carrey!"  But when I say that Carrey
dominates the picture, it is not necessarily in a good way.  Yes, he does
a bang-up impersonation of Kaufman's many different personae, from his
career-making role as Latka on the late' '70s-early '80s sitcom _Taxi_ to
his most curious creation, sleazy and boorish lounge singer Tony Clifton
(whom Kaufman insisted was a completely separate person).  The problem is
that director Forman and screenwriters Scott Alexander and Larry
Karaszewski, who memorably humanized _Hustler_ publisher Larry Flynt in
_The_People_vs._Larry_Flynt_, do little to make the film appear to be
more than a showcase for Carrey's gift for reverent mimickry.
After a memorably absurd opening that perfectly captures the essence of
Kaufman's distinctly eccentric brand of humor, the creative team quickly
falls into the trap that becomes the film's ruin.  Once Forman stages his
first recreation of bits from Kaufman's standup act, the film sets into
cruise control, offering reenactment after reenactment of keystone events
and performances in Kaufman's career (including his infamous "feud" with
wrestler Jerry Lawler), with few moments of downtime in between and even
less dramatic momentum to string it all together.  There's no denying
that much attention was paid to make sure every note was played exactly
as Kaufman did years ago.  It's just that Forman and crew add nothing
fresh of their own, and the film becomes little more than a series of
rambling, indulgent performance pieces for Carrey.  This becomes all the
more redundant considering that Carrey proves he can capably do Kaufman
schtick within the film's first two minutes; and in seeing him repeatedly
hit the same beats and assume the same postures, one becomes more acutely
aware of the impersonation, of an actor acting.  Perhaps it would be
better said that _Man_on_the_Moon_ is not about Jim Carrey, but Jim
Carrey's _Oscar_bid_.
To Carrey's credit, during the quieter moments, he projects a sense of
vulnerability and humanity.  But not much is done to flesh out Kaufman's
life beyond the spotlight.  While his friendships with creative
collaborator Bob Zmuda (Paul Giamatti) and manager George Shapiro (Danny
DeVito) are fairly well-established, more problematic is his relationship
with girlfriend Lynne Margulies (Courtney Love).  The two meet on
_The_Merv_Griffin_Show_, where she angrily volunteers to fight Kaufman in
a wrestling match during his infamous anti-woman phase.  Backstage after
the show, he manages to charm her; and in their next scene together, he's
already proposing marriage.  After one more scene involving a wrestling
ring, their relationship is shoved into the background--as is Love, a
vibrant actress who radiates a beguiling warmth here, but it's
squandered.  Similarly, DeVito and Giamatti also impress, but their
efforts clearly lie on the second string as far as the filmmakers are
concerned.
The quieter moments also offer little in the way of insight into who
Kaufman was and why he was that way.  The points covered are easy,
surface ones: he marched to his own drummer; he took pleasure in
subverting audiences' expectations and wishes and in generally pissing
them off; he immersed himself so deeply into his characters that those
closest to him often did not know where the act ended and the real Andy
began--that is, if it ever did.  The last point highlights the difficulty
in making a biography about the notoriously enigmatic Kaufman; did
anyone, let alone those involved in the making of this film, ever get a
handle on who the real Andy was?   Late in the film, when Lynne tells him
with a smile, "There is no real you," one cannot help but agree--at least
as far as this shallow screen treatment goes.  (opens December 22)
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Shay Casey
Year: 1999
Starring Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Courtney Love, Paul Giamatti, Vincent
Schiavelli, Peter Bonerz, Jerry Lawler, Gerry Becker, Leslie Lyles
Written by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski
Directed by Milos Forman
Rated R
Perhaps the best question to ask of a biographical film on the late comedian
Andy Kaufman is whether or not it finds Kaufman's true essence, if it helps
you discover what Andy was really like. It is indeed ironic that "Man on the
Moon" does exactly the opposite-and may be better off for it. Milos Forman's
biopic on the mercurial performer doesn't claim to get a handle on what made
Kaufman tick. It offers up suggestions and possibilities, but can't quite
arrive at a conclusion. Why might this be a good thing? Because "Man on the
Moon" has few pretensions. The film doesn't take one tack on Andy Kaufman
and call it the ultimate truth; rather, it explains his ultimate mystery. No
one knew who Andy was, not even his closest friends. What "Man on the Moon"
displays is how Kaufman's comedy affected others, his friends, co-workers,
and audiences. Aided by an astonishing performance by Jim Carrey in the lead
role, Forman's rendition of this is impressively entertaining and strangely
affecting.
Carrey plays Andy Kaufman, the late comedian whose life "Man on the Moon"
chronicles. The film shows Andy as a showman from the start, "performing" to
the characters on the wallpaper of his childhood bedroom. We then flash
forward to Andy as a young man, performing in local nightclubs. Told by one
owner that he must do a more conventional act, Andy replies he doesn't want
to go for cheap laughs and refuses to merely "tell jokes." He gets his break
when he goes on stage pretending to be a shy foreign man bumbling through
his act-until he launches into a smashing Elvis impersonation that
thoroughly impresses talent scout George Shapiro (Danny DeVito), who lands
him appearances on "Saturday Night Live" and a plum role on the TV sitcom
"Taxi" doing his foreign-man shtick as Latka, the lovable mechanic. Kaufman,
however, treats his regular job almost as a chore, merely a vehicle he can
use to pursue more creative endeavors. With the help of his friend and
writing partner Bob Zmuda (Paul Giamatti) and eventual girlfriend (who meets
Andy initially by accepting his challenge to a wrestling match) Lynne
Marguiles (Courtney Love), Andy creates the repulsive lounge singer
character Tony Clifton (for whom Andy demands appearances on "Taxi," with
disastrous results), fools with the sketch-comedy show "Fridays," takes up
pro wrestling as "Inter-gender Champion," getting into a fight with
fan-favorite Jerry Lawler, and plays Carnegie Hall. Kaufman's life was
tragically cut short in 1984 by a rare form of lung cancer. He was 35.
"Man on the Moon" clearly leans on how well Carrey performs in the lead
role, and fortunately, he is fantastic. For a lifelong comedian who has
spent almost his entire career mugging for the camera, this is an impressive
accomplishment. Carrey truly embodies the character and spirit of Andy
Kaufman. It's hard to explain. Certainly the actor does a fine job of
imitating Kaufman's stunts. His Clifton impression is dead-on, his SNL
"Mighty Mouse" singalong could easily be mistaken for the real thing, and
his "feud" with Lawler that came to a head on David Letterman's "Late Night"
is surprisingly convincing. But that's all imitation-impressive, but not
indicative of a real performance. What Carrey really does well is to
convince the audience that they are not watching a Jim Carrey movie. Without
a doubt, we are always watching a movie about Andy Kaufman, not a movie
about Jim Carrey playing Andy Kaufman. This is a real leap for Carrey. His
star vehicles ("Ace Ventura," "The Mask," "Dumb and Dumber") were exactly
that: means for Carrey to show off, whether you found him amusing or not.
"The Truman Show" gave us some sign of him breaking out of this rut, but it
was still a role that required him to mug, since he was playing a famous TV
star whose life has been constructed to get precisely those reactions out of
him. Here, he cannot do his usual act. He must convincingly embody another
person. For my money, he did as good a job as anyone could have done.
The supporting performers turn in solid turns as Kaufman's closest
companions. DeVito comes off well as George Shapiro, though the role seems
to hamper the later recreation of "Taxi" scenes, since he can't reprise his
part on that show. I liked seeing Paul Giamatti as Bob Zmuda. The man is a
talented character actor who does more good work here. Courtney Love's part
is surprisingly small, almost to the point of becoming the dreaded
Superfluous Love Interest. To her credit, Love doesn't overact and doesn't
distract, accepting her limited role gracefully. What could have been a
major annoyance barely registers. Several star cameos show up in
reenactments of Kaufman's antics. Judd Hirsch, Marilu Henner, Christopher
Lloyd, and Carol Kane make appearances as "Taxi" cast members. Real former
pro wrestler and current broadcaster Jerry Lawler appears in a rather large
part, and does fairly good screen work, to my surprise. A scene where he and
Kaufman explain their act to George Shapiro is priceless. Current WWF
commentator Jim Ross also appears, to no one's surprise, as a wrestling
announcer. Along to recreate the "Late Night" fight are Letterman himself
and bandleader Paul Shaffer. SNL producer Lorne Michaels also plays himself.
Seeing these now more grizzled stars playing younger versions of themselves
is a bit jarring at first, but not hard to get used to.
"Man on the Moon" refuses to be a conventional biopic. Many will go into the
film expecting to get some kind of great insight into Kaufman's life. Why
was he the way he was? Why did he choose to pursue such a career, and why
did that career take such unusual turns? "Man on the Moon" doesn't know. It
doesn't claim to know. In many other films, this could be seen as a cop-out,
but Forman's film is not, because it explains exactly why this approach has
been taken. There are several telling exchanges between Kaufman and his
business partners, friends, and lover. When Lynne tells Andy "There is no
real you," the film's vision has become clear. No one knew who Andy Kaufman
was. If you're looking for insight into that, you've come to the wrong
place. What "Man on the Moon" claims is that Andy was all out there in his
performances, but you had to figure out where that was.
Andy was not a comedian; he was a showman, a man seeking to get people's
attention, to see their reaction to his performances. Some got it, some didn
't, and if you're going to appreciate his brand of "comedy," you had to
first understand what he was trying to do. Explaining this is where "Man on
the Moon" really succeeds, because it starts out with perhaps the most
clever opening of the year: Carrey comes out, brandishing Kaufman's
wide-eyed stare and tells the people in his Latka voice that since so much
of it was false, he had to cut the movie so much that there was no movie
left. He then plays his mini record player and begins rolling the credits.
After a bit of silence, Andy returns and says that was to clear out all the
people who wouldn't understand. This is Forman's way of letting you know
that this will be a story told on Andy's terms, not one to give us a
sentimental picture of his life, but one that will leave us guessing. Andy
often had people so turned around that they didn't know if he was performing
or being serious. When he read "The Great Gatsby" in its entirety to a
theater full of rowdy college students, only those who stuck around really
"got" the joke. Not many cast members got the joke when Tony Clifton trashed
the "Taxi" set. Not many women got the joke when he put himself up as a
misogynist wrestler. Even when he was diagnosed with cancer, no one believed
him.
Likewise a whole lot of people won't really get "Man on the Moon." There is
sure to be a whole lot of disappointment coming from audiences viewing this
film. Some might see it as a mere chronology of Kaufman's life and career,
pointless and empty. Others might think Kaufman was a repulsive person, not
worthy of having a feature film based on his life. But "Man on the Moon" is
really Andy's final performance, his final refusal to play by the rules and
give the people what they think is best. The irony here is that everyone who
is disappointed with this film, everyone who didn't get what they expected,
are those that would be clowned by Andy consistently. So a lot of people are
going to dislike Forman's film. So what? George Shapiro complained to Andy
after a performance, "They hated you out there." And Andy said just what he'
d say about this film: "That means we're a success."
For more reviews, go to
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Land/4252/movies.html

Author
Annie M Benson
      This movie didn't feel like most other movies to me.  Although
it told a story, it wasn't a smooth narrative progression, rather it
was series of disconnected feeling moment that when put together gave
a glimpse into the life of the late Andy Kaufman.
   I wasn't a big Kaufman fan going into this film.  I'd seen him on
Taxi, and in a few other venues, but I didn't really know that much
about him.  While I now know more about the events of his life, I feel
that I don't know much about him personally.  Jim Carrey was on-screen
almost constantly, yet it seemed like there was only ten or fifteen
minutes of him playing Kaufman, not him playing Kaufman playing a
character.  This could be appropriate, the impression I was getting
was that Kaufman was almost engulfed b the characters he created.
      Kaufman's childhood and early career are almost entirely skipped
over.  There is a hint that he had to struggle at the beginning. but
basically the movie gives the impression that fame fell into his lap
overnight.  It seems like he got handed his role on "Taxi" despite his
hating it, and through very little effort of his own.
      This movie seems to raise a question.  Was Kaufman really a
jerk, or just really good at playing a jerk, almost constantly, for
comedic effect?  The film's answer is the later.  Yet, this answer
seems sugar-coated.  His relationship with the others in the cast of
"Taxi" seems strained as best, with him being shown as a bigger star,
but disdainful of his fellow cast and not willing to associate with
them except when the camera was rolling.  His relationship with his
family is equally strained.  When his doctor tells them of his
illness, they speculate on how Andy managed to pull off the joke.  I
left feeling that maybe both positions were true.
      No review about this movie would be complete without a few words
about Jim Carrey's performance.  Aside from eye and hair color, Carrey
and Kaufman don't look that much alike.
 Kaufman was shorter and stockier, Carrey more lanky and slender.  And
yet I didn't find myself noticing that too much as I watched.  Carrey
threw himself so effectively into the role that it's almost as if he
ceased to exist and Kaufman had come back from the grave.  As I
watched him recreate scenes from "Taxi" he was just as I remember
Kaufman being.  In fact, it was jarring watching the scenes being
played with original "Taxi" cast members, many of whom were showing
their age.  If it is an actor's job to make us believe the role he is
playing, the Carrey deserves an Oscar nomination.
      While this movie seems to paint a rosier picture of the man
behind this story than the facts may dictate, it does do justice to
enigma and creativity that was the Kaufman experience.
Remove "fakespam" from my email address to reply.

Author
Christopher Null
     How do you make a Serious Movie about someone who never took
anything seriously at all?
     This Andy Kaufman biopic has been in the works and has been talked
about for so long, it's become as cultish as the man himself.  Will
Carrey get the Oscar nod he didn't get for THE TRUMAN SHOW?  My
prediction: yes.  Will viewers of the film finally come to understand
the infamous comedian?  No, and he wasn't a comedian, it turns out.
Andy Kaufman, in what may be the greatest revelation MAN ON THE MOON has
to offer, was a self-stylized `song and dance man.'
     It's hard to fathom a more difficult subject to tackle, which
explains why this picture has languished in development for such a long
time.  Kaufman, as even passing fans are aware, used elaborate pranks to
entertain the audience  and more importantly, to entertain himself.
     With co-conspirator and writing partner Bob Zmuda (see our
interview, coming soon), Kaufman wrapped his entire life in mystery.
>From his well-documented obsession with wrestling women, to made-up
lounge singer Tony Clifton, to his hatred for having to play dumb on the
TV show `Taxi,' to his funeral after struggling with lung cancer,
everything was a big joke to Kaufman.
     Or was it?  MAN ON THE MOON gives us a teeny peek inside Andy
Kaufman's skull before sealing it shut.  I can't say that I know any
more about Andy Kaufman than I did before I went into the theater.  And
while Kaufman may have been unknowable to all but his innermost circle,
I find that a failing of the film.
     But mind you, there's more to like.  Jim Carrey, as Kaufman's
doppelganger, is haunting and devastatingly accurate.  The man is
virtually indistinguishable from the real thing, and he deserves some
serious credit for his work here.
     Courtney Love, on the other hand, comes as close to ruining a
picture as she ever has.  Playing Kaufman's girlfriend, she has far less
screen time than she did in THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT (also written by
the same team that did MOON), but she just does just as much damage to
the story with her abrasive, out-of-place presence.
     `There is no real Andy,' someone says during the film.  I'm
inclined to agree.  Kaufman was a awesomely complex individual, and he
lived his life as much in front of the camera as he did behind it.  What
is there left to explore?  Movies, books, miniseries  I don't think
we'll ever know.
     Note to self:  The title of the film, taken from the R.E.M. song of
the same name, is never explained.  I'll have to ask Zmuda about this.
Director: Milos Forman
Producer: Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, Stacey Sher
Writer: Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski
Starring: Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Courtney Love, Paul Giamatti, Jerry
Lawler, Lorne Michaels
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Check out G-Rex.com Personal Shopper at http://www.g-rex.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
MAN ON THE MOON (1999) - A Film Review By Jerry Saravia
Andy Kaufman remains as the old saying goes, "a mystery wrapped inside of an 
enigma." He was the most unconventional comic to ever grace a stage or an 
open mike because he purely challenged the whole notion of what comedy was. 
Comedians are known for one-liners, such as the famous Milton Berle, and 
punchlines - a plethora of jokes are expected to make the audience laugh. 
Kaufman is not someone you would accuse of taking the easy road to make 
people laugh - his intentions were based on showing up as the showman and 
nothing more. He did not tell jokes nor did he know how to tell them, and he 
was not a political or angry comedian like Lenny Bruce was. No, this man 
played the theme to "Mighty Mouse" and wrestled with women to get laughs. 
"Man on the Moon" stars Jim Carrey as Andy Kaufman, showing us his early 
stage routines of mimicking Elvis Presley leading to his famous Latka Gravas 
character on the popular TV show "Taxi." His agent (played by Danny De Vito, 
who does not do a reprise of his "Taxi" character) is amazed by Kaufman, but 
has no idea how to promote such a talent, so he lends him the coveted "Taxi" 
role promising a "Fonzie-type" breakout character. It is no secret that Andy 
despised "Taxi" and caused a ruckus, often using his hateful alter-ego 
character, Tony Clifton, a lounge singer, to cause chaos on the set. It is 
also no secret that Tony become a bigger star than Andy, especially in the 
days of Andy wrestling with Memphis wrestler Jerr Lawler (amusingly playing 
himself). 
The moments where Tony Clifton appears ,silencing the crowd before singing or 
insulting audience members, are the most outrageous and the funniest. Clifton 
was Andy, and sometimes Andy's best friend and writing partner, Bob Zmuda 
(Paul Giamatti), was also Tony, and so this caused more confusion among 
audiences. How could anyone respond with a straight face to anything Clifton 
or Andy did on stage or on TV? 
In fact, that is largely the appeal of "Man on the Moon." The film distorts 
reality on screen just as Andy did - we never knew what to expect from him or 
when he was staging fights or insults or actually doing them. The truth is 
that it was all staged, including the punishingly slow, one year debacle of 
Lawler fighting Andy on the ring or on David Letterman. That distortion or 
the fact that Andy was always in on the joke himself is what makes his life 
so speculative. Who was Andy? What kind of man was he? When was he not 
fooling around, and when was he being serious? There came a point when his 
sister did not believe that Andy had lung cancer, which he tearfully admits 
on stage while the audience bawls with laughter. 
Carrey is so good as Andy that he disappears into the role, and it is more 
than just a recreation of the man or his acts - it is spookily eerie in that 
it really feels like Andy Kaufman is alive and well on screen. Carrey also 
carries scenes of tenderness beautifully such as the movie's key line where 
he tearfully replies to his girlfriend's remark "There is no real you" with 
"Oh, yeah, I forgot." I also like the moment where Andy is tricked by a 
psychic surgeon, who is actually a charlatan, into believing that his 
cancerous condition will be taken away - Carrey's face shows a mixture of 
elation and sadness. Jim has so many good moments that an Oscar nomination 
should be guaranteed - we have not seen such an authentic recreation of a key 
figure in show business since Val Kilmer's Jim Morrison in "The Doors." 
If only the film dealt with his childhood past in more detail, especially in 
the days when he thought there were cameras in his bedroom walls watching his 
act (a reminder of Carrey's performance in "Truman Show"). And what did his 
parents think of Andy's act? Or his sister and friends, especially his 
girlfriend (thanklessly played by Courtney Love)? There must have been some 
thoughts on Andy - was he just a showman out for thrills or a genius of 
comedy? 
"Man on the Moon" does not try to understand Andy Kaufman nor is there any 
attempt to. The mystique is still there, including the possibility that his 
lung cancer was a joke and that he will return in the year 2000 (the film 
makes no attempt to disprove the hoax). It is not a complete or fulfilling 
biography as was director Milos Forman's last film, "The People vs. Larry 
Flynt," but it is a strange and entertaining experience. I have a feeling 
Andy would have wanted it that way. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at 
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
If you are old enough to remember watching Andy Kaufman on television, you 
will have the feeling you are seeing him again in Milos Forman's "Man on the 
Moon."  If you are too young to have seen Kaufman, I'd be interested in 
hearing if you had a hard time seeing Jim Carrey in there.
Carrey has gotten some press for taking method acting to its limits.  
Apparently, on the set of this film, he often stayed inside his character's 
head while the camera was not running.  According to the film, this was a 
habit of Kaufman's - keeping the switch "on" even among friends and 
relatives.  These quirks obviously helped Carrey capture verisimilitude:  in 
appearance, gesticulations,  tone of voice - in all aspects save physical 
stature (I get the idea Carrey is taller and thinner than Kaufman) - the man 
pulls off an astounding impersonation.  Through the bug-eyed, goofy visage, 
the longish, fluffy hair and sideburns, the articulate politeness sometimes 
practiced by class clowns, Carrey captures much of the persona of one of the 
more colorful figures of the early 1980's.
Forman starts the piece with an offbeat quasi-monologue in which Kaufman 
tells us, using the voice of "Foreign Man," that the movie about his life is 
bad, and has been cut so short that it is over already.  Then we fall into a 
sequence showing a young Andy (Bobby Boriello) M. C.-ing an imaginary 
television show.  His father tells him that there's no camera in the bedroom 
wall, that what Andy needs is an audience.  Herein lies the key to Kaufman's 
showing off: if no one is there to watch, it doesn't happen.  The movie 
traces Kaufman's development as a live performer, focusing on the lack of 
understanding and support for what is now called performance art.  We do not 
see much biographical focus, as we meet the comic artist's parents and 
sister only briefly, seeing the parents at their son's various appearances 
but never watching their characters explored.
So many parts of this "biopic" are easy to watch because they are already 
familiar.  We know Lorne Michaels, and recognize him and many others playing 
themselves.  Michaels is deadpan as he watches Kaufman introduced as 
'Saturday Night Live's" musical guest;  following is Kaufman's famous though 
brief lip-sync of the "Mighty Mouse" theme.  In part Kaufman's style  was 
reactionary, even confrontational, as he decides to punish a college 
audience by carrying out what seems to be "Plan B," reading "The Great 
Gatsby" in its entirety, while most of the audience leaves. We recognize 
most acutely his tussles with professional wrestler Jerry Lawler (playing 
himself as well).  As David Letterman tries to promote peace, Kaufman jumps 
up and curses at Lawler;  the wrestler responds with a very realistic slap 
that floors Kaufman and sends him into on-the-air, profane fury. The rub 
here is obvious:  is Kaufman serious, or is he engaging in the inflammatory 
posturing that wrestlers have acted out for decades?
The film reaches its most interesting moments when this question comes up.  
And the film is often interesting.  Carrey and his director, Forman, develop 
the artist as a lovable person who is next to impossible to work with.  
Always obnoxious when he didn't get his way, always looking for a grander, 
more self-reflexive ruse, Kaufman cared more about creativity than he did 
about social politeness.  At times the film is hard to watch because it 
makes us think about the consequences of what seem to be Kaufman's 
ill-considered actions.  He taunts a Memphis audience heartlessly, and 
toward the end, a "Saturday Night Live" poll shows a vote to ban him from 
the show.  Multi-faceted he surely is, and Carrey loses himself in the role.
As Andy Kaufman's friend and producer, Bob Zmuda, Paul Giamatti acts with 
sharp intelligence.  We first meet him during a run-in with Kaufman's alter 
ego, the villainous, hateful, non-talented lounge lizard Tony Clifton.  
Clifton pours a glass of water over the head of an audience member - Zmuda 
as a plant - and we can see Kaufman's in-your-face brilliance.  Zmuda seems 
to be the one who knows Andy the best - although we don't see anything of 
how their friendship developed.  But even Zmuda is unable to read Andy at 
times.
Courtney Love plays Lynne Margulies, Kaufman's girlfriend.  It seems they 
meet when, on the "Merv Griffin Show," he offers a challenge to wrestle any 
woman who thinks she can pin him.  With Merv innocently shrugging his 
shoulders, and with Zmuda as referee, Kaufman proceeds to humiliate her, 
inviting the wrath of the audience.  But backstage he is surprised this 
woman took him seriously.  Later we ponder the same question about reality 
when Lawler slams Kaufman's inert body to the canvas.  Is it real?  Should 
we be worried about Andy or angry at him for deceiving us?  Can deception be 
entertainment?  Love has grown into a natural actress, and although Lynne's 
relationship with Kaufman could be given more coverage, she draws our regard 
and pity.
Danny DeVito - a Kaufman friend and fellow "Taxi" cast member - supplies the 
main link between parts of the story.  A smooth actor, DeVito knows when to 
turn on which emotion.  He does well in showing a frank ambivalence toward 
Kaufman's wildness.  A good agent, he  gets Kaufman to accept the sitcom 
"Taxi" with the intimidating quip that an opportunity like this would never, 
never surface again if Kaufman turned it down.  He also humors the moody 
artist numerous times, smoothing out disagreements with network executives.  
DeVito's performance is strong enough to warrant nominations for major 
awards.
Milos Forman paces the film well;  there are lots of different levels of 
action happening:  we switch from Kaufman's personal life to his onstage 
personas.  A compliment should go to this director for not becoming too 
heavy-handed in portraying a search for selfhood or clear identity.  These 
themes he explores obliquely - the best way they could be explored.
So much of the film seems to have written itself.  There are the 
controversies, the comic routines, the delving deep into the interactive 
side of behavioral science;  but there's a story we don't know much about 
until the movie tells us.
After Kaufman contracted lung cancer, many of his friends, and apparently 
even some of his family, thought it was another put-on.  The ultimate irony 
here is that, at some point in the film, Kaufman does mention faking his 
death.  And after we watch his dead-on Elvis impersonation - one of the 
earliest and best - we too wonder if we are being put-on.  That's the charm 
of the film, it sketches a clear picture of Andy Kaufman but never captures 
him completely in focus.  There's always some movement of his causing a blur 
in our understanding.  The person most responsible for creating these 
illusions is Jim Carrey, and based on his performance in this picture alone, 
he gets my vote for this year's best actor.


Author
Scott Renshaw
MAN ON THE MOON
(Universal)
Starring:  Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Courtney Love, Paul Giamatti, Jerry
Lawler.
Screenplay:  Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski.
Producers:  Danny De Vito, Michael Shamberg and Stacey Sher.
Director:  Milos Forman.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, brief nudity, adult themes)
Running Time:  118 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In the first moments of MAN ON THE MOON'S splendidly inventive
prologue, Jim Carrey says, "Hello ... I am Andy." And for two hours, he
is. There is no way to describe Carrey's performance as Andy Kaufman in
Milos Forman's bio-pic except to say that Carrey inhabits Kaufman. When he
plays Kaufman's squeaky-voiced immigrant character, which will become
"Taxi's" Latka, he's pitch perfect; when he dives into one of Kaufman's
deliberately provocative stage routines, he captures a mind of lunatic
inventiveness at work. Carrey's work may be the best, most effective
extended impression in film history.
     The astonishing thing about MAN ON THE MOON is how entertaining it is
despite the fact that there's very little to it but Carrey's extended
impression. After a brief glimpse of Kaufman's childhood in Long Island,
MAN ON THE MOON dives into his early days as a stand-up comedy performer
who befuddles and aggravates his audiences as often as he makes them
laugh. He is undeniably unique, however, a fact that grabs the attention
of super-agent George Shapiro (Danny DeVito). Shapiro sees stardom in
Kaufman, stardom Kaufman himself claims he wants. There's just the small
matter of Kaufman's insistence on pushing himself, his act and his
audience farther than they've ever gone before. Even as "Taxi" makes him
famous, his stunts -- including an open-ended challenge to beat any woman
in wrestling -- make him harder and harder for many people to take.
     Hard to take, perhaps, but impossible to ignore. It's also impossible
to deny that MAN ON THE MOON owes most of its entertainment value to
Kaufman himself, since the film's biggest laughts come from re-creations
of Kaufman's outrageous performances. We see his faux-nervous "Saturday
Night Live" lip-synch to the "Mighty Mouse" theme; we see his running feud
with wrestler Jerry Lawler (playing himself) that pre-sages the popularity
of professional wrestling as scripted antagonism; and we see plenty of
Kaufman's doppleganger, abrasive Vegas lounge singer Tony Clifton. When a
college audience demands "Latka!," Kaufman responds with a reading in its
entirety of _The Great Gatsby_. Watching Carrey-as-Kaufman reach for the
edges without anything resembling a net is exhilarating. Kaufman's
routines still have the ability to inspire gasping laughter.
     The only question remaining -- and the one for which MAN ON THE MOON
has no answer -- is who Andy Kaufman really was, and what he really was
trying to accomplish in his career. The script by Scott Alexander and
Larry Karaszewski casts a similar rosy glow over its subject as their
scripts for ED WOOD and THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT, making the film more
of an homage to driven eccentricity than piercing character study. It may
be true, as Kaufman's girlfriend Lynne (Courtney Love) says to him in one
scene, that "there is no real you," but that doesn't make the absence of 
insight any less disapppointing. While MAN ON THE MOON's performance set
pieces are dazzling, in a sense they never end. It's a portrait of an
entire life lived as performance art, when you keep hoping for at least a
glimpse behind the curtain.
     There are moments during the film's final half hour, when Kaufman is
coping with cancer -- and with the boy-who-cried-wolf repercussions as his
friends and family doubt that he is really sick -- that we begin to see a
self-aware Andy. In one of the film's best moments, a trip to a Philippine
"psychic surgery" clinic becomes an ironic revelation that attempts to
delude others can go too far. With just a few more moments like that, MAN
ON THE MOON might have been a classic film biography. Maybe ultimately
it's just a showpiece -- for Kaufman's decades-ahead-of-his-time genius,
and for Carrey's dynamic rendering of that genius. Maybe it's just a grand
illusion without an easily-understood human being behind it. And maybe, in
a story about the life of Andy Kaufman, that's perfectly appropriate.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
Man on the Moon's big draw isn't Andy Kaufman. That would be too big a
gamble, as his comedy takes a refined sense of humor to appreciate, to say
the least. Likely, Milos Forman was aware of this, so he tried to shift
things ever so slightly, away from Andy Kaufman, to the legend of Andy
Kaufman. America did love Eddie and the Cruisers, after all, which was all
about legend. And of course--talking pop recognition--Taxi is nearly as much
a part of our sitcom-reality as M*A*S*H or Cheers, meaning Latka is already
a familiar character. The bad thing is, though, without the prompting of Man
on the Moon's trailer, the bigger part of today's audience wouldn't have
known it was Andy Kaufman in those shuffling white coveralls and the thick
accent. Meaning he's only achieved 'legendary' status for a select few. So,
in spite of what Milos Forman might be trying to do here, the big draw of
Man on the Moon finally isn't Kaufman-related or even Jim Carrey-related,
but Forman-related: we go on the chance that he's cooked up another Cuckoo's
Nest, another Amadeus, something like Larry Flynt.
And for a while, too, it seems he has. First of course there's Jim Carrey as
Andy Kaufman, likely one of the few actors who could have captured Kaufman's
body language and diction so precisely. Second there's all the nostalgia
involved with getting the old Taxi cast back together again for a few scenes
(though Danny DeVito's presence as George Shapiro is a little disorienting
at first). Third, there's the opening, which functions both as a timid
disclaimer (accuracy vs. dramatic necessity) and adds a little meta-dialogue
to the mix. Same kind of stuff you get in Private Parts, only this is Milos
Forman, thus it's all done just a little better. Unlike Private Parts,
however, we don't mire around in childhood too long, but cut quickly out of
it, to Kaufman's career, which of course functions as something of a
biographical lens: nevermind the 'draw' of Man on the Moon--once we're
there, the focus for Forman is the intriguingly inconsistent (tender,
self-destructive, etc) character of Andy Kaufman. The idea is that Man on
the Moon will explain why a man would wreck his career by wrestling with
women, will get to the bottom of the whole Tony Clifton thing, will do with
a person what Cronenberg did with reality in eXistenZ: layer it to the point
where you don't know what's real, to the point where you can't tease Kaufman
away from his comic personas.
Which is to say Forman gets us to initially ask those questions, to be
interested in the real Kaufman even if we don't think he's funny, which is
no small feat. But then he takes it just a little further, sets Man on the
Moon up so that we're willing to trade in those answers we so want if Andy
Kaufman can just make it out alive somehow, in the movie version (the 1995
Scarlet Letter tack). Inaccurate as Man on the Moon self-consciously claims
to be, though, it doesn't go quite so far as to change the documented facts,
which, while respectable, also introduces some dramatic weakness (see
Insider for more like this). Thing is, right at the point when we need to
think Kaufman might pull through, we already know he's many years gone.
Which siphons a lot of the tension out of it all. Granted, Forman does muddy
the waters up some, (some of that dramatic license) which does make the
closing frames quite beautiful, but too, they may just be beautiful in
comparison to the thirty-odd minutes that preceded it. Too, however, this is
a problem endemic to all historically-based movies; it's not just local to
Man on the Moon. And there is a way out: you simply have to make all the
documented facts hinge upon the in-between parts you make up, which is where
Forman stumbles a bit. Yes, he does take a different slant on the
Kaufman-Lawler fiasco and various other things, but rather than pushing the
drama ahead, they explain what just went on. So, yes, there is some marked
dramatic weakness to Man on the Moon, but still, it is Andy Kaufman on the
big screen at last. Perhaps some oversight is excusable. And who knows,
maybe Andy would have even wanted it this way.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Milos Forman's long-awaited biopic on the life of the late Andy Kaufman
begins hysterically.  A black-and-white clip of Andy tells the audience
that the movie isn't really that funny.  In fact, Andy explains, since
they edited out all of the unfunny moments, the movie is actually over.
The credits start to roll and the screen fades to black for several
seconds, while viewers shift around in their seats, unsure if the
projector blew a bulb.  Then Andy pokes his head into the frame, stating
that the whole intro was a ploy to make people that didn't get his humor
to leave the theater.
This opening bit perfectly captures Andy's career.  His performances
seemed geared more to pleasing himself than his audience, with his
career (and possibly his life) a huge inside joke that nobody was a part
of except Andy.  After this brilliant start, Man on the Moon lays out
Andy's life, from his childhood in Great Neck, Long Island, where he
performed to an invisible audience contained within his bedroom wall, to
his death from a rare form of lung cancer.  The title of the film is
taken from R.E.M.'s homage to the ultra-talented performer (they also
provide the score to the picture).
The first half of Man focuses on Andy's (Jim Carrey, The Truman Show)
rise to stardom.  He never thought of himself as a comedian, but more of
a `song-and-dance' man.  Actually, performance art is probably a more
accurate description.  Andy's legendary stage performances, which
usually involved shocking his audience into various states of
discomfort, landed the entertainer on the ABC sitcom Taxi, despite his
reluctance to be tied down creatively.  He only accepted after quickly
conjuring up a list of crazy demands, one of which guaranteed that his
alter ego, Tony Clifton (also played by Carrey), would appear in four
episodes of the popular television show.  The brash, offensive Clifton
was, in my opinion, the greatest comedy bit since `Who's on first?'
Moon's second half concentrates on the established comedian's fall from
grace.  As far as his audience was concerned, Andy began to take things
a little too far.  His involvement in wrestling, which is probably the
greatest entertainment hoax of the decade, seemed to turn off what few
people still enjoyed the performer.  The film also shows Andy as an
obsessive-compulsive that practiced holistic medicine (this probably
sounds familiar to Howard Stern fans).
His illness and death are probably the most ironic story to come out of
Hollywood.  When Andy announced that he had cancer, nobody believed it,
thinking it was just another one of his practical jokes.  When he died,
people though that was a stunt, too.  Later, when a television special
honoring his career was broadcast, people actually expected him to show
up and pull off the greatest showbiz prank ever.  I know  I was one of
them.  Even when the special is re-aired, I still watch, hoping that
Andy will pop out and yell `Surprise!'
Carrey's performance is electrifying, capturing not only Andy's physical
appearance but his spirit as well.  There are times you will forget that
you aren't watching clips of the real Andy.  He nails the mannerisms
(especially the eyes), the voices and even Andy's nuts-on impression of
Elvis.  Paul Giamatti (The Negotiator) is terrific as Bob Zmuda, Andy's
friend and cohort, and executive producer Danny DeVito (Living Out Loud)
capably plays George Shapiro, the talent agent that `discovered' Andy.
It's strange that DeVito, who played opposite the real Andy on Taxi, was
the only cast member that didn't portray him or herself in the film.
Well, except Tony Danza, but who will really miss him?  The film also
features cameos by David Letterman, Jerry Lawler, Lorne Michaels and the
real Bob Zmuda, who I always figured was just spelling his last name
backwards.
There seems to be huge chunks missing from the film, especially
revolving around Courtney Love's role as Andy's girlfriend Lynne, which
isn't really too much of a surprise.  Her Lynne seems relegated to looks
of astonishment during crowd shots at Andy's appearances.  The rock star
doesn't appear until sixty minutes into the film, and even then she's
kind of abruptly crammed in without much explanation.  I have a feeling
that many of her scenes ended up on the cutting room floor (which is
where most of her last album should be laying).  Forman's (The People
vs. Larry Flynt) films are usually much longer than 120 minutes.
Also lacking was Andy's rise to fame, which was brushed over in
minutes.  The film gave the impression that Andy went from struggling at
an improv club, to SNL, to Taxi in the same week.  And his childhood,
which I was the most curious about seeing, was condensed into about
ninety seconds.  As a side note, Bobby Boriello plays the young Andy -
he's the same kid that played Howard Stern in Private Parts and now has
the unique distinction of portraying two of the funniest people in the
last half of this century.  What does this poor kid do with his career
now?
Moon does spend a great deal of time on the downfall of Andy's career,
skipping from his banishment from SNL, to the cancellation of Taxi, to
being kicked out of his transcendental meditation group.  This brings up
an interesting point  who is going to pay to see this movie?  Most
people disliked Kaufmann, so count them out.  Die-hard fans may go, but
they'll be disappointed that the film consists mostly of bits that you
can watch three times a week on Comedy Central.  Other than Andy's
wonderful bits and Carrey's performance, there isn't really much else to
this film.  But those two factors are almost all it needs.
2:00 - R for adult language and mild violence

Author
Brandon Herring
Rated: R for some language and nudity. 
Starring: Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Paul Giamatti, Courtney Love, Jerry Lawler,
Jeff Conway, Marilu Henner, Judd Hirsch, Lorne Michaels, Carol Cane,
Christopher Lloyd, Norm McDonald, Caroline 
Reah, David Letterman, Paul Shaffer.
"Man on the Moon" which is based on the life of Andy Kaufman one of the
greatest comedy acts of our time is that of a brilliant movie. It not only
introduces a generation who didn't know Kaufman, but it also introduces us to
the real Kaufman himself, not a comedian, not a goof, but a real person.
Throughout the film we get to know Kaufman as a person not as a stage act. Jim
Carrey who plays Andy Kaufman himself gives a brilliant performance that
screams Oscar to the highest octave.
The film starts with Andy talking to us about how they edited out the parts of
the film and it isn't the way he wanted it to be. So the credits role and the
screen goes blank. Audiences will probably wonder what the heck is going on and
Andy's head pops on screen and explains that if the people left then they just
didn't get his sense of humor. Then he introduces us to his life...as a young
boy he always wanted to be before an audience...always wanted to entertain,
always wanted to sing. Then we cut to Andy singing in a nightclub, not doing a
very good job Andy is fired and forced to find work elsewhere. When performing
on a stage and impersonating Elvis he is spotted by George Shapiro who asks
Andy where he comes up with these things. Later on George tells Andy that he
has been offered to star in a TV sitcom entitled "Taxi" as long as he plays his
foreign character. Andy hesitates but agrees and starts a long-running career.
Andy gets in trouble here and there and pulls many practical jokes and meets
the love of his life (Courtney Love) who is always great in the movies she
plays in. Throughout Andy's life he was known as a brilliant comedian and
horrible person but which was he brilliant or horrible? During the movie we are
forced to make a decision until the end which is heart wrenching and at the
same time thought-provoking and makes us ask ourselves: Was Andy really a good
person, or was he just another comedian. In my opinion I say andy was a good
normal person and all of his jokes and pranks were just part of his act.
Milos Forman does a terrific job of making Andy come to the screen and he
directs with skill and style. Jim Carrey who gave a terrific performance in
1998's "The Truman Show" yet again shows us that he can give good dramatic and
believeable performances that scream Oscar. He is very funny and brings Andy to
a younger generation. To me I think Jim might have just out did his Truman Show
performance and in my case gives the second best performance of the year
(Behind Michael Duncan in The Green Mile).
The supporting cast isn's a letdown either and all of them Courtney Love, Danny
DeVito, and Paul Giamatti all support Andy and give stand-out performances
especially by Courtney Love. The screen play written by Scott Alexander and
Larry Karaszewski   is very funny but at the same time thoughtful and
realistic. It would not surprise me if "Man on the Moon" gets Oscar nods for
acting or picture and it comes out at not better time than Christmas. When you
see "Man on the Moon" you almost become Andy in a way and see the world through
Andy's eye's instead of the movies eyes.
Around the middle of the movie I felt cherished to get to see such a touching
film that after it was over I cheered and clapped. The theme song by R.E.M.
adds much to the excitement and don't be surprised if you eyes fill with tears
by being both sad and happy. Let's just hope that by making this movie Andy
Kaufman's spirit will stay alive and that everyone will remember him as a comic
genius. Even though I wasn't alive when Andy was famous I can tell by this
movie that it would have been a pleasure to know Andy Kaufman...and know that
he was just a regular guy.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring December 20, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Milos Forman.
Cast: Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Courtney Love, Paul Giamatti, Vincent 
Schiavelli, Jerry Lawler, Marilu Henner, Judd Hirsch, Carol Kane, Christopher 
Lloyd.
1999 - 118 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, sexual situations, and nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, December 24, 1999.
Comedy comes in many different forms in life. This could also be said about 
the humor of Jim Carrey, who began his rise to stardom with 1994's 
intentionally dumb (and unfunny) "Ace Ventura: Pet Detective," followed it up 
with that Summer's goofy comedy-fantasy "The Mask," and concluded the year 
with the also intentionally dumb (but, this time, very funny) "Dumb and 
Dumber." If humor is going to work, the setup and payoff have to be exactly 
right, and the material has to be strong. That's why "Ace Ventura" failed 
miserably in the joke arena, while the wittier "Dumb and Dumber" had me 
practically rolling in the aisles upon first viewing.
Andy Kaufman, who died in 1984 from lung cancer, while still only in his 
thirties, broke these rules. Not wanting to be a comic so much as an 
"entertainer," much of his routines stemmed from doing the opposite of what 
everyone expected him to do, and that utter unpredictability is what 
ultimately propelled him to stardom. A hilarious prologue opens the film with 
an ingenious bang, in which Andy (Jim Carrey) jokingly states to the viewer 
that the following movie isn't very good, and so proceeds to run the end 
credits at the beginning, only for the screen to go black for about 20 
seconds. This is a perfect example of what he got his pleasure out of doing: 
toying with the audience's expectations, just to conclude with a bang that 
could only be described as being from the mind of a comedic genius.
Constantly insisting that he does not wish to be a comic, however, the first 
time we see the adult Andy, he is working at a standup comedy club. His 
material is offbeat, to be sure, but he is a man who is able to get his 
audiences involved most of the time, even if that means angering them. Any 
reaction was better than no reaction at all, thought Andy. One night, talent 
agent George Shapiro (Danny DeVito) sees Andy in one of his acts, and 
immediately sets up a meeting with him. Before long, he has appeared as the 
"musical guest" on TV's "Saturday Night Live" and, although he hates sitcoms, 
after a few requests are met, he becomes one of the stars of the ABC series, 
"Taxi," gaining a sizable fan base. Andy also has an alter ego, as an 
offensive, uncooperative Las Vegas lounge singer named Tony Clifton, whom 
many people who know Andy don't even realize it is the same person. 
Milos Forman's "Man on the Moon" is a biopic that does not have a 
particularly strong story that pulls the happenings together into a whole, 
but that is because, as is, Andy Kaufman was a one-of-a-kind, eccentric 
person, but someone that probably did not warrant a full-length feature on 
him. Eventually, Andy meets Lynne (Courtney Love) and they fall in love. 
"Taxi" is canceled, to his delight. He has always longed to appear at 
Carnegie Hall, and he finally gets to live that dream. Unfortunately, because 
Andy was a man constantly trying to misconstrue the truth, when he finally is 
diagnosed with lung cancer, initially everyone believes it is just another 
one of his pranks. 
"Man on the Moon" is a fascinating film that, while not always dramatically 
sound, never stops being an entertaining picture. Forman and screenwriters 
Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski never stray far from Andy (come to 
think of it, he may very well be in every scene), as it follows him from one 
thing in his life to the next. Nothing that happens is extraordinary or 
surprising, particularly if you are familiar with Andy or have even seen the 
theatrical trailer, which is effective but pretty much a 2 1/2-minute version 
of the film. 
Instead, what pulls the viewer in so deeply is Jim Carrey himself. Whereas 
1998's "The Truman Show" was a step in the right direction towards a serious 
role, there were moments when his usual routine would break through. In "Man 
on the Moon," Carrey embodies the life and soul of Andy so completely and 
convincingly that it is almost like watching the real Andy, resurrected. A tou
r de force portrayal, Carrey is deserving, and should rightfully garner, an 
Oscar nomination for his work here, which is superior to anything else he has 
done on film.
Courtney Love, a surprisingly talented actress who was outstanding in 
Forman's last film, 1996's "The People Vs. Larry Flynt," is given a slight 
role this time around, as Lynne, Andy's true love later in his life. The 
writing severely botches this subplot as it feels rushed and uneven. In their 
first scene together, Lynne asks Andy if he is always such an asshole, and in 
the next scene, they are going out on a date and discussing traveling to 
Memphis to get married. Andy may not be like other guys, but Lynne loves 
him--is apparently attracted to his intentional multiple personalities. The 
mild truthfulness that stems from Lynne is thanks solely to Love, who does 
everything she can within the confines of the noticeably limited role.
If "Man on the Moon" is an intriguing film from start to finish, the only 
really powerful and dramatically impressive moment comes in the recreation of 
Andy Kaufman's funeral, which reunites most of the cast of characters, 
including some of the costars of "Taxi," such as Marilu Henner, Christopher 
Lloyd, and Carol Kane. This scene is tonally flawless, and builds up momentum 
to become an emotional powerhouse, signifying the grief that the people who 
knew Andy were feeling, even while he proved after death that what he truly 
was was a good-natured, caring human being. "Man on the Moon" is a 
respectable tribute to the memory of Andy Kaufman, but is nowhere near 
perfect, and in the confines of staying true to Andy's life, it probably 
could never be.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Directed by Milos Forman
Written by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski
Starring Jim Carrey, Danny Devito, Courtney Love, Paul Giamatti, Vincent
Schiavelli, Caroline Rhea, Norm Macdonald, Jerry Lawler, Marilu Henner, Jeff
Conaway, Christopher Lloyd, Judd Hirsch, David Letterman, Lorne Michaels, Paul
Shaffer, Bob Zmuda, and George Shapiro.
`Man on the Moon' is a very entertaining documentation of the life of eccentric
comedian Andy Kaufman. Played with amazing accuracy by Jim Carrey, Kaufman is
portrayed as the man who broke all the rules to make people laugh, or in some
cases to make people extremely upset. In a series of hoaxes and controversies
concerning whether the audacious performances Kaufman put on were real or not,
we learn that Kaufman was a pure genius at what he did. The director, Milos
Forman, shows us that Kaufman's whole life was one big joke with twists at
every corner that left audiences surprised, embarrassed, and eventually wanting
more of him. We learn that Kaufman's ability to fool the public made him one of
the greatest entertainers in American history. Forman shows us act after act to
plaster this statement into our minds. What Forman does not inform the audience
is enough about Kaufman's life off of the camera or off the stage. There are a
few scenes examining his childhood and his later years in which he suffered
from cancer, but certainly not enough. The conclusion of  this film could be
the same from seeing a documentary on Kaufman. Both just focus on his
performances, the slight difference is that `Man on the Moon' has several shots
of the audience's reactions to Kaufman's shenanigans, from confusion to
drunkenness. This difference between the film and a documentary already made on
 Kaufman is very small and useless because it does not matter how the audience
reacts to it but rather how you, yourself, react to it emotionally. Another
problem with `Man on the Moon' is that it gives away too much information about
Kaufman's acts. Prior to this film, the acts had a perfectly ambiguous feel to
them because you never knew exactly what was going on or who was behind them.
This feel was mainly what makes Kaufman so amusing to watch and listen to. When
the film displays each act, later it inevitably discusses how they were done
and unfortunately takes a little away from the enjoyment of the actual Kaufman.
I do not know how Forman could have avoided explaining situations, so I am a
little confused about why this film was even made. Maybe because Kaufman's life
was a perfect formula for a Hollywood tale; he was funny, iconoclastic, and
died at an early age. But the film ruins some of Kaufman's mysteriousness and
it doesn't explain Kaufman's background, which is the only information not well
known by the older aged public.
 Still `Man on the Moon' is entertaining nonetheless thanks to an incredible
performance by Jim Carrey who becomes Kaufman. His mannerisms and voices are so
incredible that it is obvious Carrey did a vast amount of research for his
role. This is by far Carrey's best role ever and with his previous film, `The
Truman Show,' Carrey is hushing critics who have once derided him. He is now
the master of dramatic comedies since Robin Williams has been lagging lately
with some unsatisfactory titles to his name. Another snub by the Academy Awards
against Carrey would be completely unacceptable. He should not only be
nominated but he should also win for best actor.
 Jim Carrey is also helped  by some fine supporting actors in Paul Giamatti and
Danny Devito. Playing Bob Zmuda and George Shapiro respectively, they allow
Carrey to soar even more with some witty one-liners and some fine acting.
Courtney Love was unfortunately wasted in her role. It was simply too brief and
ineffective. It seemed like the movie would not have been any better or worse
without her. Also deserving credit are a number of actors playing themselves in
cameo roles. To see them as they did fifteen years ago was humorous, especially
a zany Christopher Lloyd doing his Taxi character with the hair and everything.
 `Man on the Moon' is as entertaining as any movie this year. It is funny and
extremely accurate in its portrayal. It may be a great educational film for
younger generations not introduced to Andy Kaufman's strange world. They see
that this comedian was wilder and funnier than his time and maybe even the
present time. The world has yet to catch up to Kaufman's eccentricity. For
older generations however, the film presents nothing new. Kaufman's life
outside of the entertainment  industry is very brief. He was one of the great
introverts of entertainment and unfortunately remains one into the year 2000.

Author
Walter Frith
I'm sure that there is something to behold within the personality and act of
the late Andy Kaufman.  But I just don't see it.  Director Milos Forman's
1996 bio pick on the life of pornographer Larry Flynt is a seriously under
rated and brilliant film that didn't get the credit it deserved.  I never
liked Larry Flynt or the things he did but his right to free speech was and
is absolute and although I never liked his lifestyle, I still thought the
film about him is a classic and it was my favourite film the year it came
out.  So my dislike for 'Man on the Moon' has nothing to do with the way I
feel about Andy Kaufman.  This is simply a one dimensional and totally non
lethal motion picture that never finds a way to tell its story above the
level of mediocrity, a quality a lot of people thought Andy Kaufman
possessed.
The first thing that has to be noted is the casting of Jim Carrey.  It came
down to casting either him or Edward Norton.  Carrey looks more like Kaufman
that Norton but what's really disappointing about the movie is that instead
of Jim Carrey playing Andy Kaufman, Carrey plays Andy Kaufman PLAYING JIM
CARREY!  And shame on the powers that be for selecting Carrey over a real
actor simply for box office reasons.
Andy Kaufman (1949-1984) died at the age of 35 of lung cancer and the film
opens in the late 1950's when he is just a boy and shows how he always had
the desire and ambition to become a performer.  The film then zips forward
to the mid 70's when Kaufman is in his mid to late 20's and how he got his
start in the profession of stand up comedy.  This is how the film begins its
downfall.  It fails to avoid mirroring its own subject and can't find a way
to be a grand piece of film making and can't elevate itself very far to give
its structure depth and remains totally mediocre for two hours.  There is
also no room for real characterizations.  Carrey as Kaufman is the only
mildly interesting character in the entire movie.  Danny DeVito plays his
agent, George Shapiro and is neither colourful nor absorbing.  Courtney
Love, who was so good in 'The People vs. Larry Flynt' isn't introduced in
the film until almost a full hour into it and never shows any strong
characteristics in a very pivotal role.
Aspects of popular culture cannot be explained to people.  You either see
the art of you don't.  It's like the Andy Warhol contribution of the
Campbell's soup can as art.  No one can explain it as you either see it or
you don't.  The only contagious part of 'Man on the Moon' is the pro
wrestling reference.  As a fan of pro wrestling myself, I thought the
segments involving Andy Kaufman and Jerry Lawler were worth watching.  Pro
wrestling is like a male soap opera with circus like performers who make it
big based on personality and microphone skills rather than pure wrestling
talent.  Again, when realizing this, you either see the concept or you
don't.
Another aching part of 'Man on the Moon' is that it spends too much time
showing Kaufman in his stand up performances and his antics on stage,
including the creation of a character Kaufman created named Tony Clifton.
Carrey brings aspects to the Andy Kaufman portrayal by using scenes from
'Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls' (the bongo playing) and 'The Cable Guy' in
the way he showcases Clifton.  There is a scene in 'The Cable Guy' where
Carrey, dressed up with bad hair and a bushy moustache, beats up a guy in
the men's room in comic fashion.  Carrey looks like that and acts like that
in his portrayal of Clifton.  There is too much Jim Carrey on screen and not
enough Andy Kaufman.  All of Kaufman's involvements with the entertainment
industry only scratch the surface, except for the pro wrestling stuff.
There was a need in this film to place more emphasis on the personal side of
Andy Kaufman's life with the woman he loved.  More interaction with the cast
of 'Taxi' was not shown and it should have been.  Writers Scott Alexander
and Larry Karaszewski have written what looks more like a television script
and you won't see director Milos Forman's stamp of sub text on any part of
this movie.
The movie also has serious problems with its continuity.  A reference is
made to Jimmy Carter as president of the United States and then it later
shows Kaufman on the first broadcast of Saturday Night Live which 1975.
Carter didn't take office as president until January 1977 so how could a
reference be made to him as president in 1975.  Also, a scene where Kaufman
and his lady go to the movies shows a poster of 1980's 'Coal Miner's
Daughter' and 1982's 'E.T. the Extra Terrestrial' side by side.  The film is
also technically flat.  The climax of a Christmas palladium act near the end
of the film looks more like a college production than a professionally put
together movie.
As movie making, 'Man on the Moon' fails on almost every level and was a
shocking disappointment from a two time Oscar winning director like Milos
Forman and as for Oscar talk about Jim Carrey, this film looks like Robin
Wiliams' first Oscar nomination for 'Good Morning Vietnam' in 1987.  It's
simply the comedian playing himself more and not enough of the character the
script called for.  What a let down!
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Jerry Bosch
The idea of starting with the end is hardly brimming with novelty; it lacks
the originality and outrageousness of  Kaufman's devices to keep the
audience off balance, but in Man On The Moon it is a suitable harbinger of
things to come. If Kaufman had used this device he would have extended the
dead time long enough to get a strong reaction from the audience. The movie
makes you wait a while, but they barely push the envelope where Kaufman
would have torn it and thrown it to the air in pieces.
Nevertheless, a Hollywood project that is driven by integrity is a rare
thing indeed, and when it achieves the level of quality and entertainment
value of this movie, it easily stands out as one of the finest efforts of
the mature American film industry. That this project came right out of the
heart of its creators is exemplified by the fact, unprecedented to my
knowledge, that the members of the cast of TAXI played themselves as they
look today, without apologies for the age discrepancies. The audience is
expected to understand that this is a nostalgic tribute, a contrite act of
belated appreciation and formerly denied respect. Other people also play
themselves whether their recapitulated actions were flattering or
unflattering.
But a great movie must entertain greatly, and Man On The Moon delivers solid
entertainment, keeping your attention and curiosity from start to finish (or
is it finish to finish?), and in the process it captures the essence  and
the tragedy of an exceptional entertainer.  Man On The Moon proves that
Hollywood can abandon the straight jacket of formulas and still succeed.
Even Apollo XIII (man not on the moon) can not escape the formula rap,
because in its case real life was true to formula, but Kaufman broke all the
molds, and the absence of a detectable formula is one of the movie's great
virtues.  Hollywood's serious masterpieces tend to be sophisticated, its
adventure blockbusters tend to be frantic, its sensitive masterpieces tend
to be soft and soulful. But Man On The Moon is  pathos without bathos, a
serious movie that is very funny, a real movie that is not artsy, much less
fartsy. Throw in Academy worthy performances by Jim Carey and Danny de Vito
and the sense that you are seeing weird things that actually happened, mix
it with total integrity and a lot of heart, add technical elements at the
top of Hollywood's present capabilities, subtract special effects, dirty
words, nudity, sex scenes and explosions, top if off with hearty laughs and
a sense of tragedy,  and the result is a movie worthy of your intelligence;
assuming that you have enough, since it takes a little more than is needed
to love Titanic and The Green Mile. Those two are four star movies in a
scale of five, but Man On The Moon gets 4 ˝.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MAN ON THE MOON (1999) *** 1/2 Directed by Milos Forman. Written by 
Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski. Cinematography, Anastas 
Michos. Editing, Christopher Tellefsen and Lynzee Klingman. 
Production design, Patrizia Von Brandenstein.  Cast: Jim Carrey (Andy 
Kaufman), Danny DeVito (George Shapiro), Courtney Love (Lynne 
Margulies), Paul Giamatti (Bob Zmuda), Vincent Schiavelli (Maynard 
Smith), Peter Bonerz (Ed Weinberger), Leslie Lyles (Janice Kaufman), 
Jerry Lawler (himself), et al. A Universal Pictures release. 118 
minutes. R (language, sex)
Man on the Moon is like one of those beautiful, old European squares 
--which are generally round and called "Place," "Platz" "Piazza," 
etc. Many are even more appealing because they come as the meeting 
point of colorful streets or avenues. In this film about the comedian 
Andy Kaufman (1949-1984) what you have is the coming together of 
talents: the main star, the director, the writers, the production 
designers, and more.
Jim Carrey is amazing, lives his part as Andy, becomes Andy, is Andy. 
Stories have circulated about Carrey being like a reincarnation of 
Andy during as well as off shooting. Sounds like publicity, but it's 
a fact.
Director Milos Forman's films are all splendid, from the features 
made in his native Czechoslovakia  in the 60s ("Black Peter," "Loves 
of a Blonde," " The Firemen's Ball") to his American debut in 1971 
with the neglected "Taking Off," then "Hair," " One Flew Over the 
Cuckoo's Nest," "Ragtime," "Amadeus," " Valmont," " The People vs. 
Larry Flynt." They are quirky, eccentric, humorous, well-observed, 
and have warmth without gloppiness. Forman loves the unusual, even 
the demented, which are musts if you make a film about Andy Kaufman. 
"Man on the Moon" takes its title from the eponymous REM song tribute 
to the late Andy.
The screenwriters has previously penned "Ed Wood" and Larry Flynt." 
They too also love and thrive in, the weird. Production designer Von 
Brandenstein, was Oscared for "Amadeus" and nominated for "Ragtime." 
Many other co-workers are veterans of Forman films. The ensemble 
works like clockwork, but you cannot hear them ticking. The tic-tocs 
are all concentrated on the persona of Andy.
"MOM" is a biopic, not factual in all details but faithful to the 
Kaufman spirit. In only two hours one gets not only a first-rate feel 
for the peculiar Andy, but coverage of a large number of his life's 
steps: Saturday Night Live is there; so is the character of Latka 
Gravas of the TV's series "Taxi." Also club appearances; his reading 
all of "The Great Gatsby" to students of Arizona State; the 
mysterious lounge performer Tony Clifton; the Mickey Mouse song; the 
Old Macdonald song; the infamous wrestling matches with women, then 
with the real champion Jerry Lawler; etc. etc. etc. as Yul Brynner 
would say.
Andy was the truest original in the trade and arguably the first 
performance artist. He had no comic shticks. His appearances were 
oddball happenings which puzzled all. The pranks he played on 
audiences, the practical jokes at their expense, his overt 
antagonizing of the public, his sado-masochistic attitudes, his 
private, convoluted jokes and hoaxes were surrealist, dadaist, 
Theater of the Absurd. The aim, we guess, was not to amuse but to 
confuse, to infuriate, to cajole and to insult, to be a provocateur 
whether in childish ways or in highly (but hidden) sophisticated ways.
There was no telling who or what was Andy-the-person and who Andy-the 
performer. One flew into the other. The audiences as well as people 
who knew him personally could not tell whether Kaufman was putting 
them on or being himself. But then "himself" remains elusive to this 
day. It would seem that everything he did -- even in private 
life--was an act .Everything was rigged. Even chance was 
orchestrated, but not so that anyone could tell. Indeed, when it was 
announced that Andy was dying of cancer, all, even his family, first 
thought that it was a stunt.
  In the movie, he tells his last girlfriend, Lynne Margulies "You 
don't knoe the real me." "There's not a real you" she retorts. That's 
the best possible summation of Andy.
"MOM" is no comedy, no entertainment, not anything we've seen before. 
Yet it is fascinating, all the more so because it does not follow the 
canons of entertainment or biopics. Biographical movies are 
notoriously inexact, homogenized (or at least pasteurized), bent on 
tying up loose ends and explaining their heroes or antiheroes. "MOM" 
does nothing of the sort. It is, for this reason, and because Andy 
himself was a huge loose end as well as a loose canon that it all 
rings true. Kaufman, that child of TV who grew up to push the 
envelope farther than anyone in showbiz, remains a mystery.
Carrey's superlative embodiment of Andy should not eclipse other 
roles. Though Courtney Love (as Lynne) has an unimpressive, shortish 
part (the real Lynne, shown on a TV special, is most atractive and 
lively), Danny DeVito brings a palpable warmth as Andy's manager and 
true friend. His pal-client may have been a looney--then again he may 
have been just acutely different-- but he stuck to him. And there's 
Andy's alter ego, the mysterious, obnoxious Tony Clifton, who eludes 
identification. Is he Andy in disguise? Yet well after Kaufman's 
death he reappears to pay homage.
Don't miss the start of the movie. The precredit introduction is 
highly original.

Author
Michael Redman
The greatest and most important piece of art that any artist can produce is
his or her life. There is no single painting, song, book or poem that can
compare to the journey one makes and the body of work that is evidence of it.
The truths discovered along the path, the path as a whole: these are the
destiny of an artist. The products they leave behind are merely artifacts
through which we might be able to glimpse what they have found.
Andy Kaufman's lifework was indeed his life. Sometimes his performances were
wondrous inventions from outside anything the audience would expect.
Occasionally they were hilarious. And of course, as with anyone doing
something new, they sometimes didn't work at all.
Let me get my prejudices out up front. I belong to the school that thinks
Kaufman was a genius. Although billed as a comedian, he actually was a
performance artist and delighted in screwing with our minds. More power to him.
I also recognize that much of the public just didn't `get it'. When a
supposedly funny man walked on stage, they wanted jokes. Kaufman didn't tell
jokes. As he admitted, he didn't even know what was funny.
The film is more of a series of episodes from his life than it is a story. We
get to see re-enactments of his "Taxi" years (complete with the original
cast), the "Saturday Night Live" shows, appearances with David Letterman and
the infamous wrestling bits.
Many of these pieces are uncanny. If you remember the Letterman shows, the
film seems as you are there, albeit Dave looks a little older. The behind the
scenes look at "Taxi" are worth the price of admission. Christopher Lloyd's
expressions are priceless.
Kaufman (played with an amazing accuracy by Jim Carrey) is best known for his
Latka character on "Taxi", which although a high point of the series is the
least of his creations. At the time, it didn't make much sense that the same
person performing on-the-edge pieces would be involved in a sit-com. The film
makes it clear. It was a means to an end. Latka made him popular enough that
he could do the work he wanted.
Although there are some insights mixed in with the looks at his career, the
film falls as flat as some of Kaufman's less successful performances. We see
what Andy did, but rarely get any idea of why he did it.
We never meet the real Andy Kaufman. We're shown the comedian, the wrestler
and the artist but we don't get many clues as to what made him tick. In some
ways this is consistent with his life. He kept us guessing then and the movie
keeps us guessing now.
His girlfriend  Lynn (Courtney Love) tells him there is `no real you'. It's a
great line and certainly describes his public persona, but without knowing
more about who he was, the film doesn't hold together.
The two scenes where we do see something of the real are the best in the film.
When he announces to his friends and family he has lung cancer, they think
it's another stunt. Later he visits a psychic surgeon in the Caribbean and is
amazed to find a kindred soul.
Carrey is remarkable in his portrayal. He has all of Kaufman's nuances. He
even looks like him. At times you will forget that it's Carrey on the screen.
His career has had an odd run from the hilarious but little-known Duck
Factory television series to far too many insipid films to this one. With
his last couple of movies, we are beginning to see his true talents. Perhaps
Jim Carrey is now popular enough that he can do what he wants.
I walked into the theater wanting to love this film. But I didn't. It could
have been a great movie, but director Milos Forman only gives us the tip of
the iceberg.
There is a few-minute prologue at the beginning that is perfectly
Kaufmanesque. If that piecea had been followed by 90 minutes of white screen,
it would have been grand. No one would have ever gone to see it, but it would
have been the real Andy Kaufman.
(Michael Redman has written this column for more years than some of you have
been alive. He's looking forward to the new millennium. In about a year.
Redman@indepen.com seems to be a functional entity once more.)
[This appeared in the 12/30/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
This week's Y2K article: http://www.indepen.com/
Y2K archives: http://www.indepen.com/y2k.html

Author
Christian Pyle
Many geniuses have been misunderstood, but Andy Kaufman may be the only one who
made being misunderstood a goal.  Milos Forman's "Man on the Moon" chronicles
the career of the comedian.  Several of the reviews I read of the movie fussed
that Forman did not explain Andy.  These reviewers missed the point:  no one
could explain Andy, not even Andy.
As the movie begins, Andy's father finds young Andy facing the wall in his room
performing to an imaginary audience.  Even as a child, he lived his life on an
imaginary stage.  Grown up, Andy (Jim Carrey) plays the comedy clubs to mixed
reactions, but he catches the eye of talent agent George Shapiro (Danny
DeVito), who manages to get Andy a part on the sitcom "Taxi."  Reluctantly,
Andy agrees with the condition that lounge singer Tony Clifton be a regular
guest star.  George goes to see Tony perform and is horrified by the singer's
belligerent attitude toward his audience.  Backstage, George discovers that
Tony is Andy in disguise.  The secret soon becomes public knowledge, and people
book Tony with the assumption that Andy will appear.  However, there's a joke
within the joke:  Andy's friend and collaborator Bob Zmuda (Paul Giamatti)
often performs as Tony.
"Man on the Moon" follows Andy through all his "greatest hits"-the Elvis
imitation, the Mighty Mouse routine on "Saturday Night Live," the rise and fall
of "Taxi," the aborted sketch on "Fridays," the wrestling matches with women,
and the fight with Jerry Lawler on the Letterman show-up to his untimely death
from cancer.  The movie feels episodic, jumping from memorable moment to
memorable moment, but this may be a result of how many outrageous and original
things Andy did in his brief career.
What makes the movie work is Jim Carrey's sensitive and subtle performance. 
I've never been impressed by Carrey's acting before, not even in "The Truman
Show."  However, in "Man on the Moon," he proves that his rubber face can
convey complex emotions.  Carrey's Andy is a mixture of a mischievous imp, a
driven artist, and a confused soul who is as much a prop in his own madcap
artform as everyone around him.  He laments to his love, Lynne Margulies
(Courtney Love), "Nobody knows the real me."  She responds, "There is no real
you."  Carrey's expression registers a combination of bemusement and horror as
he replies, "Oh yeah, I forgot."
The movie's best scene comes near the end as Andy travels to a ramshackle
clinic in the Philippines in search of a miracle cure for his cancer.  Pale,
bald, and confined to a wheelchair, Andy watches as another patient is treated;
the doctor plunges his fingers into the patient's abdomen and rips out a
handful of tissue.  The wound heals itself immediately.  After Andy takes his
place on the table, he can see that the doctor has the wad of tissue concealed
in his palm.  Even as his eyes register the hopelessness of his situation, Andy
laughs, realizing that life had finally played a prank on him.
Rather than attempting to explain Andy Kaufman and his unusual form of
performance art, "Man on the Moon" urges the viewer to contemplate the
questions posed by Andy's life:  Was there a point?  Did he know what it was? 
Why attracted him to playing creeps like Tony Clifton and the "bad-guy
wrestler"?  Did he want his audience to hate him?  Did he hate them?  Was his
life a joke in search of a punchline?
Wrestler Jerry "the King" Lawler plays himself in his bouts with Andy.  Other
players in the Kaufman saga appear briefly as themselves, including the cast of
"Taxi" minus DeVito (Jeff Conaway, Marilu Henner, Judd Hirsch, Carol Kane, and
Christopher Lloyd), David Letterman and Paul Shaffer, Improv owner Budd
Friedman, and "SNL" producer Lorne Michaels. The real George Shapiro and Bob
Zmuda also have cameos, in addition to exec-producing the picture.
Director Forman and the writing team of Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski
share a fondness for unusual biopics.  They previously collaborated on "The
People vs. Larry Flynt," a biography of the "Hustler" publisher.  In addition,
one of Forman's best films is "Amadeus," the story of Mozart, and Alexander and
Karaszewski wrote Tim Burton's "Ed Wood," about the "world's worst director." 
Somehow this strange group of bizarre personalities seems like the perfect
company for Andy Kaufman.
Bottom line:  A thought-provoking, funny, and poignant portrait of a comic
genius 
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Are you sick of hearing about hoooow much Jim Carrey acts like Andy Kaufman
in this movie?! Are you sick of all the comparisons, the praises, the
highbrow kudos? Well, I am, and God knows he is really good in this movie,
but lest we all forget what Jim Carrey does for a profession. He is an
actor. It is his job to act. The fact that he does it so well in this film
is really great and all, but why isn't anyone talking about the actual film?
Helllloooo? Is it good? Is it entertaining? Does it have something to say?
Well...allow me.
PLOT:
Based on the real life of comedian/singer/bongo drummer Andy Kaufman, this
film takes us through the early part of his career in Hollywood, his sudden
rise to fame on TV's "Taxi", his manufactured multiple personalities and all
the goofy stuff in between.
CRITIQUE:
This film wasn't really all that funny, wasn't really all that interesting
and wasn't really all that dramatic. In fact, if it wasn't for Jim Carrey's
strong showing as the lead character of Kaufman, I doubt I would even
recommend this film to anyone who didn't really care or know this man named
Andy. I personally knew very little about the man before this film, other
than his Latka performances on "Taxi", but I had the impression that he was
weird, controversial and kinda "out there". After this film, I know much
more about his performances (In fact, I think I know ALL of them, since it
felt like every one of his acts was basically played out on the big screen),
but little more about the man himself. In fact, all it did was confirm the
fact that he was weird, controversial and kinda "out there". Did it address
the man's upbringing, formative or high school years to get some kind of
feel as to why he may have acted the way he did? Nope. In fact, besides
admiring the man for his raw courage and debatable talent, I found very
little of significant value in this film.
Some might enjoy Carrey's (Kaufman's) routines in the movie, but I
personally didn't care much for most of them. Sure he was over-the-top,
loud, different and obnoxious, but is that supposed to be entertaining?
Well, I suppose it would be to some (Admittedly, Howard Stern is cut from
the same fabric and I do dig him...), but considering that this film is
little more than a showpiece for many of Kaufman's goofy shticks, I think
that you actually have to enjoy many of them to truly appreciate the movie
as a whole. And if you are thinking of seeing this movie because of the
Courtney Love "romance" factor, stop dead in your tracks right now, cause
this has got to be one of the weakest "love affairs" ever put to film. In
fact, why was she even in the movie? She didn't appear to make one iota of
difference in the man's life one way or the other. Anyway, if it feels as
though I'm complaining too much, you're probably right, but it's Christmas
time dammit, and I haven't even begun my stinky shopping!
Harumph...but with that bit of ugliness aside, I would recommend this film
on video to most who are interested in seeing how some people in showbiz get
started and how one goofy, really strange man made something of himself. On
the big screen, it really isn't worth it, unless you truly like the Jim
Carrey, who should definitely get an Oscar nod for his performance, or just
want to see Andy's performances all over again. Oh and by the way, when I
say that Carrey was excellent in his role as Andy, I don't pretend to know
whether or not he was EXACTLY like the man himself (I didn't know Andy
much). But what I am saying is that by the end of the movie, I no longer saw
Jim Carrey playing a part...I saw a person named Andy. And that, to any
actor, should be the highest praise indeed.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
According to good buddy Bob Zmuda's recent book about Andy entitled "Andy
Kaufman Revealed! Best Friend Tells All", Andy was "so in love with
prostitutes - he admired their "purity" - that if he'd been female he would
have wanted to be one himself." As it was, he had to settle with being a
one-man orgy at the notorious Mustang Ranch brothel in Reno. In fact, in
1979 he was in Reno for a week of shows and decided to have sex with every
prostitute at the brothel. Not only did he bed six hookers per day, he paid
$100 per prostitute - twice the going rate. By the end of the week, writes
Zmuda, his friend was sore from all the activity. He did also like to keep
in touch with many of the Mustangers and would, on occasion, fly one of them
out to stay with him in Laurel Canyon for a few days at a time.
Besides the numerous real life cameos by stars from TV's "Taxi", David
Letterman and Lorne Michaels playing themselves, it's interesting to note
the small role by Norm McDonald in one particularly awkward scene, and the
real Bob Zmuda as an angry man in another.
According to Jim Carrey, he and his-then wife, Melissa, were in attendance
the night of Andy's last big show at the Carnegie Hall. Melissa also has a
small role in this film as the waitress in the Comedy Store.
The IMDb reports that the title of the film is a reference to an R.E.M. song
about the late comedian, and that director Forman could not decide between
Edward Norton (who was reportedly dating the overrated Courtney Love at the
time) and Jim Carrey for the lead role. He eventually left it up to the
studio, and they obviously went with the more bankable Carrey.
And for all you who believe in the superstitious fodder, please note that
both Jim and Andy were born on the same date of January 17 (though 13 years
apart), and while on the set of this film, Jim apparently suffered the a
similar minor neck injury while filming a scene with the same professional
wrestler who once put Andy in a neck brace (Jerry Lawler, who incidentally
plays himself in this film).

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Jim Carrey impersonates Andy Kaufman so deftly that the
performance artist--who died of lung cancer in 1984--comes
alive in all his weirdness. That Kaufman was strange,
maverick, a performer who listened to the beat of his own
drummer, is never challenged.  Instead "Man On the Moon,"
an extraordinary vehicle for the actor in the lead role, shows
Andy Kaufman as neither a misunderstood person nor an out-
and-out looney tunes.  What comes across by the time the
two-hour entertainment ends is that Kaufman, who insisted
that he was not a comic and did not even know what being
funny meant, was intent on getting a reaction from the
audience.  We've all heard of entertainers who bore the pants
off the audience; who are neither funny nor tragic,
mesmerizing nor amusing.  Andy Kaufman probably knew
that the worst thing a person can be in real life or on the
stage is b-o-r-i-n-g, to evoke no reaction.  What mattered to
him, then, was to get a reaction, even if the effect he had on
his crowd was one of loathing, resistance, and disgust. 
Perhaps no other man in recent entertainment history pushed
the envelope more in that regard or was so intent on being
an original that he actually loved getting booed and hearing
shouts of abhorrence as much as he adored the approving
roar of the crowd.
   You wouldn't know this from the opening scene. If an
award were given for the most ingenious start of a picture,
that would be for "Man On the Moon," hands down.  To show
us that Kaufman wanted to keep the audience off-guard,
never knowing when he was serious or when he was messing
with our minds, Carrey appears on stage with a old,
table-model phonograph, rolls his eyes to the left, to the right,
up and down, and says nothing for a while as the credits roll. 
When the credits stop rolling mid-way as the record ends, he
starts the music from the beginning and the credits roll once
more.  He then announces that the movie is over and
disappears, making this what could have been the shortest
full-length film of the year.  Seconds later, he re-appears to
explain himself. 
   That's about the last time we really do understand the
method behind the madness, however, since Carrey never
resolves the question we all have in mind throughout the
performance.  We really do not know the extent of Kaufman's 
emotional stability.  After all, he did plenty of things during his
pursuit of performance art to alienate the crowd, a practice
which conventional psychotherapists would call neurotic
behavior indeed.  What person intent on a career in show
business would have the temerity to turn down a leading role
on a popular TV sitcom, "Taxi," which Kaufman's agent,
George Shapiro (Danny DeVito) won for him?  Was he truly a
man of principles who detested the very idea of sitcoms with
"dumb jokes and a dead audience," or was this guy simply
being self-destructive?  And how could a person so soft-
spoken, one who comes across as so shy that he appears to
be stage-struck, impersonate a no-talent singer like the
fictitious Tony Clifton?  "Clifton"'s night-club act demolished
the people in the lounge unlucky enough to be singled out for
his devastating commentary and made others simply squirm
with uneasiness, probably eager to crawl under the table.  
   Director Milos Forman, whose "The People vs. Larry Flynt"
similarly deals with a man outside the bounds of respectable
society (who made us wonder whether the title character was
simply a scuzz or a person involved in upholding First
Amendment freedoms), takes a chronological approach to
Kaufman's life.  Working with a script penned by Scott
Alexander and Larry Karaszewski, Forman takes us from
Kaufman's early night club acts, where he wows the
audience with a spot-on impersonation of Elvis Presley, to his
being scouted by hotshot Hollywood agent George Shapiro. 
He appears on Saturday Night Live where he has a chance to
become a regular but later, in a straw vote of people calling
a 900 number, is voted out by a margin of 72% to 28% 
Attaining a whopping five-year contract with the TV sitcom
"Taxi" starring Judd Hirsch, he plays Latka Gravas, an
Estonian with a heavy accent and, inciting the women in one
live audience with the most outrageously sexist comments,
he winds up challenging the females to wrestle with him to
prove once again that men are the superior sex.  This gets
him a girl friend in Lynn Marguiles (Courtney Love), who
takes up the challenge and loses.  All the while Kaufman's
greatest supporter is his writing partner, Bob Zmuda (Paul
Giamatti)--who writes into an ABC special that is
characteristically Dadaist and makes people squirm.
   The movie cleverly pastes in some actual scenes from
"Taxi" with Carrey playing the Kaufman role next to the actual
stars including Judd Hirsch, Marilu Henner, Carol Kane and
Christopher Lloyd and features an interview between
Kaufman and a former wrestling opponent, Jerry Lawler
(playing himself throughout) on an actual David Letterman
show.
   As a biopic "Man on the Moon" goes further than the more-
or-less factual study of the association between Gilbert and
Sullivan, "Topsy-Turvy."  Using actual resurrected scenes to
cement its authenticity, "Man on the Moon" is an amazing,
frenzied, even deranged experience that will doubtless re-
create a posthumous fan club for Kaufman, whose death from
lung cancer is graphically re-created, including his trip to an
alternative treatment clinic in the Philippines.  Like the boy
who cried wolf, Kaufman has a difficult time convincing even
his own family and girl friend that he actually has the fatal
disease: some believe that even the doctor who points out
Kaufman's x-rays is a Hollywood actor and that the playful
performer is again toying with everyone's head.  To Jim
Carrey's credit, he presents Kaufman the way he really was--
a largely bizarre person who at the very least made a lot of
people uncomfortable with his antics, and yet by Carrey's
charisma, he makes us love the guy, foibles and all.  Now,
that's acting.  And this is quite the original film.
Rated R.  Running Time: 119 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Homer Yen
"Man on the Moon" -- Andy Kaufman in a Wrestling Match
- yeah - yeah - yeah - yeah
To me, Andy Kaufman was some semi-talented actor who
spent a few years on a show called Taxi.  I never
really watched the show, except when I was channel
surfing and happened to catch it for a minute or two. 
I couldn't even tell you any of the characters on the
show - that is, except for Latka, played by Andy
Kaufman.  He stood out.  He was a shy-looking,
diminutive actor who spoke like he had just inhaled
dangerous amounts of helium.  And I always asked
myself, 'what's the deal with this guy?'
"Man on the Moon" doesn't try to answer this question.
 It doesn't try to be a detailed biography of Kaufman.
 Rather, it is more like a visual diary that
illustrates a few of the more unique chapters in this
performer's life.  And unique is a very good word. 
Kaufman's oeuvre of wacky performances include a
wicked transformation into Elvis; an affable foreign
mechanic named Latka; a crass lounge singing alter
ego, and a trash talking wrestler who proclaimed
himself to be the Inter-Gender champion because no
woman could beat him.  Kaufman was considered
brilliant by a few and enigmatic by some, and
eventually scorned by many.
But his brand of humor was not even supposed to be
humor at all.  Instead, Kaufman would say that they
were experiments in behavior.  He was sometimes funny,
sometimes mean-spirited, sometimes edgy, and sometimes
tasteless.  But despite his many facades, he was
always sincere at trying to give the public something
unexpected.  He wanted to shock the audience and to
elicit genuine emotion.  His philosophy was not about
making people laugh.  It was about making people
react.  The result was that some would roll in the
aisle with laughter while the person seated next to
him would be scratching his head in wonderment.  
"MOTM" stars Jim Carrey, who is showing moviegoers
that he's becoming much more than a 2-dimensional
comedian who relies on squeezing his butt cheeks and
molding his rubbery face.  Carrey ably transforms
himself into the Kaufman persona.  Though Kaufman has
great schemes that he wants to set in motion, he is
not always the sole architect.  Helping him are is
long-time friend, Bob (Paul Giamatti), an agent (Danny
DeVito), and an extremely patient girlfriend (Courtney
Love).  Yet, Andy is always engaging in his own
machinations, frequently even catching his closest
friends and family members off guard.  It gets to the
point that even the National Enquirer ignores rumors
about him because they've 'been burned too many times
before.'
In some ways, Kaufman was an immature boy trapped in a
man's body.  In other ways, he may have been
considered a visionary performer.  But I think that if
he lived in the 1990s, he would have been considered a
very capable performance artist.  This film gave me a
new sense of respect for him.  He was definitely
fighting an uphill battle, but perhaps opened the door
for people like Howard Stern and helped to make
'Professional' wrestling more mainstream.  In Kaufman,
there is an undeniable sweetness to him, despite his
need to shock and to stay one step ahead of the
audience.
I am recommending the film for two reasons.  The first
is because Jim Carrey delivers an Oscar-worthy
performance, who not only does a hauntingly real
imitation of the late Kaufman but also shows unusual
dramatic depth.  It's difficult to be a serious clown,
but Carrey shows great restraint.  Also, credit
Director Milos Foreman for being able to present a
film whose tone accurately mimics Kaufman's
unpredictability and for giving us a thoughtful look
into why Kaufman probably deserved more credit than he
received.  

Author
Steve Rhodes
Where does obnoxiousness end and comedic talent begin?
Andy Kaufman's performances constantly raised that question, and so does
Milos Forman's movie about Andy's life, MAN ON THE MOON.  Starring Jim
Carrey as Kaufman as well as Andy's alter ego, Tony Clifton, the movie
tests the limits of the viewers' patience just as Andy did.  The
frequently funny result is as much a curiosity piece as a traditional
motion picture.  But one fact is undeniable, Carrey is terrific in the
role and might finally earn the Oscar nomination that he so richly
deserved, but didn't get, last year for THE TRUMAN SHOW.  Then again,
Hollywood has never really warmed up to Carrey's acting talent, so don't
bet on any nominations.
The script by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski has the movie start
with the closing credits.  Yes, you read that right, the closing, not
the opening credits.  One problem with the script, however, is that this
turns out to be the highlight of the entire show.  It never again
reaches this level of imagination and joy.  Just as Andy generated a
mixture of reactions from his audience from grimaces to nervous
laughter, the movie produces those same reactions.  Still, even at its
most unpleasant, the movie features Carrey's talent, which never ceases
to dazzle and amaze.
"I'm not a comic," Andy honestly tells his future agent George Shapiro
(Danny DeVito).  "I don't even do jokes.  I don't know what's funny."
He does know success.  And to Andy, success consists of so riling up his
audience that half of them walk out in disgust.  He'll do anything to
get under their skins -- reading "The Great Gatsby" aloud to college
audiences, insulting patrons at nightclubs by telling them how fat they
look and ridiculing females who he eggs on to wrestle him.
George thinks Andy may be his diamond in the rough.  "You're insane, but
you might also be brilliant," he tells his new client, who proceeds to
give George the fake snot that he has had hanging out of his nose,
telling George to save it since it may one day be valuable.
Paul Giamatti plays Andy's writer and comedic partner, Bob Zmuda, and
Courtney Love plays Andy's girlfriend, Lynne Margulies.  Lynne meets
Andy in a wrestling match on "The Merv Griffith Show."  It's not often
that a romantic relationship starts with a fight.
Perhaps the most honest line is uttered by a television executive.  When
shown the tape that Andy wants to be his big TV special, the executive
looks at it in total disbelief, saying the obvious, "This is not funny!"
"You're like some stupid kid who comes home and says, 'Look Dad, I got
an F'," George tells Andy, as Andy's career goes down the drain.  Andy,
of course, has mixed reactions to his lack of popularity, which to him
may be some crazy measure of success.  Enjoying a movie in which bad is
supposed to be good is at best problematic, but Carrey manages to make
it strangely compelling.
It's always hard to figure out whether someone will like a movie, but
the recommendation on this one is easy.  If you've seen the trailers,
you've already seen the movie.  The full-length version just fills in
some details.  If you liked the trailers, you'll probably like the film.
And if you didn't think much of the trailers, well, save your money.
MAN ON THE MOON runs 1:50.  It is rated R for language and would be fine
for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        "Man on the Moon" is Milos Forman's biopic of the late "Taxi" star
who succumbed to a rare strain of lung cancer following a short-lived
career carved out by an eccentric style of humor and elaborate pranks that
kept his audiences guessing.
        As brilliantly realized by Carrey, Kaufman was a neurotic (some say
psychotic) who turned traditional notions of stand-up comedy on their head.
Kaufman's idea of entertaining a room full of college students, for
example, is to read them "The Great Gatsby," cover to cover, with a dubious
British accent.  "Now *that's* funny."  We never really know what makes
Kaufman tick in "Man on the Moon," but it never seems to matter--the road
traveled is a sad, funny, and remarkable one, made all the more remarkable
by Carrey's unnervingly accurate portrayal.
        Forman pulls us into the comedian's twisted, singularly manic world
early on, with black and white, pre-credits footage of Kaufman (Carrey)
telling us that this film is over before it even begins.  In some ways, it
is.  And for Kaufman, in a lot of ways it was.
        Kaufman is discovered by agent George Shapiro (Danny DeVito), who
witnesses his cutting-edge stand-up act in an improv comedy club.  "You're
insane, but you might also be brilliant" he tells Kaufman over dinner.
Soon after, Shapiro offers Kaufman a part in a sitcom called "Taxi" (with
Judd Hirsch, Marilu Henner, Carol Kane, and Christopher Lloyd all reprising
their roles; the years have been kinder to them than you'd expect).
Believing sitcoms to be the lowest form of entertainment, Kaufman will only
agree to the contract if certain conditions are met.  His terms include his
own television special (creative control assumed) and four guest
appearances on "Taxi" by some no-name Vegas lounge singer called Tony
Clifton.  Tony who?  The network top brass don't seem to care and Kaufman
is on the payroll.
        Tony Clifton, it turns out, is really one of Kaufman's many
alter-egos.  Keep 'em guessing indeed.  "Kaufman is Clifton, and Clifton is
Kaufman" waxes Shapiro.  "You get two Kaufman's for the price of one."
Actually, *we* get two Carreys for the price of one (and one Carrey is
usually more than enough for any one movie).  Like everything else in
Kaufman's repertoire, Tony Clifton is just another gag, just another
fabrication to get him onto that next rung of the show business ladder.
Unconsciously, the abrasive Tony Clifton signaled the beginning of
Kaufman's self-inflicted decline.  The self-proclaimed "song and dance man"
was beginning to alienate his audiences now and, while Kaufman could still
fill auditoriums with ease, he was often times guilty of playing to an
audience of one.  Himself.
        Successful and unsuccessful appearances on "Saturday Night Live"
follow.  Then "Taxi" is canceled.  His transcendental meditation doesn't
seem to be helping.  Kaufman starts a new gig--inter-gender wrestling in
Memphis--where he meets a woman called Lynne (Courtney Love, powder fresh
from Forman's previous biopic "The People vs. Larry Flynt"), pisses off a
whole lot of God-fearing Southern women, and starts a brawl on "Letterman."
Oh, and then he gets cancer.  All part of the act?  Many--family members
included--aren't convinced.
        Andy Kaufman was a wild and crazy guy.  Jim Carrey is a wild and
crazy guy.  Together, they make for fascinating cinema in Milos Forman's
stellar "Man on the Moon."
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Christopher Null
Ground Control to Major Bob  The Bob Zmuda Interview
By Christopher Null
`Andy Kaufman asked me on his deathbed to do two things,' says Bob
Zmuda.  `One was to write a book about him, the other was to produce a
movie about him.  He was scared of being remembered as Latka on Taxi.
That scared him worse than death.'
So Zmuda wrote the book (Andy Kaufman Revealed! Best Friend Tells All).
Now prepare for Andy Kaufman: The Movie, also known as Man on the Moon,
which opens December 22.
So who is Bob Zmuda?  When you see the film, you'll understand.  He was
Andy Kaufman's best friend and writing partner (played expertly by Paul
Giamatti in the film).  He was Employee #2 in a quiet partnership that
got its jollies from playing tricks on an unsuspecting public.  He was
Tony Clifton (q.v.) from time to time.  And after Kaufman's death, he
was the creator of the Comic Relief specials, which have raised millions
of dollars for the homeless.
On a recent press tour in San Francisco, Zmuda talked about the film,
the book, and how Jim Carrey just about lost it trying to get inside the
head of the most eccentric comedian the world has ever known.
Zmuda says, `Jim said he would never again approach a role like this.
Jim Carrey is the biggest Andy Kaufman freak in the world.  If he wasn't
Jim Carrey, he could travel the country lecturing on Kaufmanism.  He
fought to get this role.  He was born to play this role.'
Zmuda continues, discussing Carrey's preparation to play Andy Kaufman.
`Jim said, How would Andy Kaufman approach this role?' Jim approached
the role just as Andy would have.  We shot for 85 days.  Jim was only
there for 2.  The rest of the time he was Andy or Tony.'
Who's Tony?  As the film explains, Tony Clifton was the anti-Andy.
Kaufman, a die-hard Transcendental Meditation guru, health food nut, and
all-around purist, had a dark side.  That dark side was Tony Clifton, a
rotten Vegas lounge singer that looked nothing like Kaufman and fooled
people for years.  Clifton would smoke, drink, and whore with the best
of them, and that was just the beginning of the ruse.  The only problem,
of course, is that the guy didn't really exist.  Says Zmuda, `Andy's
contract with Paramount said that Tony Clifton had to have a parking
space next to Kaufman's with his name on it, and he had to have his own
dressing room.'
As it turns out, Tony was quite the character, and the personality had a
serious affect on Carrey, too.  `One day we were shooting half Tony
Clifton, half Andy.  Next thing we knew, Andy showed up on the set with
a bloody nose, saying he had passed Tony Clifton and Tony punched him
out.  I don't know if it was real blood, but a real medic was brought
in.'
It's hard to imagine anyone but Carrey in this role, but there was a
time when Carrey didn't have it locked down.  `Everyone wanted to play
Kaufman.  I was not a believer in the beginning.  I thought Nicolas Cage
looked more like Andy Kaufman.  This was even before The Truman Show.
Carrey calls me one day and says, Bob, will you come over and see my
audition tape for Milos [Forman, the director]?  I said sure, thinking
this is gonna suck eggs.  The tape's not on a minute, and I'm crying
like a baby.  It was remarkable.  He had the role.  There was just
something about him.'
And what about the name of the film, Man on the Moon, which is taken
from the R.E.M. song of the same name?  I had heard rumors that one of
Kaufman's hoaxes was that he thought the moon landing had been faked,
but apparently that's not so.  Zmuda explains the name, `R.E.M. were
saddened when Andy died.  But that whole thing, Is there a man on the
moon?' means is there a card up my sleeve?'  Nothing more, apparently.
Still, Zmuda says, `The hoax and the practical joke are lost art
forms.'  But did Andy Kaufman pull one last stunt on his deathbed at age
35?  No, says Zmuda.  `Andy Kaufman is dead.  He's not in some truck
stop with Elvis.'  While Kaufman tinkered with the idea, tells Zmuda, he
never brought it up again.  `The only thing that is odd is page 112 of
The Tony Clifton Story, a screenplay that Andy and I wrote, that was
never made.  On page 112, Tony dies of lung cancer at Cedars-Sinai
Hospital.  Andy Kaufman would die of lung cancer at Cedars-Sinai eight
years later.  Pretty odd stuff.'
But Zmuda does admit, `Had Andy Kaufman lived, he would have faked his
death.'
And what of that grand last scene, which hints at Kaufman's return?
Zmuda describes an encounter with a woman who was begging to know.
`'What does it mean? What does it mean?' Look, it's the monolith in
2001.  It's just there.  We don't know.  And if you have to ask, you
really don't get it.'
We got it, Bob.
---
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Check out the G-Rex Personal Shopper at http://www.g-rex.com

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at 
http://www.moviereviews.org/man_on_the_moon.htm ---
---Those of you in the Portland, Maine area can hear Mac VerStandig's 
film reviews every Friday morning on the 98.9 The Point morning show.---
Man on the Moon is a brilliant movie that tells you absolutely nothing 
about its subject. At the end of two hours you are no closer to 
understanding what made Andy Kaufman (Jim Carrey) so zany, innovative or 
genius. Rather, you come away with a complete comprehension and 
subsequent newly found appreciation of the man's work.
"Hello, I am Andy and I would like to thank you for coming to my movie. 
I wish it was better" is the opening line of Man on the Moon. Soon you 
learn that Andy (Jim Carrey) wishes it was better because, once all the 
bologna was done away with, the movie is now finished. Credits role, you 
are instructed to go home and the screen goes black. Anyone that gets 
up, demands a refund or even thinks of heading for an exit at this 
juncture becomes the punch-line of the film's first joke, one that would 
make Mr. Kaufman proud. Soon Andy is back on screen and inviting you to 
at least attempt to understand his career by watching the biography that 
follows.
Kaufman's roots are the same as most comedians': at home, with family 
looking on. Years later Kaufman is bombing at an improvisational comedy 
club because, despite a radically different type of audience, his act 
hasn't changed from his days as a bedroom performer. Tapping his guitar 
and making funny sounds, Andy soon gets a clear message from the 
manager: get with it or get out. Andy returns with a dead-on Elvis 
impression that is definitely with it.
Like many stars, Kaufman is discovered in the aforementioned humble 
night club environment. Agent George Shapiro (Danny DeVito) doesn't take 
long to get his new client on Saturday Night Live and a little show 
called Taxi (for those of you still scratching your head as to exactly 
who this Kaufman guy was, he played Latka Gravas on the hit series whose 
cast returns to play themselves here, minus DeVito who is obviously 
occupied otherwise). Kaufman begins to perform in many different arenas 
with unheard of material. Whether it be wrestling women, disrupting a 
live TV show or taking the audience at Carnegie Hall out for milk and 
cookies; Kaufman ventures where few have previously gone and soars to 
the top in the process. But everything that goes up must come down.
Academy Award winning director Milos Forman helms this project with 
experience in both insanity and reality having also done One Flew Over 
the Cuckoo's Nest, Amadeus and The People Vs. Larry Flynt. Here is 
joined by screenwriters Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski who penned 
The People Vs. Larry Flynt (supporting actress Courtney Love, giving a 
delicious performance in a limited role here, is also an alumni from the 
pornographer's bio-pic). There is little doubt that Forman and the 
writers will be nominated for Academy Awards.
The other person who will likely be in The Shrine Auditorium on Oscar 
night is Jim Carrey. Once considered a funny-faced comedian doomed to a 
career of potty-mouth fart-fests, Carrey suddenly shows up here with one 
of the greatest dramatic performances of our time. Much like Robin 
Williams, Carrey's new trend (with the primarily dramatic The Truman 
Show in the not to distant past) seems to be playing funny people in 
serious movies.
Andy Kaufman probably died in 1984. Some people are of the opinion that 
he is still very much alive, and Man on the Moon actually provides a 
very nice "out-clause" should that ever prove to be true. Regardless, 
Kaufman's public recognition was at an all time low on May 16, 1984 and 
has hardly risen since. This film will likely project his name into 
household status once again, perhaps permanently.
Although Man on the Moon may not win battles at the box office or even 
on Oscar night, although it certainly deserves to, the movie will likely 
be one of only a handful from 1999 that is still fresh in minds several 
years down the road. Andy Kaufman aimed to give his audience an 
experience they would never forget, and Carrey and Forman do just that 
in Man on the Moon.

Author
Ross Anthony
Don't arrive late, the five minute introduction is marvelously unique and
quintessentially Kaufman. The entertaining film that follows, though
documentary in nature ... "is not an historical biography and it's not
always faithful to the facts," director Milos Forman admits (in the press
notes) "It is, however, always faithful to the spirit of the facts."
Jim Carrey portrays the eccentric, controversial comic Andy Kaufman
(1949-1984) who charmed audiences with his Latka character on the 1970's
sitcom "Taxi," shocked millions with his disruptive antics on the live-taped
"Fridays," baffled all of us with his incitingly sexist challenges to
wrestle women on TV, and finally left us in 1984 wondering if his death was
just another prank. Robin Williams once referred to Kaufman as the "kamikaze
of comedians" because he didn't care if he bombed.
Carrey, once known as the "man with the rubber face" for his ability to
actually look like the celebrities he imitated, can't shake off the fame
surrounding his own. That said, Carrey is absolutely rock solid conveying
the Andy Kaufman persona in voice and eye movement. He never falters. Even
though he looks like Jim Carrey, this is not a Jim Carrey movie. Critics of
Carrey's acting ability won't be able to ignore this disciplined
performance.
Danny DeVito (responsible for the film's conception and realization) leads
us through the production while portraying George Shapiro (Andy's agent). In
the "Taxi" sequences, only original cast members appear (though DeVito's
Louie character is conveniently elsewhere). Especially with DeVito in a lead
role along with wrestler Jerry Lawler's cameos (he does a fine job, by the
way), this lends a warm, friendly, sentimental feel to the film for those of
us who knew the "TV" Kaufman. It also serves to reassure us that the film's
portrayal of this enigmatic comedian is authentic. Lastly, it appends to the
memory of Andy, a sense of family and belated forgiveness for pulling our
legs and yanking our chains.
Courtney Love's performance as Lynne Margulies (who was on the set virtually
everyday) confirms her talent as an actress, making the transition from the
rock world with more grace than, personally, I'd have expected.
The film sheds light on the mysteriously odd death of Andy Kaufman, but
can't resist casting a shadow of a doubt on its audience during a slightly
unnecessary last scene. Ultimately "Man on the Moon" is a strong film,
unique and enlightening; even after the many Kaufman documentaries released
in anticipation of it. As for those of you unfamiliar with Andy's work I'd
be very curious to hear your reaction to this film (email@rossanthony.com).
Man on the Moon. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Courtney Love, Paul Giamatti and Jerry
Lawler (as himself).
Directed by Milos Forman.
Written by Scott ALexander and Larry Karaszewski.
Produced by Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, and Stacey Sher at
Universal/Mutual Film
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
