Title
Review for Misérables, Les (1998)
Number of Reviews
22

Author
Scott Renshaw
LES MISERABLES (1998)
(Columbia/Mandalay)
Starring:  Liam Neeson, Geoffrey Rush, Uma Thurman, Claire Danes, Hans
Matheson.
Screenplay:  Rafael Yglesias, based on the novel by Victor Hugo.
Producers:  Sarah Radcliffe and James Gorman.
Director:  Bille August.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, profanity, violence)
Running Time:  131 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I've been hearing people refer to the new film adaptation of LES
MISERABLES as "Lay Miz," which goes to show what the common frame of
reference is going to be.  That abbreviated moniker comes, of course, from
Alain Boublil and Claude-Michel Schonberg's immensely popular musical
adaptation, which has been selling out theaters around the world for over
a decade.  Millions of people already know the story of a convict named
Jean Valjean, whose twenty year struggle to build a new life after his
release from prison is thwarted repeatedly by a monomaniacal police
inspector named Javert.  They already know of the romance between
Valjean's adopted daughter Cosette and a rebel leader named Marius.  They
already know of a civil war in the Paris streets somewhere beyond the
barricades.  They know all this not so much because they are familiar with
Victor Hugo's novel, but because of that musical with its signature
waif-and-tricolor iconography.
     Bille August's straightforward rendering of LES MISERABLES makes you
realize exactly why the story works so well as grand opera.  The
screenplay by Rafael Yglesias (FEARLESS) efficiently streamlines the
narrative, following Valjean (Liam Neeson) from his conversion at the
hands of a kindly bishopto his life as a businessman and mayor to his
decade hiding out in a Paris convent, all the while hounded by the
relentless, unforgiving Javert (Geoffrey Rush).  Along the way he cares
for a destitute young woman named Fantine (Uma Thurman), and eventually
becomes the guardian of Fantine's daughter Cosette (Claire Danes).
     The film is certainly faithful to most basic events of the novel,
though it cuts certain characters entirely and chops other encounters down
to a bare minimum.  It's not textual fidelity which is lacking in LES
MISERABLES; it's emotional scope.  Virtually every scene feels muted, the
passions tamed to a state of dignified dissatisfaction.  What LES
MISERABLES really needed was for someone, anyone, to break into song.  The
stage production captured the sweeping melodrama of Hugo brilliantly --
the battles carried a tragic grandeur, the conflicts shook the foundations
of society, and the deaths were moments to jerk tears from the driest
eyes.  There is no substitute for the kind of dramatic economy music or a
well-constructed song can provide; three minutes of furtive conversation
between Cosette and Marius (Hans Matheson) can't create nearly the
convincing sense of love at first sight that three minutes of "In My Life"
does.  The film seems to have been crafted and edited strictly to make
sure certain necessary plot details were included, with little interest in
building momentum towards a cathartic release.
     From a certain standpoint -- one with no musical preconceptions in
the way -- LES MISERABLES is perfectly effective as period drama, and a
fine introduction to the classic story.  Technical credits are first rate,
with costumes by the gifted Gabriella Pesucci (THE AGE OF INNOCENCE) and
effective recreations of 19th century Paris.  The exceptional cast does
generally sharp work, particularly Rush in a more interesting and subtle
performance than his Oscar-winning showcase of tics and flourishes in
SHINE.  Often, however, it feels as though August is keeping them all on a
leash, eschewing musical theater in favor of "Masterpiece Theater."
There's no real power to the film, nothing which suggest the popular
response inspired by the musical.  I suspect that the only viewers who
will be genuinely satisfied with LES MISERABLES are those who don't come
in with radically different expectations in mind...expectations most
succinctly expressed by the two syllables "Lay Miz."

Author
Homer Yen
Is moral reform merely a deluded fantasy as Inspector Javert (Geoffrey
Rush) believes?  Do our actions forge an irreversible path towards a
predetermined destination or are we capable of retracing our path,
mending our ways and turning over a new leaf?  
As the film opens, we are introduced to Valjean (Liam Neeson), a convict
who has served 19 years of hard labor in a quarry for stealing.  Dressed
in rags and ready to faint from weakness, a gracious man of the cloth
allows him to stay the night and feeds him.  But despite this act of
kindness, Valjean still finds this to be an opportunity to steal.  And
though he is caught, the man of the cloth lets Valjean go.  "I've
ransomed you from fear and hatred and I give you back to God," he says,
urging him to become a new man.  A decade passes by, and when we see
Valjean again, he has transformed himself into a well-respected
businessman, a beloved citizen and the Mayor of the economically
prosperous town of Vigo.  His new-found status, however, will be
shattered when the town receives it's newest member of the police force,
Inspector Javert.
Javert was a guard during Valjean's time in the quarry, and vaguely
recognizes him.  His own brand of scruples compels him to denounce the
Mayor as a convict, even though he lacks proof.  But in his heart, he
believes that putting a former convict in a position of authority
undermines the public trust.  Wait until he meets DC's Marion Barry.
But we see many examples of Valjean's turnaround.  The most poignant
centers around factory worker Fantine (Uma Thurman) who gets fired for
having a child out of wedlock.  Needing money for her daughter's
medicine, she turns to prostitution.  After being ruthlessly tormented
by pedestrians and arrested by Javert, Valjean intercedes and begins to
take care of her.  Thurman's performance is especially sympathetic and
strong.  Valjean eventually flees to Paris, taking refuge in a convent
that he helped to establish.  Valjean also raises Fantine's daughter,
Cossette (later played by Claire Danes).  Years pass by, and now having
grown up, the virginal Cossette falls in love with a fiery radical under
the watch of police, which once again brings Javert to Valjean's
doorstep.  Valjean just wants be left alone, but throughout the film,
Javert unyieldingly pursues his personal vendetta.
What struck me as odd, however, was the lack of passion displayed by the
Inspector.  His conviction was unquestionable and he presented his
points clearly and crisply, but Javert always seemed to speak in a
monotone.  The cinematography was also somewhat uneven.  There were
great shots of the lush landscape and a breathtaking shot of a parade
that would mark the beginning of the revolution, but the smaller street
sets where the fighting took place looked nothing more than sets on a
stage.   As a period piece, it did only marginally well to transport me
to a different place and time.  Several other shots seemed too dimly
lit, and the movie's ending seemed somewhat abrupt.  
But the heart of this story is about sin and redemption, law and
justice.  Neeson and Rush emote the right stuff.  Neeson is good at
conveying the difficulty of sacrifice in light of his new-found moral
obligation.  Rush delivers a strong performance as the cynical officer
that must follow the law to the letter at the expense of his own
humanity.  The motivations of Valjean and Javert are clearly presented,
and we know that Javert will never cease pursuit even though Valjean has
had several opportunities to end the chase.  We understand and are
sympathetic to Valjean's plight.  All contribute commanding performances
and confidently steer the movie to its conclusion.  Les Miserables
deserves to be looked at, if not for its finely crafted presentation, at
least for its finely tuned performances.

Author
Michael Redman
        Can a person fundamentally change? This is a question that has been plaguing
philosophers ever since our ancestors sat around their campfires discussing
the nature of things. Is there such a such a state as redemption?
        French convict Jean Valjean (Liam Neeson) and Inspector Javert (Geoffrey
Rush) are at opposite ends of the spectrum when answering this conundrum. In
this version of Victor Hugo's classic novel - there have been at least 15
others - their interactions are at the core of the film.
        Valjean skips out on his parole after serving 19 years in an early 19th
century prison for the crime of stealing bread to eat. Encountering a kind
monsignor who forgives him after the criminal steals, Valjean turns his life
around. Years later he has somehow become wealthy, owns a factory and is mayor
of the small town of Vigau.
        When Javert arrives as the new prefect of police, he believes that he
recognizes Valjean from the days when he was a prison guard. Because once a
man is a criminal, he's always a criminal ("Reform is a discarded fantasy"),
he sets out to expose the mayor's past.
        Valjean's factory is a tight ship. He demands clean living from his workers,
going as far as separating the sexes in the work place. When Fantine (Uma
Thurman) is found to be an unwed mother, she is dismissed. Without an income,
she is forced into prostitution to make money to support her daughter.
        Later Valjean saves her from brutality and jail time at the hands of Javert.
Incarceration turns out to be the least of Fantine's worries: she is dying of
tuberculosis. Her last wish is for her benefactor to care for her daughter.
         He decides to flee when his history is brought to light, either by Javert's
scheming or Valjean's morality. The film doesn't make it clear. Gathering up
Fantine's daughter Cosette, they sneak into the heavily guarded city of Paris.
They live in a convent shut off from the outside world for 10 years until the
now-grown girl (Claire Danes) decides that she doesn't want to take vows.
        The two set up a soup kitchen to feed Paris' teeming poor and who should show
up but Javert. He is able to track Valjean down by following Marius (Hans
Matheson), a revolutionary leader who has fallen in love with Cosette. Amidst
the backdrop of one of several French revolts in the early 1800s, the final
showdown between the two life-long rivals is played out.
        The film is epic in scope with impressive sets and costuming, but there are
some major flaws. It is difficult, perhaps impossible, to translate Hugo's
1,000-plus page book into a two-hour film. The story encompasses 20 years,
dozens of characters and is heavy on internal dialogue. Not the stuff of
successful films.
        Screenwriter Rafael Yglesias took the impossible task and cut the novel to
the core out of necessity. He concentrates on struggle between Valjean and
Javert, eliminating many characters and sub-plots. While he had no choice but
to drop most of the book, some of his other choices are dubious. In the book
Valjean is not violent but in the film, he often uses his fists to prove his point.
        Neeson is his usual grand brooding self and portrays the reformed brute with
a quiet passion. Thurman eats up the screen as the dying whore providing the
most lively character in the film. Rush's obsessed cop who lives in fear of
breaking a rule is interesting, but there isn't much range in the character.
None of the rest of the actors are anything more than adequate and some not
quite so.
        The love stories between Valjean and Fantine and between Cosette and Marius
are not believable. We are never shown a motivation for Valjean's attraction
to her (except perhaps for her beauty) unless it's his guilt from putting her
into dire circumstances. The only possible reason for Cosette's falling in
love with the bland lifeless boy is that he's the first male she met. Neither
of these relationships are convincing although it is amusing to see Marius
begging for "just an hour" off from revolutionary fighting to visit his lover.
        The biggest problem with the film is its lack of grandeur. Epic scale films
call for epic scale scenes and emotional responses from the audience on the
same level. The scenes here are small, mostly involving only a few people.
With the climate of post-revolutionary Paris, the possibilities for
magnificent vignettes on a large scale are endless, but we get only a few
minutes. The film lacks energy and power. It never reaches the heights it
might have.
        It's difficult to care about most of the characters. With the exception of
Valjean and Fantine, the film is filled with cold one-dimensional people.
Perhaps that's why Cosette and Marius' affair is so difficult to grasp.
Neither of them are humans, only cardboard cut-outs. When the audience isn't
involved with the players, there is no epic. Swedish director Bille August
("The Best Intentions", "Pelle The Conqueror") gives us very little to work with.
        The immense popularity of the musical that has been selling out for years
almost guarantees this film's success no matter it's quality. In the future
producers would do well to look for 50-page short stories to adapt to film or
plan for five-hour films. The "Reader's Digest" versions don't do justice to
the originals and even worse, they don't work.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years right here in
beautiful southern Indiana and is grateful for the new green. Email fan
letters and evil comments to redman@bvoice.com.)
[This appeared in the 5/7/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Joy Wyse
In the movie theater, prior to the screening, a trivia statement appeared
on the screen.  It said that Les Miserables was the first full-length
motion  picture filmed in America, in 1809.   Now if that was so Victor
Hugo would have been writing science fiction    because the story begins
in 1812 after  Jean Valjean has served 19 years in prison, and continues
for another 20 years.  The date should have read 1909.   Some later
versions have been 1913 [France], 1918 [US], 1922 [ GB], 1925 [France],
1934 [France] 1935 {US - with Fredric March and Charles Laughton], 1946
[Italy], 1952 [US - Michael Rennie and Robert Newton] and 1957 [France]. 
And, there is the musical version.
The trivia statement also said that the current version stars Geoffrey
Rush.  When did Javert become the main role?    Perhaps it was because we
get to know Javert a bit better in this rendition than in others.  His
admission that his father was a thief and his mother was a prostitute
helps us understand more fully his reactions to Valjean, Fantine, and
Cosette.
Unless you have read the very long book by Victor Hugo, you will have
different memories of the main and sub-plots as they unfold.  It was
interesting to me that an unusual number of people got up and left the
theater for short times.  When I went outside, because I started coughing,
I spoke with a couple of people.  They  said that they  knew the plot well
enough to miss a bit of it.  That does not speak well for a film.  How
many went outside during Titanic, because they knew the ending?
A brief synopsis is that Valjean had served 19 years in hard labor for
stealing food because he was hungry.  After his release he is shunned by
most people except for a bishop who gives him a second chance in life. 
Ten years later, in 1822, he owns a factory and is the mayor of Vigau,
living a quiet life.  
Javert, who was a guard at the prison, is assigned to Vigau and thinks
that he recognizes Valjean, although he's not certain.  
Working at Valjean's factory is Fantine who is an unwed mother.  Her
daughter, Cosette, is living with a foster family, The Thenardiers, who
treat the child poorly and overcharge Fantine for her keep.  Fantine turns
to prostitution but becomes ill.  Valjean takes her into his care and
promises her, on her deathbed, that he will protect Cosette and raise her
as his own.
As Javert closes in, Valjean and Cosette leave Vigau and take refuge in a
convent elsewhere, but when Cosette grows to be a young woman she does not
wish to become a nun.  She longs to learn of the world outside of the
convent walls.  During one of her first ventures into those unfamiliar
surroundings she falls in love with a young political activist, Marius.  
The conclusion combines an attempted rebellion, Javert's pursuit, Marius'
injury, and what destiny holds in store for all of them.
Marius was the big disappointment.  He came across as a wimp.  It had to
be Cosette's lack of knowledge that attracted her to him.  She could have
done so much better.   I don't feel that anyone, with the exception of
Fantine, was portrayed as well as possible.  There were times that I
should have been brought to tears, and I wasn't.  Perhaps it was because
August and Yglesias tried to condense the plot too much.  Only the scenes
with the Bishop, or the ones with Fantine moved me.   What should have
been a memorable motion picture was simply a good one.  Instead of wanting
to see it again, I'd like to see another  version  or re-read the book.
Because it does have so many redeeming features including costumes and
locations, I give it a B.  I wish it had been an A.

Author
Bob Bloom
The newest screen version of Les Miserables is like its hero, Jean Valjean,
strong and solid.
This adaptation of the Victor Hugo classic about social injustice and
redemption is a well-acted, moving movie.
 But looming over this production, like a giant elm keeping it always in
shadow, is the very popular musical stage version of the book. For more
than 10 years people around the world have become familiar with Hugo's
story through this extravaganza. They know the words and they hum the
music.
 However, that should not stop anyone from enjoying director Bille August's
newest incarnation. Only don't expect any surprises.
 Jean Valjean (Liam Neeson) is paroled after 19 years in prison for
stealing food. He finds a night's sanctuary at the house of an archbishop,
whom he repays for his kindness by stealing his silver.
 When the archbishop refuses to send Valjean back to jail, telling his
captors that he made a gift of the silver to the ex-con, Valjean is freed
and his life transformed. The archbishop tells the confused Valjean that he
has ransomed his soul for God, and that he must now walk the path of
righteousness.
 Neeson is a wonderful Valjean. His bulk conveys the weight of a man who is
striving to do good, to compensate, not only for the injustice in the
world, but for his own past.
 Neeson's Valjean is a man always looking over his shoulder. He is striving
for a bright, peaceful future for himself and adopted daughter, Cosette,
while continually running from his past.
 That past is represented by Javert (Oscar-winner Geoffrey Rush), the
police inspector who ferrets out Valjean's secret and vows to bring him to
justice.
 Rush's interpretation of Javert is the movie's only drawback. Rush's
Javert is too implacable, too grim. The tragedy of Javert is that he is a
man for whom the law is everything. He is so blinded by adhering to the
letter of the law that he forgets that law is tempered by justice.
 The audience should feel pity, even a bit of compassion, for Javert and
his merciless obsession with Valjean. But Rush refuses to allow that. His
inspector never reveals the chink in his armor, thus when his end comes,
the audience feels relief instead of loss.
 Javert is a character to be pitied not scorned.
 Clare Danes is wholesome as the grown-up Cosette, who while loving her
adopted parent, fights the restraints he imposes on her to protect their
lives.
 Uma Thurman's Fantine is another figure who is trampled under the weight
of society's injustices. Dismissed from her job because she has an
illegitimate daugther, she is forced into prostitution to earn money for
her daughter's upkeep.
 A haunting score by the usually bombastic Basil Poledouris adds a touch of
yearning to Les Miserables.
 Les Miserables has been filmed many times both in the United States and
France. Thus, because of its various screen incarnations and the worldwide
popularity of its musical cousin, it is a story that offers no surprises.
 August, wisely, sticks to the basic text. Les Miserables is nothing more
than a very good adaptation of a classic novel. It is literate,
well-crafted entertainment.
 And until that day that the film version of the musical arrives, this
production should serve nicely.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net
Carol Bloom of Bloom Ink Publishing Professionals
3312 Indian Rock Lane  West Lafayette, IN 47906-1203
765-497-9320   fax 765-497-3112  cbloom@iquest.net
Committed to Lifelong Learning through Effective Communication 

Author
James Sanford
Given all the liberties Hollywood has taken with the classics lately -
spicing up "The Man In The Iron Mask" with scatological jokes; a "Romeo &
Juliet" boasting a disco-belting drag queen; Indian attacks and a happy
ending for Hester Prynne in the Demi Moore version of "The Scarlet Letter,"
etc. - it comes as a surprise to see director Bille August offering up a
perfectly straightforward and decidedly non-musical version of "Les
Miserables."
After all, the last Victor Hugo book to make it to the big screen was "The
Hunchback of Notre Dame," overhauled as a Disney animated spectacular
featuring singing gargoyles.
While therešs something to be said for reverence, nobody said it had to come
at the expense of passion or imagination, and, sadly, "Miserables" comes up
short in both those departments.
Aside from being shot on somewhat stagy-looking sets and with sometimes
inappropriate lighting levels, therešs nothing glaringly wrong with Augustšs
film, and several of the performances are terrific. Why then does it seem
about as engaging as a well-written book report?
Itšs tempting to put the blame on August himself. Since his Oscar-winning
"Pelle the Conqueror," August has floundered, directing the dismal "House of
the Spirits," which somehow managed to squander the talents of Meryl Streep,
Glenn Close, Jeremy Irons and Winona Ryder, and "Smillašs Sense of Snow," a
silly attempt to film the complex best-seller. By the low standards set by
that pair, "Les Miserables" looks almost like a comeback.
In paring down Hugošs epic melodrama to its basics, screenwriter Rafael
Yglesias has chosen to focus on the novelšs mid-section, beginning with the
parole of Jean Valjean (Liam Neeson) after two decades of serving hard time
in the quarries for stealing bread. In later years Valjean will end up as
mayor of the village of Vigau, where he oversees a tile factory.
One of his workers is Fantine (Uma Thurman), a young beauty struggling to
make ends meet. When itšs revealed that the unmarried Fantine has had a
baby, Valjeanšs underlings fire her, sending her on a downward spiral into
prostitution and poverty.
Around the same time, Vigau gets a new prefect of police in the person of
Javert (Geoffrey Rush), formerly a guard in the prison where Valjean was
incarcerated. Javert eventually recognizes Valjean and does everything he
can to ruin the lives of Valjean, Fantine - who Valjean tries to help - and
later Fantinešs child Cosette (Claire Danes), who Valjean adopts.
"Reform is a discredited fantasy," Javert tells his partners when they try
to suggest Valjeanšs nature has changed over the years. "People are either
law-abiders or law-breakers." The always subtle and detail-oriented Neeson
reads Valjean as a brute trying to reclaim his humanity, while Rush plays up
Javertšs cold detachment from the same world Valjean is reaching out to.
Both actors are outstanding.
Thurman strains to deglamorize herself, but even when shešs coughing up
blood at deathšs door she canšt help looking seductive. Still, shešs a
sympathetic Fantine, and Danes, despite a sometimes wavering accent,
sparkles as the noble, devoted Cosette.
If only the director had the same commitment to the material as his cast.
Unfortunately, Augustšs mind seems to have been elsewhere, which accounts
for why "Les Miserables" often has a perfunctory feel, as if August was
satisfied with footage that was just good enough, instead of making the
extra effort required to achieve something truly great and memorable.

Author
Michael Dequina
Les Miserables (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
The calendar year has not even reached its midway point, but that hasn't
prevented Columbia Pictures from trotting out a lavish period drama more
befitting of the winter Oscar-bait season.  Bille August's high-profile
adaptation of Victor Hugo's classic Les Miserables delivers everything one
would expect from a classy Hollywood epic--handsome production values,
strong performances by a top-notch cast, a literate screenplay--with one
critically missing element: emotional sweep.
For those not familiar with Hugo's original novel or the hit stage musical
it inspired, the hook of Les Miserables essentially boils down to something
like a 19th-century French-set version of The Fugitive.  After serving 19
years in a prison work camp for stealing a loaf of bread, the brutish Jean
Valjean (Liam Neeson) is paroled.  Immediately upon release, he steals
valuable silverware from a kindly bishop who takes him in for a night; he
is caught by authorities, only to be forgiven by the bishop, who lets
Valjean keep the silver to start a new life on the straight and narrow.
That he does, and in doing so breaks his parole, which sets the obsessively
determined Inspector Javert (Geoffrey Rush), who was one of the guards in
Valjean's prison camp, on his trail.
Thematically, however, Les Miserables is a story about redemption, which
Valjean finds through his dealings with two women, the hard-luck
factory-worker-turned-prostitute Fantine (Uma Thurman), and her
illegitimate daughter, Cosette.  Years after breaking parole, Valjean
becomes mayor of the town of Vigau, where he forms a warm friendship with
Fantine after saving her from an unjust arrest by Javert.  Valjean promises
the gravely ill Fantine he will rescue the young Cosette (Mimi Newman) from
her cruel caretakers, the Thenardiers, and raise the child as his own.  The
"father" and "daughter" eventually land in Paris, where the teenage Cosette
(Claire Danes) falls for dashing student revolutionary Marius (Hans Matheson).
The decades-spanning story is the stuff that cinematic epics are made of,
and the Danish August turns in his most accomplished English-language work,
following the underrated 1994 superstar soap The House of the Spirits and
last year's stylish but highly preposterous mystery Smilla's Sense of Snow.
 He and screenwriter Rafael Yglesias bring the sprawling tale into clear
focus and keep the events moving at a brisk pace.  Production designer Anna
Asp, costume designer Gabriella Pescucci, and cinematographer Jorgen
Persson give Les Miserables a sumptuous period look whose accomplishment is
mostly matched by the efforts of the cast.  Neeson is commanding yet
endearingly vulnerable; Rush's finely modulated menace is far more
rewarding than his overrated, Oscar-winning theatrics in Shine; and Thurman
disappears nicely into her highly unglamorous role.  The younger members of
the cast fare less well.  Danes is convincing as Cosette, but her overdone
lip quivering during her crying scenes becomes a distraction; and Matheson,
while competent, is a less interesting Robert Sean Leonard.
As technically adept and cerebrally engaging the film is, by the time Les
Miserables was over, my emotions had only been superficially involved.
While I was touched by Valjean's relationships with Fantine and Cosette, I
was not moved.  Not even reaching the "touching" level is the
Cosette-Marius pairing.  My only previous experience with Les Miserables is
with the musical (as I am sure many others' is), and I was dismayed to see
Eponine, a friend of Marius's who selflessly dies in the name of her
unspoken love for him, almost completely jettisoned from this adaptation
(the daughter of the Thenardiers, here she is only briefly seen as a
child).  Her presence would have added some much-needed conflict and
emotional heft to the youthful romance, but I suppose August and Yglesias
felt one tragic heroine (Fantine) was enough.
Even so, as 1998 creeps into summer blockbuster season, Les Miserables is
a thoughtful, well-made, entertaining film, one that will sate moviegoers
hungry for a dose of drama before popcorn no-brainers invade the multiplex.
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Edwin Jahiel
LES MISERABLES (1998) ** 1/2  Directed by Bille August.  Screenplay, Rafael
Yglesias, based on the novel by Victor Hugo. Photography, Jorgen Persson.
Editing, Janus Billeskov-Jansen. Production design, Anna Asp. Music, Basil
Poledouris. Cast: Liam Neeson (Jean Valjean), Geoffrey Rush (inspector
Javert), Uma Thurman (Fantine), Claire Danes (Cosette), Reine Brynolfson
(Captain Beauvais), Mimi Newman (Cosette, age 8), Peter Vaughan (the
Bishop), Hans Matheson (Marius), et al. A Sony release. 131 minutes. PG-13.
What it means. How to say it.  Les Miserables means "the wretched ones, the
outcasts, those whose life is misery."  "Les" should not be pronounced  as
"lay" but as the short "Le" in Lenin. "Miserables" sounds like
"Mise-RABBLE," final "s" not pronounced.
Now, that was easy. It is harder to explain the ** 1/2 rating. I sometimes
run into people who pay me the compliment of taking my newspaper reviews
seriously, too seriously, and  say "we only see what you gave more than
three stars to."
This is disturbing. The whole system of ratings via stars is approximate,
does not allow for nuances. New movies are generally written up almost
immediately after they have been watched, so that there is no time for
delays that give reviewers to reconsider. First impressions can be tricky.
The most reliable opinions (and ratings) are after second or third
screenings, often years apart. Finally, lower ratings are not necessarily
dishonorable. Many a  **1/2  or even  **  movie can be interesting,
amusing, pleasant, entertaining, worth seeing.
"Les Miserables" has its ups and downs. It's neither really good nor really
bad. It's just OK. I'm glad I saw it;  I probably won't see it again soon;
I find it watchable though  unmemorable and not contributing anything to
the art of film.
This movie, like many others, carries the seed of its own frailties.
Pictures, including popular ones, from great books, very seldom make great
films, especially when the book is massive, like "War and Peace" or "Les
Miserables".
The protean, visionary Victor Hugo (1802-1885) wanted to be "the sonorous
echo" of his century. He did just that in his huge, sprawling, socially
conscious novel, which came out in 1862. Starting with the silent cinema,
it was made into films 15 or more times, in France, America, Mexico, Japan,
Italy, and elsewhere. All those works were essentially abbreviated
anthologies of various sections of the novel. None could do that tumultuous
book justice.
The closest any version came to this was the 1934 French  film directed by
Raymond Bernard from a script by him and Andre Lang. It was 305 minutes
long, made as a triptych : "A Tempest in a  Head," (120 minutes); "The
Thenardiers," (90 min) and "Liberty, Beloved Liberty" (95 min.). The
following year, the same two writers  plus an American colleague, condensed
the three films into the under-two-hours Hollywood "Les Miserables" (1935)
the best-known US version, starring Fredric March and Charles Laughton.
This year's picture was directed by  Denmark's Bille August, twice winner
of the Cannes Film Festival's Golden Palm, for "Pelle the Conqueror" and
the Ingmar Bergman-scripted "The Best Intentions." August 's earlier "Twist
and Shout" is also notable. I think that with the best intentions, the
filmmakers cannot conquer Victor Hugo's epic novel, no matter how they
twist it. But they did come up with a version acceptable by the public at
large.  Why? Because, whereas the novel was once read world-wide by
millions of students, literati, and non-literati, its public today is
minimal. (I had this confirmed by my poll of dozens of students and faculty
on a major campus). On the other hand, many --though still a tiny fraction
of the former masses of readers-- have seen the musical version of Les Miz.
It is impossible to summarize the original story, but many people know at
least the bare bones of it. A famished Jean Valjean  steals a loaf of
bread, for which he spends 19 years at inhuman forced labor. Released, he
robs a kindly bishop of silver forks and knives. He is brought before the
prelate by the police.The good man of God fibs, says he had made a gift of
the items to Valjean, and adds silver candlesticks.
The gesture redeems bitter Valjean who, with this capital, gradually
becomes a factory owner in a town, as well as its beloved mayor. To save a
half-wit con identified as Valjean, he (the real one) volunteers testimony
in court that he  is Valjean. Having come to the help of dismissed,
consumptive, dying factory girl Fantine, he flees, but saves Fantine's
child Cosette from the clutches of the nasty people who kept her (for
money). Under one of his many pseudonyms, he adopts her, cares for her,
later helps her and her suitor, the rebel Marius, and so on.
The constant in the book is Inspector Javert's merciless pursuit of
Valjean. This, the movie does well,  although it simplifies both the hunter
and the hunted. There is not enough footage to get into the heads and
hearts of those two, especially dour Javert, a clinical case who combines
pathologically cruelty, masochism, sadism, doggedness and a perverted sense
of values. Javert has an odd sense of duty and morality. He is what later
in that century would be called a "determinist" but without the
understanding of the determinist scientists.
Roughly, this goes: people are the products of their background and their
heredity. Hugo (and later, more pointedly even, Emile Zola) blamed society
and other exterior causes rather than the victims of this miserable state
of things. (Father Flanagan of Boys' Town was in their lineage with his
"There's no such thing as a bad boy").
Javert is convinced that once a thief, always a thief, that the sooner
criminals are punished, the better. In addition, Javert's father was a
thief, his mother a prostitute. The Inspector's own sense of guilt, his
hidden compulsion to make up for his progenitors, make him over-react, like
a puritan who goes to extremes, like a religious fanatic who has converted.
Like those extremists who are "more royalist than the King," Javert,
seeking his own redemption in twisted ways, becomes maniacal about
upholding the Law at any price..
He is a fascinating character, far and away the movie's most interesting,
even though there's a lack of screen-time to dig deeply into his psyche.
With the elimination of a host of persons and events, including main
character Eponine and most social and political conditions of the times,
the movie becomes primarily an old-fashioned melodrama in which we root for
the hero and hiss at the villain.
Each of the men is limited to two expressions: Liam Neeson's worry and
sympathy, Australia's Geoffrey Rush's (of "Shine" fame) nastiness and
monomania. They both get much mileage out of them. Oddly, they age
minimally over the years, something that did not happen in the marathon
French version. There, Harry Baur and Charles Vanel were the kind of burly
actors who looked older, as in all their films. Still, the current lead
players are convincing.
Thurman-Fantine is given all the stops of pathos to pull, and pull well,
through make-up and dribbling blood; young Cosette sounds far too American;
older Cosette-Danes fails to touch or interest us; Matheson-Marius is close
to a nonentity. The sketchiness of the Cosette-Marius "amours" helps
neither performer. But the smallish part of Beauvais, the small town's
Police Chief whom Javert outranks --and repels -- is excellent.
Missing too is the sociological canvas Hugo has painted. There's enough in
the film to show how miserable the existence of the poor was, but not
enough to hammer that point, or that following the French Revolution,
France became a  Republic but not a democracy in today's sense. The
historical canvas is vague. The press information speaks wrongly of the
1832 Revolution, when there was only a very short-lived uprising led mostly
by liberal young students. The viewers can have no notion that after the
1789 Revolution, came successively:  monarchy's fall, the First French
Republic, Napoleon, the return of royalty  (Louis XVIII), King Charles X,
the July Revolution (1830 's "Three Glorious Days") and Louis-Philippe, the
"Citizen King." The picture does not orient us about this, or such mundane
yet helpful matters as Valjean's fortune, his good deeds as Mayor, the
distances between places, the sewers of Paris, and much else.
Production values are good, with period reconstructions done in the Czech
Republic, Paris, and studios. The score misses its chance to use period
popular or folk music. It's generic, unnoticeable background stuff.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A short while ago a woman was put to death in Texas for
the brutal pickax murder of two people.  The execution
followed world-wide protests in favor of clemency, not simply
because she was a woman but because she had reformed so
much during her long years on death row.  She had become
a kind, generous, born-again Christian, a pale shadow of her
former ruthless self, a transformation which led some to insist
that Texas would not be executing the same person. Even
more significant was the contention by another large block of
people that she was a fake: that human nature does not
change.
   Can human nature change?  Jean Valjean, the hero of
Victor Hugo's epic "Les Miserables," said himself that "the
world has not changed," and indeed, if we look around us we
find the planet is still teeming with poverty, homelessness,
vindictiveness as well as with examples of kindness,
generosity, and good will.  This is what gives "Les Miserables"
its contemporary appeal.  But if Valjean meant that the
individual cannot change, he was dead wrong as he proves
himself during the twenty-year span of the story.  Valjean is
changed by love--the respect accorded him by a bishop from
whom he stole; the affection he felt for a young prostitute; and
most of all for the adoration given him by an eight-year-old
girl whom he cared for over the course of two decades.  But
not everyone changes: Javert, the principal villain of this tale-
of-many-characters, is himself brutalized by his environment
and takes on an anal-retentive obsession with duty.  He is the
quintessential go-by-the-book creep.  The twenty-year
struggle between the miserly Javert and the beneficent
Valjean is probably what gives the story a universal appeal
that has made it popular throughout the world, has led to a
long-running Broadway musical, and has been the subject of
four films, featuring greats like Fredric March, Charles
Laughton, Michael Rennie, Gino Cervi, Jean Gabin, Richard
Jordan, Jean-Paul Belmondo, and now Liam Neeson.
   The current offering helmed by Bille August differs from the
1995 Claude Lelouch in that Lelouch framed the story by
placing it into a 20th-century landscape, ending in a story of
France during World War II.  In that, Belmondo is a simple
man who becomes like Jean Valjean as he helps a Jewish
family fleeing from the Nazis.  Lelouch wanted to impress us
with the impact that a single good man can have on the lives
of the people around him.  August's version is more
straightforward and suffers, by comparison, for its didacticism. 
Better suited for a high-school class of kids with no prior
knowledge of the narrative, this "Les Miserables" telescopes
the long social chronicle into a relatively brief 129 minutes
(Lelouch used 178) and spells out each detail so plainly that
the most classics-hating pupil would be able to follow--if not to
love--the adventure.  The photography is as direct as the
story is straight, in no way emulating the gauzy effects of a
Merchant-Ivory work.
   "Les Miserables" is a Dickensian tale which uses the
downtrodden people of Paris as a backdrop to its central,
moral narrative.  Bille August's version ignores the opening
scenes of the novel which shows Jean Valjean (Liam Neeson)
stealing a loaf of bread, gaining a five-year sentence, and
then having the penalty upped to nineteen after an escape
attempt.  We do witness his visit to the kind bishop who
allows him the use of his home and food and refuses to turn
him in when Valjean is picked up for stealing the old man's
silverware.  Much of the tale is a detective drama, featuring
the pursuit by the reformed Valjean by the obsessed police
inspector Javert (Geoffrey Rush), as Javert believes that a
depraved man will always be depraved and dangerous and
insists on apprehending Valjean.  Valjean becomes rich when
he invents a way to use jet for jewelry (also not shown in the
movie) and uses his wealth to better the lives of the workers
in his factory.  His life takes on much greater meaning when
he adopts the eight-year-old Cosette after the death of her
mother, Fantine (Uma Thurman), and while the Javert-Valjean
chase goes on, Valjean does not reveal to his charge that he
is not her real father.
   The beady-eyed Geoffrey Rush, who turned in a stunning
performance as a disturbed concert pianist in "Shine," rises to
the occasion as a man who is also disturbed, but is unable to
release his full energies because of the limitations of Rafael
Yglesias's pedantic screenplay.  Neeson is better able to
overcome the weakness of the script by his powerful
presence, though the tremendous love he feels for Cosette
does not really come across.  
   This "Les Miserables" is a fine text for helping students in
French Literature 101 but falls short of engaging the senses
the way a momentous melodrama of this caliber should.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 129 minutes.  (C) Harvey
Karten 1998

Author
Ben Hoffman
       ********************************************************
Victor Hugo's classic epic has been brought to the screen magnificently.  Aided
by a top-notch cast, the film will surely be considered come Oscar time.  In
1812, Jean Valjean (Liam Neeson) is the convict who spends 20 years in jail at
hard labor for having stolen a loaf of bread.  His pursuer, Javert, (Geoffrey
Rush) is nothing less than malicious as he relentlessly tracks him.
When Valjean seeks food and shelter at a house several days distance from his
jail, it is the home of a Bishop.   He is allowed in to have dinner and to have
a good night's sleep.   However, the many years of hard labor as a convict have
taken their  toll and Valjean will do anything to survive: steal, lie, cheat.
Amazed that the Bishop will allow him to spend the night there, he cannot help
but ask "How do you know I will not kill you?" To which the Bishop replies, "And
how do you know I will not kill YOU?"
Nevertheless, the 20 years in jail overcome Valjean and before he leaves the
house he steals some silverware and, when the Bishop enters the room and
discovers the theft in progress, Valjean bludgeons him and runs away.   Shortly
thereafter the police find him because being poor he looks like a suspicious
character.  The silverware is found on him and he is returned to the Bishop.
The gendarmes are told that Valjean told them the truth when he said the Bishop
had given him the silverware, and the astonished police release him.   If the
police are amazed, Valjean is even more so,  that after having stolen  and
physically hurt him, the Bishop did not turn him in.    At the Bishop's urging,
Valjean promises to turn over a new leaf.
Fast forward 10 years to 1822.   Valjean is not only prosperous but is also the
quiet, honest Mayor of the small town of Vigau.    All would have been well had
not Javert happened to come to town and recognize Valjean as a former prisoner
who after being released had not reported to the authorities which the terms of
his parole required. Thus begins the  chase.
In the town, there is a poor, sick  woman named Fantine (Uma Thurman) who has
had a baby  out of wedlock.   Before she dies, Valjean promises to raise her
daughter, Cosette (Claire Danes) as if she were his own.   To evade the pursuing
Javert, the two take refuge in a convent.   Eventually, as Cosette matures into
a beautiful young lady she persuades Valjean they must leave the convent.  She
wants to see the outside world.
It is now 1832, with young revolutionaries challenging and wishing to unseat the
government.  Among the leaders of the revolution is Marius (Hans Matheson) a
young handsome man with whom Cosette falls in love when she sees and hears him
urging revolution to a crowd of bystanders.   More trouble ensues when, shades
of Tien An Men Square, the army kills and routes many of the young
revolutionaries.
But the main story is that of Valjean and Javert who, in the film's several
climaxes, encounter each other.  What takes place between them in each of the
tense meetings as well as the final one could only come from the pen of a genius
such as Victor Hugo.
Both Neeson and Rush are superb in their roles.  There is nothing about
Schindler in Neeson, nor is there the slightest resemblance to SHINE's David
Helfgott in Rush's malevolent, unsmiling, vindictive Javert.   A fine film with
Screenplay by Rafael Yglesias and excellent music by Basil Poledouris.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        Those of you who frequently read my reviews are not likely to be
surprised by the fact that I have not read Victor Hugo's novel Les
Miserables.  I don't know if a lot of people have, though I imagine many
are familiar with the popular musical based on the novel.  I haven't
even seen that.  Going into this film, I had almost no knowledge of the
story or its characters (I even expected the film to be a musical). 
Walking away from it, I'm kind of glad I had no prior experience with
the material.  Writer/Director Bille August's film version is a
straightforward, beautifully told film.  
        Liam Neeson stars as the miserable Jean Valjean; in the beginning, he
has just been released from a 19-year prison sentence.  He is allowed to
stay in a convent by a kindly priest despite his rude and destructive
behavior.  The priest's words of wisdom influence him, and he makes a
vow to change himself.  Nine years later, we are informed that he is now
the mayor of a town called Vigo; nobody knows his real name, and that he
is wanted for skipping his parole nine years ago.
        Conflicts arise when Inspector Javert (Geoffrey Rush) is assigned to
Vigo.  Valjean remembers Javert as one of the prison guards who
constantly beat him, and Javert remembers Jean to be a convict.  Javert
is hell-bent on upholding the law, and he does everything in his power
to bring Jean to justice.  Along the way, Valjean meets and falls in
love with a peasant woman, Fantine (Uma Thurman), and vows to take care
of her daughter, Cosette (played later by Claire Danes).
        Les Miserables is visually a solid and often striking picture.  The
production design by Anna Asp is authentic and vast, and the sets don't
look like sets (they look like real towns and villages); Gabriella
Pescucci's costumes are noticeably spectacular.  Basil Poledouris'
soundtrack is thick and usually well-placed (though it does get a bit
heavy at times).  Many scenes in the film have a memorable photographic
quality, such as the climax, which takes place next to a dark river in
the grey obscurity of early evening.  
        Augusts keeps the story simple (which I hear is a good thing, since the
novel is so complex) and easy to follow.  He manages to develop the main
characters and most of the subplots adequately.  I was also impressed
that he didn't go overboard with flash and style, which is something so
many directors seem to be doing to classic stories these days (such as
Baz Luhrmann's vicious tragedy William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet). 
This film feels solid and whole, and each scene has a certain amount of
importance and vigor that keeps the audience interested.
        Liam Neeson is terrific in the main role; Neeson is the kind of actor
who does solemn desperation extremely well, and Valjean is certainly a
man who clearly fits that adjective.  Thurman, in her small role, is
very good, and proves that she has a lot of range and can perform in a
very non-glamorous role such as this one.  Rush is absolutely incredible
as Javert; I don't remember ever feeling so strongly about a villain as
I do here; he adds depth and complexity with subtle glances and nuances,
and effortlessly makes each of his scenes intense.  I can't be as
charitable for Danes, however; though I know she is a talented actress,
here she tends to overact when it might have been better to underplay
the character a bit.
        Les Miserables is, as I've said, a solid, intelligent motion picture. 
My only complaint is that it feels a bit too easy, and perhaps too
staged.  Each scene is grand and huge, and exploding with Poledouris'
score, but I didn't always want them to be.  For the most part, Les
Miserables is not a subtle or deep picture.  It's a good movie, and
tells its story well, but August tends to hand-feed us themes and scenes
that would have worked better had they been more subtle.  However, in a
film this exciting and well-produced, a few minor flaws are easily
overlooked.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: May 1, 1998
Starring: Liam Neeson, Geoffrey Rush, Uma Thurman, Claire Danes, Hans
Matheson, Reine Brynolfsson, Peter Vaughan, Mimi Newman
Directed by: Bille August
Distributed by: Columbia Pictures / Sony Pictures Entertainment
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (violence, some sexual content) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/miserables.htm
At the very beginning of 1998's LES MISÉRABLES, the eighteenth remake of
the classic Victor Hugo novel, the convict Jean Valjean (Liam Neeson)
says to a kindly bishop (Peter Vaughan), "Thank you for the meal and a
bed to sleep in. In the morning I will be a new man." And indeed he is,
as this very ambitious, mostly pleasing, and surprisingly serious drama
tells the story of his life. Undoubtedly not as good as previous
versions, but a quality movie nonetheless, this remake is another gem
that will most likely be passed over in public opinion. 
Valjean is our hero, and he is played by Neeson in outstanding fashion.
The benevolence displayed is very much akin to Oskar Schindler (in the
1993 classic SCHINDLER'S LIST), a role which won him an Academy Award
nomination. Opposing him is the persistent Inspector Javert, done by
Geoffrey Rush in a quite contemptable but perfectly compatible manner.
The few scenes when Javert and Valjean come within inches of each other
are tense and exciting because of the two actors' mastery of the roles.
Also of credibility and quality is Uma Thurman as Fantine, whose
baseline role accentuates the kind-heartedness of Valjean. Her daughter
Cosette (Claire Danes), on the other hand, plays exactly the opposite
and becomes the one character to unintentionally illicits negativity
from our hero. The cast is very solid and plays testiment to Hugo's
novel. 
The movie follows Valjean from his first days as a parolee after
nineteen years of hard labor. Breaking parole, however, he escapes
policemen and turns up nine years later in the town of Vigo as the
mayor. His life, quite the opposite now, is perfect until the cunning
Inspector Javert is assigned as the chief inspector of the town. Javert
suspects the mayor to be the convict Valjean, but he cannot place
anything solid on the man and is forced to follow him from a distance.
It is then that Valjean makes a promise to Fantine, a woman who used to
work at his factory and is now dying of pneumonia, to bring her bastard
daughter back to Vigo so that the two may reunite before death.
Unfortunately, Javert tracks Valjean and forces him to take the daughter
to Paris, where the final hunt begins between Javert and Valjean. 
In a time of the year when recent fare has been loaded down with
senselessness and unintelligence, a remarkable redone drama like LES
MISÉRABLES is a very watchable film. Its 140-minute running time makes
it quite long and windy, although every scene begins with a superb
narrative hook to make the picture mostly entertaining throughout. At
the midway point, when the film reaches its highest tempo, the viewers
are very into the movie, and unfortunately it takes a big cut in pacing
and starts over with another plot that doesn't conclude the original
until the very end. While the first half is the story of Valjean, the
second half is the story of Cosette and Javert, and the transition is
not very pleasing. Nevertheless, a very entertaining and watchable film,
recommendable on all counts.
FINAL AWARD FOR "LES MISÉRABLES": 3.0 stars - a good movie.

Author
James Sanford
        Given all the liberties Hollywood has taken with the classics
lately - spicing up ``The Man in the Iron Mask'' with scatological
jokes; a ``Romeo & Juliet'' boasting a disco-belting drag queen;
Indian attacks and a happy ending for Hester Prynne in the Demi Moore
version of ``The Scarlet Letter,'' etc. - it comes as a surprise to
see director Bille August offering up a perfectly straightforward and
decidedly nonmusical version of ``Les Miserables.'' But while there's
something to be said for reverence, nobody said it had to come at the
expense of passion or imagination, and, sadly, ``Miserables'' comes up
short in both those departments.
  Aside from being shot on somewhat stagy-looking sets and
with sometimes inappropriate lighting levels, there's nothing
glaringly wrong with August's film, and several of the performances
are terrific. Why then does it seem about as engaging as a
well-written book report?
  It's tempting to blame August himself. Since his
Oscar-winning ``Pelle the Conqueror,'' August has floundered,
directing the dismal ``House of the Spirits,'' which somehow managed
to squander the talents of Meryl Streep, Glenn Close, Jeremy Irons and
Winona Ryder, and ``Smilla's Sense of Snow,'' a silly attempt to film
the complex best-seller. By the low standards set by that pair, ``Les
Miserables'' looks almost like a comeback.
  In paring down Hugo's epic melodrama to its basics,
screenwriter Rafael Yglesias has chosen to focus on the novel's
mid-section, beginning with the parole of Jean Valjean (Liam Neeson)
after two decades of serving hard time in the quarries for stealing
bread. In later years Valjean will end up as mayor of the village of
Vigau, where he oversees a tile factory.
  One of his workers is Fantine (Uma Thurman), a young beauty
struggling to make ends meet. When it's revealed that the unwed
Fantine has had a baby, Valjean's underlings fire her, sending her on
a downward spiral into prostitution and poverty.
  Around the same time, Vigau gets a new prefect of police,
Javert (Geoffrey Rush), formerly a guard in the prison where Valjean
was incarcerated. Javert eventually recognizes Valjean and does
everything he can to ruin the lives of Valjean, Fantine - who Valjean
tries to help - and later Fantine's child Cosette (Claire Danes), whom
Valjean adopts.
  ``Reform is a discredited fantasy,'' Javert tells his
partners when they try to suggest Valjean's nature has changed over
the years. The always subtle and detail-oriented Neeson reads Valjean
as a brute trying to reclaim his humanity, while Rush plays up
Javert's cold detachment from the same world Valjean is reaching out
to. Both actors are outstanding.
  Thurman strains to deglamorize herself, but even when she's
coughing up blood at death's door she can't help looking
seductive. Still, she's a sympathetic Fantine, and Danes, despite a
sometimes wavering accent, sparkles as the noble, devoted Cosette.
  If only the director had the same commitment to the material
as his cast.  Unfortunately, August's mind seems to have been
elsewhere, which accounts for why ``Les Miserables'' often has a
perfunctory feel.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Liam Neeson, Geoffrey Rush, Uma Thurman, Claire Danes, 
      Hans Matheson
Director: Bille August
Producers: James Gorman, Sarah Radclyffe 
Screenplay: Rafael Yglesias based on the novel by Victor Hugo
Cinematography: Jorgen Persson
Music: Basil Poledouris
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     As written by Victor Hugo, the 19th century classic novel LES 
MISERABLES is a long, sprawling epic that encompasses everything from 
the political upheaval of post-Revolutionary France to the intimate 
orchestrations of the heart.  Over the years, millions of fans have come 
to admire Jean Valjean, the book's protagonist, who proves that a man 
can change, and to adore Cosette, the one girl who captures his heart.  
Considering the book's length, which easily exceeds 1000 pages (it is 
probably the second-longest novel I have ever read), there's no way that 
a 135-minute motion picture can begin to capture its vast scope (nor, 
for that matter, can a 3-plus hour popular musical).  Nevertheless, 
while screenwriter's Rafael Yglesias makes a host of significant cuts, 
he manages not only to capture the essence of LES MISERABLES' key theme 
-- redemption -- but also to faithfully render the characters as more 
than one-dimensional condensations of their literary inspirations.
     Towering over the entire film is Liam Neeson, the Irish actor who 
seems at home in any kind of picture, whether it transpires in 
contemporary America (NELL), World War II Germany (SCHINDLER'S LIST), or 
centuries-ago Scotland (ROB ROY).  Here, the setting is France during 
the 1820s and 1830s.  Using all of his considerable powers as an actor, 
Neeson buries himself in the role of Jean Valjean, a convicted thief, 
who, after serving 19 years in prison, is released on parole.  Valjean 
is a bitter, dejected man who is headed back to a life of crime until a 
monsignor takes pity on him, and, through a simple act of kindness, 
causes Valjean to re-evaluate his life and dedicate himself to the 
betterment of others.  As brought to the screen by Neeson, Valjean is 
not only a grand, heroic figure, but a distinctly human individual as 
well, with frailties aplenty.
     Valjean's opposite is Inspector Javert, an inflexible man who 
pursues the former criminal in part because he sees much of himself in 
his quarry.  The one thing that separates the two is that, while Valjean 
lives a life characterized by love and kindness, Javert is consumed by a 
fear of transgressing the law that he clings to like a lifeline.  
Geoffrey Rush, as dislikable here as he was likable as David Helfgott in 
SHINE, makes Javert a memorable villain, but he avoids the obvious 
temptation of turning the inspector into a cartoonish bad guy.  As 
Valjean has his failings, so Javert has his virtues, and there are many 
times when we pity him more than hate him.
     For the most part, LES MISERABLES is the story of Javert's attempts 
to track down and punish Valjean.  It's an obsession that blinds Javert 
to all else, and consumes his entire life.  Other characters enter and 
leave as the tale progresses.  There is Fantine (Uma Thurman), a poor, 
sick prostitute who Valjean takes under his protection, and with whom he 
forms a powerful bond.  Cosette (Mimi Newman and, later, Claire Danes) 
is Fantine's bastard daughter, who Valjean raises after her mother's 
death.  And Marius (Hans Matheson) is a fiery revolutionary who captures 
Cosette's heart even as he plans to restore the Republic to France.
     None of the supporting actors come close to matching Neeson's quiet 
intensity or Rush's zeal.  Uma Thurman is surprisingly effective as 
Fantine, but she's on-screen for less than a quarter of the film.  Mimi 
Newman is wonderful as the 8 year-old Cosette, but, after the girl ages 
10 years, Claire Danes is a dubious replacement.  Given to overacting 
her most emotionally-charged scenes, Danes seems wrong for the part.  
Hans Matheson, playing her love interest, is rather bland, but he is 
handicapped by an underwritten part.  The Marius of the movie is a pale 
shadow of the Marius of the book, and the screen version of the love 
story is far from captivating.  Marius often seems more like a plot 
device than a genuine character.
     Directed by Bille August, who was once hand-picked by Ingmar 
Bergman to helm THE BEST INTENTIONS, LES MISERABLES is a gloriously 
rich, if flawed, drama.  The two-plus hours fly by as we are captivated 
by the characters and their circumstances.  Despite being condensed from 
a novel that would take 20 hours to present in its entirety, the film 
rarely has the feel of being rushed.  It progresses briskly, but in such 
a manner that we never lose sight of the two-pronged emotional core of 
the story:  Valjean's rivalry with Javert and his deep, abiding love for 
Cosette.  
     This is not, of course, the first motion picture version of LES 
MISERABLES, but it is one of the better ones, with a streamlined script 
that doesn't have the uneven feel of many of its predecessors.  There's 
little doubt that the popularity of the musical made it easier to 
finance the movie, but anyone expecting singing and dancing will be in 
for a shock.  And, while this version of LES MISERABLES lacks the 
cleverness and contemporary spin evident in Claude Lelouch's brilliant 
1995 re-interpretation, it is moving and effective in its own right, as 
a more "straightforward" adaptation.  Kudos to all involved for a 
finely-crafted period drama that delivers over two hours of solid, 
literate entertainment.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Liam Neeson, Geoffrey Rush, Uma Thurman, Claire Danes, Hans
Matheson
Director: Bille August Producers: James Gorman, Sarah Radclyffe
Screenplay: Rafael Yglesias based on the novel by Victor Hugo
>From the start, I knew that this adaptation of Victor Hugo's Les
Miserables was going to be difficult. The 1000 plus English translation
of this French novel, which I read several years ago, was not going to
be easy to relay to screen.
For someone who has had no prior knowledge of this great accomplishment
in modern literature, watching this movie may be confusing. The motives
behind why certain characters react/act come across clearly on the
written page, but is watered down to basic facts without clear
reasoning, in two hours of film footage. For example, why can't the
Inspector Javert stop hunting down the reformed convict, Valjean? Why
does Javert commit suicide in the end? These are all unanswered actions
that a first time viewer is left lingering with at the end of the movie.
For this very reason, it is almost impossible for any film to fully
capture the finer intricacies of this expertly woven piece of art.
Other annoying happenings, which fans of Les Miserables may notice, is
how the relationship between Valjean and the prostitute, Fantine, is
thinned down to a lunch over cheese and wine, a passing touch and
connotations that there was something romantic lingering in the air. If
this was the case, it left me with as much romantic inclination as a
wingless bee attempting to pollinate the flowers. The villainous
scoundrels, the Thenardiers, are also quickly brushed aside due to time
constraints; most criminal off all, was the total emission of Eponine,
the silent heroine who sacrificed herself for love.
Perhaps if they added the music of the theatrical production of Les
Miserables, all could be forgiven; without the music, this adaptation of
Les Miserables seems empty and lifeless, somehow missing the heartbeat
of the revolutionaries  and unfortunately  I don't hear the people
sing, singing the songs of angry men.'
The cast is well chosen. Liam is big and believable enough to be the
immensely strong Valjean. Geoffrey Rush, throws all he has to bring out
the best and worse in Javert and is very good in the role. The whispy
beauty, Uma Thurman, works best when she is dying, looking pale and
forlorn. Whilst Clare Danes is charming as the young Cosette. As I
alluded to earlier, Les Miserables works best as a musical, pure acting,
unfortunately, serves only to keep the story afloat.

Author
Rick Ferguson
Starring Liam Neeson, Geoffrey Rush, Uma Thurman and Claire Danes
If you go into LES MISERABLES with the expectation that the Valjean or 
Fantine or any of your other favorite characters are going to burst into
song, you're in the wrong place.  This umpteenth version of Victor Hugo's
classic morality tale is not, I'm sorry to say, the long-awaited screen
version of the famous Broadway musical.  It is rather a well-intentioned,
if bloodless, dramatic version: a top drawer production, made by an
internationally-renowned director, populated by A-list Hollywood stars who
know their way around a period drama.  It is full of acts of heroism, grand
ironies, tragic falls and stunning acts of repentance- all the elements
which have made the novel such a gripping read to each successive
generation.  So why does it ultimately leave such a dusty taste in the
mouth?  For all the artistry that went into its making, this LES MISERABLES
is missing something.  Passion?  Spice? A little of the old Grand Guignol? 
It's hard to say.  This version flirts with greatness, but as any high
school lothario can tell you, flirting is not the same as scoring.
Just in case you missed out on reading the Cliffs Notes for your Sophomore
English report, here's the short version of the story.  Liam Neeson stars
as Jean Valjean, a convicted thief who is released into 19th Century France
after spending 19 years at hard labor.  After an encounter with a kindly
Bishop whom he tries to rob, Valjean becomes a changed man, and nine years
later he has become a prosperous businessman and the mayor of the city of
Vigau.  The fruits of success turn bitter upon the arrival of the new
Prefect of Police, Javert (Geoffrey Rush), a fanatically moral man who was
a prison guard during Valjean's incarceration.  Javert knows Valjean's
origin, and becomes obsessed with denouncing him as a convict.  Meanwhile,
Valjean becomes caretaker to a dying woman named Fantine (Uma Thurman), who
was forced into prostitution after Valjean unwittingly had her fired from
her job at his factory.  Valjean, now a kindly soul, promises Fantine that
he will care for her daughter Cosette, whom she was forced to leave in the
care of cruel foster parents.
Soon Javert's unrelenting pursuit of Valjean forces he and Closette into
hiding in Paris.  Another decade passes, Cosette grows up to become Claire
Danes,  Valjean has taken on another new identity, and Javert has become
the Chief Inspector of the Parisian police.  Cosette's love affair with the
fiery revolutionary Marius (Hans Matheson), brings Javert back to Valjean's
trail, and the hunt begins anew.
Literary purists will no doubt chafe at the liberties taken with the novel,
the absence of key characters and the reduction of Hugo's deeply complex
leads into their lightweight Classics Comics doppelgangers.  But let's face
it, as literary adaptations go, we've all seen worse.  Anybody recall the
hatchet job Demi Moore wrought upon THE SCARLET LETTER?  Critics have
called this story a 19th Century version of THE FUGITIVE, which is unfair-
after all, Hugo came first.  Sure, the book is a lot more complicated, but
you can hardly fault screenwriter Rafael Yglesias for focusing on Javert's
obsession with Valjean.  As depicted here, Javert is a 19th century
Terminator, programmed by law and damnable pride to bring Valjean to
justice no matter who is destroyed in the process.  This central conflict
is as good a place as any for a filmmaker to hang his hat, and there is
ample opportunity to forge great cinema from this rich source material.
Yet Bille August's film misses the mark.  Why so?  You can't blame Liam
Neeson; his Valjean is yet another variation of the character he has played
for most of his career: the mythical, larger-than-life hero whose most
valuable possession is his honor.  Oskar Schindler, Rob Roy, Michael
Collins, even Briar Gates from that old Patrick Swayze dog NEXT OF KIN-
they're all the cut from the same cloth, really, and Jean Valjean is part
of the same heroic tapestry.  I still say Neeson would have made a better
William Wallace than Mel Gibson, but I suppose I'm in the minority.
No, if I have to pin it down, I'll blame the film's failure on a singular
lack of an emotional arc to go along with the story line.  I can't blame it
solely on the script or on the direction, so let's just say both are at
fault.  Valjean is simply kind and brave, when he should be a tragic figure
haunted by the demons of his past.  Javert should personify those demons. 
This leads us to a serious misstep on the part of August and Geoffrey Rush.
 Fresh from his showy performance in SHINE, Rush seems determined to
underplay Javert.  Where madness and fiery passion are called for, Rush
gives us quiet restraint; instead of functioning as Valjean's tormentor, he
comes across as that one guy in your circle of friends who nobody likes but
who nobody can seem to get rid of.  This wrong decision is carried clear
through to the final confrontation between the two men on the banks of the
Seine, which is an utter failure.  Hugo knew better than to end his story
there, and the filmmakers should have know better, too.
But I'll still recommend the film, because it provides an easy introduction
to Hugo for those who have never read him, and who might like to after
seeing the film.  Besides, I'm a big Liam Neeson fan- he was the right
choice for the lead, and he more than carries his weight.  My only other
complaint is that, like all Hollywood costume dramas, this one suffers from
a smorgasbord of accents: everything from Neeson's Irish brogue to the
cockney-sounding peasants to Claire Dane's affected English boarding school
accent.  I suppose this solution is better than having everyone speak like
Inspector Clouseau.  The brave choice, of course, would have been to film
it in French with subtitles.  But in Hollywood, that has about as much
chance of happening as a comet striking the Earth.  Oh, I forgot- that
movie opens in a couple of weeks.
VISIT THE FILM GEEK WEBSITE AT: http://www.filmgeek.com

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
>From the first film version of Victor Hugo's classic novel 'Les
Miserables' in 1935 with Fredric March and Charles Laughton, to the
latest (not counting this one) in 1995 with Jean-Paul Belmondo and
Michel Boujenah, there have been four other notable versions sandwiched
in between.  Two in 1952, one in 1957 and a television version in 1978.
Hugo's fascinating novel of forgiveness and redemption is a timeless and
literary classic message to be passed down for all generations to come.
I've read the book twice but the last time was some 15 years ago or so
and I must confess that I've never seen any of the staged versions but
so what?  Motion pictures capture the true essence of eternal human
expression better than any other medium.  Just my opinion, of course,
but seeing visuals spring from the pages of artful writing is truly one
of life's greatest pleasures.  The latest version is a pleasing, but is
at times a muted adaptation that might disappoint the hard core fans of
the story but will satisfy most others.  I'm somewhere in between and I
recommend the picture either way.
Set in early 19th century France, Liam Neeson is Jean Valjean, a man
convicted of stealing bread from a merchant's window display and is
forced to spend 19 years in prison, suffering the harsh labour of a
punishment that doesn't fit the crime.  The hypocrisy of 19th justice
comes to complete fruition as people are judged in the workplace on
their morals, but a completely immoral punishment such as this comes to
pass.  Upon his release on parole, he examines his future through the
kind actions of a monsignor who spares him from a return to prison and
Valjean rises above the social cellar to become a man of political
influence and considerable wealth.  Neeson is towering in the role of
Valjean, uncompromising in his righteous path of redemption while
retaining the strength of character he learned the hard way in prison.
Geoffrey Rush ('Shine') is Javert, a man who served as an official who
supervised, abused and humiliated Valjean in prison and now recognizes
Valjean twenty years later, determined to see Valjean arrested for
circumstances that he considers to be a violation of Valjean's parole.
His intention is to expose Valjean for who he once was.  In this time
and place, you don't have the chance to reform as society always judges
you by what you've done in your past life.   Javert is a man so rigid in
his moral high ground, that he fails to see the errors of his way.  Rush
is completely different from the role he played in 'Shine'.  He proves
he can make a villain just as memorable as a hero and he is truly a
gifted performer.
Valjean now owns a factory and is the local mayor and takes pity upon a
former worker, Fantine (Uma Thurman) who was dismissed for having a
child out of wedlock and is now forced to work as a prostitute to
support her daughter that she sent away to live with others.  As he is
forced to leave his business behind because of the relentless pursuit by
Javert, Valjean adopts Fantine's daughter Cosette (Mimi Newman as a
little girl and and later Claire Danes as a young woman) after Fantine's
death and as the years pass, they try an make a life for themselves
around the time of an uprising against the French monarchy.  Cosette's
semi-romantic involvement with a young revolutionary (Hans Matheson) is
the film's weak spot, an underwritten sub plot that detracts for the
overall impact of the film's climax.
As a richly textured and deeply felt part of literary history, Les
Miserables transforms well into a motion picture but it is impossible to
portray all of the book's elements in a 2 hour and 13 minute film but
director Bille August and screenwriter Rafael Yglesias have fashioned a
version of the story that moves well, is easy to understand, and despite
the lack of French accents among the cast, it's a story of redemption on
many levels, most notably that of souls tormented by their past.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Victor Hugo's famous novel, "Les Miserables," has now been made
into - count 'em - 16 different movies, and that doesn't include the
filmed version of the musical from a few years back.  What THE HOUSE OF
THE SPIRITS director Bille August is trying to say with his version of
the movie that has not been said so many times before remains unclear.
Although he assembles a strong cast to tell a powerful story, he has
trouble breathing much life into it.  Most scenes are staged strictly
by the book with only the brilliance of the source material and the
extremely handsome production raising the picture above the ordinary.
     Anna Asp's sets are picture postcard perfect, especially the snow
encrusted village.  Jorgen Persson's cinematography dazzles the eyes
with its lush colors.  And the romantic music by Basil Poledouris has
best seller written all over it.
     As the story opens, Jean Valjean (Liam Neeson) has been released
after 19 years in prison for stealing a loaf of bread.  After being
befriended by a kindly bishop, Jean goes on to make his fortune as a
factory owner and to become the mayor of a small town.
     One day Inspector Javert is sent from Paris to Jean's town to be
the new prefect of police.  Javert recognizes Jean as an ex-prisoner,
and he abides no belief in criminal rehabilitation.  ("Reform is a
discarded fantasy.")  The rest of the story becomes a long
cat-and-mouse game with Javert trying to capture and reincarcerate
Jean.
     SHINE's Academy Award winner Geoffrey Rush, as Inspector Javert,
proves to be the film's most troubling choice.  Unlike the highly
emotive and agitated character in SHINE,  Rush makes the key role of
the story's villain into a lifeless enigma with a single facial
expression that looks like a head from Mount Rushmore.  One wonders why
the director didn't snap his fingers and ask Rush to get with the
program.
     Almost as unsatisfying is Uma Thuman as Fantine, the dying factory
woman with an out-of-wedlock child.  Thurman turns the character into a
mawkish cliche.
     Although Neeson does a good job, the only outstanding performance
comes from Claire Danes in her fairly small part as Fantine's daughter,
Cosette.  (The movie takes several large leaps in time.)  She is the
only one to demonstrate strong emotions, both tragic and romantic.
When she sticks her hand through the hole in the family's door to brush
fingertips with her lover, a revolutionary played by Hans Matheson, the
air becomes electric with her passion, proving again that filmdom's
most erotic moments can occur fully dressed.
     In the film's final battle sequence, complete with the killing of
small children I should warn you, the movie gets the energy so absent
from the body of the picture.  A disappointing film that can be
strangely cold and antiseptic, its wonderful story and its production
save the day in the end.  But if you don't want to see this version,
you can rent one of the others or wait a few years for the next one.
     LES MISERABLES runs a bit long at 2:09.  It is rated PG-13 for
violence and for some sexual content and would be fine for kids around
twelve and up.

Author
Mark O'Hara
Opening May 1, "Les Miserables" beats the handfuls of summer films.  It 
sprawls across the screen, inviting the viewer into the expansive French 
countryside.  Even larger are the themes, which are portrayed without 
condescension.  
Liam Neeson dominates the screen.  His Jean Valjean is a lout who 
clobbers a good-hearted bishop, a man who forgives Jean without 
hesitation, who ransoms (what a good word!) Jean's soul from evil and 
darkness.  For the rest of the film Jean returns this gift of redemption 
to other characters.  His relentless kindness never clogs up the plot 
with sentimentality;  Neeson allows us to accept Jean's selflessness 
without question.  Dynamically changed from the brute who became 
animal-like after 19 years of imprisonment, he hardly seems like a 
dynamic character.  Indeed his decency during the two eras into which 
the film leaps seems static, a miraculous given.
Uma Thurman never looked so bad.  As Fantine, eyes bugged and gums 
bloodied, she commands our sympathy completely.  Of course Victor Hugo 
created a cliché with Fantine's character, but Thurman delivers an 
understated resignation that permits us to imagine the depth of her 
sadness.  Inspector Javert's purposeful destruction of Fantine is his 
most despicable act.  Geoffrey Rush, who took the Academy Award for Best 
Actor for "Shine," brings a wonderful, transparent methodology to his 
acting.  His Javert carries out the law whenever he is onscreen, 
passionately but quietly:  and Rush's lankiness is perfect for the 
sternness demanded by the role.
Claire Danes gives us a believable Cosette.  Reacting with 
understandable puzzlement and determination, she alternates between the 
loyal daughterof Jean and the cunning lover of Marius.  Danes is 
wide-eyed and pleasant to look upon, but when her chin quivers with 
emotion -- as it does in "Romeo + Juliet" and "Little Women," -- we are 
reminded of Stallone's sneer or Clooney's downcast glances;  it becomes 
a trademark tic.  
It is admirable that director Bille August has cut Hugo's 1200 page 
novel down to a film of just two hours fifteen minutes.  This remake of 
"Les Miserables" is stronger than the recent "Man in the Iron Mask";  
the narrative builds a watchable momentum, scene by scene appalling or 
satisfying our sense of humanity.  But there is too much that is quiet.  
I was not expecting an epic with "Braveheart"-style battle scenes;  the 
ones shot in the old streets of the Czech Republic are fine.  But a 
greater amount of old-fashioned character development would let us know 
Marius better;  would tell us more about Javert's obsession with the 
law;  would, in the form of flashbacks, let us see Jean in prison or 
Fantine with her daughter, before their separation.  The story stands 
just on the strength of Hugo's thick plot.  But at least fifteen more 
minutes before the eyes would give the work the pleasant heft of the 
novel carried under the arm.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The best and certainly the longest novel I ever read--about 1600
pages in my unabridged edition--was Victor Hugo's LES MISERABLES.  Hugo
turned slow operatic pacing into a piece of monumental art throwing in
which fifty-page essays were just side comments.  This novel also has
the distinction of being the only piece of written fiction that ever
moved me to tears.  So I was very much looking forward to seeing the
new film version.  The new version is not a screen adaptation of the
popular international musical, but a straight dramatic rendering.  Much
of what I enjoyed of the novel was missing, but then it should come as
no great surprise that not all 1600 pages of story would make it to the
screen.
     Liam Neeson plays Jean Valjean, a vicious ex-convict who is turned
in one night into a human saint by the goodness of the Bishop of D.
But in the course of the story he will be tempted to return to evil
many times as his past repeatedly fights to catch up with him.  In this
case his past takes the form of the implacable Inspector Javert,
searching for the missing Valjean.  SHINE's Geoffrey Rush plays the
inflexible lover of law and order Javert who hounds Valjean for years.
As the film opens Jean Valjean has already been released from his
nineteen years in prison, but with his yellow passport nobody will give
him shelter until an old woman suggests he try the door of the Bishop
of D.  After the familiar story of the Bishop's silver, probably the
best-known sequence in the novel, we jump forward ten years to see
Valjean having become the enlightened factory owner and mayor of the
village of Vigo.  Uma Thurman plays Fantine, a woman fired from his
factory who turns to prostitution.  Fantine has got to be the least
glamorous role of Thurman's career.  Behind the (intentionally) ghastly
makeup Thurman is able to put some real passion into her role and gives
as good a performance as I can remember from her.  Her love for her
daughter is a new inspiration for Valjean.  Claire Danes completes the
set of principles as the adult daughter Cosette in a role that requires
little but that she be cute and a bit spoiled.
     The film takes a number of small liberties with Hugo's plotting to
make things going on within characters' heads happen on-screen and more
visibly.  In this version Valjean does not just slip out of the
Bishop's house with the silver; he physically attacks the Bishop.
Valjean's escape to find Cosette is much simplified from the novel and
turned into a carriage chase to add some excitement to the story.  The
Thenardiers are reduced from major characters in the novel to a single
scene.  The modification that is really the most bothersome is the
final meeting of Javert and Valjean.  Apparently Rafael Yglesias, who
wrote the script, wanted a piece of strong dramatic action.  He ends
the film in a major key, where a minor key seems more natural to
portray Javert's final doubts.
     Liam Neeson is physically a large man making him instantly more
appropriate than Fredric March was in the classic 1935 version.  Neeson
tends to underplay the role where some more passion would have been
what was expected.  Geoffrey Rush is equally passionless, but in this
case it works to his advantage.  Javert, after all, makes himself
little more than a machine for enforcing rules and laws.  The most
disappointing casting is in having Peter Vaughan play the Bishop of D.
Vaughan appears to be something of a ditherer, a nice man but not one
with a great deal of intellectual power.  Yet the Bishop is really the
most important character in the story, and Valjean is only an extension
of the goodness of the Bishop into a second person. Valjean is the
embodiment of the good that the Bishop did living on rather than being
interred with the Bishop's bones.
     LES MISERABLES too often is just a bit bloodless.  It is a bit
more an intellectual exercise than the story of tragedy and triumph
Hugo wrote.  Still it recalls the passion of the novel.  I would still
give it a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Matt Williams
Modern audiences are more likely to be familiar with Les Misirables from
the pop-Broadway musical rather than Victor Hugo's original tome.
Adapted several times for the cinema, this latest effort does a superb
job of translating the characters, story, and heart of the novel to the
screen.
Liam Neeson stars as Jean Valjean.  As a young man, Valjean stole some
bread to satisfy his hunger...and he was sentenced to 19 years of hard
labor for his crimes.  Prison hardened him, and on his release he seems
doomed to a life of crime and squalor.  However, an unexpected act of
compassion changes his outlook on life, and he vows to become a better
man.
However, he runs up against one man who doesn't believe in reform.
Inspector Javert (Geoffrey Rush) is an obsessive law abider.  He has no
tolerance for anyone who breaks the rules, even with benign intentions.
He once served as a guard at the labor camp where Valjean served, and
after Valjean breaks his parole, Javert devotes himself to bringing him
to justice.
Two women also get caught up in the struggle.  Fantine (Uma Thurman) is
an unwed mother suffocating in an unforgiving society.  Her daughter,
Cosette (Mimi Newman, and later, Claire Danes), is her life, yet she
cannot afford to raise her.  Instead, Cosette is sent to live with a
cruel foster family which extorts money from Fantine, and forces Cosette
into a life little better than a slave.
Director Bille August manages to create a faithful adaptation of Victor
Hugo's novel, which, though omitting some of the political undertones,
remains true to the overall story and tone of the book.  Hopefully you
won't, as some clueless members of the audience did, wonder where all
the songs went. The movie manages to be completely engrossing without
the Andrew Lloyd Webber flourishes.
The experience is bolstered by strong performances throughout, though
Neeson and Rush deservedly take center stage with their core roles.
Neeson in particular deserves kudos for his portrayal of a man trying to
do good, but continually haunted by his past.
The supporting cast is also extraordinary.  The only actor who dims in
comparison is Hans Matheson, playing the revolutionary, Marius.  The
film slightly loses its luster during his brief love affair, but it is
transitory, and truly only distracting when contrasted with the rest of
the film.
The novel Les Misirables is, by any account, an epic, both in its scope
and in its length.  While it would be nearly impossible to cram
everything from its pages into a two hour movie, this latest attempt
does an admirable job at the translation.  It, too, is an epic...and one
worth seeing.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Bille August || Screenplay: Rafael Yglesias (based on the novel by
Victor Hugo) || Stars: Liam Neeson (Jean Valjean), Geoffrey Rush (Inspector
Javert), Uma Thurman (Fantine), Claire Danes (Cosette), Reine Brynolfsson
(Beauvoir), Hans Matheson (Marius) || MPAA Rating: PG-13
For those who have seen the Broadway musical version of "Les Misérables" (and
after more than a decade of performances, I know there are many of you out
there), Bille August's film rendition of Victor Hugo's sweeping French novel
will seem very familiar. The screenplay, by novelist Rafael Yglesias
("Fearless"), follows almost the exact same trajectory as the musical, which
maintains the major plot points of Hugo's 1862 novel, but pares away many of the
subplots and political dimensions.
At roughly two hours and twenty minutes, "Les Misérables" feels much longer than
it actually is. The story itself spans almost three decades and numerous major
characters, but that is not why the film feels long. Instead, it is because
August never manages to build any real momentum or urgency to pull the story
along- it's more like he wades through it, moving from one set-piece to the next
with deliberate care. There are few moments of real tension and little comic
relief; although the movie is beautifully filmed and performed with vigor and
intensity by the principle actors, "Les Misérables" never really gets going.
The story begins in France around 1815. Liam Neeson stars as Jean Valjean, a man
who has just been released from nineteen years of prison for stealing a loaf of
bread. At this point he is a gruff, bitter man; he repays a kind priest who
offers him food and shelter by stealing his silver. When the priest forgives him
and allows him to keep the silver, Valjean decides to become a new man. He
breaks his parole and assumes another identity, later becoming a successful
factory owner and the mayor of a small town.
However, Valjean's past is always following close behind him in the form of the
relentless Inspector Javert (Geoffrey Rush), an inhuman, no-nonsense police
official who remembers Valjean from his days in prison. Javert is the kind of
man who lives only within the strict parameters of the law. There is no gray
area, no room for negotiation or mercy. Even though Valjean has turned his life
around and treats all his workers with dignity and respect, Javert sees him as
only one thing: a convict who has broken his parole and is therefore subject to
punishment.
Most of the film details Valjean's lifelong quest to live in peace without
Javert discovering him. Things become complicated when Valjean takes on the
responsibility of Cosette (Claire Danes), the young daughter of Fantine (Uma
Thurman), one of his factory workers. After being fired for having a child out
of wedlock, Fantine is reduced to prostitution in order to make money. Valjean
attempts to rescue her from her miserable condition, but she eventually becomes
sick and dies, leaving him with Cosette. In an attempt to escape Javert's
pursuit, Valjean raises Cosette in a Parisian convent.
When the teenage Cosette falls in love with a young student revolutionary named
Marius (newcomer Hans Matheson), Valjean's existence is again put into peril.
While investigating Marius, Javert discovers Valjean's new identity. Their paths
become crossed during the Parisian student revolutions following the death of
the last sympathetic government leader, General Lamarque. (For those not up on
their French history, some portions of the film may be a bit confusing.)
"Les Misérables" is considered one of the greatest novels of all time, but at
more than 1,400 pages in length, it represents a daunting task for a movie
adaptation. Hugo was a fervent political activist, and much of the novel was
written as a fierce political statement. However, the majority of the political
dimension is lost in the transformation to the big screen, and what is left is
essentially a cinematic human drama, which has its ups and downs.
The best aspect of the film is the antagonistic relationship between Valjean and
Javert. Neeson gives Valjean a bold, powerful, yet noble presence. You can truly
feel that this man has a good heart, and the constant persecution he endures is
sometimes painful. On the other side, Geoffrey Rush - in his first starring role
since winning the Oscar for "Shine" (1996) - is outstanding as the rigid
Inspector Javert, whose strict enforcement of the law is really a perversion of
it. Rush is cunning, harsh, and unsmiling in his performance, although he gives
Javert just enough humanity that the audience can feel some pity for him at the
end.
On the down side, the romance between Cosette and Marius is woefully
underdeveloped. Their relationship seems more plot necessity than an integral
aspect of the story's thematic development. It might have been better if August
had trimmed the beginning of the film to allow more narrative expansion at the
end, instead of cramming so much into the last thirty minutes. As Cosette,
Claire Danes is never truly effective because she doesn't get enough screen time
to make her character sympathetic - she comes off as kind of a brat. This is
unfortunate because the way her romance with Marius plays out in the movie, it's
puppy love, not worthy of the noble Valjean's destruction.
"Les Misérables" does get a good boost from its outstanding technical qualities,
including beautiful cinematography by Jörgen Persson and gritty production
design by Anna Asp, both of whom worked with August on "Smilla's Sense of Snow"
(1997). However, the battle scenes at the barricade between the student
revolutionaries and Javert's army are quick and seemingly inconsequential,
despite the bloodshed. The intense realism of Hugo's prose is almost entirely
lost at what should have been the grand climax. Instead, it is undermined by
August's apparent rush to bring the film to its conclusion.

