Title
Review for Madadayo (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Christopher Null
It seems only fitting that Akira Kurosawa's last film (which he wrote
and directed) be an homage to teaching.  After all, he inspired many of
today's respected directors and is taught in film schools
internationally.  Madadayo is a sweetly overlong portrayal of an
interconnected community whose center is a beloved professor.
Madadayo opens with a Professor (Tatsuo Matsumura) announcing to his
class that after 30 years of teaching, he is now choosing to write in
retirement.  The young sing his praises and previous alumni move the
Professor and his wife into a new home.  The pair is as hospitable to
everyone as if they were children returning from college.
His students visit him constantly, trying to repay all his work with
whatever token of comfort they can.  Though he is still called Professor
and spins new tales, the relations no longer have the condescending
quality of talking down to a pupil.  The generation lines are blurred
more as the youths build a house for the couple when their new home has
been destroyed by air raids in the second World War.
With the perfect mix of humility, humor, and acceptance, it's easy to
understand the Professor's popularity.  He is idolized even when most
vulnerable.  It is also accepted when his alumni refuse to allow him to
wallow in self-pity.  As the standard of living decreases, the Professor
accepts his pupils as equals that much more, for each chips in to help.
Every year after his retirement, a Maadh Kai (translation: Are you
ready?) party is thrown in the Professor's honor.  They shout verses
back and forth to jokingly confirm to the entire community that he isn't
ready to die yet.  The tiresome length of these scenes is somewhat
abated by the contagious laughter and various toasts as to the nature of
the Professor's lessons.
The Professor is never shown in front of a class again, so his pupil's
words are the strongest indications of the type of mentor he was.  Added
to this is that the only time the young peers are shown communicating
without the Professor around is when they are talking about him. 
Matsumura carries the nucleus of the film well, with his subtle sarcasm
and silent revelry.  The script is also intelligent enough to display
the wonderful impact he has had on others' lives without having to bear
witness to a school lecture.
As kind and humbling as Madadayo is, the plot becomes monotonous.  Each
section simply presents something going wrong with the Professor's life,
and his students then resolve the issue.  One unending series of scenes
revolves around the revered older gentleman losing emotional control
over a cat that disappears.  The beauty of his visions about the missed
feline is intoxicating, as are the verses spoken, but the effect wears
off due to the long interval.
As with other foreign subtitled films, some of the culture-based jokes
won't have the same strength when translated, leaving the viewer at a
loss to understand why the characters are laughing.  The unique
collaboration between age groups is pleasant but it's difficult to
accept that these lads risk setting their mentor on the correct
emotional track only once.
Impeccably shot by Takao Saito, who was also the cinematographer for
Kurosawa's Ran and Dreams, it can be difficult to concentrate on what is
being said.  From lush gardens to stark devastation after World War II,
cultural details seem to flow past the screen.
Similar to Stand and Deliver and other "perfect teacher" movies,
Madadayo is a feel-good experience worth a rental, if only because the
central character is flawed, and therefore a more interesting study. 
The humor is contributes unexpectedly poignant satire, which is rarely
found in the peers of this genre.  However, for a truly brilliant
Kurosawa experience, check out his earlier work first.
Director: Akira Kurosawa
Producer: Hisao Kurosawa
Writer: Akira Kurosawa
Starring: Tatsuo Matsumura, Kyoko Kagawa, Hisashi Igawa, George Tokoro,
Masayuki Yui, Akira Terao, Asei Kobayashi, Takeshi Kusaka
http://www.ran2000.com/index.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   I'm envious.  Here's why.  I taught high school kids for over
thirty years in much the way that the guy in Akira Kurosawa's
thirtieth and final movie taught in college.  Never once did the
pupils ever stand at attention when I entered the room. 
Occasionally when the bell ran concluding the final class, a
couple of youngsters would come up to shake my hand, but
usually they just walked right through me to their next class. 
They never built a house for me and they never helped me
look for a lost cat. (OK, I never had a cat, just a dog, and he
never got lost.)  You think all this is too much to ask?  Not if
you see "Madadayo," a reflection based on the life of an
actual professor who became a noted writer in Japan after his
retirement and who was virtually worshipped by his loving
students and later by the students' children and even their
grandchildren.  
   But if the name "Kurosawa" is synonymous in your mind
with some cool battle scenes (think "Ran") you're in for a
surprise.  This man, whom Roger Ebert called in 1993 "the
greatest living director," has often proven himself capable of
knocking out films on a wealth of themes.  (Kurosawa had
since died at the age of 88.)
   "Madadayo" means "not yet" in Japanese and is an
expression used as repeatedly in this absorbing film as "you
know" is used in Gen-X-targeted movies produced by
Hollywood.  "Madadayo" is a reflection on aging and
friendship, two of life's major themes--though the former is
not the sort of focus that most of us have taken in during our
moviegoing days.  While it deals, as stated above, with the
life of a real person named Hyakken Uchida--and, by the
way, one that could remind film buffs in America of John
Ford's "The Long Gray Line"--this story stretches over a
period of seventeen years in the life of the teacher, beginning
during the war years in 1943.  
  Uchida, called simply "professor" or "sensei" throughout the
tale, opens the movie by entering a room filled with highly
disciplined male college students, calling them to attention,
ordering them to bow, and then employing the sense of
humor that permeates the film he announces that he will
retire to spend his twilight years writing books.  Some of his
students soon go to his small house to converse and share
saki and tea with him, but when the house is destroyed by B-
29's in an air raid, the students proceed to build him a larger
place to live.  In addition to the professor's meeting with his
favorite students, he is feted each year on his birthday right
to the age of 77 at a catered affair, obviously a function
showing the material success of the men.  Though there is
little physical action in the movie--for example Kurosawa
would not think of showing you an actual bombing raid since
his aim is a contemplation of aging with its expectation of
death--one incident is particularly poignant.  When the
teacher's cat Nora disappears, the man is broken up.  He
cannot eat or sleep, cries most of the day, and eventually he
and his students go all-out to locate the truant feline.
   For a story on such a sober theme, there is considerable
good cheer and humor throughout. For example early on, told
that his small house had under previous tenancies been the
source of burglaries, the professor puts up signs saying
"Burglar's Passage," "Burglar's Recess Area" and "Burglar's
Exit" to the laugh-out-loud amusement of his favorite ex-
students Takayama (Hisashi Igawa) and Amaki (George
Tokoro), who pretend one night to be burglars simply to see
whether the place has been secured.
  This picture will be looked at with affection by all
moviegoers who have had heroes like this gentle and witty
man and should result in many leaving the auditorium after
the screening with broad smiles on their faces--as the director
specifically hoped that they would.  The film is warm,
whimsical, tender, and genuinely heartfelt.
Not Rated.  Running time: 134 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
