Title
Review for In the Bleak Midwinter (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Edwin Jahiel
A MIDWINTER'S TALE *** Written and directed by Kenneth 
Branagh. Photography, Roger Lanser. Editing, Neil Farrell. 
Production design, Tim Harvey. Music, Jimmy Yuill.  Cast: 
Michael Maloney (Joe Harper), Richard Brier (Henry Wakefield), 
Julia Sawalha (Nina), Nicholas Farrell (Tom Newman), John 
Sessions (Terry Du Bois), Mark Hadfield (Vernon Spatch), 
Gerard Horan (Carnforth Greville), Celia Imrie (Fadge), Joan 
Collins (Margaretta D'Arcy) and the voice of Noel Coward. A  
Castle Rock/Sony release. 98 minutes. Rated R (language) 
It would be an insult to the acting profession to state  that 
Kenneth Branagh is today Shakespeare's paramount interpreter. 
True, he is excellent, but there are many actors or directors 
who can do a bang-up job with the works of the Bard, 
especially in Britain, a country that constantly amazes us 
with its talented people.
Whether Branagh is Number One or Number Twelve (out of 
hundreds probably) is a moot point. The fact is that thanks to 
his films, he is currently, at least in the English-speaking 
world, the most famous Shakespearean. Knowing as he does what 
he speaks of and what the theatrical profession is, he's a 
natural to have written and directed "A Midwinter's Tale."  
Long unemployed actor Joe Harper (Maloney) is a man so 
desperate for work that he invests what money he has left , 
plus a sum from his nice agent Margaretta (Joan Collins) to 
float a "Hamlet" with a cast of unknowns who will work on a 
share basis.
"Midwinter" opens to the great, distinctive tones of the 
great, late and lamented Noel Coward singing his great, funny, 
affectionately cynical song "Why Must the Show Go On?"  This 
is also the title of Act I.
Soon Joe is auditioning a succession of down-and-out 
performers. They are, collectively and individually, such a 
magnificent, such an incredible set of eccentrics, bizarros, 
hams, weirdos and hilarious types that they make that 
10-minute sequence a four star piece.  
Past this magnificent start, some of the movie becomes 
anti-climactic, though still eminently worth watching. There 
are 24 speaking parts in "Hamlet." Joe can only afford a cast 
of six  to do all the roles. He will be Hamlet, myopic Nina 
will be Ophelia, gay Terry wants to do a queen (Gertrude, of 
course).  Two are non-actors: Fadge (an odd nickname for an 
odd woman) in charge of designing the production and the 
costumes: and Joe's sister, nursery teacher Molly, the 
manager, caterer and ticket seller. The situation is fraught 
with madness.
AC II. "There's No Business Like Show Business." It's 
Chritmastime. Molly works in a village called Hope. (No, not 
the Hope, Arkansas of Bill Clinton or the famous 
loudspeaker-maker Paul Klipsch. This is England). The troupe 
hies over there to occupy the play's venue, a large, drafty 
church, where they will somehow live and work for three weeks. 
The rest is far from silence. To the tune of Coward's song, 
the players prepare, rehearse, argue, improvise, stumble and 
bumble, do group exercises. They want to make "Hamlet" 
relevant to modern times and do odd things, especially as each 
person has his own notions about what should be done and how. 
They bicker and squabble (though never seriously, since 
they're no stars or divas), fraternize and pull apart. They 
are by and large self-centered, insecure and often inept. But 
they try. A nimble camera follows them.
What Branagh does is to combine a comic send-up of his 
profession with a great deal of affection for it and its 
members. He exaggerates the idiosyncrasies of his people, both 
keeping to what they are like, yet adding at times a 
near--grotesque spin, more so than do two other films I saw 
recently, about actors who never stop acting in "real" life 
(but then what is reality to illusion makers?) : Francois 
Truffaut's "Day for Night" and Henry Jaglom's "Last Summer in 
the Hamptons."
The movie proceeds interestingly, colorfully but unevenly, 
with peaks and troughs. Its nine people talk non-stop with 
machine-gun speed. That's an obvious flaw. We cannot keep up 
with them, there are no little pauses for savoring a 
particularly good line, trivialities cannot be distinguished 
from serious points. The speed and aural muddle can irritate 
somewhat. The film ought to have modeled its speech after the 
marvelous clarity of Noel Coward's diction, especially as the 
sounds are not helped by the echoey stone of the church.
ACT III. "Another Opening! Another Show!" Matters pick up. 
Camaraderie  mounts. Euphoria sets in as opening (and closing) 
night draws near. But now comes a crisis caused by sudden good 
luck (which I will not disclose) of a character. The play is 
about to be canceled, but a last-minute shift allows it to go 
on. And it's a dandy performance of "Hamlet," emergencies 
notwithstanding. The small audience loves it, the thespians 
love it and each other, there's even a warm, Hollywood-type 
reunion between a father and a neglected son.  
Branagh said: "It's a romantic and comedic look at the theatre 
and actors, with a plot that owes much to the kind of romance 
and silliness of the old Mickey Rooney and Judy Garland 
movies." Perhaps, but with a huge difference. When Mickey and 
Judy said "Let's have a show," which was inevitably almost 
canceled at the eleventh hour but saved at the twelfth, the 
stakes were youthful fun and games. In Branagh's movie, the 
stakes are much higher for the adults and the oldsters.  It's 
a matter of precarious survival, self-esteem and  justifying 
one's life.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Michael Maloney, Richard Briers, Julia Sawalha, John Sessions,
      Hetta Charnley, Celia Imrie, Nick Farrell, Mark Hadfield, 
      Gerald Horan, Joan Collins, Jennifer Saunders
Director: Kenneth Branagh
Producer: David Barron
Screenplay: Kenneth Branagh
Cinematography: Roger Lanser
Music: Jimmy Yuill
U.S. Distributor: Castle Rock Entertainment/Sony Pictures Classics
     Following the spectacular failure of MARY SHELLY'S FRANKENSTEIN, 
Kenneth Branagh returned to England to make the kind of film he was most 
familiar with:  a very British, low-budget production rooted deeply in 
the works of William Shakespeare.  However, instead of filming "Hamlet" 
straight (as Branagh will do for his next film), the writer/director 
chose instead to focus his story on a small troupe of largely-untalented 
actors and their attempts to put together a Christmas week production of 
the Bard's most celebrated tragedy.  Echoing the farcical NOISES OFF, A 
MIDWINTER'S TALE is a first-rate comedy that offers far more laughs (all 
of them intentional) than anything Branagh has previously done.
     A MIDWINTER'S TALE is loaded with allusions, both cinematic and 
literary.  The most obvious are those from Shakespeare, which 
understandably permeate the film.  Not only are the characters 
attempting to perform "Hamlet", but certain scenes from the play hit a 
little too close to home for several of them.  Branagh also 
simultaneously pays homage to and pokes fun at one of the most respected 
British filmmakers of all time:  Sir Laurence Olivier.  Elements of A 
MIDWINTER'S TALE's presentation recall the work of Woody Allen, and the 
ensemble cast is the kind that Allen usually gathers -- although Branagh 
uses British names while Allen typically assembles Americans.
     With all of Branagh's energy focused on directing (he never appears 
on screen), A MIDWINTER'S TALE is almost always on-target.  Unlike the 
failed comedy PETER'S FRIENDS, melodrama never threatens to overwhelm 
humor.  In fact, most of the so-called dramatic aspects of this film are 
subtle parodies of traditional Hollywood cliches:  the struggling actor 
choosing love over fame, a reconciliation between a long-separated 
father and son, and a man finally earning his mother's approval after a 
lifetime of failure.  Branagh handles these themes deftly, treating each 
with enough respect to create emotional arcs for the characters, but 
making sure the audience knows he's fully aware of how overused the 
material is.  
     The main character is actor/director Joe Harper (Michael Maloney, 
who bears a strong physical resemblance to Ralph Fiennes, and whose 
acting style echoes Branagh's), who, during a slow time in his career, 
risks bankruptcy to stage an experimental Christmas-time production of 
"Hamlet" in his home town of Hope.  Unfortunately, auditions don't go 
well -- all the respected theatrical talent is involved in one 
production or another of "A Christmas Carol" -- and Joe finds only six 
willing participants.  Since the text necessitates 24 roles, everyone is 
forced to play multiple parts.  Thus, Hamlet's Ghost, Claudius, and the 
Player King all bear a strong resemblance to one another, Laertes is 
moonlighting as about five other people, and Rosencrantz and 
Guildenstern are one.  Gertrude is played by a drag queen (John 
Sessions), Ophelia is essayed by an amazingly nearsighted actress (Julia 
Sawahla), Horatio is a drunk (Gerard Horan), and the set designer (Celia 
Imrie) is a mystic who judges the likely success of a production by how 
stiff her nipples become.  
     Branagh has fun with his material, weaving a tale likely to 
generate guffaws even for those with little knowledge of the play upon 
which it is based.  As the "Hamlet" rehearsals get underway, Murphy's 
Law is in full effect.  Egos clash, Laertes' funny accent becomes 
incomprehensible, Rosencrantz/Guildenstern gets sauced, and Ophelia 
takes a nasty spill.  It's all enough to make Joe doubt the sanity of 
putting on a "400-year old play about a depressed aristocrat."  
     As usual, the director has surrounded himself with a group of fine 
actors.  Central roles go to Michael Maloney (OTHELLO), Branagh alum 
Richard Briers (MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING), AB FAB's Julia Sawalha (her co-
star from that show, Jennifer Saunders, has a cameo as an American movie 
producer), John Sessions (HENRY V), Gerard Horan (MUCH ADO), Hetta 
Charnley (as Joe's sister), and the ethereal Celia Imrie (MARY SHELLY'S 
FRANKENSTEIN).  Joan Collins goes intentionally over-the-top as Joe's 
vulture-like agent.
     No current film maker appears to love and understand Shakespeare as 
well as Branagh, and never has his affection for the Bard been more 
apparent than here.  This picture succeeds as a comedy, a satire, and 
even, to a certain extent, as a mild melodrama about choosing between a 
paycheck and the nourishment of the soul.  A MIDWINTER'S TALE is also a 
stylistic accomplishment.  Filmed in black-and-white, it's a movie of 
shadows and starkly contrasting images, all of which are used to their 
best effect.  Anyone who wondered about Branagh's future following 
FRANKENSTEIN can set their concerns to rest.  He's back on top in the 
independent arena with A MIDWINTER'S TALE, a film that offers ninety-
eight minutes of pure fun re-interpreting the phrase "the play's the 
thing."
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Director and Writer Kenneth Branagh's A MIDWINTER'S TALE (called
IN THE BLEAK MIDWINTER in Britain) is a wonderful celebration of the
pure joy of acting.  It is full of exuberant energy and literally
bursts at the seams with happiness.  It is a comedy that kept a smile
on my face from start to finish.  Since one of my least favorite movie
genres is comedy especially British comedy as this one is, I was really
surprised at how much I thoroughly enjoyed this film.  My only problem
was that I had to make myself stopping laughing out loud sometimes so
that I would not miss any of the excellent dialog, and this was
sometime extremely difficult.
     Opening to the strains of "Why must the show go on, oh mammy", the
picture tells the story of a director named Joe Harper (Michael
Maloney) who wants to produce and star in a production of Hamlet.  He
auditions actors and actresses for the play, and these auditions are
perhaps the best part of the movie.  The thespians he recruits appear
to be the dregs of the acting world, and each audition is hilarious.
In Tom Newman's (Nicholas Farrell) interview for the part he explains
to Joe that, "Hamlet isn't just Hamlet.  Hamlet is me.  Hamlet is
Bosnia.  Hamlet is the desk.  Hamlet is the air.  Hamlet is my
grandmother."  The actors appear to share a single trait - they are
hungry and need the work badly.  Joe solves the problem by hiring all
of them.
     His "friend, agent, and personal investor" Margaretta D'Arcy (Joan
Collins) arranges for them to do the play in a dying town called Hope,
of which it had little.  They setup shop in an abandoned church that
has been taken over by developers.  They will live there, eat all of
their meals together there, and open the play in a few weeks on
Christmas Eve.  A constant subplot is will they sell any tickets or
will they go bust and be thrown out before opening night.
     The best part of the film other than the script and the directing
is Michael Maloney's acting.  He is so infectiously happy and naive
that you begin to feel sorry for him since the actors he has to work
with are the pits.  Eventually they will become a team and more than
that a family, and it is this considerable camaraderie that gives the
audience such a warm feeling of joy.
     Nina Raymond (Julia Sawalha), who plays Ophelia, is not optimistic
on their chances of getting kids out on Christmas Eve to see Hamlet.
She asks, what are we going to tell them, "Hello kids, do stop watching
The Mighty Morphin Power Rangers and see a four hundred year old play
about depressed aristocrats."  I nearly fell over in my seat when she
delivered that line.
     All of Joe's happiness finally begins to crumble when opening
night draws nigh and the play is not coming together.  His emotions
explode, and he tells the cast, "Hamlet is a loser led by the chief
loser, yours truly."  Branagh creates Joe as a director with whom the
audience easily empathizes.  You want such an incredibly energetic,
albeit naive, guy to succeed no matter how small the odds.
     After initial bickering, the cast finally comes together.  When
Joe's sister Molly (Hetta Charnley) is worried about forgetting her
lines, Carnforth (Gerard Horan) advises her to do what he always does.
He tells her, "If I forget my lines in Shakespeare, I always say,
'crouch we here a while' and wait."
     The casts thinks the set decorator is named Vag (Celia Imrie).
Carnforth tells her he is glad she uses her nickname.  She then
corrects them telling them that her name is Fadge.  She lets Molly call
her Pher, which Molly says she appreciates but that Pher is even harder
to say than Fadge.  Fadge is a great quirky little character who keeps
the cast guessing as to what the set will look like.  Eventually they
come to believe she is such a minimalist that the set may have no
external manifestations at all.  I will not spoil it by describing what
she decides.  It is major funny.
     The cast in the show is great from top to bottom.  I can only
scratch the surface with this review.  As well as the ones above, there
is Henry (Richard Briers), Vernon (Mark Hadfield),  Nancy (Jennifer
Saunders), Terry (John Sessions), Tim (James White), and Mortimer
(Robert Hines) among others.
     The movie is filmed in a low contrast and a little hazy black and
white by Roger Lanser.  I thought this look worked very well with the
material.  The sets by Tim Harvey and the costumes by Caroline Harris
are suitably hokey.
     A MIDWINTER'S TALE flies by at 1:39 thanks to crisp editing by
Neil Farrell.  It is incorrectly rated R for a tiny bit of bad
language.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence of any kind.  I would
class the film as a mild PG-13 and would have no trouble taking a kid
of any age who was genuinely interested in the theater to it.  This is
an energetic, funny, but not slapstick comedy.  It makes you feel good
to be alive and reminds you what is special about the acting
profession.  I recommend it to everyone highly and award it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
