Title
Review for Erin Brockovich (2000)
Number of Reviews
37

Author
Steve Rhodes
Erin Brockovich is a "Dressing for Success" kind of gal.  She's the kind
who might read the book and carefully do just the opposite.  Her office
clothes look like something that Playboy magazine might have come up
with for a photo spread of women in law offices.
Wearing micro-mini skirts and bras that shove her breasts so high that
they look in constant danger of popping out into your face, Erin is the
sort of woman that attracts a considerable amount of attention.
Have I mentioned yet that she is played by Julia Roberts?
ERIN BROCKOVICH, directed by Steven Soderbergh (SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE
and OUT OF SIGHT), is based on a true story.  The movie has two stories
for the price of one, and both are terrific.
One concerns the foul-mouthed but eminently likable Erin, as she
struggles to make a living as a single mom with three young kids.
Susannah Grant's screenplay turns this into a comedy just a few small
notches below NOTTING HILL in the level of its humor.  Roberts is a
charmer.  No matter how many times she uses the F-word, she's still just
as adorable since the character she plays probably talks just that way.
Even when she calls her coworkers names such as "bitch" and worse, it is
easy to forgive Erin her flaws.
The other part of the movie concerns a contamination case against PG & E
(Pacific Gas and Electric) that's similar to A CIVIL ACTION but much
more compelling.  In both movies we are asked to accept at face value
that the Hollywood version of a complex legal case is the correct one.
Whatever the truth is, this movie presents a cogent case that sounds
plausible.  And within the context of the movie, it certainly works.
Erin, a former Miss Wichita, is an outspoken woman who clearly bears
some responsibility for her lack of "luck" in life.  She has 3 kids, 2
ex-husbands and no job.  Whenever she gets work, she leaves her kids
with some pretty unreliable people for whom the word "caregiver" would
be a major misnomer.
After a car accident, Erin's abusive mouth loses her any chance of a
settlement when she explodes in court.  Her lawyer, Ed Masry, doesn't
want anything to do with her after the outburst.  But, since she can't
get a job, she initiates what is effectively a sit-down strike in his
office until he hires her to work for him.  She has no skills but is
full of moxie.
At the top of his form, Albert Finney plays Ed with wry charm.  His
clothes are as badly conservative as Erin's are tackily sexual.  He
takes constant ridicule from Erin, whom he hires, but he eventually
learns how to dance with the tiger without getting his head bitten off
too often.  The chemistry between them is precious.  She is a
firecracker on a short fuse, and he is an old businessman who worries
that his one-man law office may go bankrupt.
Almost as a lark, Ed lets Erin look into a ground water contamination
case in Hinkley, California.  The case soon consumes her life.
Frequently abandoning her kids to the tattooed biker, and sometimes
boyfriend, George (Aaron Eckhart from IN THE COMPANY OF MEN), who lives
next door, Erin devotes her every waking moment to research into the
case.  The well-written script makes the case crystal clear even if it
is quite complex.  Luckily for the children, George appears to be the
first adult who takes the time to play with them and really devote
himself to them.
Erin learns about an incredible number of tumors and cancers that have
occurred in Hinkley.  Her secret weapons in this investigation, as she
points out to Ed, are her boobs.  She sexually charms men to reveal
details of the case.  And she makes genuine, personal friends of just
about everyone in town.  An indefatigable worker, she risks everything
to get the best settlement possible.
The movie has a few flaws, including needing just a little tightening up
in the editing.  The only irritating part is that a key plot twist is
too obviously telegraphed in advance and for no good reason.
A real crowd-pleaser of a movie, it delivers excellent value for your
entertainment dollars while still staying honest.  Erin is the sort of
woman you'd like to know.  And the type you'd probably have just as much
fun trading barbs with as Ed does.  The movie about her life is an easy
one to recommend to one and all.  It's a fun story about a real
character, in all senses of the word.
ERIN BROCKOVICH runs 2:06.  It is rated R for language and would be fine
for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Mark O'Hara
Naming a film or book for its protagonist is often a simple but ingenious 
tactic.
It's a strategy used by writers from Charles Dickens and Honore de Balzac to 
Muriel Spark and Saul Bellow.  What we look for in these namesake titles is 
strong characterization: what else are they but focused character studies?  
A work should, after all, be about what it is called.
So ERIN BROCKOVICH serves as a good title, as its heroine seems to have two 
sides - the tender loveliness of a mother to match her first name, and the 
assaulting harshness of a fullback to match her last name.  Julia Roberts 
does a strong job displaying these sides, sometimes within the same extended 
shot.  As she is driving late at night, for instance, she calls home to talk 
with her lover, George (Aaron Eckhart).  After days of legal legwork she is 
exhausted and bitter, and just hearing his voice cheers her;  but what 
should confront her but that she has missed the first words of her infant 
daughter!  On a cell phone in a car, alone late at night, Roberts mixes her 
emotions wonderfully.
One flaw in the characterization is the lack of background.  We are told 
that Erin Brockovich has been married and divorced twice, that she had been 
badly used.  But her only behavior that reflects this history is her caution 
around men.  She is hesitant to get close to George too fast - or at least 
she claims she is hesitant - but we see no real evidence of past trauma.  
Couldn't director Steven Soderbergh have shot snippets of old fights, or at 
least provided family photographs of Brockovich's three children with their 
respective fathers?  The film spends more time showing the woman's futile 
job search than it does explaining why she is the way she is now.
What proves the salvation of Erin Brockovich is the job into which she 
insinuates herself.  Unsuccessful in a lawsuit against a doctor whose Jaguar 
plowed into her jalopy, Brockovich appears in the office of her lawyer Ed 
Masry (Albert Finney).  Again and again showing her abrasive attitudes, this 
determined mother becomes a top-notch legal assistant, sharpening her skills 
on a case that actually becomes too large for Masry's firm to handle by 
itself.  It's a suit against the multi-billion dollar corporation Pacific 
Gas and Electric, a company that has committed crimes against local 
populations by contaminating groundwater for decades.
Of course this whole situation reeks of cliché, and the players even refer 
repeatedly to David and Goliath.  But the acting lifts the premise out of 
the mundane and into the human: we see frailties and platitudes and motives 
that are believable, and we end up liking all of the main players, even 
though we might not want them as close friends.
As Ed Masry, Albert Finney may be a bit old, but his facility as an actor 
convinces us completely.  He plays a good foil to Brockovich, rolling with 
her ego-deflating punches, learning some tact himself from her tactless 
chidings.  Like the other focus characters, Masry's life before the action 
of the film - and outside the office as well - is kept uncomplicated.  We 
only hear him say, "But I'm married," yet we never meet his wife.  Such 
simplification is not always good, but it does create an emphasis on the 
action at hand, and evokes chemistry between Roberts and the masterful 
British actor.
Aaron Eckhart is underused in the picture.  George's relationship with Erin 
causes a certain ambivalence:  we want to see more of him, yet we admire the 
decisions made by screenwriter Susannah Grant, decisions that remove George 
from the scenes that lead up to the climax.  In any case, Eckhart has a sure 
screen presence, and is certainly cut from the cloth of young leading men.
Do we know enough about the problem that is causing various cancers and 
other illnesses among the people living near the gas and electric plant?  It 
is explained to us a few times, and thankfully, the explanations do not 
treat viewers as idiots, as does the scene in ARMAGEDDON in which Billy Bob 
Thornton moves a space shuttle model around a moon model.  Reservations:  
the business with the trump card, involving Charles Embry, comes too easily; 
and though it sounds unlikely, the story actually has too few courtroom 
scenes.
Julia Roberts is a sort of working person's actress.  She has created for 
herself a public persona that is slick and smart, that banters almost 
spitefully with the press yet offers pleasant interviews.  At 32, she's 
received the highest paycheck for a female lead, a reported $20 million for 
this outing.  That this information is common public knowledge attests to 
the coverage with which Julia Roberts is swarmed.  Like her or not, she is 
an important force in entertainment; fortunately for the public, her agendas 
are mature and decent and compassionate.  ERIN BROCKVICH shows that she can 
inhabit a character who is larger than life.


Author
Ron Small
Author: iysmall@aol.com (Ron Small)
Starring: Julia Roberts, Albert Finny, Aaron Eckhart, Peter Coyote, Marg
Helgenberger, Cherry Jones, Jamie Harold, Tracey Walter
ERIN BROCKOVICH is one of those rarities: a commercial star picture with
something of a brain. It won't bring about world piece or even provide much of
an emotional catharsis but, despite that we all know this story through and
through and can pretty much predict how it'll turn out, it entertains without
insulting anyone's intelligence. Perhaps what I appreciated most about the film
was its director, Steven Soderbergh's, attention to detail.
Most directors of big budget star vehicles don't give a rat's tuchas about
details. They simply tell their familiar story and rely on their star to bring
audiences in. Soderbergh is an indie filmmaker at heart (and I mean "indie" in
the best way possible). He came to fame with SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE, delved
into experimental film with SCHIZOPOLIS and THE UNDERNEATH, and most recently
has began toying with high concept films (OUT OF SIGHT, the upcoming OCEAN 11
remake and TRAFFIC), imbuing them with a playful cleverness. With ERIN he has
taken a product and put his own sensibilities all over it. And god bless him,
because I am a true fan of High Concept Hollywood films…when they are done
correctly. Problem is, they rarely are. These kind of pictures are grinded out
by studio hacks like Damon Santoslefano and Brian Robbins without an once of
joy or style. Films (PATCH ADAMS, STEPMOM, READY TO RUMBLE to name three) that
trot forth before our glazed eyes, amping up woebegone tunes so we know when to
cry, and wacky melodies cueing us to laugh. I think I can tell on my own, thank
you very much. Ignorant pricks, those High Concept directors are.
For the most part, Soderbergh stays away from such Hollywood bullying tactics
and tells this story in the cheeky, idiosyncratic manner for which he is known.
All the typical Soderbergh elements are prevalent, in the neo realist
direction, the hip score that doesn't call attention to itself the way most
self consciously hip scores often do, and all the little components the
director uses to flesh out his various characters.
As I said, ERIN is a star picture, and Julia Roberts is its incandescent star.
After several light-as-Flockheart comedies, she steps into something a little
divergent (but not much). ERIN isn't a heavy film by any means. In fact without
Soderbergh's direction or Roberts in the lead it wouldn't be out of the realm
of possibility that this picture would debut on SHOWTIME.
In BROCKOVICH Julia's attributes are constantly on display, from the very low
cut dresses she wears (demonstrating the power of Personal Trainers), to that
bright, wide smile that takes over her entire face. We always know we're
watching Roberts and not Brockovich, but it works because the film builds on
Roberts' sweet, snappy personality. Like Tom Cruise, the actress uses her smile
as a bit of a weapon. It's one of her actors' "tricks". Similar to the peculiar
George Clooney head bob, or Mark Wahlberg's intermittent scowl, it's something
she flashes like a defense mechanism, a conceit that draws attention away from
her performance, and into her attractiveness. I remember watching her in an
interview on Howard Stern's E! show where she had that smile plastered across
her face during the entire interrogation, all while Stern posed his usual
litany of scatological queries. She seemed phony, like she was in pain but had
to hide it with that wide smile. Like I said, it's a trick, but one that works
its desired effect and, believe it or not, Stern soon acquiesced. It's
important that actors be aware of their range, as Roberts seems to have become
after some ill-fated attempts at character roles. After all, Cruise may be
unable to do a passable Irish accent (see FAR AND AWAY, actually don't, just
take my word for it), but he sure can paste on that affable grin whenever he's
in trouble (which he did a whole lot in EYES WIDE SHUT).
And Roberts uses the smile well as Erin Brockovich, an accidental lawyer who
stumbles upon a PG and E scandal, then, along with her grizzled boss, a
veteran\amateur attorney (skillfully acted by Albert Finny in all his fog horn
glory), she attempts to bring down the company. Nothing new here. We've seen
this kind of thing in films from SILKWOOD to THE INSIDER, but this movie is
full of the style and charm that most of the others lacked. THE INSIDER sunk
because of its stubborn, unwavering attention to the procedure of its true
story, hardly focusing on the human element. It was skillfully made, but
ultimately dramatically inert. I saw SILKWOOD so long ago (I believe I was all
of ten years old) that I won't even bother commenting on what it did right or
wrong, though at ten anything without green mutated turtles bored me silly.
BROCKOVICH isn't academic, it's cheerful, and it's the kind of film that will
make you smile. In fact I felt, at first, that the plot worked against the film
(and maybe I still feel that a bit). It opens with Brockovich in a terrifically
unexpected accident, shifting to her hectic home life, an attempted pass from a
motorcycle jockey (played with a little too much smug intelligence by Aaron
Eckheart) who falls to the ground after being "shot down" by Brockovich (a
little detail I'm sure most directors would neglect to include), and her out
spoken attempts to get a job. This stuff is handled with such gleeful
naturalism that I might have given the film higher marks had it just gone along
as a simple character study of this marvelously fascinating women. But I doubt
most audiences would like that.
When the scandal is introduced the way it is I admit I was groaning for about
ten minutes, but things pick up. Soderbergh stages terrifically mild
confrontations, and the relationship between Finny and Roberts is subtly
charming. Really the only reason I stayed involved in the picture was because
of how fun Roberts makes the character of Brockovich. I would rather see that
character (who's based on a real person) go through a familiar story than no
story.
Though Soderbergh does make a TV movie-like plot more than watchable, I do wish
he had taken it a couple steps further. For instance there's a scene where a PG
and E lawyer comes down to the firm to meet with Finny and Erin. Right when we
see this bookish, rather mousy looking fellow we immediately know that he is
going to be played for laughs, and the good guys will come out on top. During
the meeting Brockovich stares (one of those if looks could kill stares)
directly at him, her eyes smoldering with disgust. Meanwhile the guy sort of
notices, and stammers a bit. It's a scene we've scene a lot, where, before the
big guys get involved, a little corporate weasel is sent in as damage control.
Well why not do something a little different? How about a big intimidating guy,
who's articulate and intelligent (maybe someone like Vin Diesel of BOILER
ROOM), come in as damage control, and stare back at Brockovich. Instead we get
a recognizable cartoon in a fairly recognizable scene.
The brief bits that feature the victims of the PG and E scandal (a scandal that
I'm just realizing I haven't yet gone into, so here's a quick, fragmented
summary for those of you who chose to read what I put in the parenthesis:
company lies, water unhealthy, people sick + need money = law suit) are common
as well. In one instance Soderbergh goes in for a slow, extraneous, extreme
close-up of a cancer stricken youngster. Isn't there another way he could have
conveyed the emotion, rather than doing what every director does when dealing
with sickness: close-ups of sad faces. I dunno, maybe stuff like that is needed
in big studio films, but surely Soderbergh could have imbued his victims with
some of the multi-faceted character traits he gives nearly everyone else. Then
I recall PATCH ADAMS, a movie so saccharine I had to shower after, and I can
imagine what BROCKOVICH would be like in the hands of Tom Shadyac, that films
director, or even Rob Reiner, who seems to be slowly losing all the talent he
once had on a film by film basis.
But I doubt audiences will even care about the details Soderbegh plugs in,
since the film would probably be just as successful if it was directed by a
studio hack who would give it no personality. Audiences are like that, they go
to see their favorite stars in familiar stories, and they generally don't care
to be challenged. Of course BROCKOVICH doesn't challenge anybody, but it does
raise the bar a bit on the quintessential star picture. I liked it, but I would
have really liked it if Soderbergh aimed just an itsy bit higher.
 http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
Herb Kane
"Erin Brockovich" is a funny, heartwarming movie and Julia Roberts may have
given her best performance ever - Oscar material indeed. So it's no big
surprise that only a few critics chastised the movie, one of the most brutal
reviews coming from Roger Ebert (Chicago Sun-Times).
Ebert's scathing 746 word review of "Erin Brockovich" may indicate he was
looking for a remake of the film "A Civil Action" (he mentions the film four
times). When Roger Ebert writes a good review, make no mistake - it's a good
one. However, this is the worst he's written since his take on "Patch
Adams."
Out of the blocks, Ebert attacks Roberts' sexy wardrobe (based on Erin's
real-life clothing) and accuses Roberts' natural beauty for upstaging the
material. "If the medium is the message, the message in this movie is sex,"
said Ebert.
Jay Carr (Boston Globe) said, "Roberts's Erin assertively plays the sex
card, dressing in miniskirts and low-cut jerseys that help her talk her way
past reluctant record-keepers in dusty municipal archives. But the strength
of Roberts's commitment and the unstoppability of Erin's moral outrage count
for a lot more here."
The movie doesn't even have a sex scene! Granted the underdressed Erin
obviously doesn't go unnoticed, but Roberts' performance and her character's
underlying motives are much more prominent.
Ebert belittles Albert Finney's performance (Ed Masry, a lawyer) comparing
his character to an H&R Block office manager, "He's dampened; there's no
fire in his performance, and when he complains that the cost of the lawsuit
may bankrupt him, all we can think about is the infinitely greater impact of
John Travolta's similar dialogue in 'A Civil Action.'"
A closer understanding of the character comes from Mick LaSalle (San
Francisco Chronicle): "Though Finney's main function is to act befuddled by
his tempestuous clerk, the audience comes into a full sense of this fellow
as a decent guy coasting toward retirement who gradually becomes
re-energized." Robert Wilonsky (New Times Los Angeles) also observes, "He's
an old man awaiting retirement; Ed's exhausted, going broke, and finished
with law."
Finney is playing the character as intended.
A USA TODAY review said, "Atop all the talk about this being Roberts' career
performance so far (and it is), it would be unjust to overlook that this is
also the best screen role Finney has had in years."
Indeed this was the finest performance of Roberts' career, but Ebert
complains about Roberts' acting, too - that "we're always aware a
performance is going on." On the contrary, Michael O'Sullivan (Washington
Post) got it right: "Roberts is so unself-conscious, so free of the cheap
accents and trailer-trash superficialities affected by movie stars when they
go slumming (which only call attention to the actor), that it's easy to
forget you're watching a performance."
Kenneth Turan (Los Angeles Times) said, "Yet there is the sense about 'Erin
Brockovich' that this is the part Roberts has long been looking for. It's a
role that allows the actress, like her character, to use her allure for a
good cause, to put her undeniable star qualities, her great gift for humor,
empathy, romance and vulnerability, at the service of a character with real
texture."
Ebert's fixation on "A Civil Action" calls for more legal action in this
movie, not so-called drab disputes among lawyers. "There's none of the juice
that Robert Duvall's company attorney brought to 'A Civil Action,'" said
Ebert.
For the love of God, Roger. Again - this is not "A Civil Action." This movie
is not intended to play out that way.
Lou Lumenick (New York Post) said, "'Erin Brockovich' is less a courtroom
drama than a journey of self-discovery." Michael O'Sullivan adds, "In the
end, 'Erin Brockovich' is less about punitive damages and compensation and
sticking it to The Man than it is about the difference each one of us
makes."
Ed Johnson-Ott (NUVO NewsWeekly) spells it out plainly, "If this sounds a
lot like 1998's 'A Civil Action,' it is, but with a crucial difference in
approach. Where 'A Civil Action' followed lawyers and showcased courtroom
dramatics, 'Erin Brockovich' remains focused on the people whose lives were
devastated by corporate neglect."
Most critics compare films with a similar theme in a review and that's fine.
Usually it's worthwhile and reflective. But Ebert doesn't just compare in
this case, he practically demands a twin. You cannot consider a movie on its
own merits by hoping for the same formula and direction of a similar film. I
realize I don't need to teach this Pulitzer Prize winning critic how to
write a review, but in my opinion, Ebert went a bit far here - stepping over
the line with "A Civil Action."
The magic of "Erin Brockovich" was the chemistry between Erin and Masey.
Owen Gleiberman (Entertainment Weekly) brilliantly observes, "Erin and Ed
become tag-team detective partners, and it's a delight to watch Roberts,
with her flirtatious sparkle and undertow of melancholy, ricochet off
Finney's wonderfully jaded, dry-as-beef-jerky performance as the beleaguered
career attorney who knows too much about the loopholes of his profession to
have much faith left in it."
Ebert concludes, "'Erin Brockovich' has a screenplay with the depth and
insight of a cable-TV docudrama, and that won't do for a 126-minute 'major
production.'"
I contend Ebert's review of "Erin Brockovich" has the depth and insight of a
rejected high school term paper, and that won't do for a 746 word "major
film review." I'm surprised Ebert didn't criticize and accuse the film for
trying to use a bald chemotherapy child to manipulate emotions as he
unjustly did in his review of "Patch Adams." Regardless, Ebert's review has
little to do with "Erin Brockovich' and more to do with the movie "A Civil
Action."
A.O. Scott (New York Times) summed the movie up best: "'Erin Brockovich'
will make you laugh. It will make you cry. It will make you stand up and
cheer. 'Erin Brockovich' is the feel-good movie of the year."
I normally do not spend this much time on a single film critic, but Ebert's
review required a civil action. "Erin Brockovich" was an exceptional film
worthy to defend. The film alone, however, is the movie's best defense.

Author
Michael Dequina
On paper, _Erin_Brockovich_ bears more than a passing resemblance to
1998's _A_Civil_Action_.  Both are vehicles for major Hollywood stars
(respectively, Julia Roberts and John Travolta); both are based on true
stories; and both stories are about a legal crusader helping the
residents of a small town battle a large corporation that has been
contaminating the local water supply.  Despite these striking
similarities, there remains one key difference: while treating its
serious subject matter with the gravity it deserves, _Erin_Brockovich_
also manages to be a lot of fun.
That fact owes a lot to the film's vibrant title character, one that I
imagine even Hollywood would have difficulty creating if reality hadn't. 
Erin (Roberts) is a vivacious, twice-divorced mother of three who, as we
meet her, is not doing a very good job selling herself at a job
interview.  The scene is short, but its few minutes vividly depict the
delicate balance that Roberts and director Steven Soderbergh achieves
throughout the film's entire two-hour-plus running time.  The scene is
undeniably funny, its humor heightened by Erin's trashy mode of dress and
the increasing desperation of her words.  But one laughs at the situation
and not her; in Roberts' eyes one can catch the underlying sadness and
seriousness of the situation, plus the gradual awareness that she's
fighting a losing battle.  For the most part, _Erin_Brockovich_ plays in
a similar way; one is consistently engaged on a purely--for lack of a
better term--"entertainment" level, but providing an underlying
foundation is something that lends the proceedings a bit more dramatic
weight.
The major "something" in _Erin_Brockovich_ is the aforementioned case
involving the residents of Hinkley, California, whose water supply has
long been contaminated by the large PG&E corporation.  Through some
not-terribly-convincing plot machinations, Erin gets a job as an aide to
attorney Ed Masry (Albert Finney), and it is through her work there that
she gets personally involved with the plight of the Hinkley citizens,
many of whom are suffering grave illness due to prolonged exposure to the
poisoned water.
Erin is brassy, smartmouthed, and, most important of all, not a lawyer,
and the bulk of the film's enjoyment derives from the ballsy, carefree
way she conducts her research and life in general.  She is also
unabashedly a woman, not afraid to call upon her feminine wiles to get
her way--allowing Roberts to be more brazenly sexual than she has since
her career-making turn in _Pretty_Woman_.  Roberts also has never been so
ideally cast since that film; the kookiness of her character gives her
ample opportunity to flash that trademark smile of hers (not to mention a
few other assets) while giving her a chance to stretch comfortably as an
actress.  Not only are there plenty of the light moments for the fans,
there are just as many heavier dramatic scenes for her to display her
serious acting chops.  That these two sides seamlessly gel into a
full-bodied character is as much a compliment to her as it is to
Soderbergh.
Soderbergh's sure direction keeps the action moving briskly enough, the
actors believable enough, and the audience's emotions and interest
engaged enough to forgive the overall familiarity of the story.  Erin is,
above anything else, an average woman, and this is a traditional tale of
how she bucked the odds and scored a big triumph for herself and her
fellow common folk.  What aren't so easily forgiven, however, are other
formulaic wrinkles in the script, which is credited to Susannah Grant. 
Chiefly problematic among these is her relationship with the next-door
neighbor, a kind motorcyclist named George (Aaron Eckhart).  Their
relationship begins prickly, warms to a friendship, then heats up into a
romance.  Roberts and a barely unrecognizable Eckhart are well-matched,
but their skill and rapport are shoved into some pedestrian plotting.  As
Erin gets more involved in her case, George and her kids feel neglected,
leading to the usual resentment.  It is here where Soderbergh comes up
with the one moment that rings completely, ridiculously false: tending to
Erin's kids at a barbecue, George longs for his more freewheeling days
after watching a gang of Harley-riding bikers roar by.
The entirety of _Erin_Brockovich_ achieves its desired--and highly
commercial--effect so well, though, that most viewers, including myself,
won't ultimately care about such awkward moments.  Soderbergh loyalists
may be a bit dismayed that this film is not as risky and experimental as
his other works, but only a filmmaker with his  fresh savvy could take a
well-worn formula and make such a satisfying entertainment.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Eric Grossman
 Despite being based on true events (key word there is based), "Erin
Brockovich" isn't about a story, it's a star vehicle.  Ostensibly, the film
is about people having their water polluted by an evil corporation.  A
well-endowed, twice-divorced mom named Erin Brockovich (Julia Roberts),
comes to their rescue by digging up the dirt on this corporation and then
she gives her eunuch of a boss, a lawyer named Ed Masry (Albert Finney), the
cajones to go after them.  As David Spade might say, I liked this movie more
when it was called, "A Civil Action," or "Silkwood" for that matter.
The film, which was directed by Steven Soderbergh, the man who helped put
independent film on the radar, is so irritating that I wanted to throw
something at the screen.  Unfortunately, the three people behind me who were
jabbering throughout the entire showing were too heavy.  Just as an aside, I
've must say that going to the movies has become oh so pleasant nowadays.
People put their feet on your armrest, kick your chair, talk through the
movie, answer their cell-phones and all of this comes complete for the low,
low price of nine bucks.
 Julia Roberts is considered America's sweetheart, but I guess here is where
I admit to being out of touch.  In movie after movie, she treats other
characters terribly.  In "My Best Friends Wedding," she is awful as she
connives and plots against Dermot Mulroney and Cameron Diaz.  She is
reprehensible in how she treats Hugh Grant's character in "Notting Hill,"
teeing off on him for no good reason and the worst part is, he takes it.
Wasn't the whole point of that film the idea that he was different and
unlike everyone else, not tolerant of spoiled-brat, movie star behavior.  In
"Runaway Bride," she keeps dumping men at the altar when she gets the
jitters.  Gee, let's make a charming little film about a guy who bails on
his brides to be and see how charming audiences find that.
And now she plays an obnoxious woman with horrible taste in attire that
attempts to cash-out on a frivolous lawsuit.  When she loses, she demands
her lawyer give her a job because he "owes" her and then she continues to
talk back to him whenever it suits her.  In addition, she goes off on her
fellow office assistants, in particular, making fun of an overweight woman
whose only crime was criticizing Erin for not properly doing her job.  And
when Ed, her boss, tells her that perhaps she ought to wear something other
than the micro-miniskirts and revealing tops with her gazungas hanging out,
her reply is, "as long as I have one ass instead of two, I'll wear what I
like;" Wow, what a role model.
 Instead of feeling bad for the people who were poisoned, I just began to
get more and more disgusted by Roberts' character since in this film, the
victims, like everyone else, are really just incidental to her.  Unlike any
other good legal drama, there is no compelling conflict created in regards
to the tragedy.  Soderbergh and his writer Susan Grant are more interested
in making Roberts look good by having everyone else look like a schmuck.
Finney comes across as a dolt as do all the other lawyers in the film.  The
office co-workers are all portrayed as fat and stupid.  The love interest,
George (Aaron Eckhart) seems like a decent guy but like Hugh Grant in
"Notting Hill," he takes so much trash from her that we can't care about him
either.   Even the poor folks who have been injured are portrayed as
pathetic which is upsetting because theirs is a sad story that should have
been told properly.  I feel terrible for what happened to them and I think
that Universal, Roberts, and the rest of the above-the-line talent should
donate their entire earnings from this film to make up for exploiting their
plight.
The biggest disappointment is that Soderbergh, after doing two good movies
("Out of Sight," "The Limey"), has so completely gone south here.  Maybe he
did it just so he could get a pet-project made or something lofty like that.
However, I think the reality is that all independent filmmakers, with a few
exceptions such as John Sayles, just want to sell out and make movies about
Julia Roberts' breasts.  That's fine, breasts are great, but let's cut the
pretense and the "I'm an artist" routine.

Author
Jamey Hughton
Starring-Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart,
Marg Helgenberger, Cherry Jones and Peter Coyote
Director-Steven Soderbergh
Canadian Rating-14A
Released by Universal Pictures - 03/00
`Erin Brockovich' is the first movie of 2000 that made me want to stand
up and exclaim `You go, girlfriend!' during showtime.
Hoping to keep my personal dignity intact, I waived that opportunity to
thoroughly embarrass myself, although I sensed the other theater patrons
would have supported my bombastic outburst. After all, the title
character of Steven Soderbergh's `Erin Brockovich' is such a smart,
sassy heroine. Although her manner is laced with brash, foul-mouthed
terminology and her wardrobe is indicative of a street-corner
prostitute, Erin generates an instantly likable presence of good looks
and quick wits. The twice-divorced mother of three shows admirable
persistence as she claws at accomplished lawyer Ed Masry (Albert
Finney), demanding a position at his law firm by attacking him like an
unleashed pitbull as opposed to kissing up. While in certain
circumstances it proves to be more of a distraction than a
reinforcement, a big name star like Julia Roberts seems to only further
the bolstering appeal of the snappy `Erin Brockovich'.
Roberts is certainly positioned at center-stage, delivering a powerhouse
performance that could be the definitive achievement of her career, but
she is backed by a beneficial slew of wonderful supporting performances.
An early prediction for the 2001 Oscar telecast: Albert Finney for Best
Supporting Actor. Erin first meets Masry after she is involved in an
auto collision and he is assigned to represent her. Unfortunately, even
though it was the fault of the other driver, Masry loses the case
because of Erin's feisty attitude and flagrant use of profanity.
Afterward (and I'm sidestepping some big complications), when Erin
begins working at the firm as a legal assistant, the interaction between
Roberts and Finney becomes some of the most fun and tractable I've ever
witnessed between two polar opposite characters. Finney (most recently
in `Simpatico') is such a joy to watch; as Masry slowly progresses to
the point of accepting and understanding Erin, we believe every ounce of
it. More enthusiasm should be directed to Aaron Eckhart as friendly
biker boyfriend George, who acts as nanny to Erin's three kids while she
discovers the demanding conditions of a business environment. The main
concentration of Susannah Grant's funny, observant screenplay is Erin
herself (a wise move given the compelling nature of the character), and
yet the film achieves measurable success on a collective level as well.
Did I mention this is all based on a true story? The accolades of the
real Erin Brockovich are unbeknownst to me (like many), but whether it
is entirely factual or not, Soderbergh's film visibly flounders only
during the opening minutes. The plot, involving Erin's investigation of
a possible hexavalent chromium contamination in the local water supply,
is strictly recycled Hollywood formula -- often bearing resemblance to
the 1998 legal thriller `A Civil Action' -- but the dramatics are
enhanced by the compelling human details, and a briskly enjoyable
character study only further motivated by top-flight performances.
Soderbergh's latest work includes the revenge thriller `The Limey' and
the comic crime caper `Out of Sight', but the director will be forever
known for the independent landmark `sex, lies and videotape'. Just as
Soderbergh revolutionized the Sundance Film Festival with `videotape' in
1989, he has breathed new life into the formulaic courtroom drama with
`Erin Brockovich'.
More likable magnetism comes from the fact that `Erin', at its core, is
a feel-good movie. The grin on your face will spread ear-to-ear as you
exit the theater, because the story of a little nobody striving to make
a big difference is always a crowd-pleasing antidote. It's all the more
acceptable in `Erin Brockovich', where the familiarities seem fresh and
involving because the characters entangled within the regular genre
clichés are not just boring, career-driven caricatures. It's nice to be
able to identify with Erin's plight, as she becomes torn between work
and family, than simply understand the verdict she is battling for in
court. Soderbergh puts little strain on the viewer in his journey to
help us encompass this fact. Let's hope `Erin Brockovich' isn't too
early an addition for possible Oscar attraction next year. If the
Academy members have forgotten the stellar performances and direction
that this film has to offer by then, I will weep for the filmmaking
community. Just as the title character conducts herself, `Erin
Brockovich' goes for the throat and wins you over.
Your Comments Appreciated!  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Jon Popick
It's one thing for an actor or an actress to pump out several films over
a short period of time, but it's something else entirely when a director
tries to tackle a similar task.  And to have the films rank among the
best of that period is a true testament to the director's talent.
In just over two years (twenty-five months, to be exact), director
Steven Soderbergh has released Out of Sight, The Limey and his latest
film, Erin Brockovich - a true story about a single mom that led the
fight against a utility company which ultimately culminated in the
largest settlement in a direct class-action lawsuit in U.S. history.
Fans of Soderbergh, whose first film (Cannes winner sex, lies &
videotape) is widely recognized as launching the renaissance of American
independent film, may be surprised to see the director filming what
appears to be a glossy Hollywood courtroom drama with a predictably
linear story and a larger-than-life female star (Julia Roberts).
Although he's treading in all-too-familiar territory that isn't at all
familiar to him, Soderbergh has crafted yet another winner with
Brockovich, directing Roberts to her best performance yet.  In fact,
she's so good that it's a surprise that Universal didn't hold
Brockovich's release until the end of the year  a season typically
reserved for films competing for major year-end awards.  Perhaps the
studio couldn't help releasing the film on St. Patrick's Day, so that
some crafty critic could whimsically declare `Go See Erin
go-Brock-ovich.'
Roberts (Runaway Bride) stars as the titular Brockovich, a single L.A.
mom with three kids, a roach-infested house, big hair, high heels, short
skirts and low-cut tops.  She has a beat-up Hyundai, empty cupboards,
two deadbeat ex-husbands, no money, no job, no education and a wicked
case of sass-mouth.  The only thing this former Miss Wichita has going
for her are her good looks and killer rack, but even they can't help
Erin secure a settlement when she's broadsided by a doctor that runs a
red light and creams her vehicle.  With no insurance, Erin finds herself
$17,000 in debt.
Desperate to find work, Erin turns to the attorney that handled her auto
accident.  She guilts Ed Masry (Albert Finney, Simpatico) into hiring
her as a file clerk at his tiny, private law firm where, almost by
chance, Erin stumbles onto a real estate file containing some ominous
medical data concerning a giant utility company.  Despite not knowing a
lick about the law, Erin does some digging and finds out that Pacific
Gas & Electric knowingly poisoned the water of a Mojave Desert burg
called Hinkley.  Through hard work, perseverance and a bunch of dumb
luck, she's able to piece together a case against PG&E, signing up over
six hundred plaintiffs in the process.  The result is a battle between
the $28 billion company and Roberts' $20 million smile (and who would
you put your money on?).
As Erin's life becomes consumed by the Hinkley case, she begins to
neglect her own family, leaning heavily on her new biker boyfriend
George (a nearly unrecognizable Aaron Eckhart, Any Given Sunday).  But
she believes that the sacrifice is worth missing big chunks of her
children's lives.  For the first time, Erin feels like she is making a
difference, befriending many of the Hinkley plaintiffs, including
struggling mothers Marg Helgenberger (Species 2), Cherry Jones (Cradle
Will Rock) and Mimi Kennedy (Dharma & Greg).
Soderbergh doesn't bog the film down with courtroom scenes, which makes
the two-plus-hour film seem to fly by.  The director used his brilliant
cohorts - Sight editor Anne V. Coates and Limey cinematographer Edward
Lachman - to film the Susannah Grant (Ever After) script, which,
although extremely conventional, is well-written, fresh and often very
funny.  Some interesting casting  the real Brockovich plays a diner
waitress in an early scene (her name tag says `Julia'), producer Michael
Shamberg plays a PG&E lawyer, and Judge Leroy A. Simmons, the judge that
handed down the 1993 decision that allowed the real-life suit to
proceed, plays himself.

Author
bob bloom
Erin Brockovich (2000) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Julia Roberts and
Albert Finney. Written by Susannah Grant. Directed by Steven Soderbergh.
 "Erin Brockovich" is like watching a master magician perform: You know
you're being hoodwinked, nevertheless, you find it entertaining.
 Erin Brockovich is a free spirit. How do you know? She wears halter
tops and mini skirts, curses like a sailor and elicits disapproving
glances from the uptight people around her.
 How do we know these people are uptight. Because they wear starchy
clothes, they're not perfectly built and they work in a law office.
 Catch my drift. "Erin Brockovich" is an enjoyable David vs. Goliath
story, only this David is a twice-divorced mother with three little
kids. But beneath its glossy veneer, this based-on-a-true-story feature
appears smug, sanctimonious, self-righteous and pandering.
 I'm not saying that's all bad. All movies try to manipulate your
emotions, that's what good films are supposed to do. But "Erin
Brockovich" does it in such a contemptuous style. It's like the magician
daring the audience to guess the secret of the trick.
 You may still feel you are being entertained, but at the same time you
almost feel as if you were being held in contempt.
 Julia Roberts' Erin Brockovich is a kindred spirit to Sally Field's
Norma Rae and Meryl Streep's Karen Silkwood - with a bit of Cher's biker
mom from "Mask "tossed in.
 That is she's not an educated person in the classical sense, but she is
a smart woman who knows right from wrong and has a built-in b.s.
detector. Roberts' Erin usually fails to see any gray area. Things are
either yes or no, black or white.
Lawyers and the legal system in general merely complicate the world and 
muddle clear-cut issues of morality. Thus, Erin Brockovich is a very
proletarian movie.
 Yet Roberts cuts through all this baggage. She is the movie, a true
film star whom the camera loves, a young woman who holds the screen and
draws you to her.
There's a cliché about someone being good enough to sell ice to eskimos.
That's Roberts, especially when she flashes that multimillion dollar
smile. You forget all the movie's manipulations, everything that is
bogus about "Erin Brockovich" and just melt in her personality.
 The rest of the cast? Well, there basically props, furniture off which
Roberts plays. Even Albert Finney as the gruff, pragmatic Ed Masry, the
head of the law firm at which Erin works as a filing clerk, is putty
when up against this human dynamo.
 The story, oh yea, I almost forgot. Erin, when filing some papers for
her boss, uncovers a cover-up by massive Pacific Gas & Electric
involving contaminated water in a nearby community.
 She rallies and bands together those affected by PG&E's actions and
through her tenacity and dedication - and some legal expertise from her
boss - wins them a massive settlement.
 If only screenwriter Susannah Grant and director Steven Soderbergh had
had the same determination as Erin to let the story tell itself without
resorting to smoke and mirrors.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Frankie Paiva
Julia Roberts has been digging herself into a very deep hole, beginning with
the release of My Best Friend's Wedding in 1997. She was cast in the lead role
again and again in the same type of dreamy romance movies, her recent credits
include Stepmom, Notting Hill, and Runaway Bride. After Bride, I was beginning
to get pretty tired of her. It just seemed like she was playing the same person
repeatedly. She has done a marvelous job of digging herself out of the hole
that I mentioned earlier. While she still retains much of the regular Julia
charm, she's able to use it in another way, and the results are a great
comedy/drama that many will enjoy.
Erin Brockovich, (Roberts) a woman with three kids, an interesting assortment
of plunging neckline outfits, and little money, is desperate for a job. When
misfortune leads her to a law office she begs for a job on a whim, right after
her claim is settled. Ed Masry (an amazing Finney) is the head of the small
legal firm. Erin convinces him she will do a good job, and she's hired.
Soon after they hire her, she notices a real estate file that looks suspicious
to her. She investigates the files she finds, which concern chemicals a Pacific
Gas and Electric factory have let get into the water of the small California
town of Hinkley. People in the town are dying of a large variety of illnesses
and everyone has some type of disease or another. For some reason, no one
really seems to do anything about it. They aren't wealthy enough to take care
of their families, and this could go on forever if someone doesn't do
something. Erin discovers that there is an extremely high amount of a deadly
chemical in the water for the town and is determined to help the residents
bring PG&E corporate down. Due to her low knowledge of legal expertise, her and
Masry must team up, in order to win the fight.
Winning performances here from Julia Roberts and Albert Finney. The two have
dazzling chemistry and their is much humor in their developing friendship. The
two make a great team, and writer Susannah Grant (who has also written the
screenplay for the upcoming Sandra Bullock film "28 Days") gives Julia some
great one-liners. It's really fun to see Erin jostle with the big time law
firms. Don't think this movie is all comedy though. It would be appropriately
suited in the dramedy category. The scenes of Erin's struggle with men and her
new love George (Eckhart) are the other part of the movie. The film doesn't get
too crowded, despite it's dramatic and humorous counterparts. Director Steven
Soderbergh (director of two superb pictures, "Out of Sight" and "The Limey")
use the slow fade to death, which makes the film's story appear to be in
chapters, a welcome thing that helps us keep track of the time this movie
covers.
A welcome addition to the Julia Roberts film library, this true story is a fun
drama that will probably appeal to young teenagers and up. Besides the heavy
use of the f-word this would be a good movie to take your kids to. At times
Erin's strife feels too easy, at times too hard, but by the end of the movie,
you'll be rooting for her. The real Erin Brockovich is in the movie, look for
her in the diner scene as a waitress named Julia. What fun, I can't wait to see
what Roberts does next. And maybe if the movie catches on, we'll even see a
line of Erin Brockovich clothing, now wouldn't that be interesting.

Author
Benjamin Kelsey
In terms of a movie's credibility, the words "true story" or "actual events" 
doesn't really mean jack squat. Last year's MUSIC OF THE HEART had definite 
feel-good intentions and a "based on a true story" tag to back it up, but in 
the end, it was no better than your average work of fiction. Not every 
noteworthy news clipping that gets passed around your office at work is 
reason for a studio to pump big dollars into shooting a two-hour major motion 
picture and casting the highest-paid actors in Hollywood in the lead roles.
On the other hand, thank goodness for ERIN BROCKOVICH. To sound completely 
clichéd, yet to be completely sincere, BROCKOVICH is sure to be one of the 
most satisfying crowd-pleasers of the year.
Julia Roberts stars as the title character, a crass, brash, and rash single 
mother of three, up to her over-exposed breasts in debt, and jobless to boot. 
After losing a personal injury court case against an emergency room doctor (a 
case the audience knows is justly Erin's, but is merely her foul-mouthed word 
against his), Erin storms her small-time lawyer's office and demands a job. 
In essence, a consolation prize for a lost case.
Believe it or not, it works, and Erin immediately beings work as a file clerk 
for Ed Masry (Albert Finney). Erin doesn't fit in at the law office any 
better than she fits into her leather mini-skirts, but as everyone onscreen 
and off will soon learn, she is the best thing to ever happen to the firm. In 
the jumble of papers regarding a seemingly routine real estate transaction, 
Erin discovers medical records pertaining to such things as blood-cell count 
levels, etc., not the kinds of subjects usually dealt with in an issue of 
"Better Homes and Gardens". When she decides to poke around a bit more, she 
discovers the cover-up that would result in the largest settlement in a 
direct-action lawsuit in history.
More specifically, the company of Pacific Gas & Electricity is using a toxic 
chemical in their water that is giving nearly every family in the community 
some form of cancer, and now they're buying out their homes in an effort to 
disconnect themselves from the impropriety. What Erin discovers is over 600 
plaintiffs ready to go up against a multi-billion dollar corporation.
It may sound like your typical underdog vs. the system courtroom drama, but 
what's so wonderful about the film is that it doesn't settle for being 
nothing more than "another brick in the wall" of its genre. For the 
plentitude of laugh-out-loud moments BROCKOVICH possesses, someone walking 
past the doors of the theater might expect the sharpest, most brilliant 
comedy in years to be playing inside, and they actually wouldn't be too far 
off the mark. The sharp one-liners are indeed cutting into the audience's 
funny bone at a constant pace, but the film can never be accused of "goofing 
off". As extremely enjoyable as it is on a comedic level, it is unwavering in 
its true intentions as a drama, in which it succeeds exquisitely.
Perhaps the most commendable aspect of BROCKOVICH is that it is so consistent 
in a genre easily trapped by melodrama. The underlying element of innocent 
people done-wrong forces the film to walk a thin line that few could balance 
on. Director Steven Soderbergh's competency in this department is exemplary. 
In a sense, he "never looks down" as he walks along that cliff. He doesn't 
even flinch. The perfect blend of comedy and drama, humanity and pragmatics, 
combine into a power bar serving up 100% of your essential cinematic vitamins 
and minerals. The humor keeps the melodrama even more at bay, but it's not 
merely comic relief.
It's an extremely smart move to keep the legal details in focus. No 
manipulative side trips to see a 10-year-old child choking up blood on the 
doorstep of death. It's something most other filmakers would've done, but not 
here. While we know Brockovich as a genuine human being who is in this for 
anything but the money, you never sense that this is meant as a lesson on how 
to be a decent human being. Avoiding the sentimental aspects keeps the movie 
fluid and strong. It's never cold-hearted in its approach to the situations 
faced by the victims, but it never once tries to be a tear-jerker. Too often, 
filmakers are going for brownie points with the audience's heart, and they 
bribe their way in. BROCKOVICH doesn't even try. Now that's integrity.
The fact that Julia Roberts chose to break free of her NOTTING HILL / RUNAWAY 
BRIDE stereotype will likely cause for premature plaudits to her performance. 
But forget that Roberts brought in $20 million for this picture. She was 
perfect, end of sentence. Truth be known, I thought she was a bit stiff in 
NOTTING HILL. To say this is the performance of her career may be an 
understatement. But none of this would be true if it weren't for Finney. He's 
the one that screams Oscar contender. Also, the chemistry between Roberts and 
Finney is of the finest ever to hit the screen. It's a vibrant depiction of 
detestation between two equal halves of the perfect team.
Also of note is Aaron Eckhart as Erin's neighbor/boyfriend, George, a Harley 
Davidson fanatic who becomes a nanny for Erin's children when her 
investigations become an around the clock ordeal. George is a genuinely 
likeable character; I was disappointed he didn't have more presence in the 
film. In fact, his virtual disappearance at midpoint makes for a definite 
loose end. Still, at least the director keeps the romantic element in its 
place as a subplot. Yet another example of something that could've 
inappropriately taken over, given the chance.
If you want more examples, there's the fact that Erin never has to play 
superhero. Her accomplishments are always kept real. When the case is almost 
stolen out from under her, a simple history lesson in cinematics will have 
you bracing yourself for an "Erin against the whole world" kind of turn. It 
never happens. In fact, there is only one element where the film undeniably 
makes a threat. Without saying much, Soderbergh knows how to use our 
expectations against us - in a very funny way.
ERIN BROCKOVICH is a people's movie, with delicate direction that allows 
familiar territory to be tread without feeling old. As good a piece of 
entertainment as it consistently is, there are moments when the film still 
manages to sparkle above its own quality. At more than one point, the 
audience's stifled applause was a tangible sensation in the room, something 
that was unleashed in zealousness when the film finally ended. Did I say 
finally? Yes, BROCKOVICH had moments of seeming long, but to be honest, it 
was more of an observation than an annoyance, and when I checked my watch 
afterward, I was surprised it had actually been as long as it was. And I'm 
already ready to go back.

Author
Ross Anthony
If the poster of Julia, babe in arm, strawberry-pocked halter-top popping
them two assets forward, hardworking blue-collar lips ready to launch a
stream of obscenities from the roughened-heart reminds you of a trashy
Sharon Stone in "Gloria"; fear not. "Erin Brockovich" is a fine production.
In fact, why isn't Julie Roberts on the Academy's list? She's simply
awesome.
A cross between "A Civil Action" and "Howard Stern" in drag, "Erin
Brockovich" graces the screen with the difficult balance of heart, tragedy
and hard-hitting pottie-mouthed humor. In fact, the film's only dips from
divinity occur during a couple of segments that postpone Erin's
lightning-charged tongue. It's her sharp lingua determined to cut though any
BS, which sets fly sparks. Her mouth is as refreshing as an ice cold shower;
it's sure to send hilarious jolts of truth through audiences around the
country.
Divorced twice, raising three kids, one-time Miss Wichita proves that
credentials and high-power suits play second fiddle to heart and brains.
Dressed like one of Charlie's Angles, busty waitress Brockovich and her
mouth take on big corporate lawyers in a case involving a small town's
polluted water supply.
This strong script along with its gritty dialogue still may have fallen
short even with Roberts' lead if not for some great supporting actors.
Albert Finney's patience and expertise complement Roberts' fiery passion.
Aaron Eckhart is both charming and real as love-interest-on-a-Harley.
The story is based on the real life exploits of one Erin Brockovich. If
you're curious to see what she looks like, Erin cameos as a greasy-spoon
waitress during a short segment near the beginning of the picture. In my
particular screening, a handful of viewers greeted her brief appearance with
a clap or two. By the end of the film, this audience of critics gave the
entire production a round of applause.
Erin Brockovich. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart.
Directed by Steven Soderbergh.
Written by Susannah Grant.
Produced at Jersey/Columbia/Universal.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Greg King
ERIN BROCKOVICH (M).  
(Columbia Tristar)
Director: Steven Soderbergh
Stars: Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart, Peter Coyote, Marg
Helgenberger, Scotty Leavenworth, Gemmenner De La Penna, Cherry Jones,
Tracey Walter, Dawn Didawick
Running time: 131 minutes.
A twice divorced, unemployed mother of three young children,
Erin Brockovich (Julia Roberts) struggles to be taken seriously.  But
when she lands a job as a secretary in the small law firm run by Ed
Masry (Oscar winning veteran Albert Finney) she eventually gains
respect as the key player in a multi- million dollar law suit against
a giant energy corporation.
Masry has been in the business for years and thinks he has
earned a little bit of peace and quiet.  He has become a little set in
his ways after years of dealing with civil matters and trivial
litigation.  But even he finds himself actively involved when Erin
discovers that a power company has, for several decades, been
polluting the water supply of a small town and lying about it.  Erin
investigates why real estate records for the sale of houses within the
town also contain private medical records.  Eventually she rallies the
townsfolk together in a frustrating effort to sue the power company.
It is a David versus Goliath like struggle in which the
underdog eventually triumphs.  Victory also enables Erin to break away
from that stereotype in which most people have neatly pigeon holed her
for so long.  Erin Brockovich is based on a true story, and although
it takes a few liberties along the way, it is, for the most part, an
involving tale.
Steven Soderbergh's direction is a tad manipulative, as he
takes great pains to make us feel sympathy for the small town victims
of the faceless corporation's greed.  There are few subtleties to be
found in this film, as Soderbergh (the superb crime film Out Of Sight,
etc) tends to paint everything in broad strokes.  But the script, from
Susannah Grant (Ever After, etc) and Soderbergh, contains plenty of
winning humour and is not without its charms.
When the film explores Erin's troubled and unconventional
personal life it becomes bogged down and occasionally repetitive, and
many within the audience will become restless during these scenes.
However, while depicting Erin's tenacious paper chase through the
daunting amount of documents and legal technicalities and her patient
attempts at gathering evidence, the film works a treat.
Like a few other recent films based on true stories about an
unlikely triumph against the odds (The Insider, The Hurricane, etc),
Erin Brockovich becomes a compelling and inspiring drama that should
please audiences.  Like its appealing heroine, Erin Brockovich should
also effectively change a few misconceptions about Roberts' abilities.
Comfortable with roles in lightweight romantic comedies,
Roberts has sometimes struggled with the demands of portraying more
dramatic characters.  However, she finds a role that perfectly suits
her here, and delivers one of her best performances for quite some
time.  She delivers a warts and all characterisation of a woman
unafraid to speak her mind and exploit of her sexuality in getting
what she wants.  Her well rounded and complex performance captures
Erin's prickly nature, her hidden strengths, her driven nature, yet
also hints at the vulnerability and insecurity that lies just below
the surface.
Finney is also superb as her initially blustering boss, who
originally underestimates his unusual new employee, but gradually
grows to admire and respect Erin's ability.  Aaron Eckhart (In The
Company Of Men, etc) makes the most of the lesser developed role of
George, the bikie who befriends Erin and her kids, but is driven away
by his own inability to cope with her growing sense of confidence and
assurance.  The real Erin Brockovich contributes a brief cameo as a
waitress in a restaurant early in the movie.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Erin Brockovich (2000)
Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart, Marg Helgenberger, Cherry
Jones, Veanne Cox, Conchata Ferrell, Tracey Walter, Peter Coyote, Scotty
Leavenworth, Gemmenne De la Pena, Jamie Harrold, Erin Brockovich. Music
by Thomas Newman. Screenplay by Susannah Grant. Directed by Steven
Soderbergh. 131 minutes.
Rated R, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Following the sneak preview of "Erin Brockovich," I listened to a couple
of young men discussing the movie. While agreeing that the film was very
good, they mocked the notion of Julia Roberts playing a down-on-her-luck
working-class woman. As the two prattled on, I fought the urge to
interrupt their conversation and dramatically intone, "Please, don't
hate her because she's beautiful!"
"Erin Brockovich" is an enormously rewarding tale of a real life hero
and Julia Roberts does terrific work in the title role. Renowned
independent film director Steven Soderbergh ("sex, lies and videotape")
has crafted a mainstream film with a realistic feel that manages to
present disturbing facts in a crowd-pleasing fashion without
compromising the integrity of its source material. He also provides
Julia Roberts the best forum for her acting abilities to date. As
Brockovich, an acerbic twice-divorced mother of three, she hits a grand
slam with a vibrant performance crackling with authenticity.
After coming out the loser in a "can't miss" lawsuit over a car
accident, Brockovich badgers her rumpled lawyer, Ed Masry (Albert
Finney), into giving her a job as a legal assistant. Her coworkers
detest her foul mouth and brash manners, not to mention her insistence
on wearing outrageously sexy outfits more appropriate to a biker bar
than a law office. While her presentation style is abrasive at best,
Brockovich proves to be a fiercely effective employee.
Uncovering some paperwork that just doesn't make sense, Brockovich
visits a tiny California desert town to check out the incongruities. She
learns that a Pacific Gas & Electric plant has been involved in a quiet
campaign to buy off the locals, paying their medical bills and offering
modest sums to purchase their homes. The residents are grateful to the
"caring" corporation, until Brockovich discovers that the area water is
tainted with a toxic chromium rust inhibitor. The chemicals, which the
utility told the people was "good for them," is the likely cause of a
laundry list of horrific medical conditions affecting the haggard
townspeople.
Brockovich takes this information to Masry, who gradually realizes he is
dealing with a lawsuit of potentially historic proportions. The tired
lawyer, in the sunset of his career, is appropriately concerned that he
may lack the resources and energy to take on a corporate giant. But
nonstop badgering from Brockovich results in his reluctant acceptance of
the David versus Goliath case.
If this sounds a lot like 1998's "A Civil Action," it is, but with a
crucial difference in approach. Where "A Civil Action" followed lawyers
and showcased courtroom dramatics, "Erin Brockovich" remains focused on
the people whose lives were devastated by corporate neglect. We watch
Brockovich as she travels from home to home, trying to build and
maintain hope with families beaten down by their various physical
ailments.
But the film is not a downer. By keeping the amazing Brockovich front
and center, Soderbergh gives us a production as entertaining as it is
poignant. Brockovich has a hell of a mouth on her and is given to
gloriously acidic speeches and tart one-liners. But she doesn't know
when to stop and the fiery woman often turns out to her own worst enemy.
Brockovich also is well aware of her good looks and uses sexy clothing
and push-up bras to open doors that would remain closed to most. Roberts
is spectacular in the role, creating a wonderfully three-dimensional
character.
Incidentally, the real Erin Brockovich makes a brief appearance as a
put-upon waitress who offers the fictional Brockovich a bit of advice.
Watch her eyes and listen to her line delivery, and you'll see that
Roberts had a dynamic role model to work from.
Albert Finney proves a grand match to Roberts' lightning and thunder,
reacting magnificently to her take-no-prisoners approach. What a delight
it is to see the veteran actor studying his young charge with
expressions that simultaneously reflect his delight in her impudence and
fear that Ms. Mouth will screw things up.
Aaron Eckhart, lead viper in the indie hit "In the Company of Men" and
self absorbed schlub in "Your Friends and Neighbors," transforms himself
yet again as a good-hearted biker who becomes Brockovich's boyfriend,
only to find himself relegated to being little more than a live-in
baby-sitter as Brockovich grows obsessed with her crusade. Eckhart is
excellent and his role is a welcome reversal on the countless
stand-by-your-man neglected females in other films.
In addition to his obvious rapport with the cast, Soderbergh handles
this big story with great technical skill as well, deliberately
overexposing the desert town scenes and using hand-held cameras to give
personal moments a home-movie intimacy. And, to his credit, he tells the
complex legal tale clearly with, miracle of miracles, only one very
short courtroom scene.
At times, the production becomes overly glib, but even that minor
failing somehow fits, given the style of the main character. "Erin
Brockovich" is the first truly satisfying film of 2000, an inspiring and
terrifically entertaining tale of tenacity and triumph. Don't miss this
one.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ERIN BROCKOVICH (2000) *** Directed by Steven Soderbergh. Written by 
Susannah Grant. Photography, Ed Lachman. Editing, Anne V. Coates. 
Production design, Phil Messina. Music, Thomas Newton. Cast: Julia 
Roberts (Erin Brockovich), Albert Finney (Ed Masry), Aaron Eckhart 
(George), Cherry Jones (Pamela Duncan), Peter Coyote (Kurt Potter), 
Veanne Cox (Theresa Dallavale), Marg Helgenberger, Cherry Jones, 
Scotty Leavenworth,Gemmenne de la Pena, Tracey Walter. Produced by 
Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg and Stacey Sher. A  Universal 
/Columbia release.  127 minutes. R.(language)
Let's talk beauty. Julia Roberts made her first big splash in and as 
"Pretty Woman." The title has stuck to the lyrically enthusiastic 
descriptions of her.
Is she really as incredibly gorgeous as the slick magazines keep 
hammering? What's happening to the classic canons of pulchritude? 
Through the ages the standards have changed. The chorus girls of 
1930s-40s motion pictures are, to say the least, plump by today's 
measurements. The pouty little mouths of the silent screen 
disappeared after talkies took over. "Glamor" is a moribund 
expression. Even so, some constants do remain.
Julia Roberts has a willowy figure. Her face is, to put it mildly, 
unorthodox. Both serve her well in "Erin Brockovich." Her noticeable 
nose and big slash of a mouth are respectively symbolic of Erin's 
amazing ability to sniff things out and to talk her way through the 
film with vigorous arguments, and expletives that are light years 
away (or 61 movie years) from Rhett Butler's "Frankly, my dear, I 
don't give a damn!"
Writer-director Steven Soderbergh's first feature "Sex, Lies, and 
Videotape" won the Golden Palm at the 1989 Cannes Festival. Almost 
all of his subsequent films have been remarkable, original, quirky 
and playing with time --but not commercial hits. Yet  his excellent 
"King of the Hill " was most accessible and his recent "Out of Sight" 
pleased audiences and critics.
Erin Brockovitch , correctly pronounced should be VITCH and not VIK, 
but I can't remember hearing the last name in the movie. I can flatly 
state however that the film will be a big hit. It is a mainstream , 
linear job without tricky flashbacks or other stylistic flourishes. 
It stars an enormously popular prima donna who is in just about every 
scene of this two-hours-plus story. And it is arguably the best 
performance to date by Roberts.  But don't let the word "mainstream" 
fool you. Soderbergh has assimilated audience-pleasing principles 
yet, in other ways injects novelty and imagination in his picture.
Take the opening. Erin, a twice divorced single mother of three, is 
scraping bottom financially. She needs -- and how -- a job. We meet 
her in a wonderfully scripted and performed interview with an MD for 
a receptionist position. Her febrile talk underlines her anxiousness 
as well as her lack of credentials. The doctor then says something 
like "Now look at this"-- and you just know that she won't get the 
job. The movie cuts away to Erin getting back to her car, which, 
seconds later, gets hit by the BMW of, ironically, another doctor. 
Fine, clever direction and editing.
Erin gets aging lawyer Albert Finney to sue. His firm is small, his 
girth is not. We get, refreshingly, the only courtroom trial in a 
movie that's chockfull with legalities. The scene is short, but not 
sweet for Erin. She loses. No explanations are given but we guess 
clearly that Erin's blatantly sexy outfit on the stand and her 
generous use of the f-word have done her in.
Increasingly desperate, the lady scours the want ads. She may have 
been a beauty queen in Topeka, but she was also a school drop-out. 
The absence of qualifications again. Things are tough. So Erin, with 
the irony that throughout the movie alternates with pathos, applies 
for a file-clerk job at Finney's very office, She gets it through 
mega-moxie which includes her special brand of outspokenness
The film tells you from the start: This is a True Story. That's more 
often than not an alibi for embroidering fantasies and inventions 
into facts. Yet in its basic, general lines the movie is fact indeed. 
Getting ahead of myself  I'll say that a real corporation,  giant, 
$28 billion Pacific Gas & Electric, had to pay the  largest 
reparation ever in the USA to a huge number of suing individuals.
True too is that the real Erin started it all, that she dressed, 
acted, spoke the way Julia Roberts does.  She also was a looker. You 
can ascertain this in the sequence where Erin takes her kids to an 
eatery. The comely waitress is the genuine Erin.
  When ordering food Erin pretends not to be hungry but then, back 
home, devours a can of something. It does not matter whether or not 
this  is an invention. It is touching, plausible and fleshes out the 
character.
The movie's Erin is an extraordinarily fast learner who uses 
efficiently her eyes, nose  and hitherto unexploited brains. 
Shuffling files she finds out that there is a connection between PG&E 
and the dreadful illnesses and deaths in the working-class California 
desert town of Hinkley, next to which the corporation had been 
dumping a poisonous chemical, hexavalant chromium. Forcefully 
persuading her boss Ed Masry (Finney) that she should and could 
investigate, she takes off with the energy of a rocket.
The unlikely Erin becomes a convincing sleuth as well as a sensitive 
and sympathetic interviewer of the population of Hinkley. All of its 
people have been and still are affected by the poison. Some of them 
are naive, in need of education and of persuasion to sue. Most are in 
awe of a mammoth power company's power. Additionally, there are 
strong layers in the film where the ordinary people mistrust lawyers, 
lawyers mistrust other lawyers, and legal firms are scared of being 
sunk by the billions of dollars the corporations can fight back with, 
as in the film "A Civil Action."
Increasingly Erin shows superb initiative, intelligence and an 
amazing comprehension  and specific details of her work. The movie 
works breathlessly as human interest and as a dandy detective story 
against a painful background. Deja vu?  Yes. Think "Silkwood," the 
aforementioned "A Civil Action,"" The Insider," etc. Yet the subjects 
are so enormous that there's room for several more works along those 
lines.
"EB" has a nice balance of tragedy, suspense, and humor. Erin herself 
is the right combination. She takes her work --in fact her mission -- 
as ardently as possible, and her role as mother too, At the same time 
she seems, slyly, to take her private persona un-seriously, 
sometimes self-mockingly. She dominates the story. Lawyer Ed plays 
second (but still major) fiddle to her. Puffy Albert Finney's 
performance is perfectly on-target. He is fully dimensional as a 
professional, as Erin's often annoyed boss, and in the ways he slips 
into the role of a friend and partrner. The varied supporting cast 
are well-drawn, with economy and feeling. Sensibly, the movie does 
not try to make of them picturesque characters. Instead it saves all 
its ammunitions of colorfulness for  Julia R. There is 
star-worshipping strategy here--not irritating, in fact quite 
pleasant, but
over-the-top .Even so, it's not an Achilles' Heel.
The main sub-plot (actually a sub-sub-plot) comes from Erin's plight 
in caring for her children. This is partly solved by new neighbor 
George, a  tattooed biker and construction worker who makes good 
money and gets jobs only whenever he pleases. He volunteers to 
babysit the kids, whom he likes.  Obviously  this service is also his 
entree to becoming Erin's new flame. The affair is not especially 
interesting, appealing or romantic. Mercifully George doesn't take up 
much movie time. He does have one good, telling moment, and I do mean 
a moment.  While he helps Erin in a "business" picnic of the Hinkley 
folks, bikers raise dust on the road. George's short look at them is 
neutral but says a lot in a  prime illustration of the Kuleshov effect
A major, indeed enormous distraction runs throughout the film : 
Erin's hooker-like outfits,  short skirts, long legs, spike heels and 
a push-up bra cleavage that constantly threatens to spill the goods. 
Her reverse dress code raises eyebrows and criticism. It also brings 
on Erin's snappy retorts. She does not mince her words. The 
spectacular views, whether cheap, cheaper or cheapest, underline her 
"take me as I am" attitude. One does wonder how many times the sights 
make males in the audience miss dialogue lines. They may also be 
missing the fact that this is a feminist film with a vengeance. Erin, 
if you half think of it, Wonder-Bra and all, is no bimbo but an 
activist who's pulling out all the stops. That she is is smart enough 
to ask for raises is natural.  But she has a true cause and feels 
sincerely the pain of others. Her themes song could be "Body and 
Soul."
The familiar formula of the film is the old David and Goliath one -- 
the triumph of the little people over mighty forces--which has fed 
countless movies, including several of Frank Capra's. It's 
irresistible, makes the audience rapt with suspense, causes it to 
cheer openly or inwardly when the good guys win.
"ER" 's scenario feels like the job of a veteran writer, yet it is 
Susannah Grant's first solo script, following her co-writing of 
"Pocahontas" and "Ever After." Remember her name.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Mac VerStandig
---Once in release, a copy of this review will be posted to
http://www.moviereviews.org/erin_brockovich.htm ---
There is something about Erin Brockovich that makes it virtually impossible
for the film not to please. Perhaps it is Julia Roberts' overflowing
cleavage, perfectly round nostrils or famously plump lips that have made her
the quintessential movie star of our time. Perhaps it is director Steven
Soderbergh's deft guidance and meticulous attention to reality. Perhaps it
is the compelling story that demands the audience's respect with its early
claim of truth.
`I'm great with people' begs a desperate Erin Brockovich (Julia Roberts) in
a job interview. She doesn't get the position. But that's nothing new; this
30-something super mom has grown accustomed to raising her three youngsters
while trying to simultaneously shield their eyes from her $16 bank account.
So when from
out of nowhere a speeding doctor's high-priced Jaguar strikes her car, a
lawsuit looks to be the answer to her problems.
Brockovich is ridiculed on the stand as her unemployment and two failed
marriages are
brought to light and the jury is convinced she's an irresponsible woman
trying to sucker a good and honest doctor out of his money. But fate works
in mysterious ways and soon Brockovich has a job . . . working for the
lawyer who lost her case.
Erin Brockovich isn't so much about the life of the woman's name it shares
as the thrilling legal battle that she wages working for the aforementioned
attorney. In filing some papers for a pro-bono real estate case, she
stumbles onto oddities that lead her to investigate mass contamination in a
small community's water supply and the multi-billion-dollar corporation that
is trying to cover it up.
The movie's only substantial flaw is that rather than dedicating all of its
time to the intriguing lawsuit, a fair amount of attention is given to
Brockovich's personal life and the old-fashioned cliché of her being married
to her job and putting her family second. The film simply doesn't need these
scenes. There is already an emotional angle as Brockovich becomes
sympathetic and friendly to the sick and dying families that have had their
life ruined by the local water supply (she even professes to know all 600 of
their phone numbers by heart). The most enjoyable scenes of the movie take
place in a back office where strategies are discussed and a conference room
where settlements are negotiated - not the bedroom where her kids complain
about her not being home for dinner.
Erin Brockovich has the potential to be a major Oscar candidate as its style
plays to the Academy's liking. What doesn't, however, is the release date.
Oscar voters traditionally love true stories like Quiz Show, A Civil Action
and, more recently, The Hurricane as well as brilliant lead female
performances like the one Roberts turns in. But the Academy's memory is
notoriously non-existent so a March release normally means a shutout on
Oscar night.
For Steven Soderbergh this might be his best work to date. Having previously
overseen sex, lies, and videotape, Out of Sight and, more recently, The
Limey, all to critical acclaim, the director seems more confident than ever
in his ninth film. Other than Roberts and teh notable Albert Finney,
Soderbergh had no major actors to work with but still manages to get mighty
performances out of his supporting cast while still keeping an appropriately
bright spotlight on his diva star.
America seems to be very interested in its own laws and how they are upheld.
John Grisham's books fly off the shelves, O. J. captivated television
audiences for over a year and Rodney King sparked riots. America is equally
fond of grade-A crowd-pleasing movies with the local cinema being a key part
of our culture. Erin Brockovich is the perfect combination of both.

Author
Scott Renshaw
ERIN BROCKOVICH
(Universal/Columbia)
Starring:  Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart, Marg Helgenberger,
Conchata Ferrell, Peter Coyote.
Screenplay:  Susannah Grant.
Producers:  Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg and Stacey Sher.
Director:  Steven Soderbergh.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  133 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Steven Soderbergh has fashioned one of those careers that movie
people always claim they want. He gets to make unconventional,
experimental films like KAFKA, SCHIZOPOLIS and THE LIMEY, while still
making a few bucks doing "mainstream" films like KING OF THE HILL and OUT
OF SIGHT. Yet "mainstream" truly belongs in quotes where Soderbergh is
concerned, since his approach to timeworn genres is as unconventional and
his conventionally unconventional work. Despite his popularity with the
art house set, he has found it difficult to cross over to a broader
audience, since he keeps baffling that audience by taking amiable
entertainments and putting meat on their bones. You might think you know
what to expect from a coming-of-age story or a crime caper, but did you
really expect what Soderbergh delivered in KING OF THE HILL and OUT OF
SIGHT?
     ERIN BROCKOVICH is another film -- a legal crowd-pleaser with a
tart-tongued heroine -- that looks like you should know what to expect. 
Leave it to Soderbergh to make even that kind of you-go-girl Hollywood
premise uniquely appealing. Julia Roberts stars as the real-life title
character, a twice-divorced single mother of three desperate for a job,
any job. She finds one at a small law firm headed by Ed Masry (Albert
Finney), where she bulldogs her way into a position doing filing. But Erin
stumbles onto something big when she investigates a real estate deal
pending in the California desert. It seems that families in the town of
Hinkley have been experiencing health problems at an unusual rate, and
that the local power company may be trying to hide its responsibility for
those problems.
     In most films of this kind, you would expect a combination of sassy
one-liners and courtroom theatrics. You do get some of the former --
courtesy a solid Susannah Grant script that gives Roberts plenty of
no-nonsense dialogue to bite into -- but there's a way Roberts plays a
line that keeps the film from degenerating into mundanely rabble-rousing
chick flickery. Roberts has her detractors, particularly when it comes to
her dramatic performances, yet ERIN BROCKOVICH finds her effectively
taming the glamour girl looks into a convincing character. Even when she's
snapping off one of Erin's saltier tirades against the lack of recognition
she's getting, Roberts never seems to be waiting for a laugh. She does one
of the hardest things anyone can do with a character like this: She
refuses to play Erin with a wink to the audience so we all know it's Julia
Roberts beneath the bitter exterior. She has the guts to play Erin with an
equally bitter interior.
     You also have to give Soderbergh his share of the credit for knowing
how Erin needed to be played, but it's no surprise to find him in control
of his material. In keeping with the less-than-sexy title of the film,
Soderbergh makes sure the case never overwhelms the character. While the
lawsuit against Pacific Gas & Electric makes for compelling drama, it's
not as compelling as Erin navigating the path towards self-respect. The
story features elements familiar from a hundred legal investigation dramas
in the Grisham era -- the nasty corporate monolith, gutsy underdogs,
saintly victims, etc. -- but ERIN BROCKOVICH always seems to find an
unexpected angle just when it's most necessary. When a PG&E attorney shows
up to throw some weight around, it's a youngster who squeaks out his
scripted threat in a barely-changed voice; when it's time to announce the
verdict, there's not a judge to be seen.
     ERIN BROCKOVICH does take its conventional turns, and -- not
coincidentally -- that's usually when it starts to meander. Erin's romance
with a soft-hearted biker named George (Aaron Eckhart) leads to a trite
"you care about your job more than your family" confrontation (think Sissy
Spacek's whine in JFK with a little gender role reversal), and there's one
moment of precocious sensitivity by Erin's son Matthew (Scotty 
Leavenworth)  that almost makes you want to shudder. Erin's relationship
with Masry (wonderfully played by Finney in one of his best performances
in 20 years) generates much more kick than any of her at-home
relationships, which leads to some sag during the domestic interludes. 
Still, Soderbergh and Roberts bring too much crackling originality to ERIN
BROCKOVICH for its study of character through hard work to suffer too
much. I'm not sure Steven Soderbergh's ERIN BROCKOVICH will set audiences
to applauding as they leave the theater. That would happen in another
director's version, one where the predictable doesn't have a way of
turning into the unpredictable.

Author
Gary Jones
In Erin Brockovich, Julia Roberts takes the title role of an outwardly
trashy single mother who takes a menial job in a small law firm and,
despite her lack of legal training or experience, bluffs her way into
investigating the apparent connection between chemical discharges from a
power plant and the health problems experienced by families living
nearby. Like The Insider, the film purports to tell a recent true story
of corporations whose attempts to cover up their illegal activities are
foiled by determined individuals.
Director Steven Soderbergh is effective but unobtrusive and lets
Susannah Grant's script and the central performances carry the film. As
the foul-mouthed Brockovich, who desperately tries to provide for her
young family while finding a new kind of fulfilment in her
investigation, Julia Roberts has a meatier and tougher role than her
usual fluff. She handles it all very well, while still making the most
of any opportunity to display that smile and those legs. With Erin
Brockovich, Soderbergh has probably given Julia Roberts the kind of
boost he gave George Clooney's stalled career in Out of Sight.
Romantic interest is provided by Erin's biker neighbour George. I had to
wonder whether the real George could possibly have been as warm,
generous and understanding as he is portrayed on screen. As William
Goldman points out in his book Adventures in the Screen Trade, writing
screenplays based on real events and characters is plagued by the
problem that reality does not necessarily make convincing drama -
sometimes real life is just too corny to be believable. Erin Brockovich
is pretty corny, but maybe so is life. When movie stars play characters
based on real people, there is always the suspicion that the actors are
considerably better-looking than the people they're playing (Bonnie and
Clyde were no Beatty and Dunaway) but the real Erin Brockovich has a
cameo in the film as a waitress and she genuinely is a very attractive
woman, so maybe George really was as wonderful as shown here and this
whole rags-to-riches fairy tale in which the bad guys get their
comeuppance is a faithful adaptation of what actually happened.
Erin Brockovich tells a truly remarkable story. As a piece of filmed
drama, though, it's efficient but unexceptional.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
John Sylva
Erin Brockovich (2000) by John Sylva    Rating: A
Sheryl Crow's hit song "Every Day is a Winding Road" couldn't be more
appropriate to play in the end scenes and credits of the emotional powerhouse
"Erin Brockovich."  Steve Soderbergh's follow up to the 1999 thriller "The
Limey" is an amazing, profound motion picture that will leave you in awe.  The
title character of the flawless film is a heroine, a role model for the new
century- An unemployed single mother of three who eventually becomes
responsible for the largest money settlement in a direct action legal suit in
American history.  Soderbergh shows his strongest outing as a filmmaker yet
with his sharp, fast paced direction, and shows potential for many remarkable
films in years to come.  Soderbergh's film showcases the best acting
performance to date from who could arguably be called the world's biggest movie
star, Julia Roberts, and a memorable, astounding performance from British actor
Albert Finney.
The highly energized must-see film stars Julia Roberts as the title character
of Erin Brockovich, an energetic, charismatic character who supports her three
children alone, without a cent coming in.  Knowing there are bills to pay, and
children to feed, Erin applies- more demands- a job at a privately owned legal
firm in California, headed by Ed Masry (Albert Finney).  Reluctantly, he keeps
Erin as an employee, but little does he know that she will soon become the most
successful woman he will most likely ever work with.  While reading through a
few court cases, Erin finds the fact that blood samples and medical records are
being incorporated into a real estate case, so she decides to look into the
subject a few steps- more like a mile- further.  Without knowing her true
intention, Mr. Masry allows her to head out to Hinkley, California, where she
will discover that a large utility company, PG&E, is responsible for the
contamination of drinking water in the entire city, which has resulted in
hundreds of fatal sicknesses.  Eventually, Erin teams up with her boss to take
the company to court, which results in the largest settlement in a
direct-action legal lawsuit in American History- 333 million dollars turned
over from the multi-billion dollar company.   
Julia Roberts is a knockout as her offbeat character, showing her strong acting
skills are far from dead.  Roberts takes on a much more serious, dramatic turn
as Erin Brockovich, much more so than she did in the double line up of 1999
romantic comedies, "Runaway Bride" and "Notting Hill."  Roberts brings such
dramatic and emotional tension to the screen, her performance is stunningly
overwhelming- A sure bet for next year's Oscars.  As her sidekick of sorts,
Albert Finney also gives a top notch performance, delivering some of the film's
best lines and laughs.  In supporting areas, Aaron Eckhart provides a strong
character as boyfriend of Erin, and Marg Helgenberger does equally as well as a
victim of the contaminated water. 
Never feeling forced or generic, "Erin Brockovich" owes a great deal to its
screenplay, penned by "Ever After" scribe Susannah Grant.  Grant paces the
happenings in the film well, always keeping the viewer on edge as to where
Brockovich's ambitions will lead her next.  Unlike many legal dramas,
"Brockovich" doesn't plod along, but races full throttle, straight to the
finish line. 
"Erin Brockovich" is a film that is fully aware over the power it has over the
viewer.  It consistently delivers the perfect line, the perfect facial
expression, or the perfect set of musical notes at a certain spot in the movie,
bringing a whimsical spell across the viewer.   As stated earlier, "Every Day
is a Winding Road" couldn't be more suitable for the film.  Every day in the
life of our main personae is a winding road- complex, unpredictable, fun, and
provocative.  The same goes for the film, as "Brockovich" is certainly a
winding road. You don't want the credits to ever roll.  It entirely hooks you,
sucking you right into its enticing story line and 3-D characters.  You can't
get enough of the dramatic tension, the masterfully developed characters, the
well timed one liners, and the one thing that you really can't get enough of
is, Erin Brockovich.
The Bottom Line: Strong performances from Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, and
perfect direction and writing make "Brockovich" a stunner.   

Author
Jerry Saravia
There is no other female star as watchable as Julia Roberts - no matter what
film she is in, she is indeed the sparkling star whom can't take our eyes off.
She sometimes makes good films ("Notting Hill," "My Best Friend's Wedding") and
rotten films ("Runaway Bride," "Sleeping With the Enemy"). Count her latest
"Erin Brockovich" as one of her best, a conventional but unquestionably
spirited and entertaining romp showcasing Julia's qualities to full flowering
effect. She burns on screen with such radiance, beauty and toughness that the
film will leave you beaming in phosphorescent delight.
Julia stars as Erin Brockovich, a real-life crusader who went against all odds
and came back as a winner of justice. At the beginning of the film, Erin is
desperately trying to get a job and uses her persuasive, feminine skills to get
one (she fakes resumes to obtain interviews). She fails, ends up in a car
accident, and gets a lawyer (Albert Finney) who fails to get her compensation
for her neck brace. Erin is so overwhelmed with anger that she confronts the
lawyer, Ed Masry, and convinces him to give her a job in his shabby L.A.
office. She is after all a divorced, single mom with starving kids, but her
attitude and flashy clothes, not to mention excessive cleavage, causes her
fellow employees to take notice. After sifting through a pro bono case
involving the company Pacific Gas & Electric in a nearby town named Hinkley,
Erin discovers that deposits of a lethal substance called chromium had been
placed in the water causing various tumors and other afflictions in the
townspeople. She investigates and questions the townsfolk, and before you know
it, she is knee deep in the water literally pulling a dead frog out as
evidence. 
Erin's personal life has its ups and downs. She reluctantly has a babysitter
named George (Aaron Eckhart from "In the Company of Men"), a biker with
multiple tattoos, a bandana and a big grin, but he is also a very nice guy and
falls in love with Erin - the character is refreshingly cliche free of what we
expect to see from hardcore bikers. After a while, George becomes the caretaker
rather than the boyfriend since Erin is on her endless adventurous crusade
against PG&E. Will Erin realize that her work is less important than her
family, or will she fight to the bitter end and lose the multi-million dollar
court case? This may be the stuff of a Lifetime TV drama, and I only wish that
writer Susannah Grant devoted a little more attention to this inevitably
fractured relationship. There is an uneasy balance between Erin's case and her
home life, especially since George almost disappears from the story.
What makes "Erin Brockovich" special is Julia, and she cuts a dazzling figure
out of this character. She is tough, funny, sexy, charming, rude, obnoxious,
warm, caring, tender, flirtatious - my goodness, what a delight to see such a
real, intoxicating woman on screen for once! Julia disappears into the role so
well that we forget it is Julia, the movie star. For the first time in years,
Julia acts with tremendous, dramatic force. 
Albert Finney is also pleasurably engaging as the haggard Masry, and his
double-take reactions to Erin's behavior and inappropriate language are
priceless. Another miraculous performance is by Marg Helgenberger as Mrs.
Jensen, one of the Hinkley townspeople afflicted with cancer - her porch scene
with Julia is as moving as one can expect. 
Director Steven Soderbergh, known for nonlinear puzzles like "The Limey" and
"Schizopolis," effectively taps into Julia's high-wire act to keep things
afloat. If the screenplay took more chances with such a conventional storyline,
it might have been a more winning character study. As is, Soderbergh allows for
some occasional jump cuts during Erin's frantic moods, and a burnished glow to
the desert scenes in L.A. that makes one feel the heat and humidity. And Julia
creates an inspiring character - an uneducated, strong, honest woman who used
her brains and beauty to uncover corruption and to save people whom she cared
about. Inspiring indeed.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
James Sanford
           Julia Roberts may not be a great actress, but she is a
genuine star, a presence that captivates an audience. Likewise, "Erin
Brockovich" may not be a great drama, but it is a first-rate
button-pusher, a contemporary David and Goliath story guaranteed to get
viewers cheering. Put Julia and "Erin" together, and you've got a movie
to reckon with.
  "Erin" comes from a most unlikely source, director Steven
Soderbergh, whose interests tend to run to either crime dramas ("Out of
Sight," "The Limey") or semi-arty explorations of human psychology
("sex, lies and videotape," "King of the Hill"). But despite having
Roberts in the leading role, "Erin" doesn't represent Soderbergh selling
out. Quite the contrary, in fact, since the film is full of Soderbergh's
trademark jump-cuts, hand-held camera shots and utterly off-the-wall
humor.
   Best of all, "Erin" represents that rare mainstream Hollywood
crowdpleaser with substance as well as style. Susannah Grant's snappy
screenplay lays out the saga of Brockovich (Roberts), a twice-divorced
mother of three with a smart mouth, marginal work experience, and a
clinging, cleavage-revealing wardrobe she apparently picked up at
Samantha Fox's garage sale.
    Yet somehow Erin manages to land a position as a clerk in
the law offices of Ed Masry (Albert Finney), and when some suspicious
documents in real estate files arouse her curiosity, Erin gets
permission to investigate. Her research eventually pits Masry's tiny
practice against Pacific Gas and Electric, a $28 billion monster that
doesn't want its dirty laundry hung out in public.
    The plot conjures up memories of "The China Syndrome" and
"Norma Rae," in which Jane Fonda and Sally Field respectively locked
horns with callous corporations that put profit and public relations
ahead of safety. But with its bold, ill-tempered central figure, "Erin
Brockovich" is actually closer to the story of Karen Silkwood, another
working-class woman who became a most unlikely crusader for justice.
    However, in contrast to director Mike Nichols' deliberately
paced 1983 film "Silkwood," "Erin" moves at the same speed as its
no-nonsense heroine, brought winningly to life by a surprisingly sassy
Roberts. She's just plain wonderful in the role, whether clashing with
her boss, flirting with her neighbor/babysitter George (Aaron Eckhart)
or bombarding highfalutin lawyers with the details of her work. While
Erin's salty tongue and borderline-slutty clothing initially provoke
laughs, Roberts slowly turns this prickly woman into someone we can
admire and root for.
   Her run-ins with Masry are particularly amusing, as she
bulldozes her way through the legal process and fends off those who want
to take over her project. "Excuse me for not going to law school," the
tempestuous Erin snaps. "Law school?" Masry replies. "At this point, I'd
settle for charm school!"
   Finney, who's kept a fairly low profile recently, is also
fine and often funny as he tries without much success to rein in this
hellion in a halter top, and while Eckhart ("In the Company of Men")
seems a wee bit uncomfortable in grease-stained biker garb, he and
Roberts trade zingers quite well. The supporting cast is also ripe with
top-flight character actors, including Cherry Jones as a strong-willed
woman who's unsure of Erin's motives, Tracey Walter as a creepy stalker
and Conchata Farrell as an envious office manager who delights in giving
Erin a hard time.
  Admittedly, there's a certain degree of calculation in Grant's
script, especially when Erin tangles with the sharp-dressed lawyers for
hire Masry brings on board to help build the case. But the dialogue is
funny enough and the acting so on-target, it's hard to complain. "Erin
Brockovich" was designed to be a crowdpleaser, and that's exactly what
it is. No apologies are necessary. James Sanford

Author
Greg King
        A twice divorced, unemployed mother of three young children,
Erin Brockovich (Julia Roberts) struggles to be taken seriously.  But
when she lands a job as a secretary in the small law firm run by Ed
Masry (Oscar winning veteran Albert Finney) she eventually gains
respect as the key player in a multi- million dollar law suit against
a giant energy corporation.
Masry has been in the business for years and thinks he has
earned a little bit of peace and quiet.  He has become a little set in
his ways after years of dealing with civil matters and trivial
litigation.  But even he finds himself actively involved when Erin
discovers that a power company has, for several decades, been
polluting the water supply of a small town and lying about it.  Erin
investigates why real estate records for the sale of houses within the
town also contain private medical records.  Eventually she rallies the
townsfolk together in a frustrating effort to sue the power company.
It is a David versus Goliath like struggle in which the
underdog eventually triumphs.  Victory also enables Erin to break away
from that stereotype in which most people have neatly pigeon holed her
for so long.  Erin Brockovich is based on a true story, and although
it takes a few liberties along the way, it is, for the most part, an
involving tale.
Steven Soderbergh's direction is a tad manipulative, as he
takes great pains to make us feel sympathy for the small town victims
of the faceless corporation's greed.
 There are few subtleties to be 
found in this film, as Soderbergh (the superb crime film Out Of Sight, 
etc) tends to paint everything in 
broad strokes.  But the script, from Susannah Grant (Ever After, etc) and 
Soderbergh, contains plenty of 
winning humour and is not without its charms.  
When the film explores Erin's troubled and unconventional
personal life it becomes bogged down and occasionally repetitive, and
many within the audience will become restless during these scenes.
However, while depicting Erin's tenacious paper chase through the
daunting amount of documents and legal technicalities and her patient
attempts at gathering evidence, the film works a treat.
Like a few other recent films based on true stories about an
unlikely triumph against the odds (The Insider, The Hurricane, etc),
Erin Brockovich becomes a compelling and inspiring drama that should
please audiences.  Like its appealing heroine, Erin Brockovich should
also effectively change a few misconceptions about Roberts' abilities.
Comfortable with roles in lightweight romantic comedies,
Roberts has sometimes struggled with the demands of portraying more
dramatic characters.  However, she finds a role that perfectly suits
her here, and delivers one of her best performances for quite some
time.  She delivers a warts and all characterisation of a woman
unafraid to speak her mind and exploit of her sexuality in getting
what she wants.  Her well rounded and complex performance captures
Erin's prickly nature, her hidden strengths, her driven nature, yet
also hints at the vulnerability and insecurity that lies just below
the surface.
Finney is also superb as her initially blustering boss, who
originally underestimates his unusual new employee, but gradually
grows to admire and respect Erin's ability.  Aaron Eckhart (In The
Company Of Men, etc) makes the most of the lesser developed role of
George, the bikie who befriends Erin and her kids, but is driven away
by his own inability to cope with her growing sense of confidence and
assurance.  The real Erin Brockovich contributes a brief cameo as a
waitress in a restaurant early in the movie.

Author
Brandon Herring
Rating: * * * * out of * * * *    (* * * * * for NZone)
Starring: Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart, Marg Heleberger, 
Cherry Jones, Peter Coyote, Veanne Cox, Conchata Ferrell.
Directed by: Steven Soderbergh
2000--131 Minutes
Written By Brandon Herring March 17, 2000
So far in the year 2000, we have not had a great movie. So far in the year 
2000 only 7 films have gotten *** or more, two films have gotten Zero Stars. 
I was starting to give up on movies so far, when I came along this gem, which 
has become a huge hit. Julia Roberts is probably my favorite actress in the 
world, and starred last year in one of my top 10 favorites "Notting Hill". 
Roberts was mostly known for her roles in romantic comedies such as "Pretty 
Woman" and "Runaway Bride", now in the year 2000 Roberts comes back in a role 
much different from her past, this time she is a tight skirt wearing, 
foul-mouthed, sexy paralegal in the first great movie of 2000.
"Erin Brokovich" is the incredibly true story of a young woman (brilliant 
played by Julia Roberts) who is the single mother of three, married twice and 
divorced twice, living in a run down house with roaches, battling a lawyers 
office which happens to be her job, and her love life is on the rocks. This 
is the everyday of Erin's life. The film starts out with Erin getting into a 
nasty accident, and sueing the guy responsible for hitting her. She ends up 
working for this lawyer's office led by Ed Massery (played greatly by Albert 
Finney). Erin is hired reluctencly as a paralegal, and ends up investigating 
a very serious case in her real estate files, which has to deal with people 
on this once piece of land, whose water comes from PG&E, ends up developing 
cancer after living on this land, and drinking this water. Erin meets a young 
woman played fantastically by Marg Helenberger who is being attacked with a 
handful of diseases, and Erin gathers up enough people who in the past have 
lived on this land to file a lawsuit. What insues is a uplifting story, and 
an incredibly showcase of acting. 
Julia Roberts who starred last summer in one of my favorite movies of all 
time, 1999's "Notting Hill", has again come through and made another movie 
that is howlingly funny, devistatingly sad, and in the end uplifting and 
powerful that a tear came to my eye because I felt so good. Julia gives yet 
another Oscar-calibur performance, and her portrayal of a single mother here 
is priceless. Roberts being not a mother in real life, is so believable that 
you'd think she has kids secretly. Her on screen chemistry with the camera is 
beyond descriptive words, and only the mind can imagine how good Julia is. 
Her snappy dialogue written by Susannah Grant has some brilliantly funny 
lines, and very smart words come out of this woman's mouth. Julia and her 
tightfitting clothes are another character trait in this film, she is always 
in cleavage showing, short tight-fitting skirts that always show off not even 
enough. She in the end is powerful, yet subtle, foul-mouthed, yet gentle 
woman whom we fall in love with by the time the credits role.
Her supporting actors notably Albert Finney are fantastic, and back up the 
lead actress with charisma and charm. Albert Finney plays Erin's boss, and is 
incredibly effective in his role. He gives us a believable man, who owns a 
business and is having this young woman work for him, which we all know could 
not be that easily done. In the end again we fall in love with him as well. 
Aaron Eckhart most notable from "In The Company of Men" and "Your Friends & 
Neighbors" is an on screen gem playing Erin's gruff, biker boyfriend Robert, 
who behind all the facial hair, and ruff and tuff image, is a sweet natured 
guy, who falls in love with both her and her kids. 
Directed by Steven Soderbergh who gave us 1998's fantastic "Out of Sight" 
strikes gold once again, with this realistic, breathtakingly fresh view into 
Erin's world, and the effects it has on Erin's family. Not only does he do 
such a good job at being a director, as he does making good movies. If 
Soderbergh continues to make movies like this, I will continue to praise 
movies like this. When you walk into a movie, and expect the best, and get 
even more it is a rare feeling to know that movies like this can come out. 
Even though only being March of 2000, I can already tell right now, "Erin 
Brokovich" is already one of the best films of 2000, and so far the best 
movie I have seen of 2000. 

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Steven Soderbergh. Screenplay by Susannah Grant and Richard
Lagravenese. Starring Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart.
Running time: 129 minutes. Rated AA for offensive language. Reviewed on
March 29th, 2000.
It's said that everyone loves an underdog. In that case, the box office 
success of new Julia Roberts vehicle "Erin Brockovich" is all but assured,
for here is a movie all about celebrating the underdog. Not only is its
heroine essentially an everywoman with the same problems and worries that
confront the rest of us, but the villain of the piece is big business, a
favorite target of the common man. The fact that the movie is based on
real life events is merely the icing on the proverbial cake.
The story begins around 1992, when Erin Brockovich (Roberts), a 
twice-divorced mother of three, manages to gain employment at a legal 
firm run by Ed Masry (Albert Finney). Brockovich has no prior legal
experience and Masry initially balks at the proposition, but Brockovich
finally convinces him to hire her on a trial basis ("Don't make me beg,"
she quietly pleads with him in front of the entire office). Setting to
work as a legal secretary, Brockovich comes across some real estate files
which, to her consternation, include medical records. Gaining no insight
from her reluctant coworkers as to why this might be the case, Brockovich
visits the home of Donna Jensen (Marg Helgenberger) to learn more.
The Jensens live in Hinkley, a small California town built around a
refinery run by Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E). The family has been
plagued by medical problems, and Brockovich soon discovers that the cause
may be hexavalent chromium, a pollutant which has leaked from the PG&E
plant into the groundwater and has been contaminating the community for
the past thirty years. Soon it becomes clear that the health of not just
the Jensens, but indeed most of Hinkley's current and past residents, has
been damaged by PG&E's neglect and outright lies (the company actually
claimed at one point that the chromium in the environment was a type
beneficial to humans). Brockovich manages to convince Masry to take
on the Hinkley case, but must overcome people's perceptions of her own
shortcomings as the lawsuit proceeds forward.
As the title implies, this is a movie not so much about the legal battle
against PG&E as it is about Erin Brockovich herself. As such, it lives and
dies on the performance of Julia Roberts. Fortunately Roberts is up to the
challenge, demonstrating a facility for both the dramatic and comedic
elements of the role. This is not the sort of character one would
necessarily expect Roberts to take on, but it is not hard to see its
appeal. Brockovich is tenacious, brassy and self-confident, an extrovert
willing to speak her mind almost to the point of recklessness. Her life
has not been an easy one -- "I got pregnant too young" she admits at one
point, although there is no question that the overriding passion of her
life is her children -- but she is doing the best she can.
No doubt the aspect of the character which has received the most attention
has been Brockovich's provocative style of dress, but Roberts manages to
pull it off. Rather than making her looking slutty, the clothes help to
accentuate the idea that this is a woman who has her own way of getting
things done, who refuses to be cowed by the expectations of others.
But "Erin Brockovich" is so focussed on the title character that the rest
of the cast largely goes by the wayside. Finney does a respectable job as
Ed Masry, but lives out the movie in Roberts' orbit. Masry's entire
personality seems to be defined in terms of how he reacts to Brockovich,
and consequently he has no capacity to develop on his own. The other major
supporting actor is Aaron Eckhart, playing Brockovich's Harley-loving
next-door neighbor and romantic interest, George. It is here that the film
is at its weakest: their relationship is unconvincing from start to
finish, and the flimsy George is never given much characterization. He
seems to exist purely to either facilitate or complicate Brockovich's
life, and his disappearance from much of the last third of the movie is
all too easily overlooked.
"Erin Brockovich" does a decent job of portraying the real-life legal
struggles against PG&E. It is smart enough to balance the courtroom
dramatics with the more human elements of the case, such as the impact of
the medical problems on the Hinkley families, and the way Brockovich's
involvement affects her relationship with her children. It is peppered
with laughs, but avoids going over the edge into parody. However, the film
struggles to generate any real sense of incident. The lawyers representing
PG&E all come across as hamfisted and ineffectual, and there is never
much of a feeling of risk that things might not work out. Scenes such as
one where Masry discusses the possible bankruptcy of the law firm, and a
court proceeding where a judge could have dismissed the entire suit, are
quickly defused and feel tokenistic.
The movie is also plagued by moments of bizarre characterization. Much is 
made, for example, of Brockovich's love for her kids. And yet, when she
receives an anonymous phone call warning her to stop digging into the 
problems at Hinkley, almost nothing is made of it. This is not to say  
that her decision to proceed with the investigation indicates she doesn't
care about her children; on the contrary, it demonstrates how passionate
Brockovich is about both. But it seems inconceivable to me that she should
treat the incident so offhandedly, dismiss it so easily. This is only
exacerbated by the fact that the threat is never referred to again. What,
then, was the point?
"Erin Brockovich" is a good movie and a good vehicle for Julia Roberts.
But it sets the bar too low, settling for being just another popcorn movie
instead of striving for deeper characterization or a more compelling
screenplay. For a movie about a woman possessed of such determination and
conviction, it is unfortunate that "Erin Brockovich" does not possess
quite the same qualities.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/ErinBrockovich.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Steven Soderbergh.
Cast: Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart, Marg Helgenberger, Cherry 
Jones, Peter Coyote, Veanne Cox, Conchata Ferrell.
2000 - 131 minutes
Rated R (for profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 18, 2000.
"Erin Brockovich," whose nonfictional roots are made markedly clear even 
before the first frame of film, is the sort of vibrantly acted, feel-good 
legal drama that will inevitably leave many viewers enthusiastically raving 
about its qualities while exiting the movie theater. After all, the film 
didn't score a 98 out of 100 on Cinemascore, an almost unheard-of average 
grade from the general public whose seen it, for nothing. Superior to the 
usual movie whose newspaper and television blurbs read such things as, "It 
will make you stand up and cheer!," and absent of the majority of possible 
corniness, and tiresome courtroom scenes, that may very well have seeped into 
the proceedings with a lesser director at the helm, "Erin Brockovich," 
nonetheless, has its own problems.
Directed by Steven Soderbergh, a largely independent filmmaker (1989's 
stirring "sex, lies, and videotape") whose last studio picture was the 
undernourished, overrated 1998 George Clooney-Jennifer Lopez starrer, "Out of 
Sight," his latest excursion into the world of feature films has acquired the 
same sparkling performances that "Out of Sight" possessed, but remains just 
as unsatisfying in the long run. With a plot hook that was almost identically 
seen in 1998's "A Civil Action," yet focuses more on the central character 
than the former did on John Travolta, "Erin Brockovich," for all of its 
attributes, lacks urgency. As the developments in the case (a toxic level of 
chromium is found within the water supply in the small desert town of 
Hinkley, Calif., causing the residents to grow seriously ill) play out in the 
nearly two-and-a-quarter-hour running time, there is a complete insufficiency 
of suspense or rooting interest because it is clear, every step of the way, 
how the plot is going to evolve. 
Julia Roberts, Hollywood's most popular leading lady, is unlike many of 
today's top stars because she actually has proven time and time again that 
she is a remarkably good actress. Unfairly labeled a performer who only makes 
romantic comedies, Roberts has made so many pictures in that genre because 
she is simply a charmer, and has the ability to win any viewer over, no 
matter what. That is not all she is about, however, as proven with "Erin 
Brockovich," which hands her one of the most memorable roles of her career, 
and she runs with it. As the self-titled character, a dirt-poor, 
twice-divorced mother of three who cares deeply for her children and 
desperately needs a job to get some cash, Roberts invigorates added life into 
a character that has been so freshly written to begin with. 
After an automobile accident that leaves her with a case of whiplash and a 
court loss when her attorney, Ed Masry (Albert Finney), fails to convince the 
jury that it was the fault of the other driver, a doctor, Erin, who brashly, 
yet honestly, has a way of telling people like it is, walks right into the 
law firm of Masry and Vitito one day and demands that Ed give her a job. "I'm 
smart, I'm hard-working, I will work without benefits. Please don't make me 
beg," Erin heartfeltly tells him. While filing the real estate paperwork for 
the purchase of homes in Hinkley by PG&E (Pacific Gas and Electric), Erin 
stumbles upon the distressingly bleak medical files of the Hinkley residents 
peculiarly placed with the real estate information. After Ed allows her to 
research the files more, and following her initial meetings with several of 
the townspeople, Erin grows deeply involved in their story, firmly believing 
that they have a case after discovering the chromium within the water. 
"Erin Brockovich" may be "based on a true story," but it is the sort of film 
that, if fictional, would be no less predictable. Following an intriguing 
opening half-hour as we meet and get to sympathize with Erin, who may dress 
in revealing clothing and not have a college degree, but who undeniably has 
an intelligent brain in her head and a caring heart in her chest, the film is 
bogged down in a narrative that is about as fresh as a loaf of one-month-old 
bread. Without a quick pace, something that almost any cliched movie needs in 
order to be successful, the film too often just lies there, immobile. Even 
the music score, by Thomas Newman, is basically a carbon copy of the one he 
composed for the infinitely better "American Beauty."
Thank goodness, then, for Roberts and the other top-flight actors, as well as 
some of the snappy dialogue within Susannah Grant's otherwise unworthy 
screenplay. Roberts, a naturally likable screen presence, single-handedly 
steals the film, but is ably supported by Albert Finney, who, with his own 
aptitude for humor and realism, makes a surprisingly great partner for 
Robert. Aaron Eckhart, playing a kind Harley Davidson-loving biker who falls 
for Erin and agrees to watch her kids while at work, tries his mightiest, but 
is so underwritten, and the subplot so shoddily penned, that the film might 
have benefitted from it being either edited out or rewritten. Finally, Marg 
Helgenberger, as the understanding housewife in Hinkley whom Erin first 
meets, is first-rate, and her character warmly and powerfully handled in only 
a few key scenes.
While it may be a wise career move for director Soderbergh to alternate 
between more risky, independent-minded projects and big-budget pictures, with 
"Erin Brockovich," he has made something so conventional and cinematically 
bland that it seems like the perfect example of the type of film Soderbergh 
has so valiantly fought against in the last decade of being a filmmaker.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) "Whatever it takes to make someone a movie star, she's
got it."
That's what my friend says about Julia Roberts, and she's exactly right.
Roberts brings warmth and enthusiasm to ERIN BROCKOVICH, making it a
much better movie than it might have been.
ERIN   BROCKOVICH takes a new approach to the lawsuit movie. You might
say it's   like THE INSIDER without the serious tension, like A CIVIL
ACTION   without the laborious melodrama. What it has instead is the
human touch that   Roberts brings to it.  
Erin Brockovich (Roberts) is unemployed and underskilled. She's a single
mother raising three kids, and she'll take any kind of work she can get.
Unfortunately, nobody will hire her.
Her Toyota gets sideswiped by a Jaguar, and her lawyer Ed Masry (Albert
Finney) nearly wins her a big settlement. But Erin does so badly on the
stand -- wearing too-revealing clothes and suggestive makeup, then
shouting at the defendant -- that she loses the case. Desperate and
angry, she insists on a job from Masry, whom she blames for losing her
case.
Roberts reuses her low-class, unpretentious persona from PRETTY WOMAN.
Erin's gaudy and revealing outfits garner disapproving looks from the
other women in the office, but she takes it all in stride. Being a poor,
single mother of three has taught her how to ignore the bullies and
respect the true friends.
Erin notices something in one of Masry's real estate cases that strikes
her as odd. Medical records have gone back and forth between the buyer
and seller of a piece of property. Instead of doing her job filing, she
follows her curiosity. She gets Masry's vague, off-hand permission to do
some investigative work, and she heads to the small town where the
property is being sold.
After a few days' work making friends in the town, Erin realizes that
something big is happening. Pacific Gas & Electric, a major California
utility has been dumping industrial toxic chemicals into the water, and
now they're buying up every property in town to cover up what they've
done. 
Back at the office, Masry has fired Erin. He can't remember giving her
permission to investigate, and even if he had, he never would have let
her spend three days on it. But Erin shows him the evidence she's
gathered and convinces him to take the case. Erin's got such a winning
way with people that she rallies the whole town to their common cause.
Albert Finney does a great job as Erin's boss and friend Ed Masry. His
character could have been a two-dimensional foil for Erin, but Finney
knows when to play up to Roberts and when to stand back and watch. He
knows this is Roberts' movie and doesn't try to fight it.
Julia Roberts singlehandedly makes this movie work. She has a great
screen presence, and she brings emotion, sympathy, and strength to the
role. One moment she's telling her boss how to run his business, the
next moment she's reacting emotionally to a phone call about her
youngest daughter's latest accomplishment. (I mention the latter because
many directors say that phone call scenes don't work on screen, but
Roberts proves them wrong.)
Some of Roberts' "presence" comes from her cleavage. Some of the
costumes are almost insulting, and even the audience was giggling at her
appearance. But before long, Erin acknowledges that she dresses that
way, sometimes on purpose. Because it was worked into the character (and
even the plot), it wasn't nearly as gratuitous or insulting as it first
appeared.
The production design and art direction (by PhilipMessina and Christa
Munro) were surprisingly good. When you see a movie with Julia Roberts
you expect money, polish, and refinement. But ERIN BROCKOVICH calls for
an ambulance-chasing lawyer, a poor title character, and a small town
too powerless to fight a utility company. Masry's office looks like it
was built in 1964, complete with dark wood paneling. Erin drives a dusty
orange 15-year old car, and the poisoned town is just redneck enough to
be convincing.
There is a subplot involving George (Aaron Eckhart), Erin's biker
neighbor. A minor romance develops between them. It's not much, and it's
not relevant to the main story, but it is sweet. The movie probably
spends a little too much time on their love and conflict, but at the end
screenwriter Susannah Grant ties it nicely to the main story.
If you're looking for the quirky Soderberg touch, you can find it,
although it's not as noticeable as in THE LIMEY or OUT OF SIGHT. There
are appropriate shots from a low angle, or with handheld camera. The
steady pace of information streaming in reads like a good crime drama.
Also, the music has some character, some flavor, without being too
obtrusive. 
But really, ERIN BROCKOVICH is a mainstream Hollywood movie. The plot
and the dialogue often seem formulaic, even though it is based on a true
story. It may have a serious subject, but it is more entertaining than
thought provoking.
So it is to Julia Roberts' credit that she makes this formula,
mainstream movie into something worth going to the theater for.

Author
Brandon Herring
Rating: * * * * out of * * * *    (* * * * * for NZone)
Starring: Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart, Marg Heleberger, Cherry
Jones, Peter Coyote, Veanne Cox, Conchata Ferrell.
Directed by: Steven Soderbergh
2000--131 Minutes
Written By Brandon Herring March 17, 2000
So far in the year 2000, we have not had a great movie. So far in the year 2000
only 7 films have gotten *** or more, two films have gotten Zero Stars. I was
starting to give up on movies so far, when I came along this gem, which has
become a huge hit. Julia Roberts is probably my favorite actress in the world,
and starred last year in one of my top 10 favorites "Notting Hill". Roberts was
mostly known for her roles in romantic comedies such as "Pretty Woman" and
"Runaway Bride", now in the year 2000 Roberts comes back in a role much
different from her past, this time she is a tight skirt wearing, foul-mouthed,
sexy paralegal in the first great movie of 2000.
"Erin Brokovich" is the incredibly true story of a young woman (brilliant
played by Julia Roberts) who is the single mother of three, married twice and
divorced twice, living in a run down house with roaches, battling a lawyers
office which happens to be her job, and her love life is on the rocks. This is
the everyday of Erin's life. The film starts out with Erin getting into a nasty
accident, and sueing the guy responsible for hitting her. She ends up working
for this lawyer's office led by Ed Massery (played greatly by Albert Finney).
Erin is hired reluctencly as a paralegal, and ends up investigating a very
serious case in her real estate files, which has to deal with people on this
once piece of land, whose water comes from PG&E, ends up developing cancer
after living on this land, and drinking this water. Erin meets a young woman
played fantastically by Marg Helenberger who is being attacked with a handful
of diseases, and Erin gathers up enough people who in the past have lived on
this land to file a lawsuit. What insues is a uplifting story, and an
incredibly showcase of acting. 
Julia Roberts who starred last summer in one of my favorite movies of all time,
1999's "Notting Hill", has again come through and made another movie that is
howlingly funny, devistatingly sad, and in the end uplifting and powerful that
a tear came to my eye because I felt so good. Julia gives yet another
Oscar-calibur performance, and her portrayal of a single mother here is
priceless. Roberts being not a mother in real life, is so believable that you'd
think she has kids secretly. Her on screen chemistry with the camera is beyond
descriptive words, and only the mind can imagine how good Julia is. Her snappy
dialogue written by Susannah Grant has some brilliantly funny lines, and very
smart words come out of this woman's mouth. Julia and her tightfitting clothes
are another character trait in this film, she is always in cleavage showing,
short tight-fitting skirts that always show off not even enough. She in the end
is powerful, yet subtle, foul-mouthed, yet gentle woman whom we fall in love
with by the time the credits role.
Her supporting actors notably Albert Finney are fantastic, and back up the lead
actress with charisma and charm. Albert Finney plays Erin's boss, and is
incredibly effective in his role. He gives us a believable man, who owns a
business and is having this young woman work for him, which we all know could
not be that easily done. In the end again we fall in love with him as well.
Aaron Eckhart most notable from "In The Company of Men" and "Your Friends &
Neighbors" is an on screen gem playing Erin's gruff, biker boyfriend Robert,
who behind all the facial hair, and ruff and tuff image, is a sweet natured
guy, who falls in love with both her and her kids. 
Directed by Steven Soderbergh who gave us 1998's fantastic "Out of Sight"
strikes gold once again, with this realistic, breathtakingly fresh view into
Erin's world, and the effects it has on Erin's family. Not only does he do such
a good job at being a director, as he does making good movies. If Soderbergh
continues to make movies like this, I will continue to praise movies like this.
When you walk into a movie, and expect the best, and get even more it is a rare
feeling to know that movies like this can come out. Even though only being
March of 2000, I can already tell right now, "Erin Brokovich" is already one of
the best films of 2000, and so far the best movie I have seen of 2000. 
"Sometimes there is so much beauty in the world, I feel like I can't take it,
like my heart is going to cave it"- American Beauty
"He came home"- Halloween
"Things fall down, people look up, and when it rains it pours" Magnolia

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Universal Pictures
 Director: Steven Soderbergh
 Writer: Susan Grant, Richard LaGravenese
 Cast: Julia Roberts, Aaron Eckhart, Conchata Ferrell, Albert
Finney, Jamie Harrold, Marg Helgenberger, Scotty
Leavenworth, Linda Larkin, Lynn Redgrave, Josef Sommer,
Malcolm Stumpf, Michael Vartan
   If sales of Deer Park, Poland Spring, Evian and 170 other
bottled water brands did not skyrocket after John Travolta's
heroic role in Steven Zaillian's "A Civil Action," they're not
likely to zoom this time around either--notwithstanding Steven
Soderbergh's frightfully similar tale, "Erin Brockovich." 
Soderbergh's story follows the outline of "A Civil Action" up
and down the line: the small-town lawyer who hocks
everything just before he is about to retire to Palm Beach,
even taking a second mortgage to pursue the big, evil
company; the heavily bankrolled legal team hired by a
billionaire corporate steamroller; the pollution which the
company knew about but did little to curtail; the illness and
death of both adults and children from a combination of
cancers including leukemia, and carcinomas of the ovaries
and breasts; the merely remote chance of winning anything
substantial.
   This time around the true story revolves not around the
Grace Company but about PG&E, or Pacific Gas and Electric,
with assets of $28 billion and an obstinacy about negotiating
anything close to the amount of money that could
compensate over 600 families afflicted by water poisoned
with chromium.  Why would the producers bank on a yarn so
similar to Zaillian's scarcely more than a year later?  Two
words: Julia Roberts--whose main assets are her big mouth
and, as one Internet critic puts it, her possession of a
wonderbra.  Travolta may know how to dance, but Julia has
the cleavage needed to bring in the crowds--particularly since
"Erin Brockovich" is a feel-good film with all the numbing
predictability movie-goers seem to demand.
    While this obvious little yarn sorely lacks irony, the one
paradoxical point is that so many Americans do not like or
trust lawyers and yet flock to the cinema for any adaptation of
John Grisham book, preferring plots highlighting small-town
Davids taking on big-city Goliaths.  We eschew the $400-an-
hour attorneys in their dark, pin-striped suits who haunt the
top floors of Wall Street offices or, on the other hand the
small-potatoes advocates who make their living chasing
ambulances.  But give us an avuncular counselor, preferably
getting on in years, who risks his entire retirement in a
gamble for justice, and we're suckered in--particularly if the
jokes are discreetly mixed with the poignancy and are sexual
in nature.  Throw in a few cute tykes and a romantic lover on
the side and you've got "Erin Brockovich."
   The title character (Julia Roberts) is at her wit's end,
bogged down with the care of three kids, her two husbands
having left her with $74 in her bank account (with which she
is able to afford rent, a car, and a dazzling array of
provocative outfits).  With no fancy degrees to her name and,
despite her looks, an inability to charm a series of potential
employers, she finagles a job as a research assistant to an
attorney, Ed Masry (Albert Finney).  By sheer coincidence,
her new neighbor, a biker named George (Aaron Eckhart), is
(by choice) unemployed and willing to take care of her kids
while she's in the legal office scraping out a living.  When
Erin comes across evidence that an epidemic of illnesses in
the town can be traced to the presence of chromium in the
water supply, she convinces her boss to take on the perps,
PG & E, despite the time, money, and energy needed to
pursue the case against an array of slick corporate lawyers. 
The hearings, the petitions, the meetings with the largely
unsophisticated and mistrusting townspeople are by now so
easy to follow by anyone who has ever been the movies that
there's scarcely a need to reveal the plot, nor would we risk
much by disclosing the final result of the litigation.  At least
John Grisham's stories, commercial though they may be, do
not end with unmitigated victories for the little guys who are
besieged and corrupted and made ill by the malefactors of
great wealth.
   Director Soderbergh is best known for "Out of Sight,"
considered quirky for a commercial movie in that it credibly
shows a romantic connection between two people on
opposite sides of the law.  But Soderbergh's real
achievement before becoming stridently commercial is his
1989 indie "sex, lies and videotape," blessed with real actors
like James Spader, Andie MacDowell and Peter Gallagher--in
which a selfish lawyer with a frigid wife and sister-in-law-lover
has an unpredictable effect on an old college friend who
comes up for a visit.
   If Soderbergh wanted to get serious with the true story of
the PG&E lawsuit, he would have used Cherry Jones in the
principal role of research assistant instead of shoving her into
the background as a reluctant witness who finally comes
around when she realizes how wonderful Ms. Brockovich is. 
I'd not be surprised to see our online colleagues on the World
Socialist Website take writers Susannah Grant and Richard
LaGravenese to task for reinforcing the idea that if you want
to succeed and make a fortune with just two years' hard
work, you'd better be gorgeous.  When asked by her boss
how she was able to get so many people to cooperate with
the plaintiff's cause, Erin replies, "It's called boobs, Ed." 
Absent the bosom and the thigh-length skirt, would this case
have ever made it out of the initial deposition stage?  Would
this movie not be shipped off to videotape after a quick run in
the theaters?
Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 130 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Homer Yen
"Erin Brokovich" is the kind of terrific storytelling
that does two things.  First, it renews my faith in
the good neighbor.  These are the unsung heroes that
toil endlessly on behalf of others.  Their payment
comes from the personal satisfaction of righting a
previous wrong.  They buck the system, overcome
daunting obstacles, and move forward with unbridled
determination in order to see that justice is served. 
But "Erin Brokovich" also renews my faith in
Hollywood's ability to make a nice old-fashioned film.
 Its subject is grounded in the real world and
presents a feel-good story that anyone can appreciate.
 I salute people like Erin Brokovich, and I salute the
filmmakers for having the wherewithal to bring her
story to the big screen.  Based on the real life story
of Erin Brokovich, this movie focuses on her
tribulations as a struggling single mom, and later,
her personal crusade in which she takes on a large
utilities company that she suspects of releasing toxic
pollutants.  
Life has truly dealt Erin, a former beauty queen, an
endless series of disappointments.  She has almost as
many ex-husbands as she does children.  With only a
high school diploma, she lacks the professional
business and communications skills to get a job.  She
can't even win an accident claim in which she was
clearly not at fault.  With the bills starting to pile
up, she convinces Ed Masry (Albert Finney), the lawyer
that bungled her aforementioned accident claim, to let
her take on a low-paying filing position.
Her reserved office mates, however, don't appreciate
her saucy and straight shooting personality.  She
dresses in an equally saucy manner, and as a result,
her relationship with the others is charged.  Never
afraid to speak her mind, her audacity presents a
serious challenge to the stodgy Masry.  "Maybe you
should rethink your manner of dress," he offers.  Erin
shoots back, "Maybe you should rethink your ties." 
However, the one great asset that she possesses is her
empathy towards their clients.  She feels their pain,
understands their needs, and embodies a rare
compassion.  "I hate lawyers; I just work for them,"
she says to those who are wary of her intentions. 
Additionally, she's smart, resourceful, and isn't
afraid to get her hands dirty.  
When she does a little extra research into a land
deal, she discovers that the activities of a nearby
utilities plant may be responsible for the failing
health of hundreds of local residents.  Erin is
devastated to learn that the long-term effects have
had horrific results, from nosebleeds to cancer.  She
is convinced that they should sue the utilities giant
on behalf of all of those who have suffered.  But
Masry, now in his 60s and comfortable with his small
practice, is naturally concerned about engaging in
such a case.  "We're not just David going against
Goliath, says the flustered lawyer.  "We're going
against Goliath and his whole family."  
Through Erin's hard work and devotion, there is
significant emotional payoff.  It's quite an
accomplishment for Erin to achieve what she does given
her situation and limited resources.  It's also quite
an accomplishment for Julia Roberts to capture the
heart, courage, and fears of Erin's crusade. 
Showcasing her dramatic talent and her wonderful sense
of comic timing, this is Roberts' richest role to date
and perhaps the richest female performance since
Hillary Swank in "Boys Don't Cry".  Finney is also
terrifically likable as a lawyer that tries to counter
Erin's zeal with conventionality and wisdom.  I also
credit the filmmakers for not succumbing to
Hollywood-esque plots.  In a dumber version, there
probably would have been a contrived, life-threatening
situation as Erin uncovered more damaging evidence
against the utilities.  And, I'm glad that the film
doesn't go the route of an extended courtroom
sequence.  The movie smartly stays focused on Erin's
pain, passion and personal ascension.  

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ERIN BROCKOVICH" (Universal Pictures)
 It's too bad Erin Brockovich wasn't released last year
because Julia Roberts would be Oscar's top contender as the smart,
struggling, twice-divorced mother of three young children who, without
law expertise, defies the odds, takes on and defeats a major public
utilities company. Funny, flippant, and feisty, she's sensational as a
Norma Rae-type of heroine. Based on true events, the story revolves
around Erin's discovery of a cover-up involving contaminated water
which is causing devastating illnesses in a small California desert
community. Infuriated by the deception, she convinces her grumpy,
avuncular boss, brilliantly played by Albert Finney, to allow her not
only to investigate but to convince the leery local citizenry to join
in litigation against Pacific Gas & Electric Co.. "It's hexavalent
chromium, highly toxic, highly carcinogenic," she explains. "Gets into
your DNA, so you pass the trouble along to your kids." With over 600
plaintiffs, they win $333 million, the largest settlement ever paid in
a direct-action suit. Brassy and bold - with the cleavage created by
her uplift brassiere always showing - mini-skirted Erin also picks up
a boy-friend (Aaron Eckhart), the biker next door, who watches her
kids while she tackles the job that earns her respect - for the first
time in her life. Written by Susannah Grant and Richard LaGravenese
and directed by Steven Soderberg, yeah, it's sexist and a bit too
lengthy - but those are minor quibbles. And if the plot sounds similar
to A Civil Action, the difference can be summed up in two words: Julia
Roberts. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Erin Brockovich is a
feel-good, nifty 9 - the first "must see" movie of the new
millennium. And let's hope voters don't forget when Academy Award
nominations come 'round in 2001.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
ERIN BROCKOVICH (director: Steven Soderbergh; screenwriter: Susannah
Grant; cinematographer: Ed Lachman; editor: Anne V. Coates; cast: Julia
Roberts (Erin Brockovich), Albert Finney (Ed Masry), Aaron Eckhart
(George), Cherry Jones (Pamela Duncan), Peter Coyote (Kurt Potter),
Veanne Cox (Theresa Dallavale), Marg Helgenberger (Donna Jensen), 2000)
A feel-good, old-fashioned (except for all the cuss words), liberal
message movie for the people and by the people, resulting in a populist
film. It surprised me in how invigorating a performance there was from
Julia Roberts (she usually turns me off), and how there was such a good
chemistry between her and the gruff Albert Finney. He is a sleazy lawyer
and her boss. She stole all the scenes in the film (she was paid 20
million bucks to be a star). But, the subtle performance by the rumpled
looking Finney, playing second fiddle without a hint of a complaint, as
his panned reactions to her antics made her star quality shine more
brightly, was the key to the film's success.
This true story tells how the Julia Robert's character, Erin Brockovich,
collected evidence against a giant California utility company, Pacific
Gas and Electric, and even though she has no formal training as a lawyer
and is uneducated, her firm, mainly through her persistent efforts, was
able to win the largest U.S. settlement ever paid in a direct-action
lawsuit: $330 million.
Erin, as the twice-divorced mother of three toddlers, shakes her ass,
exposes her boobs, and manages to stop her rotten luck by landing a job
in the same law firm she came to as a client in a car accident. She was
hit by a rich doctor who was speeding through a street crossing.
Appearing in court for the lawsuit, wearing a neck brace, she
nevertheless loses her slam-dunk case, when the opposing lawyer baits
her to react with a volley of curse words on the stand. Straddled with
bills, the former beauty queen from Wichita, bullies the boss, Ed Masry
(Finney), into giving her a chance to work there as a secretary, but
without benefits.
Erin's desperate life as a single parent revolves around her trying to
be a good mother to her children. But her dependable baby-sitter moves
out and the next one she hires is not dependable. Her new next-door
neighbor turns out to be a Harley biker enthusiast, George (Aaron). He
is attracted to her and doesn't seem to be daunted when she tells him of
her meager bank account and all her children. He ends up being her
boyfriend and baby-sitter. His role is a paper-thin one, as the
sensitive, long-suffering lover. It reminds me of the role Hollywood
usually reserves for the sweet but simple lady co-star, who is just
around to make the star look good.
Erin has a quick-wit, a winning smile, a sewer for a mouth, is
impulsive, is willing to show her cleavage, and can sexily flaunt her
feminine assets in the faces of all the men she encounters without
having to be a slut. Julia Roberts's breasts are propped up and very
noticeable, wearing tight-fitting clothes with low necklines, at all
times. When told by the boss "You might want to rethink your wardrobe a
little," She retorts, "I think I look nice, and as long as I have one
ass instead of two, I'll wear what I like."
She soon stumbles upon something fishy in a pro bono case the boss asks
her to look at. There are medical records in the file of this real
estate case, which strikes her as being odd. The boss, whose small law
firm mainly does ambulance-chasing work, gives her permission to go see
Donna Jensen (Marg), and when there, Erin finds out about the family's
sickness due to the toxic hexavalent chromium in the water and of the
utility company paying all the medical bills, as long as the family goes
to the company's doctor.
It turns out that the gas company is evilly hiding the fact that it has
polluted the ground water and is apparently responsible for death and
disease, for hundreds of people living in that hard-working community of
Southern California.
Erin spends the rest of the film making house calls on the victims,
rounding them up for the class-action suit, and juggling her home life
with her new career. The film was all about her. It plays pompously
proud of itself like the do-gooder fare it is, with no real emotions
shown for the victims, as it only shows the pain Julia feels for them.
This one's all about Julia Roberts, and if you buy into her for the
part, you are more than likely to be pleased with the film. As for my
reaction, I felt, what the hell, the utility company acted so
maliciously evil and the outcome of the case is documented, so what I
would not have accepted so readily from a drama, I found myself
accepting in this political conscience film. Where I saw the film, the
same type of working-class clients of Julia's, were in the audience and
were laughing lustily at the jokes, and they seemed to enjoy seeing this
big company being taking on by one of them.
This mainstream film by Steven Soderbergh (Sex, Lies and Videotape/Out
of Sight/The Limey), is shot in a sitcom conventional style, without
most of the director's usual artististic flourishes from his past films.
There have been many Hollywood films of this type, including, Silkwood,
A Civil Action, and Norma Rae, with this film somewhere in the middle of
the entertainment scale when held in comparison.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Eugene Novikov
 Starring Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart. Directed by
Steven Soderbergh. Rated R.
Even if the movie itself is a bit lackluster, Erin Brockovich will
stick in my mind as one of exceedingly few movies where Julia Roberts
doesn't play Julia Roberts. It hasn't happened since 1997's wonderful
Conspiracy Theory. Everywhere else, she's played the same role, the
unsure-of-what-she-wants romantic role model. She has a distinctive
romantic relationship here too, but at least she gets to spout some
entertainingly fiery monologues while she's at it. Too bad the movie
gets bogged down in a trite legal plot rather than explore her
interesting character further.
The title character is a twice-divorced, uneducated, unemployed woman,
taking care of three young children while trying to keep herself from
starving. She's desperately running all around L.A. looking for a job --
 something, anything -- but is turned down everywhere she goes because
of her lack of schooling and expertise. But finally, via a string of
good luck (and perseverance), Erin gets a position as a clerk in a
small law firm.
Her boss, an elderly lawyer named Ed Masry played by the inimitable
Albert Finney, is often taken aback by Erin's overtly aggressive
nature. She gets into fights with the staff, insults his ties and he's
ready to fire her. But then she goes off on a tangent, to investigate a
real estate case that, for some reason, has bloodwork and medical
records mixed in. She soon finds that an evil utility company
named "PG&E" is contaminating a town's drinking water with inordinate
amounts of hexavalent chromium, a poisonous, carcinogenic substance
that's not supposed to be in tap water under any circumstances.
Needless to say, all of the town's residents are seriously affected,
with medical bills starting to skyrocket. So Erin, the gentle soul that
she is, convinces her boss to take on this giant class-action suit,
which may be a serious risk for good old Ed, since it requires a lot of
time and money but does not guarantee a positive outcome. Meanwhile,
Erin herself developed a relationship with an unusually kindly,
unemployed biker dude (Aaron Eckhart) who takes care of her kids when
she's at work, but the arrangement is on thin ice because she is hardly
ever home anymore...
The first half if this movie jumps off the screen at you. Julia Roberts
is riveting as a street-smart, desperate woman struggling to survive in
a big city. Her story is interesting, compulsively watchable.
Immediately, she seems like a woman I'd love to spend the next two and
a half hours with. This blissful state continues for a half an hour or
so. But director Steven Soderbergh and writer Susannah Grant aren't at
all interested in keeping it that way. It's downhill from there.
The turning point, of course, is when the characters get mixed up in
the legal matter. This shifts Erin Bronkovich's focus -- how could it
not -- and it becomes a moderately entertaining but painfully ordinary
Grishamesque legal drama. The movie manages to pause and actually
examine what's happening to this person I got so attached to in the
first half hour precious few times. Hexavalent chromium has completely
taken over and the film isn't as interesting anymore.
Ironically, though the lawsuit plot takes up most of Erin Bronkovich's
running time, it seems almost like an afterthought, something put in to
entertain the lowest common denominator because the masses presumably
wouldn't be interested in just the person (what destroys this argument
is that the film is actually a true story, but for cinematic purposes
I'm going to cheerfully ignore that fact). It's a shame that a
personality so decidedly unique had to be diluted with a storyline so
trite.
What really pulls you through it, in the end, is the performances.
Julia Roberts remains tremendously entertaining, spouting harsh, loud
monologues right up until the credits. Few can outshout Roberts. Albert
Finney, a four-time Oscar nominee steals a lot of the scenes he is in.
He has the perfect combination of grumpiness and amiability that's
often difficult to concoct. It helps that he is given some downright
hilarious lines.
Those who watch Erin Brockovich might remember last year's terrific
John Travolta drama A Civil Action, which was also about a lawyer
helping a town with poisoned water. The difference betwene the two was
that in Civil Action, the legal matter was its driving force. It was
the centerpiece and the rest of the plot revolved around it. The
trouble with Erin Brockovich is that the character is the centerpiece
and the lawsuit takes our attention away from it.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
The similarities between this film and the John Travolta lawyer drama A
CIVIL ACTION (6.5/10) are uncanny. Both films are based on actual events,
feature strong leads pursuing legal cases against major multinationals that
have allegedly contaminated the water supply of local towns. The main
difference between the two films would have to do with the former featuring
a cutthroat, rich, successful lawyer going against the system (also a man),
while this one features a twice-divorced, uneducated, sexpot with three kids
doing the same thing (oh yeah, and she's a woman!).
PLOT:
A sexy divorcee with no formal education and a lot of debt forces herself
into a filing job at her lawyer's office, only to run into a lot of internal
politics and lack of respect from her co-workers. It isn't until one day
while filing away a case that she is intrigued by the details, and takes on
the task of researching the case further on her own. After much hard work,
determination, and personal sacrifice, she and the firm begin to put
together one of the biggest direct-action lawsuits in U.S. history.
CRITIQUE:
Despite its slow moments, extended runtime and similarities in plot to A
CIVIL ACTION, this film managed to make me like it based entirely on its
excellent performances by its shining star Julia Roberts and her rough-gruff
counterpart Albert Finney. I know it's still early in the year, but Albert
should definitely be remembered come Oscar time next year in the category of
supporting players. I don't remember the last time I truly enjoyed seeing
this type of love-hate relationship work so well in a film, especially
without it involving sex between the couple in question. The characters
drawn here are quite opposite, save for the mutual respect that both
obviously feel for one another, but to watch them go head-to-head on various
issues is just great cinema. The story itself isn't extremely original or
particularly engaging to behold (in spite of it being based on real events),
the pacing sometimes slow, and the predictability factor pretty high on all
counts. But what generally makes or breaks films of this type are their
focus on character, character, character, and this film succeeds in
radiating light through its stars.
Even Aaron Eckhart, the only other significant player in the film, comes
through as the boyfriend standing by his strong female companion as she
takes on, what seems like, the world. And even though this film was a little
foreseeable, I did find it refreshing to finally soak in a movie that
focused more on the achievements of a woman, rather than that of men. So if
only for that reason, check it out and "watch them women, hear them roar!".
Of course, some of the roaring is also being handled by the flock of
mini-skirts and push-em-up bras that Julia's character dons during this
picture, but it is not as much of a focus as the film's trailer makes it out
to be (Them marketing folks is smart!). So does the movie present the viewer
with a lot of conflict, obstacles or tension? Not really. I was barely ever
anxious to see what would happen next and rarely felt as though things
wouldn't work out for everyone involved, but then again, this film doesn't
pretend to be a thriller. It's an interesting, small tale of a woman who
never knew what she could be in life, until she actually went out and became
it. It's pretty inspiring, it's got one of the most feel-good last scenes in
a movie this year, and once again, features a couple of charming
performances by two great actors at the top of their game.
If you love Julia Roberts, you will most likely enjoy this run-of-the-mill
story, despite it running a little too long, and you will definitely come to
further appreciate the broad talent of Mr. Albert Finney, who pulls off one
of his finest performances in years. All in all, a decent "lawyer movie",
which consciously avoids any long, boring courtroom scenes. Thank you for
that, Mr. Soderbergh.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Pay close attention to one of the earlier scenes with Julia and her kids in
a restaurant, since the waitress serving them is none other than the REAL
Erin Brockovich-Ellis herself! As an inside joke, she is apparently wearing
a nametag that reads "Julia".
Julia Roberts reportedly earned $20,000,000 for her role in this film.
Collectively, her films have grossed more than $2 billion worldwide.
Albert Finney was born in Manchester, England and is apparently the only
person in history to ever call Audrey Hepburn a "bitch"...in the film TWO
FOR THE ROAD (okay, okay...so it was a line in the movie).
Writer Susannah Grant's previous work as a screenwriter was on the
Cinderella tale, EVER AFTER (7/10), starring Drew Barrymore. Her next
writing gig also stars a woman, Sandra Bullock in the drama 28 DAYS. And for
once, the events depicted in this film are apparently very accurate in terms
of what really happened to Erin in her own life. Only some of the peripheral
characters are fictitious or amalgamations of real people from her life. In
fact, photographs shown to the crew by the real Erin prove that she really
did sport 8-inch mini-skirts, 3-inch heels and plunging necklines during
these trying times. A look that she still abides by to this day and
apparently looks terrific!
This film was spawned from an appointment that executive producer Carla
Santos Shamberg had with her chiropractor. For it was as she was lying on
her practitioner's table that she overheard a conversation about another
patient whose story was larger than life. And yes, that other patient was
none other than Erin Brockovich. Carla told her husband Michael about the
story, Michael told Danny DeVito and Stacey Sher, with whom he runs Jersey
Films, and the rest is movie-making history.

Author
Chad Polenz
Based on a true story, this drama about a strong-willed, independent woman 
named Erin Brockovich (Julia
Roberts) who sticks it to a huge corporation at first comes off as a great 
story of the human spirit and an uphill
battle for justice. 
Upon closer inspection it's a little disjointed since the story tries to 
balance Erin's dysfunctional home life with
her courageous fight against a power company who poisoned a small town's 
water supply and lied about it. 
The investigative work Erin and lawyer Ed Marsly (Albert Finney) must perform 
in order to win the case and
the emotional ties they must make with each of their 600+ clients is strong, 
interesting and suspenseful. But
Erin's home life and her sort of relationship with her young children and 
biker-who's-actually-a-big-teddy
bear-boyfriend George (Aaron Eckhart) is a tad weak and doesn't work as well 
as it should have. Still, a good,
entertaining story. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odoen (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by UIP on April 7, 2000; certificate 15; 126 minutes; 
country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Stephen Soderbergh; produced by Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, 
Stacey Sher.
Written by Susannah Grant.
Photographed by Ed Lachmann; edited by Anne V. Coates.
It's astounding, how many of us turn into lawyers when we get wrapped up in 
cases. I remember the Louise Woodward affair, for example, when I knew all 
the evidence from the courtroom pictures on TV, and was able to reel off 
detailed arguments crushing people who had just looked at her and assumed she 
was guilty. Passion about justice is what makes people consider law careers; 
it chills me when I see sell-outs trying to condemn obviously innocent 
people, or using dishonest tactics to help the guilty.
Stephen Soderbergh's "Erin Brockovich" is a brilliant story of anger turning 
into courtroom skills; a David versus Goliath-style exposé in the great 
tradition of "Silkwood", "A Civil Action" and "The Insider". At its centre is 
a woman with no judiciary training or expertise, whose mind was not 
complicated with red tape or histories of statutes, and whose discoveries and 
simple logical interpretations helped small-time lawyers win one of the 
biggest lawsuits in American history.
Her name, of course, is Erin Brockovich (Julia Roberts), and when we meet her 
in the opening scenes of this film, she's just a struggling single mother who 
has failed to win a personal injury settlement. Soon after, she hustles her 
way into a filing job at the firm of her solicitor. The boss, Ed Masry 
(Albert Finney), objects, but Erin makes her services hard to refuse: "I need 
a job. Don't make me beg. If it doesn't work out, fire me."
When handling the real estate documents of a town in California, Erin notices 
something odd -- they all include medical records. Researching this further, 
she stumbles on the information that the area's water supplier, Pacific Gas & 
Electric, has been using a dangerous chemical known as 'hexavalent Chromium 
3' in their pipes. 'Chromium 3' can penetrate the body to cause pretty much 
any illness, including all forms of cancer.
What's especially horrific is that PG&E knew about the hazards of their water 
and misinformed its customers that chromium was good for them. The people 
took the company's word, even when they all started to get sick, until Erin 
Brockovich revealed her findings, and used her common touch to encourage the 
folks to stand up and take legal action.
Brockovich is not always a likeable character. At the start of the movie, 
when no job interviewers will look past her lack of a resumé or 
qualifications, her feeling of victimisation is preposterous. She seems to 
think anyone who isn't stuck in the poverty trap must be some sort of snob. 
And she displays gross arrogance when defending her wardrobe, which is made 
up of mini-skirts, tight boob tubes and high-heeled boots. "As long as I have 
one ass instead of two," she tells Masry when he points out that his office 
has a dress code, "I'll wear what I god damn well please."
But none of these flaws take away from her achievement, which is that she 
worked hard, taught herself some tough skills, became a great friend and 
advocate for victims of an abominable crime, and managed to raise a family at 
the same time. This is one of Roberts's most impressive performances, her 
best since "Pretty Woman" (1990), because she really does look affected by 
the pressures her character has to cope with. She allows herself to be 
vulnerable, with a voice that can quiver and stumble. She doesn't always have 
the answers, and could break down at any minute. There are one or two 
irritating episodes of grandstanding, where she rattles off snappy, heroic 
speeches that probably took the screenwriter hours to write; but that's kind 
of obligatory, and I'm just glad that such moments don't dominate the film.
"Erin Brockovich" is not necessarily better than the films I previously 
mentioned, but has advantages over each of them in one way or another. It's 
more fast-paced and accessible than "Silkwood", angrier about its subject 
matter than "A Civil Action" and less sidetracked than "The Insider". I'm 
starting to love director Soderbergh's new visual style, too, which he also 
used in "Out of Sight", and mixes the colour palette and star power of big 
studio movies with the documentary camera and quiet pacing of realistic 
independents. Sounds distracting. But it's oddly compelling.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Walter Frith
Cast - Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart, Peter Coyote, Conchata
Ferrell, Marg Helgenberger
Directed by - Steven Soderbergh
Written by - Susannah Grant
Produced by - Danny De Vito, Michael Shamberg, Stacey Sher
(Rating) > Motion Picture Association of America - R (Restricted), Rated R
for language
Running Length - 130 minutes
Distributor - Universal Pictures
Sometimes we as critics judge a film to harshly.  Admit it.  We sometimes
look at a film and question its credibility but take a look at life.  Who
would have thought that we would ever see a trial like that of the famous
O.J. Simpson case.  If a script like that, with the events depicted in that
trial had been offered to the studios for consideration, it would have been
thrown in the garbage.  I constantly heard it in the media that no script
could be written this way, but truth, as they say, is sometimes stranger
than fiction.  So how then does a borderline burn out with three kids bring
a multi billion dollar corporation to its knees and rake in two million
dollars from the case herself.  That's the question you'll be following in
'Erin Brockovich', a truly great film with the best performance of Julia
Roberts' career.
First of all, this is a real life character.  Erin Brockovich obtained a job
as a clerk for a bottom of the heap law firm and helped in a case where a
corporate injustice struck people down in the prime of their lives.  It
opens as we see Erin in a car accident and her representation is carried out
by a law firm headed by a man named Ed Masry (Albert Finney).  Finney is
great in this role.  He takes on an American accent and like his fellow
countrymen from the UK who have tried it, such as Michael Caine, Bob Hoskins
and Kenneth Branagh, he is great at it.  Erin loses her case and is stuck
with large medical bills.  She hounds Ed's law firm to give her a job and
won't leave until she has one.
Her mannerisms in court, that of a highly profane nature, helped her lose
her case but her firey p*** and vinegar attitude is sorely needed when she
investigates a case that the law firm is considering handling.  A property
case comes to her attention and she finds that the water pollution around
it, carried out by the neglect of a billion dollar corporation, can infect a
person's DNA to the extent of causing death.  This movie comes a little more
than a year after 1998's 'A Civil Action' entertained audiences in a much
more subtle manner with similar subject matter but 'Erin Brockovich' has a
protagonist who is determined to win.  She uses her feminine ways, such as
short dresses and skirts and plenty of cleavage to get the information she
wants from men.
I haven't really cared for Steven Soderbergh's films much over the years.
His over rated effort 'Out of Sight' from 1998 was too stilted to truly
enjoy with some actors in roles way over their heads.  1989's 'Sex. Lies and
Videotape' and last year's 'The Limey' are probably his best films but 'Erin
Brockovich' is a close rival to these films for Soderbergh.  The real beauty
of the film is the way Soderbergh pays close attention to detail and makes
every scene extremely believable in the pursuit of a small law firm taking
on a gigantic monster of a company and doing a good job of it.  It shouldn't
be too hard to figure out the ending of the film but films of this nature
rarely end any other way, especially with big Hollywood stars not wanting to
cheat their fans but I'm still not giving away the extraordinary details of
how the case ends up.
Erin involves herself with a guy named George (Aaron Eckhart), and this
needless romantic sub plot is probably what prevents the movie from earning
a four star rating but you can't have everything I suppose.  The film also
boasts performances from actors such as Peter Coyote, Conchata Ferrell, and
Marg Helgenberger and these roles could help their careers greatly.
With all of the advanced press Julia Roberts has been getting for this film,
I can't leave this review without mentioning the excellent work by Albert
Finney who should be Oscar nominated if Roberts is and both of them
certainly deserve it at this point.  Finney is a guy who has been nominated
four times the Oscar between 1963 and 1984 and all of the nominations have
come in leading roles.  His first role was in 1960's 'Saturday Night and
Sunday Morning' and David Lean wanted Finney for the leading Peter O'Toole
part in 'Lawrence of Arabia'.  He is one of the most under rated of the
British actors who makes a great comeback in this movie.
Julia Roberts proves here that she earns every penny of her salary and
audiences can revel in the fact that with so many disappointments early in
2000, this film is one of the early year gems that will carry it's quality
to next year's Oscar ceremonies.  Let's keep our fingers crossed.
A film must receive a three star rating or higher to be eligible for a
recommendation.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Christopher Null
     Besides having the hardest-to-type title of a movie since BEING
JOHN MALKOVICH, what will be the legacy of ERIN BROCKOVICH, an unabashed
Julia Roberts star vehicle that, coincidentally, also tells the story of
the largest direct-action legal settlement in American history?
     It won't be for its aura of jurisprudence.  As a primer on the U.S.
legal system, BROCKOVICH is not terribly compelling.  The legal
mumbo-jumbo is all there and feels accurate enough, but the heart of the
movie simply doesn't rest with the details of the case, which features
Pacific Gas & Electric poisoning 600 people in a small California town
with chromium (and then telling them it's good for them).
     While it's not a class-action lawsuit, the case has essentially the
same details as A CIVIL ACTION and any number of other VERDICT clones,
with nearly-bankrupt attorneys who risk it all on One Big Case.
     And while the mind wanders when the film turns toward the perils of
fighting The System, your eyes light up when Roberts takes the stage.
ERIN BROCKOVICH is her movie.  And while Albert Finney steals a bit of
thunder as her grumpy boss, it's Erin's brassy, white-trash, amateur
investigator that makes you want to watch this movie, all 2 1/2 hours of
it.
     That, and the fact that none of Roberts' outfits seem to be able to
cover her brassiere.  To say the least, Roberts is breaking new grounds
in cleavage with this film -- anticipate much to be made of her "new
look".  That said, it's fabulous to see her in an atypical role, far
away from the sap and formula of recent fare like RUNAWAY BRIDE.
     With the exception of Finney, the supporting cast is lackluster.
Aaron Eckhart tries awfully hard as Erin's Harley-lovin' yet
family-friendly boyfriend, but the role doesn't really suit him.  While
attempts are made to humanize them, the victims are all pretty much the
same character, each battling one tragic disease or another.
     It's obvious that indie breath-holder Stephen Soderbergh (OUT OF
SIGHT, THE LIMEY) is behind the camera.  Shots are regularly hand-held,
close-ups are regularly extreme.  The film looks different, but in the
end it's really just more of the same fist-waving we've seen before.  A
good film, not great, not terribly compelling, but featuring a slam-dunk
performance by Miss Roberts in a season of otherwise unwatchable films.
     All of which may leave you wondering, Is PG&E still this awful?
Last year somebody at the company flipped the wrong switch, and the
power went out in San Francisco for a full day.  I think a few lawsuits
are pending.
Director: Steven Soderbergh
Producer: Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, Stacey Sher
Writer: Susannah Grant
Starring: Julia Roberts, Aaron Eckhart, Albert Finney, Marg Helgenberger
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
