Title
Review for Conrack (1974)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Sunga
Starring:
Jon Voight, Paul Winfield, Madge Sinclair, Tina Andrews, Antonio Fargas,
Ruth Attaway, and  Hume Cronyn 
Synopsis: 
In this Vietnam era variation based on the novel "The Water is Wide" by
Pat Conroy, an idealistic young Causasian teacher named Pat Conroy (Jon
Voight) accepts a job in the deep South to teach a small class of 5th
through 8th graders on an island off the coast of South Carolina
populated mainly by impoverished rural agricultural Afro-Americans. At
the school, which is little more than a shack, Conroy discovers that the
students can't read, write, tell him what country they are in, or even
count their own fingers. They mispronounce Conroy's name as "Conrack." 
Whereas the principal Mrs. Scott (Madge Sinclair) belittles the students
and favors the whip, Conroy tries to personalize his teaching
experience, shares his life stories with the kids, and befriends them.
His classes include listening to records, picking flowers outside on
somebody's property, brushing teeth, yoga, football, watching sword
fighting movies, and a number of unconventional activities. For example,
when he learns that local kids often drown because nobody knows how to
swim, Conroy tosses his students into the water and conducts swimming
lessons.
Eventually Conroy's unconventional ways come to the attention of 
hostile superiors. Conroy comments that he believes the status quo is a
racial issue that won't be solved until racist attitudes are dead and
buried. 
Opinion:
"Conrack" is one of those "teacher" movies where a new teacher tries to
impact the lives of initially reluctant students. It is notable in its
portrayal of education. Rather than portraying education as a strictly
academic enterprise based on memorizing the three Rs, the point of this
movie is to depict education as mainly a vehicle for socialization. 
Conroy sees a problem with school officials telling the students that
they are poor, lazy and dumb, so that the students are being socialized
to think of themselves as poor, lazy and dumb. He sees education that
favors one social class over another or that portrays incomprehensible,
irrelevant situations as having little value. The trick for Conroy is to
make learning joyful through games and field trips, and to present
knowledge as a cooperative exploration of all that is relevant to the
kids' own life situations, and in so doing, educate. 
This movie matter-of-factly portrays the events and Conroy's thoughts
without boring us or resorting to long speeches.
