Title
Review for Superstar (1999)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Brandon Herring 
Starring: Molly Shannon, Will Ferrell, Elaine Hendrix, Harland Williams, Mark
McKinney, Glynis Johns.
Rated PG-13 for sexual humor and language.
As an avid SNL (Saturday Night Live) viewer I sadly never got to see 'A Night
at the Roxbury'. The two brothers from that skit always cracked me up and I
enjoyed them on SNL. Of course they are silly, dumb and plotless but SNL films
are always funny and entertaining. 'Superstar' is one of those films. It's a
surprisingly warm and good-spirited movie that doesn't even feel like an SNL
movie. It has heart and at the same time lots of laughs. Molly Shannon's Mary
Katherine Gallagher character is a riot and at the same time a lovable, sweet
character that we instantly fall in love with.
Mary Katherine Gallagher is a young high school girl in hopes of big things.
One day she would like to be a superstar and has always wanted to have a big
screen kiss. She's not a very liked person in school. One of her worst enemies
is Evion (Elaine Hendrix) the head cheerleader and major bimbo. She's going out
with Skye (Will Ferrel) the most popular guy in school and captain of the
football team. Mary has always had a crush on Skye and one day would like to
kiss him. She lives a normal life, she has friends, she has a job and she has a
loving grandma whom she lives with. When she hears that there is auditions for
a talent show she knows she HAS to try out and prove to everyone she's a
superstar.
Her grandmother disapproves of it, but Mary tries out anyway. Rather she makes
it or not is what you'll find out when you see the movie. It's a clever movie
with plenty of laughs, as well as heart. Molly Shannon is a extremely talented
actress who makes us believe who she is and what she does. She has very funny
moments including make-out scenes with a tree, yes I said that right as well as
a stop sign.
Not surprisingly other critics are panning this movie and calling it dumb and
lame. But what people have to understand is that the film isn't supposed to be
an Oscar Worthy movie. All they planned when making this film was fun and
entertainment and that is what they made. I found many of the skits in the film
funny and the overall tone of the movie was surprisingly sweet. There's a few
offensive jokes (especially towards Catholic people) but none of them are
scarring or on bad terms.
Mary Katherine Gallagher is a sweet young girl who has many priceless lines
towards Evion. The ending is very satisfying and makes a warm, fuzzy feeling go
over us as we realize even movies like this can make us feel good. There are
still some good SNL characters who need their own movies. I know I was glad to
see this movie and I might even see it again. It's a great acted, funny, warm
and engaging film that works on many levels that appealed to me and may to you.
As long as you don't take it to heart 'Superstar' is a good movie. It actually
contains a good message embedded in it's storyline: People should not listen to
others on how they look or how they should act. They need to look inside
themselves and find the good things rather than the bad ones which is a real
winner. See 'Superstar' for fast-paced fun and entertainment with heart, no
more.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring October 13, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Eugene Novikov
"You might not want to say 'Superstar' anymore because some people
might say that you super suck."
Starring Molly Shannon, Will Ferrell, Elaine Hendrix, Mark McKinney.
Rated PG-13.
I love Saturday Night Live. The legendary variety show has slipped a
bit in consistency of late, but it's still the smartest, funniest 90
minutes on tv. The good thing about the show -- and head honcho Lorne
Michaels is still not getting this -- is that the laughs come in four
minute skits. That's right, four minutes. Four, not ninety. When a
concept that can barely fill four minutes with laughs is stretched to
more than twenty times that length, very bad things happen. Those bad
things are called "SNL Movies".
There have, actually, been a couple of successful ones. The Blues
Brothers was a hit, and Wayne's World developed an inordinately large
fan following, though I didn't really like it. But they were followed
by abominations such as Wayne's World 2, It's Pat! (a title eventually
tagged with "but who cares?") and A Night at the Roxbury, proving that
a variety sketch is not the best model for a feature-length movie. And
yet the saga continues with Superstar, which earns points for breaking
the gender barrier but quickly loses them for being, well, not very
funny.
Whether she likes it or not, the film belongs to SNL vet Molly Shannon
who plays Mary Katherine Gallagher, an unpopular schoolgirl with dreams
of big-time stardom and fantasies about the French-kissing the school
hunk (Will Ferrell). Her dream is to become famous so she tries out for
her Catholic School's talent show ("Cheerleaders Fight VD"). Being the
most unpopular girl in school, she is mocked and jeered at every turn,
except, of course, by the school psycho (Harland Williams) who
inevitably turns out to be a sweet and tender "big lug".
There are obstacles everywhere, from Mary's grandmother who wants her
to be a business woman, to the nasty Evian ("Go drink a bottle of
yourself," Mary exclaims), the head cheerleader whose goal in life is
to make Mary miserable. Can she hop over all the hurdles in her path
and become a Superstar? What do you think?
There is something inherently amusing about watching 40-year-olds play
high-schoolers (not to give any bright minds in Hollywood any ideas),
and I liked the fact that they let Shannon, a woman, do all-out Carrey-
style full body humor. In fact, Shannon is a funny and talented
actress, but she is stuck with a script that makes her rerun the same
gags over and over until even she looks like she is about to bail.
Superstar is intermittently amusing, but those moments are few and far
between. It's full of jabs at Catholicism (I'm surprised the ubiquitous
and rather blind to reality Catholic League didn't make this film a
prime target of its protests; at times, it's downright offensive) that
aren't particularly clever, just mean-spirited.
Superstar is redundant, repetitive and not particularly amusing, with
an unacceptably low gag-to-laugh ratio. A gleeful spirit surrounds the
film's star, but she is lost in a meandering plot and an unsatisfying
screenplay. I have a feeling that sooner or later she will get the
project she deserves; for now, she'll have to settle at making us laugh
on tv, forgetting this misguided production as quickly as possible.
Shannon is a veritable superstar already. This was the last thing she
needed.

Author
Michael Dequina
Lorne Michaels and his SNL Studios have better luck with this big-screen
outing of meek Catholic school girl Mary Katherine Gallagher (Molly
Shannon) than they did with their previous _Saturday_Night_Live_
adaptation, last fall's horrendous _A_Night_at_the_Roxbury_.  That's
because, unlike _Roxbury_'s head-bobbing Butabi brothers, there's more to
the character of Mary than a single characteristic--there's also a lot of
heart.  Although director Bruce McCulloch and writer Steven Wayne Koren
do offer a taste of what Mary is known for--that is, reciting movie
monologues and knocking over and/or breaking stuff--what keeps the film
engaging, albeit superficially, is the gentle sweetness that Shannon
gives her.
But, much like an _SNL_ skit, _Superstar_ ultimately misses more than it
hits.  The story has Mary trying to impress her dream guy (Will
Ferrell)--and earn her first kiss--by entering a school talent
competition, and from this thin wisp of a story emerges a few funny and
amusingly bizarre set pieces, notably a memorable scene with a tree and a
couple of musical production numbers.  Between those moments, however,
are too many gags that don't work, namely a bunch of unfunny fantasy
sequences: recurring appearances by a groovy Jesus Christ (also played by
Ferrell), a strained send-up of _Armageddon_, and, most painfully, a
supermodel photo shoot.  Forced bits of padding such as those just show
that the concept really doesn't merit more than the five minutes its
allotted on Saturday nights.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Bruce McCulloch.
Cast: Molly Shannon, Will Ferrell, Elaine Hendrix, Harland Williams, Emmy 
Laybourne, Glynis Johns, Mark McKinney, Gerry Bamman.
1999 - 82 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for sexual innuendo and profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 8, 1999.
The popular "Saturday Night Live" character of the Irish Catholic high 
schooler Mary Katherine Gallagher probably doesn't have a more avid fan than 
myself. Watching the dwindling SNL each week, mostly in hopes of seeing the 
effervescent Molly Shannon portray the clumsy, yet sweet, underdog who dreams 
of being a success in whatever she sets out to do, Mary Katherine Gallagher 
stands as a role model--albeit an exaggerated one--for a lot of young people 
who may not be the prettiest or most popular, but who have a good soul and 
remain true to themselves. 
There was a lot of hope on my part that "Superstar," the character's debut 
feature film adaptation, would be a successful and bright comedy, one with a 
lot of heart and a lot of laughs, and with the always-entertaining Shannon 
on-board, I doubted it could fail. SNL-based motion pictures are too often 
criticized with the cliched statement that the movies almost always fail 
miserably because the usual 5-minute skits are stretched out to an 
insufferable film of an hour-and-a-half, but, for the most part, I disagree 
(unless the words, "The Blues Brothers," "Coneheads," or "Stuart Saves His 
Family," appear in the title). Even the critically-maligned SNL film from 
last year, "A Night at the Roxbury," was, for me, one of the most enjoyably 
funny comedies of 1998, far more satisfying than the uneven, overrated 
"There's Something About Mary."
That being said, 'guilty' would be the most accurate adjective to describe 
the way I feel for ultimately having to give "Superstar" a negative two-star 
rating. Although often outrageous, and outrageously rib-tickling, the film 
consistently does feel as if about fifteen 5-minute skits have been edited 
together, with three or four warm, character-defining moments placed in 
between, to pad out the running time to a far-too-brief, underdeveloped 82 
minutes (including the opening and end credits). 
The story is simple--almost painfully so--but it still could have worked had 
the screenplay been more focused and innovative, and the characters dealt 
with more satisfyingly. Unfortunately, the picture has been whittled down to 
a strenuously shallow concoction that, aside from its message concerning the 
importance of inner beauty, is only skin-deep. Mary Katherine Gallagher is a 
determined, accident-prone 17-year-old girl living with her loving, 
wheelchair-bound grandmother in "the ugliest house in the neighborhood, with 
the ugliest front yard, and the ugliest dog." Working part-time at a video 
store in which she gets to rewind the videocassettes as she watches her 
favorite movies over and over again, and attending St. Monica's Catholic High 
School, Mary dreams of nothing more than to be a superstar, "like the people 
you see in the movies." She also has an almost obsessive crush on the captain 
of the football team, Sky Corrigan (Will Ferrell), but unfortunately, he is 
currently going out with head-cheerleader/ice-queen Evian (Elaine Hendrix). 
When St. Monica announces their forthcoming "Let's Fight V.D." Talent 
Contest, Mary instantly knows what she's going to do: she's going to 
audition, and by golly, she's going to perform in the contest, and hopefully, 
will be able to nab Sky's admiration in the process.
"Superstar" is littered throughout with such delightful moments that it 
frequently starts to win you over, only for a slow spot to arise and sink 
things back down into mediocrity. The majority of the jokes are easy targets, 
and have been recycled from the usual character traits of Mary Katherine 
Gallagher, such as her tendency to fall over things, stick her hands under 
her armpits and sniff them when she grows nervous, and recite monologues from 
made-for-TV movies that will better express what she is feeling at any given 
moment. These moments tellingly add up to the heartiest laughs in the whole 
picture (particularly one sequence set in a confessional in which Mary 
expresses her feelings through a dead-on, perfectly-imitated monolgue from 
"Sybil," starring Sally Field), but while they work wonderfully and are 
especially memorable within the confines of a tiny skit, they plays as more 
of an afterthought in a big-screen movie.
Front-and-center is the incomparable female comedian Molly Shannon, who 
brings each and every one of her characters to vibrant life, whether it be on 
SNL or in films, which she has gradually, and deservedly, been doing more of 
recently. Although amicably appearing in supporting roles in "A Night at the 
Roxbury" and last Spring's Drew Barrymore vehicle, "Never Been Kissed," 
"Superstar" is Shannon's first chance to be the star attraction and shine 
throughout, and she does just that. Mary Katherine Gallagher is an earnest, 
likable creation, a person who is often accidentally involved in pratfalls, 
but is never demeaned or directly made fun of, and Shannon embodies the role 
with both sweetness and cheerful humor. That she is a 34-year-old actor 
playing a teenager (and this mostly goes for the whole "teen" cast) only aids 
in the picture's campy, almost innocent feel, reminiscent of 1978's classic 
musical, "Grease!"
Will Ferrell, as the object of Mary's compulsive affections, is underused and 
never really written fully as an actual character, instead remaining a sort 
of enigma throughout. Meanwhile, Harland Williams, as a silent, brooding 
fellow student/outcast who takes a liking to Mary, is a far more effective 
love interest, and Elaine Hendrix is clearly enjoying herself as the nasty, 
unredeemable villain, Evian. In one of the film's funniest scenes, Mary and 
Evian wage war in a battle of verbal insults that concludes with Mary 
practicing out martial arts moves that she learnied from watching a lot of 
Jackie Chan movies. "You're parents died because of their embarrassment of 
you," Evian heartlessly quips, to which Mary responds, "Well, at least I 
wasn't named after a type of bottled water." Later, Mary hilariously advises 
Evian to drink a bottle of herself.
By the time "Superstar" had reached its abrupt climax at the talent contest, 
I had become disappointed because I knew the film would soon be over, and 
what had come before was marginally adequate at best. Making matters worse, 
the large majority of its central comic moments were blatantly shown in the 
theatrical trailer and non-stop TV ads, and so they didn't work quite as well 
as they could have. Even when it somewhat recoups itself with a slightly 
unforeseen conclusion, and includes a crowd-pleasing moment for Mary that 
caused my theater's audience to erupt into applause (to which I almost was 
tempted to join in), the film is a major missed opportunity. Not only does it 
feel like a rush-job, but it possesses the exact aura of a skit, rather than 
a fleshed-out portrait of an admittedly lovable character. With "Superstar," 
Molly Shannon proves once and for all that she does, indeed, have what it 
takes to be a superstar; it's just too bad that for her first starring role, 
her marvelous character couldn't have been given a more worthwhile film 
vehicle.

Author
Brandon Herring 
Starring: Molly Shannon, Will Ferrell, Elaine Hendrix, Harland Williams, Mark
McKinney, Glynis Johns.
Rated PG-13 for sexual humor and language.
As an avid SNL (Saturday Night Live) viewer I sadly never got to see 'A Night
at the Roxbury'. The two brothers from that skit always cracked me up and I
enjoyed them on SNL. Of course they are silly, dumb and plotless but SNL films
are always funny and entertaining. 'Superstar' is one of those films. It's a
surprisingly warm and good-spirited movie that doesn't even feel like an SNL
movie. It has heart and at the same time lots of laughs. Molly Shannon's Mary
Katherine Gallagher character is a riot and at the same time a lovable, sweet
character that we instantly fall in love with.
Mary Katherine Gallagher is a young high school girl in hopes of big things.
One day she would like to be a superstar and has always wanted to have a big
screen kiss. She's not a very liked person in school. One of her worst enemies
is Evion (Elaine Hendrix) the head cheerleader and major bimbo. She's going out
with Skye (Will Ferrel) the most popular guy in school and captain of the
football team. Mary has always had a crush on Skye and one day would like to
kiss him. She lives a normal life, she has friends, she has a job and she has a
loving grandma whom she lives with. When she hears that there is auditions for
a talent show she knows she HAS to try out and prove to everyone she's a
superstar. 
Her grandmother disapproves of it, but Mary tries out anyway. Rather she makes
it or not is what you'll find out when you see the movie. It's a clever movie
with plenty of laughs, as well as heart. Molly Shannon is a extremely talented
actress who makes us believe who she is and what she does. She has very funny
moments including make-out scenes with a tree, yes I said that right as well as
a stop sign. 
Not surprisingly other critics are panning this movie and calling it dumb and
lame. But what people have to understand is that the film isn't supposed to be
an Oscar Worthy movie. All they planned when making this film was fun and
entertainment and that is what they made. I found many of the skits in the film
funny and the overall tone of the movie was surprisingly sweet. There's a few
offensive jokes (especially towards Catholic people) but none of them are
scarring or on bad terms.
Mary Katherine Gallagher is a sweet young girl who has many priceless lines
towards Evion. The ending is very satisfying and makes a warm, fuzzy feeling go
over us as we realize even movies like this can make us feel good. There are
still some good SNL characters who need their own movies. I know I was glad to
see this movie and I might even see it again. It's a great acted, funny, warm
and engaging film that works on many levels that appealed to me and may to you.
As long as you don't take it to heart 'Superstar' is a good movie. It actually
contains a good message embedded in it's storyline: People should not listen to
others on how they look or how they should act. They need to look inside
themselves and find the good things rather than the bad ones which is a real
winner. See 'Superstar' for fast-paced fun and entertainment with heart, no
more.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring October 13, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Once again, Hollywood delves into the deep files of "Saturday Night Live" for a story idea, so no one should be very surprised when it turns out to be like an extended TV skit. Molly Shannon reprises her SNL role of gawky parochial school-girl Mary Katherine Gallagher, easily recognized by her red hairband, thick horn-rimmed glasses, too-short plaid skirt, sensible white underpants, and armpit-sniffing nervous tic. All Mary Katherine wants in life is a kiss, a real bona fide Hollywood-style kiss. She works at a video store as a "rewind girl," so she's keenly aware of the open-mouthed passion that true love can inspire. But her prospects look decidedly grim until she enters a "Let's Beat Venereal Disease Talent Contest," sponsored by Catholic Teen Magazine, lured by the grand prize of a free trip to TinselTown, where she's sure her dreams will come true. The object of her affection is SNL's Will Ferrell, who not only plays the most popular boy and best dancer at St. Mo!
nica's High School but also a jiggy Jesus. Unfortunately, in director Bruce McCullough's close-ups, thirtysomethings Molly Shannon and Will Ferrell look their age - and they've left their teenage years far behind. After playing the character for six years on SNL, Molly Shannon explains the appeal of Mary Katherine this way: "I think people identify with her adolescent struggles because she's hopeful. It's not like she's just a loser that's not going to succeed, but she has hope and she's a fighter. She gets hurt and put down but she never lets that defeat her. She just keeps going after what she wants. She's a character with a lot of heart and passion." Nevertheless, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Superstar" is an awkward, dopey 3. Mary Katherine's best suited for the small screen, so wait for the video.

Author
John Carroll
   Reviewing movies is such a tough job.  You know, sitting there watching the
movie.  Thinking what is right and wrong.  And the thing that bothers me them
most is that whole part about sitting through the whole movie.  That was the
latest fret I had as I sat through Superstar, an SNL movie that is so blatantly
dumb, it is a shame that it was not intended that way.
   Superstar is based on the Saturday Night Live sketch of Catholic schoolgirl
Mary Katherine Gallagher.  The part is played by Molly Shannon, arguably the
funniest female performer on the current SNL cast.  However, most sketches that
have been put onto the big screen have failed miserably.  Superstar follows in
that path, despite an admirable performance by Shannon.
   The plot of Superstar is pretty simple: Gallagher is a child striving for a
kiss with the stars of Hollywood.  So, she decides she needs to become a
Superstar herself to accomplish this task.  Unfortunately, Superstar
continually strays from this plot and travels into pointless scenes that add
absolutely nothing to the main plot.
   To get one thing out of the way, the performance of Shannon is not all that
bad.  She created the Mary Katherine Gallagher character and does an admirable
job of trying to make the film funny, but one person cannot save a sinking
ship, and Superstar sinks fast.  Will Ferrell, arguably the funniest male
performer on SNL co-stars with Shannon in Superstar as Sky Corgan, the star she
wants to kiss.  Unfortunately, Ferrell gets no laughs.  None.  Undoubtedly, he
has the worst performance in the film.  But, it is definitely not all of his
fault, something I will talk about later.
   The rest of the cast does nothing to add to this movie.  Tom Green, star of
MTV's The Tom Green Show, plays one of Sky Corgan's friends, but just like
Ferrell, his immense talent is wasted in Superstar.  Elaine Hendrix plays
Evian, the snotty and bolemic girlfriend of Sky Corgan and Mary Katherine's
archnemesis.  She tries to make fun of herself, but fails, just like the film
itself.  Harland Williams plays Slater, the guy who has had eyes for Gallagher
all along and Mark McKinney plays the Mary's principal.  They try, but fail. 
The sad part is that this film had the chance to be funny, but the script
continuously fails.
   I just cannot explain it any further.  The script for Superstar is just plan
stupid.  Not stupid funny, like There's Something About Mary, but just plain
stupid, like The Haunting.  The film tries to be to serious with its comedy
and, in essence, denies itself of what it really is: an SNL sketch.  As I said
earlier, the plot continually veres off into terriotory that serves the movie
no purpose whatsoever.  In fact, they even introduce a Maryesque dog to get
some comedy, but it is more pathetic than it is funny.
   In the end, Superstar's laughs are few and far between.  Tom Green has one
hilarious salad sketch, Shannon is clever with her "monologues" in confession
and the Full Monty spoof was probably the funniest part of the whole movie. 
Besides that, Superstar is dull, boring and just not funny.  I have gotten more
laughs out of a regular, ten-minute SNL sketch of Mary Katherine Gallagher than
I did from Superstar.  And on a final note, Gallagher's finger sniffing, which
made her sketch so popular, is done twice in the whole film.  I will use a
quote from Superstar to sum it all up: It "Supersucks."
One and a Half Stars Out of Four Stars
The Movie Page- http://jump.to/moviepage
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Jamey Hughton
Some will confuse a movie based on a Saturday Night Live sketch for an
actual movie. In actuality, they are products which have been
precariously stretched beyond their usual 10-minute running length,
pampered and revamped to (barely) qualify as a feature film. Some, like
`Wayne's World' and `The Blues Brothers', fare moderately well with a
mainstream audience. Others (`It's Pat!', anyone...?) are so idiotic and
pointless that it's embarrassing to sit through even the skimpy 80
minutes of their nauseating running time.
`Superstar', the latest SNL related motion picture, actually fares
better at 82 minutes than in the suffocating confines of a 10-minute
sketch. I have never been a fan of the regular skit, which follows
Irish-Catholic school girl Mary Katherine Gallagher (Molly Shannon)
through various escapades of quoting ancient TV movies and sniffing her
armpits during fits of nervous hysteria. But with a less claustrophobic
running time, some surprising attributes of Mary Katherine are allowed
to shine through: her unexpected charm, her sensitive personality... And
Shannon fits the role remarkably, applying just the right amount of
playful exuberance in some scenes and genuine feeling in others.
There are massive problems in `Superstar' from the very beginning, but
the appealing cuteness of the cast (along with an assorted handful of
fall-down funny moments) helps revive the quality considerably. The
painfully weak plot-line finds Mary, teased and taunted by her fellow
classmates at St. Monica's Catholic school, contemplating an entry to
the upcoming `Fight Venereal Disease' Talent Contest. She is also wooing
the incredible hunk Sky Corrigan (Will Ferrell), who holds the key to
Mary's lifelong dream: a great kiss.  Anticipating this timeless moment,
she has long practiced on several inanimate objects (including a tree
and a stop sign), much to the shock and dismay of the sisters at St.
Monica's.
For every joke or physical gag that works in `Superstar', there are
three that don't. There is also an emphasis on perverted sexual humor,
including one scene where Mary has her breasts engaged in a
conversation. Hidden in all the idiocy, there are isolated moments that
are just wonderful. Like Mary's bouts with the stuck-up blond
cheerleader Evian (Elaine Hendrix), whom she describes as the
`prettiest, most successful, most bulimic girl in school'. After the two
rivals attack each other with the kung-fu tactics of Jackie Chan, Mary
tells Evian to go `drink a bottle of herself'. There is also an
enjoyable send-up of `Armageddon', and funny sequences involving Mary's
hideously ugly pooch, which I wanted to confront with a large comb.
The entire cast is bright and funny. Will Ferrell, one of the most
talented additions to the current `SNL' cast, is delightfully
self-satisfied as the stereotypical jock Sky Corrigan. It's unfortunate
that Sky's character is left relatively unexplored, but whatever ground
Ferrell loses with that drawback, he makes up for with a funny recurring
appearance as Mary's subconscious interpretation of God (who advises the
Catholic girl to `get jiggy with it'). Glynis Johns is Mary's
wheelchair-bound gramma, Harland Williams is unusually sweet as a
mysterious and speechless drifter, and `Kids in the Hall' veteran Mark
McKinney supplies several gratifying moments as the bewildered Father
Ritley. McKinney can take even the most lifeless scene, such as when
Ritley chews on a blackened piece of toast, and revitalize it with
humor.
On the subject of `Kids in the Hall', it's also the original comic
origins of director Bruce McCulloch, who previously tried his luck
behind the camera this year with `Dog Park'. There's something absent
from McCulloch's direction, but it suits the subject matter nicely.
Undeniably, the real star here is Shannon, who originally created the
character of Mary Katherine Gallagher and deserves the credit where
credit is due.
Mary is certainly a clumsy girl (crashing through a confessional door in
one particular scene), and in some ways, the film embodies her
clumsiness. There's no reason why anyone would want to endure
`Superstar', unless they were a dedicated fan of `Saturday Night Live'
or Molly Shannon. But there are a few redeeming qualities - including a
contagious charm - that helps the film rise above a few general
standards normally associated with the `SNL' breed of movie-making. I
laughed during `Superstar', and if it catches you in the right frame of
mind, you might laugh too.
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton
http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
http://MovieThing.com/members/movies/MovieViews
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton - YOUTH WEB SITE NOMINEE
http://www.shocking.co.uk/iawards/youth/home.cgi?referrer=movieviews
"CLICK" and Show Your Support!!

Author
Steve Rhodes
For those who feel that movies should be more like TV, SUPERSTAR, the
latest movie by director Bruce McCulloch (his last was the abysmal DOG
PARK), is a movie-length version of a "Saturday Night Live" skit.
Starring Molly Shannon as the geeky Catholic schoolgirl Mary Katherine
Gallagher, the film concerns Mary's desire to turn superstar so she can
get her life's one wish, a big, movie-style kiss.
Featuring Hollywood's favorite whipping boy, the Catholic Church, the
irreverent film asks such questions as whether the host at the Mass is
low-fat.  A Jesus-like figure, in the form of a hippie deity, appears
periodically in a vision to guide Mary.  His advice includes "get
jiggy."  What this means exactly remains somewhat of mystery, but it has
a sexual connotation.
When just 10 years old, Mary prays, "Please God, send me someone to make
out with."  The sexually charged film pushes the envelope of its PG-13
rating as in such scenes as the one in which Mary pushes up her breasts
and has them talk to each other.  It also skirts the rating by showing
lots and lots of panties and some bras, but no actual nudity.
Relying on slapstick for most of its humor, a typical scene occurs in a
confessional.  "My feelings would best be expressed in a monologue from
.... ," Mary begins as she frequently does.  Launching off into yet
another imitation of a movie scene, she gets so much into character that
she gathers the attention of all of the other students in the church
with her loud voice.  The conclusion of this comedic episode has her
knocking down the confessional door due to her acting exuberance.
A recurring scene has her French kissing a tree, as she turns orgasmic.
As her tongue went deep into the tree, our audience went wild.
Steve Koren's script puts Mary in special Ed so that he can include lots
of jokes aimed at "retards."  Am I the only one who doesn't find the
word "retard" funny?
The cast includes Will Ferrell as BMOC Sky Corrigan, Elaine Hendrix as
the proudly bulimic blonde Evian, Emmy Laybourne as the braces-wearing
jock Helen and Glynis Johns as Mary's wheelchair bound Grandma.  Lest
you think they missed ridiculing everyone, don't worry.  There's a gay
guy, a stutterer, etc.
For all of its silliness, its crudeness and its cheap shots, the movie
does have a few nice moments.  Eventually, as it throws every joke it
can think of at you in the hope that you'll like something, it almost
wins you over.  Still, a 5-minute comedy sketch of the same material
would be preferable.
SUPERSTAR runs just 1:22.  It is rated PG-13 for sex-related humor and
language and would not be appropriate for kids under 13.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Let's face it – films based on sketches from Saturday Night Live have a
really bad rap.  People have major problems with the concept of a
once-funny skit that's been driven into the ground for three or four
years being stretched into a 90-minute movie.  And who could blame
them?  But if you look closer at the list of skits-turned-films that SNL
bigwig Lorne Michaels has produced, you will see a surprising track
record.
Of the four previous attempts, only the most recent (A Night at the
Roxbury) has failed critically and commercially.  Roxbury wasn't even a
funny sketch to begin with, so it was doomed from the get-go.  Lorne's
other endeavors were much more successful, including both Wayne's World
films, The Coneheads and the teaming of Chris Farley and David Spade in
the hysterical Tommy Boy (which wasn't really ever a skit…and I'm not
going to mention Black Sheep).  But because most of the mega-stars that
matured on SNL were featured in original films (read: not tired skits),
those featuring current cast members are tossed off quicker than Sharon
Stone's panties at a Hollywood Foreign Press party.
That said, Superstar is not at all a good movie.  Doesn't that
contradict everything I just said?  Well, yes and no.  It is still a
slight concept stretched way too thin, but the refreshing part of the
film is that it doesn't repeatedly hammer home the protagonist's snappy
catch phrase – `Sometimes, when I get nervous, I put my hands under my
arms and then I smell them like this.'
Based on the character she created on SNL, Molly Shannon (Never Been
Kissed) brings the soft-spoken, apologetic, TV-movie-loving Mary
Katherine Gallagher to the big screen.  Here, like the television
sketch, M.K. is a bit of an outcast at St. Monica's High, craves
popularity and dreams of becoming a superstar.  Additionally, viewers
will learn that M.K. was born and raised in the small town of Bessame
Heights in the ugliest house with the ugliest yard and the ugliest dog.
She is in love with Sky Corrigan (Will Ferrell, Dick), the captain of
the football team, and ends up in the special ed. class when a nun
catches M.K. smooching a tree that she pretends is Sky.
M.K.'s home life isn't much better.  Originally told that her parents
were torn apart by hammerhead sharks, she later learns that they were
victims of a grisly step-dancing competition accident.  Raised by her
crippled grandmother (Glynis Johns, Lady Penelope Peasoup from the ‘60s
Batman serial), M.K. gets a very unprestigious after-school job at Kip's
Video as the rewind girl.  She fails at attempts to join both the
cheerleading squad and the gymnastics team, but sees a potential for her
big break when St. Monica's announces that they will conduct a `Let's
Fight Venereal Disease' talent competition.  The winner will receive an
all-expenses paid trip to Hollywood and a part in a movie with `positive
moral values.'
The film proceeds predictably to the big, dull finale, where M.K. is pit
against her arch-rival Evian (Elaine Hendrix, The Parent Trap), who also
happens to be both a popular cheerleader and Sky's current squeeze.
There isn't much imagination in the script (Steve Koren, Roxbury) or the
direction (Bruce McCulloch, Dog Park), except a spiffy Armageddon dream
sequence spoof.  I think Superstar's opening credits – featuring an
overhead drop shot into a pool of synchronized swimmers - probably cost
more than the entire production of Dog Park.  And I got really tired of
continually seeing M.K.'s white cotton panties.  Superstar co-stars MTV
shocker Tom Green, Harland Williams (Rocket Man) and Mark McKinney
(S.N.L.).
1:25 - PG-13 for sex-related humor and language
