Title
Review for Rain Without Thunder (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
As those familiar with off-topic flame wars on the Usenet
know by now, very few political issues can be as divisive
and emotionally charged as the issue of abortion. This is
especially the case in USA, with the never ending abortion
debate escalating into acts of violence which, if we are to
believe some analysts, could turn into civil war in a
foreseeable future. Of course, debate of such magnitude
spilled over on the screens, sometimes with mediocre
(CITIZEN RUTH), bad (Schloendorf's screen adaptation of
HANDMAID'S TALE) and sometimes with good results (IF THESE
WALLS COULD TALK by Nancy Savoca and Cher). The best film
among them, RAIN WITHOUT THUNDER, 1992 drama by Gary
Bennett, is probably the least known of them all.
Same as in Margaret Attwood's novel HANDMAID TALE, the plot
of this film is set in the near future and it extrapolates
some present-day trends. The year is 2042. Many years ago
"pro life" conservatives managed to win their fight, change
US Constitution and thus enable legislatures to outlaw
abortions. Allison Goldring (played by Ali Thomas) and her
mother Beverly Goldring (Betty Buckley) are serving prison
sentences under Unborn Child Kidnaping Act, after trying to
evade abortion laws by perfoming operation in Sweden.
Reporter (played by Carolyn McCormick) is following the
story and through the interviews with the people who are
familiar with the case, as well as with different
politicians, clergymen and other celebrities, we are
introduced to the future America where the concept of
women's abortion rights is laughable.
While the author of this film, like the authors of almost
all other films with the same subject, takes liberal "pro
choice" stand, RAIN WITHOUT THUNDER is hardly a propaganda
movie. On the contrary, using the mock documentary style to
portray bleak distopic future, allows viewers to draw their
own conclusions. Not only that, this film shows "pro life"
America as still democratic country - with the people being
able to speak freely and have different points of view. RAIN
WITHOUT THUNDER also suggests, unlike Attwood's novel (the
novel got nod by the film-makers in the form of future
"Attwood Society"), that the "pro life" regime would be
introduced gradually and democratically. "Pro lifers" are
given the chance to explain their views and extrapolate on
the practical implementation of those views. What makes this
film very scary (at least for "pro choice" viewers) is the
fact that many times their arguments make perfect sense -
instead of gun-wielding fanatics and religious maniacs, they
are presented as down-to-Earth politicians, lawyers and
bureaucrats.
Of course, this film still isn't perfect. The world, if we
don't count some new and exotic slang words didn't change
much in fifty years. The fashions and technology is the
same, and film didn't try to explain why USA became
non-abortion country, and other countries (like Sweden)
didn't. Some plot developments in the last part of the
movie, although plausible, seem too melodramatic. And the
last nightmare scene was hardly necessary - the authors had
already made their point. But, despite those flaws, RAIN
WITHOUT THUNDER is still a rarity among American movies in
last few years - a film with intriguing, socially important
subject, and in the same time intelligent, ingenious and
thought-provoking.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Carolyn McCormick, Ali Thomas, Betty Buckley, Jeff Daniels,
           Linda Hunt, Graham Greene
Director:  Gary Bennett
Producers:  Nanette Sorensen and Gary Sorensen
Screenplay:  Gary Bennett
Music:  Randall Lynch and Allen Lynch
Released by Orion Classics
     The year is 2042; the country is the United States of America.
Alison Goldring (Ali Thomas) and her mother Beverly (Betty Buckley) have
been convicted of fetal murder under the new "Unborn Child Kidnapping
Act."  Since abortions are no longer legal in the United States, Alison,
accompanied by Beverly, traveled to Sweden to obtain one.  However,
the new law provides that women who leave the country for the express
purpose of getting an abortion can be tried and convicted as if they had
illegally obtained one inside the United States.
     RAIN WITHOUT THUNDER concludes with the following quotation by
Frederick Douglass:  "If there is no struggle, there is no progress.
Those who profess to favor freedom and yet avoid confrontation, are
people who want crops without plowing up the ground; they want rain
without thunder and lightning; they want the ocean without the roar of
its waters."  In a few sentences, this statement expresses the message
that the people behind this movie are attempting to get across.
     Told in a documentary style, RAIN WITHOUT THUNDER is both a triumph
and a failure.  It presents and explores many important and timely
issues, but in the process loses sight of the characters.  The narrative
style--interviews with the principals rather than actually showing
events--further dilutes the impact of the story.  There were many
instances during the movie when I wanted to see a scene rather than have
it recounted to me.  Words do not adequately replace actions.  By the
end of the movie, although I understood the characters, they never
become completely real.  As a result, the concluding scene--a
black-and-white nightmare--had little impact.
     On the other hand, RAIN WITHOUT THUNDER raises issue after issue,
nearly all of which are thought-provoking.  Women's rights, racial and
sexual equality, the nature of freedom, and the politics of choice are
all placed under the microscope.  They are not simply given cursory
lip-service, either.  In most cases, both sides are examined and reasons
are given for each of the opposing positions.  RAIN WITHOUT THUNDER is a
film that demands its audience's attention and intellectual involvement.
Those that refuse to debate the topics within their own minds will find
this a dry and uninteresting experience.
     Most movies taking place in the year 2042 are science fiction
films.  Nothing could be further from the truth for RAIN WITHOUT
THUNDER.  In fact, one of its weaknesses is that, aside from the
political changes, nothing else seems much different.  This could be
1993 rather than fifty years beyond.  There are numerous silly-sounding,
currently-meaningless slang terms thrown in to add a dash of
authenticity to the dialogue.  That particular attempt at realism is
more distracting and annoying than effective, however.
     RAIN WITHOUT THUNDER is a difficult movie to critique.  While it
provides more fodder for thought than most recent films, it doesn't
succeed in telling its story.  Director/writer Gary Bennett has a style
that is unnecessarily cynical with a view of the future that could not
be more bleak.  The plot, with the exception of a single ironic twist,
is unspectacular, and the central characters are left half-developed.
Without the documentary-style framing, the people of this film would
have been more real, but some of the issues might have gotten lost.  As
it is, RAIN WITHOUT THUNDER has great substance, but little drama.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
