Title
Review for Synthetic Pleasures (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I love documentaries.  If I had a bumper sticker on my car, it
would probably read "This car breaks for documentaries" or
"Documentarians do it with realism."
     The best documentaries are made in the cutting room where the
documentarian decides just how long to go with each scene.  Of those
practicing their craft today, Leni Riefenstahl is pretty much retired,
Michael Apted is the best at this.  I would suggest that everyone
interested at all in film see his 28 UP and 35 UP.  As he follows a
group of English men and women as they grow up, he has an uncanny
ability to linger with an interview at length and yet know exactly when
to cut away.  MTV directors and most American newscasts have the five
seconds and cut rule.  Makes for a fast past, but does little to
enlighten.
     SYNTHETIC PLEASURES is a new documentary made in the Silicon
Valley, where else with a name like that, but it features scenes from
all over the world with special emphasis on Japan.  The film is
produced by the owner, George Gund, of the local San Jose Sharks hockey
team and is directed by his wife Iara Lee.  Both are first time film
makers and the results show.  Nevertheless, this is an interesting and
provocative film and worth seeing.
     If I had a single criticism, it is of the editing by Stacia
Thompson and Andreas Troeger.  Lee's choice of subjects are
fascinating, but the editors are way too influenced by MTV.  Lee should
have edited the picture herself, and she should have spent more time on
the synthetic pleasures part of the movie and less on the peripheral
material like cryonics.
     So what does the documentary show us?  Well, it starts mainly in
Japan with large indoor artificial environments of all types.  This is
the best part of the film.  We see gigantic buildings where people
inside are skiing, surfing, golfing, fishing, you name it.  The film
says people like these better than the real thing because they are
guaranteed consistency and perfection - the snow will always be white
powder, the waves large, the fish biting, etc.
     The movie is a three way blend of visits to places of synthetic
pleasures, talking heads about technology and computer animations.  The
first is the most fascinating, and the last the most boring.  The
expert's views provide as much comical relief as insights.  Among other
things we are told are, "Technology is power to us," "You no longer
have to go to the Pyramids, the Pyramids come to you [in Las Vegas],"
and "The electricity goes off, and you discover you're not living in
Paradise, you're living in Hell."  The last quote seem apropos since I
saw the movie the day after a ten statewide power outage!  It also
reminded me of WESTWORLD where they have a little trouble with their
artificial environments.  See my recent review of it for more details.
     After a while the show begins to bog down with all of the stuff
Lee tries to cram in.  We have everything from old science fiction
movies to women who want to use virtual reality to feel the sexuality
of a man to people discussing all of the places on their bodies that
have been pierced to a section on cyberporn.  Lee takes a kitchen sink
approach which almost sinks the film.
     Like the photographer who takes a thousand pictures in the hope
that a few good ones will emerge, Lee interviews countless number of
people.  One is French performance artist Orlan who tells us, "I gave
my body to art."  She is shown getting her ninth plastic surgery to
rearrange her face to make a different artistic statement.  In a very
gory sequence we see her face being cut open so that her doctor can
make large puffy areas the size of a sliced peach above her eyes.
Another low point in the show is a very spaced out guy with rings all
over his body and with multicolored hair who informs us, "I definitely
think artificial intelligence is happening and will take over."  The
film is full of pop science, and provocative choices of experts.
     SYNTHETIC PLEASURES runs 1:25.  The film is not rated, but would
be an R.  It has nudity, sexual situations, and one gory scene.  It
would be fine for most teenagers.  I recommend this film to you even
with its flaws.  The good parts are fascinating, and if you don't like
a section, all you need do is wait two minutes, and the film will have
switched to something else entirely.  I give the show ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: variable (limited)
Running Length: 1:23
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Featuring Scott Bakatman, John Perry Barlow, Robert Ettinger, 
      Robert Garland, Timothy Leary, and others
Director: Iara Lee
Producer: George Gund
Cinematography: Toshifumi Furusawa, Marcus Hahn, and Kramer Morgenthau
U.S. Distributor: Caipirinha Productions
     The idea behind SYNTHETIC PLEASURES is fascinating enough:  examine 
how rapid advances in technology are changing culture and civilization.  
It's a rich and varied subject with more depth than even a lengthy 
documentary could probe.  And, at 83 minutes, SYNTHETIC PLEASURES is not 
long.  That doesn't stop the film from attempting to touch on such 
varying topics as nanotechnology, artificial intelligence, cryonics, 
plastic beauty, virtual reality, nootropics, cyber sex, transhumanism, 
biotechnology, artificial nature, and terminal identity.  Don't know 
what some of those terms mean?  Well, even after seeing the movie, you 
probably still won't.  Each is mentioned, briefly discussed (emphasis on 
"briefly"), then passed by.  SYNTHETIC PLEASURES is a shallow, rapid-
fire survey, not an in-depth essay.
     There's a direct relationship between your ignorance of the 
material and how much you'll get out of the film.  Computer-literate, 
technologically-minded individuals are likely to find much of SYNTHETIC 
PLEASURES insubstantial and trite.  For those of us who are "in the 
know" (hence, most likely to be attracted by the premise), the film 
doesn't offer any revelations.  It rehashes things that we've read about 
or experienced.  On the other hand, those who don't understand how to 
set the clocks on their VCRs may be in for an eye-opening experience.
     It's hard not to applaud director Iara Lee's intentions, even if 
the results are less-than-satisfying.  There's at least enough here to 
spur a lengthy post-film discussion.  Unfortunately, any such 
interaction is likely to be more compelling than the movie itself.  One 
of the most distressing aspects of SYNTHETIC PLEASURES is that when it 
raises a truly thought-provoking issue, instead of staying with it, the 
film rushes on.
     SYNTHETIC PLEASURES asks a lot of questions.  Is cyber interaction 
a danger to interpersonal interaction?  Are we creating an environment 
we won't be able to live in?  Will increasing reliance upon computers 
add to the already-pervasive sense of alienation?  Does a controlled 
life make for a better life, or does the unexpected make life worth 
living?  However, not only are none of these questions answered, the 
film doesn't offer much of an opinion about them.  We get occasional 
sound bytes from talking head experts, but that's all. 
     I was intrigued by a few of SYNTHETIC PLEASURES' observations, such 
as the direction Las Vegas weddings are taking ($30 drive up windows), 
the obsession with controlled environments in Japan (where they have a 
"Golf Dome", "Ski Dome", and "Ocean Dome"), and the level of faith that 
some people place in unproved technologies like cryonics.  The film 
mentions so many issues that it can't help piquing everyone's curiosity 
at some point.  For example, if you're wondering how close we are to the 
implant devices of STRANGE DAYS or the holodeck of STAR TREK, SYNTHETIC 
PLEASURES has something to say.
     Visually, the film is unspectacular.  Consisting mainly of crude 
computer animation, SYNTHETIC PLEASURES' look rapidly grows tedious.  
Since most of the information comes through a series of short interviews 
and the voiceover narration, it's possible to close your eyes and not 
miss much.  For a movie that's about cutting-edge technology, it's 
ironic (although not surprising, considering the small budget Lee had) 
that the presentation is so technically limited.
     Essentially, SYNTHETIC PLEASURES is an MTV-style documentary.  When 
it comes to subject breadth, the movie is in good shape, but at no time 
does it attempt anything more ambitious than skimming the surface.  
Unfortunately, it's underneath, beyond SYNTHETIC PLEASURES' scope, where 
the really good stuff lies.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
