Title
Review for Kiss Before Dying, A (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
A KISS BEFORE DYING  (1991) ***  Directed by James Dearden. Written by
Dearden from a novel by Ira Levin. Photography, Mike Southon.  Editing,
Michael Bradsell. Production Design, Jim Clay. Music, Howard Shore. Cast:
Matt Dillon (Jonathan) Sean Young (Dorothy and Ellen), Max Von Sydow
(Copper Baron Carlsson), Diane  Ladd (Jonathan's  mother),et al.  A
Universal release. 93 min. Rated R (violence, adult situations).
Ira  ("Rosemary's Baby" ) Levin's thriller  "A Kiss Before Dying"  was
filmed  in 1956  with Robert Wagner, Joanne Woodward, Virginia Leith,
Jeffrey Hunter , Mary Astor, and George Macready.  In the 1991 remake their
counterparts are  Matt Dillon, Sean Young, Sean Young again, nobody, Diane
Ladd and Max Von Sydow.
Jonathan is a psychotic,  fortune-hunting student at the University of
Pennsylvania;  Dorothy is a co-ed (remember that term?) the daughter of a
mining tycoon. She is also Ellen, her identical twin sister who is
alienated from Dad, Carlsson the Copper Baron.  Jonathan's mother is an
abandoned woman.
Jonathan grows up on the wrong side of the tracks and only  feet away from
them, dreaming of the Carlsson fortune as the copper company's cars roll
by.  Later, in college, he becomes Dorothy's ultra-secret lover, conniving
marriage with the heiress. Finding  out that he has made her pregnant  --
therefore sure to be disinherited by her intolerant father-- he throws her
from the top of the Philadelphia City Hall, making it look like suicide.
All this in one of the fastest starts in thriller history.
Sister Ellen suspects murder but no one will listen.  When she sleuths on
her own, Jonathan strangles Dorothy's previous boyfriend, staging it like a
suicide and making this new victim  appear like the  girl's killer.
Months later Jonathan is  in New York , as  "Jay " and  as Ellen's lover
and co-worker in an agency for street people. When they marry he gets his
coveted position with Carlsson . Slowly though Ellen gets suspicious of her
husband,  Jonathan suspects her suspicions , and the tension mounts...
The book had  holes, the 1956 movie had craters the size of the tycoon's
copper mines. The remake too plays fast and loose with credibility.  The
difference is that Dillon and Young  are better than their predecessors ,
hold your attention and  distract you somewhat from the  plot's
illogicalities. But they still can't make all the gaps go away.
Britisher James Dearden is the writer-director of a little gem,
"Diversion," which won  Best Short Drama at the 1980 Chicago Film Festival.
Later he expanded that subject in the scenario of director Adrian Lyne's
"Fatal Attraction,"  a 1987 feature which is flawed, blatant, not
uninteresting however, yet cannot hold a candle to  "Diversion." Dearden is
the first to agree, as he did in private as well as responding to a
question at a Cannes Festival press conference.
[You might wish to read my review of "Fatal Attraction." It also details
"Diversion"]
Next Dearden made "Pascali's Island," in 1988, scripting from someone
else's novel. This is an excellent, colorful, unusual work, but sadly, it
failed because of poor and limited distribution .
"Kiss" is obviously a much more commercial venture, and it does have
problems of verissimilitude. Yet it is good film-making, with good  pacing
, characterizations,  production values and with clever touches.  (
Curiously, its U.S.A. was recreated inside British studios.)
If there's less than meets the eye in the coincidences and gaps, there is
more to "Kiss" than one notices at first sight. Dearden belongs to a
film-conscious generation, and what's more, his father was a famous
movie-maker.  Adroitly, Dearden Junior blends the style of 1940s and 1950's
films noirs with several  homages to  Alfred Hitchcock , some   devious,
others obvious, like Ellen watching "Vertigo" on TV;  or like references to
"Psycho," notably in  a steamy sex scene inside a steamy shower, and a
close-up of the drain .
Dearden improves on the 1956 in many ways. Among them, by  making Dorothy
and Ellen twins, which  reinforces Ellen's feelings of foul play ,  since
twins are said to have mysterious affinities. Or by  eliminating the
ludicrous Jeffrey Hunter character, the weakest point of the earlier movie.
There is some gore in Dearden's version but by contemporay  standards the
graphic violence is restrained, as when  a dismemberment is only implied
by  a suitcase with a grizzly cargo.
Dearden's other bag --of tricks this time --  finds him stressing
Hitchcockianly suspense over surprise in a plot where the menacing details
keep  your attention well,  less through zapping effects than in observing
Jonathan and Ellen. And even then, the best part of the movie is not so
much  Jonathan's fiendishness or Ellen's detection, but the gradual rise
and fall of Ellen's attitude toward her husband.
The 1956 film was and still is overrated .  The new version is vastly
superior to the original and stands nicely on its own feet, even if they
wobble.
