Title
Review for De eso no se habla (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
This is not a bad film.  It's just that it isn't that good either.  But, one
great actor, does make it a little interesting. It's not always boring.  And
I suppose that the story is a bit to blame.
An elder man, whose life is as mysterious as his stories comes and goes.
And he makes the acquaintance, of a lady who has a midget for a daughter.
It is never explained, but the daughter may have been born out of wedlock,
and during a time when the lady had an  affair during a circus visit.
And as D'andrea gets closer to the family, his feelings are turned into the
young lady, who is not specially attractive, but is charming and nice.  In a
social sort of way, she is never going to be appreciated even if her talents
are above normal.  She has become a rather nice pianist, for example.   But
all of this is a reflection of the mother's point of view, and her desire to
make the daughter fit in at any price, without her daughter's own needs and
desires.
D'andrea, is a ladies man, called a "perfect lover" by a woman in a watering
hole, and their loss of this man doesn't go by un-noticed.  They lose a
great lover.  He loses some fun, or so it seems.  But the elder D'andrea,
finally gets his chance, and marries the young lady. And by all accounts,
Charlotte is doing very well in the upper class structure that she lives
with D'andrea.  And one day, a circus comes to town, and the
worried mother tries hard to make sure that her daughter does not get to see
it.
And the film basically ends.  The daughter finds her milieu, and disappears
with the troupe.  D'andrea, is apparently left behind, or just like his
stories, nothing is explained, just gossiped about.  And the film throws the
story away, just like a circus throws life away for an evening.
The film is nice. The women are the attraction through out the whole story,
and when they finally do not become the attraction, it seems that the film
loses its guard.  Charlotte has won out the attention  of the story, and our
attraction span has changed.  We have to decide between the women, or a
life.  And D'andrea chooses for a life and living, which the women like, of
course, but can not sustain day and night, or he would have been married to
one of them.
Not a great film, it is a rather odd one, actually.  Marcello Mastroianni is
very good, and some of the actors are nice, amidst a bunch of card board
women parading around.  At times, one feels we are watching a bad soap
opera.  But the film is better than that.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Marcello Mastroianni, Luisina Brando, Alejandra Podesta 
Director: Maria Luisa Bemberg 
Producer: Oscar Kramer 
Screenplay: Maria Luisa Bemberg and Jorge Goldenberg based on a 
            short story by Julio Llinas 
Cinematography: Felix Monti 
Music: Nicola Piovani 
Released by Sony Pictures Classics 
In Spanish with subtitles 
     "To make a film is always an adventure and a defiance.  I DON'T
WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT is the riskiest of my films and also the one that
taught me the most about myself....  Charlotte is a metaphor for all of
us who are in one way or another different from the flock.  In that
sense ... she could be any independent spirit."
     - Maria Luisa Bemberg, director of I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT
     There are many ways to deal with a child's disability.  The least
practical, and probably the most immature, is to deny that it exists,
eradicate all reminders of it, and refuse to allow anyone to mention
it.  Which is exactly how Dona Leonor (Luisina Brando) reacts when she
realizes that her daughter Charlotte (Alejandra Podesta) is a dwarf.
Not only does she place the entire town of San Jose de los Altares
under a gag rule, but she takes a pick ax to some local stone gnomes
and burns copies of GULLIVER'S TRAVELS, SNOW WHITE, and TOM THUMB.
     How to classify I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT is something of a
mystery.  The story is structured as a fractured fable, but contains
elements of comedy, melodrama, and tragedy.  Those determined to
pigeonhole this movie into a specific genre are likely to be
confounded; I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT isn't conventional enough for
that sort of generic identification.
     Everyone in the 1930s Argentinean community has their own vision
of Charlotte.  Her mother does everything she can to build the girl up
and have her lead a "normal" life, including allowing what might at
other times be considered a shockingly inappropriate marriage.
Ludovico D'Andrea (Marcello Mastroianni), a local playboy with a
fondness for collecting small things (he has a miniature pony and a
tiny monkey) falls in love with her, in part because of her stature.
Charlotte, on the other hand, is a very pragmatic young woman who
doesn't mind acknowledging her shortcomings.
     Even at its most poignant, the tone of I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT
IT remains playful and romantic.  The budding relationship between
Ludovico and Charlotte, which could easily have turned into something
satirical or uncomfortable, is handled with restraint and sensitivity.
Incidents of frequently funny, offbeat humor are included to keep the
audience off-balance.  I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT is nothing if not
unusual.
     The trio of lead performers--the charismatic Mastroianni, the
sultry Brando, and the charming Podesta--cement this movie in a solid
foundation.  These three handle every turn given to them by the script,
and make even the most bizarre situations believable.  Cinematographer
Felix Monti chooses his shots effectively, suggesting a sense of magic-
realism (the scenes outside on the benighted streets of San Jose de los
Altares, photographed through a blue lens, are stunning).
     I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT has a lot of heart, and that's why
its themes come across so clearly.  As director Bemberg has admitted,
this is not a story to be viewed from a logical perspective.  Its
mystical quality makes it a fairytale for adults, complete with a moral
that each individual can interpret as it applies to him- or herself.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Eric Mankin
     The translation of the title doesn't convey the stuffiness of the
original.  DE ESO NO SE HABLA is more, "THAT IS NOT DISCUSSED."  The
reference is to the airtight hypocrisy of the seaside Argentine town
that is the setting of this astringent tale by director Maria Luisa
Bemberg.
     It is the early 1930s: the formidable widow Leonor (Luisina
Brando) refuses to accept the fact that her daughter Charlotte
(Alejandra Podesta) is a dwarf.  On one level, she's Mrs. Gump of the
pampas--"Short is as short does"--but in Bemberg's film the
mother's refusal merges serenely into a municipality-wide structure of
denial.  Everyone in the town systematically avoids discussion of all
unpleasant truths, from the mayor's idiocy to the existence of the
brothel where the entire male population spends every night drinking,
whoring, gambling and listening to scratchily recorded Carlos Gardel
tangos.  The agreement not to communicate is only disturbed when
Ludovico D'Andrea (Marcello Mastroianni) an emigre Italian who is the
only cultured or imaginative man in the town, falls in love with
Charlotte.
     Mastroianni is perfectly cast as the silver-tongued, gallant and
rueful expatriate Don Ludovico.  His presence and the richly detailed,
knowingly satiric period provincial setting both recall Fellini, but
the style is very much Bemberg's own.  The story, narrated by the voice
of an outsider whose identity is one of the film's better revelations,
has a slippery rhythm as catchy and pungent as one of Gardel's
plaintive hymns to love as screwy masculine self-absorption, love in
which the love object is nearly irrelevant.  Bemberg treats Don
Ludovico with affection, but doesn't let her affection for him spoil
her fun.
