Title
Review for John Updike: In His Own Words (1997) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
Coordinating Producer: Ronald G. Shafer (as Ronald Shafer)
Script Coordinators: Ronald G. Shafer (as Ronal Shafer) and Jonathan
Alexander
Post Production Audio: Bob Millslagle and Dennis Williams
Post Production Editors: Paul Byers and Kevin Conrad
 Routinely I am asked to speculate on the nature of things.  Perhaps that is
what the critic's role is, to be a traveling ponderer of other's works.
Recently, I have been asked by the existence of John Updike: In His Own
Words to ponder the nature of the documentary.  I stated in a review of
another documentary that my friend Ronald Shafer worked on that the point of
a documentary may be to inform, but a point of human nature is to entertain
oneself when possible.  I revoke that statement, or, rather, I modify it.
The idea of a documentary is the dispensing of information but in a format
that will engage all viewers, bring them into the process.
 By that definition, John Updike: In His Own Words fails as a documentary.
 Although it is highly informative, the film feels more like an extended
interview than an bunch of information presented in an interesting manner.
The difference is likeable to that of a resume and a biography.
 John Updike: In His Own Words is highly fascinating for a writer such as
myself to watch, and most likely highly fascinating to a reader of Updike.
However, over my years in this business, I have learned to think in terms of
other demographics... and other demographics will not find this film
interesting.  This is a piece of academia, of pure esoteric documentary
filmmaking.  It has no soul or personality, only bits of information to hand
out.
 Although academics will tend towards academia, and almost all of us enjoy
academia in our own field, academia does not have much application in the
documentary filmmaking world... a world that works off of broader appeal.
 John Updike: In His Own Words is a film that can only be measured as
enjoyable or unenjoyable based upon a benchmark of discussion.  People that
find pure dialogue enjoyable will most likely enjoy the documentary, as will
people that find Updike a person worth listening to.  However, due to the
fact that the film is cut in such a way as to focus exclusively on Updike
(only a few times does anyone else's voice pop up), you have the feeling of
almost experiencing idolatry while watching the movie. From the shots of the
highly attentive crowd to the incredible esteem that the only other person
in the movie's voice holds while talking of John Updike, the author of  such
books as Rabbit Run, The Coup, and The Witches of Eastwick, you have the
feeling that these people worship this man, despite the man obviously not
worshiping himself.
 Like many films that fall into the "documentary trap" (this was the first
film that my friend participated in), it feels more like watching My Dinner
with Andre then getting any actual information out of it.  As much of a
friend as I am to Ronald G. Shafer, I cannot recommend his first film to the
broad band audience. I recommend it to people who do worship Updike, or who
worship the written word (as I do, I found the film fascinating), but I
cannot recommend it to the Joe Schmoe.  It just wouldn't be fair.
