Title
Review for Bure Baruta (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Atul Akhare
"Look long enough into the abyss, and the abyss looks at you" said
Nietzsche, and as the ending credits of the film rolled by, I silently
wondered if they had forgotten to credit *him* w/ the screenplay for
the film. Indeed, the bottomless pit lies at the very heart of this
film's characters, and although yours truly recommends it, it certainly
isn't an easy film to watch.
The film is set "in the country formerly known as Yugoslavia", and is a
set of loosely connected vignettes. The Cabaret style "emcee" sets the
tone for the rest of the film -- we are the ass**** of the world, we
are really f***ed up -- and these nihilistic sentiments are more than
borne out by the events that follow.
When a teenager rear ends an old Volkswagen in a seemingly harmless
accident, this sends the other driver into a state of angered frenzy.
The teenager manages to escape, but is hunted down by the driver, who
barges into his apartment, accosts his father and proceeds to smash
things. A taxi driver who has once been wronged by a policeman exacts a
terrible revenge.
A jealous man stabs his best friend to death after seemingly
reconciling w/ him. He then proceeds to commit a suicide in a macabre
fashion, killing a hapless victim in the process. A deranged young man
hijacks a bus and proceeds to humiliate and terrorize the passengers,
much to the amusement of a new married couple who continue to make out
in the backseat.
The girl who is the object of his humiliation manages to escape, but is
accused of being the provocateur when she narrates the episode to her
boyfriend. While they are arguing about it, they are kidnapped by coke
snorting drug pushers, and in a scene that puts Dennis Hopper's Blue
Velvet scene to shame, the boyfriend is forced to sing at gunpoint
while his girlfriend is subjected to unspeakable horrors.
So, what is the movie really about? IMO, ravaged by years of unrest and
wracked by impotent rage over their inability to do anything about it,
the characters in the film have paid the ultimate price: the loss of
the human soul.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Cabaret Balkan
Not Rated, 105 minutes
Starring Miki Manojlovic, Sergei Trifunovic, Mirjana Jokovic and Lazar
Ristovski
Screenplay by Dejan Dukovski and Goran Paskaljevic
Based on the Dukovski's play The Powder Keg
Directed by Goran Paskaljevic
website: http://www.paramountclassics.com/cabaret/index.html"
IN SHORT: Arthouse connoisseurs only
Original title The Powder Keg, which is a name Kevin Costner has grabbed
for a flick in development. Thus, the name change.
The Website says: Over the course of one evening various interlinked
stories unravel; A boxer discovers the extent to which his life has been
a facade and fights his best friend in an act of desperate retaliation;
A former Sarajevo professor is too proud to work for the new refugee
mobsters dealing in gas, cigarettes, and other contraband, opting
instead to drive a bus; A young woman, harassed during a bus hijacking,
ends up safely in the arms of her boyfriend only to find that their
lovers quarrel places them in an absurdly dangerous situation. In his
focus on the lives of ordinary people living in the dawn of an awakening
political consciousness, Belgrade-born Paskaljevic masterfully balances
dark comedy with heightened realism, creating a compelling exploration
of the human spirit.
Cranky sat through Cabaret Balkan watching the dehumanizing portraits of
lives in a country on the brink of war thinking, were we bombing the
wrong side? As the various stories play out, there are a couple of none
too subtle remarks about racial or religious background which to
American eyes meant very little. All them Balkanites/ Yugoslavs/
Macedonians look pretty much the same. Nor do the male of the species
come off as particularly enlightened.
Lessee what we've got here. There are a pair of middle aged best friend
boxing and drinking partners, one of whom has admitted to an
indiscretion with the other's long forgotten girlfriend whom he had
promised to watch over. The other "friend" then proceeds to reveal a 20
years long systematic emasculation of his buddy. One smashed beer bottle
in the gut later, the survivor heads off in a drunken haze, boarding a
train with no destination in mind. But there's a blonde on the train
that gets the attention of his stunted little willie and while she
attempts to defend herself from the coming rape, her weapon of choice, a
grenade, works against her. Meanwhile, in a hijacked bus across town,
tough guy with a knife is sexually terrorizing the hostage passengers.
One poor woman, whose legs are spread and stroked by said blade will get
away and call her boyfriend to come get her. The lout who is her
protector automatically assumes that it is the woman's fault that she
was attacked; that she may have derived pleasure of some sort from the
attack and so has emasculated him. Like I wrote, a very enlightened male
populace. The stories get even more unpleasant, culminating in a
lynching and a string of car explosions symbolizing the "powder keg"
that is modern Yugoslavia pushing civilized behavior beyond the boiling
point to utter depravity.
OK film students and arthouse cineastes, this is the kind of stuff you
maintain you like. If it turns your stomachs and makes you ashamed to be
part of the greater human race, then it must be good film and everyone
should see it.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Cabaret Balkan, he would have
paid...
I save the zero for total drek. Cabaret Balkan wasn't drek, though it is
not to my taste. Thoroughly unpleasant and not recommended to anyone
outside of the film student arthouse circuit.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"You've heard about this city," Topi (Voja Brajovic) says about the
war-ravaged Belgrade.  "It's much worse.  The Balkans are a powder keg."
Goran Paskaljevic's ironically named CABARET BALKAN (BURE BARUTA) was
originally titled THE POWDER KEG.  The movie was filmed entirely at
night because, according to the press notes, the director feels that
"night has fallen on my country."
The relentlessly depressing story is well acted but hard to watch.  The
only sympathetic character is a puppy that appears briefly.  The large
cast of unhappy characters are uniformly angry at each other and the
world as they are forced to live a marginalized existence in a city with
few legal jobs left.
The script by Dejan Dukovski, based on his play, is composed of a series
of partially related vignettes of desperation.  In one of these, two
long-time friends have what starts as a harmless argument.  Although
they share a nervous laughter, the tragic result is anything but funny.
Another incident has a rebelliously angry youth hijacking a bus.  After
terrorizing the passengers with a knife, he leaves them with little life
lessons to ponder.
Some of the episodes are less hostile, as the one in which a professor
has to drive a bus for a living.  His problem one night is that he can't
get his needed caffeine fix before his shift starts because the gas is
off again in his cramped apartment.
"For you it's funny," the transvestite performer in the nightclub
Cabaret Balkan tells the audience.  "For me it's horrible, kids."
Certainly living in a city in which the inhabitants pulverize each other
with little compassion would be hard.  To remind us of how bleak and
inhospitable their environment is, the script has the city's residents
averaging one F-word per sentence.
Looking for a depressing film in an obscure foreign language, filled
with anger and random acts of senseless violence?  CABARET BALKAN is it.
Although this is just the high-minded sort of film that critics tend to
love, most moviegoers will avoid this movie like the plague.  And if
they do go, they will probably find it long and tedious.  As tragic as
the situation is in the former Yugoslavia, CABARET BALKAN provides few
fresh insights and little compelling reason to see the movie.
CABARET BALKAN runs 1:40.  The movie is in Serbo-Croatian with English
subtitles.  It is rated R for strong violence including an act of sexual
assault, strong language and some drug use.  It would be acceptable for
teenagers only if they are older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
