Title
Review for Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and the Media (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Gareth Rees
     The media, Chomsky tells us, whether by deliberate intent or
through the effect of the power structure of our society, deceives us
and diverts our attention from the issues that matter.  In a democratic
society, where people's actions cannot be directly controlled, it
becomes a function of the media to control what people think and to
make sure that they do not want to change the status quo.  In order for
this to work, people must not only be misinformed, but they must also
feel that it does not matter that they are being misinformed, that some
information is too sensitive to be made public, that there is nothing
that one ordinary person can do about this misinformation.  Chomsky is
trying to challenge our apathy, trying to make us think about the way
our opinions and actions are shaped.
     Directors Peter Wintonick and Mark Achbar plunge into the awkward
situation of portraying a man who has attacked the very techniques they
use to present him with, it seems, hardly a second thought.  Chomsky
stands up on stage to argue his case, but the directors cut and
intercut him with pictures, graphics, visual metaphor and
"re-contextualisation," until the focus and force of his argument is
lost among the videobabble.  A mention of an article being cut by the
New York Times inspires a scene in which a group of surgeons perform a
dissection on a page of newsprint, and the irony is that this is
exactly what is being done to Chomsky.
     It's possible that I'm just not media-literate enough to
appreciate the film, that I'm not prepared for the thirty-second
sound-bite, but then neither I think is Chomsky.  I kept wanting to hear
what he has to say, not what the directors think I should hear.
     This is not to say that the film does not have some brilliantly
effective moments.  A section on the Indonesian invasion and occupation
of East Timor (with the complicity of the United States and other
western governments) supports Chomsky with some of the detailed
evidence on which his argument depends; a section on Chomsky's defence
of the right to free speech of a holocaust revisionist demonstrates
more clearly than anything else in the film the extent to which our
thinking on important issues can become controlled and inflexible.
     What saves the film is Noam Chomsky, whose genius shines through
everything his opponents or the directors can throw at him.
