Title
Review for Unagi (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 New Yorker Films
 Director:  Shohei Imamura
 Writer: Shohei Imamura, Motofumi Tomikawa, Daisuka
Tengan, novel by Akira Yoshimura
 Cast: Koji Yakusho, Misa Shimizu, Fujio Tsuneta, Mitsuko
Baisho, Akira Emoto, Sho Aikawa, Ken Kobayahsi, Sabu
Kawara, Etsuko Ichihara, Tomoro Taguchi
   At first sight you'd hardly guess that Shohei Imamura, who
directs "The Eel," was also at the helm of "Black Rain." 
"Black Rain," a quietly moving story, deals with the effects of
the Hiroshima bombing on one Japanese family over a period
of five years.  Ultimately, though, you realize that "The Eel"
follows a similar trajectory.  Like its predecessor, it is quiet,
slow moving, and involves bloodshed and redemption.  Unlike
the black-and-white forerunner, though, "The Eel" is filmed in
vivid color, an unsullied view of the Japanese countryside.  It
is warm and dignified, its symbolism never overshadowing the
telling of a simple story of a man who commits an awful
crime, climbs into his own shell for years, and is brought to
life by the love and loyalty of a woman.
   "The Eel," which won the Palme D'or prize when it
appeared at the Cannes Film Festival in 1997, is based on
Akira Yoshimura's novel "Glimmering in the Dark."  The story
begins in 1988, centering on office worker Takuro Yamashita
(Koji Yakusho) who one day receives an anonymous letter
accusing his pretty wife of committing adultery during
Yamashita's frequent absences from his well-appointed
suburban home.  Yamashita deliberately cuts a nightly fishing
excursion short to return to his residence, where he catches
his wife in the middle of a sexual act with a young stranger. 
He stabs her brutally and, in his blood-soaked fishing outfit,
he turns himself in at the local police station.
   We see only a moment's glimpse of the man--on the last
day of his eight years' incarceration--but are informed that
during his stretch he talked to no one except his pet eel, a
sea creature who "listens to what I say" and "never tells me
what I don't want to hear."  Attached to a probation officer
who is a priest, he is warned to stay out of trouble.  He opens
a barber shop, business picking up only after he has rescued
a suicidal woman, Keiko Hattori (Misa Shimizu), on the brink
of death who then joins him as an associate in the business.  
   Shohei Imamura, who directs "The Eel" ("Unagi" in
Japanese), does not claustrophobically limit his camera to the
man and his lovely new partner, but frequently cuts to an
assortment of oddballs who inhabit the scene. Chief among
the curious characters he depicts is a trash collecter, once in
prison with Yamashita and now envious of his success, often
drunk on sake, who reveals the man's past to his associate. 
He introduces us to Keiko's nutty mother, who is prone to
break into flamenco at the earliest strum of a guitar
(uncharacteristic for Japanese culture) and to a gangster who
claims the money which really belongs to the demented
woman.  Yet another peculiar personality is a man who tries
to attract UFOs to the town by drawing first a Star of David on
the grounds outside the shop, later incorporating the barber
pole and an elaborate piece of machinery to attract the aliens.
   While "The Eel" won one of Cannes' most prestigous
awards last year and is effectively emotional, quiet, and
leisurely paced, it is prominent more for its competence than
for any leap to artistic heights.  At best Imamura unfolds the
story behind the redemption of a man whose prison term
seems unusually light considering the brutality of his crime
and who has been granted an envious relationship with a
Buddhist priest. It also portrays a Japan which is not like the
Utopia which Thomas Moore once outlined and which is
prominently featured in the Cinderella movie "Ever After." 
Japan is apparently a place which, like the U.S., has a fair
share of oddballs, criminals, love-starved and guilt-ridden
people.  Perhaps no one can evoke this palette as well as the
wonderful performer Koji Yakusho, whose astonishingly
popular "Shall We Dance?" is more enjoyable and--for all its
lightness-more emblematic of the conflicts underlying today's
Japan.

Author
James Sanford
 In many cases, you can guess the ending of a movie without even seeing
it. From the commercials alone you can deduce the teen lovers in "She's
All That" will probably wind up in each other's arms, or that the finale
of "Gloria" will find hard-hearted Sharon Stone becoming a mother figure
to the orphaned kid she's looking after.
 Then there are films like "The Eel," which constantly catch you
off-guard with more plot twists and surprises than most thrillers would
dare to utilize. "The Eel" begins with an illicit affair, followed by a
savage murder, then changes courses to become a generally quiet,
contemplative study of Takuro Yamashita, the man responsible for the
crime.
 Yamashita is played by Koji Yakusho, best-known in this country for his
role as the uptight "salaryman" who discovers the joy of the rhumba in
"Shall We Dance?". Again Yakusho has been cast as a sedate type, but
Yamashita isn't looking for an escape from the drabness of his life. In
fact, he quite prefers being alone and silent, much like the pet eel he
keeps in a tank in his barber shop.
 The eel is a souvenir of the eight years he spent in jail for killing
his wife, whom he caught in bed with another man. Now out on parole,
Yamashita finds himself haunted by his moment of madness and unable to
fit into his new surroundings. Then along comes Keiko (Misa Shimizu), a
young beauty who has fled her out-of-control life in Tokyo to hide out
in the small coastal town Yamashita is now living in.
 Just when it seems like "The Eel" is going to settle into a standard
love-conquers-fear tale, the writers begin coloring in the characters,
revealing their secrets and insecurities. The results are sometimes
shocking and sometimes funny, but there's nothing in the movie that
feels out of place. Although it flips from drama to thriller to comedy,
"The Eel" manages to make its tonal shifts effortlessly; Shohei
Imamura's direction is a model of quiet complexity.
 "The Eel" deservedly received the Palme D'Or -- the top prize -- at the
1997 Cannes Film Festival and though some Cannes winners are so esoteric
even the filmmakers might be hard-pressed to explain what their movies
are about, this one is surprisingly straightforward and unpretentious.
Imamura even manages to blend surrealistic fantasy sequences into the
storyline without going overboard, and the performances of Shimizu and
Yakusho could not be any better.
 Best of all, the film keeps you guessing what Yamashita and Keiko's
fates will be, up until the final scene. Though "The Eel" is as sinuous
and slippery as its namesake, it's a good deal more interesting to
watch. James Sanford

Author
Steve Rhodes
Takuro Yamashita, played by Koji Yakusho from the indie smash hit SHALL
WE DANCE?, is the Japanese equivalent of an average Joe, what they call
a salaryman.  An unremarkable white-collar worker, Takuro spends his
free time fishing in the evenings.
One day on the way home, while on a crowded commuter train, he reads an
anonymous letter whose writer claims that his wife is having an affair
while he fishes.  He sneaks back early that night and catches his wife
having passionate sex with another man.  Grabbing a large kitchen knife,
Takuro stabs both of them, killing his wife as the blood flies
everywhere.  Takuro rides his bicycle down to the local police station
and confesses his crime.
As the beginning credits finish rolling, Takuro is paroled after serving
8 years of his sentence.  The warden admonishes him not to get into any
trouble.  To the detriment of the movie, that is exactly what he does,
avoiding confrontation and concentrating on living as serene a life as
possible.
Takuro saves a young, suicidal woman named Keiko Hattori (Misa Shimizu),
who looks like the wife he murdered.  They come to live together.  She
cooks for him while he spends his time as a barber during the day and a
fisherman at night.  (When he ever gets a chance to sleep is the story's
biggest mystery.)
Set in the Japanese countryside that is rarely shown to American
audiences, the film is handsomely photographed by Shigeru Komatsubara.
The scenes of the fishing boats at twilight are particularly striking.
They carry a little lamp to cut through the fog, and its light casts a
lovely glow.
The film, which won the Palm d'Or award last year at Cannes, is directed
by Shohei Imamura.  Although it starts off like a sports car barreling
down the highway in high gear, the director shifts into neutral right
after the opening credits end and coasts until almost all momentum is
lost.  He shifts back into gear briefly toward the end, but by then the
dramatic energy has been drained away.
The story contains numerous metaphorical references to Takuro's pet eel.
Contemplating their possible meanings provides the best way to stay
awake until the end.
THE EEL runs too long at 1:57.  The film is in Japanese with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but would be an R for violence, sex and
nudity and would be acceptable for teenagers only if they are older and
mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
David Dalgleish
"You talk to the eel because you don't like dealing with people, right?"
Starring Koji Yakusho, Misa Shimizu, Fujio Tokita, Mitsuko Baisho,
Akira Emoto;
Directed by Shohei Imamura;
Written by Imamura, Daisuke Tengan, and Motofumi Tomikawa, from a
novel by Akira Yoshimura;
Cinematography by Shigeru Komatsubara
        A roll call of Shohei Imamura's protagonists reads like a summary
of society's cast-offs.  A prostitute.  A pornographer.  A serial killer.
A pimp.  A radiation poisoning victim.  And, in THE EEL, a man who murders
his wife and, eight years later, tries to start a new life.  Imamura always
empathizes with the people in his movies, although they are not always
sympathetic: while some are victims, others deserve no pity.  Certainly, it
is difficult to feel sympathy for Yamashita, the wife-killer, when the
pre-credits sequence shows us the murder, which is sudden, brutal,
unforgivable, graphic, and not easy to sit through.
        This is what happens: Yamashita (Koji Yakusho of SHALL WE DANCE?
and TAMPOPO) suspects that his wife is cheating on him.  He comes home
early one night from fishing, to find a strange car in his driveway and the
sound of heated lovemaking coming from his bedroom.  He looks in.  We see a
close-up of his face as he watches, impassive, for a moment, and then his
face dissolves into shadow, as he goes to the side of the house, fetches a
sharp trowel, and then enters the bedroom.  He wounds the man in flagrante
delicto, then methodically stabs his wife to death.  The camera does not
turn away; blood spatters the lens.  Yamashita then cycles to the nearest
police station and, in a splendidly deadpan moment, matter-of-factly
confesses to the murder and hands over the murder weapon to the astonished
desk sergeant.  He does not dissemble.  He cannot: there are no excuses.
        We have gone from the everyday to the extreme to the absurd.  Time
for the opening credits.  Most directors would be unable to muster such a
sequence as a finale; for Imamura, it is merely the preamble to a movie
that is never dull and often superb.  Yamashita's action cannot, of course,
be justified, and he knows that.  But, his sentence over, he has a lot of
life remaining to him.  And this is where the movie really begins.
        THE EEL is about how a man rebuilds his life after committing a
crime he cannot rationalize or even explain.  There is a scene in which he
does try to explain--he killed his wife because he loved her too much to
forgive her, or something--but it is not much of an explanation.  He is not
a man capable of murder, but he murdered someone.  Go figure.  As with the
serial killer in Imamura's earlier VENGEANCE IS MINE, his motives are not
to be understood.  But there the similarity ends: the serial killer was
amoral and subtly insane, while Yamashita is soft-spoken, polite,
solicitous.
        He relocates to a small town, under the eye of his parole officer,
who is also a priest, and, having learned the trade of a barber during his
prison term, Yamashita opens a barbershop, and soon establishes a small but
loyal clientele--none of whom know about his past.  The locals see him as
rather eccentric, because he talks to his pet eel, and seems to care more
for it than anyone else.  In fact, Yamashita is rather dull, as killers go.
The same cannot be said for the townsfolk around him, who include a young
man who spends all his time trying to contact UFOs and a man obsessed with
eel fishing.  There is also a vivacious young woman, Keiko (Misa Shimizu),
who comes to work in Yamashita's shop--against his wishes--after he finds
her comatose in a field, an empty bubble-pack of pills by her outflung
hand, and has her rushed to hospital, saving her life.
        The would-be suicide has, like Yamashita, a troubled past, a past
which is revealed, piecemeal, in flashbacks.  Their cool professional
relationship inevitably warms, to become a guarded rapport, and then heats
up, becoming something more, although Yamashita holds something back: he
remains emotionally detached from the world, partly as self-imposed
punishment for what he did, partly from fear that he might do it again.
Having structured the film with the murder first, Imamura makes it
difficult to care for this man, but we do come to empathize with him:
everything about him elicits our understanding, except for that
inexplicable crime.
        He can no more forget it than we can.  The eel fisher takes him out
to teach him how to spear eels, but when he tries to stab one, he cannot:
thrusting the spear recalls the movement of his hand when he stabbed his
wife.  Images of an eel writhing on the end of a spear flash on the screen,
pulsing with guilt and sexual symbolism.  The symbolic associations of the
eel, developed mostly in night-time conversations with the eel fisher, are
actually one of the film's shortcomings, as Imamura overworks the metaphor,
tending to explain in the dialogue what is already obvious from the
context.
        The working out of the love relationship is also rather flawed,
sometimes predictable, sometimes sentimental, although the little things
are constantly refreshing, like the character of Keiko's mother, an
overbearing and mentally unbalanced flamenco dancer.  But sentimentality,
from this most unsentimental of directors, is perhaps not unwelcome.
Imamura tends to see human relationships as primarily pragmatic, as matters
of convenience.  He regards the finer emotions with skepticism--perhaps too
much skepticism.  In THE EEL (and his previous film, BLACK RAIN) there is a
touch of tenderness, new to his oeuvre, which makes his work seem broader,
more complex, and therefore more complete.
        Whatever the reason, Imamura's vision finds perhaps its
quintessential expression in the climactic sequence of THE EEL, when all
the major players in the film are brought together in the barbershop, as
Keiko's past catches up with her.  A melee erupts.  It is a madcap
orchestration of slapstick and sudden violence, funny and grotesque, and in
the midst of the chaos are a few people trying to do the right thing.
Imamura brings sense to the anarchy, and out of human failing creates hope.
It is the work of a master at the height of his craft, and it bustles with
life.  It contains, perhaps, a summary of all Imamura has to tell us, and
he has much to tell.

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Jeremiah Kipp.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/be6d628f22d15fda882568f8000966f0?OpenDocument
 Takuro Yamashita is a bland, efficient little man who worked nine to
five in your standard office job, going off on fishing excursions during
the weekend. He hardly emotes at all, and when he discovered his wife
sleeping with another man one night he dispatched her in a chilly,
businesslike manner then immediately turned himself in. He spent eight
years in prison.
 Shohei (Black Rain - not the Michael Douglas version) Imamura's new
film, The Eel, documents this quiet, eccentric character during his
first several months of parole. What starts out as the story of a
murderer shifts gears to become a quirky character study with more than
a little touch of farce as he attempts to start his life over as a
village barber in a small seaside town. He doesn't seem to like people
very much, spending most of his time confessing to his eel, which
`listened to him' as his pet during those hard years in prison.
 His broadly played, if colorful, neighbors include a cheerful priest
who happens to be his parole officer, a grouchy and cantankerous
fisherman, a simple soul who thinks that by hanging up bright lights
around the barber pole he'll be able to summon UFOs, and a garbageman
who seems to recognize Yamashita from prison.
 Most troubling of all is Keiko, a young woman who attempted suicide by
the river. Yamashita saved her life, and she's decided to repay her debt
by helping him around the shop. Of course, she bears an uncanny
resemblance to his murdered wife.
 Imamura plays his cards close to the vest, allowing his story to play
out through the minimal bits of information Yamashita and Keiko will
divulge about their lives. He does manage to pack in enormous quantities
of backstory with economy and grace, and slowly hints at how these two
broken souls deal with their histories of guilt and make their wayward
attempt to leave that past behind them.
 The Eel  is packed with charged silences as they clean the barber shop
together, or deal with customers, and every now and then we will receive
a glimmer of new information. It's almost entirely photographed in long
shots which provide a meditative distance from the characters and their
dramatic situations, and keeps their story subtle.
 If the film stumbles before the climax, perhaps it's because Imamura
has inserted too many distracting subplots which somehow feel gauche and
overcooked, like Keiko's half insane mother fancying herself a dancing
queen or the kid looking to the skies for UFOs. They don't really fit
with the central dramatic action, and the humor is too broad and forced
to work alongside the seriousness of Yamashita's scenes.
 The final confrontation feels like it belongs in a French farce, with
slamming doors and a packed room of shouting people. It also serves to
wrap up the story a little too neatly, giving easy ways out for the
central problems of Yamashita and Keiko.
 The Eel works best in those quiet moments where two people seem to
slowly, fearfully drift toward each other. Unfortunately, when you
surround them with a raucous circus of offbeat neighbors clamoring for
attention, the central arc only gets lost in the shuffle.
Director: Shohei Imamura
Producer: Hisa Iino
Writer: Shohei Imamura, Daisuke Tengan, Motofumi Tomikawa
Starring: Koji Yakusho, Misa Shimizu, Fujio Tokita, Mitsuko Baisho,
Akira Emoto
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html">
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
To unsubscribe from filmcritic.com's Breaking Reviews mailing list,
reply to this e-mail with UNSUBSCRIBE as the subject.  E-mail address
changes via reply with both old and new addresses.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

EEL, THE (UNAGI) (director/writer: Shohei Imamura; screenwriter: Daisuke
Tengan/Motofumi Tomikawa; cinematographer: Shigeru Komatsubara; editor:
Hajime Okayasu; cast: Koji Yakusho (Takuro Yamashita), Misa Shimizu
(Keiko Hattori), Fujio Tsuneta (Rev. Jiro Nakajima ), Mitsuko Baisho
(Misako Nakajima), Akira Emoto (Tamotsu Takasaki), Sho Aikawa (Yuji
Nozawa), Tomoro Taguchi (Eiji Dojima), Ken Kobayashi (Masaki Saito),
1998-Japan)
Imamura's last film before this one, was as long ago as Black Rain (89).
The director who was born in 1926, was an assistant to Yasujiro Ozu
early on in his career, but when he left him, he developed his own
style, which differs from the master's formal one radically--his is a
style of fractiousness, shunning with dread the idea of ever making a
perfect film. He has made 20 features in his 40-year film career. This
lyrical film shared with "Taste of Cherry" the Palme d'Or for 1997. It's
a virtuous film that after its violent beginning settles down and
becomes an amusing and insightful study about a man trying to find
himself after spending the last eight years in prison.
The film begins in the summer of 1988, Takuro Yamashita (Koji Yakusho)
is an nondescript office worker commuting to work by train, when he
reads an anonymous letter he received mentioning his wife is having an
affair, which take place when he goes on his all-night fishing trips.
On his next fishing trip, his wife packs him a picnic basket and wishes
him luck, but he returns early from his all-night fishing trip, and sees
a white sedan parked in front of his house. Through the house window he
sees his wife making ecstatic love with an unseen man. He draws a long
fisherman's knife when entering the bedroom and butchers her to death,
letting her lover go, who yells at him, you're a murderer, before
fleeing. He then pedals his bike to the police station, with his yellow
slicker still drenched in blood, and confesses to the police that he has
just murdered his wife.
When he gets out of prison, the guards give him the pet eel he kept in a
pond, which they told the other prison authorities was theirs, because
prisoners can't keep pets. A Buddhist priest (Fujio Tsuneta) will become
his parole officer for the next two years. Trained in prison to be a
barber, he opens up a shop in a desolate suburb of Tokyo, within a short
travelling distance from where the priest lives with his wife. It is
interesting to note how this couple take this murderer into their home,
something that would not likely happen in America.
Though Imamura paints Yamashita's character as being serious and
withdrawn, there are comical interludes which make him seem plain daffy.
When walking with the wise Buddhist priest, he sees some joggers go by
and joins them out of habit from the eight years of such jailhouse
routines and goes into his jog ala prison-style, and has to be called
back by the priest. He also talks to his eel, whom he keeps in an
aquarium. He explains, that he talks to the eel because he listens to
what I say.
Trying to reintegrate to society is not an easy thing for him to do,
feeling alienated from people, he is able to make contact with some of
the fringe members of his new neighborhood. One of them is a young
unemployed man (Kobayashi) still living with his parents, who believes
in UFO's. To help him attract them to his site, Yamashita lends him his
barber's pole, though one of the neighbors says all this talk of UFO's
has been started by the TV stations to boost their ratings. Another
friend is a neighborhood fisherman who takes him out nights on fishing
trips, and when he sees that Yamashita can't spear the eels because he
doesn't want to hurt them, he builts him a tunnel contraption to catch
them without hurting them.
His best catch, is an attractive 34-year-old woman from Tokyo, who
resembles his wife. She tries to commit suicide in this isolated area by
the river where he is fishing, and he saves her life by getting his
neighbors to take her to the hospital. Her name is Keiko Hattori (Misa
Shimizu), and she is despondent because she fell in love with the wrong
man. She also has problems because her man has been fooling around with
her mentally disturbed mother, who madly thinks she is a flamenco
dancer. She has just been released from a psychiatric hospital.
The Buddhist priest gets her to work in Yamashita's barber shop and she
brings all the social touches needed to make it a friendlier place,
which starts bringing in customers. She is also romantically interested
in him, but he pulls away, too scared to start a relationship.
Things change when a garbage man (Akira Emoto) who was in the same
prison, tells Keiko out of spite that the barber is a wife-murderer. He
drunkenily tries to rape her, and comes back later to fight with the
barber. We then learn more about Keiko and her problematic relationship,
and we also find out that Yamashita's jealous rage was caused because he
loved his wife so much.
Before we get to the riotously funny climactic scene, we are told about
the eel's habits, which is used as a symbol to explain Yamashita's life.
The eel's mating habits involve the female laying her egg in the waters
by the equator where the unknown father impregnates the egg, and then
the male eels migrate to the water's in Japan.
The climax brings most of the characters involved in the story together
in the barber shop for what could have been a serious fight, but instead
turns into a comical free-for-all among Keiko's ex-boyfriend thug,
Dojima (Taguchi), his henchmen, the town's policeman, and Yamashita and
his neighbors... The eel's aquarium tank is busted in the melee.
The rehabilitation of Yamashita is supported by his willingness to be
cooperative with his parole officer and come to terms with his crime
through how he feels in his heart, and by Keiko and his neighbor's
finding him trustworthy. But through the interactions of those in
society, not through any fault of his, the past catches up with him and
he again must face the consequences of the Japanese penal system... An
interesting film, that works most effectively as an introspective study
of how to deal with one's anger and love.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
