Title
Review for Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo (1999)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Messier
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Max Messier.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/8fd516580062d1448825684300090f19?OpenDocument
When the lights go down--the manwhore comes out to play
When I watch certain actors paint such vivid and animated characters
across the silver screen, I am almost reach a state of pure cinema
bliss.  I came close to that bliss when I watched the riveting Richard
Gere is his latest film, American Gigolo 2, Male Gigolo.  Gere has such
a powerful presence in a number of memorable moments that draw from him
an almost frightening realism that seems to reach out from the screen to
the audience.  Richard Gere's performance in the film--oh, wait a
minute--let me retract that last statement.  Did I say Richard Gere?
Sorry for the confusion perplexed individuals. I meant the new film
Deuce Bigalow, Male Gigolo.  Gere and Schneider, I tend to mix up the
two so often.
Deuce Bigalow, Male Gigolo, always a bridesmaid but never a bride.  The
new comedy co-written and starring Rob Schneider has been designed
specifically for the current style of comedic filmmaking made popular
years ago with Porky's and Hot Dog: The Movie.  The "stereotypical,
drunken, convoluted, skit humor pressed into ninety minutes" style.
Following in the vein of Adam Sandler (who is one of the co-producers of
Deuce Bigalow) and numerous Lorne Michael's films, Deuce tries to
capture those hilarious situations made famous by its predecessors but
ends up feeling forced and limited.  It lacked fluidity to the pace of
the film and seems to rely too much on the physical size of Schneider as
a comedic vehicle.
The set-up is simple and if handled properly, it could have produced
memorable moments that seem to dominate the current comedic films of
recent.  The problem is that Schneider restores to using situations will
very bland, stereotypical characterization that only work for about five
to ten minutes, such as a skit on SNL or MadTV, and never seems to
extend to a further point.  The Farrelly bros. used to same premise in
their films but was able to extend those characters into interesting and
complying characters.  Certain situations succeed in capturing very
funny moments but overall, the jokes are hit and miss.
The supporting cast includes Eddie Griffin, of the "Malcolm and Eddie"
television show, who supplies Deuce with the proper connections into the
world of the "manwhore."  I wouldn't be surprised to see Griffin's
character spinning off to his own television show, "Malcolm and the
ManPimp," which no doubt would be picked up by either the WB or UPN in a
heartbeat.  The versatile actor, William Forsythe, provides his Method
acting made famous by his performances in Dick Tracy and Firestorm, to
the role of the main adversary against Deuce who has a small problem
below the waist, which he reveals too many times.  Forsythe, call your
agent and tell him to please get you out of the career path made famous
by Gary Busey pronto.
The efforts of Scheinder in producing a successful comedy for the masses
are recognizable but his story structure and character development is
unoriginal and predictable.  The last thing I would want is another
romantic comedy about learning to love someone for who they are.  Years
ago, I saw Rob Schneider at a comedy club and everything he did was
brilliant and original, almost Kaufmanesque.  His work on SNL was
impressive and ranked with the works of the Belushi and Farrelly caliber
of comedy.  That individual who I saw years ago can make you laugh.  But
with this film, Schneider only succeeds in scratching the surface of his
comedic talents.

Author
Christian Pyle
Deuce Bigalow (Rob Schneider) cleans fish tanks.  Yeah, I didn't know that was
a real job either.  One of his customers is Antoine LeConte (Oded Fehr), a
successful gigolo.  When Antoine has to go to Sweden for three weeks, he lets
Deuce use his house to look after an ailing $800 fish.  Fooling around, Deuce
sets fire to the kitchen and smashes a $6000 fish tank.  After taking a try at
one of Antoine's clients and earning $10, Deuce decides to prostitute himself
to raise the money to replace the fish tank before the fiery-tempered Antoine
returns.  
Enter T. J. (Eddie Griffin), a pimp for "man-whores," who arranges for Deuce to
service an assortment of women whose imperfections keep them from dating. 
There's an enormous woman (played by transvestite porn star Chi Chi La Rue) who
hides food in her clothes.  There's Claire (Gail O'Grady) whose narcolepsy
causes her to fall asleep every few minutes.  Tina (Torsten Voges) is so tall
her face doesn't fit on the screen, and Ruth (Amy Poehler) has Tourette's
Syndrome and shouts obscenities without warning.  Finally there's Kate (Arija
Bareikis) whose sorority sisters secretly paid her fare.  She seems perfect,
and Deuce quickly falls in love with her.  (She does, we discover later, have
an imperfection, but Deuce decides it isn't important.)
Deuce's life is complicated by a bothersome cop (William Forsythe) looking for
information on Antoine and by Kate's discovery of his man-whoring.  However,
neither threat generates much suspense.  The formula is so familiar that we
know how it will end from the start.
"Deuce Bigalow" is the first project from Adam Sandler's company Happy Madison,
the formation of which assures that we'll be seeing the Sandler style of comedy
mass-produced at an increasing rate in years to come.  Be afraid.  Be very
afraid.  
The good news is that Sandler doesn't actually appear in "Deuce" and that Rob
Schneider and Eddie Griffin are funnier than Sandler.  Schneider has a
sweetness that makes the clueless but good-hearted Deuce believable.  Griffin's
delivery is dead-on, especially in the coining of "technical terms" for T. J.'s
profession, as in "Don't make me he-bitch man-slap you!"
There's the expected amount of toilet humor in "Deuce."  (For one thing,
Deuce's dad is a men's room attendant).  Does anyone over the age of eight
actually find bowel movements that funny?  For most of us, I think that
childhood fascination with bodily functions disappears when we hit the far-side
of puberty and discover how funny sex is.  I, for one, will be glad when the
toilet trend is finally flushed.
Bottom line:  "Deuce" doesn't offer anything new but it is intermittently
funny.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Jamey Hughton
The title `Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo' is undeniably more catchy than
the alternative descriptions offered for a male prostitute in the film
(releasing a film called `Deuce Bigalow: Man Whore' would probably fail
to draw much of an audience). Rob Schneider, a `Saturday Night Live'
veteran who is now renowned among comedy fans for his touching portrayal
of the `you can do it!' guy in `The Waterboy', plays the title
character. Deuce is actually a fish tank cleaner who inherits the role
of being a gigolo when circumstances become extreme. Sit back and I'll
tell you the story....
Antoine Laconte (Oded Fehr, `The Mummy') is a wealthy male prostitute
who requires the services of a aquarium attendant. Enter Deuce. When
Antoine is called away for an extensive business trip in Switzerland,
Deuce is left with the assignment of looking after a sick fish.
Unfortunately, Antoine's entire aquarium system is destroyed, leaving
Deuce with the daunting task of producing $6,000 for a replacement tank
before he returns (insert comedic plot-twist here). Reluctantly, Deuce
becomes a gigolo himself to raise the required amount of money in time.
Surely enough, the clients he attends to all have some kind of
ridiculous characteristic that will ensure their romantic interludes are
fall-down funny. Sorry guys, no dice.
The scatological humor in `Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo' is often mean and
obvious, with the screenplay centering around the prime concern of
taking cheap shots at those with mental and physical disabilities. The
list of targets include the blind, the tall, the overweight, those
afflicted with Tourrets syndrome and those with prosthetic limbs. For
it's majority, `Deuce Bigalow' scrapes the very bottom of the proverbial
comedy bucket in a manner that is both disgusting and thoroughly
careless. And yet, it's sort of funny at times. Eddie Griffin has an
amusing role as a black pimp named T.J. who takes Deuce under his wing,
but too often his character is reduced to low-brow gags such as eating
various food items after they've been dipped in a hot tub. Meanwhile,
William Forsythe overacts with gritted teeth and slicked back hair as a
cop who frequently drops his pants in public to ask Deuce advice about
his manhood. As Kate, a client who Deuce falls head-over-heels for,
Arija Bareikis navigates her way to an admirable performance. Anyone who
could make us believe that Schneider has some charming characteristics
must be doing a fantastic job.
Actually, even with such a heavy burden on his shoulders, Schneider
delivers. He is not a particularly well-rounded comic, and the extra
dimension someone like Adam Sandler might possess is missing, but the
actor nonetheless does a fair job. Speaking of Sandler, this is actually
his producing debut. Rest assured, I'm sure that his company - called,
appropriately enough, `Happy Madison' - won't go bankrupt anytime soon.
`Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo' is essentially a hit-and-miss comedy for
anyone craving endless potty mouth, but it does have it's charm. I know
that's hard to fathom in a breeding ground of perverse and offensive
vulgarity like this, but there are actually traces of it. The film does
have a few inspired gags up it's sleeve, too, particularly a pair of
well-executed nods to `The Matrix' that occur during elaborate battle
sequences. Unfortunately, though, this is just your typical
conglomeration of low-level humor on the whole. Perhaps,  one of these
days, the people of Hollywood will stop to ponder the idea of a decent
script being attached to a project like this. Alas, for every `There's
Something About Mary', there are ten grotesque and unfunny imitations
designed to attract only adolescent males. It has it's moments, but all
in all, `Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo' falls into the latter category.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
"Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" tips its hand from
the moment the theater lights go down.  In the first two minutes
of the film, all of the following events occur: (a) our protaganist
appears, nude, in a public aquarium, thereby allowing us a glimpse at
his bare bottom; (b) an old lady falls down a flight of steps; and
(c) a young lady's t-shirt gets wet, exposing... well, the fact
that she's not wearing any undergarments, for starters.  Most bad
films take at least ten minutes to reveal their wretchedness, so
give the movie credit for revealing its complete lack of
intelligence up front.  At least this way the audience develops
no expectation of quality or entertainment value.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Buena Vista International on May 26, 2000; certificate 
15; 88 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Mike Mitchell; produced by Barry Bernadi, Sid Ganis.
Written by Harris Goldberg, Rob Schneider.
Photographed by Peter Lyons Collister; edited by George Bowers, Lawrence 
Jordan.
A lot of the reviews of "Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" have laid the blame for 
its failure on the star, Rob Schneider. But it's not his fault that the film 
is obnoxious, it's the situations that his character is put in. Schneider 
plays the eponymous Deuce, a pond cleaner asked by a gigolo to mind his sick 
fish when he is away on business in Switzerland. He warns Deuce in no 
uncertain terms that he must not mess up his beautiful apartment, which of 
course Deuce does almost immediately, by letting things smash on the floor 
and getting the place flooded. To raise some money to replace the damaged 
property, Deuce contacts the gigolo's pimp (T.J. Hicks), who helps him become 
a "man-whore" (this phrase is used every two minutes, as if we'd forgotten 
it, and will laugh every time). The comedy of the movie is intended to come 
from the assortment of freaks Deuce has to date, including a lady who keeps 
passing out, a 7-foot giant, an amazingly obese slut with a man's voice and a 
usually sweet girl who has obscene outbursts.
The reason Deuce can't attract choice clientele is he's supposed to be an 
unattractive slob. Schneider has an awfully well-toned, hairless body to be 
playing such an undesirable, so I guess the movie must be set in Los Angeles, 
where almost everyone is obsessed with physical perfection, and anyone except 
the most die-hard health freak is an outcast. Not that "Deuce Bigalow: Male 
Gigolo" would play well in L.A. -- its jokes are far too politically 
incorrect. As soon as Deuce begins his new job, for example, he's having a 
fistfight with a woman. And then there are the inappropriate pot shots that 
the screenplay takes at narcoleptics, the overweight, the disabled, etc.
The portrayals of all these people are too broad to be convincing, and so 
they're not sharp or funny, they're just offensive. The fat woman hides 
pizzas and chicken in her dress. And the Tourette's Syndrome sufferer doesn't 
have proper mood swings, but simply starts screaming obscenities out of the 
blue, in the middle of regular conversations. That's such a transparent 
attempt to be funny; a calm, realistic portrayal of a gigolo dating a 
Tourette's patient would be infinitely more entertaining. Remember the scene 
in Woody Allen's "Celebrity" where the polymorphously perverse supermodel 
caused Kenneth Branagh to crash his car? That took time to develop, and 
played out seriously, even though it was a slapstick situation, and was an 
example of how to do this sort of thing better.
"Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" is easy to watch because of Schneider, who is a 
likeable comic hero, with goofy posture, wide ol' puppy-dog eyes and a cutely 
timid voice. The film doesn't work, though, even though the premise has 
potential. It's the kind of thing that has to be credible to make us laugh, 
and who could believe in any movie where someone puts a cheese sandwich in a 
toaster?
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website at 
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Brandon Herring 
WARNING!: MAY CONTAIN SOME MILD SPOILERS AND OFFENSIVE MATERIAL. 
Rated: R (!) for sexual content, crude and sexual humor, and some nudity.. (A
mild R rating) 
Starring: Rob Schneider, Oded Fehr, Eddie Griffin, Arija Bareikis, Amy Poehler,
Norm McDonald. 
"Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" is simply a hilarious good-natured comedy that may
offend some, but underneath all it's crude humor and sexual content is a sweet
little love story that is surprisingly involving. It isn't any kind of
cinematic classic, but it's a very very funny comedy that keeps us entertained
until the end credits which themselves are funny too. It has all it needs to be
a breezy entertaining comedy: the acting is up to pace and some of the
performances quite funny, the screenplay is witty and smart, and the whole
story is sweet and cute. 
Deuce Bigalow (Rob Schneider) is your typically average guy: He cleans fish
tanks for a living and gets an average of 10 bucks for it. Though one might
call him a loser, Deuce gets a job he would never thought he would get. He gets
to clean the tank for a Male Gigolo (Oded Fehr) and gets offered to watch over
his place while he goes on a trip. Trying to be like him he hangs upside down
from a pole and accidentally pushes off the fishtank and burns his cabinets.
The thing is now he has to try and find $6,000 dollars in three weeks to make
sure everything looks right again. So he decides to go "Man-whoring" and to his
luck gets the oddest people on Earth: An over-weight woman who decidedly wants
to eat everything in site, a woman with Narcolepsy who sleeps all the time, a
woman who has sudden screaming outbursts, and a woman he can't stop thinking
about. He charges $10 but he is willing to negotiate. From now on he is
considered Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo. 
With non-stop laughs an a abundence of crude humor "Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo"
is sometimes like last years hit "There's Something About Mary" that is
offensive but very funny. The screenplay by Harris Goldberg and Rob Schneider
himself is a smart, clever and witty screenplay that seems to have been written
with care to make is so hilariously funny. The characters in the film are all
actually likable especially "Jabba Lady" with her big body but soft heart.
There are actually times in the movie where I fell out of my chair laughing so
hard that my stomach was killing me. Even though I thought "Toy Story 2" and
"Being John Malkovich" were the funniest of the year "Deuce Bigalow" follows
right behind them. 
The directing by Mike Mitchell is fantastic and shows he took time on the film.
Rob Schneider gives a surprisingly endearing performance and when his romance
develops with one of his customers Kate (Arija Bareikis) it is a sweet romance
that we get involved in and actually like being involved in it. "Deuce Bigalow"
is a good-natured film worth all the merit it can get. Its not a classic or a
masterpiece, it's just a comedy that we don't feel bad about watching. Sure it
may come off as offensive and may come off as dumb sometimes, but you cannot
deny that it isn't funny. 
"Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" is no disappointment. Its a fast paced,
entertaining sweet and hilarious comedy that may be destined to become a cult
classic. Fans of Schneider will not be disappointed and fans of crude but nice
comedies will not either. For some reason the film garnered an R rating but
with no "f words" or extensive use of sexual content or explicit nudity I was
really wondering why the film was R. A mild R to put it to the least, but even
if your under 17 or above at least 13 this film is good enough for you to see.
Don't try to be one of those people who make so much of a film that they do not
like it, just sit back, laugh and enjoy the movie. 
Reviewed by Brandon Herring December 9, 1999
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Steve Kong
"Gigo-Who?"  Deuce Bigalow asks as he meets Antoine the male gigolo.
Did I laugh during Duece Bigalow?  Yes, sporadically, I laughed so loud 
that my family had thought I'd gone nuts.  But, there were also the down 
times in the movie where Duece gets to give big thoughtful speeches, which 
is kind of weird in a comedy like this.
It is nice though to see a comedy like this, a comedy that is sophomoric in 
a lot of the sense, that has a main character who has a heart of gold and 
who cares for the people around him.  Duece Bigalow (Rob Schneider) is a 
fish tank cleaner, who is a loser and cannot get a date.  As fortune has 
it, he ends up fish-sitting for Antoine (Oded Fehr) who is a male gigolo 
("I give women pleasure").  After Antoine leaves, Bigalow gets himself into 
some monetary trouble and ends up dabbling into the gigolo business with 
his Man-Madam T.J. Hicks (Eddie Griffin).  Bigalow becomes a Man-Whore (I 
just had to work that into the review because it just sounds funny, 
Man-Whore).  Well, a romance ensues when he meets a wonderful girl.  But, 
there is always the conflict and in this comedy, the conflict comes from a 
cop named Chuck Fowler (William Forsythe) who is hot on the trail of Hicks 
and Antoine.
I've always liked Schneider.  He's funny without being annoying and that's 
just how he is in Duece Bigalow.  Unlike other comedians who are just plain 
annoying and try to pass that off as funny (Jim Carrey being one of them), 
Schneider is genuinely funny and he does well with the heart-of-gold role 
of Bigalow.  Oded Fehr over does his part as the mean and anal Antoine but 
in the end it all works out.  And Eddie Griffin is good as Hicks, I loved 
the Jacuzzi scenes with the food.  Those were hilarious.  And it is just 
hilarious how he says, "Man-Whore."  The one actor that had me scratching 
my head was William Forsythe.  His scowling detective seemed out of place 
and he just seemed like he was trying to hard.
Overall, Duece Bigalow is a funny film.  It's quite enjoyable and 
well-worth a rental to enjoy on a quiet day.  Duece Bigalow: Male Gigolo 
gets a high recommendation, but lacks enough to get a Don't Miss nod.

Author
Greg King
DEUCE BIGALOW: MALE GIGOLO (M).  
(Touchstone/Buena Vista International)
Director: Mike Mitchell
Stars: Rob Schneider, William Forsythe, Arija Bareikis, Eddie Griffin, 
Oded Fehr, Gail O'Grady, Jacqueline Obradors, Richard Riehle
Running time: 88 minutes.
Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo is the sort of crass, crude, loud
and generally unfunny low brow comedy that we have come to expect from
the current crop of Saturday Night Live stars.  Fans of the
deliberately dumb style of humour perfected by Adam Sandler will
probably get a kick out of this rather juvenile, politically incorrect
comedy.  Sandler produced this comedy, which stars his friend Rob
Schneider, who played a small role as the pizza guy in Big Daddy.
Schneider plays the eponymous Deuce, a rather innocent,
snivelling loser who cleans fish tanks for a living.  By chance he
finds himself minding a lavish apartment for Antoine (Oded Fehr), a
male gigolo who has gone to Switzerland on business.  Antoine keeps a
large fish tank full of rare fish, and also collects antique weapons
that are worth even more if they have actually been used to kill
someone.  But when Deuce accidentally breaks the tank and wrecks some
of Antoine's precious furniture he is forced to come up with enough
cash in a hurry to repair the damage before Antoine returns home.
With the help of jive talking pimp TJ (Eddie Griffin), Deuce
reluctantly becomes a "man whore."  But things do not go smoothly for
the inexperienced Deuce.  Rather than have sex with his eccentric
clientele (who are either overweight, gigantic, or suffer from
Tourette's Syndrome), Deuce helps them become happy with their own
bodies and their unique problems.  Complications arise when he begins
to fall in love with Kate (Arija Bareikis), the one legged nurse who
works in a hair donor clinic.
Mike Mitchell directs this nonsense with a remarkably heavy
hand and a lack of subtlety.  The performances lack any sense of
nuance whatsoever.  Most surprising of all, however, is the
unashamedly over the top performance from screen tough guy William
Forsythe (The Waterdance, etc), who plays a vice squad cop obsessed
with his sexual failures.
There are some wonderful sight gags, and some rather obvious
spoofs of recent movies, but there is precious little imagination at
work in the script, co-written by Schneider himself.  There is also a
preponderance of tasteless innuendo, smut and puerile toilet humour,
which may appeal to younger adolescent male audiences.  There is an
emphasis on childish slapstick humour and pratfalls, but there are
also many moments that fall flat.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Rob Schneider, Oded Fehr, Eddie Griffin, William Forsythe, Chi
Chi La Rue. Directed by Mike Mitchell. Rated R.
Rob Schneider's Deuce Bigalow, Male Gigolo is so much better than most
of the crap the similarly idiotic, infinitely higher-profile Adam
Sandler has made (with the possible exceptions of The Wedding Singer
and Happy Gilmore) that it's almost tempting to recommend it. And had
the movie been more of a knee-slapper, I might have done just that;
unfortunately, this eminently likeable movie is only mildly amusing.
First-time feature director Mike Mitchell made a decent frame of a
movie -- including a main character that actually develops -- but he
forgets to suffuse his goofball, gross-out comedy with laughs.
The title character (Schneider) is actually a fish-tank cleaner by
trade. One day he gets himself a gig cleaning the expensive fish tank
of the enigmatic and very European Antoine. Deuce soon finds out just
what Antoine does for a living, and nobody describes the occupation
than Antoine himself: "women pay me to give them pleasure." Deuce
responds "I'm gonna kill my guidance counselor!"
Well, Antoine has to go away to Switzerland for six weeks and he
entrusts Deuce with his house and his fishtank (not forgetting the
ominous "you mess up anything and I'll kill you!"). Needless to say, on
his first day on the job, fishtank goes bye-bye thanks to Deuce's
overwhelming curiosity about Antoine's fancy exercise equipment. This
leaves Deuce with six weeks to obtain enough money to replace the tank
and clean up the mondo mess he made. No prizes for guessing Deuce's
cash flow sourse of choice.
Yes -- Deuce gets himself a pimp, played by Eddie Griffin. He hooks
Deuce up with various colorful dates. One is named "Jabba the Slut,"
weighing in at some 600 pounds. Another has Tourette's syndrome and
spouts random obscenities at innocent passers-by. Yet another is
grotesquely tall, with a suspiciously manly voice. We never see the
latter's face. Aside from these freaks of nature -- pleasuring whom is
repulsive but very lucrative -- there is one normal girl, the one Deuce
inevitably falls in love with. Her little secret I dare not reveal,
though you can probably guess it from the trailers.
To my surprise, I really warmed up to Deuce Bigalow the person. Unlike
some of Sandler's subjects, who tend to be meanies, retards or
similarly unlikeable types, Schneider's misbegotten Gigolo has a warm
heart and is not an utter moron. What's more, his character actually
goes someplace, rather than just being used as a tool to elicit cheap
laughs (though there are plenty of those). It's nothing groundbreaking -
- I don't want to over-analyze this feather-light fare or give it more
credit than it deserves -- but by the end of the movie I felt like
Deuce Bigalow was a happier person and I actually cared.
While Deuce Bigalow fulfills the daunting task of inserting likeable
characters into the script, it doesn't quite do it when it comes to
laughs. Aside from a couple hilarious The Matrix parody sequences,
there just isn't much here to incite the kind of fall-off-your-chair
belly laughs the ads seem to promise. I won't say that all the gags
fall flat but none of them are memorable. I laughed or chuckled
intermittently but the movie just wasn't as funny as I was hoping.
After watching Deuce Bigalow, I'm not convinced that Rob Schneider is a
bankable leading man. He's successful here, but before this movie, he
was only known as "the delivery guy in Big Daddy" or "the guy who
shouts 'You can dooooo it!' in The Waterboy". This will streamline his
career, but it is hardly a star-making turn. Schneider is a talented
actor, but he needs something more challenging (sophisticated?) than
this. Adam Sandler (who, by the way, executive produced this) proved
that he wasn't a hack in the sweet, romantic, smart The Wedding Singer.
If Schneider doesn't want to be remembered as "that gigolo" for the
rest of his career, he needs a more significant comedic role.
This is an entertaining diversion, nothing more, nothing less. It's not
exactly riotous but it's more than watchable. Deuce Bigalow is probably
more hit than miss, though not quite a bullseye.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky CriticŽ movie reviews: Kirikou and  the Sorceress
Not  Rated, 71 minutes
Written by Michel Ocelot
Directed by Michel Ocelot with Raymond Burlet
website: www.kirikou.net
IN SHORT: An enchanting and delightful tale for kidlets and the li'l
kidlet inside.
How does this figure? A French Guinea born animator takes a West African
fairy tale, gets Peter Gabriel collaborator Youssou N'Dour to do the
music and delivers the whole thing in an English dub to four American
theaters where no one will see the thing. This is the curse of the indie
flick, folk, and this is one of the times I'll screech about something
that was delightful.
>From the first frame, you know that you're looking at a story that is,
to say the lease, unusual. A very pregnant African sits. A voice comes
from her belly saying "I am ready to be born now!" The soon to be mother
replies "Any child that says to me it is ready to be born can do it
himself" (I'm paraphrasing). So the kidlet crawls out of mom, snaps the
umbilical with his hands and proclaims to the world "I AM KIRIKOU!" and
walks away. Not only can he walk and talk, he can run at speeds akin to
The Flash of comic book fame. The kidlet is adorable and the film is
entrancing from the start.
Like all good fairy tales, there is an evil witch. In this case it is
the Sorceress Karaba, who lives in a hut outside the village. Nearly all
the male warriors of the village disappeared, presumed dead, after going
off to fight her. Karaba's lust is for all the gold of the village, and
her demands are constant. Kirikou decides that he will end the threat of
the Sorceress and, even more, discover why she hates the village so. It
is a question that no one has thought to ask.
Again, like the good fairy tales, Kirikou gets help. From the plants and
animals of the local forest. From a mystic wise man who lives at the end
of a very dangerous trek through territory controlled by Karaba. With
the knowledge he has gained, Kirikou's final confrontation with the
sorceress is quite surprising.
The animation keeps the African feel of the story. The Masai natives are
dressed according to their style (think National Geographic) but there
is no sexual implication that could concern parents of tiny kidlets.
N'Dour's music is a perfect complement to the story and, darn it, this
kidlet is plain out adorable.
I can't tell you much about this flick. It's distribution is almost nil.
Even if you have to search it out on tape, 'toonheads will want to see
this beautifully told tale which, like all archetypal folk tales, finds
its parallels in fables like Androcles and the Lion and intellectual
explanations by Joseph Campbell. Long time readers know Cranky eats that
stuff for breakfast, which means I walked out of the screening as one
happy camper.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Kirikou and the Sorceress, he would
have paid...
That release schedule I've got puts Kirikou and the Sorceress in New
York on February 18, Chicago on March 10 and Northern California on
March 24. Other than that, read the fine print in your newspapers.
Badger your video stores. Find this flick.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Bob Bigalow (Richard Riehle) is a tuxedoed member of the restaurant
business, but he's neither a waiter nor a maitre d'.  He's a bathroom
attendant whose duties include cleaning up really awful toilet messes.
On Bob's birthday, his son, Deuce (Rob Schneider) comes to visit with
his new girlfriend, Kate (Arija Bareikis), and they bring a birthday
cake for him.  The lovebirds bring him the cake right into the stall,
where he is unstopping a badly clogged toilet.  Bob eats the cake with
his hands and sticks his fingers in his mouth to clean them off.
Granted, this is the low point of DEUCE BIGALOW: MALE GIGOLO, but the
rest of the crude story isn't much better.
The setup has Deuce, a fish tank cleaner by profession, babysitting a
sick fish at the apartment of a rich and successful male gigolo, Antoine
Laconte (Oded Fehr).  Antoine, a collector of ancient weaponry, has
given Deuce strict orders to make sure his expensively furnished
apartment isn't harmed in the 3 weeks that he's off to Europe.  Needless
to say, Deuce will shortly destroy the place in a fit of bad slapstick
antics.
In order to make the money to restore the apartment, Deuce takes a job
as a "male-whore" for Antoine's "man-pimp."  (The lame script by Harris
Goldberg and Rob Schneider has other, earthier names as well.)
The movie's idea of comedy is to force Deuce to cope with the problems
of women with a wide variety of handicaps and unusual physical
characteristics.  From a 600 pound women like Jabba Lady (Big Boy) to
women who cuss uncontrollably like Ruth (Amy Poehler), the women are
made to look almost like members of a circus freak show.  There's even
an 8-foot tall woman, whose face is never shown, but to whom strangers
call out insults as she walks with Deuce.  Funny, huh?  You're not
laughing?  Neither was I.
Did I mention the detective, played by William Forsythe, who has an
obsession with showing Deuce his private parts in public in order to get
advice?  And did I mention that this scene is repeated a half-dozen
times?
So, was it ever funny?  I think I laughed once, but, for the life of me,
I can't remember why.
DEUCE BIGALOW: MALE GIGOLO runs 1:30.  It is rated R for sexual
situations, crude sexual humor, nudity and language and would be
acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Mike Mitchell.
Cast: Rob Schneider, Arija Bareikis, William Forsythe, Eddie Griffin, Oded 
Fehr, Gail O'Grady, Richard Riehle, Jacqueline Obradors, Big Boy, Amy 
Poehler, Dina Platias, Torsten Voges, Deborah Lemen, Bree Tucker, Andrew 
Shaifer, Norm Macdonald, Marlo Thomas.
1999 - 88 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, sexual situations, and extreme scatological humor).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, December 12, 1999.
At first appearance, "Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" might seem akin to the 
(dis)likes of "Ace Ventura: Pet Detective" or, even more horrifying, a Pauly 
Shore movie. Executive produced by Adam Sandler and starring his good pal and 
SNL alum Rob Schneider, this politically incorrect and relatively 
good-natured comedy pleasantly surprises for a number of reasons, and comes 
off being one of the funniest films of the year.
In its story of fish tank cleaner Deuce Bigalow (Rob Schneider) and the turn 
of fate that causes him to take over the profession of Antoine Laconte (Oded 
Fehr), a gigolo, in order to make quick cash to pay for the extreme damages 
that are accidentally inflicted upon his home, there is ample opportunity for 
comedic situations, and screenwriters Harris Goldberg and Rob Schneider are 
up to the challenge. Occasionally snappy dialogue and, especially, an 
overabundance of clearly lowbrow, yet insufferably humorous, physical comedy, 
help to give the picture a breezy, entertaining pace.
While the film's myriad jokes target everyone from the obese, to the tall, to 
the blind, to those with Tourette's Syndrome and Narcolepsy, it never seems 
downright mean because there are lessons that are learned and the characters 
are mostly likable people. All of Deuce's clients, it seems, have some sort 
of shortcoming, and although the aforementioned groups are featured at the 
expense of some tasteless humor, the characters still, strangely, keep away 
from being cartoonish with no purpose but to be laughed at. For example, the 
young woman Deuce takes out who has Tourette's (Amy Poehler), is very funny, 
as she uncontrollably yells profanities at random, but it turns out to 
develop a kinder edge when they go to a baseball game and, in his attempt to 
not make her feel out of place, tries to incorporate her profanities into 
their discussion of the ball players.
Amid all of the silliness, a genuinely sweet romance develops between Deuce 
and recent college graduate Kate (Arija Bareikis). Originally hired to take 
her out, posing as a blind date, but then unintentionally falling head over 
heels for her, problems arise when Kate discovers Deuce has been lying to 
her. One of the more sensitive aspects of this subplot is in its treatment of 
Kate, who turns out to have an artificial leg. Instead of only being played 
for laughs, Deuce is easily able to overlook such a thing, as he nonetheless 
sees her otherwise inner and outer beauty. Arija Bareikis (1997's "The Myth 
of Fingerprints"), as Kate, is a sparkling presence onscreen, and in many 
ways, this romance that is played out against the backdrop of occasional 
gross-out humor, is reminiscent of 1998's "There's Something About Mary." 
While the latter picture was overhyped, and thus, was a disappointment, 
"Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo," surpasses all expectations for its usually 
disreputable genre, and is almost consistently funny from start to finish. 
As in most comedies of this ilk, there is a little excessiveness in some of 
the humor, and not every joke works. Accordingly, the film is light in tone 
and its message is sophomorically simple-minded, but it somehow works. More 
than anything, "Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" has arrived at a time when 
theaters are currently being overrun by serious films vying for Oscar 
statuettes, and it was nice to finally see a movie that isn't 3 hours long 
and requires a strong train of thought to process. Director Mike Mitchell 
shows a spark for filming comedic setpieces, and Rob Schneider acts as an 
enjoyable protagonist, not overly annoying or imbecilic, and someone that we 
are willing to follow throughout the story. "Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" may 
not be a masterpiece, but it has no aspirations to be. It is simply a very 
funny comedy--no more, no less--and sometimes, that is enough.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Freud said, "What do women want?"  Now the answer. 
According to scripters Harris Goldberg and Rob Schneider,
they want men to make them feel good about themselves. 
"Men worry about the size of their penises," say the writers
through one of the characters, "But women are anxious about
their entire bodies."  Well, then, no matter what we think of
the down-and-dirty humor of this extended Saturday Night
Live Sketch, we men know what to do next time we're out
with the women, thanks the lessons taught by Goldberg and
Schneider.  Say nice things about them.  You don't have to
be handsome or muscular or have a sexy foreign accent like
the real gigolo of Mike Mitchell's frequently riotous comedy,
Antoine Laconte (Oded Fehr).  And relax.  Size doesn't
matter either.  What counts is your line of patter, but make it
all sound sincere.  Women who feel good about themselves
will like you.
   That's pretty much the Western Union of this movie, but
purport doesn't count.  Physical and verbal humor do. And
since sitcomish parody is about us human beings acting
pretty silly, who better for the main role than Rob Schneider--
the delivery guy in "Big Daddy"--for the nebbishy and clumsy
title figure?  Deuce cleans pools in the L.A. area for a living
and knows his fish but he can't score a date even with the
local bimbo who clerks in the pet fish store.  While examining
the $6000 tank of a strikingly handsome gigolo, Antoine, he
notes that one of the expensive fish is sick and needs daily
care.  Since Antoine must leave for Switzerland on a
business trip, he agrees to hire Deuce to housesit for a few
weeks on condition that Deuce never answer the phone and
that he keep the house clean--threatening the poor guy's life
with a series of expensive weapons that serve as collector's
items on his walls.  Needless to say, Deuce satisfies neither
condition and soon he is hired as a "he-bitch," i.e. a "whore-
man" by an aggregation of women, each with a defect that
prevents her from meeting guys on her own.  T.J. Hicks
(Eddie Griffin) serves as pimp, clueing in the new worker in
this comedy of role reversal, and leading Deuce into bizarre
adventures with the customers.  Kate (Arija Bareikis), who
seems perfect, warns Deuce in bed that there is something
mighty strange about her body--can he take it?  Big Boy
(Jabba Lady), whose mind is on food more than on sex, has
a special bodily need that she asks her male hooker to satisfy
while Ruth (Amy Poehler), a sweet little woman afflicted with
Tourette's syndrome, comes out frequently with curses that
she cannot help vocalizing.  Throughout the film, Deuce is
pursued by an off-the-wall detective (William Forsythe) who is
ostensibly out to bust Antoine but as we learn in the film's
finale, has another agenda in mind.
   Director Mike Mitchell mines vulgarity for what it's worth,
not satisfied going with mere physical humor.  Deuce's dad,
Bob Bigalow (Richard Riehle), gives bathroom humor an
absolutely literal meaning, serving as the men's room
attendant in a restaurant who plunges the plot into the depths
of toilet jokes.  
   Even at 85 minutes, some of the skits become tiresome,
particularly that involving Ruth's Tourette's syndrome.  How
many times do we have to hear her screaming obscenities for
no apparent reason at passers-by, and how often do we need
to see Detective Fowler unzipping his pants to demonstrate,
sadly, that he is as lean as Big Boy is hungry?  Political
correctness takes a vacation as director Mitchell evokes
laughter at the expense of the blind, the amputee, the grossly
overweight, the very tall, and the homely.
   Given the low comedy that's come out during the past few
years--"Clerks," "Mallrats," "There's Something About Mary,"
and from Scotland the inimitable "Trainspotting"--Mitchell can
scarcely score points for originality or envelope-pushing.  But
as one fellow online critic said just before the start of the
movie, "We're swamped with pictures about beheadings and
burnings--"Sleepy Hollow," "The Messenger," "Anna and the
King," "The Green Mile"--and with the usual crop of 3-hour-
long December pictures.  We need some comic relief--a nice,
short, goofy flick like this one."  Well said.  "Deuce Bigalow"
is satisfying comic relief sandwiched in among a thicket of
melodrama.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring Rob Schneider, William Forsythe, Eddie Griffin, Arija Bareikis, Oded
Fehr, Richard Riehl, and Norm MacDonald.
"Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" is a film that gives star Rob Schneider a perfect
chance to meander the streets with no clothes on. This heinous image is
sprinkled throughout the film to everyone's chagrin. Why would we want to see
thisespecially on the big screen? If this image is triggered to disgust its
audience, it certainly succeeds. There are points where it is almost impossible
to stare at the screen. Some films of this same gross-out genre are highly
entertaining for one reason. They disgust and entertain simultaneously because
they are either innovative or hilarious. "Deuce Bigalow" lacks these two
qualities causing the disgust factor to greatly outweigh the entertainment
factor. Most of the jokes were unoriginal, either tired spoofs from other films
(there were two idiotic Matrix spoofs in two different scenes) or blatantly
stolen from its predecessors (an angry dog bangs against a door almost
identically to the dog in "There's Something About Mary"). If I wanted to see
funny gags just like those of past movies, I would see past movies. It's
cheaper and much simpler. The saddest thing about "Deuce Bigalow" is that its
mentor is an unfunny Adam Sandler flick. By copying off unsatisfactory movies
like "Happy Gilmore" or "Billy Madison" in which the loser does something crazy
but winds up getting a hot girl at the end, Rob Schneider's movie is even more
unsatisfactory. Now I know why Sandler himself produced this film; he is trying
to make his pictures look better. 
"Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" tells the story of sad, pathetic Deuce, a
worthless pervert who also happens to be a fish freak who cleans fish tanks.
Under some wacky circumstances, Deuce finds himself making money as a gigolo so
he can pay off debts to a real gigolo whose house he ruined. As a "man-whore,"
as they call male prostitutes, Deuce ends up tagging along on dates with
bizarre women who no one else will go out with. He escorts an incredibly large
woman, an incredibly tall woman, a narcoleptic, a woman with Tourette's
syndrome, and of course the woman of his dreams. It is hard to root for
Schneider in his role. He is just so pathetic and slimy to start out with, that
when he begins to date these women the enthusiasm to see him succeed is very
low. At least Sandler is like the guy next door you go to sports games with.
Schneider's character is just such a jerk that eventually he becomes
excessively irritating. 
The film follows a one-joke premise that dies off half way through. Although
this may be one of the shortest movies of the Winter, with the openings of
nearly a dozen three hour plus films, it seemed a lot longer than an hour and a
half. Its predictable plot is mostly responsible for this. Also its terrible
acting from the talented William Forsythe, who spends the whole film
complaining about the size of his private part, to Norm MacDonald, who had a
quick and forgetful cameo as a bartender.  
The saddest thing about this movie is that it, and the many others like it, are
successful at the box office meaning they will continue to multiply and top
more deserving films. The scariest, and only real thought that popped into my
brain after watching this movie (besides the fact that I think it made me
stupider) is that if this movie copied off the very disappointing Sandler
flicks, then will future films copy off "Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo." I
continue to shiver at the thought.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Rob Schneider, Arija Bareikis, Eddie Griffin, William Forsythe,
Oded Fehr, Gail O'Grady, Richard Riehle, Amy Poehler, Chi Chi LaRue,
Norm Macdonald 
Written by: Harris Goldberg and Rob Schneider 
Directed by: Mike Mitchell 
Running Time: 88 minutes 
The first film produced by Adam Sandler's Happy Madison production
company (clever title eh?) is essentially a one joke movie, much like
the movies Sandler stars in himself.  However the difference here is
that this one joke just isn't very funny.  
Rob Schneider stars as the title character, a scruffy fish tank cleaner
who ends up becoming a "man-whore" to raise enough money to replace a
wealthy client's custom made fish tank, which Deuce destroyed while
staying in his home.  Deuce goes on numerous "dates", and each woman he
goes out with has a "humorous" quirk about herself.  One has narcolepsy,
one has Tourette's Syndrome, one is a man... etc. etc.  My problem is
that we see all of these women in the film's trailer, so why do I need
to watch the movie?  Seen the trailer... seen the film.  Only a quick
cameo from Norm Macdonald (and a follow up joke during the closing
credits) generates any chuckles. 
Deuce Bigalow:Male Gigolo is available on DVD from Touchstone Home Video
(a division of Di$ney).  The disc includes the film in its original
theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1, and features the original theatrical
trailer (as well as trailers for Mystery Alaska, Happy Texas, and
Outside Providence), an extremely brief production featurette (which
contains footage not used in the film), and storyboard-to-scene
comparisons. 
Yep, you read that right... there are STORYBOARD comparisons on this
DVD.  Two scenes are storyboarded... neither of which are particularly
exciting.  There are fight scenes in this movie, so why aren't we seeing
storyboards of those segments (especially the parody moments from The
Matrix)?  I wonder what's funnier: the fact that any moment in this film
required storyboards or that Di$ney thought fans of this film would want
to see them?  Deleted scenes?  Sure.  Audio commentary?  You betcha. 
But storyboards?  Come on. [R]
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
AOL Instant Messenger: FilmJax
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Mac VerStandig
***Moviereviews.org has been asked to start collecting a list of readers 
in the Washington, DC area who would be interested in attending advanced 
promotional screenings of major motion pictures for free. If this 
interests you, please e-mail Moviereviews.org at passes@moviereviews.org 
with your name and zip code (to verify that you are in the Washington, 
DC area). Then check back at Moviereviews.org 
(http://www.moviereviews.org) as often as you like to see what 
screenings you could be eligible to attend!***
---Starting on Christmas Eve you can hear Mac VerStandig's movie reviews 
on the radio in Portland, Maine once a week in addition to reading them 
on Moviereviews.org. Details on time and dial placement still to come. 
Stay tuned!---
*** A copy of this review can be found at 
http://moviereviews.org/deuce_bigalow_male_gigolo.htm ***
Deuce Bigalow Male Gigolo is a very pointed film that doesn't waste any 
time screwing around from the beginning by continuously firing shots at 
the handicapped, blind, tall, obese and Tourette's Syndrome inflicted, 
all to give the audience the pleasure they seek: morally reprehensible 
yet hilarious sexual humor. The production is also big where it counts: 
in the heart. This gigolo is well worth the $8 price of entry.
Deuce Bigalow (Rob Schneider) has mastered his trait to a point where he 
swims with the fishes- literally. A knowledgeable yet sexually deprived 
fish tank cleaner, the highlight of Deuce's day is getting a sales girl 
to bend far enough over a water-filled tank that her white shirt becomes 
transparent. But he soon learns that Antoine Laconte's fish has 
developed a rare gill disorder. Aside from being one of Deuce's clients, 
Antoine is a male whore preparing to leave the country on business. Soon 
the title character is fish-sitting in a mansion and, predictably 
enough, finds himself having destroyed the $6000 mini-aquarium that he 
is supposed to be looking after. The race is on for him to buy a new one 
before Antoine returns home, and there is only one way he is going to 
come up with that much money that quickly: the same way Antoine does.
Rob Schneider is a member of the Saturday Night Live (SNL) class that 
produced stars like Adam Sandler (who produced this movie), Chris 
Farley, David Spade, Norm Macdonald (who has a cameo) and Mike Myers. Of 
the group, Schneider is most similar to Sandler with his ability to play 
an average (or below average for that matter) Joe who happens to be in 
the right (or wrong) place at the right (or wrong) time. Schneider also 
exhibits a Sandler-sized heart here when he falls in love with a 
"client" named Kate (Arija Bareikis). But Schneider is yet to peak, and 
if this movie isn't a hit you may never hear his name again, let alone 
with such prestigious company as the above.
So, just how far does this movie push the envelope sexually? Well, it 
makes the old SNL skit "Fred Gervan: Male Prostitute" seem tame and this 
summer's hit film American Pie seem like Deep Throat (not the Nixon 
informer). A police officer pulls down his pants numerous times and 
complains about his skinny member but no genitalia is ever shown and a 
pornographic film appears on television but only the sound is indicting. 
Deuce's adventures are relatively innocuous beyond some spanking and 
condom use, but you shouldn't forget that this is a movie about a 
gigolo. 
Deuce Bigalow Male Gigolo will likely make a tidy profit from teens 
seeking its services on weekend nights. The movie needn't worry about 
getting rushed out of theatres as it will quickly go in video stores 
where a significant number of people will probably jerk it off the shelf 
and take it home for hours of private entertainment. Running at close to 
two hours, the film isn't too long to cause pain nor too short to not 
get the job done.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
You have to hand it to Adam Sandler. Whether or not you dig his type of
humor, the man should be admired for at least one positive attribute: he
sticks by his friends. He and his old college roommates have written and
produced most of his own movies, and now, Sandler has turned his newfound
Hollywood super-power, into a greenlit project for his good buddy Rob
Schneider. And luckily for us, unlike their ex-SNL bud David Spade's first
sans-Farley effort, LOST & FOUND, this one actually works.
PLOT:
A professional fish tank cleaner suddenly finds himself in a big hole of
debt when he mangles the apartment of a male gigolo client of his, whose
place he was looking after during the man's three-week absence. Recognizing
his inability to come up with that kind of dough in that little amount of
time, Deuce decides to join the world's oldest profession, and turns himself
into...a manwhore!
CRITIQUE:
One of the funnier movies of the year, this film will definitely trigger two
types of reactions: love or hate. If you like the Adam Sandler grown-up
stupid child routine and all the crass humor from THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT
MARY (7.5/10), well by golly, sign yourself up for this gig, cause it's
perfect for you. If, on the other hand, Merchant & Ivory are considered to
be two of your favorite words when discussing film, then I suggest you leave
Deuce and his piss and fart jokes alone. This definitely ain't for you!
Simple enough? Absolutely, and much like this film's actual plot line, do
not expect to find the answer to the world's problems lying in this movie's
abundance of wet T-shirt and handicap jokes, but do prepare yourself to
laugh a hardy har-har when Mr. Schneider and co. pull off two of the first,
and most hilarious, MATRIX, hommages of the year. You have to see it to
believe it. Pretty cool. Also, much like Sandler's last cinematic vehicle,
BIG DADDY, this film takes a real shot at romance tied into an emotional
scene or two, and believe it or not, Schneider actually pulls these scenes
off. Wow. Pretty neat.
Don't get me wrong here folks, you aren't gonna find the lost scenes from
CASABLANCA in here, but God help me if I didn't appreciate the obvious but
poignant "make the best of what you have" message woven into Schneider's
goofy script. And if all that wasn't enough, you have an excellent cast of
side characters, including one of the most intense cops put to film (with a
"small" fixation on his own penis), a beautiful girlfriend, who also happens
to be a pretty decent actress, and Oded Fehr, who if you hadn't noticed by
the umpteen love notes inscribed after my MUMMY review, is a great looking
man with an ass that would put most porno stars to shame. And the
mane...wow! Another hilarious turn is also given to the character of Deuce's
dad in this movie. His description of how he met Deuce's mom is to die for!
The one thing which surprisingly didn't work for me, were the epilogues at
the end of the movie. They seemed to be wanting to be funny, but just fell
flat. All in all, this movie is filled with cheap, filthy and quick humor,
and if that's what you're looking for, this should be your ticket to
he-bitch heaven (you'll fully appreciate that line after you see the film).
And for God's sakes, if you truly do not like childish, dirty and "stupid"
humor, do us all a favor and skip this movie, because you'll just end up
bitching about it later, even though a flashing neon light is telling you
"this is NOT for you!". Don't say I didn't warn you :).
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Schneider mentions a Filipino dish in this film, which might've been spurned
from his own familial background. Rob's mother is Filipino and his father is
Jewish. He was born and raised in San Francisco, the youngest of five
children. He got his first big break on the "David Letterman" show in 1987
at the tender age of 24, and apparently dated co-SNL star Julia Sweeney for
a few years in the early 90s.
This is Oded Fehr's second big screen appearance after his turn as Ardeth
Bey in THE MUMMY earlier this year. The real Oded was born in Tel Aviv,
Israel.
Surprisingly, there is only one other noticeable ex-SNL cameo in this film,
and that is the wonderfully dry humor of Norm McDonald, who not so
surprisingly, has a line which deals with anal intrusion.
Adam Sandler's film production company, which produced this film, is called
Happy Madison. Uuhm, do I really have to explain where the name came from?
Well, okay. Two of Sandler's films were called BILLY MADISON and HAPPY
GILMORE. There you go.

Author
Ran Sanudrala
Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo
http://www.ram.org/ramblings/movies/deuce_bigalow_male_gigolo.html
/Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo/ is a low-brow comedy not quite up to the
scale of an /Austin Powers/, /There's Something About Mary/ or /Dumb
and Dumber/, but it is on par with a /Big Daddy/.
As is usually the case, the movie is a bunch of one-screen gags strung
together in the hope of making the audience laugh continually. Because
of the great mood I was in, this generally worked. The plot is just a
showcase for the gags: Deuce (/Saturday Night Live/'s Rob Schneider)
is a fish tank cleaner who ends up being responsible for taking care
of the apartment of Antoine (Oded Fehr), a male prostitute.  When
Deuce begins to monkey around, he manages to destroy a $6000 aquarium,
which he must replace or face Antoine's wrath. Needless to say, Deuce
begins to sell his "services" to pay for the damage.  This results in
a somewhat hilarious sequence of episodes where Deuce finally realises
his niche in life and finds true love.
/Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo/ has its high spots. In particular, the
parody of /The Matrix/ is pretty hilarious. The main politically
incorrect focus of the film is primarily on physically handicapped
people who are, in a way, outcasts of society.  Deuce's services
involve making these people feel "normal" again and this is done by
taking some risk (of offending the audience) which I appreciated.
Generally though, the one-track nature of this approach became
tiresome after a while.
The trailer is a bit misleading compared to what actually happens in
the film (like in the trailer for /Go/) which can be interesting, as
is the novel way the Tourette's syndrome problem is handled. /Deuce
Bigalow: Male Gigolo/ wil induce a few laughs if you're in the right
mood.  Worth renting.

