Title
Review for Akai hashi no shita no nurui mizu (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Girl: To you, I must appear like a slut.
Warm Water Under a Red Bridge is a continuation of the themes that have
preoccupied esteemed Japanese director Shohei Imamura for much of his
career.  This 74-year old filmmaker trains his detailed eye on a
cross-section of small town life (near the Noto Peninsula, to be
precise), accurately representing the lewd fishermen and shopkeepers who
reside there.  His characters are often middle-to-lower class,
gregariously smoke and loiter, make endless small talk, are often
preoccupied with sex, and are constricted by their societal roles,
particularly that of women -- widely considered to be the weaker sex. 
Imamura's female characters are surprisingly resilient, much more than
the cloddish men.  Even the more likable male roles (pretty much all of
them in Warm Water) are possessed by aggressive machismo and blundering
jealousy.
One of Imamura's more accessible features, Warm Water is a comedy that
breaks sexual taboos through freewheeling use of magic realism.  That's
not immediately apparent, though, which is a nice touch.  We've grown
accustomed to movies that don't offer such pleasing surprises.  The
story begins as a man at wit's end embarks on an impromptu treasure
hunt.  Former office drone Yosuke (Koji Yakusho, The Eel) roams the
streets of Tokyo unsuccessfully looking for work.  Much of his time is
spent with the affable homeless philosophers that populate the
waterfronts.  One of the more wily tricksters in the bunch, Taro (Kazuo
Kitamura), spins an elaborate yarn about a gold Buddhist statue he once
stole from a Kyoto temple.  He's too old and too damn tired to track it
down, but encourages Yosuke to follow the clues to its whereabouts: a
house near a red bridge, the entrance lined with trumpet flowers.  It's
about time Yosuke left Tokyo behind anyway -- all he's found is bad
fortune.  His nagging wife is about to leave him unless he comes up with
some cash pronto, so what's he got to lose?
When Yosuke arrives at the red bridge, his adventure is diverted by
encounters with the astonishing young girl that lives in the treasure
house with her long-suffering clairvoyant grandmother (Mitsuko Baisho). 
One could safely say that Yosuke has never met anyone quite like the
lovely, cheerful, elusive Saeko (Misa Shimizu), a compulsive
shoplifter.  While at the supermarket, he catches her in the act and
draws himself into her life by returning the golden earring he found in
a small, inexplicable puddle of water where she stood during the theft.
It soon becomes clear that Saeko's kleptomania isn't what drives Yosuke
to distraction, it's her seemingly magical and sensual ability to "make
water" ...which is where the mysticism gets pretty thick.  Audiences
will either go with it or they won't.  Prudes beware.  In much the same
way lovers spontaneously combusted in the odious Like Water For
Chocolate (my comparison ends there), Saeko produces enormous quantities
of water when she's excited.  Sex is like a gigantic tidal wave.  It's
Imamura's way of transforming love scenes into virtuoso comic setpieces,
but once he's mined the joke to the fullest he digs deeper into the
novelty of male fantasy and that magnificent, indescribable female aura
that sometimes transforms men into obsessive fools.  It's Imamura's
allegory for the "repulsive power" of women -- what attracts boys also
mortifies them.
Leaving his former drab life behind, Yosuke stays with Saeko, becomes a
fisherman, makes himself at home, and might even live happily ever
after.  Everything seems to be going well until one of his hobo pals
from Tokyo (grinning Manasaku Fuwa, funny and sad) starts sticking his
smelly little nose in all of Yosuke's affairs (he's in search of the
treasure too, the old sot!)  Then there's the problem that Yosuke bears
more than a passing resemblance to Saeko's old boyfriend.  Is he just an
object for her desires?  Hey, wasn't it supposed to be the men who
objectify women?  What the hell's going on around here, anyway?
Imamura's camera is restrained, sticking to rigorously composed images
that sometimes remain static for entire scenes (a couple of times the
unhurried pace becomes positively languid, but that comes with the
territory with this particular director).  Nothing stodgy about it, Warm
Water allows viewers room to take in their fill of the locations and be
attentive to the physicality of his characters.  There's also tremendous
energy from the cast, a sense of playfulness and excitement that seems
appropriate.  When Yosuke and Saeko aren't having sex, they're eating or
telling jokes.  There's a chorus of fishermen right down the block who
delightfully grumble about their catch, their neighbors, and beautiful
girls.  Warm Water doesn't feel like the work of an elderly filmmaker
gone out to pasture; it's young without being innocent or impetuous. 
Imamura's approach to storytelling is that of the curious spectator,
inviting laughter and raised eyebrows at erotic hijinks, fistfights,
sports, even philosophy.  What makes his humor so unerringly perceptive
is the lingering pain that burns underneath all that playfulness. 
That's human nature.
Aka Akai hashi no shita no nurui mizu.)
Director: Shohei Imamura
Producer: Hisa Iino
Writer: Motofumi Tomikawa, Daisuke Tengan, Shohei Imamura
Starring: Koji Yakusho, Misa Shimizu, Mitsuko Baisho, Manasaku Fuwa,
Kazuo Kitamura
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
