Title
Review for Clean, Shaven (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Christopher Null
     Faster than you can say, "Toys in the attic," it becomes painfully
aware that Peter Winter (Peter Greene), the main character of Lodge
H. Kerrigan's new film, is not quite right.
     CLEAN, SHAVEN is a brief but extremely powerful look at a page from
the life of a schizophrenic who is on a quest to see his daughter who has
been taken from him.  Peter's mental illness, we discover, is a little
more than a small problem, creating in him a near-constant need to be
clean and free of body hair.  Throughout the film, Peter is constantly
shaving, in an attempt to rid himself of the "receiver and transmitter"
that he believes are housed within his body.
     Peter makes it to the village where his daughter Nicole (Jennifer
MacDonald) lives, only to find himself hunted by the police.  The reason? 
Alongside Peter's arrival in town came the slaughter of a local young
girl.  The cops figure Nicole is next.  Everyone *always* blames it on the
psychos.
     Clocking in at a spare 80 minutes, CLEAN, SHAVEN looks more like an
episode of "The X-Files" than a feature film, yet manages to pack more
punch than most films twice its length.  The feel is that of a
documentary, and the picture appears so real at times that it's hard to
remember it's a fantasy.  Kerrigan has created a creepy, disturbing, and
graphic atmosphere.  Dialogue is hardly required to get the emotions of
Peter across: you can see it in his face, and in his actions.  In fact,
Peter goes so far as to cut off his fingernail (in vivid color) in order
to get "the transmitter" out of his system.  The collective groaning in a
crowded theater must be tremendous.
     This movie is definitely not for everyone.  I'm not even sure if it's
for *anyone,* but the bottom line is that CLEAN, SHAVEN is a spectacular
example of how movies should be made.  Greene deserves an Oscar nod for
his work here, playing Peter so well as to make Norman Bates look like Mr.
Rogers.  Another hand goes to Kerrigan's direction, which plays perfectly
off of Greene's acting.
     If you go, be *sure* you know what you're getting in to.  This one is
definitely not for the faint of heart.

Author
Chris Loar
Written and Directed by Lodge H. Kerrigan
Cinematography by Teodoro Maniaci
Starring Peter Greene (Peter Winter), Robert Albert (Jack McNally),
 Megan Owen (Mrs. Winter), Jennifer MacDonald (Nicole Winter),
Molly Castelloe (Melinda Frayne)
_Clean, Shaven_ is a minor miracle of a movie; it's risky and
innovative, and yet it's not esoteric, since the director's aim --
to put you inside the head of a schizophrenic man -- is
immediately obvious, and the occasionally obscure way the
story unfolds is no impediment to understanding what the
film is really about.  This is a film that almost no one will
enjoy watching, exactly -- and yet it's hard to imagine
anyone walking away from it unaffected.  It's not an easy
or a pleasant film to watch, but it will repay the effort many
times over.  Because while it is, on the one hand, a
fascinating and utterly horrifying trip into the mind of a
schizophrenic man, it's also a story about loneliness,
isolation, and the vast spaces that lie between ordinary
people.
The story revolves around the efforts of a schizophrenic man,
Peter Winter (played with astonishing power by Peter Greene)
to locate his daughter.  Along the way, we meet several lesser
players -- Peter's mother, his daughter, and Jack McNally,
the detective who is pursuing him on suspicion of a brutal murder.
We follow Peter as he is released (or escapes) from a hospital
and steals an ancient, decrepit car.  We remain in large part
attached to Peter's point of view, and Kerrigan makes good
use of all the arthouse techniques at his disposal -- eerie
close-ups on mundane objects combine with bizarre sound
effects and half-intelligible dialogue offscreen, and even the
rather ordinary processes of shaving and pouring cream into
coffee become genuinely disturbing.
What makes Greene's performance so compelling is the
fear and desperation that bleed into his every gesture,
each twitch, each blink of a wide, terrified eye.  Peter
is profoundly alone -- cut off not just from other people
but from the stability of daily reality that we all take for
granted.  The film's most startling effect is to take all
these fairly stock film techniques and transform them
into something that helps us experience some of that
isolation and fear.
This effect is intensified by the enigmatic way in which
the story unfolds; the film provides us with nothing
especially stable to cling to, either, except for Peter's
terrified presence.  We identify with him because we
have nothing else to cling to.  Peter, unfortunately,
doesn't have anything to cling to but a damaged
photograph of his daughter.  In his loneliness and
despair, he's drawn to her -- perhaps the only person
alive to whom he feels any sense of connection.
Intercut with Peter's search are sequences, often no less
disturbing, that focus on the secondary players.  These
characters are, in their own ways, no less alone than
Peter, and the fact that they are "normal" makes their
isolation is all the more unsettling.  In various sequences
we see Peter's mother biding her time alone in her large
house; Peter's daughter waiting by herself for her adoptive
mother to pick her up after school; Detective Jack McNally
drinking alone in a noisy bar.  Each of these scenes is
created using the same cinematic tools that create Peter's
reality -- an erratic soundtrack, disorienting close-ups --
and the consistency of this technique emphasizes the
isolation that these characters all have in common.
Ultimately, Kerrigan's emphasis on loneliness and
what keeps us apart feels utterly hopeless.  The
movie creates a feeling that nothing can be
accomplished, that serious human contact -- real
intimacy -- is impossible, or at least rare.  Even the
most poignant emotional connection made between
characters in this film -- the powerful, immediate bond
between Peter and his daughter in the movie's final
scenes -- seems to founder on misunderstandings and
incompatible illusions.  I'm not at all sure I like that
hopelessness, particularly after the film has taken such
pains to show us that we can get inside another person's
head -- that while every man may be an island, we're all
capable of building bridges.  But that's a minor quibble.
The film's real achievement resides in helping us see
the world through the eyes of men and women who feel
alone; in that achievement lies something unbearably hopeful.  

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release 4/95
Running Length: 1:20
MPAA Classification: Not Rated (Violence, gore, language)
     Consider how mainstream movies depict violence.  Bodies are chopped
up, blown apart, and torn to pieces.  Blood and gore flow as freely as
water.  Films like INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE are awash in a crimson
tide, and no one thinks twice about it.  Then along comes a film like
CLEAN, SHAVEN, where nothing is gratuitous, and suddenly viewers are
shocked.  HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER provoked a similar response,
for the same reasons.
     There's no denying that the film is disturbing, at times profoundly
so.  One scene in particular resulted in more than half the audience
wincing, turning away, or leaving.  Often, it's the simplest, most
realistic forms of violence, when portrayed in such a vivid manner, that
cause the stomach to churn.  During CLEAN, SHAVEN's screening at the 1994
Sundance Film Festival, a member of the audience fainted.  As a result of
this single, thirty second sequence, which film maker Lodge Kerrigan
refused to edit out, this movie took nearly eighteen months to acquire a
distributor.
     Peter Winter (Peter Greene) is a schizophrenic, and CLEAN, SHAVEN
introduces us to his world, where paranoid delusions intermingle with
reality.  Through the use of viewpoint photography and stark, unusual
images, we are brought into Peter's mind.  It's not a pleasant place to
be.  Upon occasion, movies like to present a protagonist who straddles
the line of sanity, but CLEAN, SHAVEN shows no such ambiguity.  Peter is
clinically insane.  (One psychiatrist at the screening I attended
described this as "the best portrayal of untreated schizophrenia ever
[presented] on film.")
     The story, which develops largely without dialogue, follows Peter's
quest to locate his young daughter Nicole (Jennifer MacDonald).  Having
been institutionalized for the last several years, Peter has had no
contact with Nicole, who had been living with her grandmother.  Now, she
has been adopted, and he is determined to find her.  His intentions are
profoundly unclear, and he is already under suspicion of having brutally
murdered another young girl.  A detective (Robert Albert) is on his
trail, closing in while gathering evidence.
     In many ways, CLEAN, SHAVEN is an incredible cinematic experience,
but it will neither entertain nor appeal to a "typical" movie-goer.
Writer/director Kerrigan is aware of this, but was unwilling to change a
frame of the final cut.  His vision, which took more than two years to
commit to film, remains intact.  And, frankly, without the controversial
scene, the character study would be incomplete.
     As was true of Michael Rooker in the title role of HENRY, so Peter
Greene is hauntingly convincing as CLEAN, SHAVEN's off-balance lead.
Whether scrubbing his skin with steel wool, cutting into his scalp with a
scissor, curled into a ball fighting against a flashback, or hiding from
his own reflection, Greene has a perfect sense of Peter.  The other
actors are all competent, but their work pales in comparison to this
singular performance.
     It's always difficult to rate a film that, while powerful and well
made, is an exercise in endurance.  There are those--even among the
art-film crowd--who will find this picture unbearable.  Theaters will
warn of its graphic content.  Viewers will endlessly debate all the
unanswered questions posed within.  But no one who sits through this film
is likely to forget it.  CLEAN, SHAVEN is one of those rare movies that
leaves an indelible imprint on anyone still watching as the closing
credits roll.
-James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
