Title
Review for Return to Paradise (1998)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Michael Dequina
_Return_to_Paradise_ (R) *** (out of ****)
Give up three years of your life or let a friend hang.  That is the moral
dilemma facing two young men in _Return_to_Paradise_, a largely intriguing
drama whose by-the-numbers paces are elevated to a higher level by the
strong acting ensemble.
Sheriff (Vince Vaughn), Lewis (Joaquin Phoenix), and Tony (David Conrad)
meet and bond during a month-long vacation in Malaysia, where they engage
in all the pleasures "paradise" offers them: women, booze, and especially
cheap hashish.  When the month expires, Sheriff and Tony return home,
leaving Lewis, who stays--in a not completely convincing plot point--to
study endangered orangutans.  Two years later, Sheriff and Tony, both in
New York, learn from attorney Beth Eastern (Anne Heche) that Lewis has
spent the ensuing years in a Malaysian prison, awaiting hanging for drug
possession.  According to Beth, if both Sheriff and Tony return to Malaysia
and share responsibility for the hash, Lewis's life would be spared.  In
turn, however, they would also have to serve, along with Lewis, three years
of hard time.
It's an intriguing moral dilemma, but with the unfortunate title
_Return_to_Paradise_ (the film's original, comparatively less snappy title
was _Force_Majeure_, the name of the 1990 French film on which it is
loosely based), the decision that Sheriff and Tony arrive at appears to be
a foregone conclusion, and director Joseph Ruben's slack pacing of Wesley
Strick and Bruce Robinson's competent script does not add much in terms of
suspense.  Thus the effectiveness of the piece is reliant on the actors,
and it is their effort that elevates _Return_to_Paradise_ into something
special.  The slick, selfish Sheriff follows a predictable character arc,
but his evolution is made natural and involving by the charismatic Vaughn.
He shares a nice rapport with Heche, who, after displaying her flair for
light comedy earlier this summer in _Six_Days,_Seven_Nights_, shows she has
strong dramatic abilities to match.  As touching as she is, the emotional
linchpin of the film is Phoenix, who creates a highly sympathetic and
tragic figure with a minimum of screen time.  Of the cast, Jada Pinkett
Smith comes off the least impressively, but that's mostly due to her
shallowly written and developed character, M.J. Major, an ambitious
reporter bent on creating an sensational international incident with
Lewis's case.
_Return_to_Paradise_ is not a great film, but its weighty concerns and the
care and craft with which they are addressed make it a diverting dramatic
oasis in the substance-parched late summer movie season.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Steve Kong
Return to Paradise is a movie that has a great morality play. It uses the
characters to force us to ask ourselves one question Is the life of a
friend worth three years of your life?
As Return to Paradise opens, we learn of three friends Sheriff (Vince
Vaughn), Tony (David Conrad), and Lou (Joaquin Phoenix). They are speding
their vacation together in Malaysia - smoking hash, having sex with exotic
women, and enjoying the quiet life. Sheriff is a limo driver, Tony an
architect, and Lou a self proclaimed tree hugger. As their vacation ends
the three decide what to do. Sheriff and Tony decide to fly back to New
York, but Lou wants to stay and help free orangutans.
Two years later Sheriff and Tony are approached by a lawyer, Beth (Anne
Heche), who tells them what happened to Lou right after they left. It turns
out that Lou was caught with the hash and has been imprisoned for the last
two years. Compounding this news is the fact that Lou has only seven days
to live. The Malaysian government takes drugs seriously and they have
sentenced Lou to death. The only thing that can save Lou is if both Sheriff
and Tony go back to Malaysia and accept their responsibility with the
drugs. In that case, Lou's life will be spared. If Sheriff and Tony return,
they will have to spend three years in prison to complete this deal to save
Lou.
Writers Wesley Strick and Bruce Robinson have put together a tight and
engrossing script. The script never strays into melodrama and focuses
solely on the question of if these two friends will go back to save Lou.
Kudos to cinematographer Reynaldo Villalobos, who shoots this film
wonderfully. The film is shot with mostly grays, blacks, and whites. But,
Villalobos skillfully slips in some bright colors to match the emotions of
the characters onscreen.
The cast is superb. Vaughn, who I last saw in the Lost World, is the staple
for this film. His performance stands out. Vaughn plays Sheriff right on
the money - a guy who is hesitant to go back to Malaysia. Anne Heche
absolutely glows in Return to Paradise. Her portrayal of Beth is diverse,
hard-edged and pushy sometimes and soft and loving at other times. David
Conrad doesn't get enough screen time, but when he is on screen he matches
the performances of both Heche and Vaughn. As for Phoenix, he does well
with the minimal amount of work the script provides.
Director Joseph Ruben has a winner of a film. Return to Paradise is a Don't
Miss film. This film is remarkable - the writing is strong, the film looks
great, and the acting is near perfect. It's nice to have films like Return
to Paradise mixed in with the late summer films. It gives a good balance to
the explosions and gun-fights that typically populate the summer films.
Again, Don't Miss Return to Paradise.
After seeing this film, let me know if you'd trade three years of your life
to save the life of a friend.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Vince Vaughn must've really liked working with his co-stars in this
film. Come autumn, Vince will be co-starring opposite Joaquin Phoenix
in CLAY PIGEONS, and come Christmas, he joins his other co-star, Anne
Heche, in Gus Van Sant's shot-by-shot remake of Alfred Hitchcock's
classic PSYCHO (Don't look at me, I didn't green-light this project.)
PLOT:
Three guys go down to Malaysia for some fun and relaxation. They smoke
hash. Drink a lot of rum. And bang a lot of girls. Money depleted, two
of the friends return home to NY. The remaining guy gets caught with
their remaining brick of hash, and is to be sentenced to death by
hanging, unless his two friends return to the exotic land of Malaysia,
and serve respective three-year prison sentences. If one returns, he
serves six years. What would you do?
CRITIQUE:
Solid premise filled with a plethora of moral dilemmas, this film rocks
you through the gamut of emotions on the strength of its superb casting
and genuine performances. If the plot line of this film does not
interest you, then you may or may not like this movie depending on your
mood. On the other hand, if the basis of this film does draw in you
some intrigue, get ready to enjoy the spoils of your emotional
interest. This is a not a film for the kids. Suffice it to say that if
you liked the Oliver Stone-penned MIDNIGHT EXPRESS (7.5/10), you will
most likely appreciate this film as well.
This movie is not a cut-and-paste moral drama that slowly places all
the right pieces in front of you as you strand along. It's a well
drawn-out story with interesting characters, real emotions, and several
unforeseen curves thrown in for a deeper search of the soul. The twists
keep the story from getting boring, but more than that, it is the
actors that come through in blazing colours. Vince Vaughn delivers his
best performance since his breakthrough role in SWINGERS (8.5/10), with
a character that could easily have been played without much care, but
instead, we find a well-rounded human being whose continually
interesting to watch, and a joy to deconstruct. Granting that I've
never been much of an Anne Heche fan should draw further notice to my
acclamation of her rock-solid performance, while Joaquin Phoenix plays
his part with a big heart and sensitive touch, likely to bring tears to
your eyes. 
The two negative points in this otherwise extremely compelling drama
would be Jada Pinkett Smith's appearance and performance as the
one-dimensional reporter with a dire need for acting lessons, and the
uninspired and trite budding of romance among a couple of the
characters. Other than that, make sure that you bring plenty of
tissues, if you're the type of person that cries (Mrs. JoBlo is guilty
as charged...again!), and prepare to be transported through some of the
darkest passages of your consciousness, while attempting to complete
the answers to some of the most personal questions rustling through
this fine film. A summer blockbuster it is not, but a thought-provoking
story, it is.
Little Known Facts: 
Previous titles for this film were FORCE MAJEURE (The title of the 1989
French film upon which the film is based), ALL FOR ONE, and A LONG WAY
TO PARADISE.
Born in Puerto Rico, Joaquin Phoenix changed his name to Leaf at the
age of four, but then reverted back to Joaquin in the early '90's. His
siblings' names include Summer, Liberty and Rain. He was also brother
to late actor, River Phoenix of MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO (7.5/10), STAND BY
ME (7.5/10) and DOGFIGHT (8/10) fame. River died of an overdose of
drugs on Halloween eve, 1993, in front of the Johnny Depp-owned bar The
Viper Room in Hollywood.
Vince Vaughn stands 6"4, and was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
Jada Pinkett Smith stand 5"0, and is married to film-star Will Smith of
MEN IN BLACK (7/10) fame.

Author
Nick Amado
Regardless of the critical response to this film, few would debate that
Return To Paradise is one of the most thought provoking films of the
decade. The story asks two main characters, Sherrif and Tony, if they
would spend three years of their life in a third world prison in order
to save a friend from execution. But from the get go it is clear, at
least to me, that the filmmakers are asking the audience to think about
it as much as they are asking the characters to.
Sherrif, Lewis and Tony meet each other for the first time in Malaysia.
They are three young men who are experiencing life, sharing hash, beer
and babes. Sherrif and Tony decide to return to New York to continue
their lives. Lewis stays put, planning to head off to Borneo to work
with mistreated apes. The three friends realize that they've bought too
much hash and toss most of the remainder in the trash outside their hut.
The story picks up two years later in New York City as a lawyer tries to
track down Sherrif and Tony. She informs them that Lewis will be
executed because of the sheer volume the officials found in his
posession. That amount makes anyone in Malaysia a suspected drug dealer,
the penalty for which is death. But if one man goes back for his friend,
he spends six years in prison but accepts half of the responsiblity,
thus half of the drugs. If both go back, three years each.
Most of the film tugs at our morality. We know what we SHOULD do, but
what we would actually do if faced with the situation is a different
story. The filmmakers make no bones about it, the characters ping pong
back and forth with their emotions, as do we. Conscience, the "right"
thing to do is not always the easiest, nor necessarily the best. The
conflict is firmly implanted early on. After that, we just wait to see
what they would do.
Return To Paradise is a well-crafted picture. It is dark, it is
depressing, and there are probably a lot of things in the film that you
might question, as I did. There were some things I just didn't buy. But
they are also intentional choices made by the men and women behind the
camera, and that was something I was able to accept. The film looks as
though every scene was shot using the one available light on the set.
Every shot is drenched in thick shadows. Reasonably, there arent' a lot
of moments of bright color in Return to Paradise, once the men part ways
early on. The decisions they have to make are grave. The situation their
friend faces is grave.
Like last year's pitiful Red Corner, this film tackles the issues of
Asian judicial systems, though the real story here is the morality of
man, a true "what if". But, the choice by the filmmakers is to make the
"enemy" (the Malaysian government) faceless for the most part is a good
one. A faceless enemy in the movies is always much easier to sell, and
it is easier for the audience to accept. But we do see the faces at the
end, and it is a matter of personal opinion whether or not what we see
really works.
Perhaps the most surprising amidst the fine performances in Paradise was
that of Joaquin Phoenix. He has a rather small part, playing the
imprisoned Lewis. But he makes the most of his limited screen time and
may, in certain circles, be considered for an Academy Award nomination.
(Are we talking about this already?) Vince Vaughn, as Sherrif, sells his
character well. We are pulled every which way with his character. Anne
Heche gives a good sentimental performance as Lewis' lawyer, who shows
grit and perserverance as a fighter who is always patient with the two
men who face the ultimate decision.
Return to Paradise is certainly good enough to recommend, but try not to
watch it with sharp objects in the vicinity. Be prepared to question
yourself, your morals, and for god's sake, don't go after a really fun
afternoon.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Tony and Sheriff have one hell of a decision to make.  They have 
eight days to decide whether they will part with three years of their 
young lives in order to save a friend named Lewis from hanging.  This 
moral dilemma is complicated and complex since it requires them to trust 
each other as well Lewis's lawyer, Beth, that her description of the 
parameters of their predicament is accurate.  
     Joseph Ruben's RETURN TO PARADISE, based on the French film FORCE 
MAJEURE, is a character study of individuals grappling with an ethical 
nightmare.  Both the strength and the weakness of the film come from 
Rubin's dedication to his vision.  He consistently keeps his actors in 
careful check.  Faced with issues of enormous proportions that could 
mean not only imprisonment but also possible death, his characters stay 
low key and pensive.  
     The casting, with the exception of a weak performance by David 
Conrad as Tony, is strong enough to sustain a drama played more in the 
characters' heads than in their words.  Subtle expressions on their 
faces tell much of the story.
     Vince Vaughn and Joaquin Phoenix, who had the leading parts 
recently in CLAY PIGEONS, play "Sheriff," short for Volgecherev, and 
Lewis.   Anne Heche is Beth, the lawyer who lays the problem into 
Sheriff and Tony's laps.
     It begins with 3 college kid types, Lewis, Sheriff, and Tony, on a 
carefree vacation to Malaysia.  They plan on partying, drinking, and 
smoking dope until their money runs out.  Three likeable kids, they 
share some good-natured high jinks together with "broh" punctuating 
their every other sentence.  After six weeks, Sheriff and Tony move back 
to New York City to go to work while Lewis stays on in a environmental 
mission to help save the orangutan.
     The story then cuts to 2 years later in Manhattan.  Sheriff is a 
limo drive, and Tony is a construction worker engaged to be married.  
Beth shows up and tells them that their friend Lewis will be executed in 
8 days.  It seems that the local authorities found him in possession of 
a little over 100 grams of hash just after they left.  In Malaysia 
having more than 100 grams automatically makes him considered a dealer 
in the eyes of the law, and the sentence for dealing is death.  
     Since the hash belonged to all of them, Beth wants them to come 
back with her.  If one of them agrees to be imprisoned there, he will 
get 6 years.  If both go back, it will be 3 years each.  In either case, 
Lewis will not be executed.
     Immediately, Sheriff and Tony start to position themselves.  At 
first, Tony says he will go, but only if Sheriff goes.  Sheriff, on the 
other hand, appears happy to let Tony go alone.  As you can imagine, 
these attitudes will evolve, and motives and "facts" will be questioned.  
An important and well-developed subplot features increasing sexual 
tension and interest between Sheriff and Beth.
     The conclusion, which can be partially guessed, contains the 
explosive drama absent from the rest of the picture.  Even if the film 
suffers from its languid pacing, its fascinating plot and excellent 
acting more than make up for its shortcomings.
     RETURN TO PARADISE runs 1:51.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, 
profanity, drug usage, and violence, and would be fine for older 
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
RETURN TO PARADISE  *** Directed by Joseph Ruben. Written by Wesley Strick
and Bruce Robinson. Photography, Reynaldo Villalobos. Editing, Andrew
Mondshein & Craig McKay. Production design, Bill Groom. Music, by Mark
Mancina.Cast: Vince Vaughn (Sheriff), Anne Heche (Beth), Joaquin Phoenix
(Lewis), David Conrad (Tony), Vera Farmiga (Kerrie). A Polygram release.
109 minutes. R (physical and psychological violence)
There was a l953 love story in the South Seas of that title, and a
runner-up title, Return to the Blue Lagoon in 1991. Return to Paradise is
not a remake of either, even though the innocent filmgoer could easily
think it is a romance in the Tropics, especially since the female lead is
Anne Heche who was so recently in the cutely sentimental Six Days Seven
Nights. Here the title is used as very black irony.
Three twentysomething American men spend some weeks together in Malaysia
whooping it up with wine, women and hash. Two of them, old pals, return to
New York: limo driver Sheriff and architect Tony. The third one, Lewis
(whom the others did not know before that trip) stays behind to help save
the orangutans. Two years later, in New York City, Sheriff is approached by
lawyer Beth with terrible news. After their departure from Asia, the
authorities, investigating a missing rental bicycle that the trio had
high-handedly thrown away, had found hashish used by the men. Lewis had
been arrested. Possession of drugs in certain countries can be punished
with utmost severity. The large amount found by the police called for the
death penalty. The only way Lewis can be saved is for the other men to
return to "paradise," share the blame. If both New Yorkers do this, each of
the trio gets three years in jail. If just one shows up, the imprisoned men
get six years.
Lewis is eight days away from execution. Beth, who represents him, tries to
persuade the two men to sacrifice years of their lives. Much of the film
follows Beth's efforts and the men's quandary, with the main stress on
Sheriff and to a lesser extent, on Tony who is about to get married. The
moral dilemma is unbearable. The process is both slow (the men's reactions
are detailed) and urgent. Beth pleads persistently, in fact with too much
dedication and humanity for a lawyer. (This is elucidated later, but too
neatly and for some in the audience, too predictably). The clock is
ticking, as the story uses a countdown (" 7 days left, five days left..."),
a familiar device but in this context without the predictable ending of
pictures about, say, atomic bombs, where, as a rule (and with serio-comic
exceptions like Dr. Strangelove) the world gets saved at the very last
minute.
The countdown is a gimmick, but it works, except for making one wonder why
Beth waited so long to approach the men. Though  explained, this still
feels like a an artificial device. So does a sexual relationship between
Beth and Sheriff. No matter. The slowness of the passing days keeps raising
the situation's tragic level. So, warts and all, the movie is overall a
most gripping work.
Where all this leads us, I cannot possibly disclose, except to say that one
crucial aspect of the plot is the irresponsibility of the press.
The Malaysia of the movie, obviously unfilmable in the real country, was
shot in Hong Kong, Macao and Thailand, standing in for the island of
Penang, one of the 13 states of the Federation of Malaysia. The photography
and the sets are exquisite, with both urban scenes and landscapes made
enormously appealing, a true paradise for the three companions. But no
doubt, in Malaysia this movie will be banned as (I cannot say why) its
national pride, shown as excessive, is bound to upset that country.
The movie is a remake of a 1989 French film I had never heard of, Force
Majeure (Uncontrollable Circumstances) directed by Pierre Jolivet whose
work I know very little. His cast included solid French actors as well as
Kristin Scott Thomas as the female lead.
>From what I gather, Return to Paradise is not doing well in theaters, which
is what would expect, since this is not "entertainment" but as far from a
feel-good movie as can be. All the more reason to catch it now.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Bruce Robinson, Wesley Strick
Starring: Anne Heche, Joaquin Phoenix, Vince Vaughn, David Conrad
Synopsis: 
The setting of RETURN TO PARADISE is the real-life Muslim nation of
Malaysia, where all prostitution is illegal, and drug dealing and
sufficient possession are met with capital punishment. People bow in
Islamic prayer at prescribed times of the day. Crime in general is
harshly dealt with.
Enter Lewis McBride (Joaquin Phoenix), and his buddies Sheriff (Vince
Vaughn) and Tony (David Conrad). They are three culturally disrespectful
young guys, who treat women like objects and indulge themselves with
copious amounts of marijuana. Sheriff and Tony escape to the United
States to become 'respectable,' but unknown to them Lewis gets caught
and predictably sentenced to death for drugs. 
Lawyer Beth Eastern (Anne Heche) informs Sheriff and Tony that Lewis has
received the death penalty, but mentions there's a possibility of Lewis
avoiding death if the two partners return to Malaysia to stand trial.
Can she pay or otherwise convince the cowardly and irresponsible men to
return to Malaysia to rightfully serve time for their offenses?
Opinion: 
Back in the old days, if you broke a neighbor's window, you paid for it.
In the post-Watergate era the mentality shifted to "Everybody does it.
It's only a crime if you get caught." Now, as prosecutor Kenneth Starr
might observe, we have whiny, apparently guilty offenders with one foot
in prison and the other foot in the grave, insisting, "I didn't even do
anything! Why am I being persecuted?" 
I'm a proponent of the concept of "audience justice" in movies. When I
see some B-movie RAMBO wannabe arrogantly announce, "I know this JUNGLE
like the back of my hand," I know in my gut that Mr. Know-it-all is
going to bite the big one sometime during the movie. RETURN TO PARADISE
seems to have forgotten the notion of good old fashioned justice because
the film tries to pedastalize its Ivy League heroes - - make them seem
noble and glamorous when in fact, there's nothing particularly
enlightening about pampered whiners who cry out for preferential prison
treatment on the basis of class, when in fact they are guilty as sin.
"Hey, man, we didn't do anything wrong because we were on vacation, so
we deserve better treatment than the locals." 
Speaking of bad old days, back in ancient cowboy and Indian movies it
was considered okay to portray Native Americans as "the only good Indian
is a dead Indian" if the cowboys were the main characters and
sufficiently handsome. As a modern American I had thought the days of
tap dancing kewpie doll servants and Frito Banditos were over, but
apparently the emphasis has merely shifted to Asia. RETURN TO PARADISE
is, unfortunately, a film that proliferates the unwelcome stereotype of
Asian women as gold-digging island sluts and prostitutes while the
film's Asian men are portrayed as ugly, bantering drug dealers or
sadistic faceless prison guards who bark incredibly ferociously, just to
say "enter" in Malay. In RETURN TO PARADISE, Muslims/Asians in this film
constitute a faceless race -- a barbaric, dehumanized, anti-white
"other." This is an unconscionable example of modern cinematic race
baiting.
I don't REALLY mind movies about moral yutzes. Nor do I mind in general
when a fictional movie portrays fictional characters on a fictional
island having sensationalistic adventures. As long as they're not naming
names and singling folks out for racist caricatures. 
But in RETURN TO PARADISE some good, kind, decent, technologically
advanced folks - - are referenced specifically by location ("Penang,
Malaysia") and singled out for overwhelming negativity. I have visited
Penang and found it not too much different than Honolulu in terms of
commercial trade, high technology, education, malls, theaters, and
general friendliness. RETURN TO PARADISE singles out these same highly
educated businessmen and women and their high tech Islamic society - -
for portrayal as ruthless overlords, pimps, degraded prostitutes and
sluts in a shantytown hell. Basically they took some GI's Subic Bay
fantasy and said, "Hey, let's call it Penang. Nobody'll notice. You know
how them Asian islands are all alike (wink nod)." This attitude is an
unpalatable throwback to shameful, feathers-and-shoe-polish, supremacist
notions in Hollywood.
In other respects, the cinematography and dramatic tension in RETURN TO
PARADISE are good, as is the acting. Anne Heche is skillful as the
lawyer under duress, but her chemistry with romantic lead Vince Vaughn
seems strained.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
J.K. Salisbury
Cast: Anne Heche, Vince Vaughn, Joaquin Phoenix, David Conrad, Jada Pinkett
Smith
Buried somewhere, deep in the recesses of your local multi-plex, lies one of
the true gems of the summer, and of the year so far.   This is surely the most
powerful, and emotional movies I've seen, if not one of the best this year
(Sorry Mr Spielberg, but this movie didn't go for the obvious emotion, but
rather, it let the story tell itself.  It allowed the truth and power of the
story to provide the emotion)
Return To Paradise (based upon the story 1997 story Force Majeure) tells the
tale of an American, (Joaquin Phoenix, River's very talented little brother)
imprisoned in Malaysia on drug charges.   His two friends (Vince Vaughn and
David Conrad), who partied with him there, and then left, are his only hope of
survival.  Buoyed by an American attorney (Anne Heche), the men are given the
choice of returning to Malaysia to commute the American's death sentence, in
exchange for prison time, or having their friend die, and living with it on
their consciences.
I have often complained about the pacing of movies this year.  Whether they
be a bit too slow to develop (my only complaint on H20 ) developing too fast
and spoiling the movie (as in Snake Eyes) or never developing at all (as in a
recent video viewing of the Coen brothers disaster, The Big Lebowski).        As
Return to Paradise plodded along, I began to feel victim to this again.  The
story started slow, developed slowly, and I was afraid that I was in for
another slight letdown.  Although intrigued and entranced to the screen, I
still was waving my hand in the saying "Alright already, get to it".  But
then, something magical happened.  The last 20 minutes of this movie are the
most emotional, and powerful, that I have seen in recent memory.  All of a
sudden, the previous hour and a half plus, made perfect sense.        It developed
the characters, let you know them, reeled you into the plot.  In doing so,
making you care, without even realizing it.
You go through the moral dilemmas of each character.  Vaughn, who is
partially responsible for Phoenix's imprisonment, fights it, and you fight it
with him. Conrad, the calm one, with so much to lose, yet never hesitating,
showing the true power of friendship.  Heche, the impassioned voice, fighting
the ultimate uphill battle, against the friends, and foreign governments. 
But most of all, Phoenix, his life torn apart, his world destroyed, and you
are there with him. From his partying, happy-go-lucky, save the world nature,
directly to the haunting, disturbing visions of his new leaf.  In a foreign
prison, no freedoms, his body rotting away, but his soul, and faith remaining
strong.
This is a look into the various aspects of human nature, in each character,
you see, and relate, to the different stages of how people deal with crisis.
Denial, rejection, desperation, acceptance, all portrayed so eloquently here.
The performances are nothing short of magnificent, and are the main reason
that you care about each person.  Because you know them, you relate to them. 
Heche and Vaughn both give their best performances by far (which says a lot
considering how wonderful Vaughn was in one of my favorite movies, Swingers),
Pinkett (as a nosy, persistent reporter, whose purpose seemed like a
pointless side story, until it all came together), and Conrad give fine
supporting nods as well.  (Ever notice that a good movie, and good
performances around you, can raise the bar?..these two rise to the occasion).
 But the standout here is Phoenix.  If the Academy can remember this movie
come springtime, the least that must be done is to recognize this performance
(and maybe make up for missing Kevin Bacon's masterful prison turn in Murder
in the First).        He has shown flashes of brilliance before (and is making big
brother up in heaven very proud I'm sure) in U-Turn (one of the few watchable
things there) and To Die For (the only watchable thing).  But here, he clears
the bar, and then some. The emotion, the strength, without dialog, you know
exactly what he's saying, what he's feeling..you are in that cell with him. 
The best supporting nod I have seen this year.
When you work on a puzzle, the end result is sometimes unclear, until the
last piece fits in.  But when it does, everything comes together, into focus,
the final picture is truly amazing.  That is what happens here.  Meandering
along, slowly, yet deliberately, creating the powerful stage, where the final
act unfolds.  Then drawing the curtain back suddenly, and grabbing us by the
heart, and staying there.  I thought that the summer movie season may be
dead, and hopeless.  However, with this movie, my faith has been restored. 
Find this one wherever you can, and see it  ($$$$1/2)
Want To See More of My Reviews? Visit
http://www.angelfire.com/ks/nearside/comingatt.html
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Vince Vaughn, Anne Heche and Joaquin Phoenix
Directed By Joseph Rubin
Running Time: 1 hour 41 minutes
Return to Paradise is a grim thriller that tries hard to impress, but is
somewhat flawed. Sheriff (Vaughn), Lewis (Phoenix) and Tony (David Conrad)
are three friends who spend time in Malaysia drinking, having sex, and
smoking lots of hash. Tony and Sheriff eventually leave, but Lewis, an
Greenpeace activist, stays to help introduce urangutangs back to the their
habitat. However, he is shortly busted by the police, and his stash o' hash
is found. Back in Brooklyn, Beth (Heche), Lewis's lawyer, appears from
nowhere, telling Sheriff and Tony that if they don't come back to Malaysia
and accept some of the blame, Lewis will be hung. Sheriff and Tony then have
to make the moral decision.
Return to Paradise falls into the dreaded trap: it's an 'okay' movie. That
is, there is nothing particularly special about it, but nothing truly awful
either. The performances are fine, and Anne Heche, after her 2.D characters
featured in Six Days Seven Nights and Psycho, has a potentially better
character to work with, and  the chemistry  with Vaughn works well. Although
the film seems somewhat disinterested with Heche's character on occasion,
she plays the role well enough. Vaughn is great as Sheriff, delivering a
fine performance. His transition from a stubborn 'no, I'm not going' to
seriously thinking about it is well played and delivered, but again the
script just doesn't do enough justice, and Vaughn himself makes the
character work. It's up to Phoenix, as the most underwritten character in
the film, to give the best performance, and nearly all of his scenes have a
harrowing reality about them, especially the unexpected, and scary, ending.
But although the actors are great, the characters themselves act, and talk,
like soap opera stars. The script and story are sometimes surprisingly
amateurish, the sort of thing you'd expect to be on television late night
with the title 'Return To Paradise: The True Story of Lewis.' The ending,
although harrowing, is somewhat unbelievable, and there is a tacky sex scene
thrown in between Heche and Vaughn, which doesn't help the movie at all. And
the final scene, a reunion between Heche and Vaughn, is overplayed and
irritatingly sloppy, almost strangling the audience to emit some kind of
emotion from them. It's a shame, because when the scenes work, they really
work, and the gritty realism of some of the scenes give the idea that this
film could of been much better than it actually is.
The direction is good, although it works far better during the second part
of the film, in Malaysia. The prison scenes are unsettling, and work well.
But there's some problems with the pacing, and the film seems really long
winded at some points, almost as if it were padding. But generally, like
everything else in the movie, the direction is just good,  not brilliant nor
pathetic.
Return to Paradise is a admirable attempt, but something is missing to make
it an truly engaging epic. There is enough entertainment on offer, but
occasionally this largely well made movie just does some things hopelessly
wrong. The film raises some interesting questions, and pulls some surprises,
but overall it seems like it's underachieving. It's worth watching for the
strong performances of the cast, but Return to Paradise is a T.V drama that
tries to be a lot more, but doesn't always succeed.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: August 14, 1998
Starring: Anne Heche, Vince Vaughn, Joaquin Phoenix, David Conrad, Vera
Farmiga, Jada Pinkett
Directed by: Joseph Ruben
Distributed by: PolyGram Filmed Entertainment
MPAA Rating: R (violence, language, sexuality)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/return.htm
The release date listed for RETURN TO PARADISE might be interpreted as a
typo, considering the fact that it's in release at the same time as
multimillion dollar blockbusters made for the masses. Certainly, this
deep and engaging drama might be more at home in late fall or early
winter, when films of this quality see limited but noteworthy release
and usually catch our attention several months later at Oscar time.
There is no doubt that this movie will be pulled under against more
glamorous products, but as was the case with earlier-this-year's
TWILIGHT and last year's NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN, sometimes there are
diamonds in the rough. 
Strictly speaking, RETURN TO PARADISE (directed by Money Train helmer
Joseph Ruben) is not at the peak of its genre. It's a typical drama in
most ways: believable characters thrown into a plot with at least one
heart-wrenching or tearjerking event. But in other ways, it's atypical
in its subtle workings of these elements. Scenes do not scream of plot
development, and characters are larger than they originally appear to
be. Though Ruben cannot be credited with this - his delightfully
star-free cast is the power behind that plus - he manages to weave
everything together into a sturdy mold that does not fall apart upon
inspection. Simple and to the point, with a running time of less than
two hours, PARADISE is an enjoyable drama. 
Most of the premise is laid out in the first thirty minutes, which tends
to make the last eighty minutes not as fun as they could be. Three
friends spend a summer in Malaysia, accumulating during their stay 104
grams of hashish. At the end of the summer, two of the group - Sheriff
(Vince Vaughn) and Tony (David Conrad) fly back to the US with promises
to keep in touch. The other friend, Lewis (Joaquin Phoenix), will stay
at their condo a few days before moving on to Borneo to help a wildlife
preservation program. Before he can do that, however, police officers
find him and the hash. Lew, in possession of over a hundred grams, is
tried and convicted of drug trafficking and sentenced to death by
Malaysia's strict justice code. 
Back in the States, two years later, a young lawyer named Beth Eastern
(Anne Heche) approaches Sheriff and Tony and informs them of the
situation. Lew is set to be executed in eight days, but if the two of
them go back and accept their share of the responsibility, the
government will grant Lew clemency. There will still be prison time
involved, but not without compensation, Beth promises. Then,
predictably, for the greater part of the rest of the movie, both Sheriff
and Tony turn their options over in their heads. Though somewhat slow,
this middle section builds to a final twenty minutes that is some of the
most powerful drama in recent memory. RETURN TO PARADISE is not always
on the mark, but it hits more than it misses and you're sure to find it
worthwhile, at the very least.
FINAL AWARD FOR "RETURN TO PARADISE": 3.0 stars - a good movie.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Return to Paradise (1998)
Vince Vaughn, Anne Heche, Joaquin Phoenix, David Conrad, Vera Farmiga, 
Nick Sandow, Jada Pinkett Smith, Ming Lee, Joel De La Fuente, Richard 
Chang. Screenplay by Wesley Strick and Bruce Robinson. Directed by Joseph 
Ruben. 109 minutes
Rated R, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
Talk about ironic titles! Although the phrase "Return To Paradise" 
conjures up images of a tropical romance, the film is actually an intense,
 harrowing drama focusing on friendship, sacrifice, ethics and personal 
responsibility. Director Joseph Ruben has crafted a riveting morality 
play you won't soon forget.
It begins in Malaysia, where three buddies are wrapping up a hedonistic 
vacation. Sheriff (Vince Vaughn) and Tony (David Conrad) head for home, 
while their pal Lewis (Joaquin Phoenix) stays behind to pursue his work 
with animals.
Cut to two years later, when Beth (Anne Heche) visits Sheriff and Tony in 
New York. Introducing herself as Lewis' attorney, she lays out the 
nightmarish scenario. Minutes after the men departed, police raided their 
cabin and found enough hash to convict Lewis of possession with intent to 
sell, an offense punishable by death. 
Beth wants the men to go back and accept responsibility for their share 
of the stash. If they do, the charges will be reduced to simple 
possession and Lewis will eventually be freed. If both men confess, 
they'll receive three years each. If only one confesses, he'll be jailed 
for six years. And if they both refuse, Lewis will be led to the gallows 
and hung. His execution date is a mere eight days away. 
What would you do? Would you save the life of your friend by voluntarily 
subjecting yourself to a sentence in a hellish third-world prison? Or 
would simply say no and go about your business, with the burden of his 
death on your shoulders for the rest of your life?
There isn't a simple solution and thankfully, the story doesn't opt for 
easy answers. Based on the 1989 French film "Force Majeure," "Return To 
Paradise" keeps its focus on the gut-wrenching situation. Although the 
screenplay occasionally becomes sluggish during the New York scenes, 
director Joseph Ruben never lessens the intense feel. By the time the 
film reached its unexpected climax, I was left emotionally drained.
While all of the performances are strong, Vince Vaughn and Anne Heche 
deserve special mention. Vaughn, who became a star with his electrifying 
turn in "Swingers," gives depth to Sheriff, a likable young man 
accustomed to going through life on cruise control, always ready for a 
quick exit when things get dicey. Vaughn makes the callow youth's crisis 
of conscience seem credible. 
Anne Heche gives a wonderfully nuanced performance as the desperate and 
determined Beth, whose character starts off strong and becomes even more 
engrossing as the movie goes along. Over the last couple of years, Heche 
has made an impact that handily overshadows her high-profile personal 
life. From her engagingly loopy cameo in "I Know What You Did Last 
Summer" to her delicate comic work as the romantic lead in "Six Days 
Seven Nights," Heche has proven herself one of the most versatile and 
talented actors working today.
"Return To Paradise" could easily have turned into "Midnight Express Jr.,
" but the writers have more integrity than that. Just when you're ready 
to dismiss the Malaysians as ruthless barbarians, one of their judges 
delivers a blistering indictment of the United States approach to social 
problems that is jarring because it contains so much truth. 
Likewise, the American media takes some heavy shots, as their bullying, 
morally superior stance towards the policies of foreign nations 
exacerbates an already horrible situation.
Despite the slow spots and periodic lapses into melodrama, "Return To 
Paradise" succeeds because it makes us squirm. Long after leaving the 
theater, the film's central question stays with me. What would I do in 
that situation? I still don't know the answer.

Author
Kristian Lin
RETURN TO PARADISE is about three American tourists who meet and
befriend each other in Malaysia:  Brooklyn limo driver Sheriff (Vince
Vaughn), clean-cut Harvard grad Tony (David Conrad), and hippie activist
Louis (Joaquin Phoenix), all carousing in a land of sunny beaches,
sexually submissive women and cheap hashish.  Sheriff and Tony leave for
the States, giving Louis what's left of their hash.  Two years later, a
lawyer named Beth Eastern (Anne Heche) turns up in Sheriff's limousine. 
She explains:  the day after their parting, the police busted Louis, and
all the hash he had made him a trafficker in the eyes of Malaysian law,
and subject to the death penalty.  Louis's life will be spared only if
Sheriff or Tony or both return to Malaysia to claim their share of
responsibility for the drugs and serve prison time.
What to do?  The dilemma is supposed to give its characters
opportunities for courage, cowardice, or redemption, but this dull,
self-important movie only shows up how successfully SAVING PRIVATE RYAN
covers the same ground.  The story takes too long to set up, and the
movie goes limp despite its eight-day time frame that's supposed to
create tension.  The plot twists are cheap and arbitrary, as in the 
revelation of Beth's real relationship to Louis, or the contrived
courtroom climax that no amount of good acting can redeem.
The acting is good, though.  Joaquin Phoenix steals the show.  His two
set pieces from his prison cell are horrifying glimpses of a gentle man
brought close to psychic ruin by his isolation and impending death. 
When Louis tells Sheriff, "There is no God in this place," you feel the
terrible force of the words.  Jada Pinkett-Smith is saddled with a plot
device instead of a character, but watching her play her scene with 
Anne Heche made me think that THE NEGOTIATOR would have been even more
interesting with them in the leads instead of Samuel L. Jackson and
Kevin Spacey.
Vince Vaughn looks appropriately lumpish for the part (so much so that
he bears a disturbing resemblance to Diedrich Bader from "The Drew Carey
Show"), and nicely underplays his change from moral weakling to hero. 
Heche is in fine, anguished form, too.  The romance plot between them is
a problem, though.  Hollywood watchers have been scrutinizing Heche's
career to see if she'll make a credible romantic lead now that everyone
knows she's gay in real life, which is ridiculous and grossly unfair to
an actress who has more than once proven this kind of thinking wrong. 
That having been said, however, she's lucky that SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS
was viewed as the test case for her viability as a romantic lead rather
than this movie, because there's no chemistry going on between her and
Vaughn.  It doesn't make sense that the dedicated Beth and the
vacillating Sheriff would be attracted to each other.
The whole subplot is shoehorned in.  Even worse, it's used as the hook
for Sheriff's redemption - at the end, he tells her that doing time
would be better than losing her love by not going back.  Director Joseph 
Ruben and writers Bruce Robinson and Wesley Strick vitiate their own
moral drama because they don't trust us to believe that Sheriff is doing
the right thing.  For all its ambitions and gritty atmosphere, RETURN TO
PARADISE is as phony as any Hollywood action-thriller or comedy, and a
good deal less fun.

Author
Alex Fung
RETURN TO PARADISE (Polygram - 1998)
Starring Vince Vaughn, Anne Heche, Joaquin Phoenix, David Conrad,
  Jada Pinkett Smith
Screenplay by Wesley Strick and Bruce Robinson
Produced by Alain Berheim, Steve Golin
Directed by Joseph Ruben
Running time: 109 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   The moral dilemma in RETURN TO PARADISE looms everpresent throughout
   the picture's middle hour, inextricably tightening a noose around its
   protagonist's neck.  More ethical examination than suspenseful
   potboiler -- its sparse location usage and reliance upon persuasive
   conversation to facilitate the high drama result in a nagging
   resemblance to a filmed stageplay -- this is a sober morality play
   told in shades of gray.
   In earlier days, where rectitude in the movies was as subtle as the
   black and white ten-galloners worn in westerns, the course of action
   would be automatic: if the lead had the means to spare a condemned
   man's life by owning up to his involvement in the crime and turning
   himself in, by God, he bit the bullet and did the time.  It's the
   sort of selfless display which plays as suitably noble in a
   simplified world but is implausibly straightforward for a brooding
   take of modern realism.
   Sheriff's (Vince Vaughn) quandary is even more deliciously sticky.
   As informed by advocate Beth (Anne Heche), Lewis (Joaquin Phoenix) is
   scheduled to hang in eight days as a drug trafficker, but a deal has
   been struck to spare his life if his two cohorts return to Malaysia
   and accept their culpability -- three years imprisonment each if they
   both surrender, but six years should only one decide to face the
   music.  Sheriff, of course, doesn't want to see Lewis die -- but,
   then again, neither does he particularly want to rot in a jungle
   prison; wouldn't it be less messy if Tony (David Conrad) went back to
   do the honours instead?
   It's an ethical predicament made all the more delicate by the set of
   circumstances: the male trio only vaguely know each other, having met
   during a fleeting comradeship two years ago.  Sheriff's indirectly
   responsible for Lewis' death sentence -- the discovery of his
   sloppily-discarded brick of recreational hash pushed Lewis over the
   legal limit, designating the crime as trafficking rather than mere
   possession -- but still, the instinct of self-preservation is strong
   enough (especially in a New Yorker) that it's difficult to make this
   sort of sacrifice for a close friend, let alone a long-ago associate.
   While the film doesn't browbeat -- the filmmakers are smart enough to
   realize that while the audience wants Sheriff to do the right thing,
   it may very well be a hypocritical sentiment -- it's not exactly
   subtle with its characterizations.  Even a virtuous man put in this
   dilemma would have second thoughts, so to depict Sheriff as an
   amoral, looking-out-for-Number-One character is unnecessarily
   heavy-handed.  Not only is he not the nice-young-professional sort
   that Tony is (who even has a sweet fiancee -- talk about tipping the
   scales), but Sheriff's also apparently the kind of shifty guy that
   gets confronted in restaurants by angry ex-lovers and even prompt
   fathers to expect the worst.  Sheesh.
   Sheriff's character arc, then, is tidily well-defined and
   consequently apparent from the outset: initally directionless, the
   crisis prompts him to experience a personal awakening, stirred from
   his moral reverie by the growing realisation of his own
   self-involvement and the love of a good woman.  This last element, in
   particular, struck me as superfluous; the love story, though
   thematically appropriate, is narratively jarring and lends little
   catharsis to the film.
   Still, despite the scenario's obvious setup, the lack of any evident
   urgency (the days are counted down with occasional onscreen
   subtitles, but even a permanent running chronometer wouldn't add
   enough tension to overcome the lackadaisical pacing), and the
   inevitable outcome (though its antecedent -- it's based on the 1990
   French film FORCE MAJEURE -- often teases at a more oblique course),
   it nonetheless sustains interest as the cerebral chess game of
   pursuit and evasion develops between Sheriff and Beth; beneath their
   posturing, their arguments often seem to be as much to convince
   themselves as they are to sway their intended parties.
   The picture falls apart in its final reel, full of melodramatic
   revelations and twists unworthy of the preceding intrigue, but the
   actors do what they can to salvage it.  This is a particularly
   well-cast film -- Jada Pinkett Smith's characteristic verve is nicely
   channelled into controlled insistence as an ambitious news hound,
   while Mr. Phoenix turns in a vivid performance as the martyr Lewis;
   beneath his menacing features, he conveys the same innate sweetness
   as exhuded in his impressive breakthrough performance in Gus Van
   Sant's TO DIE FOR.  Ms. Heche, splendid actor and uncanny
   presidential barometer (she starred in WAG THE DOG when tensions
   increased in the Gulf and L'Affaire De Lewinsky first broke, and now
   appears here in a film dealing with a man coming to terms with taking
   responsibility for his past actions and submitting himself to
   inquisition -- boy, I can't wait to see what happens when her PSYCHO
   hits theatres) is in fine form with a quiet, focused intensity.
   At the end of the day, though, it all feels a bit slight.  RETURN TO
   PARADISE is terribly earnest and well-intentioned, but it doesn't
   quite achieve the degree of gravity or profundity that it strives
   for; it's an agreeable 110 minutes which involves for the duration,
   but vaporizes from the mind shortly thereafter.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"...a first screenplay unaccompanied by a powerful agent or industry
 sponsor is generally a pathetic fetus of a film, nothing more."
                               - Andrew Sarris

Author
Dennis Schwartz

RETURN TO PARADISE (director: Joseph Ruben; screenwriters: Wesley
Strick/Bruce Robinson/loosely based on a 1990 French film called "Force
Majeure"; cinematographer: Reynaldo Villalobos; cast:Vince Vaughn
(Sheriff), Anne Heche (Beth), Joaquin Phoenix (Lewis), David Conrad
(Tony),Vera Farmiga (Kerrie), Jada Pinkett-Smith (M.J.), 1998)
The moral dilemma is that two friends must choose whether to help a
third friend who was arrested in Malaysia for drug possession. He will
be hung in eight days after spending two years in jail if they don't
return and each do three years, or if one of them returns, he must do
six years. These three young men were post-college vacationing in
Malaysia, as one of them called it, "a paradise of rum, girls and good
cheap hash."
When Sheriff (Vaughn) and Tony (Conrad) left to return to NYC, Lewis
(Phoenix) stood behind to be an activist for Greenpeace's cause of
saving the orangutan in Borneo. But before they left, they rented a
3-man bike which they never returned to their owner because a truck
knocked them off the road and Sheriff threw the broken bike away rather
than have it slow them down from walking back to town. The next day the
police came to their residence on the bike owner's request, and they
found more than a brick of hashish in the trash bin, just where Sheriff
deposited it, and charged the occupant there, Lewis, with being a drug
trafficker for having so much hashish in his sole posssession.
Joseph Ruben (Sleeping With the Enemy/The Stepfather/Gorp/The Good Son)
has directed a lot of films that are just plain awful, as you could see
from those mentioned above, except for the adequately made SWTE. He
directed this predictable drama with a heavy hand as it lapses into
melodramatics after a very emotionally moving start and after presenting
a most interesting premise; it is just too bad that the script had no
conviction to follow through on its premise. It fails to really answer
the question it raised about the moral duty one has in going back to a
Malaysian prison for a very casual friend, someone whom it is unlikely
you will ever see again. The weakness of the film can be found in the
director's lack of courage in understanding what a decision like this
really entails to the person involved, and by making the film all about
the Anne Heche character instead of focusing mainly on the two boys, as
the film loses its sense of direction. By adding sidebars to the simple
premise, it changes the question considerably and takes the edge off
what decision is made. The director spoon feeds the answer that he
thinks the audience wants, and it all seems to be a predictable formula
driven film instead of one filled with a raw energy. After mid-film, any
logical attempt at soul searching for what to do was lost in a series of
obvious contrivances and clichés that were displeasing to watch. Bad
directors do such things to good ideas.
The story picks up two years after the opening dreamy sequences of the
boys enjoying themselves in exotic Malaysia. Beth (Heche) is in the limo
driven by the cavalier and free-spirited Brooklyn born Sheriff, who
hustled his way into going on that vacation by getting a frequent flyer
ticket. She tells him she is a lawyer for his friend Lewis and is laying
on him the details of Lewis' imprisonment, asking him to save his life.
Heche is intense and persistent, not letting up on the less than eager
Sheriff to make such a commitment. She fails in her attempt to bribe him
with money and then she meets Tony, who Sheriff hasn't seen since their
return from Malaysia, who is now a successful architect, just engaged.
He tells her that he couldn't do the six years but would go back for
three years if Sheriff goes, also. Here the story gets side-tracked for
bad reasons. One, a stereotypical annoying reporter (M.J.) is brought
into the story to show how irresponsible the press is. The reporter
threatens to break the story, even as Beth tells her that her client
will surely be killed if she does, that these third world countries
over-react when they are put under the spotlight of the world press.
And, the second annoying development to the story, is the unbelievable
romance that develops between Beth and Sheriff. It is especially
unbelievable because Sheriff just mentioned how she would try anything
to get him to go back and to now believe that Sheriff would fall for her
after saying that, just doesn't add up.
The only scene that made sense from this point on in the story, was the
one where Tony's fiancée (Vera) asks some intelligent questions of the
lawyer and fails to illicit responses that would make me want to go
back. For instance, it is illicited from Beth that there is no
guarantees in writing that Tony will only get three years. To think of
going to a prison in Malaysia without an official representative of the
U.S. government available to offer advice and confirmation of what is
actually happening, is simply ludicrous. Who in their right mind would
unquestionably believe what Beth is saying? That the carefree Sheriff
will become the responsible good guy afterall and really go back to
redeem his former irresponsible behavior, is an old formula story and
you can see that being the setup from the very first reel of the
picture, where he rescues Lewis from unsavory Malaysian drug dealers.
That he goes back because he falls in love with Beth, sends a wrong
message about the dilemma the film's premise poses. That is too easy a
reason. The real question is, would one do what they can to save
another's life without getting anything in return for it? The answer to
that question can only be answered individually and according to the
current situation one is in. Heroes usually don't know if they are going
to be heroes, they just do what is right at the moment. It is
instinctual. In this case, from what I have seen of Beth's direct
confrontational approach, as difficult as it might be to say no, I think
most people in Tony's shoes would have no choice but refuse her request.
As the story gets played out and we find out that Beth is holding
something back from the boys, the fact that she is Lewis's sister,
changes everything, anyway. At least, it does for Tony.
The acting was not that convincing, except one could make an argument
for Joaquin Phoenix and the real fear he shows in the prison cell and on
the video tape he sends to his two friends. The scene of Lewis in the
Malaysian jail, which is actually a jail cell in the Philadelphia prison
system, of him rambling on incoherently, complaining about the cell
being godless, I thought, more than being good acting, smacked of
melodrama and was not a very convincing portrayal of someone going over
the edge; but, it was scary.
My thinking is, if Lewis was that crazed-out and fearful of dying, why
did he wait until the last moment to contact his pals?
I just wonder how many would honestly go back to save Lewis if they were
in Tony's shoes or in Sheriff's shoes.
I also wonder how good this film could have been in the hands of a Fritz
Lang or even an Elia Kazan, or a modern director such as a Martin
Scorsese. And that is the shame of this somber picture, it failed to
move me and seemed to turn into a slight story, and this is after all
its contrivances.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Homer Yen
How much would you be willing to sacrifice for someone that you hardly
knew?  For my family and closest of friends, I'm sure that I'd sacrifice
everything I could to help them.  But I'm not so sure that I could say
the same if the person in question was just some casual acquaintance.
Sheriff (Vince Vaughn) and Tony (David Conrad) are faced with that same
moral dilemma.  Two years ago, these two and Lou (Joaqin Phoenix) met as
vacationers in Malaysia.  They spent their days and nights picking up as
many women as possible, drinking as much beer as possible, and smoking
as much hashish as possible since it's so easy to buy and inexpensive
too.  A few days after Sheriff and Tony left, the police raided the
bungalow and found Lou and all of the leftover hashish.  Because of the
excessive amounts found, Lou was charged with trafficking, which carries
a sentence of death.
Sheriff and Tony find out about this after they are located by Lou's
attorney, Beth (Anne Heche).  With only 8 days left until Lou's
execution, Beth explains to them that she has struck a deal with the
Malaysian magistrate.  If one or both goes back to share the
responsibility and serve jail time, Lou's life will be spared.  Tony has
a beautiful fiancée, a promising life, and a heart of gold.  He
tentatively agrees to go back if Sheriff will too.  However, the burly
Sheriff who has always been reckless and careless can not find it within
him to go back.  And both voice extreme reservations about their chances
of survival given that the prison system is fraught with disease,
malnutrition, and guards that randomly torture the inmates.  With time
running out, Beth must find a way to change their minds.
Beth's task is enormous.  She delicately walks a fine line between
promoting the courage behind the deed and moral blackmail.  All the
while, she is also being hounded by a hungry reporter that threatens the
stability of her deal.  I liked Heche's performance.  She remained
focused and I liked the way her character tried to read every emotion in
order to figure out the next mode of approach.  She's sincere but also
scheming at the same time.  Another nice element was the questionable
attraction that Heche develops for Sheriff.  Is this just one of her
plays?  Already in a situation mired with ambiguity, this further
complicates Sheriff's life as the loner slowly learns the meaning of
compassion.
Despite the good performances and the pungent atmosphere, I somehow
wished that this film would have been more compelling.  As pure drama,
this film delivers, but my reservation lies within the fact that the
storyline was too cerebral in nature.  I would have preferred something
more visceral.  I would have liked a closer examination of the Malaysian
government's view on drug trafficking or would have liked to have seen
the brutal environment of the prisons.  I think that with that added
sensation, this movie might have been more memorable.  Nonetheless,
Heche's worthy performance and good supporting roles merit a
recommendation.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "RETURN TO PARADISE" (Polygram Pictures)
         This intensely involving drama presents a stunning moral
dilemma. The story begins with three twenty-something American men
cavorting carelessly in sun-drenched Malaysia, enjoying the rum,
girls, and cheap hash. Originally strangers who met while touring
Asia, they've spent a month in paradise, free from responsibilities
and inhibitions. When their vacation ends, two head back to
Manhattan while the third decides to remain inPenang as a "Save the
Orangutans" volunteer. Skip ahead two years - and a lawyer (Anne
Heche) tracks the New Yorkers down. One (Vince Vaughn) is working as
a limousine driver, while the other (David Conrad) is a structural
engineer, engaged to be married. She tells them that their buddy (Jo=
aquin Phoenix) has been in jail for the past two years after their
discarded and forgotten hash was discovered in a trash barrel. Under
Malaysian law, the stash was large enough to qualify him as a drug
dealer, a crime for which there is a mandatory death sentence. All
three are culpable buthe will be executed in eight days unless the
pair return to Malaysia, confess their responsibility, and volunteer
to join him in serving out a stiff prison term. Meanwhile, the media
threatens to break the story, further jeopardizing an already
precarious situation. The crisis-of-consciencetheme is superbly
developed by writers Bruce Robinson & Wesley Strick and realized by
director Joseph Ruben. Anne Heche is the hot-wire here. Her waifish
sensuality sparkles yet she never loses her downright determined
edge. She is a stunning actress. Vince Vaughn and David Conrad wrestle
with cynicism and decency, while Joaquin Phoenix delicately etches
the sensitive idealist. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Return to Paradise" is a powerful, compelling 9, provoking the
question: What would you do in similar circumstances?

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Polygram Filmed Entertainment/Propaganda Films
 Director: Joseph Ruben
 Writer: Wesley Strick, Bruce Robinson
 Cast: Vince Vaughn, Anne Heche, Joaquin Phoenix, Jada
Pinkett Smith
   When people lie, cheat, steal, even kill, they will either deny
that they committed these transgressions or will make
excuses for the iniquities.  Some people are psychotic and
are able to do dastardly deeds without feeling a twinge of
guilt.  Most of us, though, are made cowards by our
conscience.  If the society does not catch up with us, we
punish outselves, unable even to look ourselves in the mirror. 
How do we protect ourselves from these unfortunate feelings? 
We rationalize.  We do what we can to justify our bad conduct
to ourselves and to others.  "Return to Paradise" is the story
of two young men--regular, fun guys--who must make a moral
choice.  Do they surrender three, maybe six years of their
youth in order to save the life of a friend?  Or do they turn
their backs on him and spend that time enjoying their careers,
their girls friends, their comfortable lives in America--perhaps
unable for the rest of their lives to face themselves?
   To get a broader picture of the dilemma, take a quick look
at one of the great stories penned in the 20th century about
our ability and willingness to rationalize.  In Friedrich
Duerrenmatt's play, "The Visit," an old and very rich woman,
Clara Zachanassian, revists the town of her youth to take
revenge on Anton Schill, who made her pregnant and then
abandoned her.  She offers all the people of this Central
European village a substantial sum of money if they would
surrender to her the life of Anton Schill.  At first
the townspeople consider the notion immoral and
preposterous, but they are inevitably corrupted.  When they
start buying things on credit in anticipation of the money they
will get, they rationalize their pathetic behavior by saying that
Schill deserves his fate.
   Now look at how two men in "Return to Paradise" decide
how to excuse themselves should they turn their backs on
their friend and how, in addition, an appealing woman
vindicates herself for her own frauds and deceptions.  Sheriff
(Vince Vaughn), Tony (David Conrad) and their buddy Lewis
(Joaquin Phoenix) are three happy-go-lucky guys in their
twenties who are enjoying the beaches, waters, vegetation
and women of Malaysia's Penang region.  They smoke
hashish regularly, and, hale fellows that they are, they have a
couple of misadventures.  At one point, they are offered an
aphrodisiac by a fast-talking Malaysian woman which turns
out to be a rhino horn, and they barely escape with their lives
from a small gang of local toughs.  Just after Tony and Sheriff
board a plane to go back to New York, Lewis, who stays
behind to work on a new project, is arrested for possession of
104 grams of hashish.  He is indicted for dealing--although
the weed was strictly for personal use--and under Malaysia's
stric anti-drug laws is sentenced to hang.  That Asian
country's attorney general makes a deal: if Lewis's two friends
return to Malaysia to take responsibility for their part in the
ownership of hashish, Lewis's life would be spared, though
Tony and Sheriff would have to spend three years in jail.  If
only one of the two friends returns, Lewis's life would still be
spared but the buddy would have to spend six years in jail.  
   "Return to Paradise" is in no way a sterile, academic
exercise in Philosophy 105: Ethics.  Joseph Ruben directs
Wesley Strick and Bruce Robinson's screenplay with a tight
hand, keeping the tension on a steady keel and unleashing a
series of clever twists that keep the audience guessing about
Lewis's future.  Reynaldo Villalobos's camerawork delivers the
ambiance of a section of the world that is indeed a tropical
paradise, contrasting the lush vegetation and colorfully
relaxed city atmosphere with the stark, dank span of the local
penitentiary.  
   At first Tony is determined to return to save his friend even
while Lewis is obstinate about keeping his stable, though
dead-end, life in Brooklyn undisturbed.  Their ultimate
decision is inspired by the actions of a woman who represents
herself as Lewis's American lawyer, Beth Eastern (Anne
Heche), who appears willing to do anything to save the
imprisoned man's life.  She must contend with the scheme of
a zealous reporter, M.J. (Jada Pinkett-Smith), who is
determined to break a story about Malaysia's draconian
system of justice--a story which Beth believes would infuriate
the Malaysian society and have an adverse effect on her
client.  She will use money and sexual favors to persuade the
two young men to go back to the Far East to face at least
three years in a prison that would make Attica look like a
country club.  She has no compunctions about lying--insisting
that this third-world dungeon allows residents an ample supply
of rice and is free from the threat of violence by the guards. 
And as she rationalizes her deceitful maneuvers, the young
men do likewise, acquitting themselves of accountability
should they decide to turn their backs on Lewis.
   While "Return to Paradise" headlines several surprises, the
grandest revelation is Anne Heche.  Who would have
imagined her depth, judging by her hack performance in the
lame comedy, "Six Days, Seven Nights" and her waxen-faced,
two-dimensional portrayal in "Wag the Dog"?  It took a drama
of global import and moral gravity to bring out the full range of
her talents, and in this she is well supported by the three
men, especially by the strong appearance of Vince Vaughn as
a posturing Brooklynite whose moral standards get a quick
turnaround from his relationship with a fiercely determined
woman.
   We in the audience cannot help leaving the theater
pondering what we would do in this situation.  And remember
that you'll not know your response unless and until you are
actually faced by the severe predicament.  Unfortunately,
"Return to Paradise" undercuts an otherwise taut picture by a
contrived ending, a conclusion which weakens the entire
ethical temper of the story.  It would be unforgiveable to give
away this resolution--a shocker that would have let the
condemned man's pals off the hook if they chose to remain in
New York. Go back a sec to Duerrenmatt's "The Visit."  In the
play, the townspeople must face their guilt in condemning one
of their own to death.  In a movie version starring Ingrid
Bergman, however, the old woman gives her enemy his
freedom.  That done, couldn't the townspeople have said, "We
knew all along that you would not carry out the death threat. 
That is why we felt free to spend the money we were to
receive from you."  Rationalization is a powerful defense
indeed.

Author
Matt Williams
Return to Paradise is a drama based entirely on a key ethical dilemma.
The dilemma itself is a potentially fascinating one, but the film
doesn't fully live up to its potential.
Sheriff, Tony and Lewis (Vince Vaughn, David Conrad and Joaquin Phoenix)
are casual acquaintances.  They met two years before while vacationing
in Malaysia.  Their days and nights were filled with rum, women and
hashish.  After their weeks in paradise, the three parted ways and lost
contact.
Flash forward to the present day, when lawyer Beth Eastern (Anne Heche)
arrives in New York to pay a visit on Sheriff and Tony.  It seems that
after the two of them left Malaysia, Lewis was apprehended with the
remaining 104 grams of hashish, just enough to be classified as a drug
dealer, and to be sentenced to death.
Beth is in New York to convince Sheriff and Tony to return with her to
Malaysia. If they do, each man will be sentenced to three years in the
Malaysian prison system. If they refuse, Lewis will be hanged in eight
days...
Return to Paradise poses an intriguing ethical dilemma.  Unfortunately,
the way the film poses it leaves little doubt as to what the eventual
resolution will be.  It simply becomes a matter of waiting for the
characters to come around to the film's point of view.
Another of the film's stumbling blocks is with the film's lead
character, Sheriff.  Though he's given a few minor introductory scenes
in Malaysia, we are introduced to his character primarily through the
moral dilemma. Vince Vaughn plays Sheriff with great ambivalence.  Since
we have no neutral ground with which to view his character, we never
know what he's really thinking.
David Conrad is mostly ignored as Tony, so we're given even less insight
into his character than Sheriff's.  Redeeming the cast, however, are
Anne Heche and Joaquin Phoenix.  Both give passionate, moving
performances that show the heights to which Return to Paradise might
have risen.
Still, there are some interesting ideas sprinkled around Return to
Paradise. One subplot, involving Jada Pinkett Smith as a journalist who
is investigating the story, ties in nicely with the overall theme of
responsibility vs. self-interest.  There is plenty of material
throughout to spark an after-the-movie "what would you do" conversation.
Return to Paradise isn't a bad film.  It's just one that doesn't live up
to its potential.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This is an adult film in the literal meaning.  It is a film that
does not sugar coat its view of reality.  Things do not happen in this
film because of wishful thinking the way they might in a Frank Capra
film.  RETURN TO PARADISE is a film without a safety net.  It asks the
right questions and does not provide the viewer with pre-digested
answers.  In A FEW GOOD MEN there are some interesting issues raised,
but there are giant neon signs telling the viewer which side to
sympathize with on the issues.  Independently of the Jack Nicholson
character's ideas, the script makes him an insulting male chauvinist.
The film entirely sidesteps the issue of whether Nicholson might be
correct about defense, he clearly is a villain.  RETURN TO PARADISE
also raises issues.  But it is not a morality tale.  It does not tell
the viewer what the answers are. There are no neon signs.
     Tony (David Conrad), Sheriff (Vince Vaughn), and Lewis (Joaquin
Phoenix) are having a good time together in Malaysia.  They are
drinking beer, seeing the countryside, getting into trouble, and
smoking cheap hashish.  They throw out the hashish they have not used
when Sheriff and Tony have to go home.
     Flash forward two years.  Sheriff is a limousine driver, and Tony
is an architect.  Lewis has spent the last two years in a Penang
prison.  Now the Malaysian government is going to hang Lewis as a drug
dealer unless he can prove he was only a user.  To do that he has to
produce the people who shared the drugs with him.  Informally the
Malaysian government says that they will give a total of six years
prison time to the one or two people who show up and will commute
Lewis's term.  Lawyer Beth (Anne Heche) is in New York and has the job
of convincing Sheriff and Tony to go and take their prison sentences so
Lewis will not be executed.  But how does one weigh the greater evil
when the prison is so bad that six years may be tantamount to a death
sentence or perhaps be enough to permanently unhinge the prisoner.
     Vince Vaughn and Joaquin Phoenix are perhaps better known as the
leads of CLAY PIGEONS.  Here they have a very different moral
relationship but their fates are similarly connected.  Anne Heche of
SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS is the lawyer stuck with the task of getting two
men to give up years of their lives to save the life of someone they
hardly know.  The script is based on the film FORCE MAJEURE by Pierre
Jolivet. The original English language script was written by Bruce
Robinson  who wrote what I considered the best film I saw in the 1980s,
THE KILLING FIELDS.  And here he is connected with the best film I have
seen thus far in the 1990s.  Wesley Strict rewrote the script.
     RETURN TO PARADISE is a rare film experience.  It is an
intelligent and adult look at people making hard choices in the real
world.  I give it a 9 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +3 on the -4 to
+4 scale.
     Heavy spoiler.... Heavy spoiler....Heavy spoiler...
     If this film were only about the heavy price Sheriff and Tony were
being asked to pay to save Lewis's life, this would be a very good
film.  But it goes much beyond that.  Unfortunately one only realizes
the other issues of this film toward the end and I cannot discuss them
in the main body of may review.
     If one were to ask if freedom of the press is a good thing or a
bad thing, I think most of us would vote in favor.  We give the press a
broad range of freedoms in this country in the hopes that it will help
to topple dictators, or better yet never letting them get started.  We
do not want to let the government limit our freedom of expression, our
First Amendment rights.  If I were asked what is the downside of giving
this much power to the press the first example that comes to mind is
that we are giving the press the right to publish how to make dangerous
devices.  There have been issues in the past of magazines wanting to
publish instructions for building your own atomic bombs.  It is also
very timely that this film comes out just as a media barrage is
toppling a President.  There are certainly good arguments that the
press has overstepped its bounds.
     Our First Amendment really hamstrings us in controlling dangerous
information.  There are laws that may let us use restraining orders,
but deep down the First Amendment has given all the big guns to people
who want to make information available, for better or for worse.  In
the case in RETURN TO PARADISE it was a lost cause from the beginning.
The international press was going tell the world about Lewis's case.
That would anger the Malaysian government and they would punish Lewis.
Any nobility on the part of Sheriff and Tony would be misplaced.  (And
that really is something we rarely see in film.  The ethical thing to
do is rarely shown as being useless and pointless.)  As soon as the
press got hold of the story, it was out of the main characters' hands.
Lewis was going to die, not because of his crime, but because the
founding fathers felt the press had to be unrestrained.
     Another issue is raised in the film, that that we are much more
tolerant of drug use in this country than the rest of the world.  The
Malaysian judge has a very good point.  In his country children are
free from the risk of drugs.  Malaysia has a much lower risk of crime.
Our lax attitude on drug enforcement also has a heavy price.  We walk a
middle ground between either legalizing drugs or treating drug use as
harshly as the Malaysians do.  We are afraid to do the former and do
not have the stomach to do the latter.  And that middle ground of
shadow tolerance is also what kills Lewis in this film.

Author
Ryan Davis
Would you give up three years of your life to save a close friend's life?
This is the moral dilemma placed before Sheriff (Vince Vaughn) and Tony
(David Conrad) in Return To Paradise.
Two years previous Sheriff, Tony, and Lewis (Joaquin Phoenix) are three
young guys that meet by coincidences unexplained, in Malaysia. They become
best of friends and live together for five weeks partying and having a great
time. Finally, Tony and Sheriff  decide they have to get back to the states,
they exchange good-byes and go back to their humdrum lives in the states.
Two years later, they find out,  that Lewis, who stayed in Malaysia to work
on environmental projects, was arrested the day after their departure. It
seems that the police had come to their house in search of a missing bike,
and instead found a block of hash. Due to the amount of weed found, Lewis is
charged with trafficking and sentenced to be hanged.
After two years of appeals, in desperation, Lewis  sends his lawyer Beth
Eastern (Anne Heche) to attempt to persuade his two friends to return to
Malaysia and accept responsibility for their portions of the pot.  If they
both return, Lewis' life will be spared and they will both be given three
years and if only one returns he will get six years imprisonment.
The film mostly follows Sheriff, now a limousine driver in NYC, as he tries
to decide if he should return and give up his freedom.  Also featured is
Jada Pinkett  in a small role as an ambitious and deceitful newspaper
reporter, named M.J.
Return to Paradise is beautifully directed by Joseph Ruben, whose previous
work includes "The Good Son".  He does a great job of keeping the pace of
the film, and doesn't let up near the end, but unleashes several great plot
twist.  The script is suspenseful,  and was tightly written by Wesley Strick
and Bruce Robinson, with lots of great dialog.
This is a very powerful, intelligent, and thought provoking film. It
contains great performances by Vince Vaughn and Anne Heche. I was especially
impressed by Heche's performance, as it is so much stronger than all her
previous roles.
It is rare, in the summer, to find a movie that makes the audience think.
This one does. There wasn't one person who didn't leave the theater, who
wasn't thinking to themselves, "Would I do this for my friend." As for the
answer, they probably will have a of  hard time with it as these characters
did.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum
