Title
Review for Floating Life (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Alex Fung
FLOATING LIFE (Southern Star - 1997)
Starring Annette Shun Wah, Annie Yip, Anthony Wong, Edwin Pang,
  Cecilia Fong Sing Lee, Toby Chan, Toby Wong
Screenplay by Eddie Ling-Ching Fong, Clara Law
Produced by Bridget Ikin
Directed by Clara Law
Running time: 95 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
FLOATING LIFE, Australia's first-ever submission to the Academy of
Motion Picture Arts & Sciences for consideration in the Best Foreign
Language Film category (its dialogue is in Cantonese, English, and
German), marks a special accomplishment by Clara Law.  A compelling,
at times poignant film, it manages to maintain its truthfulness while
teetering between comedy and melodrama.
FLOATING LIFE centers around a Hong Kong family's sense of dislocation
and loss of identity after moving to Australia in order to avoid the
Communist takeover of Hong Kong, and is divided into clearly defined
vignettes, each chapter labelled with title cards pertaining to
houses, which serves to emphasize the film's theme of family.
The film opens with Mr. and Mrs. Chan (Edwin Pang, Cecilia Fong Sing
Lee) and their two teen sons (Toby Wong, Toby Chan) leaving the
bustling, claustrophobic metropolis of Hong Kong to join their second
daughter Bing (Annie Yip) in Australia.  With their spacious,
immaculately-white new house and the vast abundance of neighbourhood
greenery, the Chans initially find this serene new land a strange and
wonderous one, and - with neurotic Bing cooly remarking about the
possible dangers of Australian life (killer dogs, poisonous spiders,
dangerous ultraviolet rays) - a frightening one.  This sets up a
wonderfully amusing scene early in the film where the four immigrants,
aimlessly ambling about their new suburban neighbourhood, are sent
scrambling by the yelps of a little white puppy.
The tone set up early in the film is broadly comic, and one expects
FLOATING LIFE to depict the clash of cultures as the Chans struggle to
acclimatize themselves to the new ways of Australian life as they
integrate themselves into Australian society (a scene where the two
teen sons meet up with a sunbathing neighbourhood girl is left
dangling), but the film suddenly veers towards an introspective and
melodramatic tone.  FLOATING LIFE shifts its focus away from the
exploits of the new immigrants and towards Bing's domineering of her
newly-reunited family, setting out a set of stringent and oppressive
rules which create tremendous tension within the household and
threaten to fracture the family.
Meanwhile, elder daughter Yen (Annette Shun Wah), happily settled in
Germany with her husband and young daughter, begins to suffer an
identity crisis, manifesting itself with her claims to her patiently
exasperated husband that their new home is cursed with bad feng shui,
and further exacerbated upon hearing of the familial conflict Down
Under.  Among the dramatic threads of FLOATING LIFE, this is perhaps
the most effective and engaging, with an interesting set of characters
and a storyline which generates a genuine emotional punch.
The one misguided vignette in FLOATING LIFE involves eldest son Gar
Ming (Anthony Wong), left behind in Hong Kong to resolve various
affairs on behalf of his family and to await his immigration papers
before rejoining his parents and brothers in Australia.  Emotionally
detatched and aimlessly drifting, his is an uncompelling character,
and consequently subsequent attempts to draw out pathos are
uninvolving and ineffective.  His desperate search for emotional
fulfillment is depicted by philosopical droning on the exquisite peak
of an orgasm, which quickly becomes tedious.
Ms. Law's film cheerfully embraces melodrama - each of the major
vignettes feature excessively emotional climaxes which I couldn't
help but find reminiscent to Wayne Wang's acutely unsubtle THE JOY
LUCK CLUB - but despite the director's rather clear attempts to tug
at the heartstrings, I couldn't help but be touched by a powerful and
affecting soliloquy delivered masterfully by Cecilia Fong Sing Lee
which truly packs an emotional wallop and, in dramatic terms, is
certainly the highlight of FLOATING LIFE.
FLOATING LIFE at times spreads itself too thin; given the myriad of
characters involved, it could either stand to delve into each
vignette a little deeper, or narrow its focus to a select group of
key characters.  However, it is a fine film, with a thoughtful and
insightful screenplay by Clara Law and husband Eddie Ling-Ching Fong,
and some superb acting by a cast consisting almost exclusively of
non-actors (special note is to be made of Cecilia Fong Sing Lee,
Annette Shun Wah, and a short but dazzling performance by an actress
who portrayed Gar Ming's girlfriend from Vancouver).  FLOATING LIFE is
ultimately about the ties that bond a family together, which are able
to withstand great distances and new environments.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"At one point when berated and bloodied by her male military superior,
 Moore screams out a guttural invitation to him to enjoy partaking in the
 absorption of a certain anatomical member." - Dan Cox, VARIETY, on G.I. JANE

Author
James Berardinelli
Australia, 1996
Running Length: 1:35
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/8/97, 5/10/97 & 
      5/11/97
Cast: Annette Shun Wah, Annie Yip, Anthony Wong, Edwin Pang, 
      Cecilia Fong Sing Lee
Director: Clara Law
Producer: Bridget Ikin
Screenplay: Eddie L.C. Fong and Clara Law
Cinematography: Dion Beebe
In English, Cantonese, and German with subtitles
     With Hong Kong's approaching return to China's fold, the prevailing 
atmosphere is one of anxiety-tinged anticipation.  Now, more than ever 
before, families are leaving, believing that the uncertainties of 
emigration offer more hope than staying home.  Clara Law's (TEMPTATION 
OF A MONK) FLOATING LIFE, one of many films to draw upon the current 
situation for inspiration, examines the difficulties encountered by Hong 
Kong emigrants.  On one level, FLOATING LIFE is about the experiences of 
the Chang family as they change residence from Hong Kong to Australia, 
but much of what is presented regarding this small group of individuals 
has universal resonance.  Immigrants worldwide will recognize the truth 
in what Law has to say.
     The title refers to one facet of the immigrant experience.  Those 
who live their entire life in one place are said to put down roots, but 
anyone who moves from one country to another loses any sense of 
stability.  With relatives, memories, and all familiar things in a 
different part of the world, immigrants no longer have a fixed point of 
cultural reference; hence, they are "floating."
     The floating individuals in this film are the members of the Chang 
family -- father, mother, and two boys -- who have left Hong Kong to 
live with "second sister" Bing, who is forging a successful career in 
Australia.  While Bing is pleased to have Mum and Pa in her home, she 
lays down a series of stringent rules that her parents find unreasonable 
and oppressive.  Soon, the atmosphere under Bing's roof is one of 
growing tension.  Meanwhile, the oldest Chang son, Gar Ming, still 
living in Hong Kong, is forced to contemplate his future when a casual 
girlfriend becomes pregnant.  And Bing's older sister, Yen, who lives 
with her husband and daughter in Germany, begins to worry that her 
parents might die before she has a chance to see them again.
     Comedy and drama are expertly interwoven throughout FLOATING LIFE.  
For all of the contemplation of death, lost roots, and fractured 
families, this is actually a surprisingly lighthearted motion picture.  
In fact, the movie starts out almost as a farce, and never completely 
abandons its playful tone even when dealing with serious issues.  The 
most important and compelling of these, of course, is the price of 
becoming a part of a new culture.  Those who refuse to adapt will find 
themselves forever looking back, and therefore incapable of moving 
forward.  On the other hand, those who try too zealously to assimilate 
risk losing their heritage, their traditions, and themselves.  
     Two of FLOATING LIFE's many vignettes aptly illustrate Law's 
primary concerns.  In one, Yen plaintively asks the simplest of 
questions:  "Who am I?"  She is caught between two worlds -- not truly 
German or Chinese, with a life that is defined solely by her husband and 
child.  Bing, on the other hand, is determined to become Australian at 
all costs.  But, when she finally recognizes the consequences of what 
she is giving up in pursuit of that goal, her life collapses.
     FLOATING LIFE works because it allows the viewer to feel the 
characters' confusion and isolation.  Most of us are used to looking at 
the immigrant experience from the outside; FLOATING LIFE offers an 
opportunity to observe it from another perspective.  Law's own recent 
experience moving from Hong Kong to Australia serves to heighten the 
film's verisimilitude.  Ultimately, FLOATING LIFE is about the 
importance of balance.  It's a lesson that is useful not only for 
surviving an immigration, but in all dealings with relatives, both near 
and far. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"All film directors, whether famous or obscure, regard themselves as
misunderstood or underrated. Because of that, they all lie. They're obliged
to overstate their own importance."
-- Francois Truffaut
equences of what 
she is giving up in pursuit of that goal, her life collapses.
     FLOATING LIFE works because it allows the viewer to feel the 
characters' confusion and isolation.  Most of us are used to looking at 
the immigrant experience from the outside; FLOATING LIFE offers an 
opportunity to observe it from another perspective.  Law's own recent 
experience moving from Hong Kong to Australia serves to heighten the 
film's verisimilitude.  Ultimately, FLOATING LIFE is about the 
importance of balance.  It's a lesson that is useful not only for 
surviving an immigration, but in all dealings with relatives, both near 
and far. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
