Title
Review for Godfather, The (1972)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Max Scheinin
Certain films are transcendent -- such a film is Francis Ford Coppola's The
Godfather, his 1972 masterpiece about life in the mafia, and the characters
who inhabit that life. Central to this portrait, is Michael Corleone (Al
Pacino). As the film opens, he is a war hero, a nice kid -- despite the
fact that his father, Don Vito Corleone (Marlon Brando), is head of a
powerful mafia ring, he doesn't want to get mixed up in the family
buisness. In the first shot, black fades to a close view of a face; in the
last, a close view of a face, fades to black. What comes inbetween is like
poetry commited to the screen. It isn't so much a tale of crime, as a tale
of family, and an intamate study of power. The way in which the director
and actors collaborate is magical -- you see the mark of Vito, on the face
of Fredo (John Cazale), Sonny (James Caan), and Michael. You understand the
ties that bind -- loyalty, trust, love. Coppola knows when to cut away, and
how to keep the story moving. This film runs just below a full three hours,
but absorbs us so completely, that never once does it need to pause for
breath. Every time I see it, I become more and more absorbed -- in my last
viewing I actually saw Michael go through all his subtle phases. He moves
beyond his original dreams, when he bends over his father and whispers "I'm
with you now, pop". The way in which you sympathise with the various
characters is almost frightening. When they aren't out strangling one
another, and dealing in dope, they're nice people. When Jack Woltz (John
Marley), the big-shot movie producer, wakes up in bed with the head of a
horse, we move outside and view the building with the muffled sounds coming
from within, and then to Vito,  raising an eyebrow, half in suprise, half
in enjoyment. The Godfather has a level of charm, flash, dazzle, all
suggesting pure American trash. But strip away these feelings, and you will
discover the underlying profundity. With repeated  viewing, you see more
and more of the irony -- Michael is offended that Moe Green (Richard
Conte), would even slap around his brother Fredo in public. But in
companionship with Part II, we see such a strange view of this moment.
Through its superb mix of comedy, tragedy, and all inward feelings, comes a
masterpiece that deepens with reflection, rewatching, and rethinking.
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an irregular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"We all go a little mad sometimes."
- Anthony Perkins @ the Bates motel.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I believe in America," says Bonasera, the undertaker.  "America
has made my fortune."  Bonasera, played with eventual unctuousness by
Salvatore Corsitto, is speaking to a large figure in a darkened room.
Bonasera's daughter was raped, and the American justice system failed
her, so he told his wife that "for justice, we must go to Don
Corleone."  Marlon Brando, in the classic American movie THE GODFATHER,
is Vito Corleone, Godfather to many and patriarch of a large and loyal
family.
     For its 25th anniversary the movie has been re-released to the
theaters with a new print but not much visible restoration.
Nevertheless, epic films exist to be seen on a big screen, and THE
GODFATHER reflects director Francis Coppola's vision of a picture both
vast and intimate.
     The script by Coppola and the novel's author, Mario Puzo, opens at
the wedding of the Godfather's daughter.  This richly textured montage
immediately sets the tone for the entire story.  The Corleone family
represents the ideal American family -- loyal and loving.  All families
have flaws, and theirs has to do with the family business.  Everyone in
the family, except the young college kid and war hero Michael (Al
Pacino), is involved in the family's illegal business.  Murder being
the price of entry in their trade, the Corleone clan has long since
been desensitized to violence by the requirements of their jobs.  Only
Michael appears untouched by the evil around him.  Michael tells a
frightening family story to his future wife, Kay Adams (Diane Keaton),
but distances himself from it.  "That's my family, Kay," he assures
her.  "It's not me."  Anna Hill Johnstone's costumes for Michael almost
always include preppie ties to reinforce his putative innocence.
     As in all good businesses, they must think strategically.  Robert
Duvall plays Tom Hagen, the only non-Sicilian in the family.  An
adopted stray, he is the family's lawyer (Consiglieri), levelheaded
brain, and chief representative.  "Now we have the unions, we have the
gambling; and they're the best things to have," starts the
Consiglieri's prophetic advice to the Godfather.  "But narcotics is a
thing of the future.  And if we don't get a piece of that action, we
risk everything we have -- I mean not now, but ah ten years from now."
     Duvall and all of the actors in the film are perfectly cast.  His
Consiglieri has the cunning of someone who has no morals but total
allegiance.  Hitler would have been pleased to have had him as his
second-in-command.
     James Caan plays the loose canon brother named Sonny.  Dressed
sometimes in just a sleeveless undershirt, his performance smolders as
if a personal firestorm is always imminent.
     Brando won the Academy Award for his performance, and it is his
signature role.  Looking like a big, friendly teddy bear, he is
alternately the all loving father figure and the head of a brutal crime
syndicate.  Watch especially how delicate and pronounced are his hand
gestures -- the subtle movement of his fingertips in front of his mouth
when thinking and the placing of his hand solemnly on his heart when
making a promise.
     Done by someone less capable than Coppola, the movie would have
become just an impressive gangster movie -- full of large scale
violence.  Certainly it is that, but the beauty of THE GODFATHER is in
the intimacy and realism of the script.  "Don't forget the cannoli!"
screams Mrs. Clemenza (Ardell Sheridan) to her husband (Richard
Castellano) on his way to work.  Work that day consists of seeing that
an errant coworker has his brains blown out.
     The cinematography by Gordon Willis and the sets by Dean
Tavoularis create two worlds.  The business side is conducted in darkly
paneled rooms with ominous shadows everywhere.  The family side is full
of celebrations filmed in gorgeous autumnal colors and with beautiful
sets.  The great Nino Rota's music similarly blends delightful, almost
folk music with somber funeral cadences.
     William Reynolds's editing deserves a special mention with two
particularly stunning scenes coming to mind.  After the Godfather dies
in the tomato patch, Reynolds dissolves the image into a convoy of
black Cadillacs bearing masses of flowers on their way to the
gravesite.  As soon as the transition starts, funeral bells ring out
with great majesty as if a king has died.
     The other scene comes toward the end when Michael is acting as
Godfather to his niece at her baptism.  The priest asks him, "Do you
renounce Satan?"  Before his answer, "I do renounce him," the editor
cuts to a scene of Clemenza blowing Strachi away with a shotgun.  As
the priest continues with the baptismal litany, the editor continues
these seamless transitions between good and evil.  One of the messages
of the film is the duality of man, and no sequence in the film
illustrates it better than this one.
     THE GODFATHER is a seminal film in the American cinema.  Examining
the meaning of family, violence, love, betrayal, and loyalty just to
name a few, its quality set a standard that few films have matched.  An
unforgettable motion picture, but one worth seeing again and again.
     THE GODFATHER runs just the right length at 2:55.  It is rated R
for violence, profanity, nudity, and sex.  The violence can be quite
shocking so I would recommend the film for teenagers only if they can
handle its intensity.  I give this classic film my strongest
recommendation and a full ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Back to the "revival theater" this past weekend.  Look at all the time this
baseball strike is giving me...
Starring: Marlon Brando, Al Pacino, James Caan, Robert Duvall,
          Diane Keaton, Talia Shire, Al Lettieri, Sterling Hayden, 
          John Cazale 
Director: Francis Ford Coppola 
Producer: Albert S. Ruddy 
Screenplay: Francis Ford Coppola and Mario Puzo based on the novel 
            by Mario Puzo 
Cinematography:  Gordon Willis 
Music: Nino Rota 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     Rarely can it be said that a film has defined a genre, but never
is that more true than in the case of THE GODFATHER.  Since the release
of the 1972 epic (which garnered ten Academy Award nominations and was
named Best Picture), all "gangster movies" have been judged by the
standards of this one (unfair as the comparison may be).  If a film is
about Jewish mobsters, it's a "Jewish GODFATHER"; if it's about the
Chinese underworld, it's an "Oriental GODFATHER"; if it takes place in
contemporary times, it's a "modern day GODFATHER."
     If THE GODFATHER was only about gun-toting Mafia types, it would
never have garnered as many accolades.  The characteristic that sets
this film apart from so many of its predecessors and successors is its
ability to weave the often-disparate layers of story into a cohesive
whole.  Any of the individual issues explored by THE GODFATHER are
strong enough to form the foundation of a movie.  Here, however,
bolstered by so many complimentary themes, each is given added
resonance.  The picture is a series of mini-climaxes, all building to
the devastating, definitive conclusion.
     Rarely does a film tell as many diverse-yet-interconnected
stories.  Strong performances, solid directing, and a tightly-plotted
script all contribute to THE GODFATHER's success.  This motion picture
was not slapped together to satiate the appetite of the masses; it was
carefully and painstakingly crafted.  Every major character--and more
than a few minor ones--is molded into a distinct, complex individual.
Stereotypes did not influence Coppola's film, although certain ones
were formed as a result of it.
     The film opens in the study of Don Vito Corleone (Marlon Brando),
the Godfather, who is holding court.  It is the wedding of his daughter
Connie (Talia Shire), and no Sicilian can refuse a request on that
day.  So the supplicants come, each wanting something different -
revenge, a husband for their daughter, a part in a movie.
     The family has gathered for the event.  Michael (Al Pacino), Don
Vito's youngest son and a second world war hero, is back home in the
company of a new girlfriend (Diane Keaton).  The two older boys, Sonny
(James Caan) and Fredo (John Cazale), are there as well, along with
their "adopted" brother, Tom Hagen (Robert Duvall), the don's
right-hand man.
     With the end of the war, the times are changing, and as much as
Don Vito seems in control at the wedding, his power is beginning to
erode.  By the standards of some, his views on the importance of
family, loyalty, and respect are antiquated.  Even his heir apparent,
Sonny, disagrees with his refusal to get into the drug business.
Gambling and alcohol are forces of the past and present; narcotics are
the future.  But Don Vito will not compromise, even when a powerful
drug supplier named Sollozzo (Al Lettieri) arrives with promises of
high profits for those who back him.
     Don Vito's refusal to do business with Sollozzo strikes the first
sparks of a war that will last for years and cost many lives.  Each of
the five major mob families in New York will be gouged by the
bloodshed, and a new order will emerge.  Betrayals will take place, and
the Corleone family will be shaken to its roots by treachery from both
within and without.
     The Corleone with the most screen time is Michael (it's therefore
odd that Al Pacino received a Best Supporting Actor nomination), and
his tale, because of its scope and breadth, is marginally dominant.
His transformation from "innocent" bystander to central manipulator is
the stuff of a Shakespearean tragedy.  By the end, this man who claimed
to be different from the rest of his family has become more ruthless
than Don Vito ever was.
     Despite the likes of SERPICO, DOG DAY AFTERNOON, SCARFACE, ...AND
JUSTICE FOR ALL, and SCENT OF A WOMAN on his resume, Pacino is best
remembered for the role he created in THE GODFATHER (and subsequently
reprised in two sequels).  While this is not his most demonstrative
performance--indeed, he is exceptionally restrained--the quality of
the script makes Michael Corleone notable.
     Next to Humphrey Bogart's Rick from CASABLANCA, Oscar-winner
Marlon Brando's Don Vito may be the most imitated character in screen
history.  The line "I'm gonna make him an offer he can't refuse" has
attained legendary status--as has the entire performance.  With his
raspy voice, deliberate movements, and penetrating stare, Brando has
created a personae that will be recalled for as long as motion pictures
exist.
     Don Vito is a most complicated gangster.  In his own words, he is
not a killer, and he never mixes business with personal matters.  He
puts family first ("A man who doesn't spend time with his family can
never be a real man") and despises displays of weakness.  He
understands the burden of power, and his wordless sympathy for Michael
when he is forced to assume the "throne", is one of THE GODFATHER's
most revealing moments (about both father and son).
     THE GODFATHER had three Best Supporting Actor nominees, all
well-deserved.  The first was Pacino (who probably should have
been nominated alongside Brando in the Best Actor category).  The
other two were James Caan and Robert Duvall.  In a way, it's surprising
that Duvall wasn't passed over.  His presence in THE GODFATHER isn't
flashy or attention-arresting.  Like his character of Tom Hagen, he is
steady, reliable, and stays in the background.  Not so for Caan's
Sonny, whose demonstrative and volatile personality can't be
overlooked.
     Family responsibility.  A father's legacy.  The need to earn
respect.  The corrupting influence of power.  These are some of the
ingredients combined in Francis Ford Coppola's cinematic blender.  They
are themes which have intrigued the greatest authors of every medium
through the centuries.
     Although the issues presented in THE GODFATHER are universal in
scope, the characters and setting are decidedly ethnic.  Even to this
day, there is an odd romanticism associated with New York's Italian
crime families.  The word "Mafia" conjures up images of the sinister
and mysterious--scenes of the sort where Luca Brasi meets his fate.
Francis Ford Coppola has tapped into this fascination and woven it as
yet another element of the many that make his motion picture a
compelling experience.
     We come to THE GODFATHER like Kay Adams--outsiders uncertain in
our expectations--but it doesn't take long for us to be captivated by
this intricate, violent world.  The film can be viewed on many levels,
with equal satisfaction awaiting those who just want a good story, and
those who demand much more.  THE GODFATHER is long, yes--but it is
one-hundred seventy minutes well-spent.  When the closing credits roll,
only a portion of the story has been told.  Yet that last haunting
image (Kay's shock of recognition), coupled with Nino Rota's mournful
score, leaves a crater-like impression that THE GODFATHER PART 2 only
deepens.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Brian Koller
By the time it finished its run, "The Godfather" had
the biggest box office gross of all time.  It would remain
the highest-grossing film until "Jaws" three years later.
Of all the films that have held that title, "The Godfather"
may be the best.  Unlike later title-holders like "Star Wars",
"E.T." or "Titanic" that relied at least partly upon
special effects, the success of "The Godfather" came
from its script, story, and characters.  Perhaps better than
any other film, "The Godfather" combines outstanding production,
conventional storytelling, and commercial success.
The film was based on the best-selling novel by Mario Puzo,
who also co-wrote the screenplay with the director,
Francis Ford Coppola.  Vito Corleone (Marlon Brando) is
The Godfather, the Don (head) of a successful, tightly-knit
family whose business is organized crime.  Heir apparent
is impulsive, hot-tempered Sonny (James Caan), whose brothers
are brooding Michael (Al Pacino), who tries to seperate himself
from his criminal family, and Fredo (John Cazale), who can't
seem to do anything right.  Vito has also adopted level-headed
Tom Hagan (Robert Duvall), now the family lawyer.  Michael's
second wife is Kay (Diane Keaton).
The film is set in the 1950s.  Vito's refusal to enter the
lucrative drug rackets puts him at odds with other Mafia families.
A war between the families follows.  Events place Michael
as the Don, who plots vengeance against those who opposed or
betrayed the Corleone family.  Along the way, Michael changes
from an idealistic and independent young man to a calculating,
ruthless Mafia Don.
"The Godfather" has little comic relief, but the film is rich
with ironies.  'Family' is considered to be very important by
the Mafia leaders, and yet their very actions lead to the
destruction of their own family.  'Loyalty' to the family is
also vital, enforced by 'hits' that punish betrayal, and yet
family members regularly betray one another.  While Vito's word
is his bond, the same doesn't apply to his son Michael, a
smooth operator for whom words are merely another tool for
information or influence.  Non-Sicilians are outsiders, kept
from knowledge of the 'family business', and even adopted son
Hagan is sometimes excluded.  Women are relegated to being
household servants and child raisers, although this role gives
them a longer lifespan than their vendetta-targeted husbands.
"The Godfather" won only three Academy Awards.  But they were
important ones: Best Picture, Best Actor (Brando) and Best
Screenplay.  There were also nominations for Best Director
(Coppola), Best Supporting Actor (Pacino, Caan, Duvall),
Best Editing and Best Sound.  Oddly, Nino Rota wasn't nominated
for the compelling, mournful score, although he did win the
British Academy Award for Original Film Music.
Pacino must have been surprised to have been nominated as a
supporting actor, since he saw more screen time than Brando.
But the Academy probably did not want to split the votes between
Brando and Pacino.  "The Godfather" recovered the languishing
career of Brando, who did not attend the Academy Awards ceremony.
He instead sent a minor actress who posed as an Indian named
Sacheen Littlefeather, who refused the Oscar on the grounds that
Hollywood discriminated against Indians.  Brando was nominated
for Best Actor the next year for "Last Tango in Paris",
demonstrating that the Academy didn't hold a grudge.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Walter Frith
Celebrating its twenty fifth anniversary in 1997 is one of the most important
movies in the history of film.  Mario Puzo and Francis Ford Coppola's 'The
Godfather' is actually one of those very rare occasions when the movie is
actually an improvement over the book by Puzo.  Spanning approximately ten
years (1945 to 1955), the film tells many different stories.  To simply say
that this motion picture is about organized crime would be shallow and inept
to say the least.  To properly list everything 'The Godfather' is about would
constitute writing a book in the single context of this review so to make
things easy, see the film if you haven't already done so.  Those of you who
share the belief that it is one of the greatest films ever also must believe
that it's greatness is not only derived from what appears on the screen but
the events that transpired to make it happen.
Don Vito Corleone (Marlon Brando) is arguably the film's protagonist but that
view is not shared by everyone as we will discover later in this text.  Some
other contenders for the leading role as the head of the fictional Corleone
crime family (portrayed as the most powerful in America at that time)
included Danny Thomas, Ernest Borgnine and Laurence Olivier.  All of them
admirable choices but Brando brought a dapper quality of refined essence and
a sharply perceptive amount of dignity and wisdom to this role.  His three
sons by blood, Michael (Al Pacino), Santino or Sonny (James Caan), and Fredo
(John Cazale all display the highest amount of family love and loyalty
although Michael prefers to take a back seat to the "family business" and
decides to live a life separate from that of his brothers.  Also included as
one of the Corleone brothers is Robert Duvall as the adopted German-Irish son
whom Don Corleone relies on as his attorney.
Director Coppola is the real genius of this production which was originally
intended as a trashy, low budget money maker for the studio but Coppola
crafted it into a masterpiece of sublime and clandestine story telling with
character development of the highest order.  It's hard to believe that at one
point the executive, non-creative branch of the film's development actually
wanted either Jack Nicholson, Ryan O'Neal or Robert Redford in the part of
Michael and Coppola stood alone in his decision to cast Pacino and James Caan
also auditioned for the role of Michael and Coppola is rumoured to have asked
Diane Keaton who she wanted as Michael because her role as Kay Adams, the
woman who would eventually fall victim as Michael's wife, would prove to be a
pivotal one and the chemistry would have to be right.  Keaton reportedly
chose Pacino as her preference and most of the film's casting was set.
'The Godfather' opens with what we would eventually see is a family wedding
but before that we hear 'I believe in America...' before the film's first
visual frame opens and an undertaker is telling Vito Corleone that he needs
him to set up a hit on two men responsible for permanently injuring his
daughter in an attempted rape.  Corleone refuses and explains his philosophy
for the refusal and the film immediately displays a quality of intelligence
and depth.  As 'The Godfather' progresses the audience is drawn into the
family wedding scene which lasts approximately half an hour so the audience
would be fully introduced to the film's colourful cast of major characters.
 It's a repetitive trademark Coppola would use in all three 'Godfather' films
as a way to breed familiarity into linking all three films together although
they are all vastly different.
The real attraction in 'The Godfather' aside from Brando is Pacino.  His
characterization of Michael is impressive difference from the time the film
opens until it concludes.  Some would argue that Pacino and not Brando is the
film's true protagonist and the debate that has raged all these years among
fans of the film only re-enforces its stature as one of the best character
studies in film history.  Michael is a man who knows right from wrong but
eventually becomes drawn (somewhat reluctantly) into a life of crime after
his father is nearly murdered by a rival crime lord.  He is the logical
choice to replace his father one day as head of the family, something his
father was always against.  Sonny, the 'hotheaded' brother wouldn't have
lasted because of his temper constantly clouding his judgement and Fredo was
always the naive and weak son bent more on reaping the rewards of crime
rather than working to achieve them.  Robert Duvall probably has the most
under rated role in 'The Godfather' as the fourth son, made to feel somewhat
like an outsider as he is not a blood relative and his loyalty to the family
is constantly tested.  A test he always passed with flying colours.  One
classic scene has Brando and Pacino on screen together (they would share
surprisingly little time on screen together which would turn out to be very
effective) in a long conversation about the future of the family and what
Brando always aspired Pacino would become.
Many reviewers have stated over the years that 'The Godfather Part II' (1974)
is actually a better film than the original and having been the only sequel
to win the Best Picture Academy Award in history is proof that even many in
the film community feel the same way.  In the opinion of this reviewer I
believe that the sequel 'mushroomed' the story better and offered Coppola a
chance to go to a broader horizon but overall, the original is preferred
because of its freshness in breathig new life into the gangster category of
film history.  Its controversial subject matter stirred up much debate at the
time of its release and is also certainly one of the most talked about films
of all time.  As 'The Godfather' draws to a conclusion it sets up Part II in
such a way that you feel satisfied that you've seen Part I and it doesn't
have a cliff hanger ending which is frustrating and empty.  
Other members of the cast include Talia Shire (whose character would be
greatly improved upon in the other two films), Sterling Hayden, John Marley,
Al Lettieri, Al Martino, Abe Vigoda, Richard Conte, Morgana King and Alex
Rocco.
'The Godfather' is one of the pioneering films that will carry the film
industry into the next century and its important legacy is a testament not
only to the talent of its cast, filmmakers and their crews but it's a film
that will undoubtedly stand the test of time and is one of those classics
that simply cannot be remade better than the original.       

Author
Dragan Antulov
Many years ago, when the author of this review had to rely
only on cinemas and television as the source of cinematic
knowledge, he was intrigued by the word "godfather",
featured in many movies and television shows as the synonym
for organised crime. The use of the word didn't stop there -
many movies were branded "godfathers" by their distributors,
in order to bring the audience hungry for intelligent and
spectacular drama about gangster organisations. Fascination
with the word and the movie who inspired their use grew with
years. Unfortunately, I wasn't able to see the first movie
before being exposed to the second. Nevertheless, the first
seeing of THE GODFATHER was memorable experience indeed -
years of waiting actually paid off in a three hours of
cinematic feast.
In many ways, THE GODFATHER follows the same pattern of many
cinematic classics who used to be made in a time periods or
circumstances that aren't here anymore. It was made in a era
when the Old Hollywood collapsed, and the new rules hadn't
been established. The studios were willing to experiment and
to give the movie authors free reign over their projects.
One of such authors was Francis Ford Coppola, who made one
of the most intimate, yet most universally appealing movies
of all times; the movie which earned its cult status by
satisfying both the high standards of snobbish critics and
the simple needs general audience. The greatness of the
movie can't be seen only in a success that followed him in a
last quarter of century; it could be even more tangible in a
series of references, imitations and hidden remakes created
by Coppola's colleagues through the years.
Almost every scene in a movie is memorable, but for many
most effective is a beginning - in a dark room, Bonasera
(Salvatore Corsitto), Italian undertaker, tells that he
believes in America and its values; but only minutes later
his speech gives another spin on the beliefs in life,
liberty and pursuit of happiness - they shatter confronted
with the humiliating and unpunished rape of his daughter. In
order to see justice done, Bonasera is forced to ask favour
from his godfather, powerful Mafia figure Don Vito Corleone
(Marlon Brando), using the marriage of Don Vito's daughter
Connie (Talia Shire) as an opportunity to win over the
mobster's heart. That same wedding is a nice opportunity to
meet Don Vito's sons, family and friends. Don Vito has three
sons - Sonny (James Caan), whose macho temperament is nicely
combined with the calm wisdom of his adopted brother and
family advisor Tom Hagen (Robert Duvall); hedonistic Fredo
(John Cazale); and, finally, college educated Michael (Al
Pacino) whose disgust with the violence and crime forced him
to leave the family and come to the wedding as a decorated
WW2 hero. However, Michael's reluctance to engage in the
family business gets tested soon after the wedding. Angered
by Don Vito's refusal to engage in narcotic operations,
other Mafia families from New York organise the attempt on
his life; simply by trying to protect his father, Michael
gets drawn in the war and slowly becomes the rising member
of his crime organisation.
Since both the real-world Mafia and numerous Italian
American organisation actually tried to stop this movie from
being made or distributed, it is quite ironic to see THE
GODFATHER as a source not of numerous movie cliches that
actually portray the Mafia as a social element more benign
than in real life (mobsters as devout family men; violence
exists only between its members and doesn't affect general
and innocent population; opposition to drugs etc.). It is
even more surprising to see THE GODFATHER not only as an
inspiration to other, less original, filmmakers, but also to
the real-world gangsters who tried to imitate the appearance
of his main characters. However, although the movie might
seem a little bit apologetic towards Mafia, and definitely
has insiders' point of view, it still has the flavour of
authenticity, necessary for the viewer to have a critical
relations towards the characters and their morally
questionable actions.
The authenticity of the movie isn't just in some references
towards real-life mobsters and mob-related stories and urban
legends. Coppola worked very hard to capture the way of life
in his native Italian American community, and also invested
a lot of effort in order to have his epic story, that takes
place in late 1940s and early 1950s, firmly set in that time
period through production design, costumes, hairstyles and
soundtrack that is well balanced with the original music of
Nino Rota, that also became one of the identifying symbols
of the movie.
The most memorable element of the movie are its actors.
Marlon Brando, almost washed-up in the time when he made THE
GODFATHER, gave the performance of his life by playing Vito
Corleone - his role was so grand that the actor himself
parodied it in THE FRESHMAN. Although obviously shadowed by
Brando, the other actors were also impressive. Among them,
Al Pacino, who had to work hardest by portraying slow
transformation of lead character, shines most brightly and
his role of Michael shone the path to his future as one of
the best serious movie actors in contemporary American
cinema. The calmness of Pacino's character, calmness that
crumbles under emotions only in brief moments of family
crisis, is so in contrast with the emotional outbursts that
would be Pacino's trademark in a years to come.
The other actors might not be in Brando's or Pacino's
league, but they benefited from Coppola's good casting and
also gave the roles of their life simply by being in this
movie, so well-written and directed. The only exception to
this is James Caan, who works well with the role given to
him, but whose all-American appearance seems a rather out of
place with the more or less ethnically pure Italian American
cast. Despite that shortcoming (one and perhaps the only in
the entire GODFATHER), the cast is really more than
impressive, although many actors and actresses later didn't
live to the potential indicated by their performance in this
movie.
Those who like analysing movies to death would probably ask
why THE GODFATHER kept its cult status through the quarter
of century. There were many well-made, well-directed and
well-acted movies produced in the years before and after,
but it seems that only THE GODFATHER stood the test of time
and kept the imagination of the future moviegoers. The
reason might probably be in the universal subject of the
movie; although it shows rather obscure and ethnically
isolated phenomenon the messages of THE GODFATHER can be
translated on all the worlds languages and applied to other
systems in different times and places. The movie portrays
both the society and individuals who lost their freedom
because they were too insecure or unprepared for
responsibility; same as the poor Italian immigrants had to
rely on Mafia to overcome the difficulties of New World
(like Bonasera in the opening sequence), Michael is forced
to join the family because he, despite all his efforts,
can't live in a insecure world outside his father's
omnipotent shadow. And even when he actually becomes his
father (in a brilliant and most memorable last shot), the
freedom is lost - omnipotence and freedom are just illusion,
because with the power comes both the responsibility and the
never ending task of keeping. The story of this movie could
have taken place everywhere in the world, and that explains
why the people will associate with its characters for many
decades to come.

Author
Max Scheinin
Originally released 1972, rereleased 1997
A Francis Ford Coppola film, "The Godfather".
Starring: Marlon Brando, Al Pacino, Robert Duvall, James Caan, Diane
Keaton, John Cazale, Talia Shire, Richard Conte, Richard Castellano, Abe
Vigoda, Alex Rocco, Sterling Hayden, John Marley, Al Lettieri, Sofia
Coppola, Al Martino, Morgana King
Rating: ****
Yeah, I like the cast too. Coppola's 1972 epic masterpiece was back in
theaters for a short time earlier this year, and I hope all of you caught
it. On the tv screen The Godfather is simply a masterpiece. On the big
screen it is an indespensable experience. 
The film opens at a somewhat slow pace. The paramount logo is presented
agaunst a lusterless background. Then the screen goes black. The words
appear: Mario Puzo's The Godfather. We hear Nina Rota's haunting theme and
then we are staring into the face of Bona Sera. He is on the verge of great
emotion. through oncoming sobs he says the films famous first line: "I
believe in America". 
Over the next two hours we learn to understand why. To the film's
character's America is not a place, it represents a certain ideal. The film
is about many things, but mostly it is about love and trust. It is about
how one family passes on a legacy. In The Godfather, nothing is more
important then honor. 
Marlon Brando's performance is justly famous. His use of props like the
kitten show that he is a supremely confident actor. the character he
creates is a man who, although immoral and unjust, is understandable; that
is the film's secret; although everyone the film watches with morbid
fascination is a rat, we identify with them somehow. By the time Don
Corleone dies  in his garden he has became such a real person that we
almost feel upset; this is someone we have known. 
Al Pacino had the performance of his career as Michael Corleone, the
reluctant heir to his father's position. Everything he does is so real; we
almost think that Pacino can't be acting. He suggests a young Brando in
many ways; I don't know if this is the effect they worked for, but they
certainly got it. 
In the last shot of the film he has became the next don. He straight out
lies to his wife Kay ( Diane Keaton ) and arrogantly holds out his hand to
be kissed. The door swings shut on Kay and for the last time we hear Rota's
mournful score. Michael didn't have to be who he chose to be. He had
choices but, in the end, there was no other way it could have worked.
Nobody knew that better then The Godfather.
The Godfather runs 2:31. This length would have been far too long for a
normal film, but The Godfather is no normal film. It is truly one of the
greatest films ever made. I saw it with my good friend and movie lover
Micah on a big screen and we were both stunned. On a big screen ( where you
should make an effor to see it ) there is no intermission and, to the
film's eternal credit, you won't even want one. It's a goregous and
haunting movie. It is rated R for semi-nudity,  graphic but, for the most
part, not too disturbing violence, cursing, and adult situations. It is
appropriate for mature 11-12 year olds and up.  See it. Again.
