Title
Review for Shall We Dansu? (1996)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Hanson Yoo
Being that it is a foreign language film with no known names with a select
number theaters showing it, "Shall We Dance" won't be seen by that many people.
And that's a shame - this is a funny, enchanting, and goofy movie full of
laughs, surprises, and wonderful dance sequences.
The surprising thing about "Shall We Dance" is the universal appeal of the
story.  A US version is in the works, and it's no wonder - it's not really all
that culture specific.  Although there is a narrated set-up that adds some extra
resonance to the proceedings (about the view the Japanese culture has about
ballroom dancing), the movie is so rich in character and appeal that this added
layer isn't at all necessary to understand or enjoy the film.  The only
important unexplained Japanese-specific reference that may leave some a bit
puzzled is that 1000 yen is roughly $10 (when you see the film - and you should
see this film - you'll know why).
A middle aged company man realizes that achieving all the goals he set for
himself in life (a house, a child, and good marriage) still doesn't translate
into a fulfilled life.  After glimpsing a melancholy beauty looking out from a
dance studio window while on the train home from work, Sugiyana (Koji Yakusho)
decides after some trepidation to take up ballroom dance lessons in order to
meet the woman who has stirred something in himself.  After finding the weekly
fees for private lessons from the elegant and beautiful Mai (Tamiyo Kusakari)
too rich for his blood, Sugiyama opts for groups lessons simply to be near her.
We then meet the players in this gem of a movie, who all have their own reasons
for joining the class.  Later on, we meet Aoki at the dance studio (Naoto
Takenaka), a co-worker and all out weirdo and one of the laugh riot highlights
of the film.  The story, laughs, and touching scenes evolve as the movie goes
along.
It's a pleasure to watch such a wonderful film that is propelled almost solely
by the characters and performances.  It's difficult to explain the charms of the
film without revealing too much - the movie abounds with little revelations that
subtly shape the characters, and in the end, each one is that much fuller and
more understood by the time you leave the theater.  It's one of those movies
that only the French seem to make anymore - no big plot, no special effects, no
gunplay, no tragic consequences, no forced examinations of the nature of love,
and no insights into the nature of evil.  Just a warm, funny, endearing film
that will charm the pants off of you.  When was the last time you left a theater
feeling all warm and fuzzy inside?  "Shall We Dance" will do that to you without
any treacly aftertaste.

Author
Homer Yen
If you stand with your eyes closed and listen to the wonderful,
musical rhythms of ballroom dance, something strange and vibrant
begins to happen.  You can feel the music carry you off into a world
free of worries.  And as you open your eyes and witness the fanciful
footwork being displayed on the floor, you feel as if dancing can
enable you to fly.  Dancing is about joy; freedom; and pure
expression.
However, in a society like Japan where lives evolve into monotonous
routines, outward expressionism, especially dancing, is viewed with
suspicion.  This characteristic of the Japanese culture is quickly
established as we watch the main character, Mr. Sugiyama, live his
life from one day to the next.  Middle-aged and seemingly bored with
his life, he wakes up very early and comes home very late at night.
He is an accountant, accepts his job, loves his family, appreciates
his newly bought house, but he never smiles.  There is no joy in his
heart; his soul if bereft of passion.
One day, as he takes the train home from work, he notices a wistful
figure staring out the window of a building.  Her solemn look and her
stately sadness captures his interest and awakens his heart.  He
eventually finds the courage to seek her out, and discovers that the
office from where she stands is a dancing school, and that she is one
of the dance instructors, named Mai.  He signs up for lessons, but is
a total beginner.  However, his goal is to get to know Mai.
Unfortunately, he and the other beginners are assigned a different
instructor.  Nonetheless, he follows his impulses and asks Mai out to
dinner, but she rejects him, explaining that there is nothing more
important to her than dancing.  Icy cold, she also goes on to say that
she hopes that he didn't take lessons with going out with her as the
goal.  The truth hurts, but her words motivate him to continue dancing
to prove her wrong.  Gradually, the steps come to him, and he
discovers that he has a flair for dancing.  
Enjoying dance is an embarrassing secret, but after many exhaustive
practice sessions, he confesses that even when he's tired, he has
never felt more alive.  His search for personal freedom, however, may
come at a high cost if his actions are discovered.  No doubt, if his
wife or colleagues knew of it, it would incredibly shame him.  Yet,
while Mr. Sugiyama's search for individuality is tender, we also learn
that Mai has her own secrets and her own personal demons with which
she struggles.  The collaboration between these two creates a poignant
association that allows them to move forward in their personal
searches.  
The creators of this film not only give us two enjoyable main
characters, but they also give us several rich supporting players.
These include Aoki, Sugiyama's colleague, who is a shy office worker
by day, but at night on the dance floor, transforms himself into an
overzealous Fred Astaire.   He encourages his boss to dance but warns,
"when you love to dance, it becomes second nature.  You don't even
know you're doing it,"  he says, as he sashays around the corner.
There is also the wife of Sugiyama who grows suspicious when her
husband stays out late and comes home showing signs of happiness.  And
there is also Natsuko, the school's den mother, who imparts not only
lessons in dance but also lessons in life.  The director also does
well to bring out the eccentricities of the Japanese culture from
Sugiyama's initial fear of breaking his routine to the weight of the
shame that he might eventually face.
During a lesson, Mai emphatically states, "a weak first step transmits
nothing!"  You'll find that this cute story unfolds with confidence,
although "Shall We Dance?" plays more like a stately waltz rather than
a quick two-step.  In Japanese, with English subtitles, this is a
pleasant film about finding personal fulfillment in a Victorian
society, where individual needs are not regarded as a high priority.
It's about renewal, and it's about discovering the joys of life if you
have the heart to break free from societal conformity.  

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In the strict rules of Japanese society, public signs of affection
are considered to be in bad taste.  Things that Americans would find
innocuous, like a husband putting his arm around his wife, are
considered to be breaches of decency.  And while there are Japanese who
get involved with ballroom dancing, we learn in this film that it is
considered as tawdry in Japan, as going to strip clubs would be in the
United States. Paradoxically, the society that shuns the touching of a
partner on the ballroom floor is the same society that jams so many
people into a subway car that literally nobody else can be shoved
through the doorway.  But that touching is considered non-voluntary.
Ballroom dancing has connotations of rebellion in Japan that we just do
not see in our country.
     Shohei Sugiyama (played by Koji Yakusho) is a successful 40-
something business executive with a staff of people working for him.
He has a wife and daughter and has recently bought a house in suburbia.
In Japanese society, this is not just success, it is affluence.  Yet
Shohei is dissatisfied with his pat little accounting job and his
simple, programmed life-style.  One night, returning home, he gazes up
from his subway car and sees a beautiful woman, Mai Kishikawa (Tamiyo
Kusakari) gazing out the window of a ballroom dance studio.  After
seeing her there multiple times he decides to go up and look in on the
dance studio.  He enrolls as a student in secret.  As anxious as he is
to meet and even dance with Mai, he is unwilling to pay 6000 yen per
lesson from her.  So, unable to afford private lessons from Mai he
enrolls in a public class with two other men to be taught by an older
woman.  There at least he can see Mai and perhaps occasionally dance
with her.  Shohei becomes friends with the two other men in his class
as well as with a Japanese dancer with his own fiery Latin style.
Shohei's wife Masako (Hideko Hara) recognizes that her husband is doing
something without telling her and it is taking a lot of his time.  She
suspects the worst and determines to find out what mischief her husband
is up to.
     Masayuki Suo wrote and directed the film that tells its story and
gives us a few chuckles and a few bittersweet moments along the way.
The real problem is that what happens is rarely unexpected and never
surprising.  Indeed the dramatic last sequence of the film is not just
cliched, it seems almost inevitable. Mai's secret that she contemplates
so wistfully at the window each night seems far too trivial to warrant
so much attention, and as the core of the film seems too meager.  This
almost might have made a decent hour- long story, but there really is
not enough here to make a satisfying feature film.  Perhaps some of the
reason is that there are very likely cultural differences that make
this story resonate better in Japan than it does in the United States.
Certainly there is humor in this film that requires some knowledge of
Japanese culture to appreciate.  In one scene one of the characters
takes a strip of dried squid and dances it on the top of a restaurant
table.  Some of the humor was lost on most of our audience who probably
did not recognize what it was that was dancing.  Certainly the Japanese
would see the touching while dancing as being daring. While Tokyo may
have rock and roll dancers in the park--dressed like 1950s bikers from
THE WILD ONE- -even they do not touch each other when they dance.  It
is difficult to see this film as a Japanese would and that might make
all the difference between the simple story we see and one that is
considerably richer. Similarly it is difficult to judge the quality of
the acting.  While we might recognize the difference between really bad
acting and decent acting, it is unlikely we would recognize really
great acting if we saw it.
     What does come across is an innocuous and enjoyable comedy with a
touch of human drama and a bit of melodrama.  The story of the dancer
with the secret past will remind some of STRICTLY BALLROOM, but this
film is nowhere near as amusing as that film was.  I rate this one a
low 1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     As feel-good formulaic as it may be in its own way, SHALL WE DANCE?
also demonstrates a kind of charming restraint you don't often find in
American films.  This Japanese import tells the story of a middle-aged
accountant named Sugiyama (Koji Yakusho) whose mundane life is shaken up
one night when he spots beautiful Mai Kishikawa (Tamiyo Kusakari) in the
window of a dance school.  Intrigued by her melancholy demeanor (and
slightly infatuated with her), Sugiyama signs up for weekly classes at the
school -- and, much to his amazement, ends up as attracted to dancing
itself as to his young sensei.  Meanwhile, Sugiyama's wife (Hideko Hara)
becomes suspicious of his late Wednesday nights, and sets a private
detective on her husband's trail.
     In a Hollywood film, you can bet that sub-plot would be turned into a
stream of slapstick comedy and crazy misunderstandings.  In SHALL WE
DANCE?, writer/director Masayuki Suo dispenses with it in a matter of
minutes, using it to set up later character interactions rather than
letting it overwhelm the story with pratfalls.  Neither does he make the
climactic moment of victory a competition between the hero and some
mean-spirited token rival.  Suo gives his comedy the graceful movements of
his subject matter, allowing the humor to flow from the characters rather
than forcing it upon them.
     An opening prologue in SHALL WE DANCE? goes to some effort to place
the film in a sociological perspective, explaining how contrary ballroom
dancing is to the Japanese sense of propriety.  It's a forced message in a
story which doesn't need such a culture-specific angle.  The dance school
in SHALL WE DANCE? plays the role of a singles' mixer, with everyone
vaguely embarrassed to be there yet taking the opportunity to try on new
personalities.  Most amusing among these new personalities is the one
adopted by Sugiyama's co-worker Mr. Aoki (Naoto Takenaka), a balding
systems analyst who becomes a fiery Latin lover when he dons a frizzy wig
and begins to rumba.  Sugiyama's awakening is less overt, but Koji Yakusho
does a wonderful job showing a transformation of small steps.  It's a
delicate performance with a huge heart.
     SHALL WE DANCE? is a fairly lightweight experience, which makes its
final half hour rather a long sit.  Suo crams a lot of exposition into
very little time, including an unnecessarily detailed back-story for Mai,
resulting in a sluggish march towards the resolution.  It is here that
SHALL WE DANCE? feels most Hollywood-conventional, attempting to
blind-side the audience with a truckload of emotional catharsis.  Suo
might have been better advised to conclude with the small gem of a scene
in which Sugiyama and his wife take their first tentative dance steps
together.  That's the real joy of dance SHALL WE DANCE? conveys:  its
ability to create an intoxicating mood of romance which can soften the
stiffest shirt.

Author
Jonathan Hauer
SHALL WE DANSU?, a.k.a. SHALL WE DANCE? (1996)
Invoking the spirit of Yul Brenner, Masayuki Suo's "Shall We Dansu?" invites
us to take a long look at a tradition which is as foreign to most of us as
it is to the Japanese: ballroom dancing.  The film begins by telling us that
dancing is almost unheard of in Japan, and that a man embracing a woman in
public is considered  lecherous and perverse.
The film then jumps to the workaday life of Shohei Sugiyama (excellently
portrayed by Koji Yakusho, managing to remind me of both Jackie Chan and
Harrison Ford, go figure).  Mr. Sugiyama is an accountant who has committed
his life to his wife, his child, his work and his new house.  However,
Sugiyama's soul is in limbo, and as he rides the train home every evening he
longs for a lonely soul he sees peering out of a dance studio window.
Natch, we find him entering the studio and taking classes without his wive's
foreknowledge.  Funny, heartwarming capers ensue.
Sometimes, while I'm watching a foreign film, I begin to wonder whether it
is the film I'm enjoying or the fact that I understand what's happening on
screen. Upon reflection, "Shall We Dance?" did at times succumb to sitcom
cliche characterization, and plot devices that might have irritated me in an
English language film.  However, this film is so lacking in the ever-present
self-consciousness of North American filmmaking, and so gleeful in its
spirit that I found myself forgiving the simplicity of sub-plots and simply
enjoying the film for what it was.  There was a more complex message about
the stoicism of Japanese society hiding within this film, but this state of
mind seemed to leave many of the main characters pretty easily.
I recommend this movie.  It's not pretentious, it's a little manipulative
and it's a lot of fun.  Your significant other will thank you for renting
this one, too.
Strictly Ballroom (Baz Luhrman, 1992) http://uk.imdb.com/Title?0105488
The King and I (Walter Lang, 1956) http://uk.imdb.com/Title?0049408

Author
Steve Rhodes
     One night, as he leans his head wistfully against the window in
his homeward bound train, the Japanese salaryman captures a fleeting
glimpse of a strikingly beautiful woman in the window of a ballroom
dance studio.  This chance encounter will forever change his life.
     Back at home the changes in him will lead his wife to seek out the
services of a private investigator, since she will begin to notice
bizarre behavior, like secret dancing, and strange perfume smells on
his clothes.  She figures he is having an affair with another woman,
which he isn't - well, not exactly.
     In SHALL WE DANCE, writer and director Masayuki Suo fashions a
tale of intricate beauty, full of romance and comedy.  Although it is a
descendant of the Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers movies as well as the
more recent STRICTLY BALLROOM, the movie takes an approach so fresh and
charming that it is easy to forget the formula roots of its plot.  More
than just a romantic comedy, it is a film of self-awakening and
self-actualization.
     Shohei Sugiyama, played with solemnity and reticence by Koji
Yakusyo, works in an office where he is little more than another
occupant of one of a sea of desks.  A depressed forty-two-year-old, he
has an attractive wife and daughter and a new home with concomitant
mortgage payments, but he longs for something more.  After the third
celestial vision of his woman-in-the-window, he finally hops off the
train to meet her.  Since she is a dance instructor, he signs up for
lessons albeit not with her, since individual lessons are too
expensive.  He choose a group setting while someone richer than he
dances nearby with the woman of his dreams.
     The new students in Sugiyama's little group are bad dressers and
awkward dancers.  His and their leaden feet lead to the expected number
of slapstick results.  More unusual is a wild Latin dancer with a mop
hairdo who has been taking individual lessons for five years.  He turns
out to be Sugiyama's work colleague, Tomio Aoki, played with tremendous
comic energy by Naoto Takenaka, who gets his new persona and younger
looks by wearing a wig.  His outlandish dance numbers drive his
partners crazy.  "I'm tired of you and your one-trick rumba," complains
one.  Aoki owns any scene he appears in.  Even in the office, he moves
with a ballroom dancer's stiff back and sharp turns.  None are better
than his ritualistic approach to the urinal.
     After one dance session, Sugiyama follows his dream woman, Mai
Kishikawa, a long-legged beauty played with serenity and aloofness by
Japanese ballerina Tamiyo Kusakari.  When he asks her to dinner, she
crushes him with her brusque negative reply, "This may sound rude, but
I hope you don't join the class with me as your goal."  Rather than
giving up, he redoubles his efforts, but they start shifting more to
dance and less to Mai.  A beautiful small scene shows his feet dancing
in the office below his desk as he toils away on his computer.
     Although nominally about dancing, the script contains so many gems
of universal wisdom that, like Sun Tzu's "The Art of War," it could be
used as a guide for success in business.  "A weak first step transmits
nothing," advises Mai to Sugiyama.  He also gets help from an older
dance instructor, who tells him, "Dance is more than the steps.  Feel
the music and dance for sheer joy."
     The last half of the picture develops a narrative drive as
Sugiyama decides to enter a dance contest.  Along the way are many more
self-revelations for Sugiyama and preparation for the big dance is
secondary.  "At my age," he confesses to Mai, "it's embarrassing to
say, but each day I feel so alive."  In the film's most touching and
revealing scene, he tells Mai that although he loves his wife and
child, he was missing something in his life until she (Mai) came into
it.
     Each moment in the picture has the lead character falling deeper
and deeper under a spell.  How this spell is finally broken comes as
something of a surprise, but the film itself will leave a lasting spell
on the audience.  It is almost impossible to leave the theater without
a song in your heart.  And watch those feet at work the next day.  They
may take off without your ever realizing it.
     SHALL WE DANCE runs 2:03 but feels shorter.  It is in Japanese
with English subtitles and is rated PG for a couple of mild
profanities.  The film would be acceptable for all ages, but a kid
would probably have to be around nine to enjoy it.  I loved this sweet
and uplifting little film so I recommend it to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) Shall We Dance? Opens (at least to American audiences)
with an explanation that in Japan, dancing is as socially acceptable as,
say, picking your nose. 
The movie then introduces Mr. Sugiyama (Koji Yakusho), a good-looking
Japanese businessman in his early forties. He sold his soul to the
company to earn enough to buy a house for his wife and daughter. With
that accomplished, he realizes he is still unfulfilled. 
Every day, at a certain stop on his train ride home, he sees the same
girl gazing forlornly out the window of a dance studio. He becomes
infatuated and, one day, gets the nerve to go to the studio for a closer
look. Flustered, and unable to pay for private lessons with the girl in
the window, he enrolls in a beginning dance class with two other
students. Sugiyama is a below-average student, but his infatuation keeps
him coming back every Wednesday. 
After a few lessons, he gets up the nerve to ask Mai (Tamiyo Kusakari)
out for dinner. She coldly tells him that she doesn't date students -
then adds that if he joined the class because of her, he should quit.
Rather than admit his ulterior motive, he decides to stay in the class. 
Without any hope of winning Mai's affection, Sugiyama throws himself
into his studies. Not only does his dancing improve, he begins to enjoy
it more. For now, he has found another source of fulfillment. Soon he
finds himself practicing dance steps on the train platform while he
waits to go home. 
At the apex of the story's arch, Mai looks out her window and sees
Sugiyama absentmindedly practicing his steps. This time he is the object
of her glance, and she is the one who is moved. She sees that Sugiyama
has found a simple joy in dance, which moves her to re-evaluate her own
motives. 
The plot then continues to its rather conventional conclusion. 
Two aspects of this movie make it a rewarding choice. First, it is
good-natured and lighthearted. Sugiyama and Mai each start with a
certain dissatisfaction: Mai is always forlorn, Sugiyama is unfulfilled.
Along the way each finds satisfaction, not just through the ritual of
dance, but through simple human contact and interaction. The movie has
some light funny moments (some say at the expense of character depth),
that make a nice balance to the movie's simple but earnest "message." 
Second, the movie offers Americans a rare look at Japanese culture. Many
of the great Japanese movies available in the U.S. are historical epics
that don't show us the personal side of Japan today. SHALL WE DANCE
offers a look at the everyday modern Japanese world. For example,
Sugiyama doesn't even have a cubicle at work; he sits at a long table
with another person - right behind another long table seating four
people. (His computer uses Microsoft Windows.) A modest house in Japan
is hard to come by: it took Sugiyama until he was 40 to be able to
afford one. Many of these "mundane" details captured in the background
of SHALL WE DANCE? can be fascinating to the western viewer. 
So though SHALL WE DANCE is lightweight, it doesn't pretend to be
otherwise. It succeeds well in what it sets out to do. Let's hope it
does well enough in this country to encourage more cultural exports like
it.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     A bit of a long sit.  This warm and fuzzy feel-gooder from Japan,
about a 42 year-old Tokyo accountant (Koji Yakusho) who reawakens to
life through secretive ballroom lessons, runs about, oh, twenty minutes
too long.  Sure, everyone clapped at the end, but I *do* recall hearing
more than a few people squirming during the protracted finale.  (At the
Rialto, the to-be-replaced squeaky seats are far more telling than any
after-show comments in the lobby.) Even with yawns, a reduced blood flow
below the equator, and the ever-present threat of a knocked-over root
beer bottle, I enjoyed reliving the life-cycle of the partner dancer:
the hesitant attraction to the sport, often the result of a crush on a
better dancer; those painfully awkward initial lessons; mixing and
mingling with other dancers; the get-serious point of no return; the
months of practice for competition or exhibition; the cruel reality and
partner incompatibility; and, of course, the alienation and subsequent
reclamation of a non-dancing spouse.  (To try the latter, just hang out
at the Longbranch for a few months.  Then, tell your sweetie.) If you've
never waltzed, rumbaed, or quick-stepped, this may be the movie that
lands you on the dance floor.  One two three, one two three... 

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Shall We Dance (1996)
Koji Yakusho, Tamiyo Kusakari, Naoto Takenaka. Directed by Masayuki Suo. 
118 minutes.
Rated PG, Four stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
Sly, observant and elegant, "Shall We Dance" is a charming story of 
liberation, the kind of exhilarating freedom one can only achieve by 
stepping out of the shadows and taking the risk of looking foolish in 
exchange for a chance at realizing a dream. Director and writer Masayuki 
Suo focuses on some odd corners of Japanese culture in this gentle comedy,
 but the messages contained in his subtitled tale are universal.
It all begins with the mid-life crisis of a reserved 42 year old 
businessman. Shohei Sugiyama (Koji Yakusho) has attained his goals; a 
nice home, a healthy family and a successful career, but his life feels 
empty. He trudges dutifully through his days with eyes dulled by sadness. 
One evening, while taking the train home from work, he catches a glimpse 
of a young woman staring out the window of a dance studio. Her beauty, 
and the melancholy look on her face, capture his imagination. 
After several days of gazing at her during the ride home, he impulsively 
leaves the train and creeps up the stairs towards the dance studio. 
Dancing is viewed with suspicion in Japan, where public displays of 
affection between even a husband and wife are considered tasteless and 
shocking. The idea of two unmarried people holding their bodies close 
together in dance is "beyond embarrassing", the film's introduction 
explains. Regardless, Sugiyama summons his courage and signs up for dance 
lessons. Unable to afford individual instruction with the beautiful Mai 
(ballerina Tamiyo Kusakari), he joins a beginners class and his 
adventures in this unique little subculture begin.
The denizens of the studio are a peculiar bunch. Sugiyama's classmates 
are a extremely intense little man who has taken lessons before, and 
Tanaka, a tall, blobby fellow  whose utter lack of grace is matched only 
by the blissful, childlike smile on his face as he lumbers across the 
dance floor. The men are taught by Mrs. Takahashi (Eriko Watanabe), a 
friendly middle-aged matron who notices Sugiyama's fixation with Mai and 
gently tells him "She's all the sweeter when viewed from afar". Mai gives 
solo lessons to her male clients with obvious distaste. Dance is 
everything to the young woman and the amorous intentions of the men draw 
an icy response. 
The most dynamic figure on the dance floor is the amazing Mr. Aoki (Naoto 
Takenaka). A co-worker of Sugiyama's, Aoki travels through the office in 
riotous fashion, moving forward stiffly, then pivoting abruptly, with his 
pelvis virtually leading his body. At the dance studio, Aoki dons an 
absurd long-haired wig and transforms into a frenzied master of Latin 
dance, wildly overstating every move as he leers with the expression of a 
warrior about to attack. Takenaka is hilarious and a delightful scene-
stealer.
Director Suo neatly uses comedy to punctuate the wistful story of 
Sugiyama's quest for satisfaction. His observational style is reminiscent 
of Scottish director Bill Forsyth's work in the wonderful "Local Hero". 
Like Forsyth, Suo frames his subjects in a neutral fashion, letting their 
actions speak for themselves. Watching the men's ungainly efforts to 
learn the art of dance is at once funny and touching. Both director's 
maintain a smooth narrative flow, but their primary focus is on vignettes.
 One of the best scenes in "Shall We Dance" shows Sugiyama practicing his 
steps in the rain by a train platform, as Mai watches from afar. It's a 
lyrical moment that typifies the elegant sentimentality of the film.
The reserved nature of Japanese relationships is also a key factor in the 
story. Sugiyama's wife is pleased to watch her husband blossom, but 
distressed because she doesn't know the cause of his change. Rather than 
simply ask him, she hires a private detective to investigate. Meanwhile, 
as Sugiyama becomes better acquainted with Mai, he looks at his own 
motives. What is it that drives him to stay near this distant young woman?
 And what of Mai herself? Mistrust and anger block her from really living.
 Can she break through her shell and embrace life again? 
"Shall We Dance" deals with a lot of weighty issues, but with a light 
touch. Suo respects his characters, foibles and all, and guides his story 
with an affectionate and ethical hand. The result is one of the most 
accessible, entertaining and heart-warming films to come along in a quite 
a while. It's hard to imagine anyone leaving the theater after "Shall We 
Dance" without a smile on their face. 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Koji Yakusyo, Tamiyo Kusakari, Naoto Takenaka, Eriko Watanabe,
      Akira Emoto, Yu Tokui
Director: Masayuki Suo
Producers: Hiroyuki Kato, Seiji Urushido, Shigeru Ohno,
      Kazuhiro Igarashi, Tetsuya Ikeda, Shoji Masui, Yuji Ogata
Screenplay: Masayuki Suo
Cinematography: Naoki Kayano
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
In Japanese with subtitles
     SHALL WE DANCE? proves that Japanese film makers can fashion
charming, feel-good movies every bit as effective as their Hollywood
counterparts.  Unlike the Australian comedy, STRICTLY BALLROOM, which
used ballroom dancing competitions as arenas for romance and satire,
SHALL WE DANCE? uses them to explore one man's struggle for freedom from
the suffocating repression that characterizes Japanese society.  This is
a film for anyone who prefers to leave the theater smiling.
     In Japan, where public displays of affection between a husband and
a wife is considered scandalous behavior, the concept of two unmarried
people holding each other close in a dance is "beyond embarrassing." 
For that reason, ballroom dancing is not popular, and anyone caught
engaging in it risks being labeled as depraved and lecherous. 
Nevertheless, for some men and women trapped in such a restrictive
culture, dancing offers the seductive, forbidden allure of slipping the
confining boundaries of what is socially acceptable and finding a
measure of liberty.
     Shohei Sugiyama (Koji Yakusyo) is a forty-two year old Japanese
businessman who lives in a comfortable house with a loving wife and an
adolescent daughter.  But all is not right in his world.  Now that he
has attained his goals (a home, a family, and a successful career), his
life feels empty.  His wife notices his growing depression, commenting
that "he really should get out and enjoy himself more often."  One day,
while riding the train home from work, Sugiyama spies the figure of a
sad, beautiful woman (Tamiyo Kusakari) gazing out a dance school window. 
Day after day passes, with Sugiyama watching for this mysterious woman
on each trip home.  Eventually, he summons all his courage, exits the
train at the stop nearest to the dance school, and enrolls for lessons. 
However, what begins as an attempt to get to know a pretty woman turns
into the cure for Sugiyama's soul-sickness.
     The parts of SHALL WE DANCE? that are done well, are done very
well, muting the negative impact of certain less successful elements. 
One of the most interesting aspects of the film for a Western viewer is
that we're offered an opportunity to peer through an open window into
Japanese society, especially as it addresses issues of intimacy.  For
those of us who are used to the idea that dancing is an integral part of
the cultural fabric, understanding how the Japanese view this activity
can cause a shift in perspective.
     Sugiyama is developed as a low-key, likable character who fills the
role of the Japanese "everyman."  His relationship with Mai proceeds
along a natural path, shunning romantic hyperbole in favor of a
refreshingly believable tangle of feelings.  Watching both Sugiyama and
Mai grow as a result of each others' influence is one of SHALL WE
DANCE?'s subtle pleasures.  Ultimately, the results of all the dance
competitions pale in comparison to understanding the unique relationship
that develops between these two.
     SHALL WE DANCE? is not without its share of flaws, however. 
Several subplots are largely ineffective, due in part to the director's
unfortunate tendency to use caricatures to generate both sentiment and
comedy.  Several supporting characters (especially an overweight dance
student named Tanaka and a wild Latin dancer named Aoki) are poorly-
developed types whose primary purpose appears to be to act as foils for
some of the film's more elaborate jokes.  And, while this humor does
generate laughs, it results in ill-defined individuals whose dramatic
effectiveness is diluted. 
     Nevertheless, subplots excepted, SHALL WE DANCE? navigates the
tricky waters of the dramatic comedy with surprising ease. 
Writer/director Masayuki Suo, who has designed the film primarily as a
heartfelt tale of one man's solution to a mid-life crisis, keeps SHALL
WE DANCE? fresh and free of heavy melodrama by leavening the script with
universal humor.  And the ending satisfies in part because it doesn't
conform to all the expected cliches.
     Miramax Films will almost certainly back SHALL WE DANCE? with a
sizable advertising campaign -- of all the distributor's late-spring
releases, this has the most potential to be a crowd pleaser.  The
pleasant emotional aftereffects are a testimony to Suo's ability to
fashion a story whose appeal reaches far beyond the shores of his native
country.  SHALL WE DANCE? promises a convivial evening at the movies,
and a rare chance to mix culture with pleasure.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ben Hoffman
Shohei, (Koji Yakusyo) is a devoted 41-year-old husband to Masako
(Hideko Hara) and father to a sweet teen aged daughter.  Masako has
learned to depend on her husband showing up from work at the same
time every night.  In fact, she thinks, he seems to be in a rut
and could probably use a little change   Her daughter cautions her
that she should be happy that her father is such an uncomplicated
man who does not cause any kind of anxiety in this middle class
family.
Shohei, who is an up and coming office employee, takes the same
train home every night but tonight, as he gazes out the trains
open doors at a station, he happens to look up at a building where
a pretty woman is gazing out a window. It is a dance studio where
ballroom dancing is taught.   And every night now, he makes a
point of looking up and seeing her until one fateful night he
suddenly dashes out the train's open door and crosses to the
building..
Ballroom dancing had had a somewhat bad aura to it because not so
long ago it was a place where men went for more than dancing.
While that is no longer true, no one exactly advertises the fact
he is attending a ballroom studio to learn to dance.  After
looking to right and left to make sure no one he knows has seen
him, Shohei enters the building and goes up to the fourth floor,
knocks on the door and finds himself in the dance hall.
Shohei asks to be taught by Mai (Tamiyo Kusakari), the woman of
the window but when he learns that the price of a private lesson
is prohibitive, he opts for being taught as part of a group of
three, giving rise to film's funniest moments.   When he has
overcome his original stiff bearing when learning to dance, he
decides he must dance with Mai.  He even goes so far, after a bit,
to ask her to join him for dinner but she quickly puts him in his
place; if he is taking these classes just to be able to date her,
she tells him,  forget it.  It will never happen.
There are many humorous moments in the film and quite enjoyable to
watch as are the dancers as they get better and better.   Where
the movie turns a bit cold is toward the predictable end:  The
wife begins to wonder why Shohei is no longer on time . . . on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday evenings, and what is that new
perfume she smells on his shirts when she is about to do his
laundry?   And the more the film progresses from that point, the
more obvious it becomes what the ending will be..  Too bad the
film's last quarter was unable to be as rich as the first three
quarters..     Nevertheless, It has a charm and is a delight to
watch.
Others in the cast include Naoto Takenaka, Eriko Watanabe, Yu
Tokui, Hiromasa Taguchi and Reiko Kusamura.
Written and directed by Masayuki Suo.
(In Japanese with English subtitles.)

Author
Seth Bookey
One benchmark of movie success is the ability to inspire an audience. *Il
Postino* spurred more than a few people to investigate poetry. People
leaving the theatre attempted a few waltz steps right out front. (This is
the same place people wept on the curb after *Fearless*.) It's too soon to
know just how many Japanese have taken to the dancefloors, but *Shall We
Dance?* did sweep Japan's version of the Oscars. 
The opening voice-over informs us that rigid Japanese society (remember
the popular phrase, "The nail that stands up gets hammered down" came from
there) is such that a married couple rarely touches in public, much less
dance.  Couples don't even privately say "I love you" all that much. 
Such is the rut of Shohei Sugiyama (Koji Yakusho), who is married with
child, has a boring accounting job in an overcrowded Tokyo office, and has
"imprisoned"  himself by buying a house (apparently quite a feat for the
Japanese bourgeois). 
Life runs like a train on its track, until the evening Sugiyama sees Mai
Kishikawa (Tamiyo Kusakari) staring forelornly out of the window of a
dance studio. Bewitched, Sugiyama looks up each night to see whether or
not she is there. Temptation forces him off his subway car and up the
stairs and is quite hilariously and literally thrown into the studio; he
signs up for some beginners' courses.
A lively comedy ensues as Sugiyama immerses himself into amateur dancing,
eventually competing. His new acquaintances include the overweight
diabetic Tanaka (Hiromasa Taguchi) whose doctor suggested dancing as
exercise, and an older know-it-all;  the kindly older Tamako (Reiko
Kusamura) who runs the school and Toyoko (Eriko Watanabe), the Rubenesque,
tart-tongued fellow student, who has a harsh word for just about everyone.
All of these types make a nice recipe for comedy, drama, and some gushy,
sentimental moments. 
A society that demonizes dancing more taboo the way sexual orientation is
here is hard to imagine. But it's easier to imagine than *Footloose*, a
town where dancing is forbidden. The Japanese "instinctively" know not to
do this sort of thing. When the crazed dancer at the classes turns out of
the systems administrator Aoki (Naoto Takenaka), he and Sugiyama guard
their secret, afraid of being "outed." They instinctively know ridicule
and shame can follow. Accordingly, the camera keeps it's distance and
close-ups are used to underscore the drama. The full frame is utilized,
and watch for funny little things happening off to the side apart from the
main action. 
Meanwhile, as Sugiyama dances, his wife gets more and more suspicious. She
winds up hiring a very sympathetic private detective. 
Overall, this is an excellent movie. All the performances hit their
intended marks; the potential for abusing physical comedy is avoided--we
are spared a Blake Edwards movie. 
My sole complaint is that the movie comes to a snorestill at two distinct
times:  Once to literally read a letter, and the other to hear a true
confessions soliloquy. These are only minor drawbacks, though to one of
the most enjoyable films I have seen this summer. 
Dance, don't walk, to a theatre near you!
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Brian Takeshita
The opening narration of SHALL WE DANCE? informs us that Japan is a
nation of people who shy away from public or sometimes even private
displays of emotion.  Holding hands or saying "I love you" is a
blatant and shameful deed.  It is therefore that dancing, a pastime of
holding hands, touching, and bodily expression is looked down upon
with disdain.  A regular man in the professional world should have no
such desires.
So it is for Mr. Sugiyama.  He is an accountant in his forties,
married, and a father.  What possible role could dance have in his
life?  However, one day, while traveling home on the train, he happens
to notice a beautiful woman gazing from the window of a dance studio.
He is captivated by her.  Over the next few days he sees her
repeatedly at the same time, gazing outward.  One evening, he works up
the courage to enter the studio and meet her.  Instead of finding the
woman of his dreams, he finds a wonderful new world, the world of
dance.
When I approach foreign films, I never quite know what to expect.  I
suppose the stigma is that they are deep or aloof, and you may not be
able to understand it all.  Even though I've seen my share of foreign
films, and know that this is not always the case, I was still stuck
with this preconception going into SHALL WE DANCE?.  Having seen
PILLOW BOOK a few weeks previously probably didn't help.  However,
much like Mr. Sugiyama, what I found was something I didn't
anticipate.
SHALL WE DANCE? is one of the funniest movies I have seen in quite
some time.  Not a lot of the humor is intelligent, and much of it is
sheer physical comedy, but you quickly realize that as a viewer, you
must give yourself to the feeling of the movie and not spend too much
time analyzing it - much like dancing.  Koji Yakusho, as Mr. Sugiyama,
plays the straight man in this movie, but just watching his mannerisms
and awkwardness in the dance studio is more than mildly amusing.  His
sincerity through otherwise strange situations reminded me a lot of
Jimmy Stewart's earlier performances.  More outrageous are the
characters Mr. Sugiyama meets in his dance class:  A pair of
mismatched dance beginners and an office worker with the alter ego as
the king of the Latin dance.
Although the plot of SHALL WE DANCE? follows a general formula from
beginning to its inevitable ending, the plot does take a few twists
along the way.  For example, Mr. Sugiyama's wife, unaware of her
husband's dance lessons, hires a private investigator to find out what
he's been doing with his Wednesday nights. Rather than taking the
wrong-conclusion-then-have-a-zany-confrontation route, this thread
went in a surprising and decidedly more enjoyable direction.
Director Masayuki Suo presents the viewer with some excellent imagery,
especially during musical interludes which feature classical, jazz,
Latin, and pop music.  One problem, however, is that at times too many
things are happening on the screen at once.  In long shots of the
dance floor, I sometimes noticed several hilarious actions happening
at the same time, but was not able to draw all of them in.  Actually,
I'm not sure I could label it a total drawback, as trying to see it
all was a little fun.
At a hair under two hours, the film is well paced enough that the time
seems to fly.  Although the film finishes with a satisfactory finale,
I had so thoroughly enjoyed the ride that I was sorry to see it end.
