Title
Review for Death Machine (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Michael Turton
Death Machine (1994)
Sci-Fi. 120 minutes. (R) for violence, sex
Written and Directed by Stephen Norrington.  Starring: Brad Dourif, Ely 
Pouget, William Hootkins, John Sharian
Reviewed By Michael A. Turton
You know how it is. You're drifting around the video store in which, 
despite a selection which dwarfs the Library of Congress, you can't find 
anything. You're tired of Gong Li.  Some slimeball has rented _Diva_.  
You've seen _The Seven Samurai_ umpteen times.  The pickings in the Western 
selection are slim. So you mosey on over to the sci-fi and lo and behold!  
There is _Death Machine_!  Your interest piqued by the photos on the box, 
you pick it up........
Watching _Death Machine_ is rather like being in a car accident.  
Everything happens so fast, the only way you can be sure that something did 
indeed occur is by the wreckage strewn everywhere.  The plot of this movie 
is incredibly simple.  A mad scientist, Jack Dante (played by the 
increasing typecast Brad Dourif) working on a supercombat part-human 
machine feels betrayed by his superiors when they fire him for killing some 
corporate officers with his pet, so he turns his invention on them. This 
machine, called the "Warbeast," looks like a skeletal cross between a 
Tyrannosaurus rex and Freddy Krueger, and has an appetite which outstrips 
either.  It is indestructible and unstoppable, its miles of exposed wiring 
and delicate computer systems impervious to massive explosions in confined 
spaces. When it really gets fired up, the creature clicks its claws and 
spins its head back and forth, creating moments of unintentional humor in 
the middle of some rather touch-and-go scenes for the characters.
The film takes place inside the labrynthine complex where Dante works among 
his machines and computers. Bet you can't name ten other movies in which 
people in claustrophobic spaces are hunted by psychotic monsters!  The sets 
were so full of odd corners, piping, wires, sealed doors and thick metal 
walls that they looked like leftovers from the _The Poseidon Adventure_, 
gussied up with shiny metal-and-plastic fittings to make them appear 
appropriately futuristic. The producers obviously could not afford 
expensive effects, so models were opted for in certain scenes.  In my view, 
they should have waited until they had saved the money to cover the gap.  
I'll skip the obligatory gripe about Hollywood's inability to make a decent 
sci-fi film with so many wonderful books to choose from. 
This film went by in a blur and it is hard to say what happened or why. Not 
that it matters much. At some point one of the men who went in with Dante's 
boss, Cale (Ely Pouget) puts on a fighting suit and becomes a robotic 
superman who fights with the Warbeast by punching it on its metal snout 
(no, I'm not kidding). Why not just pull the wiring out or poke a thick 
hydraulic finger into an on-board computer? It has all the usual flaws of 
action movies: actors who check their talents at the door, guns which never 
need reloading, injured people performing acts of superhuman strength and 
plot holes big enough to float the Seventh Fleet, complete with a psycho 
muttering the required cliched nonsense as self-justification. It really 
should come with a disclaimer: SOME SUSPENSION OF DISBELIEF REQUIRED.  
Despite its gaping flaws there is a certain compelling power to the film's 
furious pace, weird sets and comic book action.  In more subtle directing 
hands and with a better script it might even have attained the minor cult 
film status it is so desperately yearning for.  This movie isn't quite good 
enough to rent, but if it ever comes on late night TV and you're a little 
too tired to search for the remote, then it's worth a look.
