Title
Review for Bribe, The (1949)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BRIBE, THE (director: Robert Z. Leonard; screenwriters: from a short
story by Frederick Nebel/Marguerite Roberts; cinematographer: Joseph
Ruttenberg; cast: Robert Taylor (Rigby), Ava Gardner (Elizabeth
Hintten),Charles Laughton (J.J. Bealer), Vincent Price (Carwood), John
Hodiak (Tug Hintten), Samuel S. Hinds (Dr. Warren), Tito Renaldo (Emilio
Gomez), Martin Garralaga (Pablo Gomez), John Hoyt (Gibbs),1949)
This tolerable but not particularly interesting noir film suffers from a
meaningless story, lacklustre direction, and even though, it has a good
cast, the two glamorous stars, Robert Taylor and Ava Gardner, seem
miscast: they are too beautiful for their parts. There was no conviction
felt in the two stars succumbing to their pangs of love; they brought
little to the story in the way of true cynical noir feeling, and it is
only the heavies, Vincent Price and Charles Laughton, who keep the film
hopping with their stock villainous portrayals.
The film, badly compromised by the romantic directions it headed in, was
unable to pick up steam, until the finale, where there is a splendid
shootout between Taylor and Price amidst a fireworks display. But by
that time, the story seemed too trite to really matter, and its main
theme about the moral dilemma of whether Taylor should accept a lot of
cash to look the other way or of letting Ava go even if she was guilty,
because Taylor fell in love with her, seemed to hardly matter.
Federal agent Rigby (Taylor) is sent to the island of Carlotta off the
coast of Central America to investigate a graft racket, where war
surplus supplies, such as airplane motors, are being illegally smuggled.
The organization is making millions on it and not declaring taxes. He is
given the name of a local agent on the mainland to contact for
assistance and to make any arrests needed, since the American government
has no jurisdiction there to arrest suspects. He is also told who the
two suspects are for him to keep an eye on, Elizabeth Hintten (Ava) and
her husband Tug Hintten (Hodiak). But he quickly detects another suspect
when there, someone who walks on bad feet and is slovenly and
weasel-like, whom he nicknames Pie Shape, but whose real name is J. J.
Bealer (Laughton). He was the only one in the film who was even remotely
interesting and who, along with Price, seemed to be in the right film.
Agent Rigby narrates his story in the flashback form, as he is just
recovering from being drugged and is remorseful, after losing his sense
of duty for a beautiful woman who made his head spin. He seems
bewildered by his loss of honor, as he tries to explain what happened
and how come he did what he did.
Rigby, when on the island, pretends he came down here to fish for
marlins, but that doesn't fool the crime organization, as they make
plans to either bribe him or compromise him, so that he won't turn them
in. Elizabeth's drunken husband is a minor player in the organization,
after his good combat record as an air force pilot during the war, he
unfortunately had some hard times fall on him, as he was fired from his
civilian airline job because of a bad heart. He never told his wife
about the reason why he was fired. The couple have been on the island
for the last seven months, hoping to raise enough money to go back to
the States.
Elizabeth works as a torch singer in the local nightclub and is innocent
of what her husband is doing. When Tug is ordered by the boss of the
operation Carwood (Price) to keep tabs on Rigby, that pushes his wife
closer to the agent.
The real heavy in this film, Carwood, has one great scene, where he is
out fishing on Rigby's chartered boat and Rigby lands a real big marlin
but has trouble reeling him in, so the young boy whose boat this is,
Emilio (Tito), goes to help him as Carwood takes the wheel of the boat.
Carwood jerks the boat, pretending he doesn't know how to operate it and
Rigby falls in the ocean filled with sharks. Emilio goes to rescue him
but disappears as sharks are around him. Rigby gets saved by another
fishing boat, but vows to make sure Carwood pays for this dastardly act.
Rigby is closing in on the operation but has meanwhile fallen
desperately in love with Elizabeth, who he knows doesn't love her
husband anymore. The mood of their story  is analogous to the postwar
syndrome for many couples who got married right after the war but the
returning husband from the war, somehow, couldn't adjust to civilian
life and the new modern ways of America.
Bealer tries to bribe Rigby with as much as $12,000 to leave the area,
but when Rigby doesn't take that bait, he blackmails Elizabeth into
drugging Rigby and in that way keeps him from going out that night in
his boat, which is now being operated by Emilio's father (Garralaga).
The organization has a big deal going down that night, but their plans
are spoiled anyway, as Rigby phoned ahead to have the local agents pick
up the ones on the boat.
Carwood is now desperate and when Tug threatens to talk, he kills him.
He then goes after Elizabeth and Rigby, but the action reaches its
climax in front of the fiesta crowd and Rigby, who was moments before
willing to give up his career as an agent, just to be able to shoot
Carwood, if necessary, now guns him down in a wild shootout.
"The Bribe" was shot in the MGM studio and has a phony look to it and
enough trite dialogue in it to put a few yawns on your kisser. My
favorite trite saying was by Taylor, trying to explain his moral
decline: "Selling out for honor-- honor, just a word. Say it often
enough and its just a sound without any meaning, anymore." That could
also describe this film, as it lost its purpose early on and never found
any true meaning in its story.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE BRIBE (1949)  *  Directed by Robert Z. Leonard. Produced by 
Pandro S. Berman.Written by Marguerite Roberts from a story by 
Frederick Nebel. Cinematography, Joseph Ruttenberg. Editing, Gene 
Ruggiero. Music, Nacio Herb Brown (song),William Katz, Miklós Rózsa. 
Cast: Robert Taylor  (Rigby), Ava Gardner, Charles Laughton, John 
Hodiak, Vincent Price, Samuel S. Hinds, John Hoyt, Tito Renaldo, 
Martin Garralaga, et al. An MGM film
For many years, Robert Taylor  (1911-1969) was one of the top stars 
at MGM. He was internationally thought to be the handsomest actor in 
Hollywood. He did deserve to be called "the man with the perfect 
profile," and while not a performer of AAA caliber, he was very good.
Beginning in 1934 (at age 23) he was in a quick succession of movies. 
As the lead in the musical "Broadway Melody of 1936" (1935).he was 
popular, but it is with "Magnificent Obsession" (1935) that he became 
a star. Other films confirmed his status: "The Gorgeous Hussy" (1936) 
and above the super-romantic "Camille" (1937) where as Armand Duval 
he was cast opposite Greta Garbo. Other successes followed, 
culminating again with the World War I sad romance "Waterloo Bridge" 
(1940), with Viven Leigh. In subsequent movies -- in many genres -- 
his  stature remained high, even though few of the pictures were 
truly superior. Some were indifferent. Some were stinkers.
"The Bribe" is in that last category. Still young at 39, Taylor looks 
good -- and that's all one can say about the film, which opens with 
one of the most-used clichés of film noir: the first-person narration 
that leads to a long flashback.
Taylor, named just Rigby, is a Federal agent. His superior calls him 
in. Taylor arrives wearing impeccable, expensive clothes of the kind 
that one mostly sees today (A.D. 2000) on TV network news hosts. 
Egged on by the movie's title, one might suspect that he has been 
taking bribes, but then his boss too is snappily dressed. Perhaps 
some research into Government employees in 1949 is in order.
Rigby is assigned an undercover job in Carlotta, a tropical island in 
Central America. Some clever racketeers purchase in the USA war 
surplus equipment as junk, but secretly too ship to Carlotta valuable 
airplane engines. The operations nets them millions, on which they 
pay no taxes to the US. Government.  Since Carlotta is not a tourist 
place except for deep-sea fishing, Rigby will pose as a dedicated 
amateur fisherman.
The island is transparently one of those formulaic, generic and 
unconvincing studio sets. As usual, the central meeting place for 
locals and foreigners is an hotel with a restaurant, bar and music.
Too many of the clients are wearing (or holding) jackets in 
Carlotta's sweltering weather. It adds another phony note yet. And, 
of course, there is the "de rigueur" beautiful American torch singer 
who is stranded there. In this case she is Ava Gardner, who has an 
American husband, former wartime, then civilian airplane pilot John 
Hodiak. A basket case of disillusionment, he works as barman and is 
habitually in his cups. (Why do they keep him?) The cast is rounded 
out by a peculiar Charles Laughton with hurting feet, and the 
predictably villainous Vincent Price.
Adding to lack of genuineness is the hotel's band of  Central 
American musicians who accompany Ava's singing. But you can sense 
immediately that the music is mostly provided by a large-ish, unseen 
studio orchestra.
Predictably Taylor and Gardner will fall for each other. What follows 
will not be told here except that it lacks shape, suspense, true 
romance, and any sort of interest. Neither Taylor nor Ava are 
convincing in their roles.  What could be noted is that from the 
start of the film there is an enormous amount of smoking by all, even 
by the 1940s standards. If Taylor did this in real life it  is no 
wonder he died of lung cancer.
Ava Gardner's performance is a mediocre as everyone else's. Her 
singing is indifferent. The song she does is by composer Nacio
(for " Ignacio") Herb Brown who contributed splendidly to many a 
film, and whose last picture was no other than "Singin' in the Rain." 
You wouldn't suspect this from the dullness of his song here. Nor 
does the score by another great talent, Miklos Rozsa, make a dent.
How the mighty can fall, at times!   (Edwin Jahiel)
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/
