Title
Review for "Riget" (1994) (mini)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Christopher Null
     This is what would happen if you let David Lynch loose on the set of
"ER" with nothing but a TV camera, a gaggle of Danish actors, and a bone
saw.  THE KINGDOM, an extremely ambitious effort for both the filmmakers
and the audience, is Denmark's hipper-than-thou answer to "Twin Peaks."
     I'm not even going to attempt to explain the plot of THE KINGDOM, as
it could fill several pages and still not make a lick of sense.  I'll
leave it at this:  "The Kingdom" is a giant Copenhagen hospital, and every
single room in it (and most of the corridors, and the driveway, and the
parking lot) contains at least one complete wacko.
     The dearth of information about this "film" belies its true
beginnings as a serialized TV show in Denmark.  The movie version of THE
KINGDOM is nothing more than the first 4 episodes (of a planned 13) from
this television show slapped back to back, converted to film, and played
in all its grainy glory on the big screen.  (Note!  This means it's *5
hours* long.  Really.)  In fact, watching THE KINGDOM is a very TV-like
experience.  The only things missing are the commercials and a ringing
telephone.  Of course, I'm not one to watch 5 hours of TV in one sitting. 
I left after Episode 2, as it's pretty clear where the "movie" is going
and that there's not going to be a "big finish" after Episode 4.
     This is not to say that THE KINGDOM isn't worth watching.  Rather,
you *have* to know what you're getting into.  Here's some of what you
get:  a child's ghost living in an elevator shaft, patients holding a
seance in their room, bizarre cults of doctors akin to the Masons, an
intern who decapitates a corpse to impress his love, a phantom
ambulance...and that's just Episode 1.  What you don't get is this:  much
background music, a discernibly strong plotline, a camera in focus,
character motivations, or just about anything else you typically expect to
find in the world of film.  In other words, THE KINGDOM is all but
destined to become a phenomenal cult hit.
     Occasionally, THE KINGDOM overcomes its meandering flaws and
completely shocks the audience with some truly powerful scenes.  However,
most of the time, the movie is just plain weird, and it defies description
in any other way.  If your butt can handle 5 hours in a movie theater and
this sounds like your cup of tea, don't miss it.  Otherwise, wait for
video...and get the 3-day rental.  You'll need it.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Ernst-Hugo Jaeregaard, Kirsten Rolffes, Soeren Pilmark, Baard Owe, 
      Ghita Noerby, Birgitte Raabjerg, Jens Okking, Peter Mygind, 
      Otto Brandenburg, Udo Kier
Directors: Lars von Trier and Morten Arnfred
Producers: Sven Abrahamsen, Philippe Bober, Peter Aalbaek Jensen, 
      Ole Reim, Ib Tardini
Screenplay: Lars von Trier, Thomas Gislason, Niels Voersel
Cinematography: Eric Kress
Music: Joachim Holbek
U.S. Distributor: October Films
Subtitled
     Ask Lars von Trier what his favorite line from Shakespeare is and 
he might respond, "There's something rotten in the state of Denmark."  
At least, that's the impression you'd get from watching THE KINGDOM, von 
Trier's ambitious project about the strange goings-on inside 
Copenhagen's National State Hospital (a.k.a. "The Kingdom").  Originally 
devised as a 4-part mini-series for Danish television, THE KINGDOM 
received limited theatrical distribution in the United States courtesy 
of October Films.  Since these are only the first four episodes of a 
planned thirteen, there are a significant number of loose ends and 
unresolved plot threads.  Although THE KINGDOM has a climax of sorts, it 
doesn't have a conclusion, and that can be extremely frustrating for 
anyone who has invested more than four and one-half hours viewing this 
film.
     I don't know whether von Trier ever watched David Lynch's TWIN 
PEAKS, but THE KINGDOM is so like Lynch's outlandish television series 
that it can't just be a coincidence.  Both tales start out with a series 
of slightly offbeat characters stuck in a seemingly-ordinary situation, 
then things are gradually twisted until we're watching men and women 
struggling to cope with a surreal existence where the supernatural 
reigns.  And, as was the case with TWIN PEAKS, THE KINGDOM grows 
progressively less compelling as circumstances become more removed from 
reality.  
     If nothing else, von Trier shows a lot of inventiveness in 
fashioning a watchable story from so many diverse elements.  And there 
is something in THE KINGDOM that keeps you watching, even though it 
seems to go on forever.  Many have described this film as addictive, 
but, while I disagree with that diagnosis, I sat through the whole thing 
because I was interested to see how all the subplots would be wrapped 
up.  Ultimately, however, nothing is concluded, and there's no guarantee 
that if/when von Trier films the rest of the series that those of us 
outside of Europe will have a chance to see it.
     Most of the first part of THE KINGDOM is devoted to introducing the 
large cast of characters.  There are three leads:  Hyper-egotistical 
Swedish neurosurgeon Stig Helmer (Ernst-Hugo Jaeregaard), junior doctor 
Jorgen Hook (Soeren Pilmark), and an elderly hypochondriac, Mrs. Drusse 
(Kirsten Rolffes), who spends most of the movie chasing the ghosts that 
are haunting the hospital.  When THE KINGDOM begins, Helmer and Hook are 
at loggerheads, and the situation only worsens as time goes by.  Helmer 
botches the surgery of a child and has his girlfriend, Rigmor (Ghita 
Noerby), cover up for him.  Suspecting malpractice, Hook is out for 
blood.  Meanwhile, after Helmer discharges her, Mrs. Drusse manages to 
be re-admitted so that she can continue to search for the spirit of a 
little girl named Mary.
     Other characters include the flaky chief of staff, Moesgaard 
(Holger Huul Hansen), who becomes the target of Helmer's ire; an 
attractive young doctor, Judith (Birgitte Raabjerg), who is pregnant 
with a fetus that's growing at an alarming rate; a pathologist (Baard 
Owe) who transplants a diseased liver into himself; a medical student 
(Peter Mygind) who uses a severed head to woo his true love; and a pair 
of Down's Syndrome workers who function as a Greek chorus.
     The best elements of THE KINGDOM are those that drip with acid 
satire.  Von Trier isn't afraid to lampoon anything, from the medical 
profession to spiritualists and the state of cultural relations between 
Denmark and Sweden.  At times, THE KINGDOM is blisteringly funny.  There 
are scenes when Helmer climbs to the roof of the hospital, gazes 
longingly at his native country, then calls out the names of famous 
Swedes like Bjorn Borg before railing at the "Danish scum" that surround 
him.  There's also a wonderfully funny bit where various characters try 
to sneak into the ultra-secure archives to pilfer documents.  
     THE KINGDOM is also a ghost story, but that element doesn't work as 
well.  For the most part, I found the character of Mrs. Drusse to be a 
tiresome busybody involved in a series of plodding investigations.  The 
more THE KINGDOM turns towards ghosts, zombies, and the supernatural, 
the less inventive it becomes.  This is well-trodden ground, and von 
Trier isn't adding anything new.
     One aspect where THE KINGDOM never falters is in its style of 
presentation.  Using tricks that he would later enhance and perfect for 
BREAKING THE WAVES, von Trier makes an artistic statement through THE 
KINGDOM's visual appearance.  By using a film-to-video-to-film 
procedure, he gives the movie a washed-out, cinema verite look.  
Handheld camera shots abound, and there are numerous scenes when some 
sort of ruddy filter distorts and darkens the film's already muted 
colors.  THE KINGDOM's look may not be polished, but it is interesting.
     Another aspect that stands out is the high caliber of acting.  The 
strongest portrayal belongs to Ernst-Hugo Jaeregaard, whose stuck-up 
Helmer is a joy to watch.  When he's on screen, Jaeregaard grabs our 
attention, irrespective of whether his character is sitting at a board 
meeting, operating, or yelling "Danish scum!" into the night air.  
Although no one else in the cast manages to rise to Jaeregaard's level, 
the production is blessed with a flock of solid performances.
     I should note that, stylistic issues aside, THE KINGDOM is very 
unlike either of von Trier's two internationally-known films, ZENTROPA 
and BREAKING THE WAVES.  Since it was made for television, THE KINGDOM 
is faster paced than either, and, because of the emphasis on plot, 
psychological character development is limited.  There's no one in THE 
KINGDOM who rivals the leads of BREAKING THE WAVES for 
multidimensionality, and the storyline isn't as intense or difficult.  
Beneath all the strangeness, THE KINGDOM isn't especially deep, proving 
that length does not necessarily correlate with depth.
     Since its 1994 release, THE KINGDOM has spawned a cult-like 
following, which was only to be expected considering its unusual 
material and style.  This is the kind of motion picture that leaves 
mainstream audiences shaking their heads.  Still, as much as I generally 
enjoy offbeat fare, I found myself strangely dissatisfied with THE 
KINGDOM.  The ultimate payoff doesn't seem to justify the time invested.  
Von Trier's production has its share of high points, to be sure -- it's 
just a question of whether there are enough.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Peer Wandel Hansen
     The story is situated in the Danish National Hospital
(Rigshospitalet) a.k.a. The Kingdom (Riget).  The site was originally a
bleach pond where clothes were damped and laid out in the sun to
bleach, causing the moor to be constantly shrouded in fog.  Now the
Hospital is located were the pond used to be, with all its doctors,
scientists and technology, defining life so superstition never again
will shake believe in science.  But perhaps this arrogance and the
consistent denial of the spiritual has been too much.  The cold and
moisture have returned and the solid and fashionable building has begun
to show signs of fatigue.  The gate to the Kingdom has begun to
reopen.
     This is how the new thriller from Lars von Trier opens.
Originally THE KINGDOM was a television series in four parts, but
simultaneously it has now been released as a movie.  One of the main
characters is mrs.  Drusse, a professional patient and clairvoyant, who
hears the cry of a little girl ghost in the corridors of the Hospital.
Her task is to reveal the plot of the film.  Whenever she is
discharged, she invents a new disease to be hospitalized so she can
explore the mystery.  Her contrast is Dr. Helmer, chief surgeon and a
stupid bastard who eventually ends up worshipping the occult area, as
the Zombie culture is normally regarded.  This is one of the
characteristics in Lars' movies: to blend scientific research and
metaphysics, science and superstition, the exact and the occult.
     The inspiration from "Twin Peaks" is turned from fire into water
steaming from the broken pipes in the basement parking lot.  The
strength in this story is the small anecdotes--for example, the medical
student who can't stand the sight of blood, but spend the time on duty
in the sleep-laboratory by watching a horrible bloody movie on VCR.
There are many references to other pictures, Ridley Scott having
provided material to some of the spiritualistic scenes.
     Eventually the story reaches its climax in the end where the
Minister of Health visits the hospital and all the spirits are led
loose.  The series reached almost cult status in Denmark: while it was
running in December, the streets were almost empty when a new episode
was shown.  Everywhere people were discussing the latest development in
the series, more often than to debate the weather.  It will be exiting
to see the promised sequel, and how the rest of the world will welcome
this black-humoured thriller.
