Title
Review for Brady Bunch Movie, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE is less a motion picture than a minor pop
event.  Forget your reruns and forget your Nick at Nite; this dead-on
recreation of the fabled seventies sitcom is both so exhilarating *and*
so disturbing that you half-expect to see the ghost of Rod Serling
appear in the narrative.
     Did we really act this way twenty years ago?  Of course not.  The
genius of THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE is how it heightens the surreality of
the Family Unit From Hell by fast-forwarding them into the future.
It's 1995 and Greg still calls the chicks "groovy," and Marsha still
considers hair-brushing the high point of her day.  Bell bottoms are
in, and Alice has yet to move out.
     Nothing has changed within the garish walls of Brady Manor and,
so, the plot has the family stepping out into the real world, where
they are confronted by everything from carjackers to lesbians.
Granted, nothing *too* serious happens here.  With the exception of
some heavy sexual innuendo, THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE is about as sanitary
as the source material.  And that's too bad.
     Director Betty Thomas (of TV's "Hill Street Blues" fame) doesn't
cut between real-life and Brady-life enough to make the contrast as
glaring as it should be.  The edge isn't sharp enough.  *We* know that
what we're watching is funky, though, so it's not that much of a
problem.
     Nor are the glaring low production standards.
     The cast is uniformly appealing.  Shelly Long seems to have found
her niche under awful hair, while Gary Cole is right on the mark with
Dad's sing-song truisms.  Christine Taylor is the best of the Brady
kids.  She's a cheery delight as Marsha *and* is a dead ringer for
Maureen McCormick.  Her foil is Jennifer Elise Cox, who is a howl as
the brooding Jan.

Author
Eric Grossman
     How would the ideal Seventies family, the Bradys, handle life in a
world filled with carjackings, conniving neighbors and date-raping
boyfriends?  This is the premise behind THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE, an
entertaining parody of the famous television show that ran  from 1969
to 1974.
     While the rest of the world has changed,  the Bradys have remained
exactly the same.  The loud clothes, out-of-control hairstyles, and
potato sack races are still the norm in their household.
     The screenwriters and director Betty Thomas have remained faithful
to the feel of the show while poking fun at it and the result is part
spoof, part tribute.  There is a plethora of inside jokes that the
Brady Bunch cultists (those people who know every line from every
episode) will get a tremendous kick out of.
     A perfect cast of unknowns (plus the talent of Shelly Long who
plays Carol) and plenty of cameos from the original cast are the keys
to this film's success.  Particularly good is Jan (Jennifer Elise
Cox).  Her obsessive anger towards her older sister Marsha (Christine
Taylor) is the movie's highlight.
     The film's look is true to the show.  Cinematographer Mac Ahlberg
matches the high-key, flat lighting and production designer Steve
Jordan remembered all of the details when recreating the sets, right
down to the avocado-green phone.
     While there are some squandered opportunities to go further with
the implicit conflicts and quirks of the characters, THE BRADY BUNCH
MOVIE delivers many laughs, especially for those who grew up watching
the series.

Author
Andrew Abramson
     On September 26, 1969, the most annoying TV theme song of all
times aired.  The theme song to the Brady Bunch.  The show was sure to
be a bomb.  Who would have known, that twenty-five years and five
months later, the show would still be going strong, and a movie would
be made.  Yes the Brady Bunch remained on the air for five years, and
did great on syndication, and finally a movie was made.  The movie was
up to date for the rest of the world, but it was still the same old
Bradys.  The movie took place in 1995.  All of Califorina had evolved
into the 90's, except for the Bradies who still wore bellbottoms, and
listened to Davy Jones on 8-Track.  It was funny to see to see the rest
of the world, react to this time-warped family.  The family was as
great as the television family.  Shelly Long played Florence
Henderson's old role as Carol, and Gary Cole played Robert Reed's old
role as Mike.
     Much of the humor in the movie, was seeing the rivalry between
the middle-child Jan, and the oldest-child Marsha.  Marsha has all the
glamour, and everyone loves Marsha, and Marsha this, Marsha that.  As
for Jan, she thinks that she is left out because everyone thinks Cindy
(the youngest) is so cute, and Marsha is so beautiful.
     Many of the scenes from the movie, are taken from actual
episodes, just updated.  The movie makes fun at the episodes, and
exaggerates them extremely.  Some of the best parts in the movie, is
seeing Marsha say how beautiful she is, and Jan's "voices" in her
head.  Watch for Cindy's lisp, and Greg's "far-out, groovy" music.
     The movie also revolves around an interesting plot.  The man next
door has to sell every house in the neighborhood, so he has to somehow,
stop the Bradies from earning 20,000 dollars.
     Watch for some cameo appearances by the original Carol, Peter,
and of course, who could forget maid Alice.  If you watched the orignal
TV series, and enjoy humor, this is the movie for you!!

Author
Jon A. Webb
     THE BRADY BUNCH operates, fairly successfully, on three levels: as
a parody of the original, as a nostalgic look back at it, and as a
re-creation.  My seven-year old daughter had no problem accepting it as
a feature length version of the sitcom, since all the in-jokes went
right over her head.  Teenagers and older people in the audience caught
the many jokes about homosexuality, transvestites, crime, etc. as well
as the somewhat more adept jokes about quirks in the original
characterizations, e.g., Jan's odd way of flinging her ponytail back and
forth, Marcia's obsession with combing her hair, the father's lectures,
etc.; and everyone who longed for the original show had fun seeing
cameos by the original actors, seeing Marcia's 70s perfection
re-created, etc.
     The premise of the movie is to take the Brady Bunch and transplant
them intact into the 90s, with them still holding the same values,
using the same language, wearing the same style clothing, etc.  They
are of course assaulted by the greed and crime endemic in this era, but
manage to overcome it in true Brady fashion, by sticking together and
displaying that Brady spirit.  The film carefully adheres to the
one-dimensional production values of the original.
     I liked the young actress portraying Jan Brady, who had the only
role with any dramatic conflict. She has the mannerisms (at least as 
I've seen them parodied elsewhere--I can't remember them from the show,
not being much of a fan) down well, and also brings a kind of
additional, much welcome oddness to her interaction with her interior
monologue.
     You should only go to see this film as a harmless afternoon's
entertainment for children, or if you were or are a fan of the
original.  The in-jokes are exactly the sort you probably have already
come up with if you watch the show.  I won't spoil the fun by
mentioning any of them, though this leaves little else to review.
     The biggest success in this film is its not quite over the top
parody of the Bradys.  I got the impression that I was watching a movie
any Brady-watching college sophomore could have contributed a joke or
two to, but somehow the film almost never broke down into complete
silliness, as these films often do.  Well, not quite--there's one scene
where the bad guy explicitly brings forth all the odd things about the
Bradys--but at least the Bradys aren't around then, to hear their
lifestyle impugned.
     There is some superficial commentary on late 60s/early 70s
pseudo-pop culture.  The Monkees play a fairly prominent role, and
there is a clever very brief reference to the Partridge Family.  The
segue into the title sequence is also cute.
     For a feature-length recreation of a superficial, artistically
weightless sitcom, this film is remarkably successful.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Shelly Long, Gary Cole, Christine Taylor, Michael McKean.
Screenplay:  Laurice Elehwany & Rick Copp and Bonnie Turner
             & Terry Turner.
Director:  Betty Thomas.
     It is official now:  I have become everything that I despise.
I am of a certain age where my youth has become a marketing tool,
re-packaged and returned to me for nostalgic consumption.  But those
attempts to this point (THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES, THE FLINTSTONES)
have basically left me unmoved.  The Brady Bunch ... now, there's a
different story.  I grew up with them, and I remember their dopey
antics with an inexplicable affection.  So the upshot is, they
finally got to me.  THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE is a movie that most
likely was put together by chimps, and I had fun anyway.
     As anyone who watched the 1969-1974 series will recall, this is
the story of a lovely lady (Carol, played by Shelly Long) who was
bringing up three very lovely girls:  Marcia (Christine Taylor); Jan
(Jennifer Elise Cox); and Cindy (Olivia Hack).  Carol is married to
a man named Brady (Mike, played by Gary Cole), who previously had
been busy with three boys of his own:  Greg (Christopher Daniel
Barnes); Peter (Paul Sutera); and Bobby (Jesse Lee).  The Bradys are
still hopelessly mired in the 70s, but around them it is 1995 Los
Angeles.  They are not only holdouts of an era, they are also
holding out against selling their house to next door neighbor Mr.
Ditmeyer (Michale McKean), who wants to turn the neighborhood into a
mini-mall.  Unfortunately, an unexpected tax bill might force the
family to move, unless the industrious Brady kids can raise $20,000
in a week.
     I think any discussion of THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE must begin with
this statement:  you had to be there.  Familiarity with the series,
whether in first run or its endless incarnation in reruns, is
essential, since the film is composed almost entirely of bits and
pieces of plots from the series.  When the audience laughs at Marcia
being hit in the face by a football, or Peter's cracking voice, or
Greg's attempt to turn himself into rock star Johnny Bravo, it isn't
because any of these situations are inherently funny; in fact, they
are really fairly inane.  But they are so familiar, so much a part
of the fabric of growing up in America at a particular time, that
watching THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE is like re-discovering an old toy.
Even if you realize that it was sort of a stupid toy, you are still
going to play with it, and smile while you're doing it.
     THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE was going to sink or swim on the basis of
casting, and there are both successes and failures.  Shelly Long has
Florence Henderson's mannerisms down pat as Carol, and Gary Cole is
a hoot as he pronounces Brady platitudes with a deadpan solemnity.
The dead ringer award goes to Christine Taylor, who looks and sounds
so much like original Marcia Maureen McCormick that it is truly
frightening.  Less impressive are Jennifer Elise Cox, whose slightly
unhinged Jan is too reminiscent of Melanie Hutsell's "Saturday Night
Live" characterization of Jan, and Henriette Mantel, who does a
version of housekeeper Alice which includes pratfalls and,
inexplicably, a leather bustier.
     There are about equal parts homage and parody in THE BRADY
BUNCH MOVIE, and both have their moments, but what surprised me most
was the way the film managed to recall a simpler time without
mockery.  When Jan visits a school counselor (played with a leer by
RuPaul), it is not entirely a gag that her problem is not a
pregnancy, drug abuse or an eating disorder, but simple sibling
rivalry.  Similarly, when the neighbors eventually rally around the
Bradys' stand against the developers, it recalls a time when
neighbors actually knew each other.  Make no mistake, THE BRADY
BUNCH MOVIE is occasionally quite sluggish, and required about a
thimbleful of creativity.  At the same time, it made me wistful not
only for a piece of my youth, but also for an era when families were
functional, communities seemed closer, and "Have a Nice Day" was
something people actually meant.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release on 2/17/95  
Running Length: 1:29 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Sexual Innuendo) 
Starring: Shelly Long, Gary Cole, Christine Taylor,
          Christopher Daniel Barns, Jennifer Elise Cox, Paul Sutera,
          Olivia Hack, Jesse Lee, Henrietta Mantel, Michael McKean,
          Jean Smart 
Director: Betty Thomas 
Producers: Sherwood Schwartz, Lloyd J. Schwartz, and David Kirkpatrick 
Screenplay: Laurence Elehwany, Rick Copp, Bonnie Turner, and Terry Turner 
Cinematography: Mac Ahlberg 
Music: Guy Moon from material by Frank Devol 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE, the natural culmination of a '90s revisionist 
Brady fad, is part homage and part parody.  It takes the inimitable clan 
of eight and time-transports them, '70s attitudes and dress style intact, 
into 1995.  Instead of being regarded as the perfect American family, 
they have become outcasts and weirdos.   
     Brady fans will find a lot of familiar things lurking throughout the 
film.  The house has been recreated with excellent care to detail.  The 
new actors resemble the old ones without being dead ringers.  Literally 
hundreds of references to original episodes are included, from the "pork 
chops and applesauce" bit to Marsha's obsession with Davey Jones and 
Greg's attempts to become a rock singer.  Those looking for a nostalgia 
injection will find it here, albeit with such a self-mocking tone that 
some of the truest die-hards may wince. 
     The problem with THE BRADY BUNCH is that, satirical or serious, 
ninety minutes is too much.  The first half-hour is clever, breezy, and 
amusing.  The second half hour features a noticeable dip in the level of 
creativity and enjoyability.  The final thirty minutes are a trial.  Past 
the two-thirds mark, I found myself checking my watch almost constantly, 
scarcely able to believe how slowly the "action" was proceeding. 
     One of the questions just about everyone is bound to ask is whether 
there are any cameos by the original cast members.  Without revealing 
precisely who, I can say that there are four (one of which happens so 
quickly that if you look away from the screen for a moment, you might 
miss it).  Of course, with the uncanny knack that the new cast has for 
imitating their immortal predecessors, there's little need to keep 
looking for the likes of Florence Henderson. 
     The plot is typically Brady-like, with the nasty Mr. Ditmeyer 
(Michael McKean) attempting to buy the Brady house for use in a land deal 
he's cooking up.  When the family has no interest in selling, Ditmeyer 
decides to use nefarious means.  As the story progresses, we spend a 
little time with each of the family members.  Mike (Gary Cole) gives 
long-winded, confused lectures about life's lessons.  Carol (Shelly Long) 
smiles and acts the role of the perfect mom.  Marsha (Christine Taylor) 
and Jan (Jennifer Elise Cox) engage in sibling rivalry, Cindy (Shelly 
Hack) gets taken to task for tattle-telling, Greg (Christopher Daniel 
Barns) tries to become Mr. Rock 'n Roll, Peter (Paul Sutera) copes with a 
changing voice, and Bobby (Jesse Lee) stands by and watches.  Meanwhile, 
Alice (Henrietta Mantel) stays in the kitchen, baking dinner and waiting 
for Sam the butcher. 
     THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE almost works, primarily because its creators 
(one of whom is the TV series' originator, Sherwood Schwartz) manage to 
tread the fine line between irreverence and affection.  Ultimately, 
however, the length is the film's undoing.  No matter how tantalizing the 
premise, overexposure leads inevitably to boredom.  THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE 
is good for a heavy dose of nostalgia and several hearty laughs, but not 
much more.  And for those who didn't like the family in the first place, 
this will likely be only a step away from unbearable. 
-James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
