Title
Review for Romeo + Juliet (1996)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO & JULIET is a version for the nineties,
with abbreviations in more places than just the title.  Fair Verona is
now Verona Beach, a sun-baked battlezone where all the young dudes carry
pistols, cruise the streets in low-riders, and pledge allegiance to one
of two rival gangs, er, households.  (An aerial shot says it all,
showing the names Montague and Capulet in giant letters across the tops
of their respective skyscrapers.) Early scenes are played at the pace of
a music video, with character introductions cunningly conducted through
the use of freeze-frames and title cards.  Down Under director Baz
Luhrmann (STRICTLY BALLROOM) sends his camera spinning in every
conceivable direction, sometimes sped-up, sometimes in slow-motion.  His
hyperkinetic style is intoxicating, but there's a catch:  the characters
speak in iambic pentameter and not always that well.
     The language that you learned to hate in high school spills from
many an untrained mouth.  Bill's banter is spoken, shouted, mumbled,
fumbled, and ultimately drowned out by the many sounds of the street.
No problem at first, in those explosive early scenes, such as a gas-
station shoot-out shot like a Hong Kong spaghetti western.  When the
director calms down-- and he does, regrettably-- the movie also slows
down and the badly delivered dialogue starts to sink the story, instead
of anchoring it.  (Of the young actors, only Claire Danes seems to know
what she's doing.  The best thesps over thirty are Vondie Curtis-Hall's
local police captain and Pete Postlethwaite's Father Laurence.) Another
problematic point is the plot, which isn't entirely believable by
contemporary standards.  (Romeo is sentenced to "banishment?" Huh?  And
why doesn't Juliet just run away from home?) A grand failure, yes, but
at least one that's great fun to watch.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Mike Joyce
When I first heard that Romeo & Juliet had been "updated" I shuddered. I
thought that yet another of Shakespeare's classics had been destroyed.
Fortunately, I was wrong. Baz Luhrman has directed an "in your face", and
visually stunning piece with this film. It revolves around the two rival
families, who in this version each run multi-million dollar enterprises.
These rival companies/families are the Capulet's and the Montague's. The
younger generation of these two families have formed gangs, who despise one
another. As the storylines goes, Romeo Montague (played by Leonardo
DiCaprio) and Juliet Capulet (Claire Danes) meet at a fancy dress party,
and it is love at first site. I never believed love at first site was
possible until I saw this film, the scene in which Romeo's eyes meet
Juliet's through the fish tank is one of the most memorable. Of course,
they cannot publicly reveal their love, for their families are arch
enemies. So they marry in secret, this is where things begin to go wrong.
The story, as with all good Shakespeare, ends in tragedy.
The cinematography is spectacular to say the least, and the soundtrack
provides the perfect atmosphere in which to "lay our scene", as the film
says. There is very little to criticise. The performances are convincing,
and several of the film's younger stars may find that it provides a launch
for their careers. The modernisation of the script is ingenious and clever.
Despite the well known storyline, this latest version still manages to
cause tears among many members of the audience (especially the younger
generation), and this is certainly a great credit to the film.
Film review by Adam Joyce.
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Author
Rory Mackay
THE CREDITS: Directed by Baz Luhrmann; Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Claire
Danes, John Leguizamo, Harold Perrineau, Pete Postlethwaite, Paul Sorvino
THE VERDICT: Bizarre isn't the word, but it's still a reasonably successful
re-working of an immortal classic.
Now here's an odd film! I almost still don't quite know what to make of it.
You can almost hear the initial discussions of the studio on deciding to
make this film --
Producer #1: "Hey, dude, I found like this waaay old play by some dude
named Willy Shakespeare and it's far out!"
Producer #2: "Wow, dude! You've just given me the cooolest idea! Why don't
we like do a film about it!"
Producer #1: "Yeah! That'd be bodacious! But it's set in these like
prehistoric times with all this 
well-weird speech!"
Producer #2: "Well, I guess we could like...set it in modern times!"
Producer #1: "No, make it the future - that way it'll look most
triumphant!"
Producer #2: "Yeah, and we could cast like two reeeeally good-looking
actors in the title roles, 
and have lots of loud music and funky camera movements..."
Producer #1: "And lots of explosions and car chases and guns and drugs and
more explosions! But what will we do about all this weird dialogue? Should
we get some dude to translate it?"
Producer #2: "Nah! That'll take too much time, let's just leave it as it
is! Oh, this film is going to be sooooo cool!"
Cynical - moi?! Seriously, I don't see a much higher line of thought than
that going into this. Do they pull it off? Yes, I think they do.
First of all, it's just bizarre seeing Shakespeare done with drugs, guns,
car chases and police helicopters! But the most striking thing about the
film is Baz Luhrmann's off-beat directing. He's obviously going for fast
'n' furious, and that it most certainly is - never more so than the film's
opening scenes. Frankly he goes far too over-the-top - the camera-work is
dizzyingly frenetic going on incoherent. It's certainly visually stunning,
and I mean that in quite a literal sense! He almost gives the impression of
a director gone completely insane! Despite this, his approach is sometimes
quite stylish, sometimes funny, sometimes annoying.
Thankfully Luhrmann calms down a bit once we get deeper into the film,
though the whole thing remains more than a little excessive. From the
costumes, to the sets, lighting - and even the performances - everything
seems to be done deliberately over-the-top. Is this to make it feel
"operatic"? And why hasn't the dialogue been updated along with the
setting? Is there some special significance? And what's with the
"apocalyptic look", anyway? Just a few of the questions that popped into
mind while I watched this.
The first half of the film left me grappling with the questions and musings
above. Despite the delightfully big, bold and flamboyant party scenes,
where Romeo and Juliet first meet, I felt the first hour or so was a little
choppy - Luhrmann seems to be concentrating so hard on making the film look
funky that he seems to neglect the actual storyline itself - almost as if
the whole Romeo and Juliet affair is an afterthought. However, once things
start to go wrong - the chain of events that lead to the inevitable tragedy
- that the film really starts to find its feet.
The film's second half kicks into gear with the violent, rather excessive
scenes where the Capulet Tybalt murders Mercutio, and in a fit of rage
Romeo kills Tybalt. Luhrmann's directing actually starts to prove quite
effective; ranging from his adept handling of the build-up to Juliet's
faked death, and the final tomb scene, which Luhrmann, to his credit,
manages tenderly and poignantly. It's this closing scene that makes the
film - it's moving, stirring and perfectly captures the tragedy of the
story. The final pull-back shot is beautifully executed.
Haven't mentioned the performances yet! Leonardo DiCaprio and Claire Danes
make a gorgeous-looking Romeo and Juliet, and they handle their roles
beautifully. DiCaprio gives one of his strongest performances - not only
does he succeed in delivering the dialogue convincingly, but he propels
emotion at the screen with real feeling - ranging from his pain at
Mercutio's death to his rage toward Tybalt, and his innate pain and sorrow
at Juliet's death. If anything he perhaps over-plays it a little, but that
doesn't matter because everything else about the film is! Danes is equally
fine as Juliet, though she doesn't really get much to sink her teeth into
until near the end. I'm not actually too sure about the resonance of much
of the scenes they had together - didn't seem to be that much spark,
particularly considering that these are supposed to be literature's most
infamous lovers. Still, as I said above, the final scene is every bit as
tragic and heart-breaking as it ought to be. 
Summing up; it took a while to get used to Luhrmann's rather crazy
directing-style, and I still have some reservations about why he makes
certain choices. You almost feel as if he spend too much time making the
film look good while neglecting the actual thrust of the story - the
romance. Still, it's hard to lose when you're using one of the greatest
plays ever written, and the performances are good.  All in all, I think
this is a rather successful adaptation of Shakespeare's classic play,
designed for a nineties' audience. Not perfect, but still quite good.
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
For more regularly-updated Film and TV reviews, check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
Review written by and (c) Rory B Mackay, 1998

Author
Steve Rhodes
     ROMEO AND JULIET as a movie to laugh at - what a concept! After
his brilliant and highly innovative STRICTLY BALLROOM, director Baz
Luhrmann's second movie is his cinematic treatment of Shakespeare's
Romeo and Juliet.
     Since Franco Zeffirelli's 1968 version is one of my favorite
movies of all time, I was curious how Luhrmann's version would turn
out.  Certainly it has been one of the most hyped films of the year.
The Internet has been abuzz about it for quite some time now.
     Set in a decaying urban landscape called Verona Beach, Florida,
the film assaults your senses.  I predict audience reaction will neatly
dichotomize into those who feel the show is absolute garbage, notice
the first song is aptly song by a group called Garbage, or great campy
fun.  Let me confess that I am firmly in the later group.
     Most of the cast view their parts as total romps.  Only Claire
Danes as Juliet Capulet, Leonardo DiCaprio as Romeo Montague, Brian
Dennehy as Ted Montague, and Vondie Curtis-Hall as Captain Prince have
deluded themselves into thinking they are in a serious production.
This makes the film into almost a movie within a movie.
     We have black Harold Perrineau playing Mercutio as a guy in drag
with a skimpy, silver sequined dress, a silver wig, and heavy lipstick.
The rest of the cast is not quite this off the wall, but close.  To
have actors trying to be serious ensconced within a broad farce makes
for an interesting contrast.  This is a fun film whose high energy
level is off the charts.
     With most films you start by discussing the acting, but not with
this one.  It is the direction, the sets (Catherine Martin), the
editing (Jill Bilcock), the costumes (Kym Barrett) and most of all, the
cinematography (Donald McAlpine) that is the essence of the production.
     Have you ever set through hours of your neighbor's home videos
where you watched his constant pans and zooms until you get dizzy from
his blurring images?  Well, McAlpine does this with great and effective
gusto.  Has that guy got a gun, well lets zoom in on it.  Fast action
on the periphery of the scene, then quick pan over there.  Couple this
with light speed editing, and you've got a film that veritably pulsates
with energy.
     The sets are extremely colorful and outlandish as are the
costumes.  Friar Laurence (Pete Postlethwaite), for example, is shown
without a shirt but with a large cross tattooed on his back.  Most of
the Montagues wear Hawaiian shirts and have multicolored hair.  The
Capulets stick to wearing all black and have greasy slicked back
hairdos.
     Religious imagery crops up everywhere.  We have neon crosses,
cheap Virgin Mary figurines that light up, and even their fancy silver
and gold guns have the Virgin Mary on the gun stock.  There is even a
dream sequence where Mercutio dances in drag at a bacchanal under an
enormous picture of the Virgin Mary.  Many will view all of this as
sacrilegious, but I took it as good satire.  If you think you will be
offended, then consider this review as fair warning to avoid this
picture.
     The show starts and ends with a small, cheap TV set in the middle
of a black background.  It switches from video snow to a news anchor
(Edwina Moore who played the WMIA Co-Anchor in UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL)
who delivers the prologue, "In fair Verona, where we lay our scene, two
households both alike in dignity", and the epilogue, "never was a tale
of more woe than this of Juliet and her Romeo."
     The editing is even less subtle than the photography.  During the
prologue, we keep switching to the words IN FAIR VERONA on a solid
background to make sure we are not missing the points.  In fact through
out the show, we have cuts to newspaper headlines telling us about the
events we are witnessing.  Moreover, the cast keeps walking by almost
broken TVs set out in the open where newscasters (including Annette
Bining) are reporting the events in real time.  There isn't a subtle
moment in the movie.
     The music (Nellee Hooper) and the sound of the film are dramatic
and impressive.  In the scene where Tybalt (John Leguizamo) and
Mercutio begin to spar, the music switches to loud snare drums.  The
music is quite eclectic ranging from rock to "Tristan und Isolde."  The
sounds, especially of the ever prevalent guns and hot cars, are loud
and jolting.
     The acting by most of the cast is full of exaggerated gestures,
but next to Mercutio, the most outlandish is that Diane Venora as
Gloria Capulet, Paul Sorvino as Fulgencio Capulet and Miriam Margolyes
as the Nurse.  The Nurse always refers to our pair of star crossed
lovers as "Romao" and "Huliet."
     I was originally invited to a press screening a week ago, but it
was canceled the day before since the studio said they could not get
the prints out.  Since it is just about to open, this is usually a bad
sign and means the film is in trouble.  I am not sure what the problem
was.  Perhaps the editor wanted to interlace some more newspaper images
into the print.  At any rate, Baz Luhrmann's ROMEO AND JULIET should be
controversial and popular, the former to make even more of the latter.
     Most Shakespeare, even Ian McKellen's vision of RICHARD III as a
World War II British Fascist, is done seriously.  Here, the critics in
the theater were laughing with the picture.  Baz Luhrmann has turned a
romantic tragedy into a farce and an extremely handsome looking farce
at that.
     The downfall of the show has to be the acting.  Visuals like Dave
Paris (Paul Stephen Rudd) being on the cover of Time as the most
eligible bachelor in the land are funny, but most of the actors do
little more than read their lines.  The script by Baz Luhrmann and
Craig Pearce is a very literal adaptation of Shakespeare's text, but
the director uses the images of the story and not the words to convey
his message which is a shame.
     The acting by Claire Danes and Leonardo DiCaprio is good, but
nothing special.  They've all done better work.  The rest of the cast
is okay.  The excitement of the film can be attributed to Baz Luhrmann
and his previously mentioned crew.  A director who places much of the
balcony scene in and under the water of rich Capulet's swimming pool is
one not afraid to take risk.  Also stretching the limits are the
constant aerial sequences of police helicopters patrolling the crime
infested city with search lights.  A wild picture by a bold director.
     ROMEO AND JULIET runs about 2 hours and my guess is that the film
is rated R.  They were lucky to have a screening much less get out a
press kit.  The film contains one drug use scene, bloody violence, but
no bad language, sex or nudity.  Given that the much tamer Zeffirelli
film had brief and effective male and female nudity, I was surprised
that this outre version didn't.  The show should be fine for teenagers,
who will probably love it.  I found it great fun and give it a thumbs
up.  It is destined for cult classic status.  Although I rate it ***,
if you see it and hate it, don't say I didn't warn you that it was
extremely bizarre and certainly not for everyone.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Matthew K. Gold
ROMEO + JULIET does to Shakespeare's play what CLUELESS did to Jane
Austen's novel: it modernizes and updates a classic work for the 18-24
year-old market. After seeing this loud, ambitious movie twice, I remain
conflicted about it: while I was moved by it, I also think that it is a
piece of manipulative fluff--a kind of "Teen Beat" magazine in
cinemascope.
Each generation reinvents Shakespeare for itself. This ROMEO + JULIET is
ridden with 90's kitsch. It uses Shakespeare's
words, but takes its imagery from the exaggerated vocabulary of soap
operas, MTV, and Andy Warhol. It was filmed in
Mexico City, which is an exaggeration of urban life in itself. The
kitsch works well in some sequences: in an invigorating party
scene, at which Romeo (Leonardo DiCaprio) and Juliet (Claire Danes)
first meet, characters wear costumes that effectively
communicate their personalities: Romeo wears the stylish armor of a
post-modern knight, Juliet wears the foam wings of an
earthbound angel, Capulet (Juliet's dominating father) wears the
Caesaric robes of an august patriarch, Mercutio (Romeo's
friend and the Prince's kinsman) wears the sequined dress of a drag
queen, and Paris (Juliet's establishment-minded suitor)
wears the dorky space-gear of an enthusiastic astronaut. I appreciated
the way the movie updated Shakespeare's characters.
In this movie, the Prince of Verona is a tough police commissioner, the
Capulets and Montagues are rival gangs, the chorus is a
TV anchorwoman, and the Friar Laurence (Pete Postlethwaite, who gives a
fun performance) is a hip priest who proclaims the
benefits of "herbs." Many of these touches are original and
thought-provoking; this movie could be understood as a comment
on recent racial disturbances in Los Angeles, Bedford-Stuyvesant, Miami,
and Crown Heights. The problem is that I'm not
sure what, exactly, it might be saying.
As Romeo and Juliet, Leonardo DiCaprio and Claire Daines give effective
performances. The camera adores these young stars. As soft golden light
plays over DiCaprio's wet hair, skinny torso, and sensuous lips, one
thinks of James Dean's body and Marlon Brando's cheekbones. As the
angelic Juliet, Danes looks pristine--until she smirks naughtily while
considering that "other part/ belonging to a man." The single best scene
of the movie occurs when DiCaprio and Danes first lock eyes through a
fish tank. For a few brief moments, pure innocence and charm take
command of the screen. These actors, both on the cusp of puberty, convey
the wonder and the angst of two young lovers in the throes of an
overpowering, but impossible, love. DiCaprio and Danes are a perfect
Romeo and Juliet for the 1990's: their budding bodies are completely in
sync with the recent trend of unisex ad campaigns.
At a certain point during the movie, the many excesses began to bother
me. The brashness that was at first charming soon
became tiresome. In many scenes, such as the one in Church where Juliet
reposes amid millions of crosses and candles, the
layers of kitsch became so thick that I had trouble locating any glimmer
of sincerity or feeling. The imagery of ROMEO + JULIET has the puffed-up
ethos of a TV commercial. Watching this movie made me think of Thomas
Carlyle, who, in Past and
Present (1843), decried the effects of advertising on shoemaking: "Thy
shoes are vamped up falsely to meet the market;
behold, the leather only seemed to be tanned; thy shoes melt under me to
rubbishy pulp, and are not veritable mud-defying
shoes, but plausible vendible similitudes of shoes." At their best,
movies like ROMEO + JULIET cannot create true emotions,
because they themselves evince none; they can only produce "vendible
similitudes" of emotions. In the end, that's just not
enough for me.
ROMEO + JULIET is rated PG-13. Cast: Claire Danes (Juliet Capulet),
Leonardo DiCaprio (Romeo Montague), Harold
Perrineau (Mercutio), Pete Postlethwaite (Father Laurence), Paul Sorvino
(Fulgencio Capulet), Brian Dennehy (Ted
Montague).
Directed by Bas Luhrmann. Screenplay by Baz Luhrmann and Craig Pearce.
Based on the play by William Shakespeare.
Running time: 120 minutes.
The Book-Lover's Guide to Cinema
http://www.panix.com/~mgold/meter.htm
copyright 1998 Matthew K. Gold

Author
Bryant Frazer
Close to the conclusion of William Shakespeare's Romeo and
Juliet, as the kids seated around me murmured among
themselves, I found myself wondering how many in the theater
did not know how the story was going to end. And then, with a
mix of amusement and distaste, I was wondering if even the
ending would remain the same.
The film retains Shakespeare's monicker, which demonstrates
the film's backhanded fidelity to its source material and
gives it license to go completely nutso with its pretensions
toward modernization. This is modernized, alright, from the
digitally enhanced Mexico City backdrops to the silvery
firearms that take the place of the daggers and rapiers of
Shakespearean verse. What's not modernized is the dialogue,
which is lifted directly from the original text. The
resulting hodgepodge is more than a little daffy, with beefy
guys running around in Hawaiian shirts pointing guns at each
other and saying things like, "Do you bite your thumb at me,
sir?" Not surprising that it's occasionally silly -- what may
be surprising is that, at least as often, it really works.
Australian director Baz Luhrmann (Strictly Ballroom) can't be
accused of playing it safe. In the very opening moments of
the film, which is introduced by an anchorwoman on a TV set
that's dwarfed within the widescreen frame, his camera goes
on a vertiginous high speed tour of Mexico City, spiraling
and zooming above the roofs and in the streets. The supercool
shorthand of a film trailer is adopted for a sequence
introducing this hyperrealistic world with helpful captions
superimposed over screen-filling shots of various characters.
The whole sequence culminates in a gas station showdown
that's enervating in its hysteria -- the original dialogue is
worn here as a badge of courage, with noise and camera tricks
emphasizing hyperactivity above all else. Hell, we even get
the requisite shot of Tybalt (John Leguizamo) flying sideways
through the air blasting from two pistols, a rip-off from
John Woo by way of Robert Rodriguez.
A little later, we're invited to a party at the Capulet
place, where Harold Perrineau plays Mercutio as a drag queen
in a white wig. The cinema is so thick and the cuts so quick
that for a time it looks as though Oliver Stone has been
asked to direct Priscilla, Queen of the Desert. For the first
couple of reels, Luhrmann seems to be hoping that a sustained
mania can focus attention on the quite considerable
production design and divert it from the mouthfuls of
Elizabethan prose that his principals don't seem comfortable
with. It can't, quite, but the design is as impressive as the
conceit, and if you're not thoroughly turned off by either,
you may be hoping Luhrmann can actually make this stuff mesh.
Well, it's fortunate that Romeo Montague (Leonardo DiCaprio)
has been invited to this party at his rivals' den, because
it's there that he happens across the radiant Juliet Capulet
(Claire Danes). Love at first sight, and all that. But soft
-- a sweet, understated love scene that tumbles from balcony
into the blue-lit Capulet swimming pool gives the film a
much-needed emotional grounding, even though it remains
lighter than air. DiCaprio is an unassuming romantic lead,
and Danes a sweetly idealistic receptor for his young
passions. You believe that these kids like each other, and
you're rooting for them, which is key -- even if you know how
things turn out.
The world surrounding our two star-crossed lovers is meant at
every turn to illustrate and amplify the passions and pain
felt in their everyday lives. And so it is that gigantic
signs, one proclaiming 'CAPULET' and the other 'MONTAGUE'
tower above the city, flanking an immense statue of the
Virgin Mary. So it is that the familiar red-and-white "Enjoy
Coca-cola" logo is morphed into a sign reading "Wherefore
L'amour?" (Just for giggles, there's a hot-dog stand called
Rozencranzky's.) Romeo's beach retreat is the huge proscenium
of a ruined stage, towering next to a sea and sky that roil
with the turbulence of the storyline. This may all seem like
a little much, but I've got to admit that I love it.
The fashionable pop-song soundtrack is very much of the
moment, featuring tracks by such current flavors as Garbage
and The Cardigans. A little more adventurous is a
gospel-choir rendition of Prince's "When Doves Cry" that's
inserted into the film at exactly the right moment. Des'ree
contributes a pair of original numbers, but when a scene of
DiCaprio and Danes entering liplock on-screen is accompanied
on the soundtrack by a song titled, get this, "Kissing You,"
it's a little too literal for my tastes.
Of course, Shakespeare shouldn't really need a soundtrack,
and this film uses a sound-and-fury crutch to supplement its
drama. That's not to say Romeo and Juliet doesn't have great
moments, and my favorite is Mercutio, bleeding to death on
the beach: "A plague on both your houses!" At other times,
though, all this accessory stimulus tends to lessen the
emotion of the story. Luhrmann can't resist stretching the
sentiment in the final scene, which allows his lovers one
last look at one another this time around, but such maneuvers
only go so far.
One obvious shortcoming is that of our romantic leads.
DiCaprio and Danes are uncommonly good-looking, probably the
best pair of kids who could have been picked to play this
role. Their star appeal is undeniable, and they're both
earnest enough that they're easy to watch. But just about
everyone else in the cast is better at playing Shakespeare
than these two. To see Pete Postlethwaite bring such life to
the part of Father Laurence or to hear Miriam Margoyles make
the Nurse's Elizabethan dialogue sound for all the world like
plain English is to understand the rich wallop that Romeo and
Juliet could have packed in the hands of an abler cast.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Guns, warring gangs, lavish parties, blue crucifixes, a black transvestite, an
MTV soundtrack and, oh yes, a love story. What is this, a Godard film? A remake
of "West Side Story"? No, it's "William Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet." What?
Yes, it's a modern-day variation of the Bard amidst Verona Beach, actually
Mexico City. 
Leonardo DiCaprio is the brooding Romeo. Claire Danes is the weeping Juliet.
Harold Perrineau, Jr. is Mercutio. The over-the-top Paul Sorvino is Juliet's
father of the Capulet family. Romeo is from the Montague family, and he
desperately falls in love with Juliet when he sees her through a fish tank.
They play around in pools and in big beds, but there's not much in the way of
romance. Silly? Most definitely. 
"Romeo and Juliet" wants to be an MTV version of the oft-told Bard tale albeit
with dazzling visuals and milisecond cuts - it's "Natural Born Killers" crossed
with "West Side Story." The problem is that all the poetry of the Bard's text
is lost in the translation to a modern-day setting. The soundtrack pumps out
more songs per minute than I could stand and practically drowns out all the
dialogue. DiCaprio emotes but doesn't exactly do more than that. Claire Danes
giggles for an eternity - she's like a loving puppy with big startling eyes,
but is miles away from her strong work in "Little Women." Everyone else
overacts to the hilt, including the annoying Paul Sorvino, the high-pitched
Miriam Margoyles as the Latina housekeeper, and the endless stares supplied by
Diane Venora ("Heat"). The best performance, in terms of appropriate tone and
inflection, is Pete Postlethwaite (In the Name of the Father) as Friar
Lawrence. 
The biggest mistake was in making "Romeo and Juliet" an MTV cartoon with the
original, antiquated text making the whole film as incongruous and
anachronistic as you might expect. Stick with the Franco Zeffirelli version
instead. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It was just 60 years ago that I saw my first ROMEO AND JULIET,
and loved it even though (or perhaps because) the leads were played by
Leslie Howard and Norma Shearer who were, respectively, age 39 and 36.
But what did a kid know?  They were two of my favorite actors and
I adored the film.  The music was by Tschaikowsky and that did not
hurt one bit.   I recall that when Romeo spent the  first night with
Juliet, the camera panned up over the balcony, into the sky and over
the trees and when it came down to earth it was morning.  How
beautiful it was!  How this teenager ate that up!
     Somewhere around 1958 I saw the Russian filmed ballet version
with Ulanova and with the great music of Serge Prokofiev and I went
wild about the film and especially the music.  Since then I have seen
the ballet (Bolshoi) a dozen times and nothing can surpass the ballet
version.
     In 1968, there was Zeffirelli's wonderful production starring the
15-year -old Olivia Hussey and Leonard Whiting who was a mere 17,
which was more in keeping with the original play by Shakespeare.  And
now we are approaching the millennia with Baz Luhrmann's
interpretation of that great work.
Four hundred years ago, Shakespeare wrote:
     The current version opens with a TV broadcast by an anchorwoman
(Edwina Moore) reporting a shoot-out between two rival gangs, the
Montagues and the Capulets in Verona, Florida.  The TV camera takes us
to
the scene where the gang members are firing revolvers at each other. 
Among them is Tybalt (John Leguizamo), a Capulet and Mercutio (Harold
Perrineau) a Montague  who is Romeo's best friend.
     My first reaction to this scene was "This movie is going to
bomb!"  I felt a small revulsion at the desecration of a great writer.
But shortly, thereafter, I was caught up in the film, with the nice
touch that the characters spoke Shakespearean English.   The
appearance of Romeo (Leonardo DiCaprio. whom I correctly chose to be
nominated for  Best Supporting Actor in WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE?
and that of Juliet (Claire Dane, who won an Emmy nomination in MY
SO-CALLED LIFE, and followed that with LITTLE WOMEN, HOW TO MAKE AN
AMERICAN QUILT and TO GILLIAN ON HER 37TH BIRTHDAY) moved the film
into another dimension).  Both DiCaprio and the very innocent-looking
Dane gave the film  a feeling of young love at first sight.  There
could not have been better casting.
     A couple of quick complaints.    Was it really necessary to make
Mercutio into a cross-dresser?  Was it really necessary to have Juliet
blow her brains out with a revolver . . . or was that supposed to be
in keeping with the modern crazy world of guns?  I would have much
preferred had she finished the deadly potion Romeo had just taken.
     Anyone upset that I have committed "a spoiler" by revealing that
both Romeo and Juliet die?   You have to be kidding, right?
     Other notables in the cast are Pete Postlethwaite (as Father
Laurence) who absolutely knocked me out as the tragic father in that
wonderful film, IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER as well as his appearances
in many other fine films . . . and Brian Dennehy as Ted Montague as
the head of the Montague clan and Paul Servino as Fulgencio Capulet,
the patriarch of the Capulet clan, Diane Venora as his wife Gloria
Capulet.   Paul Rudd is Paris, Juliet's suitor; and let us not forget
Juliet's nursemaid, played by that fine British actress, Miriam
Margolyes, who here has a Spanish accent.

Author
Michael Dequina
William Shakespeare's Romeo & Juliet (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
After watching the first hour of Baz Luhrmann's
Shakespeare-meets-the-20th-century take on the Bard's most celebrated
romance, I was tempted to dismiss it as a complete disaster, one of the
worst of the year.  The main problem can be illustrated by the opening five
minutes.  Following a reading of the opening narration ("In fair Verona...")
by a newscaster, we are treated to a quick-cut montage setting up the scene
(Shakespeare meets MTV).  We then have the opening Montague-Capulet
confrontation, set at a gas station, with each new character introduced with
a freeze frame and an on-screen ID (Shakespeare meets Trainspotting).  Then
bullets start to fly, and we see John Leguizamo (just awful as Juliet's
cousin Tybalt) flying through the air in slow-mo with guns blazing
(Shakespeare meets John Woo).  In short, Luhrmann tries much to hard to push
the '90s angle, so hard that the story is crushed by all the stylistic
weight.  And without the story to guide it, this first half decomposes into
flamboyant, campy excess, complete with a drag musical number (Shakespeare
meets To Wong Foo) at the costume ball where Romeo (Leonardo DiCaprio,
solid) and Juliet (an exceptional Claire Danes, the only one of the young
Americans who makes the Elizabethan speech sound natural) meet, and a
revamped, pool-drenched balcony scene between the two young lovers that is
nothing short of a travesty--a shame since DiCaprio and Danes have such a
charming rapport.
But about midway through the film, something odd happened.
Luhrmann, it seems, decided to rein in a horse that was completely out of
control, and lets Shakespeare's tale tell itself without shoving the
contemporary setting down the audience's throat--the visual style isn't
quite as chaotic, and gone is the painfully forced slapstick.  Luhrmann and
co-scripter Craig Pearce do take a few small yet pivotal deviations from the
original text (most notably in the final scene), but  they mostly work. The
result is a '90s-accessible yet respectful adaptation of the final half, and
it does manage to achieve a level of poignancy, though not as strong as
Franco Zeffirelli's  more traditional 1968 version.  However, as well-done
as the second half is, it can't erase that horrible opening hour.  Moreover,
it just shows how impressive and groundbreaking the film would have been if
the entire picture had been like the second half--making William
Shakespeare's Romeo & Juliet more  disappointing.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  /  mrbrown@thepentagon.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Max Scheinin
Recently one night a young director named Baz Luhrmann couldn't sleep. He
tumbled out of bed and moved over to the television where he watched MTV
for an hour. Then he moved to his kitchen where he spent the same amount of
time eating spoiled food. Then he took down a volume of Shakespeare's work
and read it cover to cover - never really paying attention to the words or
plot. And then, as a climax, he took out his video camera and pressed the
"On" button. 
The result? William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet - the worst film ever made
and a complete failure. 
Though, to be fair, an interesting complete failure. The idea at the film's
core is to make Shakespeare appealing to the crowds. This is done by moving
the camera around at a rapid rate so that we can't see what is going on.
And filming the dialogue in voice over. And shooting Leonardo DiCaprio like
a Calvin Klein model. And making the frame go still while flashing the
character's name at the bottom. And filming long tedious action sequences
in slow motion.
However I've seen terrible films that are fun to watch. ( Examples are
Batman and Robin and The Island Of Doctor Moreau. ) That rule doesn't apply
here. This is a film that takes itself seriously. That is it's major fault.
Another problem was pointed out by my friend, Alex ( who was singing songs
by Leonard Bernstein throughout. ); the original play is a powerful piece
of work because the author remained neutral and didn't take sides.  Here
it's clear that we are supposed to side with Romeo. ( Just look at the way
they film him. ) From the begining he's our hero and this doesn't work. And
DiCaprio's awful performance doesn't help. 
Luhrmann never decides if he wants to entertain us or enlighten us. The
result is a mess. You can feel him striving to be something he isn't. He
tries to pull of a mix in which drag queens are filmed from purposefully
arty angles. He tries very hard. Key word: tries. "Oh look, he's filming
above water action from below. Pretty. What does it represent?"
Why do people do ugly things? I scrambled away from my tv set feeling
guilty as if I could never read the play again and keep a straight face.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Claire Danes, Brian Dennehy, John Leguizamo,
Pete Postlethwaite, Paul Sorvino, Miriam Margolyes, Diane Venora, Harold
Perrineau Director: Baz Luhrmann. Screenplay: Craig Pearce and Baz
Luhrmann based on the play by William Shakespeare
I have read reports that claim this movie glamorised teen-age suicide. I
cannot agree. If someone wants to kill themselves, they're going to kill
themselves. Although there is a small possibility, that some movies, may
just tip an emotionally unstable person over the edge; it doesn't have
to be Shakespeare.
Well, whatever. I'm sure Shakespeare didn't have these tedious, social
issues to worry about, when writing 'Romeo and Juliet.' Some people have
found this movie to be too loud, noisy, splashy and colourful for their
liking. I can understand what they mean, but I personally didn't mind.
What I was more fascinated with was the lyrical beauty of the language
that was spoken:
'Two households both alike in dignity,
In fair Verona where we lay our scene.
>From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
>From forth the fatal loins of these two foes,
A pair of star crossed lovers take their life.' .
Comment: Close your eyes and hear the TALENT that is SHAKESPEARE.

Author
Phil Curtolo
Leonardo DeCaprio (What's Eating Gilbert Grape) and Claire Danes (TV's
My So Called Life) star in director Baz Luhrmann's modernized version of
William Shakespeare's classic, Romeo & Juliet. Surrounded by a superb
supporting cast, in-cluding Paul Sorvino (Goodfellas), Brian Dennehy
(Tommy Boy), Pete Poslethwaite (The Usual Sus-pects) and John Leguizamo
(Executive Decision), DeCaprio and Danes shine throughout the film.
The story starts off at a gas station, where the "Montague Boys" meet
the "Capulet Boys" and square off with one another. Symbolizing the
swords of Shakespeare's day were their weapons, like the "Rapier-9mm" or
the "Longsword- Shotgun." Instead of killing each other right away, they
shoot around, just like in sword fights of old.
Another great thing about the film was the performance of Harold
Perrineau as Romeo's best friend. Mercutio, who in Shakespeare's novel
was quite a stud, was portrayed as an Afri-can-American cross-dresser
whose violent na-ture, was a definite plus. Miriam Margoyles, a
virtually unknown actress was astounding as Juliet's nurse, even though
she was never given a name. She was the only one who could keep Juliet
out of her fantasy world.
Verona was the home of the rival families in Shakespeare's version,
only slightly changed in Luhrmann's. Now known as Verona Beach, the
Capulet's (led by Sorvino) and Montague's (led by Dennehy) are now rival
corporate dynasties. And their small family skirmishes were now huge
gang wars.
One slight problem with the film was the difficulty to comprehend the
dialogue, since it was spoken in old English. Sub-titles could have
helped in the beginning of the movie, but toward the end, it became
easier to understand.
This excellent movie poses another prob-lem: what genre is it? Romeo &
Juliet contains so much drama, yet enough comedy and action to be placed
in either of those categories.
With the same award-winning formula that was used by Quentin Tarantino
in Reservoir Dogs and Pulp Fiction, Romeo & Juliet is a sure fire modern
masterpiece.
Grade: A-, **** out of *****

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Claire Danes, Brian Dennehy, John Leguizamo, 
      Pete Postlethwaite, Paul Sorvino, Miriam Margolyes, Diane Venora, 
      Harold Perrineau 
Director: Baz Luhrmann
Producer: Gabriella Martinelli and Baz Luhrmann
Screenplay: Craig Pearce and Baz Luhrmann based on the play by 
      William Shakespeare
Cinematography: Donald M. McAlpine
Music: Nellee Hooper
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
     In LOOKING FOR RICHARD, actor/director Al Pacino expressed his 
greatest hope for the film -- that he could extend his enthusiasm for 
the Bard's plays to a broader audience.  In a very different way, that's 
what Baz Luhrmann (STRICTLY BALLROOM) is attempting to do with this 
radical approach to "Romeo and Juliet".  Luhrmann hasn't fashioned this 
motion picture with the stodgy, elitist Shakespeare "purist" in mind.  
Instead, by incorporating lively, modern imagery with a throbbing rock 
soundtrack and hip actors, he has taken aim at an audience that would 
normally regard Shakespeare as a chore to be endured in school, not a 
passionate drama to ignite the screen.
     Make no mistake, this ROMEO AND JULIET isn't the match of Franco 
Zeffirelli's unforgettable 1968 classic.  While Leonardo DiCaprio and 
Claire Danes make an effective couple, their romance doesn't burn with 
the white-hot intensity of Leonard Whiting and Olivia Hussey's.  
Nevertheless, this interpretation is so fundamentally different from 
anything to have come before it that there's no danger of repetition.  
By the same token, there have been two different "Richard III"s in the 
past twelve months, and no one is complaining.
     For those who aren't aware, "Romeo and Juliet" tells the tale of 
two "star-cross'd" teenage lovers who secretly fall for each other and 
marry.  Their families, the Montagues and Capulets, have been fierce 
enemies for decades, and, even as Romeo and Juliet say their wedding 
vows, new violence breaks out between the clans.  In the end, their love 
is doomed.  When Romeo mistakenly believes Juliet is dead, he poisons 
himself.  And, when Juliet discovers that he is dead, she too commits 
suicide.
     Luhrmann's ROMEO AND JULIET (properly titled WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S 
ROMEO AND JULIET) takes the play and deposits it in a modern Verona 
Beach that is part decaying Miami and part Mexico City.  By the 
director's own admission, this is a created world, borrowing aspects of 
its unique visual style from such diverse periods as the 1940s, 1970s, 
and 1990s, and using a variety of classic films (most notably REBEL 
WITHOUT A CAUSE) for inspiration.  Fast cars with roaring engines 
replace horses.  Guns stand in for swords and daggers.  The resulting 
hybrid background is startling.
     ROMEO AND JULIET's camera is restless, always moving.  There are 
times when the rapid cuts and raging soundtrack might cause 
understandable confusion between the movie and a rock video.  Indeed, 
with all the camera tricks, special effects (such as a roiling storm), 
and riotous splashes of color, it's easy to lose the story in the style.  
Luhrmann's intent was never to drown Shakespeare's dialogue in 
technique, but it happens, especially early in the film.  In the 
process, the more subtle intangibles of the romance are irretrievably 
lost.
     The movie settles down when Romeo (DiCaprio) and Juliet (Danes) 
first come face-to-face, gazing at each other through the transparent 
panes of an aquarium while a love ballad plays in the background.  It's 
a delicately romantic moment whose magic is never quite matched by any 
other scene in the film.  Danes makes a breathtaking Juliet, merging 
strength and fragility into one.  DiCaprio isn't quite as successful as 
Romeo; there are times when his delivery of Shakespeare's dialogue 
sounds forced, and, on at least one occasion (when he learns about 
Juliet's supposed death), he goes way over-the-top.
     The supporting cast has its share of successes and failures.  John 
Leguizamo plays a particularly effective Tybalt, Juliet's Latino cousin.  
Despite a terrible accent, Miriam Margolyes gives a delightful 
interpretation of Juliet's nurse.  In a daring move that works, Harold 
Perrineau's Mercutio is presented as a high-energy drag queen who gets a 
chance to strut his stuff to a disco tune with Shakespearean lyrics.  
Pete Postlethwaite (as Father Laurence) and Vondie Curtis-Hall (Captain 
Prince) are both at ease in their roles.  Brian Dennehy's presence is, 
as always, imposing, but, as Lord Montague, he doesn't have more than a 
handful of lines.  Less successful are Paul Sorvino's cartoon-like 
portrayal of Lord Capulet and Diane Verona's Blanche DuBois-flavored 
version of his wife.  And a pair of characters, Paul Rudd's Paris and 
Jesse Bradford's Balthasar, are so ineffectual that they're virtually 
invisible.
     There are moments of comedy in Shakespeare's play, and Luhrmann 
tries to transfer some of these over, in addition to adding a few of his 
own.  One in particular, with Romeo ineptly scaling a trellis for the 
famous balcony sequence, is ill-placed.  Also, there are times when the 
director gets a little too cute.  A run-down theater in Verona is called 
"The Globe" (the name of the locale where Shakespeare's plays were 
originally performed), and the astute viewer will catch visual 
references to "The Merchant of Verona Beach", "Rozencranzky's", 
"Wherefore L'Amour", and "Out, Out Damn Spot Cleaners".
     Ultimately, no matter how many innovative and unconventional 
flourishes it applies, the success of any adaptation of a Shakespeare 
play is determined by two factors:  the competence of the director and 
the ability of the main cast members.  Luhrmann, Danes, and DiCaprio 
place this ROMEO AND JULIET in capable hands.  And, while such a loud, 
brash interpretation may not go down in cinematic history as the 
definitive version of the play, hopefully it will open a few eyes and 
widen the audience willing to venture into any movie bearing the credit 
"based on the play by William Shakespeare."
     Now, bring on Kenneth Branagh's HAMLET...
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
Director:  Baz Luhrmann.
Screenplay:  Craig Pearce and Baz Luhrmann.
Director of Photography:  Donald McAlpine.
Producers:  Gabriella Martinelli, Baz Luhrmann.
Starring:  Leonardo DiCaprio, Claire Danes, John Leguizamo, Harold
Perrineau, Dash Mihok, Pete Postlethwaite, Miriam Margoyles.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  121 minutes.
     WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO AND JULIET is an exercise in such sheer
audacity that you will probably want either to stand up and applaud
director Baz Luhrmann or smack him in the head.  I mean, using jump cuts,
fast-motion, American accents and rock music, then calling his film
_WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S_ ROMEO AND JULIET?  Setting the story against 20th
century gang violence, as though WEST SIDE STORY never had existed?  You
need two pairs of pants to hold cajones that big, but this is one of those
rare cases where nothing succeeds like excess.  Al Pacino tried to make
Shakespeare "relevant" with a hyped-up lecture in LOOKING FOR RICHARD;
Luhrmann's glorious and gaudy ROMEO AND JULIET does it right.  It is a
work full of energy, humor and surprisingly gentle romance.
     The story, of course, is based around two warring clans, the
Montagues and the Capulets, set in sunny, flashy, modern-day Verona Beach.
The men loyal to Ted Montague (Brian Dennehy) include his son Romeo
(Leonardo DiCaprio), Romeo's cousin Benvolio (Dash Mihok) and Romeo's
friend Mercutio (Harold Perrineau); the partisans of Fulgencio Capulet
(Paul Sorvino) are led by his nephew Tybalt (John Leguizamo).  In an act
of daring and defiance, Romeo and his cohorts crash a party at the Capulet
mansion, and there Romeo spies a vision in white named Juliet (Claire
Danes).  Unfortunately, Juliet is Capulet's daughter, a circumstance which
forces the lovers to woo and wed in secret.  Meanwhile, the war continues
unabated, and a tragic death forces Romeo to flee from Verona and from a
love destined to be written in the stars.
     For half an hour or so, you might wonder whether Luhrmann and his
co-writer Craig Pearce have decided to turn the love story into an
afterthought.  The film's first image is a television screen, featuring a
news anchorwoman introducing the events; Luhrmann then bursts directly
into the conflict between the Montagues and the Capulets with a face-off
at a gas station.  That face-off is staged with frenzied editing more akin
to Robert Rodriguez than Franco Zeffirelli, and there is scarcely time for
a breath before we barrel into the costume ball, where Mercutio (played
with dazzle and fire by SMOKE's Harold Perrineau) prances in drag to
disco.  In between there is a broadly comic scene in which Juliet's mother
(Diane Venora) is made by camera trickery to move like a darting insect as
she dresses for the party.  It is a visual blitzkrieg Luhrmann launches,
played against a soundtrack which surges from the up-tempo rock of Garbage
to Mozart to a ballad by Des'ree before DiCaprio and Danes ever share a
scene.
     Once they do meet, however, the wait seems quite worthwhile.  The
scene in which they first see each other, staring through a fish tank, is
beautiful in its quiet observation, as is Juliet's dance with suitor Paris
(CLUELESS's Paul Rudd) while she is unable to take her eyes off Romeo.
Their connection registers immediately, one of the most effective and
convincing portrayals of love at first sight I have seen in years, and
Danes and DiCaprio share a sweet but powerful chemistry.  They may be the
best male and female actors of their generation, respectively, and they
give themselves both to the characters and to the language so completely
that they seem to be discovering the 400-year-old text for the first time.
     Luhrmann directs their moments together as idyllic interludes in a
world of chaos and violence, but he also gives them a fair amount of
sexual double-entendre, and anyone with more than a nodding acquaintance
with the Bard knows that Lurhmann didn't create those bawdy references
himself to appeal to the teenagers in the audience.  He is interested in
those young viewers, however, and that is what makes his vision of WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO AND JULIET so faithful even in its iconoclasm.
Shakespeare was a writer for every social stratum of his time, and ROMEO
AND JULIET is an action-filled teen romance which also retains the tragic
force of the play.  Through it all, Luhrmann also manages to make
Shakespeare's words an integral part of his film.  The rapid, colloquial
deliver of those words occasionally overwhelms them, and Luhrmann doesn't
always know when to turn down the adrenaline.  What he has done is to take
dynamic lead performances by Claire Danes and Leonardo DiCaprio and guide
them through a telling of WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO AND JULIET which
makes the poetry and thematic depth of the play resonate in 1996.
Luhrmann took his own stab at looking for Shakespeare, and may end up
showing him to an entirely new audience.

Author
Nick Schaden
    "Romeo + Juliet" is the ultimate traditionalist English teacher's
nightmare. It's Shakespeare's classic tale in modern times, with guns,
modern rocking soundtrack, and starring two hip young actors in the key
roles. Is this the destruction of true Shakespeare as we know it? No. Does
"Romeo + Juliet"'s youth and hipness destroy the movie's purpose? A little
of yes, more of no. The movie's MTV like approach is both its largest harm
and greatest strength - but in the end "Romeo + Juliet" is a satisfying
movie.
    We all know the basic premise of "Romeo + Juliet": Romeo (Leonardo
DiCaprio) and Juliet (Claire Danes) are lovers, but they are also members of
rival families...you know the rest. Obviously the biggest question is: does
the transition of Shakespeare's play from past to present times work?
    First: the bad. One of the largest problems is that the ancient prose
has stayed intact in this modern version. No matter how hard Leonardo
DiCaprio & Claire Danes try, hearing the original prose ("but why must thou
quarrel?") just doesn't cut it, it feels incredibly awkward. Furthermore,
the first acts of the original play are far too quickly speed through, the
movie instead dwells heavily on the more romantic and violent later acts. In
addition, at a few times the movie screams of cheap MTV fare, with the
soundtrack getting distracting at times.
    However, in the end I enjoyed this modern transition. While skipping
many parts of the play are a weakness, it also results in a greater
strength, as the movie is thus more accessible to a mainstream audience - it
makes the play simple to comprehend. Furthermore, movies need to be FUN. As
much as I enjoy Shakespeare, watching another classic remake of the work
could get quite boring, and the fast paced modern version kept me interested
the entire way through.
    The movie has several other strengths too. I personally thought the
acting was wonderful, especially by DiCaprio and Danes. Their acting in the
famous conclusion of the play/movie was breathtaking, it's amazing how the
couple seemed to convey their love and sadness to the audience.
    While I warn Shakespeare traditionalist die hards that your experience
may not be great, for the rest of us, "Romeo + Juliet" successfully brings
one the most famous stories of all time to the screen.

Author
Ivana Redwine
Starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, Claire Danes, Brian Dennehy, John 
Leguizamo, Pete Postlethwaite, Paul Sorvino, Diane Venora. Directed by 
Baz Luhrmann. Screenplay: Craig Pearce and Baz Luhrmann. Producers: 
Gabriella Martinelli, Baz Luhrmann. MPAA Rating PG-13 (Adult Themes, 
Violence). Running Time 121 Minutes.
Visually dense with a well-integrated musical score that runs the 
gamut from rock to classical, Baz Luhrmann's film WILLIAM 
SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO AND JULIET took me for a thrilling ride on an 
operatic tidal wave of emotion. I was almost overwhelmed by the sheer 
force of this powerful film, which I found to be a brilliantly 
innovative work of sheer cinematic artistry. It is a film that 
demands a lot from its audience and elicits a strong reaction of 
love or hate or a combination of the two.
Although Luhrmann has generally preserved Shakespeare's language, it 
is bold imagery and music that drive the film more than the words 
spoken by the actors. Also, the setting is changed from 14th-century 
Verona, Italy, to a fictional composite 20th-century city named 
Verona Beach, a creation that is a surreal nightmare wrought wholly 
from Luhrmann's imagination. To my mind, this film is as much 
Luhrmann's creation as it is the Bard's. I realize that Shakespeare's 
works are revered texts and to play fast and loose with them is risky 
business. Shakespeare purists may disagree, but what matters is that 
Luhrmann pulls his interpretation off brilliantly. However, Luhrmann 
has changed enough here that I would not blame anyone for seeing this 
film as a work separate from Shakespeare, yet closely related to it. 
While the film has been released with the title WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S 
 ROMEO AND JULIET, presumably for purposes of name recognition, titles 
like VERONA BEACH or BAZ LUHRMANN'S ROMEO AND JULIET would be more 
fitting.
Framed by the matrix of this film's unique vision, the essential plot 
elements of Shakespeare's tale remain basically intact. Two of the 
leading families of Verona Beach, the Montagues and the Capulets, are 
bitter enemies. Romeo (Leonardo DiCaprio), a Montague, crashes a 
costume party at the Capulet mansion where he falls in love with 
Juliet (Claire Danes), unaware that she is the host's daughter. Soon 
after Romeo and Juliet are secretly married, Romeo's friend Mercutio 
(Harold Perrineau) is killed by Juliet's cousin. Enraged by the death 
of his friend, Romeo kills Tybalt (John Leguizamo). As a result, 
Romeo is banished from Verona Beach. Juliet's parents have not been 
told that she has married Romeo, and they put her under tremendous 
pressure to marry Paris. (In the film Paris is cleverly introduced via 
a magazine cover as bachelor of the year.) Desperately trying to avoid 
this union, Juliet takes a potion that mimics death with a deep sleep, 
and Friar Lawrence (Pete Postlethwaite) sends Romeo a message about 
Juliet's ruse. (The film wittily has the message sent by a courier 
service named "Post Haste.") Leaving exile without receiving the Post 
Haste dispatch, Romeo goes to the church where the unconscious Juliet 
lies in a casket. Then mistakenly thinking her dead, he takes poison 
in despair. Juliet awakens just as the poison starts to take effect 
on Romeo. She takes Romeo's gun (not a dagger as in the original 
Shakespeare) and commits suicide. Luhrmann's change of weapon makes 
it a bloodier and more viscerally violent end. The image of the 
blood-spattered bodies of the lovers nestled together as the film 
nears its end is a particularly gruesome sight.
Baz Luhrmann is a daring filmmaker with an eclectic style, which makes 
for some vividly creative and memorable scenes. Verona Beach is a 
place so fantastic that it could exist only in a parallel universe; 
yet it is beset with many of the same problems that plague modern 
life, including urban violence and a media that blitzes the senses 
with a barrage of information. Our first hint of this parallel world 
comes when the film begins with a television screen that frames a 
newscaster who delivers the prologue in the same calm tone in which we 
are accustomed to hearing the news of the tragedies of modern life.
There is a witty scene set in a gas station where insults are traded 
between the "Montague boys" and some of the younger members of the 
Capulet clan; here there are echoes of WEST SIDE STORY along with the 
film language of contemporary action movies. In my opinion, this scene 
would be merely derivative in the hands of a less competent director; 
instead, it turns into a scintillating synthesis. 
The intensity and virtuosity of the costume ball sequence set at the 
Capulet mansion is a tour de force. Romeo enters the party while under 
the influence of a pill given to him earlier by Mercutio, and the 
kaleidoscopic array of vivid imagery and daring camera work reflects 
Romeo's altered state of consciousness. Soon he is overwhelmed by both 
the party and the effects of the drug and makes an exit to the men's 
room. Trying to sober himself up, he places his face in a basin of 
water. He comes up for air, starts examining fish in an aquarium, and 
sees Juliet through the aquarium's glass. Romeo and Juliet seem to 
fall in love while watching the fish and each other, and this moment 
in the film struck me as both lyrically beautiful and hauntingly 
strange. The sequence is reminiscent of Federico Fellini and Ken 
Russell, while remaining something that is distinctively Luhrmann's 
own.
The film's treatment of the famous balcony scene departs radically 
from the traditional by having the young lovers fall into an adjacent 
swimming pool and deliver much of their dialog while treading water. 
This is daring, but I am not sure it entirely worked; I missed some 
of the power of the more traditional interpretations of the scene. 
Still, I thought it was a fresh and engaging scene with a charm all 
its own. 
Three main motifs run through the film like a series of interrelated 
fugues--water, guns, and religious iconography--creating a complicated 
visual tapestry. These motifs can be interpreted on any number of 
levels: Jungian, Freudian, personal. While there seems no simple way 
to interpret them, I thought that the motifs added a touch to the 
film that was both surreal and at the same time intensely real; they 
seemed to belong to the world between wakefulness and sleep. However, 
I concede that this often had the effect of making the film harder 
to follow. In addition, sometimes these motifs were deliberately 
provocative, making the film more unsettling. In particular, I found 
that guns--sleekly designed and seductively photographed--seemed 
almost omnipresent, but they also fit the artistic vision of the film 
and were integral to the nightmarish violence that permeated Verona  
Beach. In addition, some viewers might find Luhrmann's freewheeling 
approach to religious imagery irreverent. However, in general I 
thought the use of these three motifs made the film more dynamic, so 
I gave the film artistic license on the parts that disturbed me.
There was one thing that Luhrmann did that seemed to me to be a touch 
of sheer genius. When the "star-crossed" lovers are alone on the 
screen, the bombardment of music and surreal imagery seems to fade 
away: it is as if the truth of their young love gives them a temporary 
refuge from the horror of Verona Beach.
The performances in the film are surprisingly good, although they are 
not the kind of great performances given in film adaptations of 
Shakespeare featuring actors such as Ian McKellen, Kenneth Branagh, or 
Laurence Olivier. There is less emphasis on Shakespeare's language in 
this film, so if the performances cannot match the perfection of 
trained Shakespearean actors, it is not as much of a distraction as 
one might think. Claire Danes and Leonardo DiCaprio still manage to 
shine; the innocence and exuberance of their actual youth makes them 
magic on the screen. 
Two of the supporting performances are particularly good. Harold 
Perrineau's Mercutio is charismatic throughout the film, and at times 
he is superb. Perrineau manages to steal the show as a dazzling drag 
diva in the costume ball scene. John Leguizamo gives a powerful 
performance as Tybalt; he projects some of the malignant malevolence 
of pure hate into the role.
The intensity level of this film is overwhelming at times, and that is 
what struck me as both the film's strength and its weakness. This is a 
highly stylized film, and I found that style sometimes interfered with 
substance. There were times in the film when I yearned for greater 
focus on the poetic power of the Bard's words. This is not a perfect 
film, but it is a brave and often brilliant one. A deliberately daring 
and disturbing interpretation of Shakespeare's work, I must admit that 
it is not for everyone. But I think it is easily one of the best and 
most important films of this year. This is a film that will be 
watched, studied, and its merits debated for years to come. 

Author
Jon Ridge
     I still believe that trailers should receive Academy Awards.  It's
kind of hard what those guys do:  They've got to successfully evoke the
mood and spirit of a film,  while not actually giving the film itself
away.  And most importantly,  of course,  they have to make us,  the
audience,  want to see the film.
     This is certainly true of a trailer I saw a few months back for
ROMEO AND JULIET.  With its use of sharp editing and the right
selection of music from the soundtrack,  it made me want to see the
film.  Actually,  I couldn't wait.  So,  I went wanting to like Baz
Luhrmann's update of the Shakespeare classic not only because of that
preview,  but because the concept of placing such poetic and elegant
verse in modern day intrigues me.  And the director does a damn good
job creating the surreality I'm sure he was looking to in which that
verse could exist.
     R&J plays as if somebody shot up,  got high,  then opened a copy
of Cliff's Notes and read.  Couldn't really understand what any of
it was supposed to mean,  and laughed at the whole thing.  The film is
trying to be different, like nothing we've ever seen before,  which I
definitely admire.  However, if you are going to take classic lit this
lightly,  you've got to show some more control.  I don't mean with
camera angles,  and editing techniques,  but over the flow of the
plot.  This picture seems a whole lot more interested in being
outrageous and bold than in the story it's trying to liven up.
     For all it's fresh approach,  there simply isn't much vitality.
     The opening duel at a gas station is played,  it seems,  for
laughs, and is filmed in a comical way,  with hardly anyone
getting shot.
     As is the scene of Juliet and her mom getting ready for the
upcoming party.
     There is a scene on the beach in which Tybault is pounding Romeo,
and Romeo doesn't fight back (primarily because he loves Juliet
and Tybault is related to her,  and I assume his restraint is out
of respect).  But then, Mercutio gets involved.  It's clear _he_ wants
to kill Tybault (because Romeo will not do it,  and because Tybault's
clan are bad boys and Mercutio doesn't want to see Romeo end up as
such),  but he drops his gun in the sand in order to fist fight with
Tybault.
     The father played by Paul Sorvino absolutely explodes when Juliet
says she isn't going to marry Paris,  quite nearly strangling his
own daughter.  I hear this is portrayed in Shakespeare's play,  but
here in the film we don't get to know Paris enough to care about him,
or understand his connection with Juliet's father aside from being her
suitor.
     The party that Romeo crashes - Romeo comes in,  having dropped
acid moments before,  and sees Mercutio in drag singing and
dancing,  and Juliet's father doing some sort of bad opera.  The point
of all of that,  of course, being to get the audience into Romeo's
mindset.  I just felt it was way,  way overdone.
      And so,  I left with a less than satisfied feeling.  I know that
the criticisms I have mentioned above are the director's new
vision on old themes,  and they are to be respected.  In intention.
But nothing he had to say sat right with me.
