Title
Review for Casper (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Skip it.  The computer-generated FX are cute, but the story is all
over the place. The simple, sweet premise of a very lonely ghost has
been expanded to include a variety of vulgar subplots, ranging from
hidden treasure to a kitchen-sink explanation of the afterlife.
Groan.  The result is too broad to be believable.
     If the jokes were stronger (say, a la THE FLINTSTONES), we might
have something here.  But with the exception of a few good lines, there
isn't enough to sustain adult interest. Even a half-dozen well-placed
cameos don't generate the guffaws that they should.  Kids won't mind,
though.  They'll love the eye-popping production design that looks
quite ookey on the inside (and quite phony on the outside).
     We all could do without the wish-fulfillment ending.  The final
reel is the worst, with enough ghosts, angels, and misplaced spirits to
send even the lowest-level paranormal screaming from the theater.  And,
yes, that *is* Little Richard singing "Casper the Friendly Ghost" over
the closing credits. Good golly!
BOTTOM LINE:  Strictly for kids, even if the language isn't the best in
places.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Freed from her ADDAMS FAMILY makeup, Christina Ricci gets the 
chance to play a normal teenager--if having a good-natured spook for a 
best friend can be called "normal".  Considering the deserved raves the 
young actress has already received, there's nothing surprising about the 
amazingly mature and nuanced performance she gives, but what is 
unexpected is the manner in which she steals scenes from the multi-
million dollar special effects fresh out of ILM.  Without the talent of 
Ricci, CASPER would have been a truly barren motion picture.  As it is, 
it's still not very good. 
     All the adults in this movie treat CASPER like the comic book-come-
to-life it is, and give performances for the under-twelve audience.  
Bill Pullman, normally not much of an emoter, is as two-dimensional as 
the pages in which the ghostly title character first appeared.  Cathy 
Moriarty displays an almost embarrassing--and ultimately 
undermotivated--nastiness, and Eric Idle is underused as a flunky 
whose sole purpose is to provide weak, slapstick-y comic relief. 
     CASPER, voiced by newcomer Malachi Pearson, is the product of ILM.  
He's impressive, but not nearly as eye-catching as the dinosaurs from 
JURASSIC PARK.  This film is built on special effects, but executive 
producer Steven Spielberg should recognize better than anyone that 
visual trickery should be used in service of the plot.  Sadly, in 
CASPER, it's the other way around.  We're supposed to gawk at how real 
the ghosts look--who cares if there's a story? 
     And there isn't one--or at least not one that matters.  It's 
amazing how this picture got stretched out to one-hundred minutes with 
so thin a script.  Undoubtedly, Ricci's performance has a lot to do with 
making this watchable.  The scenes she's not in become increasingly 
tedious to get through.  Imagine, then, what her presence could do for a 
really good movie. 
     Dr. Harvey (Pullman) and his daughter Kat (Ricci) come to a 
decrepit mansion after the good doctor--a "ghost therapist" who offers 
sessions to the "life impaired"--is hired by the new owner (Moriarty) 
to rid the house of its phantom population.  There are four ghosts 
present--the friendly Casper and his three blowhard uncles, Stretch, 
Stinkie, and Fatso.  After initially being scared out of her wits, the 
lonely, motherless Kat befriends Casper and together the two attempt to 
find a way to bring him back to life. 
     Clever, funny moments are far between.  There are a couple of 
amusing cameos, including an appearance by a famous ghostbuster and 
quickies by Clint Eastwood, Rodney Dangerfield, and Mel Gibson.  
However, this all lasts about half-a-minute, and Ricci is left to carry 
the rest.  And, no matter how good she is, there's not enough in the 
script.  The potentially-interesting issues--coping with bereavement 
and loneliness, for example--are set aside, presumably because they 
were deemed too "deep" for the younger, target audience.  So, instead, 
we get lots of silliness, including a roller coaster ride sure to be 
coming soon to an amusement park near you.  (Talk about merchandising!) 
     In CASPER, director Brad Silberling has filmed an amazingly 
mechanical and lifeless motion picture.  Despite its immense appeal for 
the preteen crowd, the enchantment will likely wear thin for older 
viewers.  In the end, I'm not sure which was the greater struggle:  
Casper's fight against the bad guys or my attempts to fend off boredom. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Thomas Wheeler
     I wasn't entirely sure what to expect when I entered the theater
for CASPER.  I'd seen some of the promos, which looked visually
impressive, but Casper had never been one of my favorite comic/cartoon
characters as a kid.  I suppose my main reason for going was to see if
the special effects would prove as impressive as the advertisements
seemed to show them to be.
     They were that and more.  CASPER is yet another victory for the
people (and computers!) at ILM, who in the past few years have brought
us the magnificent visuals of JURASSIC PARK, and the more cartoonish
images of THE FLINTSTONES.  CASPER is a different sort of entity,
appearing at once cartoonish and yet having to function, along with his
three obnoxious uncles, in a comparatively realistic setting.
     One of the prior reviewers mentioned that, after a time, he forgot
he was looking at computer-generated images and accepted them as just
other characters in the film.  So did I, and I tend to be fairly
analytical when it comes to special effects.  Additionally, this movie
should get an Oscar for set design.  Casper's home makes the Addams
Family mansion look like a reject from a trailer park.
     Speaking of the Addams Family, Christina Ricci turns in a
wonderful performance as young Kat, who quickly becomes Casper's close
friend, the first he's ever really had.  She's so charming, and has
such a pleasant smile, it's a shame she never got to do that much in
the Addams' films --!
     This movie impressed me more on just the technical levels,
though.  Although the story is somewhat disjointed in areas, it works
on the level it needs to.  This movie never tries to be deeply
philosophical, intellectual, or, thank God, political.  All it ever
tries to do is entertain, and in that, it succeeded magnificently.
     The climatic scene, with Casper and Kat on the dance floor during
a Halloween party, is one of the most charming scenes I've seen in
movies in a very long time.  Best of all, there is virtually nothing
offensive in this film.  A couple of scenes could be called, at worst,
tasteless.  For anyone looking for a movie that is just plain fun, and
that you can take the kids to, CASPER gets my highest recommendation.

Author
Charles Ellis
     The death of creativity is slow and lingering.  Consider Steven
Spielberg's output.  "Let's remake Peter Pan with GREAT SPECIAL
EFFECTS!"  "Let's remake The Flintstones with GREAT SPECIAL EFFECTS!"
"Let's remake the Holocaust with GREAT SPECIAL EFFECTS!"
     Now it's Casper The Friendly Ghost's turn.  Casper would roll over
in his grave.  If it is possible to make an already lame one-note
Harvey/Famous studios creation from the forties an even lamer vehicle,
this is it.
     I saw Casper with a full house of families sympathetic to the
picture.  They wanted to like the film.  They did.  Even my kids liked
it.  You will like it and your family will, too.  Let's be fair and
objective about this.  I repeat, despite my criticisms of this picture,
there's enough good stuff in it that you will enjoy and should take the
kids.  It is not "too scary."
     Now that I've said that I've got to report that the audience
groaned audibly and the words "fakey" and "puppet" were heard when
Casper makes his on-screen appearance.  It's true.  You've never seen
such a high tech technique look so low tech.  You'll swear the
computer-generated Casper is a *real* puppet.  You can almost hear the
plastic slide when Casper blinks his saucer-like "ET" eyes.  The
Ghostly Trio fares better but two recently deceased human ghost
characters look like outtakes from NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS (which
works in NIGHTMARE but not here ... these are supposed to be *real*
ghosts).  You get used to the puppet-looking Casper, but I couldn't
help wondering when Kermit the Frog was going to appear.
     They redo the classic ET "hands touching" shot.  There must be a
cut-and-paste file in the word processors at Amblin with contents like
"Use Hands Touching scene here".  There's a line Casper says "Can I
keep you forever?" which is so awful, it elicited the groans again.
And they repeat the line later at the "climax" of the film.  This is
supposed to be a tagline, the equivalent of "Life is like a box of
chocolates."  Screenwriting is dead.
     At the end, Casper gets to be a "real boy" until the stroke of 10
PM.  Yes, they stole from Pinoccio and Cinderella, too, and badly.
When Casper makes his appearance as a twelve-year-old hunk the
audience, you guessed it, groans.  Casper looks, acts, and sounds like
an eight-year-old tops.  This scene just doesn't play.  What could
these idiots have been thinking? That the pre-pube crowd is going to
flock to the picture because they heard Casper turned out to be their
age?  The scenario calls Casper's innocent "I just want a friend"
motivation into question and posits that Casper wants to get a girl
like any other pre-teen boy.
     Some "in-jokes" are that the hero's last name is Harvey (Harvey
comics) and that Casper's last name was MacFadden (also involved in the
publishing of Casper Comics).  There is a nice cameo appearance by a
Ghostbuster.
     Christina Ricci is very good as the kid with more sense than the
adults, the typical movie kid.  A good choice.  Her dad is portrayed by
a guy who looks like Robin Williams and the villainness is a woman who
looks like Kathleen Turner.  I guess they couldn't get Robin Williams
and Kathleen Turner....  Eric Idle is amusing but where's Don Knotts
when we need him? The two skinny Ghostly Trios have practically the
same voice, as far as I could tell.
     To the film's credit, they explore the origins of Casper.  After
all, the cartoons *were* about a dead kid and just ignored it.  There are
scenes and vignettes that do work as intended.  Particularly touching
is a scene in Casper's old playroom.  I bet the hottest artistic
argument of the film was who got to keep the antique toys used in that
scene.  I know it would be if I was there!
     The subplot with the secret lab and the ghost machine has the look
and feel of a 1970's TV special.  Sort of a Maxwell Smart caper.  It's
certainly *not* moody or scary.  Would you believe Maxwell Smart with
GREAT SPECIAL EFFECTS? Oh No! Another mega-idea from the creative mind
of Steven Spielberg! Watch for it soon...
THE BEST THING ABOUT THE FILM
     Kids love it and parents should take them.  Then go to a comic
store and load up on a bunch of Caspers/Wendys/Spookys etc.  They are
cheap.  Your children will want to read them.  Tell them they can read
them after you read them.  This will make them even more desirable.
The comic book Casper lives in a shack with the ghostly trio in an
enchanted forest.  He has adventures outwitting the trio and other
supernatural creatures there.  Take this opportunity to let your
discover and enjoy enjoy reading and develop an attention span.  You
will get precious few opportunities like this as your children grow.
Copyright 1995 by David Ellis, All Rights Reserved.  Permission is
granted to repost this file on any APPROPRIATE private bulletin board
or circulate this file via manual forwarding by e-mail providing that
the file is transmitted in its entirety, from the title and byline on
top to the end of this paragraph.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     Universal/Amblin's new live-action version of CASPER is
considerably more entertaining than it has any right to be.  While the
film suffers from a nearly incoherent story, it does contain some
clever ideas, a lot of laughs, eye-popping visuals, and appealing
performances by Christina Ricci and Bill Pullman.
     From the beginning, a live-action film based on the "Casper
the Friendly Ghost" cartoon series and comic books seems like a strange
idea.  While film adaptations of older TV series are popular right now,
CASPER doesn't immediately generate the strong feelings of positive
nostalgia that helped projects like THE FLINTSTONES or THE ADDAMS
FAMILY.  The project is further hampered by the fact that there just
isn't all that much to the source material.  It is an awfully thin
basis for a full-length movie.
     Surprisingly, though, the filmmakers almost pull it off.  I
suspect that the visual-effects potential is a large part of what
attracted Amblin to this project.  Many members of the Industrial Light
and Magic team that worked on JURASSIC PARK, including supervisors
Dennis Muren and Michael Lantieri, also work on CASPER.  The illusion
created for the ghosts is so believable that it seems absolutely
effortless.  After the initial "wow" factor wore off, I found that I
stopped even thinking about the fact that they *were* special effects.
I was completely caught up by the illusion.
     Some may object to the fact that the design of the ghosts is
essentially the same as the cartoon series.  At first the cartoon-like
designs are a bit jarring in a live-action film, but I quickly grew
used to it.  In the long run, I think the familiarity of the design
serves the film well.  A large part of the success of the visuals comes
from the fact that the ghosts seamlessly interact with the human
characters and live-action props (using many of the techniques
pioneered in WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT).  This interaction helps the
audience to easily lose the impression of watching cartoon characters.
     While the film is fun to watch, the script turns out to be both a
strength and a liability.  Writers Sherri Stoner and Deanna Oliver are
veterans of Amblin's "Tiny Toons Adventures" and "Animaniacs" TV
series.  That background does tend to be reflected in the film, which
sometimes seems like a cartoon short stretched out to nearly two hours.
The movie has some very clever sequences and some very funny dialog and
slapstick.  The plot doesn't really hold together, though.  It seems
like a strung-together collection of scenes rather than a coherent
whole.
     Like many of the recent TV series adaptations, CASPER is seriously
overplotted.  The main plot involves Ms. Carrigan (Cathy Moriarty), a
rich woman who inherits the mansion haunted by Casper and his three
obnoxious cousins.  She believes that there is treasure hidden in the
mansion, but the ghosts keep her from getting close enough to search.
She eventually hires "ghost therapist" Dr. Harvey (Pullman) who moves
into the mansion with his daughter Cat (Ricci).  As Cat befriends
Casper and Dr. Harvey tries to calm the obnoxious cousins, Carrigan and
her associate Dibs (Eric Idle) try to find the treasure.
     This plot is further complicated by several subplots.  Some of
them include Cat planning a school dance to be held at the mansion and
Kat helping Casper to use a resurrection machine originally invented by
his father to bring him back to life.  There are a few too many plots
here and they don't all manage to come together cleanly.  At times,
Stoner and Oliver introduce plot elements that they eventually just
abandon.  The most blatant example is an unclear prank that a couple of
Cat's classmates are trying to engineer.  It was never clear exactly
*what* they had intended.
     Despite this overall incoherence, there are a lot of individual
scenes that really *do* work.  Many of the jokes do manage to find
their mark and the writers wisely include a fair share of jokes aimed
at the adults in the audience.  They even manage a few clever and
unpredictable twists that are quite welcome.  The final fate of
Moriarty's character is particularly unexpected.
     The film does attempt to explore a few serious themes with some
surprisingly effective results.  There are several scenes where Kat
tries to help Casper to remember what he was like when he was alive.
These are quite well played and really do generate some dramatic
interest.  The film even manages a tasteful scene that explains how
Casper died.  There are also a few well- played scenes involving Dr.
Harvey trying to get past the death of his wife. This eventually leads
to an exceptionally satisfying conclusion late in the film.
     There is one issue that the film conspicuously ignores.  There are
a number of references to the concept that ghosts are spirits that have
been unable to "cross-over" due to unfinished business.  This issue
comes into play several times, but there are never any discussions of
what unfinished business is keeping Casper around.  Certainly,
resolution of that would have hurt the chances for a sequel, but it
should have at least been *discussed*.
     In MERMAIDS and both of the ADDAMS FAMILY films, Christina Ricci
managed to steal virtually every scene she was in.  She gives another
really strong performance here.  She is an extremely likable performer
and she is able to bring a lot even to this kind of cartoonish role.
I'd love to see what she would do with a more complex role.
     Bill Pullman has been a very solid character actor for many years
and he is good here as well.  He isn't given much to do, but he does a
lot with what he is given.  The combination of this film and WHILE YOU
WERE SLEEPING might help to increase his marketability as an actor.
     The rest of the performances are competent, but not particularly
inspired.  Moriarty is playing basically the same role she has played
in numerous other films and is also allowed to go a little too far over
the top here.  Eric Idle isn't given a great deal to do, but he still
manages to be pretty funny.
     First time director Brad Silberling does a competent job and
manages to generally keep the pace up.  As might be expected here, the
direction does seem to favor the visual effects over the acting (as
particularly evidenced in the supporting roles).  James Horner provides
a decent (but not particularly original) musical score.  The film does
make the mistake of never playing a straightforward version of the old
TV series' theme song (a version performed by Little Richard does play
over the end credits).
     By no means is CASPER a great film, but it is certainly a lot
better than it might have been.  The film doesn't make a heck of a lot
of sense, but it a lot of fun and I left the theater with a big smile
on my face.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CASPER is the story of an extremely sweet little "living impaired"
character, a.k.a., a ghost.  He lives with three trouble making ghosts
called Stretch, Fatso, and Stinkie.  They ridicule him and treat him
like their slave.  They all live in a large spooky house.
     Into their life comes Carrigan Crittenden (Cathy Moriarty), an
evil woman, who inherits the house.  She only wants it because she
thinks there is treasure in it.  When she finds out there are spirits
living there she hires Dr. James Harvey (Bill Pullman) since he is a
famous, but broke, therapist for troubled ghosts.  He and his teenage
daughter, whose name is Kathy Harvey (Christina Ricci) but who is known
simply as Kat, are traveling the country by car in search of the ghost
of Kat's departed mother.
     The star of the show and the only reason to see the movie is
Casper.  The special effects by Industrial Light and Magic in this show
are just that - special.  Casper is a sweet character as well.  The
movie clicked when he was the feature of a scene.  The intended to be
repulsive other ghosts were that, but they were not particularly
interesting or funny.  Always crude and sometimes scary, but on the
whole a disappointment.
     Let me cut to the chase and talk about the fatal flaw in the
movie.  The script by Deanna Oliver and Sherri Stoner relied on sight
gags for almost all of the laughs.  There were the odd funny words like
the quote I opened this review with, but not many.  Worse, the
characters were not developed nor was there any discernible plot.
Contrast this with ET where you cared about every character and the
plot raced along.  ET did not rely on the inherit cuteness of the lead
to carry the picture.  Overall, the script of CASPER felt too
derivative of previous movies like ET and THE ADDAMS FAMILY movies.
There were even cameo appearances by stars from other films like
GHOSTBUSTERS which enhanced this retread image.
     Because of the script, the middle part of the movie really drags.
Better editing (Michael Kahn) might have helped enliven the middle
section.  Kahn is an Academy Award winning editor so perhaps with this
script it was hopeless.
     There is one part of the script that frankly I do not understand.
This is a movie aimed at an audience of children and is rated PG.
There were kids all over the place when we saw it.  Given this, what
was the purpose in giving the characters dialog that included: "damn",
"hell", "for Christ's sake", "bitch", and others?  The lines were not
important ones and the characters used these words as if they were
innocuous fillers of the pauses in one's speech, i.e., as if they had
no meaning at all.  Why teach kids this for no purpose?  It certainly
did not spice up the show to any extent.
     The acting was spotty.  Kat started off slow, and I thought they
had miscast the role with Christina Ricci (from both THE ADDAMS FAMILY
movies).  By the middle of the movie, Ricci had come alive and her
sweetness was a mirror of Casper's.  The chemistry between them was
well done and was the best part of the directing by (apparently) first
time director Brad Silberling.  I hope to see Ricci in many more
movies.  She turned out to be excellent.  My favorite scene of her was
the dance sequence at the end.  Lovely.  Made you want to relive your
teenage years again.
     Cathy Moriarty does not seem to know how to play a villain, and
her director was of no help to her.  The biggest acting disappointment
to me was that of an actor whom I am fond, Bill Pullman.  Pullman, who
was most recently in the excellent movie WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING, here
gives a performance with no life.  I can only partially fault him since
the writer gave him little to work with.
     For a movie with wonderful special effects and which undoubtedly
cost a bundle, I was surprised at how low budget looking the sets by
Academy Award winner Leslie Dilley were.  The sets and the overall feel
of the show kept making me think of a made for TV movie.  Only the
special effects reminded me that this was a large budget production.
     CASPER runs 1:35.  It is rated PG and is a harmless movie except
for the previously discussed dialog problems.  Jeffrey, my six year
old, got scared during some of the movie, but gave the movie thumbs up.
The only scene he did not like was the adult romance scene.  He liked
the romantic scenes involving the kids.  Hmm, guess in his mind old
fogies like parents should leave romance to the youngsters.  Unlike
Jeffrey I can not quite bring myself to recommend CASPER, but I do
award it ** for a great lead and for some magical special effects.
Maybe Casper will be back with a better script next time.  I'd like to
see him again.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
