Title
Review for Kansas City (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     KANSAS CITY is something of a departure from Robert Altman's
recent style of telling many different stories simultaneously, then
letting them all come together at the end.  In KANSAS CITY he is really
back to telling a single story, though it takes a little while for one
of the plot threads to be tied into the mainline of the story.  In the
screenplay which he co-authored with Frank Barhydt, Altman returns to
the city of his youth to direct a story about crime, race, class, and
politics.
     The setting is Kansas City, Missouri, in 1934.  Blondie O'Hara
(played by Jennifer Jason Leigh) is in a real fix.  Her husband Johnny
(Dermot Mulroney) has robbed a taxicab, using burnt cork to make
himself look black.  Now the oddly-named Seldom Seen (Harry Belafonte),
the local crime boss, has Johnny and is going to kill him.  Blondie
realizes that that she cannot get Seldom to let the man she loves go.
Faced with an immovable object she decides to unleash the only
irresistible force she knows.  She has to convince the local Democratic
political machine to go in with its hired muscle to do the job of
freeing her husband.  And how is she going to convince them to do that?
She has a weird scheme to kidnap Carolyn Stilton (Miranda Richardson)
the socialite wife of a Democrat high muckimuck (Michael Murphy) and
force him to unleash the muscle of the political machine to save her
husband.  Much of the film is the interplay between Blondie O'Hara and
Carolyn Stilton.  Meanwhile Johnny O'Hara is a prisoner at the Hey-Hey
Club as Seldom Seen plays a cat and mouse game with him.
     All this happens to the background strains of the music at the
Hey-Hey Club, except when the music is dragged to the foreground and
the story-telling drags to a halt.  Altman obviously expected that a
big part of the show would be to hear the music of current jazz greats
playing anachronistically in 1934.  His heart was clearly in the right
place, but even his telling of the mainline plot is a little slow and
deliberate and people who are not fans of jazz may find his use of it
in longish interludes excessive.  As with many Altman films, the story
cannot be fully assessed until the film is over and much of what the
film is saying is encompassed in the last five minutes.  This is a
story of insular people who think they understand each other but who
actually have gulfs of race and class separating them more than they
realize.
     It has taken me a long time to come around on Jennifer Jason
Leigh.  For a while I have noted that she has done a good job with this
role and with that one and never thought much about it.   But I really
think now I think she is just about the best character actress of her
generation.  Although it is said more visually than verbally, it is
clear that Blondie is a woman absolutely obsessed with films and in
particular with Jean Harlow films, since it is suggested that with
bleached blond hair she resembles Harlow.  From the first moment we see
her she is dressed and made up in the style of women of 1930s films.
We learn a great deal about Blondie, but Carolyn remains a cipher
through much of the film.  We are never really sure what she is
thinking or if she is thinking under the laudanum haze into which she
sinks at every opportunity.  It is, of course, good to see Harry
Belafonte acting and for much of the film he seems in control of his
character.  At one point the character seems to run away with him and
as he goes off into a babbling tirade about what he is doing, about
racism, and about why he disagrees with Marcus Garvey's Back-to-Africa
movement.  One feels that the plot intended this speech to be more
coherent and cogent than it actually came out.
     Altman does not so much put period feel into the film as saturate
the film in a bath of rich period atmosphere.  Though the viewer has to
look quick to place the film's exact year, every scene seems to have an
exaggerated 1930s feel.  Everything looks very 1930s.  Whether or not
people dressed in real life like Blondie does, she certainly looks like
women in 1930s films.  Altman slightly disorients his viewers with a
non-chronological telling of the story in the early parts of the film.
Perhaps he thinks that the early part of his films should be
disorienting.  In any case, the story-telling becomes much more
straightforward once he gets into the meat of the story.  While not a
perfect film, 1930s Kansas City certainly does a lot more to keep the
film interesting than 1990s Los Angeles did for SHORT CUTS.  This is
the most intriguing Altman film in quite a while.  I rate it a +2 on
the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Robert Altman is perhaps the most unreliable of the great
directors.  His SHORT CUTS was one of my favorite films in 1993.  His
list of movies includes as many failures as successes, but his
greatness stems from his best movies.  I have not seen all of his
films, but I nominate KANSAS CITY as a surefire candidate for the
bottom of the list.
     The script by Robert Altman and Frank Barhydt is such a mess that
describing the plot will not convey the abyss into it sinks the
audience.  In the 1930s in Kansas City a black gangster named Seldom
Seen (Harry Belafonte) is holding a white hoodlum named Johnny O'Hara
(Dermot Mulroney).  In order to get her man back, gun moll and Jean
Harlow wannabe Blondie O'Hara (Jennifer Jason Leigh) kidnaps Carolyn
Stilton (Miranda Richardson).  She demands that Mr. Stilton get the
governor to get the Pendergas Democratic machine to force Seldom Seen
to release Johnny.
     To further complicate matters Mr. Stilton is an advisor to
President Roosevelt and is on a train to Washington.  Moreover there is
an election is in progress in Kansas City which is keeping all of the
politicians busy.  The Pendergas machine, which is supposedly the only
true part of the story, is getting drunks from all over the state to
vote "10-12 times each" for the Democrats using the names off of
tombstones.
     This is a highly confusing and contrived story.  None of it is
clear at first, but once you figure it out, you will not care.  I spent
most of my time with mouth opened in shock at how appalling bad this
film is.  Let me cover just a few examples.  Belafonte is pathetic.  He
talks non-stop, but since he mumbles all of his lines and talks in a
whisper, little of what he says can actually be heard.  That is the
good news.  When he accidentally reverts to a normal voice, you realize
that his lines are all drivel.  He even has to give a racist and
anti-Semitic joke.  Sad.
     As truly awful as Belafonte's performance is, Leigh is much worse.
She sounds like Bugs Bunny trying to sound like Jean Harlow.  It is so
bad that you find yourself laughing sometimes at Leigh's acting, and
this movie is not a parody.  She too is given ridiculous and cliched
dialog like, "Move over toots."  She is so gratingly bad, that you want
to cover your ears when her mouth starts to move in case she is about
to make another one of those terrible noises camouflaged as speech.
     All of the acting is terrible.  The only variable is how bad.  The
least miserable work is delivered by Richardson as the druggie wife.
Richardson looks like she wishes she were anywhere else but in this
picture, which at least shows some good taste.
     Okay, so the movie is not a total waste.  There is some good jazz,
and the old cars and the sets (Stephen Altman) are fun to watch.  This
is not enough to keep you confined to the theater for what seems like
an eternity but is only two hours.  Escape if you find yourself caught
in there.  Being a critic, I saw it all, but you shouldn't have to.  It
is a completely pointless show that is incomprehensible.  Finally, just
when you think Altman's film has hit bottom,  it manages to come up
with an ending even worse than the rest of the picture.
     KANSAS CITY runs 1:55, but you will see in two minutes what a
stinker it is and leave.  It is rated R.  There is nudity, drug usage
including snorting cocaine, gory spilled guts style violence, and bad
language including lots of use of the F and the N words.  I would keep
all human beings away from the show, but if kids want to see it, I
think they should be at least mature teenagers.  I hate this show and
am sure most people will.  I generously give it 1/2 of a star.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jennifer Jason Leigh, Miranda Richardson, Harry Belafonte,
Michael Murphy, Dermot Mulroney.
Screenplay:  Robert Altman, Frank Barhydt.
Director:  Robert Altman.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It is a very risky think Robert Altman is attempting in KANSAS CITY,
but then Altman has never shied away from risk.  At the height of the
Vietnam War, he made the darkly anti-establishment MASH; he turned
free-form character study into the brilliant NASHVILLE; he made satires of
the very insider worlds of Hollywood film-making (THE PLAYER) and high
fashion (READY-TO-WEAR).  For the most part, however, those were risks in
subject matter.  In KANSAS CITY, Altman structures his narrative like an
improvisational jazz solo, with a payoff in the final ten minutes that is
a real kicker.  The question is whether he will have lost his audience in
the 100 minutes of riffes which precede it.
     KANSAS CITY takes place over the course of two days in the title city
in 1934 leading up to municipal elections, beginning with the kidnapping
of Carolyn Stilton (Miranda Richardson) by Blondie O'Hara (Jennifer Jason
Leigh).  Carolyn is the wife of Henry Stilton (Michael Murphy), a local
political leader Blondie believes can help her with a serious problem.  It
seems that her husband Johnny (Dermot Mulroney) made the mistake of
robbing a black gambler while wearing blackface, incurring the wrath of
black crime boss Seldom Seen (Harry Belafonte), and Blondie wants Henry to
do whatever is necessary to orchestrate Johnny's safe release.  With the
laudanum-addicted Carolyn as her hostage, Blondie moves through every
level of Kansas City society, waiting for the word which will bring her
Johnny marching home.
     Altman has a very specific image of Kansas City he is trying to get
across, and he accomplishes that task.  It is a city which seems to exist
outside of the time, with races mixing in jazz clubs, liquor flowing
freely despite Prohibition, prosperity still evidenty despite Depression.
It is also a city where the petty corruption of gambling and alcohol
exists side by side with the hard-core corruption of the brutal Democratic
political machine controlled by Tom Pendergast, and where violence was the
real law.  The soundtrack crackles with magnificent jazz tracks, a
constant underscore to brutatlity, and Altman grounds his story in the
city's real history by incorporating Pendergast and a young saxophone
player named Charlie Parker (Albert J. Burnes) into the events fo the
story.
     The product of those elements is a fusion of music, mood and plot in
which the latter often gets short shrift.  Altman has one of his typically
large casts to keep track of, and his shifts back and forth between them
seem to have little to do with pacing.  The encounters between Seldom Seen
and Johnny are basically a series of monologues in which Belafonte's
Seldom holds forth with his captive audience on race relations, the media,
his beloved jazz music and whatever other issue happens to strike his
fancy.  Those speeches are far from riveting -- once you get the point
that he is "seldom seen and often heard," Seldom's sociological
observations simply serve to stall KANSAS CITY.  The same is true of a
sub-plot involving Charlie Parker and a pregnant teen-ager (Ajia Mignon
Johnson) which eventually proves relevant but is largely distracting while
you are waiting.  Even the ostensible main plot, the relationship between
Blondie and Carolyn, is troublesome.  For a long time, it seems to be just
another example of the kind of film I criticized MANNY & LO for being, a
hostage drama in which captor and captive predictably become friends.
     Then, just as I was prepared to give KANSAS CITY up for dead, it
assaulted me with developments so unexpected that they left me breathless.
Suddenly, a performance by Jennifer Jason Leigh which had seemed like just
another one of her mannered stabs at imitating 1930s screen actresses
made beautiful, terrible sense; suddenly, Miranda Richardson's
opium-addled society dame was even funnier and more tragic; suddenly, the
Johnny who had been little more than a piece of furniture during Seldom's
speeches came to life.  After struggling through most of its running time,
KANSAS CITY heads for the finish line in a dead sprint.  The problem is
that by the time Altman begins his kick, he's nearly out of the race.
KANSAS CITY's tale of brutal truths beneath glossy surfaces is the polar
opposite of most of this summer's fare:  it is a film which works far
better when you are thinking about it afterwards than it does while you
are watching it.  I only hope audiences are willing to trust Altman the
risk-taker as long as it takes.

Author
James Brundage
Directed by Robert Altman (The Player)
Starring Jennifer Jason Leigh, Miranda Richardson, Harry Belafonte, Steve
Buscemi, Dermont Mulroney
    I'll be honest, Kansas City is Robert Altman's worst film.  Normally,
when I open a review with a line like that, I follow it up with an
explanation of how, even though it was his worst film, it still is mediocre.
But, I'll be honest once again, Kansas City isn't even a good film.
    Kansas City follows Blondie (Jennifer Jason Leigh), a desperate wife of
Johnny O'Hara (Mulroney) in her quest to get him back.  Johnny O'Hara is a
thief who robbed a black gambler only to be quickly caught and imprisoned by
Seldom Seen (Belafonte).  Blondie decides to kidnap Caroline (Richardson)
and use her as leverage against her connected husband to have him send in
Italians to free Johnny.
    Now, you're probably thinking what I was thinking.  How the hell does
that turn into a movie two hours long.  The answer, of course, is a series
on unnecessary plot devices and intercut jazz soundtrack.  The jazz
soundtrack, in fact, is the only thing that kept me from turning the video
off and watching Mother Night, my other film for my snowed-in day.
    Like Short Cuts, Kansas City incorporates jazz into the story.  In Short
Cuts it was part of the story.  In Kansas City, it may have well been the
story.  Admittedly, the performances weren't bad, with Miranda Richardson
giving a more-than-convincing performance as the opium-addict politician's
wife.  But there wasn't much of a plot, there wasn't any point, and there
wasn't anything special.
    It doesn't function as thriller, as noir, as drama, as comedy, or as any
other genre you can imagine.  Nor does it deliver the standard excellence of
Robert Altman's normally adept direction.
    Really, folks, what the hell was Robert Altman thinking?

Author
Alexander F. Relyea
        There are two ways to view Robert Altman's KANSAS CITY.  It can be 
seen as either a politically motivated kidnapping with a jazz backdrop
or a movie about Kansas City jazz in the 1930s with a little local 
color.  This is unfortunate, because neither story is done particularly
well.  Any number of context clues in the film tell the observant 
viewer that KANSAS CITY takes place on the first Monday and Tuesday of 
November, 1933, a month before prohibition was repealed.  Nevertheless,
the alcohol is free-flowing in one of the many historical 
inconsistencies in the film.  The most obvious of these are the fact 
that KANSAS CITY has exactly zero homeless people, and that all of the
"colored" people are very wealthy; even the Western Union custodian
is well-off.
        KANSAS CITY stars Jennifer Jason Leigh (GEORGIA) as Blondie, a
telegraph operator who kidnaps Miranda Richardson (THE CRYING GAME),
the wife of a powerful local politician, in order to convince some
colored gangsters, led by Harry Belafonte (WHITE MAN'S BURDEN), to
release her husband Johnny (Dermot Mulroney, THE TRIGGER EFFECT).  A
nearly incomprehensible sequence of flashbacks helps Blondie explain 
her dilemma to Mrs. Stilton (Richardson).  Apparently Johnny had 
conspired with a cabbie with the unfortunate name of Blue Green (played
by an actor with the even more unfortunate name of Martin Martin) to
rob a rich black gambler.  They get caught, and Blondie goes down to 
Belafonte's club to try to get him back.  She gets turned away and 
goes to kidnap Mrs. Stilton and win Johnny's freedom.  Those who can 
follow this sequence are rewarded with the unfolding of Blondie's 
desperate caper as she drags poor Mrs. Stilton around Kansas City almost
haphazardly.  These images are inter-cut with laughable scenes of
Belafonte trying in vain to act tough and scenes of the twenty-four-hour
jazz band that plays at his club.  The jazz is nice, and it is featured
in about ninety percent of the scenes, either as background music, or 
as the focus of the scene, but it is hardly something to base a movie 
on, and Altman doesn't bother to give any background information that 
would provide a solid foundation.  He doesn't develop the characters of
any of the musicians except for a high school saxophonist who appears 
to have nothing better to do than watch the band in twelve hour 
stretches.  KANSAS CITY plods on with plot twists that tend to be 
inconsequential or too confusing to follow to extend it to its full 
length of a hundred ten minutes, and then has a gutless ending.  When 
one of the characters says "You know what I did today?  I forgot to 
vote.", we can sympathize, for it is hard to remember anything more 
important happening in the film.
        On the whole, the acting was solid.  Mulroney stands out as a small
time hood unable to fully realize that he has entered the big leagues.
Leigh is solid, if a little annoying.  Belafonte does his best, but he
comes across as more of a retired gangster, and is best when he relates 
his old war stories.  He is sadly miscast.  Richardson takes Mrs. 
Stilton's opium habit and plays the stock character of "Drug addict".
Scarcely a scene goes by when she doesn't dope up and stagger.  Surely
a woman this addicted had professional help, even in the Great
Depression.  Other than that, the movie seems to depend on gratuitous
violence and nudity, as well as introducing characters who are almost
completely irrelevant to the plot.  Steve Buscemi (FARGO) is an 
excellent example of this, as in his two scenes he is rough with his 
wife and beating some guy with a baseball bat, both for no apparent 
reason.  Before long, anyone watching KANSAS CITY is going to wish for
something to happen either to return to the jazz or to end the film.
It is curious why Altman calls his film KANSAS CITY since it could
take place in any city large enough to have a jazz club.  There is no
discernible local flavor, and we only know that it is Kansas City
because characters say so.  The screenplay and direction conspire to 
make KANSAS CITY too confusing and remote to cause any feelings towards
any of the characters, and I am not really sure what Altman intended to
do with this film.  Nevertheless, Mulroney and Leigh's performances and
the wonderful soundtrack make this film worth ** out of ****.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jennifer Jason Leigh, Miranda Richardson, Harry Belafonte, 
      Michael Murphy, Dermot Mulroney, Steve Buscemi, Brooke Smith, 
      Jane Adams
Director: Robert Altman
Producer: Robert Altman
Screenplay: Robert Altman and Frank Barhydt
Cinematography: Oliver Stapleton
Music: James Carter, Craig Handy, Joshua Redman, and other artists
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
     KANSAS CITY is Robert Altman's disappointing followup to the 
equally disappointing READY TO WEAR, which underwhelmed critics and 
audiences alike following its Christmas 1994 release.  While KANSAS CITY 
is a modest step forward for one of America's most-respected independent 
directors, it falls far short of the raw power of SHORT CUTS or the 
intricate, biting satire of THE PLAYER.  KANSAS CITY is a sadly ordinary 
motion picture, and, in less sure hands, it might have been something of 
an unfortunate mess.  Even with Altman at the helm, however, it manages 
to be singularly unremarkable.
     This hasn't been a very good summer for "respected" directors.  
Altman's KANSAS CITY comes in the wake of Bernardo Bertolucci's vapid 
STEALING BEAUTY and Jim Jarmusch's bizarre DEAD MAN, neither of which 
received more than a handful of positive reviews.  KANSAS CITY was given 
a lukewarm reception when it bowed at Cannes earlier this year, and, 
with almost no publicity accompanying its U.S. release, it appears 
destined for obscurity.
     Taking place over a forty-eight hour period around Election Day, 
1934, in Altman's hometown of Kansas City, the movie is carefully 
attentive of period details.  Sets, costumes, and props are all 
evocative of the time, when Kansas City was booming in the midst of the 
country's Great Depression.  The jazz soundtrack sizzles, with 
performances by the likes of Joshua Redman, Craig Handy, Cyrus Chestnut, 
Kevin Mahogany, James Carter, and Geri Allen.  Yet, although the movie 
gets the minutiae right, it stumbles over characterization and plot.  
Like an improperly-focused photograph, the background is crisp and 
clear, but the foreground is muddled.
     KANSAS CITY's main character is Blondie O'Hara, played by the 
normally-reliable Jennifer Jason Leigh with more than a dash of 
Katherine Hepburn and Jean Harlow.  This is the third time in her last 
five movies that Leigh has portrayed a tough-talking throwback to the 
thirties and forties (the other two being THE HUDSUCKER PROXY and MRS. 
PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE).  Here, while Leigh's performance leaves 
a definite impression, it's also out-of-synch with everyone else's.  Her 
character, who is largely a two-dimensional caricature, never interacts 
effectively with anyone, least of all Miranda Richardson's Carolyn 
Stilton, in whose company she spends the entire movie.  
     When KANSAS CITY opens, Blondie's husband, Johnny (Dermot 
Mulroney), is involved in the robbery of a wealthy black businessman 
who's on his way to a night of big-money gambling at a jazz club run by 
gangster Seldom Seen (Harry Belafonte, recalling Marlon Brando's 
Godfather).  When Johnny's identity is uncovered, Seldom has him picked 
up, then holds him at the club while mulling over the most effective 
means of retribution.  Blondie pleads for Johnny's life, but to no 
avail.  So, desperate to save her husband, she kidnaps Carolyn Stilton, 
the wife of a prominent local politician, Henry Stilton (Michael 
Murphy), and demands that, in return for Carolyn's life, he use his 
influence to save Johnny.
     The secondary storyline features a 12-year old Charlie Parker 
(Albert J. Burnes), who, along with his mother, helps a 14-year old 
pregnant girl who has come to Kansas City to have her baby.  As usual in 
an Altman film, this narrative element eventually dovetails with the 
primary one.  There's also a side plot about the vote fraud perpetrated 
by Tom Pendergast's corrupt Democratic machine.  In the past, Altman has 
successfully used multi-story narratives with ensemble casts to great 
effect (NASHVILLE, SHORT CUTS), but not this time around. 
     Done straight, with Altman's usual flair for intricate character 
development, there's a lot of potential in KANSAS CITY's basic plot.  
Inexplicably, however, Altman decided to do the movie with a satirical 
edge.  The film plays like part homage, part affectionate parody of old-
time noir thrillers.  The three main characters -- Blondie, Carolyn, and 
Seldom -- are intentionally developed as types rather than as fully-
fleshed out personalities.  There are numerous occasions when Altman 
obviously has his tongue planted in his cheek.  Unfortunately, that 
storytelling method doesn't really work in this setting.  KANSAS CITY 
has an uneven, confused tone.
     There's nothing uncertain about the jazz sequences, however.  
Altman has filmed them from a fan's perspective, and the scenes that 
take place in Seldom's Hey-Hey Club during an all-night cutting contest 
are infused with an energy that's lacking elsewhere.  Music aficionados, 
especially those who appreciate the tunes of KANSAS CITY's era, will 
find a great deal to appreciate about the film.  Others, especially 
those expecting something profound from an Altman feature, will discover 
that, though KANSAS CITY has its share of arresting moments, the 
production as a whole is too superficial to be considered amongst the 
director's best work.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Christopher Null
     Every time Robert Altman makes a movie, it becomes *the* thing to
do for the Hollywood acting community.  It happened with THE PLAYER.  It
happened with SHORT CUTS.  It happened with READY TO WEAR.  And it
happened with KANSAS CITY.
     The only problem is that THE PLAYER was the last of his films that
was really all that great.  While KANSAS CITY marks a slight improvement
over READY TO WEAR, that ain't saying much because, after all, so does
SHOWGIRLS.
     KANSAS CITY is Altman's homage to the 1930's in the titular city,
with a plot revolving around a brassy young girl named Blondie (Jennifer
Jason Leigh) who kidnaps the drugged-out wife (Miranda Richardson) of
one of President Roosevelt's advisors named Henry Stilton (Michael
Murphy).  Why?  Because Blondie's husband (Dermot Mulroney) is about to
be killed by local gangster Seldom Seen (Harry Belafonte), and Blondie
thinks Stilton can get him back before it's too late.
     That's basically it as near as I can tell, mainly because the plot
of the movie is given second billing to the scores of jazz musicians
Altman populates the film with.  The jazz is everywhere -- drowning out
dialogue and action and just about everything else.  Not that that's a
bad thing, because without the music the film would be even worse than
it already is.  I just hadn't realized that Altman was making music
videos now.
     What's so bad about KANSAS CITY?  The main problem is that Altman
tries to make this really dull, boring, and simple story into something
that is unique, exciting, and intricate -- all of which he fails at
miserably.  It starts with some horrible acting performances from
otherwise good actors, the worst of the lot being Mulroney, who just
*stands* there for 90 of the 120 minutes, looking like a sheepdog.  And
there's Leigh, who acts like she's reprising that wretched role from
GEORGIA, stumbling from scene to scene, and leading me to re-evaluate my
opinion of her acting ability altogether.
     KANSAS CITY does have a neat ending, but it's far too little, far
too late, and in retrospect, it doesn't even make a whole lot of sense. 
But at least it was something different.  Oh well.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
