Title
Review for Nadine (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Nadine" is a surprisingly original and entertaining film.
It is not ambitious, and makes no pretense of greatness.
It is intended as a simple comedy and action picture, but
is a little more than that.  The depiction of Austin, Texas
of 1954 is credible, and the lead actors and their characters
give winning performances.  The action sequences even have
some suspense.
Jeff Bridges and Kim Basinger are married, but separated.
Bridges merely needs Basinger's signature to finalize the
divorce, so he can marry his new girlfriend.  Bridges and
Basinger really still do love each other, but have been
too busy squabbling to notice.  (The producer of "Twister"
must have seen this movie).
Meanwhile, Basinger is trying to recover nude pictures from
a slimy photographer.  Her photos are mixed with those depicting
a proposed highway's layout.  The leads to Basinger and
Bridges becoming involved in murder, conspiracy to commit
land fraud, and other lesser crimes.  Worse yet, a group
of ruthless but amusing baddies led by Rip Torn is also
after the highway photos.
There were several things about the film that I liked.
Bridges true love is not for Nadine or new fiancee Glenne
Headly, but for a pathetic nightclub called "The Blue Bonnet",
which has few customers but many unpaid bills.  In one
scene, Bridges makes an escape from the baddies by unleashing
rattlesnakes, perhaps an original concept.  In another
scene, Basinger and Bridges are forced to crawl across
a splintering ladder spanning two high buildings.
Jeff Bridges has my favorite line of the film, "I'll bet
that she's got a husband who's even dumber than she is."
He is unaware that the woman being referred to is his own
wife!
Robert Benton directed and wrote the screenplay.  While
not a household name, he has many good films on his resume,
including "Bonnie and Clyde" and "Kramer vs. Kramer".
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dan Frank
     When we go to the movies, we generally resign ourselves to enjoying the
films in spite of their imperfections.  We say, "I enjoyed this light comedy,
even though it was totally shallow and predictable," or "This was a fun
excursion into empty-minded comic-book-style violence," or something of that
sort.  It's rare to walk out of a movie and not think that somehow it could
have been better.
     NADINE provides such a rare experience.  It stars Kim Basinger and Jeff
Bridges as an almost-divorced husband and wife, who get mixed up by accident in
the schemes of a particularly nasty wrestling promoter, played with a wonderful
mix of debonair sliminess and bewilderment by Rip Torn.  Torn was the best
feature of EXTREME PREJUDICE, and his departure early in that picture was
lamented by many critics.  He eats up the screen whenever he's on, and only the
presence of Bridges keeps him from completely dominating this film.
     I complained in a recent posting about movies that mangle their settings,
acting as if the only unique thing about, say, Chicago is its name.  Movies
like ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING are made by people who have no sense of the
unique contribution a locale can make, above and beyond mere script, to their
mood and tone.  NADINE is set, and mostly filmed, in Austin, Texas, which I've
had the pleasure of making my temporary home this summer.  Since the action
takes place in 1954, the filmmakers "fiftyized" several Austin locations of the
proper vintage to be used for the exterior shots.  When the characters are
supposed to be on Sixth Street, by God they really ARE on Sixth Street: the day
we saw the film, we happened down there, and the block they used (at Sixth and
Brazos) is almost identical to its appearance in the movie.
     There is simply no substitute for authenticity.  Chicago has it, and Texas
has it, and NADINE has it in large measure, both in its settings and its
characterizations.  I wasn't alive in 1954, so I can't compare it to my
memories, but I walked out of NADINE feeling, "That's the way it was!"  It's a
sort of honky-tonk MY FAVORITE YEAR (same year, in fact).
     I'm not going to talk about the plot, except to say that NADINE is a
comedy adventure with a perfectly plausible premise, and that you'll enjoy the
heck out of it.  You can pay real money for this one, folks.
