Title
Review for Crazy/Beautiful (2001)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Robin Clifford
Rich girl meets poor boy and they fall into star-crossed love. This has
been the staple of movies and song for decades and the question usually is:
is he good enough for her? Director John Stockwell does a 180 on this theme
in a story about rich, troubled Nicole (Kirsten Dunst) and poor,
intelligent and hard-working Carlos who find love together, but now the
question is: is she good enough for him in "crazy/beautiful"?
Nicole Oakley is a pretty, troubled and troublesome 17-year old who is
emotionally estranged from her congressman father and her wealthy
stepmother. She is always getting into one jam after another, disdains her
prestigious Pacific High School and seems destined to self-destruct. Carlos
Nunez is a poor, inner city kid who has enough smarts to want to make
something of his life. He voluntarily busses himself, for two hours each
way, to the same school, works very hard and has plans to attend Annapolis
when he graduates. When the two meet, sparks fly, but Nicole's past and her
present abuses may be too much for Carlos to handle.
"A Place In the Sun" and "Love Story" (and the classic 60's song "Down in
the Boondocks" by Billy Joe Royal) come to minds with the poor boy/girl
looking to the ritzy side of the tracks for love and success.
"crazy/beautiful," from the original script by Phil Hay and Matt Manfredi,
twists the tradition rich/poor concept around from what we normally get,
with the poor kid being warned by his friends, family and, hell, even the
girl's own father, that she's no good and will only drag him down.
I like the idea of distorting the old rich-girl/poor-boy yarn to show that
underprivileged is not necessarily a bad thing and having the lap of luxury
and all its perks is not always good. "crazy/beautiful" starts out with the
first tentative meeting between Nicole and Carlos on a sunny beach as she
picks up trash as punishment for driving under the influence. Nicole is
pretty, in a rather haggard way, and, with her troublemaking attitude, soon
gets Carlos into hot water - repeatedly. Just why he would jeopardize his
ambitious, focused future for someone who causes him nothing but trouble is
a problem I have with the story.
There are other issues, too, as "crazy" Nicole is not all that whacked out.
Sure she has psychological and self-esteem problems. She drinks too much
and acts irresponsibly, but I've known people who I considered "crazy" and
they were a lot worse than Nicole. I kept waiting for the girl to really
flip out but, except for one scene when she is awakened from a drunken
stupor by the cops who pulled Carlos over as he (soberly) drove her home,
this never materialized. By the end, when everything is nicely wrapped up,
I was still waiting for her to explode.
The two leads make a nice looking couple but I never believed in the mutual
attraction. Dunst continues to build her acting credentials and is
developing into a young star. Newcomer Jay Hernandez is personable enough,
but does not stand out as Carlos. The rest of the cast is little more than
background noise. Taryn Manning, as Nicole's best friend Maddy, is cute,
has an effervescent personality and is unceremoniously dropped from the
story entirely by the half way mark. Bruce Davison collects a paycheck as
the congressman dad who disdains and ignores his troubled child until,
perfunctorily, they all live happily ever after in the last few minutes.
The only character that rings true to me is Carlos's mom who expressed
maternal, protective volumes with just a look at her son.
"crazy/beautiful" never gets out of the shallow end of the pool with its
tale of star-crossed love. It doesn't grab me, but maybe it will win over
its female teen target audience. I give it a C-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   I've often wondered about the sons and daughters of political
figures--people who are in the public eye to such an extent that
we must learn everything about this vice president's pacemaker
implant, that mayor's intention to move out of his executive
lodging because of marital troubles, and the other president's
infidelities with a woman about his own daughter's age.  I'd be
proud as all-get-out if my dad were a congressman or a governor
or a member of a big city council or even a leader of an online
film critics' organization.  I'd do nothing to make him ashamed of
me.  And yet when President Nixon declared during one
recession that Americans should try to spend their money in the
U.S.A., one of his daughter's goes abroad with every nation's
camera flashing away. Our current president's daughter gets
picked up for drinking with a phony i.d. and the brother of one of
our previous chief executives acts like a mentally-challenged
creep.  Kudos to Chelsea Clinton for deliberately staying out of
the limelight and quietly preparing for her four years at Oxford
University.  But a high school senior named Nicole (Kirsten
Dunst) is quite another story, a messed-up piece of work. 
"Crazy/Beautiful" is her story: she's crazy and her boy friend
Carlos (Jay Hernandez) is beautiful.  Unfortunately the film
directed by John Stockwell from a script by Phil Hay and Matt
Manfredi neither pushes the envelope sufficiently to make the
picture crazy nor do they do much to accomplish the beautiful. 
What happened?  Simply that "Crazy/Beautiful"  comes across in
every scene without exception as a made-for-TV movie, taking
on a subject that might have been controversial in the 1950s, that
of a cross-cultural romance between a serious Mexican-
American lad intent on going to Annapolis when he graduates
from Pacific High School in California and a 17-year-old woman
who acts all too carefree to cover up her depression and even
suicidal tendencies.
   "Crazy/Beautiful" copies a scenario from Antonia Bird's
mediocre 1995 movie starring the bland Chris O'Connell and the
lovely drew Barrymore about teen lovers on the run, with
Barrymore playing the erratic bimbo while Chris is the down-to-
earth Mr. Bland.  Nicole, the son of rich Congressman Tom
Oakley (Bruce Davison), acts wacked-out whether in he spacious
home presided over by a maid or driving to her class in a
stunning high school.  (We know these girls are spoiled staight
away when Nicole's best friend says "I hate this school" upon
pulling into the parking lot.)  She and Carlos meet cute as Nicole
is picking up trash under the boardwalk, community service as
the result of a drug conviction.  It's pretty much love and first
sight, given that Carlos's friends act like idiots when they're
around the fair sex and that Carlos project the kind of stability
that Nicole finds lacking in her all-too-liberal father--who thinks
nothing of her daughter's sleeping around in the Oakley
household.  Carlos's family tries to discourage him from dating a
(gasp) white girl, her race meaning more to them than her
undomesticated behavior while Congressman Tom is concerned
not that his daughter is dated someone with a darker skin than
she but that the ambitious Mexican-American might be ruining his
own life.
   The story proceeds by the numbers, the soundtrack telling us
what to feel in each scene--all of which is a pity given the ability
of these two fine actors who really do send out shock waves
whenever they're together.  For Dunst, this is a step down from
the far more challenging "The Virgin Suicides" though the picture
bodes well for Mr. Hernandez who has been known mostly for his
work on TV.  A teen picture all the way for teens who might be
disappointed after digging more daring fare such as "A.I." and
"Moulin Rouge."
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 97 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by John Stockwell.
Cast: Kirsten Dunst, Jay Hernandez, Bruce Davison, Taryn Manning, Lucinda 
Jenney, Rolando Molina.
2001 - 97 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity, sexual situations, and alcohol/substance abuse).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 30, 2001.
A sophisticated, gritty drama that is notably more grown-up than most 
so-called "teen" flicks, "crazy/beautiful," directed by John Stockwell, has a 
lot going for it, not the least of being Kirsten Dunst (2001's "Get Over 
It"), who is one of the most gifted young actresses of her generation. With 
every role, Dunst fully embodies her characters with a zeal that is as 
charismatic as it is believable. And to prove what a chameleon she can be, 
Dunst has played everything from an ageless vampire (1994's "Interview with 
the Vampire"), to an alluring early-20th century debutante (2000's "Lover's 
Prayer"), to a suicidal teenager (2000's "The Virgin Suicides"), to an overly 
giddy cheerleader (2000's "Bring It On").
Dunst now stars as Nicole Oakley, a rebellious 17-year-old who is apt to go 
on both drinking and substance abuse binges. Nicole, whose father, Tom (Bruce 
Davison), is a California congressman, plays by her own rules, and doesn't 
care what other people think of her. It is this trait of fearlessness that 
attracts "A"-student Carlos (newcomer Jay Hernandez), who must travel two 
hours each morning to attend an exclusive, private co-ed high school, to her. 
They soon begin a whirlwind romance, despite their cultural, financial, and 
personality differences, which isolates them from close parties on both 
sides. When Tom, who has the power to get him into the naval academy he has 
always dreamed of going to, tells him to stay away from the troubled Nicole 
before she brings him down with her, Carlos must ultimately decide how 
important true love is when it means possibly sacrificing his future plans.
As written by Phil Hay and Matt Manfredi, "crazy/beautiful" is a thoughtful, 
if minor, movie that is surrounded by good actors who make the most of their 
respective parts. Aside from Dunst's intimate, accurate portrayal of the 
problematic Nicole, Jay Hernandez amicably portrays Carlos as an intelligent 
young man with a bright future and an undeniable connection with Nicole. His 
is a face to definitely watch in the future. Also breaking the cliche of 
being a one-dimensional parent figure, Bruce Davison (2000's "X-Men") turns 
Tom Oakley into a conflicted man with a daughter whom he unconditionally 
loves, but doesn't know how to help. Lucinda Jenney (2000's "Remember the 
Titans"), on the other hand, is stuck playing Nicole's bitchy, whiny 
stepmother whose welcome wears thin real fast. Jenney offers no help in 
giving her any deeper character shades.
Where "crazy/beautiful" goes wrong is in its unmistakable similarities to 
1995's superior "Mad Love," in which good kid Chris O'Donnell fell for 
mentally ill wild child Drew Barrymore. Not only are full scenes and plot 
developments lifted directly from "Mad Love," but Dunst's spacious glass-clad 
home is even a dead ringer for Barrymore's, complete with a Mexican 
housekeeper. The likeness doesn't stop there; even the very ending is the 
same, with the movie concluding with a brief narration from Dunst that is 
just like Barrymore's. There is a difference between two films sharing a 
resemblance, and downright infringement. Whatever the case may be, the film 
lacks urgency and any original insight into its characters because it felt 
like it had been made just a few years before. 
What must be applauded, however, is its treatment of Nicole, whose behavior 
bordering on alcoholism is accurate and palpable. It's a testament to 
director Stockwell's expertise that he is able to convey so much, while not 
once showing Nicole actually taking a drink. With such a hard-edged 
character, the cutting of material to get a PG-13 rating could have very well 
spelled disaster, but it ends up not affecting the outcome as much as 
expected.
I'd like to say that "crazy/beautiful" is a motion picture worth seeing, but 
it isn't. There is so much that is good it's almost a shame to have to 
chastise it for its cliched storyline. Unfortunately, it is that very problem 
that turns what could have been a sharp, intuitive look at teenage love into 
a movie that has "been there/done that" written all over it.
  - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
    http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman

Author
Laura Clifford
Nicole Oakley (Kirsten Dunst, "Bring It On") is the troubled, substance 
abusing daughter of a Congressman who attends high school in upscale 
Pacific Palisades.  While performing community service cleaning the beach 
as payback for a D.W.I. conviction, Nicole's harassed by a group of Latino 
teens from a poorer part of town, but one of them, Carlos Nunez (Jay
Hernandez), catches her eye.  The good looking, polite young man also 
attends her high school - by travelling on public transportation for two
hours each way, each day - because he wants a good education in order to
attend Annapolis.  These two are "Crazy/Beautiful."
Will the wild, rebellious girl drag down the fine, upstanding young man or
will he snap her out of her self-destructive streak?  "Crazy/Beautiful's" 
conflict resolution is too pat in Phil Hay and Matt Manfredi's ("Bug")
script, but the two leads make the film somewhat engaging.
Of course, first you'll need accept that straight arrow Carlos would give
a second glance to a girl who's usually drunk, gets him into detention at
their second meeting, dances provocatively through the streets of his 
neighborhood, tries to bed him within view of her own father (who mistakes
him for their housekeeper's nephew) and is disapproved of by his entire 
extended family.  Once we're over this little hump, the filmmakers back
off to show more of Nicole's free spirited, artistic side as well as the
root of her problems.
Congressman Oakley takes an interest in the boy who wants to go to Annapolis
and offers to sponsor him.  Carlos unbelievably misses his scheduled meeting
with the man, distracted by a beach outing with Nicole.  When the two finally
get together, he's warned to stay away from the troublemaking Nicole for his
own good.  For some odd reason, Carlos pays more heed to Nicole's father than
his own family.
Director John Stockwell ("Under Cover") may be dealing with an implausible
story, but he does get some fine performances from his cast.  The talented
Kirsten Dunst propels herself through the film in bleary, angry, defiance
gradually letting her natural radiance peak through after time spent with
Carlos.  She's never looked rawer, sporting the bruised, vulnerable look 
of Jennifer Jason Leigh.  Hernandez does his best to appear initially wary,
but we never get a sense of the stress he's been under that would make his
character jeopardize all he's worked for.  Bruce Davison does a good job
as the caring parent who's at wits end.  Lucinda Jenney ("Thirteen Days")
is simply shrewish as Nicole's new stepmom.  Taryn Manning creates a fully
fleshed character as Nicole's best friend Maddy, but the script just leaves
her by the wayside.
"Crazy/Beautiful" is reminiscent of Antonia Bird's 1995 film
"Mad Love" which starred Drew Barrymore as a manic depressive in love with
the upstanding Chris O'Donnell.  While this film is a cut above that abysmal
effort, it's conflict is forced and the resolution is pat.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
        From the first moment we see her raggedly shorn locks, punky
wardrobe, and sense the carefree, brazenly sexual attitude behind it all,
in _crazy/beautiful_ it's clear that Kirsten Dunst is no longer the
little girl who first captured attention with her Golden Globe-nominated
turn in 1994's _Interview_with_the_Vampire_.  However, the most striking
instance of growing up on display in John Stockwell's film is that of the
contemporary teen film.
        Whereas most youth-aimed films are really about pushing a
soundtrack and a "hot" young star's image as they tell another tired tale
revolving around who gets to go to the big dance with whom, Stockwell
actually attempts to tell a character-driven story in _crazy/beautiful_. 
Granted, this story isn't exactly anything new.  Phil Hay and Matt
Manfredi's script centers around that old standby, a romance between two
opposites.  On one end is Carlos Nuńez (Jay Hernandez), a bright student
from a rough L.A. neighborhood who takes a two-hour bus trip in each
direction every day to attend the posh Pacific High.  On the other is
Nicole Oakley (Dunst), who lives in a large Pacific Palisades home with
her Congressman father (Bruce Davison) and his cold new wife (Lucinda
Jenney).  The twist here is that the privileged white girl is the one
with delinquent tendencies and substance abuse problems, and the ethnic
guy from what would typically be "the wrong side of the tracks" is the
ambitious and responsible type.
        Naturally, a deep emotional trauma is at the root of Nicole's
frequent misbehavior, and through her developing relationship with Carlos
(whom she meets cute on the beach as she does community service for a DUI
charge) she is forced to face her personal demons.  Along the way, Carlos
himself also grows and develops into a more mature and independent
person.  All of this could easily be the fodder for an afterschool
special, but Stockwell makes the material big screen-worthy by
underplaying the melodrama.  Unlike most teen films, the pitch is a lot
more subdued and subtle, lending the picture a greater sense of reality.
        But it's hard to imagine Stockwell being able to create that air
of authenticity without his stars.  While her looks have changed with
age, Dunst's acting ability hasn't.  She once again demonstrates her
versatility and depth with her nuanced portrayal of Nicole.  Yes, the
character is yet another one of those bad girls with a heart of gold, but
where most actresses (let alone ones in her age range) can only nail one
side or the other, Dunst is not only believable when either vixenish or
vulnerable, she convinces that these are sides of the same person. 
Charismatic newcomer Hernandez is a find, managing to exude Carlos'
goodness without being a bore.  The pair's likability as individuals and
their honest and unadorned chemistry while together effortlessly generate
a rooting interest in their coupledom.
        Given the formulaic through-line of its story right down to the
neatly cathartic resolution, _crazy/beautiful_ could certainly have used
more of the first half of its title.  But in a climate where
teen-targeted entertainment is mostly concerned with attitude, the fact
that this simple story manages to generate a number of moments falling
under the latter quality alone makes the film worthwhile.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Steve Rhodes
Sometimes acceptance isn't a good idea.  Congressman Tom Oakley (Bruce Davison)
has learned to "accept" (read "give up on") his messed-up, 17-year-old daughter
Nicole, even though he admits that she's destructive, volatile and angry.  As
the almost always wasted Nicole, Kirsten Dunst turns in a gut-wrenchingly honest
performance that reduced me to tears.  If CRAZY/BEAUTIFUL had been made by some
big name director, rather than the perceptive but relatively unknown John
Stockwell ("Cheaters"), Dunst might garner serious Oscar consideration for her
part.  It is one of the best pieces of acting that I've seen this year, but most
people will probably never see it, figuring that the movie is another
forgettable teen comedy.
As the story opens, Nicole is busy cleaning the beach as part of her sentence
for her DUI conviction.  It is there that the wealthy, white Nicole meets Carlos
(Jay Hernandez), a poor Hispanic who is Nicole's exact opposite.  He's a poor
kid who is working hard to get accepted into the Naval Academy so that he can be
a pilot.  Nicole and her girlfriend Maddy (Taryn Manning) see life as one long
party.  They think nothing of skipping class to drink themselves silly, coming
on to strangers and generally shunning any kind of positive behavior.  When
Carlos, who is bused two hours to go to Nicole's rich school, says that he knows
her, she rolls her eyes in a contemptuous flirt and tells him, "Doubt it!" 
Needless to say, Nicole and Carlos become lovers, much to the consternation of
his strict mom.  Nicole's disapproving stepmother is only concerned about her
toddler.  Tom, who has spent his life trying to save the world, hasn't a clue as
to how to rescue his own daughter.  Davison stays away from the clichés so you
go from despising his character to empathizing with his plight.
Nicole, who wins your heart early-on, looks a mess.  With sunken blue eyes,
dirty, scraggly, blonde hair and disheveled clothes, she makes you want to give
her a swift kick in the pants to straighten her out.  But, she's as likeable as
she is infuriating.  In the story's key scene, she takes Carlos to bed as her
father stands outside her glass-walled bedroom.  Carlos is shocked, but Nicole
claims that its okay since her father lets her do anything that she wants. 
Besides, she points out, her father would be proud that she's using a condom. 
Their safe sex is totally Carlos's idea.  Dunst is frighteningly sexy.  Although
Carlos may be safe, you can easily see Nicole getting AIDS or some other disease
from sex or needles.  Reportedly, the director had to cut many scenes in order
to bring it in at PG-13.  Although Nicole carries a bottle around like a young
girl clutching her teddy bear, she is never shown drinking from it or doing
drugs.  Nicole's splotchy face, however, shows the ravages of long, daily hours
of destructive behavior.
Carlos's brother calls Nicole, "the trash girl," since she was picking up
garbage when they first saw her.  It's an apt nickname for more reasons than
one.  With its realistic depiction of teen angst, CRAZY/BEAUTIFUL will break
your heart without ever attempting to manipulate it.  One hopes that after this
part, more directors will offer meaty roles to Dunst, who looks like a young
version of and clearly has the potential to be the next Meg Ryan.
CRAZY/BEAUTIFUL runs 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for mature thematic material
involving teens, drug/alcohol content, sexuality & language and would be
acceptable for teenagers.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
crazy/beautiful (2001)
Kirsten Dunst, Jay Hernandez, Bruce Davison, Herman Osorio, Miguel
Castro, Tommy De La Cruz, Rolando Molina, Soledad St. Hilaire, Lucinda
Jenney, Taryn Manning. Written by Phil Hay and Matt Manfredi. Directed
by John Stockwell. 95 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"crazy/beautiful" suffers from the damned-if-you-do, damned-if-you-don't
syndrome. After a spate of flighty, cookie-cutter teen films, the
romantic drama addresses alcoholism and parental loss along with its
love story. But rather than applaud the production, early reviews have
dismissed it as an overblown "Afterschool Special." Even worse, in the
wake of Federal Trade Commission hearings that blasted the industry for
marketing violent and sexual movies to young people, the studio got a
case of the heebie-jeebies and forced director John Stockwell to
re-shoot scenes and cut footage to "tone things down." Needless to say,
the filmmaker was frustrated. "We were trying to make a cautionary
tale," he told Newsweek, "and we couldn't show the behavior we were
trying to caution people away from."
Regardless, the film works, thanks to exceptional performances from its
lead players and a script determined to transcend stereotypes.
"crazy/beautiful" is quality fare, good enough that I half-expected the
Summer Movie Crap Police to walk into the press screening and confiscate
the print for "failure to incorporate explosions and poop jokes."
Set in Pacific Palisades, Calif., the story follows the burgeoning
relationship between two teens. Every morning and evening, Carlos Nunez
(Jay Hernandez) takes a two-hour bus ride in order to attend Pacific
High School. An honor student and star athlete, Carlos is responsible,
modest and focused as he works on securing a place in the Naval Academy.
All is well until he meets Nicole Oakley (Kirsten Dunst), the daughter
of a rich congressman (Bruce Davison). Nicole is a drunk apparently
hell-bent on self-destruction. Carlos is smart enough to recognize the
danger in getting involved with her, but he is only human and she has
the greatest smile. Plus, as her father notes, she has a real knack for
drawing others into her downward spiral.
As with "Save the Last Dance," "crazy/beautiful" (God, how I hate
lower-case titles) takes situations that look stale on paper and makes
them seem fresh. While noting the racial and social differences between
the kids, the screenplay dances around most of the clichés (there are
still several MTV moments, though). The filmmakers make a point to give
characters that crucial extra bit of shading that turns them into
individuals instead of stereotypes and the actors take it from there.
Cute-as-a-button Dunst forces the viewer to share the pain beneath
Nicole's behavior. She is credible enough that when Dad urges Carlos to
get away from her before she drags him down, I hoped the boy would
listen. As Carlos, Hernandez is a revelation. Hunky without looking like
the product of a Hollywood design team, the young man can really act; we
will see a lot of this guy in the future.
Aside from its title, the biggest problem with "crazy/beautiful" is its
ending, which wraps everything up too fast and too tidy. After carefully
presenting credible characters and situations, the conclusion feels
rushed and lazy. Still, this is the kind of film that deserves accolades
from critics instead of cheap shots. "Afterschool Special" my ass 
"crazy/beautiful" is the real deal.

Author
Annette Cardwell
Just going on the sassy and jangly rock-filled MTV ad campaign for
crazy/beautiful, you'd think that this teen flick was just another She's
All That-style adolescent love story about the popular kid and the
misfit, but this is not just another happy-go-lucky clone.  While the
writing may be a little too self-indulgent with its message-laden
speeches, crazy/beautiful is pretty brave in the subjects it takes on,
and does its best to avoid many teen movie conventions.
Nicole (Kirsten Dunst) is the privileged daughter of a congressman
(Bruce Davison) who remarried to start a new family after Nicole's
mother's suicide.  Traumatized and emotionally alone, Nicole is always
in trouble, and makes a defiant play for wrong-side-of-the-tracks Carlos
(Jay Hernandez from MTV's Undressed soap), a hard-working straight-A
Latino who commutes two hours from East Los Angeles to the Nicole's
ritzy Pacific Palisades high school.
Of course, the film's filled with pat questions, like "Can their
inter-racial, inter-class romance survive?"  "Can Carlos teach Nicole to
love?" and "Will Nicole's dad ever reach out to his troubled daughter?" 
But the writers show smart glimpses into the many sides of some of these
cliché issues.  For example, instead of just going the Pretty in Pink
route where the poor kid feels alienated from the rich kid's exclusive
clique, this time the tables are turned.  Nicole finds herself at a loss
at Carlos' eastside Latino family party.  She realizes she's competing
with other Latina women for Carlos' affection, and that his family and
community could mean more to him than her or her family's money and
prestige.
But those trite themes get played out in a bad way as well, mostly
through poorly written, long, groan-inducing soliloquies.  Case in
point: Carlos delivers a classic "you make me not afraid to be myself"
monologue that could just make you gag.  Fortunately, most of the
non-speech dialogue is decent stuff.  Unlike Kevin Williamson's
tiresome, adult-sounding teen banter, conversations between Nicole and
Carlos are actually very real and often touching.
Much of that realism may be more a result of the truly impressive
performances from Hernandez and most especially Dunst, who plays Nicole
as the fragile party girl who acts out with wild and crazy antics to
dull a heart-wrenching pain.  Even Davison does the best anyone could do
with the often hollow father role, adding depth where the writing for
the character doesn't provide any.
Just keep in mind that -- despite the marketing -- this movie is no
screwball romance, so don't go in expecting to get one.  Instead of
crazy/beautiful, it should be Prozac-addled/beautiful.  In other words,
it's not a good kind of crazy; it's that dark, disturbing kind of
crazy.  In that way, it's hard to say who this movie's intended for,
but, judging from all the puffy red eyes in the screening audience, teen
girls will at least get a tearjerking (and a lame-ass soundtrack by the
likes of Seven Mary Three and Fastball) out of it.
Director: John Stockwell
Producer: Mary Jane Ufland, Harry Ufland
Writer: Phil Hay, Matt Manfredi
Starring: Kirsten Dunst, Jay Hernandez, Bruce Davison, Taryn Manning,
Lucinda Jenney
http://studio.go.com/movies/crazybeautiful/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
SSG Syndicate
Susan Granger's review of "crazy/beautiful" (Touchstone Pictures)
   It's rare to find a teenage love story that appeals to
adults, too, but this saga of a rich, rebellious Congressman's
daughter and a poor Hispanic guy from East L.A. who has faith in her
crosses generational boundaries as it also explores the bond between
parent and child.
   Talented Kirsten Dunst plays Nicole, a sexually-aggressive,
self-destructive teen, who makes a play for Jay Hernandez, as Carlos,
a hunky Latino schoolmate. Raised by a busy politician, Tom Oakley,
(Bruce Davison) and a distracted step-mother (Lucinda Jenney),
Nicole's a damaged, defiant drunk with a D.U.I. record, while Carlos
is well-mannered, respectful, grateful to be able to attend the
suburban school, and determined to get into the U.S. Naval
Academy. Nevertheless, their steamy romance flourishes - much to the
dismay of their parents. His struggling single mother (Soledad
St. Hilaire) is justifiably afraid that flaky, grungy Nicole will
distract her son from his dream of being a pilot, and Oakley agrees.
"I love her but she can be so destructive," he warns. But Carlos won't
give up on Nicole, sensing the deep hurt beneath her angst. With the
intensity of first love, he's truly there for her when she needs
him. And that, in itself, should give parents something provocative to
talk about with their teens, along with the reckless permissiveness
(regarding promiscuous sex, booze and drugs) of Nicole's parents.
    Written by Phil Hay & Matt Manfredi and directed by John
Stockwell, this romantic melodrama, full of sincere performances, is
yet another twist on the familiar inter-racial dating theme explored
in "Save the Last Dance." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"crazy/beautiful" is a serious, syrupy 6, showing that it's not what
you have in your life but who.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
crazy/beautiful tries awfully hard not to be formulaic but fails miserably
in the process.  It's not like we haven't seen this story before - the whole
girl-falling-for-the-boy-she-isn't-supposed-to-love thing can be traced at
least as far back as Romeo and Juliet and as recently as Save the Last
Dance.  crazy is so similar to Dance - the story of a painfully white blonde
girl and dark-skinned boy from a poor neighborhood - that one critic has
already dubbed the film Save the Last Burrito, because, in this picture, the
boy is played by a Latino actor.
crazy's opening credits show us a collage of arty photographs (like Dance,
this cracker also has a creative outlet - photography) before we meet our
two romantic leads.  Carlos Nuńez (Jay Hernandez, MTV's Undressed) spots a
fair-haired cutie picking up trash as part of a community service sentence
for robbing a convenience store.  She is Nicole Oakley (Kirsten Dunst, Get
Over It), a classmate of Carlos' at the predominantly white Pacific High.
She lives in giant glass house overlooking the ocean; he lives in the barrio
and has to take a two-hour bus trip (uphill both ways) just to attend
Pacific.
But wait, there's more.  Nicole's neglectful father is a U.S. Congressman
(Bruce Davison, X-Men) and she's a real problem child.  Daddy can't seem to
get his bleary-eyed, belly-baring beauty to stop drinking, drugging, banging
loads of different guys, or mouthing off to her young stepmother (Lucinda
Jenney, Thirteen Days).  Meanwhile, Carlos is a football star with an Oscar
de la Hoya smile who plans on becoming a Navy pilot (even though he's never
stepped foot on a plane) and has a closet-sized bedroom (complete with bare
light bulb) as well as a very supportive family.  Get it?  It's a twist on
the typical good-girl-dating-the-boy-from-the-wrong-side-of-the-tracks
story.
But wait, there's still more!  When Nicole and her dog-faced girlfriend
(Taryn Manning) drive Carlos back to the barrio for the first time, they
aren't all, like, "Oh my God - these street signs are all in Spanish!"
Instead, the girls hop out of the car and give a lap dance to each patron of
a taco cart.  When Nicole's dad gives Carlos the "Stay away from my
daughter" speech, he's not doing it because he's a racist - he's doing it
because he thinks his daughter is going to screw up this boy's obviously
bright future.
You know, if you really want to break the stereotypes found in these types
of films, do something drastic.  Make the guy the popular black quarterback
and the girl the slutty, pregnant daughter of a drunken crack whore.
Afflict one of them with AIDS.  Make one a serial killer.  Or at least have
a couple of the over-30 Latino females clock in under 300 pounds.  Even
though some of the specifics have changed, crazy is still the same-old
same-old.  If it's a hit, like Dance, you should expect to see a film where
a lily-white poet played by Kate Hudson falls for an Asian gangster played
by Rick Yune.
As bad as Phil Hay and Matt Manfredi's script is (they're both feature-film
rookies), crazy is made somewhat palatable by director John Stockwell, who
wrote and helmed the enjoyable HBO film Cheaters.  crazy is filled with
interesting shot composition and editing, often using nice montages to get
its tiresome point across.  The film also has a bunch of TRL-ready songs,
some of which are embarrassingly effective.  But it's all easily forgotten
by the laughable ending.
Hernandez does well in what should be a breakout role.  Dunst is a great
actress, and she gets a couple of scenes to show off her chops here, but if
you compare any of her weepy drug-addled rants to Traffic's Erika
Christensen, they just don't measure up.
1:35 - PG-13 for mature thematic material involving teens, drug/alcohol
content, sexuality & language
