Title
Review for Diamonds Are Forever (1971)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sean Connery, Charles Gray, Jill St. John, Jimmy Dean,
      Bruce Cabot, Norman Burton, Bernard Lee, Lois Maxwell,
      Desmond Llewelyn
Director: Guy Hamilton
Producers: Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman
Screenplay: Richard Maibaum and Tom Mankiewicz based on the novel
      by Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Ted Moore
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     Released in 1971, DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER was Sean Connery's final
"official" turn as James Bond (although he eventually starred in NEVER
SAY NEVER AGAIN, 1983's THUNDERBALL remake).  After skipping ON HER
MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE, Connery was lured back to the 007 role by an
extremely lucrative offer that made him the highest-paid actor at the
time.  His presence, in addition to a few typically-energetic action
sequences, is about the only thing that makes this film worthwhile,
however.  By the time DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER was produced, the series had
begun to slip into the stagnancy that would mar Roger Moore's first two
outings, LIVE AND LET DIE and THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN.
     For this outing, most of the behind-the-scenes crew from GOLDFINGER
was reassembled, probably with the hope of duplicating the 1964 film's
success.  Guy Hamilton again directed, Ted Moore wore the
cinematographer's cap, and mainstays Richard Maibaum (screenplay) and
John Barry (score) continued their association with the series.  Shirley
Bassey, who belted out "Goldfinger", returned to lend her vocal gifts to
the title song.  Unfortunately, DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER's script
deficiencies precluded a film of comparable quality to GOLDFINGER.
     The seventh Bond movie opens with the British agent seeking out his
chief nemesis, Blofeld (Charles Gray), to exact revenge for the murder
of his wife, Tracy (she was shot during the final scene of ON HER
MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE).  After dispatching Blofeld, 007 accepts an
assignment to investigate diamond smuggling.  Impersonating a smuggler,
he travels from Amsterdam to Las Vegas with fifty thousand carats of
stones for reclusive multi-millionaire Willard Whyte (Jimmy Dean).  No
one knows why Whyte is stockpiling diamonds, but everyone who gets
involved in the smuggling operation ends up dead.  Joining forces with
old pal Felix Leiter (Norman Burton) and "free agent" Tiffany Chase
(Jill St. John), who's also after the diamonds, Bond penetrates Whyte's
private apartments only to receive a very nasty surprise.
     DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER is plagued with problems.  After a promising
start, the story devolves into idiocy.  The parts about diamond
smuggling and a rich eccentric hiding out in a hotel penthouse are fine,
but as soon as the script introduces Blofeld's double and a laser-
shooting satellite, things become laughably absurd, even for a Bond
movie.  The space-based science fiction elements, which are on the same
level as those in YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE, aren't handled nearly as well as
in a pair of later entries, MOONRAKER and GOLDENEYE.  The ending is
anticlimactic, with all of Blofeld's megalomaniacal plans foiled by the
simple expediency of stealing a cassette tape.
     Connery's presence elevates the movie to a remarkably high level,
but that's no surprise.  His Bond is definitive -- a pleasure to watch
even in a sub-par film.  It's easy to like DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER
exclusively because of the lead actor.  Unfortunately, the supporting
cast doesn't give him much help.  Charles Gray isn't sinister enough as
Blofeld (who, like his cat, seems to have nine lives).  In fact, of the
various actors to play this role, Gray's effete interpretation is the
worst.  Then there's Jill St. John, the first American Bond girl, who
gives one of the most irritating female performances in a 007 feature.
Norman Burton is immediately forgettable as Leiter, and Jimmy Dean plays
Whyte like a buffoon.
     DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER's hallmark action sequence is an extended car
chase that begins with 007 zipping across the Nevada flatlands in a
moonbuggy and ends with him careening through the streets of Las Vegas
with a fleet of police cars in pursuit.  There's also an enjoyable fight
scene where Bond is beaten up by two high-kicking women (Bambi and
Thumper).  The ending, while high on pyrotechnics, is low on tension,
bringing Connery's era to a rather dissatisfying conclusion.  The actor
deserved to go out on a higher note, but his tenure as Bond provided
enough moments of quality entertainment to eclipse DIAMONDS ARE
FOREVER's final whimper.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Andrew Hicks
        One of the most entertaining James Bond outings, with Sean 
Connery in his last appearance as 007, is filled with the best of the 
usual Bond gimmicks--the supervillains, death traps, chase scenes, 
helpless women, killer women (Bambi and Thumper... Bambi's mad 
because her mom was killed and Thumper just wants to lash out 
because her foot won't stop twitching) and high-tech gadgets. Q even 
invents one for his own amusement that makes slot machines pay off.
        Yes, Bond's gone to Las Vegas this time to get to the bottom 
of a diamond caper headed by a villain who's perfected a cosmetic 
surgery technique that makes face-cloning possible. Then there are the 
evil homogenized two, Mr. Kidd and Mr. Play... Okay, the other guy's 
name isn't Play, but I've seen way too many Bond movies in way too 
short a time to remember the names of all the criminals. All I 
remember is one of the two looks a lot like Sonny Bono.
        Thankfully, the leading lady doesn't look like Sonny or Cher. 
It's Mrs. Robert Wagner, Jill St. John, who also guest-starred on the 
first episode of the "Batman" TV show as a villainous discotheque 
dancer who was vaporized in the Batcave's nuclear power generator. 
("What a terrible way to go-go," Batman laments.) If you haven't 
figured it out yet, it's my duty to interject a tidbit about "Batman" in 
roughly a tenth of the reviews I write.
        St. John also inspires the best line in the movie. Bond is 
making out with her when a group of bad guys burst into the hotel 
room. "Gentlemen," he says, "I'm afraid you've caught me with more 
than my hands up." Now that's The Man!
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     After killing SPECTRE's Ernst Blofeld in the opening scene of
1971's DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER, James Bond objects to being called into a
case as simple as diamond smuggling.  But there will be much more at
stake.  SPECTRE plans nothing less than an international auction
amongst rival nations with nuclear supremacy going to the highest
bidder.
     The Bond films keep changing the actors who play Blofeld.  This
time it is Charles Gray replacing Telly Savalas, who in turn came after
the much better Donald Pleasence.  Although the series's other
principal actors, Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny, Desmond Llewelyn as
Q and Bernard Lee as M, had long duration runs, Bond's archrival
Blofeld, SPECTRE's #1, is played by frequently changing actors.
     (The Bond film's usual dramatic opening credits are much more
prosaic this time with various shots of twirling and glistening
diamonds plus a few mundane dancers -- a big disappointment for those
of us fond of its normal high energy and visually attractive
beginnings.)
     After the disastrous George Lazenby, Sean Connery, definitely the
best Bond ever, comes back again to act his signature role of James
Bond.  But his heart does not seem in it anymore, and his acting
quality in the Bond movies decreases dramatically after THUNDERBALL.
     Jill St. John, playing a ditzy blonde, brunette and redhead named
Tiffany Case, shows lots of cleavage and gives just the right reading
of her role as a diamond smuggler and Bond companion.
     Lana Wood plays the small part of Plenty O'Toole -- love those
Bond film names so full of sexual innuendo.  Plenty is another of
Bond's love interests in the movie.
     Easily the most bizarre and out-of-place characters are Putter
Smith as Mr. Kidd and Bruce Glover as his sidekick Mr. Wint.  They
follow the diamond smuggling chain and kill off the operatives after
the diamonds have been passed along.  Looking and acting like a couple
of pseudo-country bumpkins, they seem to have wandered by accident from
the adjoining sound stage into the filming of this movie.
     As a Howard Hughes type recluse named Willard Whyte, Jimmy Dean
gives an unusual performance that would have been better cast if the
role had been given to a crotchety, older actor.  The Las Vegas hotel
where he lives is named the Whyte House with Ian Fleming's usual
flourish for names.
     CIA agent Felix Leiter, this time acted by Norman Burton, does not
wear the standard issue, dark spook glasses from previous Bond flicks.
They never make any sense, but I miss them anyway since they were so
deliciously hokey.
     Technology this time includes transparent fake fingerprints so
Bond can impersonate a diamond smuggler without being suspected.
Another gadget changes your voice to sound exactly like someone else's.
For once Q gets to use his own materials when he tries out a tiny
transmitter that allows him to beat the slot machines in Las Vegas.
     The movie does have its frivolity, especially in the chase scenes.
One race of great, silly fun has Bond in a stolen lunar vehicle being
chased by cars and dirt bikes across a moon-like Nevada desert.  As the
cars bite the dust, their doors and frames fly off as the moon craft
speeds away in front of them.
     In a night-time chase scene Bond drives a fire-engine red Mustang
through the neon-lit streets of Las Vegas with a half dozen cop cars in
hot pursuit.  The technique for his escape down a narrow alleyway,
smaller than his car, is a classic.
     DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER runs 2:00.  It is rated PG for a half dozen
mild profanities, cartoonish violence and sexual innuendo and would be
fine for kids around nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, complained about the picture's cuss
words.  He liked the movie but said his favorite of the first 7 Bond
films is still THUNDERBALL.   He hated the two stupid characters in
this one, Mr. Kidd and Mr. Wint.
