Title
Review for Hunted, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Rodney H Morrow
     THE HUNTED is a variation of the old story.  Boy (Christopher
Lambert) meets girl in a hotel bar.  Boy and girl leave and have sex.
Boy is dumped by girl.  Girl is killed by Master Ninja Assassin (John
Lone).  This sets up the whole premise of THE HUNTED.  As turns, out the
Master Ninja Assassin has never allowed anyone to either see him or
live, and Boy makes the mistake of doing both.  But the Boy is helped by
a Master Samurai and his Wife (Joan Chen).
     All in all, THE HUNTED is a fairly interesting concept, but it
is just not handled in the right way.  The script twists and turns
until we find out that the Master Ninja and the Master Samurai are
really a Japanese version of the Hatfields and McCoys.  Still, Lone
puts in a solid performance as the troubled ninja.  He wants to leave
his life, but he must kill more so he can.  As he laments to himself
"Why must I bathe in some much blood to get clean?" Lambert sleepwalks
though his role as the hapless American thrust into this fight.
     As with most movies of the this type the action is key.  And
there a several excellent sword fights, one on train, as Master Samurai
fights a group of Ninjas.  Another good one is when a Police Detective
explains how there are no ninja's anymore in Japan, while we cut to a
group of them killing his officer's to get to Lambert.  But still, THE
HUNTED falls under the heavy weight of an overly pretentious script,
with an ending that is to corny to be believed.  Take it for what it
should have been, a mindless martial arts movie.  Don't pay full price,
or wait until it comes out on video if you really want to see it.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: One of the ten worst movies ever made. Christopher Lambert vs.
evil ninjas in modern-day Japan... and nobody wins.
THE HUNTED is such a bad movie, so completely inept and so totally
brain-damaged that I could almost feel affection for it. I could see myself
showing this movie to friends and getting a good jolly guffaw out of it, if
it weren't also insanely xenophobic and insulting.
Christopher Lambert plays a computer-parts salesman who's on business in
Japan. He meets a slinky young woman (Joan Chen) and has a torrid night of
lovemaking with her -- and then manages to witness her death at the hands
of an evil ninja clan and their leader (John Lone). Apparently they had
some unfinished business that could only be concluded with her getting
slaughtered. Since Lambert is a witness, he's of course the next one to
die.
Let's stop and think about this for a second. If Lambert were in real life
being chased by fanatical devotees to a ninja secret society, he'd have a
lifespan you could only measure with an atomic clock. In this movie, the
ninja manage to kill just about everyone EXCEPT him. I imagine the Japanese
gods smiled down on Lambert and provided him with a Goof Field that
radiates out about ten feet from his body. You know what a Goof Field is:
that invisible zone in which anyone who has intent to do harm to you
becomes a klutz no matter what their real dexterity is.
This is, of course, only the beginning of the movie's problems. Lambert
eventually finds pseudo-safety with a long-haired modern-day samurai
(Yoshio Harada) and his partner -- Yoko Shimada, who you may remember as
Lady Toda Buntaro in SHOGUN. They are the two best things in the movie; in
every scene they have authority and presence, and they actually look like
they belong here, even when dressed in full samurai armor and wielding
bows. The script doesn't know what the hell to do with them.
Lone, as the bad guy, is zero-dimensional. The only bad-guy cliche he has
to wallow around in is the one about how the bad guy always has exotic
women dripping off of him. In THE HUNTED, this is elevated to the level of
an insulting stereotype. What's funny is that the peripheral characters in
THE HUNTED are not sterotypes -- there's a nice little scene with a Tokyo
cabdriver, and a girl in a pachinko parlor -- but many of the main
characters are unsalveageably hateful. Also, the phenomenal instrumental
troupe Kodo has assembled a superior soundtrack -- get the CD -- that
manages to survive despite the drek it's been designed to accompany.
There is an extended battle scene in the middle of the movie that is almost
reason enough to watch the whole thing -- a gory, excellently staged fight
on the bullet train that shows some real imagination for a moment, and then
smothers it by trying to clumsily re-couple the whole thing with the
movie's relentlessly stupid plot. By the time we get to the final showdown,
with Lambert getting to wield his own sword (which, judging from the
ham-handed editing of one scene, was forged in seven hours or so), we no
longer care. We're not even given any definitive information about whether
or not one of the key characters lives or dies!
Someone once said that the key to good art -- good movies, good books,
whatever -- is to start somewhere interesting, end up somewhere
interesting, and show respect for the audience all along the way. This
movie bungles two out of three, badly.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release on 2/24/95 
Running Length: 1:50
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, sex, nudity, language)
     Somewhere, sometime, someone is going to present an intelligent, 
suspenseful look into the role of the ninja in modern day Japan.  
However, if THE HUNTED is an indication, the filmmaker to do it won't be 
J. F. Lawton.  This gratuitously gory tale of clashing ninja warlords is 
so poorly written that it makes another Lawton script, PRETTY WOMAN, seem 
like GREAT EXPECTATIONS in comparison.
     I won't claim there's nothing worthwhile about THE HUNTED.  This 
isn't one of those "so-bad-you-want-to-hide-your-face-as-you-emerge" 
motion pictures.  Here and there, it's possible to distinguish a few good 
points.  Unfortunately, it takes a less discriminating eye to pick out 
flaws.  Not only are they more obvious, but they're in greater abundance.  
     First of all, you'd have to be almost brain-dead to miss the huge 
gaps in plot logic.  When the nasty, totally ruthless, never-before-been-
beaten Kinjo (John Lone) shows up to kill call girl Karina (Joan Chen), 
he pointedly instructs her that she's the only one ever to see his face.  
Then, who should walk in on the tableau but Paul Racine (Christopher 
Lambert), Karina's latest lover, who just happens to have left his keys 
behind in her rooms.  The first thing he witnesses is Karina getting 
decapitated.  Then he becomes the second person in one night to see 
Kinjo's face.  Funny thing, though, is that he survives.  Sure, he gets 
cut up a little, but none of the ninjas bother to finish him off.  
     Racine, a U.S. businessman on a trip to Japan, is played by the 
distinctly un-American sounding Christopher Lambert, who displays the 
same lack of ability in this role that he brought to Tarzan and the 
Highlander.  After hooking up with another top-flight ninja master 
(Yoshio Harada), Racine gets to observe a couple of brutal massacres 
before finally getting to the inevitable duel-to-the-death with Kinjo.  
This grand finale is so absurd that it's laughable.  Among other things, 
it asks the age-old question of how many times you can stick a man with a 
sword, collapse a building on top of him, and smash his head in with a 
stone before he finally stops trying to kill you.
     Once, Joan Chen was a respected actress.  However, after taking one 
too many "meal ticket"-type roles, her career got derailed, and now she 
seems relegated to thankless roles like the one here.  John Lone, another 
slumming actor who has seen better roles, brings some gusto to his 
portrayal of Kinjo.  He's not a great villain, but he's the best example 
of acting THE HUNTED offers.
     As a travelogue of Japan, this film isn't half-bad.  It depicts a 
variety of city and rural scenery, and is nicely photographed (including 
an artsy black-and-white dream sequence).  The lively score (by Motofumi 
Yamaguchi) heightens the picture's visual merits.  Curiously, however, 
considering the action-oriented audience the movie is aimed at, THE 
HUNTED comes complete with a heavy does of subtitles.  For the most part, 
the Japanese characters in this film actually speak Japanese.
     There are many degrees of "bad" movies, from the unwatchable to the 
almost-enjoyable.  Dubious though its entertainment value may be, THE 
HUNTED nevertheless belongs in the latter category.  It's far too 
energetic to be boring, and the endless bloodbaths and swordfights 
maintain a certain level of audience involvement.  In many ways, it's 
like a finely-polished, glossy bauble--pleasant to look at, but only in 
a superficial way, because scratching the surface reveals the tarnish 
underneath.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
