Title
Review for Wise Girl (1937)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
WISE GIRL (1937) Directed by Leigh Jason. Written by  Charles Norman 
& Allan Scott . Photography, J. Peverell Marley. Editing, Jack 
Hively.  Art Direction Van Nest Polglase. Cast :Miriam Hopkins (Susan 
Fletcher), Ray Milland (John O'Halloran),  Walter Abel (Karl) Henry 
Stephenson ( Mr. Fletcher),  Alec Craig (Dermont O'Neil), Guinn 'Big 
Boy' (Mike Williams), Betty Philson (Joan), Marianna Strelby (Katie), 
Margaret Dumont (Mrs. Bell-Rivington), Jean De Briac (George), Ivan 
Lebedeff        (Prince Michael), Rafael Storm ( Prince Ivan), et al. 
An RKO film. 70 minutes.
Miriam Hopkins plays the wealthy society gal who, upon the death of 
her sister, sets out to find her two orphan nieces, in New York's 
Bohemia. She tracks them down in Greenwich Village, living with their 
uncle Ray Milland, a painter. Their abode is one of those houses with 
a courtyard surrounding the apartments. Expectedly, all kinds of 
original, artistic types dwell there. All are colorful, impoverished 
but happy free souls. All are friends, all are sweet and wacky. 
Hopkins wants to get an inside view of her nieces' life, so she poses 
as a poor - indeed broke - woman. Expectedly the kids are darlings 
and wise for their age. Expectedly they and Miriam bond. Expectedly 
Milland and Hopkins get sweet on each other.
Less expected are the turns of the plot, with Hopkins getting a job 
in a restaurant where she throws amorous, posh customers into turmoil,
The film is pure Depression era escapism. Not a great unknown movie 
to discover but still a pleasant 70 minutes with several moments of 
charm and comedy, almost screwball though not fully so. The two girls 
are most cute. They speak French, with a pretty atrocious accent -- 
but who's surprised. Hollywood was ever sloppy with languages, had a 
tin ear and never seemed to invest a little money in 
language-checkers.
The movie's director, Jason Leigh, is far from being high on the 
directorial totem pole. Nevertheless, he has some nice items to his 
credit, such as the pleasant musical That Girl from Paris (1936), 
with Lily Pons (Lucille Ball in the supporting cast), and the 
screwball mystery The Mad Miss Manton (1938), with Barbara Stanwyck 
and Henry Fonda.
Wise Girl inevitably brings to mind several films by Frank Capra, 
notably the next year's  You Can't Take It With You (1938; Oscars for 
Best Film and Best Director) another escapist movie where eccentric, 
happy, non-materialistic "little people" show the rich a thing or 
two.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/
