Title
Review for Sous le sable (2000)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Frankie Paiva
Damn those trailers. Had it not been for the advertising of this film, which
reveals far too much about its contents, I would have been glued to `Under the
Sand'. As it is, the film retains some value, thanks to an excellent performance
by Charlotte Rampling, and a more mature Francois Ozon in the director's
chair.
Marie (Charlotte Rampling) and her husband Jean (Bruno Cremer) lounge on the
beach. She takes a nap while he goes for a swim. When Marie wakes up, Jean is
nowhere to be found. She contacts authorities, but they can't find him either.
Did he disappear to start a new life? Was he killed by accident? Did he commit
suicide? Marie still asks herself these questions a year later, and in order to
move on with her life, she must find some answers. 
It's a fine premise, and this little movie uses it to the limit. The film moves
at a leisurely pace, a bit slow, but relaxing. It's a very visual story, and you
can pretty much just sit back without reading the subtitles. This is mostly
thanks to the excellent camera work by Antoine Heberle and Jeanne Lapoirie, who
shot the film in a dreamy haze, and the lead performance by Rampling.
Rampling is so expressive in her portrayal of Marie, you connect with her
character instantly, despite that she's delusional. The scenes where she
interacts with her husband, who she still believes is alive, are heartbreaking.
She can't quite get over him. They've been married for twenty-five years. The
other actors, particularly Jacques Nolot, are excellent too.
The sex in the film is rather unneeded, but compared to Ozon's `Criminal
Lovers', it's the Disney Channel. 
Likely to cause some discussion afterwards, `Under the Sand' is a fine movie
going experience. While it's hard to recommend as entertainment, it's a fine
adult alternative about how we deal with loss. Ozon seems to ask what you would
do, and that's certainly a hard question to answer. 
Read more reviews at www.moviepie.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Marie (Charlotte Rampling, "Aberdeen") and Jean (Bruno Cremet, "Sorcerer")
are a comfortable, sixty-ish married couple looking forward to a peaceful
vacation at their second home in Lit et Mix.  On their first, full day,
Marie sunbathes as Jean goes for a swim.  Hours later, Marie's initiated
a full scale search when Jean hasn't returned, but no trace of him is
found.  Marie returns to Paris and resumes her life, including chats
with Jean at the end of each day in Francois Ozon's "Under the Sand."
Marie's ex-pat British friend Amanda (Alexandra Stewart, "Frantic")
and her French husband Gerard (Pierre Vernier) try to snap Marie out of her 
denial with a dinner party, where they introduce her to the handsome Vincent 
(Jacques Nolot, "Nenette et Boni"), yet Marie suggests that Gerard accompany
her and Jean to their gym the next morning.  Eventually Marie does begin 
dating Vincent, but she discusses him with Jean and even smiles at Jean, 
hidden behind a bedroom curtain, when she makes love to Vincent.
Slowly, though, reality continues to chip away at Marie's fantasy life.
Her bank advises her that without access to Jean's account, she needs to
reduce her spending.  One of her university students (she's reading Virginia 
Woolf's "The Waves") turns out to be one of the young men who participated in 
the beach search.  Then police arrive asking her to identify the clothing of a 
body they've found washed up from the ocean.  That night, Jean's not at home 
when she returns to their apartment.  Her mother-in-law (Andree Tainsy) cruelly
insists that Jean simply abandoned her out of boredom.  Finally, Marie goes to 
the police, insisting on viewing the body.  Horrified (she's been warned it was
in an advanced state of putrefaction), she laughs when handed a bagged watch, 
insisting that this is not her husband.
"Under the Sand" is a character study and melancholy portrait of aging ('I've
lost my youth,' Marie declares) and loss.  Charlotte Rampling, given the
chance to portray an older, yet still sexual, woman runs with it, bringing
us into the mind of the character.  Her chemistry with Bruno Cremet is
startlingly natural.  As Marie returns from her first date with Vincent,
she sits on the couch with Jean.  'Did he kiss you?' he asks.  The mood the
two create is incredibly intimate and sad.
Ozon ("Water Drops on Burning Rocks," "See the Sea"), who cowrote the
script with Emmanuelle Bernheim, Marcia Romano, and Marina de Van, has
turned in a more mature work than his previous, creepy "See the Sea."
While he cleverly never lets us see Jean enter the water that fateful
day, leaving a number of possibilities - accident?, suicide?, escape? -
open, he definitely tips his hand towards a certain outcome.
Cinematography by Antoine Hiberli and Jeanne Lapoirie ("Water Drops on Burning
Rocks") glides around Marie (their 180 shot as she initially searches the
ocean's horizon for a sign of Jean conveys her panic) or captures Rampling's
exotic face in mood divining closeup.  In an inventive fantasy scene,
Marie imagines Jean's hands massaging her feet while in a state of
auto-arousal.  His two hands become four, then more combined with her own,
becoming almost a one person orgy and recalling Roman Polanski's "Repulsion."
Original music by Philippe Rombi quietly adds to the overall melancholy.
"Under the Sand" is a unique portrait of loss.  It would make an fascinating
double bill with Liv Ullmann's "Faithless" from earlier this year, another 
character study of a woman facing loss for different reasons.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
François Ozon has been busy the last couple of years dickering around
with the crude sensationalism of Sitcom and Criminal Lovers, films that
resemble biting the heads off chickens.  This talented young auteur
offers a welcome change of pace from this recent spate of puerile
shock-value thrillers with the restrained, quietly haunting character
study, Under the Sand.  Ozon's latest feature returns to the quietly
haunting rigor of his first international success, See the Sea:
disturbing, minimalist, perceptive.
Much of the tension in Ozon's best work remains unspoken, or
deliberately unexplained.  In that spirit, he concocts a delicious
mystery in the extended opening sequence as middle aged professor Marie
Drillon (Charlotte Rampling, superb as ever) enjoys an annual summer
vacation to the south of France with her husband of 25 years, Jean
(giant teddy bear Bruno Cremer).  They seem a happy couple, comfortable
in their silences as they go about the routines of putting their chateau
in order, cooking meals, sunbathing on the beach.  Jean goes for a swim
one day, but to Marie's shock, he never comes back.
What became of her husband?  Did he accidentally get caught in an
undertow and drown, or was it suicide?  Or perhaps he never told her how
much he hated her, and just ran away to begin a new life?  Rather than
deal with these questions, Marie returns to her ordinary habits.  Her
friends become increasingly concerned when, six months later, she still
carries on as if Jean remains a part of her life.  With no proof that
he's gone forever, she's happy to delude herself.  Her relations and
colleagues attempt to ignore this unusual behavior, even attempting to
set her up with a new beau (sheepish character actor Jacques Nolot, from
Nenette and Boni).  How long can she go on pretending, and what will she
do if Jean is ever found?
Interesting roles for middle-aged women are hard to come by.  Charlotte
Rampling has been blessed this year to appear as virile, sexually
attractive older women in this formidable performance as well as in
Jonathan Nossiter's intriguing Signs and Wonders.  Marie is not a
particularly wonderful person -- she takes her husband for granted and
treats her would-be lover like dog shit.  But she's smart, graceful,
fiercely independent -- and though she's gone a bit too far consoling
herself in ghostly dreams, Rampling invests her choices with dignity.
The opening scenes bear a passing resemblance to the striking Dutch
psycho-drama The Vanishing, but Ozon quickly slows things down for a
meditative, observational character study that fills the 95 minute
running time.  This is slow, heady stuff that a mainstream audience
might find tedious, but Ozon wisely eschews the obtuse art house
pretensions of Krzyzstof Kieslowski's Blue (another study in mourning). 
Ozon may not always reveal every piece of information, but he keeps his
narrative clear and precise.  At least we know what's being cropped out
of the picture.
Ozon depends heavily on Rampling's performance, which carries him
through sections of Under the Sand that feel overly repetitive.  For all
his talents, he remains more comfortable with the short film format,
struggling to fill the running time of a feature length story.  Still,
if Under the Sand is any indication, Ozon is gaining confidence with his
low-key parables of cinematic dread.  We're looking forward to seeing
where this enfant terrible goes next.  Those crazy French...
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
English Literature professor Marie Drillon (Charlotte Rampling) is 
cheating on her husband, Jean (Bruno Cremer), to whom she has been 
happily married for the past 25 years.  Adultery, a popular French film 
topic, has a potentially interesting twist in UNDER THE SAND (SOUS LE 
SABLE), by François Ozon (CRIMINAL LOVERS).  Jean, you see, is dead, 
having drowned in an ocean swimming accident, a fact that everyone 
except Marie accepts.
Told with minimal dialog and long wistful scenes of crashing surf, the 
thin story doesn't come close to sustaining the movie's glacial pacing.  
Instead of being intriguing, this art house snoozer just becomes 
tedious, seeming much longer than its actual length.  Even if its 
central theme has promise, it's never developed into anything 
compelling.  
Still, you've got to applaud the belief the French have that people, 
even those without model-like bodies, can be sexy, not only after 30, 
but even well after 50!  It's an amazing concept that Hollywood would 
never be comfortable with unless one of the lovers was in his or her 
twenties or maybe thirties.  Seventy-year-old Jean, for example, was so 
chubby that Marie bursts into laughter when first making love to Vincent 
(Jacques Nolot), since he is so light in comparison to her husband.  
She's used to having something approximating a beached whale on top of 
her.  Although she's fond of them both, it's her husband who has her 
heart.  Your heart, however, will likely be someplace else entirely.  
When you're supposed to be caring about Marie, you'll probably find 
yourself more interested in your watch.
UNDER THE SAND runs a long 1:35.  The film is in French with English 
subtitles and in English.  It is not rated but would be an R for brief 
nudity, sex and language and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
David N. Butterworth
Ask me to name a Charlotte Rampling film off the top of my head and I'd be
hard pressed to come up with one, save for Liliana Cavani's controversial
1974 film "The Night Porter" (in which Rampling made a bit of a name for
herself by playing a concentration camp survivor who resumes the
sadomasochistic relationship with her former SS officer, played by Dirk
Bogarde).  But other titles do not as easily spring to mind.  Strange
really, since Rampling has made over 50 films in her 35-year film career.
One look at her latest film, François Ozon's "Under the Sand" ("Sous le
Sable"), and you'll be wondering why she's not more of a household name.
In the film, which pairs the oceanographics of Ozon's 1997 thriller "See
the Sea" ("Regarde la Mer") with the emotional turbulence of Liv Ullman's
recent marital drama "Faithless" ("Trolösa"), Rampling plays a woman, an
English professor, struggling to come to grips with the (assumed) death of
her husband.
Vacationing in the south of France, Marie Drillon (Rampling's given name
as it so happens) and Jean (Bruno Cremer) head down to the beach one
morning.  While Marie remains sunbathing on the sand, Jean takes to the
ocean, but the next time Marie looks up from her book, Jean cannot be found
and is feared drowned.
Marie is so devastated by the loss that she quickly falls into a pattern
of self-denial, acting as though her husband of 25 years were still alive.
This makes life understandably awkward for her friends, her family, and her
future lovers 
Ozon positively dumps the emotional weight of the film on Rampling's
delicate frame and she's more than up to the task.  Often without words,
the 56-year-old British actress (who's still not afraid to do nude scenes)
is able to convey a woman simply unable to face the loss of her beloved
husband.  Strangely enough, although Rampling's performance is second to
none, the character of Marie, while convincing, remains emotionally remote.
 By denying her husband's demise, she quickly puts up a wall around
herself, making it hard for anyone--and especially the audience--to relate
on an emotional level.
The director does, however, use an interesting technique in showing us
Marie's inability to accept the truth: Jean appears as an entity, a living,
breathing human being in Marie's lonely Paris apartment, even though it's
clear he's merely a figment of his wife's hopeful imagination.
"Under the Sand" is an interesting film in that slow, talky, Mediterranean
way, in which little happens in terms of plot development but a lot happens
in the mind and motivations of its central character.  It's cool and
calculated and rather straightforward but every time Rampling's on display
it seems better, somehow.  "Under the Sand" may be the impetus she needs to
stage a comeback, much like what Terence Stamp did with "The Limey," or
what Ben Kingsley, another "forgotten" actor, seems to be shooting for with
the upcoming "Sexy Beast."
Only time and talent (of which Ms. Rampling appears to have acres) will tell.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
François Ozon's latest feature is shocking because it's not the slightest
bit shocking.  Anybody who has seen Criminal Lovers, a crazy cross between
Badlands and Hansel & Gretel, knows Ozon can make films that are just as
controversial and disturbing as Hannibal or Freddy Got Fingered.  But Under
the Sand is quite a departure from Lovers - is it maturity, or the desire to
build an eclectic filmography?  Who knows, but if you're expecting something
similar to Ozon's previous films, you might find Sand to be a bit slow and
tedious.  As long as you don't mind the lack of unsettling content, viewers
should find the film to be an interesting story with a terrific lead
performance.
The film opens with a scene more than a little reminiscent of With a Friend
Like Harry, which was written and directed by Ozon's fellow countryman
Dominik Moll.  It shows a husband and wife driving to their vacation home,
but, unlike Harry, the couple is older, have no children and enjoy a quiet
ride. After taking a break at a rest stop, they finally make it to their
destination without uttering so much as a word to each other.  Although they
travel in silence, you can clearly tell that Jean (Bruno Cremer) and Marie
Drillon (Charlotte Rampling, Aberdeen) are a happily married couple that
have become accustomed to each other's little quirks and routines.
Then again, things aren't always what they seem to be (just ask the guy who
won the last Presidential election).  One day, while enjoying the sun and a
book on a quiet beach, Jean decides to take a swim.  Several hours pass
before Marie notices he hasn't returned.  She alerts lifeguards and the
police, but nobody can find her husband.  Was he done in by the strong tide,
or was foul play involved?  Perhaps Jean was unhappy and ran off to start a
new life in a new city, or maybe he was suicidal.  With no body and no
evidence, Marie and the police are unable to jump to any conclusions.
Sand then flashes forward several months, where Marie has returned to Paris
and resumed her career (she teaches English literature) and her social life.
We see her at a friend's dinner party, where she fields compliments from a
potential suitor named Vincent (Jacques Nolot), but notice that Marie is
still referring to Jean in the present tense.  When she gets home, Jean is
there, and Marie carries on as if the whole beach incident never happened,
leaving more unanswered questions.  Did Jean fake his death for insurance
money?  Is Marie off her nut and imagining that Jean is still alive?  Or
maybe we're seeing Jean in flashbacks?  Things become more mysterious when
Marie has an affair with Vincent and begins to incorporate him into the
routines we previously saw her engage in with Jean.
As the truth becomes clearer and clearer, we're treated to a wonderful
performance from Rampling, who, at 56, still looks amazing, and Ozon's
direction doesn't let you forget it.  People who complain that there aren't
any decent roles for middle-aged women need to check this film out (so do
Gena Rowlands fans, who will be amazed by the resemblance of actress
Alexandra Stewart, who plays Marie's friend).
Although Sand is quite a departure from Lovers in terms of both content and
the way they were shot (the former is almost drab compared to the latter's
flamboyant colors), it's certainly a step forward in Ozon's direction,
leaving the world holding their breath in anticipation of his next project.
1:32 - Not Rated, but contains nudity, strong sexual content and adult
language

Author
Robin Clifford
Marie (Charlotte Rampling) and Jean (Bruno Cremer) have been married for 25
years and, to the entire world, appear to be quite happy together. While
vacationing at their summer home at Lit en Mix in southern France, Jean
decides to go for a swim. When, a little later, Marie turns to look for
him, he is nowhere to be found. A frantic search turns up nothing and Marie
returns home convinced, in her mind, that her husband is still alive in
"Under the Sand."
Charlotte Rampling commands the screen with her character study of a woman
walking the fine line between madness and sanity. The shock over the
disappearance of her husband drives her into a world of denial as she
carries on with her life, believing that Jean is still with her. When out
with friends, she talks of him in the present tense. When shopping for
herself, she picks out a tie that she thinks he would like. Her friends,
especially best friend Amanda (Alexandra Stewart), fear for her sanity.
Marie  undergoes  a  continuous struggle between acceptance and denial over
the  loss of Jean. Her friends realize her conflict and do what they can to
help,  but  Marie's  denial is too strong for anyone, even Amanda, to break
through to her. When she meets Vincent (Jacques Nolot), it appears that she
may,  finally, accept he loss and get on with her life. But, Jean's hold on
her is too strong and she continues to live in her own delusional world.
Rampling gives an unabashed performance as a woman on the brink of madness.
The mental turmoil she undergoes is plainly evident on her face as her mind
battles  between  denial  over  Jean's  disappearance and acceptance of the
fact. Director Francois Ozon uses the actress's exotic looks and expressive
features  to  show the fight taking place within her mind. The actress lays
it  all  on  the line and gives a notable performance. The rest of the cast
does  well  enough  fleshing  out the background, but it is Rampling's film
from beginning to end.
Madness  is a tough subject matter for film and could be a turn off for the
viewer. Films like "Diary of a Mad Housewife" (1970) gave a no holds barred
look  into  the  frightening  world of mental illness and are harsh in that
depiction. "Under the Sand" has the same relentless grip, but with an oddly
hopeful  feel.  Marie  is  a  likable, complex and beautiful character that
deserves  happiness  and  continues  to live in he deluded world where Jean
still  exists,  alive  and  well. Rampling's stunning performance makes you
want  to  believe she is sane, even as she falls deeper and deeper into her
psychosis.
Charlotte Rampling's performance, alone, is worth the price of admission to
"Under the Sand." I give it a B.
For mor Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
robin@reelingreviews.com
laura@reelingreviews.com
