Title
Review for Wohin und zurück - Welcome in Vienna (1985) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ben Hoffman
       This is the third in a trilogy by the Viennese director which is
based on the real-life experience of the screenwriter Stephan Troller,
an Austrian Jew who fled the Nazis prior to WWII, came to the U.S. and
then went back to Austria with the victorious American army, as an
interpreter.
       It is not necessary to have seen the first two of the series as
this is a self contained movie, and is an exceedingly gripping,
well-made film not to be missed.
        The film follows Freddy, its hero, right to his home city but
none of Vienna is like the civilized country he had left, and of course
it is in shambles from the bombings.  As one woman mumbles at the
American soldier, "All you Americans are good at is bombing" as if
Vienna were in no way at fault.
       The "adoption" by the U.S. of Nazi war criminals who are able to
reveal to us Russian secrets, and how the Nazis are brought to the
U.S.  shows the collapse of the ideals the war was supposed to be
about. As one of the officers points out to Freddy, "The Russians
probably are doing the same thing."   The analogy to Kurt Waldheim is
not overlooked.
       There's the family that says they "bought" the pharmacy that
Freddy's parents used to own; the children running after the American
soldiers for chocolates, and the women playing up to them, too, for the
same reason.  There are the black marketeers.  Freddy realizes that he
belongs neither in the U.S. nor in Austria.
        Rather than dwelling on the war, the director explores the
post-war issues.  No one, including the American officers, stays clean
as they compromise their ideals as each new situation arises.
I noted that a banner strung across a street, written in German, was
not subtitled: "Welcome the Red Army, Liberators of Vienna."   Just one
more compromise and adjustment to new life by the Viennese.  Not to be
missed.
