Title
Review for Gummo (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dennis Schwartz

GUMMO (director:Harmony Korine; writer: Harmony Korine; cinematographer:
Jean Yves Escoffier; cast: Jacob Reynolds (Solomon), Nick Sutton
(Tummler), Jacob Sewell (Bunny Boy), Darby Dougherty (Darby), Chloe
Sevigny (Dot), Carisa Bara (Helen), Linda Manz (Solomon's Mom), Max
Perlich (Cole), Bryant L. Crenshaw (Midget), 1997)
This original youth film, that has the look of a pseudo-documentary but
is a work of fiction, with the nonprofessional actors seemingly changing
mid-scene from reading a script to doing ad-libs, fails to answer the
simple questions I put to it about what it is trying to accomplish. This
is director and writer, Harmony Korine's (screenwriter for Kids), debut
film as a director, accomplished with all the verve and necessary shock
and schlock he can muster. What results is a pointless but engaging romp
through a Midwestern fictional suburban city, Xenia, Ohio, and its
dysfunctional inhabitants, mostly white redneck youth, who either seem
retarded or prone to violence, as they are searching for something to do
with themselves in a city still suffering from the devastations of a
tornado. The film was actually shot not in Ohio but in Korine's
hometown, outside Nashville, Tennessee.
The film opens to a shaky home video footage of a tornado that passed
through town and killed some of its inhabitants, as we view some of the
damage and hear the youngsters cursing. We then mainly follow two
youngsters (the sallow looking Jacob Reynolds & Nick Sutton-discovered
on a troubled teen episode of Sally Jessy Raphael) who kill cats and
sell them to a supermarket that sells them to a Chinese restaurant. The
rest of the time, they sniff glue, pay for sex with an older woman, and
take one of their Granny's off a life support respirator, thereby
killing her.
Another odd character, Jacob Sewell, plays a boy dressed in pink fluffy
rabbit ears who pisses down on traffic from a bridge and walks through
town playing toy gun games with some little kids, looking like he's lost
his marbles. Korine is non-judgmental about any of his characters. But
is that necessarily a good thing?
What saves this film from being a complete absurdity, is the raw energy
exhibited by the director, as he is on the cutting edge of cinema
verite, showing the pent-up hostility and alienation these trashy young
people have. He seems to be painting his words with images of the most
freakish things you can see in America's wasteland, and not caring
whether you believe what you are seeing or not--his aim seems to be to
shock the audience and for the audience to respond and say how "hip" he
is to be showing us all these revolting and boring images. But is that
enough to make this a satisfactory film?
His characterizations of people are all off-the-wall, such as the
retarded woman who treats a doll as her baby or the albino cook who
proudly says Patrick Swayze is her favorite movie actor and she would
pay to have him touch her. Then there is the chubby, painted,
simple-minded housewife who is sold by her husband (Max Perlich) as a
prostitute to our very young protagonists. A drunk gay man (Korine) who
tries to seduce an encephalitic black dwarf (Crenshaw). Two skin head
teens senselessly punching it out with each other for an interminable
amount of time in their kitchen for fun and macho pride. And, the
sisters (Darby & Chloe), preoccupied with making their nipples grow
bigger, as they put duct tape on them and then pull it off, so as to
make them stick out. They are shown in another scene, fondled by a
pervert, who is pretending to help them find their missing cat. But by
showing all these freaks, is the director not just using them without
any purpose but to exploit their oddness?
Linda Manz as Solomon's Mom, does a bizarre tap dance, and has a strange
way of raising her son as single-parent--jokingly pointing a gun at him
to try and get him to smile. Is this funny scene a comment on
single-moms?
The film has an attention disorder disturbance of its own, as it keeps
going at random from one vignette to another, without any deciferable
plot or storyline, which should be a real treat for heavy metal
enthusiasts with low attention spans and those who respect the personal
creative nature of film and can overcome the depravity of what they are
seeing and its immature fixations, and be impressed with the film's
originality. For those lucky souls, they have found a film that is a
rarity. But have they found a good film?
Others who might like this film, could be taken in by the audaciousness
of the director's style and the fast-pace of the film and its easy
disposable use of images. But to its credit, the film does capture some
of the fears the youths have about growing up and it does show that
there are no role models around to help the children. But does the
filmmaker really care about what he is seeing?
This film will probably be viewed as one that you either hate or love,
and no one can convince you otherwise. Since I was caught being in a
voyeuristic mode by some of the film, then found myself tuning it out as
I became bored with it; I, therefore, can only say that the film did not
work for me. It is hard for me to warm up to those who kill cats, yet I
wanted to see how the minds of such people work. That I found out. Their
mind's don't work. Which is the problem I had with watching the film, as
I felt that I didn't need a mind to see it.
This film lacked the needed pathos to make the youngsters' story seem
more than a provocative freak show; it failed to offer some meaning to
their life, which resulted in giving the film a disjointed look, even
though Korine should be applauded for sticking to his personal vision.
But, the final question is, do you think the director is really
interested in showing us anything but a freak show?
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews "
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Harmony Korine.
Cast: Jacob Reynolds, Jacob Sewell, Nick Sutton, Chloe Sevigny, Darby 
Dougherty, Carisa Bara, Linda Manz, Max Perlich, Harmony Korine, Ellen 
M. Smith.
1997 - 95 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, nudity, and profanity).
Reviewed October 29, 1998.
Harmony Korine first made a splash into the film world by writing 1995's 
raw, critically-acclaimed, "Kids." It was obvious he had a talent for 
writing, judging from that picture, but could he direct? All doubts of 
this question were quickly diminished for me after seeing his debut, 
"Gummo," which was my favorite film of 1997, and one of my top 5 of the 
decade. It is a film experience like no other, a movie for which the 
word original was clearly invented for.
"Gummo," breaks all the rules of filmmaking. It mixes all film stocks, 
as well as occasionally adds documentary-style sequences. It does not 
have a nicely packaged plot and characters, but instead, is a series of 
fascinating, invigorating vignettes that form a mosaic of the small, 
backwoods town of Xenia, Ohio, where a disasterous tornado hit a few 
years before. The main people we follow, although there are many, many 
more, include two teenage boys (Jacob Reynolds and Nick Sutton) who kill 
cats and sell their corpses to a supermarket for money; three sisters 
(Chloe Sevigny, Darby Dougherty, Carisa Bara), two of which are albino; 
a lowlife (Max Perlich) who pimps his wife, who has down-syndrome; and a 
mysterious boy (Jacob Sewell) who wanders the town wearing big, pink 
bunny ears.
There is not much else that can be said about the "story," because there 
is none on the surface. One of the greatest delights of "Gummo," is 
trying to figure out what everything means and what the underlying 
themes are. Much of what I have described may sound offensive, like the 
cats being killed, and to some people, I am sure it will be. After all, 
that is why when originally released, the critics either thought it was 
a piece of vile trash or a piece of cinematic brilliance (I am in the 
latter category). Ultimately, some of the best movies are those that 
aren't afraid to be different, and aren't afraid to take chances, even 
if it means outraging some audiences. 
Another one of the biggest treats of "Gummo," is that you could watch it 
over and over again, just so to catch all of the different elements. 
There are so many things going on, and so many layers, that by the 
film's end, it feels like I actually had taken a trip to Xenia and 
learned a great deal about its history (even though the film is 
fictional, and actually filmed in Nashville). There is also a great deal 
of humor, some of which is very funny and obviously not all of it 
scripted. One particular scene involving an interview with a real albino 
woman is hilarious, especially when she says her favorite actor is 
Patrick Swayze. "I would actually pay money to touch him." 
The performances, some of which are by non-actors, all seem extremely 
natural, for the most part, and many of the scenes are done so perfectly 
and accurately that it felt like I really was watching a documentary, 
albeit one that featured quite a few dysfunctional, but always 
interesting, individuals. Chloe Sevigny, who also had the duty of being 
costume designer, is one of my favorite actresses (after her winning 
roles in this, "The Last Days of Disco," and the otherwise mediocre, 
"Palmetto"), and she acts so differently here that it's like watching a 
different person. Linda Manz, in her first role since 1980's "Out of the 
Blue," is memorable and rather touching as a mother who mourns for her 
dead husband by doing a tap dance in front of a mirror in the basement.
It is difficult to explain "Gummo," since it is so completely innovative 
and unconventional. Director Korine is truly a genius when it comes to 
the cinema, and he has said that he made the film not to please anybody, 
but just to make something that he himself would want to see. And 
through the countless bizarre and absorbing vignettes, is a message, I 
think, that is closely related to that of the message in, "Kids," even 
though it was more accessible in that film. It is a film not about a lot 
of strange people in a town, but a film about the world in general, and 
one that has a great deal to say about the loss of childhood innocence. 
Saying that, "Gummo," is reminiscent of the mindblowing, controversial, 
virtuoso 1928 short film, "Un Chien Andalou," by Luis Bunuel and Salvador 
Dali, which is now considered a classic, is probably the highest 
compliment I could give it. When that film was released, people were 
outraged at some of the images featured in it, from dead donkeys rammed 
into a piano, to a woman's eye being slit open in close-up. It was 
disturbing, for sure, but what those viewers didn't realize was that 
Bunuel and Dali wanted to tell the story of a confused man's identity 
crisis. You just have to look underneath the eccentric, often grotesque 
surface, to uncover the deep meaning it was trying to say. I have a 
feeling Korine would easily understand that.

Author
Alex Fung
GUMMO (Fine Line - 1997)
Starring Jacob Reynolds, Nick Sutton, Jacob Sewell, Darby Doughtery,
  Chloe Sevigny, Carisa Bara, Linda Manz, Max Perlich
Screenplay by Harmony Korine
Produced by Cary Woods
Directed by Harmony Korine
Running time: 88 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Along with Antonia Bird's PRIEST, the film which stirred up the most
   controversy in 1995 was undoubtedly Larry Clark's KIDS, an
   unflinching portrayal of youth alienation which rocked the
   establishment and provoked much heated debate on whether the film was
   an important social commentary on the state of youth in America
   (publications no less than the New York Times screamed "A wake-up
   call to the world!"), or merely an exploitative, sensationalistic
   piece of work.  KIDS, originally a Miramax release (which by that
   time had been acquired by the Walt Disney Corporation), stirred up so
   much trouble for its parent company that upon receiving the dreaded
   NC-17 rating from the MPAA, a one-shot spinoff distribution arm,
   Excalibur Films, was created by Disney solely for the unrated
   domestic release of the film.
   While the film was helmed by photographer Larry Clark, the vision for
   KIDS was that of Harmony Korine, who wrote the screenplay for the
   film while still in his teens.  Mr. Korine, now 23, makes his return
   with his feature film directorial debut of GUMMO, an indulgent,
   highly experimental piece of work once again centered around
   disaffected, lower-class youth in America.
   Mr. Korine has proclaimed that film is the ultimate collage artform,
   and his adherence to this sensibility is in clear evidence in GUMMO;
   the film lacks any sort of conventional narrative structure, and is
   instead a virtual kaleidoscope of varying images and sequences.
   Without a central viewpoint, GUMMO is essentially a mishmash of
   outrageous material which is clearly intended to shock and provoke
   its audience.
   As far as one can piece together, GUMMO is set in Xenia, Ohio, a
   conservative town devastated by a 1974 tornado -- this is alluded to
   in the film by some grainy handheld, presumably amateur footage of
   the storm in action which bookends GUMMO -- which is depicted as an
   amoral, impoverished, low-class neighbourhood perhaps only a tiny
   step or two above trailer park territory.  Parental guidance and
   authority figures are ineffectual, misguided, or altogether absent,
   and the youth of the town are essentially given free rein to do as
   they please.  The film introduces the audience to the repellent yet
   oddly compelling daily activities of various adolescents one would
   typically make conscious efforts to avoid in reality, and while GUMMO
   plays out as a series of generally unconnected vignettes, three
   groups of recurring characters come to the forefront of the film:
   three bleached blond sisters Dot (Chloe Sevigny, who also acts as the
   film's costume designer), Helen (Carisa Bara), and Darby (non-actor
   Darby Dougherty), who aimlessly kill time with such bizarre exercises
   (which presumably aspire to be titilative) as attempting to enhance
   their areolae through repeated applications of electrical tape onto
   their breasts; a strange, aphonic skateboarder called Bunny Boy
   (non-actor Jacob Sewell) who suitably sports a headpiece sprouting
   rabbit ears and lingers on the outskirts of the action; and Solomon
   (Jacob Reynolds, genuinely frightening-looking) and Tummler
   (non-actor and reforming paint sniffer Nick Sutton), two nightmarish
   boys who prowl around on their bicycles like latter-day dementedly
   twisted versions of Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn, in search of
   stray cats to kill and sell to the local butcher in exchange for
   solvents to inhale or money to give to Cole (Max Perlich), a local
   who pimps his retarded sister out of his suburban home.
   An early scene in GUMMO perfectly encapsulates the film's aesthetic.
   The vignette introduces Bunny Boy lingering at a fenced highway
   overpass: with his giant set of pink bunny ears and his blank,
   youthful appearance, he seems very much like an innocent cypher, an
   anomalous presence amongst the bleak, drab concrete backdrop.
   Suddenly, in an unprovoked paroxysm which is in part startling and
   admittedly bemusing in its audacity, we see him in turn spitting onto
   passing automobiles, violently kicking at the protective fencing in a
   bout of primal destructiveness, urinating from the overpass onto the
   highway below, and dangling precociously from the overhead fencing.
   Mr. Korine's GUMMO is evidently a reactionary piece against the
   conforms of traditional filmmaking technique.  While the film defies
   a conventional narrative and generally lacks a central frame of
   reference, it also dares to combine 35mm, video, and Super 8 footage
   and Polaroid photographs in its visuals, and its sound mix is pushed
   up to a point where the film occasionally becomes physically painful
   to listen to: a prolonged sequence where two preteen boys are
   screaming a bevy of astonishing worldly profanities at a prone,
   "dead" Bunny Boy is almost unbearably uncomfortable to endure.
   In attendance with his film at the 1997 Venice International Film
   Festival, Mr. Korine caused a stir when he proclaimed that he hated
   actors only to reverse himself minutes later: "Never mind, I like
   actors."  A few days later, at the 1997 Toronto International Film
   Festival, he apparently changed his mind again, asserting "I hate
   actors."  Whatever his sentiment towards professional actors may be,
   Mr. Korine's use of amateur actors and his childhood friends in GUMMO
   is occasionally effective in capturing the aura of authenticity the
   film generally strives for, but all too often his performers appear
   exceedingly conscious of the camera during inopportune naturalistic
   moments, and tend to focus their performances towards showmanship.
   The ability to improvise can be a difficult task even for seasoned
   actors, and for the most part the non-professionals are woefully
   inept when called upon for spontaneity; Mr. Korine himself is a chief
   offender in a terribly awkward scene which arbitrarily results in him
   pouring a bottle of beer upon himself.
   While there can be no doubting that GUMMO profiles a stunning
   collection of deviant characters -- indeed, there are no customary
   'normal' characters to be found -- and features outrageous acts of
   casual violence and depravity which are sure to offend some (cat
   lovers beware), the film is sporadically raucously funny and never
   becomes dull.  The sheer temerity in the behaviour of those depicted
   in GUMMO is often hysterical -- a particularly memorable moment is
   when a group of men take leisure in beating the hell out of a metal
   chair -- but it is all too clear that we are meant to gawk at, not
   empathise with, the characters in the film.
   Given GUMMO's distinct lack of commercial elements and its inherently
   controversial, vaguely disturbing nature, some may end up wondering
   why Cary Woods and Fine Line commissioned the film, even at its
   reportedly modest budget of $1 million.  The answer would seem to be:
   Harmony Korine, who remains a much-coveted property as a
   screenwriter, with two projects already on tap.  While $1 million may
   eventually prove to be a small price to pay to establish a long-term
   relationship with a talent like Mr. Korine, one would have to
   conclude that it's unlikely that another similarly indulgent film
   would be condoned in the future. 
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"The separate forms of social behaviour that we associate with film and
 television are also starting to break down..." - Jonathan Rosenbaum, 1979

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Harmony Korine / Screenwriter: Harmony
Korine / Stars: Jacob Reynolds (Solomon), Nick
Sutton (Tummler), Jacob Sewell (Bunny Boy), Darby
Dougherty (Darby), Chloe Sevigny (Dot), Max
Perlich (Cole), Carisa Bara (Helen), Linda Manz
(Solomon's Mom) / MPAA Rating: R / Review: No
Stars (out of ****).
Rest assured, it is never too late for the
cinematic medium to hit a new low.
The bottom rung of the moviegoing ladder, which
has been littered with such lonely disgraces as
"Caligula" (1980) and "I Spit On Your Grave"
(1978), must now  make room for "Gummo," the
atrocious and horrendously pretentious new "film"
from Harmony Korine. Apparently, Korine needed
more than the fifteen minutes of fame he garnered
for writing the screenplay for "Kids" (1995),
Larry Clark's effective, but overpraised
examination of disillusioned youth in New York
City.
"Gummo" represents everything that can possibly be
bad about a movie. It revels in the filth and
squalor of the worst variations of human
existence, without giving any true insight or
understanding about the predicaments of its
pathetic characters. Some have (laughably) called
the movie an attack on bourgeois taste and values,
but one doesn't need to look so high. "Gummo" is
an all-out assault on fundamental human decency,
and worst of all, it's not funny, interesting, or
in the least bit entertaining. It has a sort of
curious shock value for all of ten minutes, then
it just bogs down into its own rut of
grotesqueries.
The movie is filled with slightly related
vignettes that take place in the small,
dilapidated town of Xenia, Ohio, all of whose
residents are either uneducated rednecks, morally
depraved children, or the mentally incapacitated.
"Gummo" opens with shaky home video footage of a
tornado that hit Xenia in 1974, which I suppose is
intended to explain why the town is a spiritual
wasteland -- the tornado must have blown away all
forms of intellect, decency, and humanity.
Throughout the film's seemingly endless duration,
we are introduced to several recurring characters
going about their sad, daily routines. First we
see Bunny Boy (Jacob Sewell), a scrawny,
bare-chested youth who wears pink rabbit ears on
his head (Why? you might ask. Why not?). During
the opening credits we get to watch him pissing
and spitting off a bridge onto the cars below him.
How insightful.
Then we move on to Solomon (Jacob Reynolds) and
Tummler (Nick Sutton), two freakish-looking
teenagers who ride their bikes around the
neighborhood, looking for stray cats to kill and
sell to the local restaurant supplier. Solomon is
a short kid with a head and face that look two
sizes too big for his body. Tummler, who is tall
and lanky with peach-fuzz sideburns, is played by
Nick Sutton, who Korine first saw on an episode of
"Sally Jesse Raphael" about kids who sniff spray
paint.
I think everybody associated with "Gummo" has been
sniffing a lot of spray paint, especially the
self-professed 23-year-old "artist" responsible
for writing and directing it. Of course, Korine is
not content to sit behind the camera (even though
his name appears three time larger than any one
else's during the opening credits), so he appears
in one pathetic scene as a drunken kid making
clumsy, homosexual advances on a black dwarf. The
movie also features several people who are
mentally challenged in some way, including one
girl with Down's Syndrome and another woman who is
rented out by her husband (Max Perlich) as a
prostitute to the neighborhood kids.
The most sickening thing about "Gummo" is not what
transpires on-screen; there have been other movies
far more repugnant than this one (try Pasolini's
"Salo"), and it really isn't good enough to be
morally reprehensible. What makes the film so
nauseating is Korine's pretension that this is
some kind of new art form that he has privileged
us with. You only need to hear him in one
interview to understand how full of himself he
really is.
Just as a sampling, here are his thoughts on film
schools, which incidentally have produced such
real filmmakers as Martin Scorsese, Oliver Stone,
Francis Ford Coppola, and Steven Spielberg: "I
hate that shit. It's eating the soul of cinema.
Filmmaking has become like a process, and it's all
garbage. All these rich kids who were going to be
doctors now want to be filmmakers, but they have
very little life experience and they're just
writing really shitty wit for each other."
According to Korine, "Gummo" represents a "new
kind of film with a new kind of syntax." That
statement is about as ridiculous as the fact that
producer Cary Woods (who actively defends the
film) actually managed to scrape together $1.3
million to get this film made.
For those under the misconception that they're
seeing something original or groundbreaking in
"Gummo," that Korine has somehow recaptured "the
soul of cinema," let me clear a few things up.
Todd Browning learned the value of using human
oddities for cinematic shock value way back in
1932 when he made "Freaks." "Boldly" mixing film
stocks is nothing new. John Schlesinger did that
back in 1969 with "Midnight Cowboy," and Oliver
Stone has been making it his stock and trade for
the last decade. And making fun of poor white
trash has been a staple of television talk shows
and tabloid newspapers for years. Even the
gross-out factor is old. John Waters pioneered
that back in '72 with "Pink Flamingos," and at
least he was smart enough to do it with a sense of
humor.
Korine once said about moviegoing, "I want to feel
hatred, disgust, anything but boredom." I assume
that this was the major imperative behind making
"Gummo," which says much about him as a filmmaker.
What it says is this: he is incapable of
alleviating boredom without being disgusting and
repulsive, which points not only to a fundamental
lack of true creative energy, but to a really sick
mind.
I suppose we can all take comfort in the fact
that, even at its minimal budget, "Gummo" still
bombed at the box office and lost money, so maybe
it will be a long time before anyone funds another
one of Korine's so-called films. Let's hope so.
