Title
Review for View to a Kill, A (1985)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Roger Moore, Christopher Walken, Tanya Roberts, Grace Jones,
      Patrick MacNee, Patrick Bauchau, Fiona Fullerton,
      Desmond Llewelyn, Lois Maxwell, Robert Brown
Director: John Glen
Producer: Albert R. Broccoli and Michael G. Wilson
Screenplay: Richard Maibaum and Michael G. Wilson
Cinematography: Alan Hume
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: MGM/UA
     A VIEW TO A KILL represents the farewell bow of two long-time Bond
film actors:  Lois Maxwell, who portrayed Miss Moneypenny in all
fourteen official movies from DR. NO to this one, and Roger Moore.
While Moore's stamp on Bond was never as memorable as Sean Connery's,
seven pictures and thirteen years gave him the time and opportunity to
re-shape the British agent in his own image -- something he did with the
likes of THE SPY WHO LOVED ME, MOONRAKER, and FOR YOUR EYES ONLY -- the
best entries of his tenure.  But all eras end, and A VIEW TO A KILL
lowered the curtain on this one, opening the door for Timothy Dalton to
take the role.
     A VIEW TO A KILL is often numbered among the worst of the series,
but, upon closer inspection, this film is a vast improvement over
OCTOPUSSY.  Even though Moore sleepwalks his way through the part,
making it apparent that he should have departed two films ago, and Tanya
Roberts can't act to save her life (although she certainly can scream),
we're back to a more conventional, straightforward Bond than the
convoluted mess of the previous movie.  The stunts are more spectacular
than ever, Christopher Walken is a chilling psychopath (a role he has
become intimately familiar with over the years), and Grace Jones is
viciously effective as his sidekick.
     Walken plays Max Zorin, a brilliant-but-unstable industrialist who
intends to corner the market on computer chips by destroying Silicon
Valley with an earthquake.  Bond is sent out to stop him, hopping from
Europe, where he's partnered with Tibbet (Patrick MacNee), to the United
States, where he joins forces with geologist Stacey Sutton (Roberts, the
only ex-"Charlie's Angel" to play a Bond girl).  Locations include
arctic Russia, Paris, and San Francisco.
     The film opens with a lively, fast-paced chase across a snowscape,
with Bond using skis, a snowmobile, and an improvised snowboard to
escape his attackers.  John Barry has a little fun with the music here,
inserting some forty seconds of the Beach Boys' "California Girls" as
007 zips down a mountain and across a small pond.  This is one of the
series' better pre-credits sequences, and provides a solid intro to
Duran Duran's chart-topping title song.
     Trying to do a few things that haven't previously been attempted
with Bond, A VIEW TO A KILL features a pursuit through the Eiffel Tower
that ends in a death-defying leap, an out-of-control horse race, a road
chase with 007 in a fire engine, and a struggle at the top of the Golden
Gate bridge that has Bond fending off a blimp.  There are conventional
action sequences as well, including a car chase through Paris and
several energetic fist fights. These thrills and stunts are the real
reason to see this film.
     A VIEW TO A KILL concludes Roger Moore's reign as 007 on a
significantly higher level than it began (with LIVE AND LET DIE),
leaving all that the actor brought to the role -- both good (his sly
charm) and bad (his fatuousness) -- to posterity.  Unlike Connery, Moore
never said "never again", but, despite his fans' wishes, it's highly
improbable that he'll ever come back for another engagement.  A VIEW TO
A KILL is the last time this Bond will be in our sights.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In a fast chase high atop the Eiffel Tower, James Bond, in 1985's
A VIEW TO A KILL, climbs the stairs in pursuit of the killer known as
May Day.  Just when he's about to capture her, she takes a flying leap
to escape.  With a striped parachute to break her fall, she glides
easily to the ground.
     The killer, played by the strikingly tall and ultra-macho Grace
Jones, has jet-black hair shaped like "Winged Victory."  With Jones's
rippling muscles and her sinister and sexy scowl, her acting is best
when left to the physical.  When she speaks, her limitations as an
actress become immediately obvious.
     Roger Moore, still at the peak of his Bond form, shows no sign of
tiring of the role.  (Okay so he's not and never was Connery's equal.)
But this is Moore's last outing as the world's greatest secret agent.
     Christopher Walken plays a rich Swiss industrialist named Max
Zorin, a mean blonde with a big head of hair, who lives in a palace
that the French kings would have envied.  Even with all his riches, he
scams to fix horse races so that an inferior bred horse can win.
     Zorin's biggest scheme includes the ending of "the domination of
Silicon Valley."  So how is he going to wipe out the heartland of
American chipdom?  Well, just remember it's in California.  You can
figure out the basic idea.
     Walken is surprisingly underutilized and restrained in the film.
Why director John Glen didn't let Walken cut loose remains a mystery?
     One particularly imaginative sequence in the picture has Bond
about to be drowned in a sinking car.  He stays alive by sucking the
air from one of the tires until the bad guys leave the shore, figuring
he must have died.
     Bond films delight through their travel views of luscious locales
as well as their action.  In this episode, in addition to Paris, we
have a magnificently sunny San Francisco, albeit mainly the touristy
Fisherman's Wharf area.  Dozens of San Francisco police
black-and-whites bite the dust when they chase a hijacked fire truck
with Bond and his female companion, played by Tanya Roberts, going
across the city's hills and bridges.
     With a strong cast of supporting characters, including Walken,
Jones, and Patrick Macnee from "The Avengers" and with Moore in fine
form, the movie, nevertheless, is often a snoozer.  The action
sequences from steeple chases to fast inflating dirigibles are
imaginative, but the story never establishes any rhythm or builds much
sustained energy.  The net result is a story that has us yearning for
those much older Bond films that never lost your attention.
     A VIEW TO A KILL runs 2:06.  It is rated PG for comic violence and
sexual innuendo and would be fine for kids around nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, gave it **, saying it was too hard to
follow.  His favorite part was Q's little robot.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This is one of the weaker James Bond movies out there, but 
it's still not that bad, if you don't mind a movie with a running time of 
over 130 minutes. It would have been better with about thirty minutes 
of boredom cut out and if, perhaps, the director had coaxed a better 
performance out of Christopher Walken. I like the guy and think he's a 
decent actor and definitely one of the strangest individuals on the 
planet (good to know I'm not alone), but as villain Zorin he's way too 
bland.
        Roger Moore makes his seventh and final appearance as 
James Bond, and I think it was about time for the guy to step down. In 
this one, he just doesn't seem too enthusiastic about being the single 
most indestructible babe magnet on the planet. Of course, I wouldn't 
be able to manfacture much enthusiasm either if I had to sleep with 
Grace Jones. That's a nasty-looking woman right there.
        The plot this time has Walken as an ambitious microchip 
manufacturer who plans to create an earthquake that will destroy 
Silicon Valley, eliminating his competition. Maybe that's where Bill 
Gates got the idea to send the CEO's of Atari and Commodore 64 to 
sleep with the fishes. Grace Jones, the least feminine woman out there 
(Sandra Bernhard being the runner-up in that competition) is his 
musclebound assistant, May Day. Her name, of course, comes from the 
phrase shouted by every man who's ever seen her topless. And as 
usual, it's up to James Bond to stop everything.
        A VIEW TO A KILL moves slowly and is acted without 
much eagerness or excitement, yet has some merit as a Bond movie. 
It's got all the violence and chase scenes, some that are fun, some 
absurd. The sequence with Bond hanging from a fire truck ladder falls 
into the latter category (Latter. Ladder. Get it?), as does the entire last 
twenty minutes of the movie, which I'll just say involves a dirigible 
and the Golden Gate bridge. Still, nearly every James Bond movie is 
better than this one, which should be watched only by true fans of the 
series.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
