Title
Review for Matewan (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MATEWAN.(1987)  Written and directed by John Sayles. Produced by Peggy
Rajski, Maggie Renzi. Photographed by Haskell Wexler. Production design,
Nora Chavooshian.  Costumes, Cynthia Flynt. Music, Mason Daring. Editing,
Sonya Polonsky. Cast: Chris Cooper, Will Oldham, Mary McDonnell, Bob
Gunton, James Earl Jones, Kevin Tighe,Gordon Clapp, Josh Mostel, Ken
Jenkins, Jace Alexander, Nancy Motto, Gary McCleery, David Strathairn, Joe
Grifasi, James Kizar, Michael Preston, Joe Henderson, Ronnie Stapleton, Ida
Williams, Maggie Renzi, Hazel Dickens, John Sayles, et al. A Cinecom and
Film Gallery release. 132 minutes. Rated PG-13.
"You want to be treated like men? You want to be treated fair? Well, you
ain't men to the coal company, you're equipment. They'll use you till you
wear out or you break down or you're buried under a slate fall and they'll
get a new one, and they don't care what color it is or where it comes
from."
Thus spoke labor organizer Joe Kenehan  (Chris Cooper) to the coal miners
of    Matewan ,  in 1920, when he  came  there to form a union. Not a more
perfect union, but a patchwork  which could somehow stand up to the
merciless exploitation of the Stone Mountain Coal Company that  owned
everyone and everything in the tiny West Virginia town. Can the organized
miners refuse their bodies to the bosses and their souls to the Company
Store?
MATEWAN (pronounced MATE- WON)  chronicles  with power one of those
innumerable , tragic labor-capital confrontations that  dot the historical
map of the first part of our century.   The film is based on fact but
Sayles has  deliberately chosen to treat it both realistically and   in
naive-folkloric fashion, like the  unsophisticated laments by blue grass
balladeer Hazel Dickens which punctuate the movie with    piercing
simplicity.
The Company lowers the miners' pay while importing outside workers.  Joe
Kenehan --conceived as kissin' kin to the legendary Joe Hill - has
understanding, persistence and a sweet, dedicated idealism . Not only does
he unite his miners, he also  manages to override their suspiciousness and
racism . He forms a front of solidarity between the locals and the
imported outsiders, helpless  Southern Blacks and immigrant Italians who
join the West Virginians.  All this in spite of the  Company's   strong-arm
methods . Its  Pinkerton-like Agency   sends in two city-slick ,
strike-breaking goons ( Tighe and Clapp) who commandeer rooms at the home
of Elma, a miner's widow...
Writer-director Sayles has created  something that is unusual  these days:
a populist film on an adult subject, made in the  old-fashioned way of
straight good versus straight evil, but informed by modern sensibility and
filmmaking techniques. MATEWAN is fascinating because it is much like a
genre film, like a gangster movie or a western, while at the same time it
also harks back  to the movies of Frank Capra and their celebration of the
little people  --with two big differences: Sayles' vision is much darker
than Capra's, and , unlike Capra or genre movies, he stresses the
collective  more than the individual . It is the problem that counts more
than the people--though  , at the same time,  there is  no lack of single
portraits. The son of Elma (at whose home Joe stayed until the Agency goons
supplanted him)    is a precocious, eloquent, 15-year lay preacher as well
as a   miner who uses the Bible as a support for unionizing. The local cop
is a cleverly ambiguous figure whom one expects  to show venality and
side sooner or later with the Company , but who in fact turns out to be
like The Good Sheriff. The biggest name in the movie's cast, James Earl
Jones (as Few Clothes,)  sensitively sketches out a Black whose risk-taking
as a union man in a white-dominated society is infinitely greater than the
others'. The  two  Agency men are badness incarnate : their  gross, violent
and insulting sadism may remind you of Lee Marvin's portrayal of Liberty
Valance; in Elma's home they act  like those paranoid killers who take
hostages as well as in the way rabid  Nazis later would behave toward their
victims  when   occupying defeated countries. All the performers are
excellent in this film.
There may be manicheism at work here, but its astute of John Sayles to have
opted in part for the simplicity of early movies  in a work set in 1920. We
should not object either to  this stylization any more than we resist the
polarization between  good and bad guys in Westerns; in fact we have
infinitely better documented ,  historical proof of the  inhumanity and
greed of companies and of the savagery of strike-breakers than we do of
cowboy villains and heroes.
Sayles is a triple-threat artist: he writes, directs,  and acts. (He
appears briefly in MATEWAN , almost unrecognizably made up as a a preacher
who thunders against the Reds.) Sayles  brings superior credentials to his
film. He knows his America from experience and from minute  research. A
graduate of Williams College, he roamed this country as a meat packer, a
day laborer, and a hospital orderly. He wrote   prize-winning novels: from
his second one, UNION DUES, MATEWAN is partly derived. Sayles , as a
screenwriter, first worked for Roger Corman's factory of quickie pictures
before producing other scripts and later directing his own movies ,   all
of which deal with social problems:  THE RETURN OF THE SECAUCUS SEVEN,
LIANNA, BABY IT'S YOU, THE BROTHER FROM ANOTHER PLANET.  In MATEWAN he has
a formidable ally,  the socially committed cinematographer (and occasional
director) Haskell Wexler who shot this picture  in muted, natural hues,
naturally lit and imparted the right look to a low-budget film.
Parts of MATEWAN are left unspoken and unshown, until the film's progress
sorts them out for you. There are many good ellipses, which are in harmony
with the unloquacious nature of the West Virginians. When  Sayles uses the
old device of a purloined letter for  a  multi-level operation (a real
traitor presents Joe as an infiltrator and almost succeeds in having him
executed)  the melodrama of those sequences is balanced by  the exemplary
terseness of the aftermath.
The wonder of this movie is that it keeps up its edge-of-the-seat suspense
throughout its 132 minutes without   exhausting you , partly because there
are slow interludes, but even those are laden with tension. Anything could
happen at any moment. Near the end,   the Company brings in several armed
strike-breakers and the odds shift even more against the miners. You pray
that outside help might help the oppressed. Saviors , like The Magnificent
Seven, do not materialize, but there is a terrific, Western-style shootout
that   does  filmmakers like John Sturges  ,  Sam Peckinpah  or John Ford
proud.  At the same time, MATEWAN , directly or peripherally,  is in good
company: that of  STRIKE!,  HARLAN COUNTY, U.S.A.,  UNION MAIDS,  THE MOLLY
MAGUIRES and even parts of MODERN TIMES.  MATEWAN is certainly one of the
best  all-American movies of the year. To miss it is to turn one's back on
a crucial chapter of our history.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A great propaganda film in the best
     traditions of Sergei Eisenstein.  An engrossing account of
     the birth pangs of the coal miners' union in Matewan, West
     Virginia, as seen purely from the union's point of view.
     Rating: +2.  Disclaimer: No political intention should be
     inferred from this article.  I am addressing issues of
     filmmaking style only.
     I think a lot of people were very surprised when REDS came out.  Warren
Beatty had been in some okay films but he had never shown any great talent.
Then he made REDS and people realized that somewhere inside him there was a
serious filmmaker with something to say.  John Sayles's track record has
been only moderately better than Beatty's.  His films had been mostly low-
budget pieces, usually with a social message.  Included are films like
RETURN OF THE SECAUCUS SEVEN, LIANNA, and BROTHER FROM ANOTHER PLANET.
MATEWAN is very much Sayles's REDS.  It is a detailed historical piece done
on a reasonable budget and it is a very moving film.
     MATEWAN is the story of how the union came to the mines of West
Virginia.  It is the story of open warfare between the miners and the
company who had kept the miners in virtual slavery.  Each side has its
general.  Leading the miners is Joe Kenehan, an idealistic young union man
with visions of a worldwide union.  Leading the fight for the company are
Hickey and Griggs, mercenaries brought in to put down the insurrection of
mine workers and to get the mines turning a profit again.  There is a lot of
history in MATEWAN, but it does not detract one iota from the story-telling.
     But while in some ways MATEWAN is similar to REDS, in some ways it is
very different.  REDS was sympathetic to the socialists, but showed them
reasonably realistically, warts and all.  Sayles instead was trying to make
a perfect propaganda film and, with some borrowing from masters like
Eisenstein, I think he has made it.  MATEWAN is the American equivalent of
BATTLESHIP POTEMKIN.  In two and a half hours of film Joe Kenehan shows
absolutely no faults at all.  He is intelligent, considerate, idealistic,
committed, self-sacrificing, and courageous.  Hickey and Griggs show not one
single virtue.  They are mean-spirited, rude, lecherous, impious, selfish,
and they kill people.  Sayles is taking no chances that you might not know
who are the good guys and who are not.
     The miners are a little more human.  The whites start out bigotted
against the blacks and Italians brought in to break the strike, but Kenehan
shows them that the only real fight is the union against the company and all
the workers eventually come to love each other.  In BATTLESHIP POTEMKIN one
of a group of jubilant revolutionaries yells, "Down with Jews!" only to be
shouted down by others who understand "the real fight."
     You see almost nothing of characters who favor the company side other
than Hickey and Griggs.  Sayles wants no possibility of them being humanized
in any way.  In the climactic "Battle on the Tracks" they are simply brought
off a train and seen at a distance without any humanizing close-ups.
Characters who are humanized include the callow young boy, innocent yet
resourceful, who was always anti-company but who gets to see at close range
just how despicable the company men are and, in an almost too perfect
substory, he becomes a hero of the strike.  We also see others uncommitted
at the beginning who are won over by the justice of the strike.
     MATEWAN, in its copious cinematic quoting from Eisenstein, right down
to the "mourning of the dead" scene, undercuts its own credibility.  It is
too perfect a propaganda film to be really trusted on its facts.  It is,
however, a really fine propaganda film and does everything Eisenstein would
have tried for.  It is moving and affecting.  It pulls all the right
strings.  As such it is a pleasure to watch.  Rate it a high +2 on the -4 to
+4 scale.
