Title
Review for Accompagnatrice, L' (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE  ACCOMPANIST (L'ACCOMPAGNATRICE) (France, 1992)  *** 1/2  Directed by
Claude Miller. Written by Miller and luc Beraud, based on the novel by Nina
Berberova. Photography, Yves Angelo. Music, Alain Jomy. Editing, Albert
Jurgenson. Cast: Romane Bohringer, Elena Safonova, Richard Bohringer,
Samuel Labarthe, Julien Rassam, Nelly Borgeaud, Claude Rich, et al.  A Sony
Classics release. 110 minutes. In French with subtitles. Rated PG.
Nazi-occupied Paris. Glamorous soprano Irene Brice (Leningrad-born,
ex-Russian actress Elena Safonova) hires an accompanist. She is 20-year old
Sophie (Romane Bohringer) a talented pianist who, like many French people
in the winter of 1942-43,  is undernourished.
Unlike many in German-dominated France, Irene and her
businessman-profiteer husband Charles (Richard Bohringer, in real life
Romane's father) live in luxury. Irene laughingly admits that she is
isolated from "rigors and privations." The Brices  hobnob with the rich and
the infamous and, marginally, with the German authorities. Marginally
because Charles, though an opportunist,  unlike many other Frenchmen is no
true collaborationist  but a complex man who does a balancing act between
his conscience and his self-interest. He even taunts the Germans.
Irene, a charmer, is blithely unaware of anything except music, adulation,
joie de vivre and her lover Jacques. Yet she's no air head.  Solemn Sophie
is fairly complex. She moves in with the couple, shares some of their
privileges , quietly observes their private and public lives. Her new
condition does not  change her much.  What does affect her is her
ambivalence toward Irene :  a mixture of admiration and  silent
disapproval, and an understandable , professional frustration at staying in
Irene's musical shadow. Even though she is appreciated by Irene and the
public, the young pianist always remains an anonymous second fiddle to the
singer. It does not help either that, in a friendly way, Irene also treats
Sophie a bit like a favorite servant. And neither woman opens up to the
other.
As Charles becomes increasingly conscious of reaching  a kind of point of
no return -- moral as well as practical--  he decides to escape from France
with his wife. Taking Sophie along, they go South, cross the Pyrenees,
reach Lisbon and take a freighter to England.   There, the entrepreneurial
Charles successfully becomes his wife's impresario -- but there is a
problem: Jacques, the lover and a member of the French Underground is also
in London...
The film starts out as a series of portraits and adds  vivid components of
life, society and dealings under the Occupation. It eventually becomes
something of a saga and a melodrama, but both are played down.  There is a
delicate, constant balance among the three main characters. Stresses vary
without  becoming  systematic. Although Charles may have less screen time
than the women, his role keeps growing in importance and depth. It is
Charles who touches you most,  yet the film does not resort to
simplifications, moral judgments, villains or heroes.
I said "three characters." I really meant four, the fourth one  being the
music. There is  for me  something  most appealing  in the way  so many
French films  since 1960 incorporate  classical music, use it organically,
and often make it the key element. Think of "Diva, " "The Music Teacher,"
"Tous les Matins du Monde." It is a far cry from Hollywood's stubborn
resistance to "serious" music, and, in quality and variety, also a far cry
from the made-to-order compositions in "The Piano," an excellent film but
with a jarringly anachronistic score.
Strongly and intelligently woven into the story, the mostly vocal music of
"The Accompanist" ( Mozart, Schumann, Richard Strauss, Schubert, Berlioz,
etc.) is not limited to snippets. Beautifully dubbed by  young soprano
Laurence Monteyrol, it is superbly lip-face-and-body-synched by Ms.
Safonova.
The film reproduces its period with great accuracy, captures perfectly in
look and content facts, situations, politics and moods of Occupied France
and of Marshall Petain's Vichy Government. Vichy itself, the provincial
spa that became the  bizarre seat of the pro-German French State  (
France's Non-Occupied Zone), comes in for some deft descriptions.
Among the best touches is a cameo by Claude Rich as a realistic,
disenchanted Vichy Minister who lends a sympathetic ear to Charles'
determination to escape.
References to Petain, Laval, Brinon, Otto Abetz, Doriot, the Free French,
De Gaulle and the like add much to the ambiance if you know this particular
chapter in history.
There are many subtleties, such as color differences  between the French
sequences and those of wartime London, the latter, says director Miller,
shot "with deep reds and blacks, like old Rank films. "  And there is at
least one  conceit,  included, no doubt, for the delectation of movie
specialists: Charles,  near the end, tells his wife: "I hate the character
that you are making me play." This is almost word for word what another
Charles, actor Charles Boyer, said to his wife in Max Ophuls' 1953 gem "The
Earrings of Madame de..."
I tip my hat to a movie that does not try to simplify people, issues and
facts, and works in music so effectively. Even if viewers do not identify
every historical detail, the film is not at all hard to follow. My only
puzzlement  is why Jacques always sports a heavy five o'clock shadow,
Claude Miller is, among other things, a director of faces who  has been
influenced by Ingmar Bergman. Here he makes eloquent use of close-ups of
faces and eyes. The late Francois Truffaut, who also did much along those
lines,  and with whom Miller worked on seven films,would have been pleased.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Romane Bohringer, Richard Bohringer, Elena Safonova
Director:  Claude Miller
Producer:  Jean-Jose Richer
Screenplay:  Claude Miller and Luc Beraud
Music:  various composers, including Mozart, Strauss, and Berlioz
Released by Sony Pictures Classics
In French with subtitles
     French cinema has long been admired for the depth and breadth of
the characters brought to the screen through its movies.  Hollywood,
more concerned with moving a plot along before the attention span of
the average viewer is exhausted, rarely permits the opportunity to
examine its screen personalities with the incisive insight present in a
movie such as THE ACCOMPANIST.  A rather unremarkable tale on the
surface, this story attains its impact through the complex web of
relationships that entwines the three main characters.
     It is 1942-43 in German-occupied France.  Charles Brice (Richard
Bohringer), a French businessman, is regarded as a collaborator because
he's making money with the Germans in charge.  His wife, singer Irene
Brice (Elena Safonova), is beloved by both French nationals and the
occupying power.  Into this world of wealth and privilege comes a
talented young pianist by the name of Sophie Vasseur (Romane
Bohringer), who auditions to be Irene's accompanist.  Irene, amazed by
the young woman's remarkable ability, hires her, but Sophie soon learns
that working with the singer demands more sacrifices than she could
have dreamed possible.
     THE ACCOMPANIST is told in three parts.  The first, which takes
place in France, focuses on Sophie, exploring her life, feelings, and
the love/hate relationship that develops between her and Irene.  The
second part, the journey from France to England, is more the singer's
story, while the third segment, in England, concentrates on Charles and
the demons of insecurity and jealousy that haunt him.
     Despite the varying emphases of the different portions of THE
ACCOMPANIST, the central character is always Sophie, although she is
rarely more of an observer.  She has given up her own life to follow
Irene, and off-stage as well as on, she is always in the background.
Nevertheless, even as Sophie is obsessed with a woman whom she both
despises and is jealous of, so Irene comes to depend on the young woman
who plays the piano for her.
     At one crucial juncture during the film, Sophie is tendered an
offer of marriage by a French freedom fighter named Benoit (Julien
Rassam).  The limelight of stardom no longer shines on Irene--she and
Charles are exiles--and Benoit represents a chance for Sophie to have
a life, and possibly love, apart from the Brices.  Her reaction to the
proposal says more about the ties that bind her to Irene and Charles
than it does about Benoit's persuasiveness.
     The third member of the trio is Charles Brice, who at first
appears to be a supremely confident, smug man whose business acumen has
made him a force to be reckoned with.  It isn't until Sophie has begun
living under the Brices' roof that she learns how thin that veneer is.
Charles is far more dependent upon his wife than Irene is on him, and
this forms the backdrop for THE ACCOMPANIST's final scenes.
     All three of the principle actors, as well as the members of the
supporting cast, give fine performances.  Romane Bohringer, who won the
1992 Cesar Award as Most Promising New Actress, is exceptional,
bringing a silent expressiveness to the role of Sophie that would be
beyond many veterans of the screen.  Ms. Bohringer's rapport with her
father Richard is evident in their many scenes together.
     Those that love rich musical scores, especially those involving
pieces by composers such as Mozart, Strauss, and Berlioz, will find
this film as pleasing to the ear as to the eye.
     Ultimately, THE ACCOMPANIST holds the viewer's attention through
the power of its depiction of the bonds that develop between the
singer, her husband, and her pianist.  The story that conveys this
relationship is neither original nor exceptional, but writer/director
Claude Miller's presentation of the intricate and conflicting emotions
makes this an experience that is always absorbing, and occasionally
wrenching.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
