Title
Review for Shu shan (1983)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Sunga
ZU: WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN (1983)
Chinese with English subtitles. 
Also called SHU SHAN or SUK SAAN (Translated: 'Suk Mountain')
Starring: 
Damian Lau Chung-Yun, Adam Cheng Siu-Chow, Brigitte Lin Ching-Hsia, Samo
Hung Kam-Bo, Randy Man, Judy Ong, Tsui Hark
Synopsis: 
In this Chinese mythological fantasy, I-chen - - a young army private in
16th century China - - gets tired of war, especially a battle which pits
uniformed reds, blues, greens, oranges, and yellows all against each
other in a pointless conflict. So I-chen sneaks off and becomes the
apprentice of superhero kung fu master Sifu Ting.
Unfortunately the superhero world of flying swordsmen and magical
weapons turns out to be just as petty and divisive as the normal-powered
world. The world's big heroes - - Ice Countess and her handmaiden,
Master Ting and Private I-chen, and a superhero Buddhist monk along with
the monk's apprentice - - don't want anything to do with each other. 
This is bad news because, due to a lack of cooperation, Sifu Ting, Ice
Countess, and the monk get knocked out of commission by the supernatural
forces of evil. This leaves the three apprentices (I-chen, the
handmaiden, and the monk's assistant) on their own to save the world.
The plot revolves around a big monster that will soon hatch into the
ultimate evil, spelling doomsday for the world in only 49 days. Only two
magic swords located in a far off borderland can combine into a weapon
powerful enough to defeat the coming monster. The three young wannabes
must go on a quest, find the magical swords, enlist allies, and save the
world from the emergence of evil.
Opinion:
While THE PRINCESS BRIDE is one of the few mainstream American sword
fighting fairy tales involving comedy, fighting, and some magic, Chinese
sword fighting fairy tales are common in Hong Kong film. The difference
is, Hong Kong swashbuckling is often more 'over-the-top,' on the order
of SPAWN or other comic book fantasies. In ZU: WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC
MOUNTAIN people fly around like Superman. In addition, heroes can
levitate objects, control the forces of nature, and transfer their
powers to others. And they carry swords and shields and have big long
sashes and other enchanted weapons that can magically fly, spin,
duplicate, and take on a life of their own before returning to the
hero's side.
ZU: WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN is one of director Tsui Hark's
earlier works, before martial arts films had much of a budget - - so
you'll easily notice when the camera shot switches to a scale model - -
in contrast to the deft visual flair of the rest of the movie. This
gives the cinematography a stop-and-go feel. 
The wushu fight choreography is good, and the very beginning of ZU:
WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN features an outstanding and funny war
sequence along with some sharp quips on human nature made by the
characters. After the great beginning, the plot starts to get a little
murky. The characters also become less witty and more cardboard. Soon it
becomes confusing keeping track of who is who, as side characters such
as Long Brows, Heaven's Blade, and Lady Li-ichi are thrown in. The
finale of ZU: WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN features lots of flying,
but less martial arts.
The bottom line? ZU: WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN has a great
beginning. The characters aren't too deep, and the plot gets a little
murky, but the wushu action content is high, providing entertaining
action with little or no bloodshed or body count. 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Leong Heng Cheong
     ZU, WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN (Chinese Title: ZU MOUNTAIN: THE
NEW ZU MOUNTAIN SWORDSMEN) is a 1983 HK movie.  Directed by Hsui Hark,
this film stars Liu Songren, Zheng Shaochiu, and Lin Qingxia (of THE
SWORDSMAN II).
     This is not a martial arts film.  Rather it is a fantasy set during
China's civil war of 1740s, featuring a dozen flying swordsmen, a
hell-within-the-mountains, and some quite difficult-to-believe fights.
ZU, WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN can be better described as wu-xia
rather than gong-fu (Kung Fu).
     Partly based on the novel, and a earlier version of the same film, ZU,
WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN helped Tsui Hark and Lin Qingxia achieved
the fame of today.  It also started the movie style of combining special
effects with martial arts.
     Made with an impressive HK$30,000 at that time, this film offers
some 1983-style HK special effects.  Viewed today, these special effects
look cheesy and stupid.  Editing seems choppy, revealing how the special
effects were done.  "Cheap" models were used extensively, and the same
mountains were used over and over again.  However, being a very original
concept at that time, Tsui Hark received instant fame for directing this
film.
     Lin Qingxia was actually quite famous during the 1970s.  However
she was type-cast into playing the girl next door in Taiwan romance
movies.  When these movies ceased to be popular, her career died.  It
was this film that managed to re-start her acting career, and she has
starred in various movies since then, the most recent being THE
SWORDSMAN II.
     ZU, WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN is about the forces of good vs.
the forces of evil.  Set in the Zu Mountains, a soldier discovers a
world of evil.  However, the good force is closing on it, preventing the
evil from dominating the world.
     However, the story gets stranger and stranger from then on.  The
plot also gets messier.  The second half of the story lacks common
sense, even in the fantasy world of wu-xia, and it looks hurried.
(Somehow, it seems to have many last-minute hacking...  :-))  Although I
don't think there is any last-minute change to the ending -- we know
there is going to be a happy ending at the very beginning of the story
-- the ending still looks tagged on.
     Characterization again is lacking.  Nothing in the film explains
the romantic interest in the film.  The characters are one-dimensional,
and new characters are introduced more or less randomly.
     This is not a film that I would recommend -- unless you are a very
great fan of Hsui Hark or wu-xia.  Watch it only for historical reasons.
However, if you do watch the movie, catch the cameo appearance of Tsui
Hark towards the very end of the movie.  This film is rated PG in
Singapore.  A few killings, but with no graphical violence.
