Title
Review for Yapian zhanzheng (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Kristian M Lin
        "The Opium War" is a historical film set in the 1830s.  When the
Chinese government tried to ban opium, British opium dealers, who had
grown wealthy from their trade, persuaded Queen Victoria to go to war for
their business.  The result was a humiliating defeat for the Chinese, who
were forced to surrender Hong Kong to British control as part of the peace
settlement.
The movie follows two main characters.  Lin Zexu is the minister
designated by the emperor to wipe out the opium trade.  He's the only one
with the situation sized up, as his government ignores his advice and
vacillates in the face of the British threat.  On the other hand, He
Shinzhi, the son of a Chinese opium seller, survives the anti-drug
campaign through his knowledge of English, which allows him to work as an
interpreter in Chinese diplomatic business with England.
Writer/director Xie Jin is known in some circles as "the Chinese
Spielberg," and it's easy to see why.  "The Opium War" is an epic with 
solid plotting, judicious pacing, grand visuals, good acting, sentimental
melodrama, and nothing terribly complex.  The English are all villains in
various shades, and the heroes must fight the stupidity and corruption of
their colleagues and superiors as well as the enemy.  The film's release
in China was timed to coincide with the recent return of Hong Kong to
Chinese rule.  Ironically, "the Chinese Spielberg" has been trumped by the
American one, as Chinese moviegoers have largely neglected "The Opium War"
and flocked to see "The Lost World" instead.
The movie consistently holds your interest over its 2 1/2-hour
length, but there's only a couple of truly memorable scenes.  One is when
Lin hears rumors that his own deputies are using opium and abetting the
sellers.  He calls them to a meeting and asks if this is true, which they
all deny.  Lin then announces that everyone is going to stay in the room
and meditate for six hours.  The director Xie manages a tensely funny slow
burn as the deputies' withdrawal symptoms gradually grow worse and worse.
The other compelling bit comes at the end of the movie.  On his
way to exile, Lin meets Qishan, a minister who previously deposed him and
is now sentenced to death.  Lin gives Qishan a globe and asks him to
present it to the emperor before his execution.  "Tell him there are many
powerful countries in the world besides China," says Lin, looking much
sadder and wiser.  His homeland's complacency has been shattered, but he
still feels loss because China's illusion of cultural superiority was so
glorious (aided as it was by a righteous cause).  The emperor weeps in
front of portraits of his great predecessors, but only Lin comprehends the
inevitability of China's downfall as well as its scope.  For all the
movie's theatrics and cheap emotionalism, this is its one real moment of
resonance.  What has come before is a thoroughly conventional melodrama,
but this concluding glint of perspective gives it a few transcendent
minutes, which is more than many movies have.
Note: The opening and closing credits of the print I saw were in
Chinese, so I was unable to obtain the names of the principal actors
involved with the production.  My apologies.
