Title
Review for Year of the Horse (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David N. Butterworth
Fans of Neil Young and Crazy Horse should relish the affecting documentary
"Year of the Horse."  Its director, Jim Jarmusch, clearly thinks the band
is the bee's knees.
The film is composed of concert footage of the band during their 1996
European tour, as well as interviews (in a kitschy laundry-room setting)
and additional concert and interview footage from 1976 and 1986.
Half the time the generally dazed and confused band don't know which city
they're in or, five minutes before a show, which song they're going to open
with.  As for the documentary itself, one of the band members is
consistently skeptical of the filmmaker's work-in-progress.  "Like asking a
few questions will capture everything there is to know about Crazy Horse?"
he scoffs.  He also accuses Jarmusch of making an arty film just so people
will think he's cool.
Ironically Jarmusch, the director of quirky, off-beat films ("Stranger Than
Paradise," "Night on Earth," "Dead Man," etc.) was cool long before he made
"Year of the Horse."  A smattering of acting roles have helped sustain that
image, most recently with his Frostee Cream Boy cameo in Billy Bob
Thornton's "Sling Blade."
What's surprising about "Year of the Horse" is its distinct lack of
insight.  When reduced to talking heads the band members--Ralph Molina
(drums/vocals), Billy Talbot (bass/vocals), Frank "Pancho" Sampedro
(guitar/vocals), and Young himself (guitar/vocals)--have little of any
significance to say.  The most descriptive summation of being a part of
Crazy Horse from a band member's perspective is "heavy."  "It's hard to
describe in words," he says.  It's not unlike some sporting superstar
talking about the game: "You go out there and you give it your best shot
and you hope you get a result"--duh.
But once Crazy Horse gets on stage these aging, not very attractive men
(although there's nothing wrong with Neil Young that a barber and a good
tailor couldn't fix) powerfully demonstrate everything they've been unable
to articulate verbally.  Instantly there's synergy: the three guitarists
playing together in close proximity, acting on non-verbal cues, totally
immersed in the music, creating their singular, soaring sound to thunderous
applause.
As the engagingly dull interviews get more and more meaningless, the music
gets increasingly potent.  "Pure," as Young himself puts it.  The music is
very good and Jarmusch gives us nine full songs, including "Stupid Girl,"
"Tonight's the Night," and the anthem-like "Like a Hurricane" that closes
the film.
Jarmusch's "glue" that holds the picture together is the artier stuff that
Pancho references, wonderfully edited by Jay Rabinowitz: collage-like
snippets of soundstages, motorbikes, and American landscapes flashing by;
adoring nationals, singing Swedes, indecipherable Glaswegians.
"Proudly" shot in Super-8, 16mm, and Hi-8 video, the graininess of the
material gives the film a home movie-like texture, echoing the band
members' grunginess (that's grunge in the seamy sense, not the Seattle
sound sense).  This is a film of contrasts: black and white; black and
white and color; decades--'76, '86, '96; words, and music.
A band that plays together doesn't always stay together but after almost
thirty years, Neil Young and Crazy Horse are still cranking it up.  And in
"Year of the Horse," it's the music that speaks for itself.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Here's a pop quiz:  Can you name three things to do to make the 
time pass more quickly while you're trapped in a theater showing YEAR OF 
THE HORSE?
     Of course, the best course of action would be not to get caught in 
this position in the first place.  Unless you're a Neil Young die-hard, 
you're likely to find YEAR OF THE HORSE unbearable.  At the screening I 
attended, there were more walkouts than I have ever before witnessed at 
any movie (including such controversial titles as IN THE REALM OF THE 
SENSES, CLEAN SHAVEN, and KISSED), and for good reason:  this is quite 
possibly the worst documentary I have ever had the displeasure of 
watching on the big screen.
     Director Jim Jarmusch, the highly-regarded, maverick independent 
film maker (who is responsible for a number of intriguing films, 
including MYSTERY TRAIN and DEAD MAN) has intended YEAR OF THE HORSE as 
a loving tribute to one of his favorite bands, Neil Young & Crazy Horse.  
It's supposed to be a high-energy concert film that captures the 
intensity and camaraderie of the band members on and off-stage.  What it 
turns out to be, however, is an overlong home movie with bad video and 
barely-adequate sound.  YEAR OF THE HORSE falls into a rut very early, 
using a simple pattern that is regurgitated over and over again 
throughout the interminable 107-minute length:  interviews from 1996, 
clips from 1976 and 1986, the band performing a song in front of a live 
audience, then back to the beginning.  This recipe is repeated eight 
times.
     The interviews, which comprise roughly one-quarter of the film's 
running time, are among the most trite and unenlightening that I've ever 
heard.  Jarmusch asks soft, dull questions and receives banal answers.  
About the only thing I learned during these segments is that Neil 
Young's jacket says just "Crazy Horse" on it (rather than "Neil Young & 
Crazy Horse").  The behind-the-scenes footage that Jarmusch cannibalizes 
from the 1976 and 1986 tours is no more interesting.  The supposed 
reason to see YEAR OF THE HORSE, however, isn't to listen to Young, 
Molina, Sampedro, and Talbot babble, but to watch them perform.  Sadly, 
the concert footage isn't any more invigorating than the interview 
material.  While extended jams can be enjoyable in person, where the 
audience forges a rapport with the band, they make for terrible 
cinematic material, and, coupled with Jarmusch's shaky, muddy 
photography (accomplished primarily with a hand-held Super 8 camera), 
they become lifeless, tedious exercises in chord repetition.  Three-
minute songs are dragged out into 10-minute torture sessions.
     Unless you worship at the altar of Neil Young, I urge you to avoid 
this film.  Every year, I typically experience one or two movies that I 
find physically painful to sit through. YEAR OF THE HORSE is such a 
film.  What's especially shocking is that it comes from a talented 
director like Jarmusch, who is known for intelligent, thought-provoking 
pictures.  Evidently, his feature film making ability doesn't translate 
into the documentary realm.  YEAR OF THE HORSE is one of 1997's ugliest 
dogs.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."
