Title
Review for Romeo and Juliet (1968/I)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian Koller
Of all the cinematic adaptations of William
Shakespeare's plays, none look better than
Zeffirelli's "Romeo and Juliet".  The sets,
the costumes, and the cinematography are
bright and colorful, while the cast radiates
with youth and energy.  The film was also
aided by a memorable score by Nino Rota,
composer for several Fellini films and who
would later be best known for his score of
"The Godfather".
"Romeo and Juliet" was the third consecutive
Shakespearean play for Italian director
Franco Zeffirelli, following a British television
production of "Much Ado about Nothing" and
a big-budget Elizabeth Taylor-Richard Burton
vehicle, "The Taming of the Shrew".  Zeffirelli
would later tackle "Othello" and "Hamlet",
but his most successful adaptation was clearly
"Romeo and Juliet", one of the biggest grossing
films of the year.
Zeffirelli made several bold moves with "Romeo
and Juliet" that paid off handsomely.  Unlike
"Shrew", the film was cast with largely unknowns
(Michael York would become a star only later)
that were very close in age to the characters.
While this created greater realism, it put quite
a burden on the leads, who had to deliver whole
paragraphs of tongue-tangling seventeenth-century
dialogue.  (Sometimes the young actors take the
melodrama too much to heart, giving exaggerated
performance.)  There's also a morning-after scene
with some nudity, which was probably a surprise
to most 1968 filmgoers.
The story is well known, loaded with tragedy
that could always have been so easily averted.
It takes place in renaissance Italy.  Romeo
Montague (Leonard Whiting) and Juliet Capulet
(Olivia Hussey) fall in love, despite the fact
that their families are bitter enemies.  Their
heavy romance is threatened by the discord,
which is especially promoted by arrogant Tybalt
(Michael York) and jester Mercutio (John McEnery).
The story's greatest weakness has Romeo,
seething with rage, avenging Tybalt's murder.
It just doesn't fit his character.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Shane Burridge
A beautiful adaptation of Shakespeare that has a place in many
moviegoers' hearts.  While I love Bernstein's musical version WEST
SIDE STORY, and enoy the flippant, shrieking, MTV-style 1996 update,
there is still no substitute for this Franco Zeffirelli gem. 
Shakespeare's classic love story doesn't fit the modern-dress scenario
as well as his tragedies or history lessons, no matter how timeless or
relevant his themes may be: the notion of romance is too strongly
intertwined with sentiment, innocence and longing - qualities we
associate with an irretrievable past - to make the transition
successfully.  So while the contemporary setting of 1996's ROMEO +
JULIET makes for great cinema, its own flashiness ultimately denies it
emotional resonance: it presents Romeo and Juliet's world as so
superficial, violent, and cheerless that you can't blame them for
wanting to leave it.  Their death scene is no tragedy, merely an exit.
Zeffirelli's renaissance Italy, on the other hand, is a place any of
us could be perfectly happy to spend our lives in.
It's hard to imagine a more definitive version of the play - this film
is how Shakespeare himself would have envisaged it, a world of
sundrenched piazzas, masked balls, rowdy swordsmanship, bustling
marketplaces, moonlight, meadows, and passion.  But most importantly,
teenagers were finally trusted with the roles of the two lovers - I
cringe at those adult `Hollywood' actors strutting across the stage
and going through all the motions in earlier film versions, because
more than anything Romeo and Juliet are two hormonally-charged
*adolescents* who are swept away not only by each other, but by the
mere idea of being in love.  Leonard Whiting is a naive, impulsive
Romeo; Olivia Hussey is the girlfriend of every boy's dreams -
voluptuous, spirited, and stunningly beautiful.  Together they
represent everyone who ever wanted to rebel against the dogmatism of
their parents and improve the way of the world.  This was surely a
message that the Woodstock generation took personally - these two
youthful, optimistic heroes were seen to endorse their views on peace,
freedom, sex, and love.  Subsequently Whiting and Hussey became minor
icons of the late sixties.
Zeffirelli's eye for detail presents us with an entirely believable
milieu - all his characters seem so real and natural it's easy to
forget they're speaking Shakespeare.  Every moment Whiting and Hussey
are together on screen they are completely alive - you'll know what
all-consuming love is, just as you'll sympathise with them every
moment they are apart.  Final scenes are among the cinema's most
heartbreaking - even after three cinema screenings they still make me
choke up.  Nino Rota's well-known and popular score contributes
enormously.  Film won Oscars for cinematography and costumes.  Also
with: Pat Heywood as a robust nurse and Michael York as a cocky,
pugnacious Tybalt - one of the reasons I couldn't take the 1996
version seriously was because Tybalt reminded me of a kind of Ferris
Bueller from Hell. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In honor of my wife and my twenty-seventh wedding anniversary this
past September the thirteenth, I am going to do something I've never
done before.  I am going to review a film I have not seen in ten years.
Since the true mark of a great movie is its ability to forever cast an
indelible mark on our memory, reviewing a picture you haven't seen in a
decade actually makes some sense.
     Late in the year of 1968, Franco Zeffirelli released a new version
of the most well known love story in the English language, William
Shakespeare's ROMEO AND JULIET.  The film had a long run and was still
playing the summer of 1969 when my wife Sally and I got married.  To
this day, it is the only film I have seen more than four or five times.
Like Trekies, we want to see the film constantly doing our courtship
and could quote most of the lines.  Although I have long since lost
count, I know the number of times we have seen the picture is between
fifteen and twenty.  We frequently would stay to see it twice in a row
at the local mutliplex.  A more romantic and realistic rendition of the
nature of love, I have never seen.
     Although the play "Romeo and Juliet" has been made into movies
many times before and would be made again, no one has ever captured
young love as Zeffirelli did.  First, the casting of two photogenic,
talented, but unknown actors of the right age was the foundation upon
which he created a masterpiece.  With Olivia Hussey as Juliet and
Leonard Whiting as Romeo he had the basic ingredients, but just having
the right cast does not a masterpiece make.  It only makes it possible.
     To this casting, he rounded it out with other equally talented but
unknown actors including, Roberto Bisacco as Count Paris, Paul Hardwick
as Lord Capulet, Pat Heywood as the Nurse, John McEnery as Mercutio,
Milo O'Shea as Friar Laurence, Natasha Parry as Lady Capulet, Antonio
Pierfederici as Lord Montague, Bruce Robinson as Benvolio, Esmeralda
Ruspoli as Lady Montague, Keith Skinner as Balthazar, Robert Stephens
as the Prince of Verona and Michael York as Tybalt.  The only major
actor was Laurence Olivier who was the narrator.
     All of the supporting cast were excellent, but Pat Heywood, John
McEnery, Milo O'Shea, Michael York were especially brilliant.
McEnery's Mercutio was a complex and bizarre reading that fit the
spirit of the character perfectly.  York's Tybalt was excellent as a
character not seeking a fight, but more than confident of his ability
if forced by circumstances.
     It is interesting to note that only a few of these actors,
including the stars, had much success after this film.  Hussey and
Whiting basically faded into oblivion.
     When Romeo feels the rush of love swell up in his veins during a
party, the audience vicariously experiences that same rapture.  When he
presses Juliet's hand at the dance, it is more erotic than many a scene
today where the actors are all buck naked.  Finally, the balcony scene,
which every student knows and probably thinks is trite, is made fresh
in Zeffirelli's capable hands.
     The morning after Romeo and Juliet's love making, there is the
briefest of scene where they are both naked.  I liked the way
Zeffirelli handled this.  He included it to show the reality of the
situation, but editor Reginald Mills trimmed it down to just flash the
scene on the screen before moving on.
     Although it is clear from the beginning that this is a love affair
that is destined for tragedy, when the tragedy does strike, the
audience is crushed anyway.  By the middle of the picture, it is
impossible not to be in love with the two protagonists and thereby not
want any harm to come to them.
     The ending is sad, but effective.  This is the richest and most
moving of any Shakespeare play I have ever seen made for the screen,
and as a critic, I have seen a lot of them.
     I can not leave this tribute to one of my absolute favorite
pictures without mentioning a few of the outstanding technical aspects
of the film.  The lush and hazy cinematography by Pasqualino De Santis
deservedly won the Academy Award that year.  From the very first image,
the audience is alerted that something special is about to unfold.
     The script by Franco Brusati, Maestro D'Amico, and Franco
Zeffirelli is true to the play.  Brief sections of the play were
removed to get the play down to the right length and pacing for a
movie, but Shakespeare's poetic language was not tampered with.
     The editing was flawless.  The action sequences are full of
energy, but never too choppy.  The love scenes stay with the character
perfectly.
     The Academy Award winning costumes by Danilo Donati are gorgeous.
Especially well done are the clothes worn at the dance and all of
Juliet's clothes.  They are naturally lovely without being showy.
     Finally, the music by Nino Rota is so memorable it leaves you with
music and songs forever in your subconscious.  I love the theme song
and still hear it being played today.
     There is another remake coming of "Romeo and Juliet" this year.
This time it will be set in modern day Florida and start Claire Danes
(LITTLE WOMEN) and Leonardo DiCaprio (WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE).
Although I am sure I'll see it, it will probably feel like a sacrilege
to this fan of Zeffirelli's version.  As always as a critic, I'll try
to keep an open mind.
     ROMEO AND JULIET runs a fast 2:18.  It is not rated, but would
probably get a PG today for the extremely brief nude scene and for the
tragic theme.  There is no sex or bad language.  There is a little
violence of sword fighting and poisoning.  The picture would be fine
for any kid old enough to be interested which is probably eight and up.
I give this picture my strongest recommendation and my highest rating
of ****.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 15, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
