Title
Review for Sense and Sensibility (1995)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
M. Doyle
     I don't want to see another movie for the rest of the year.  To do
so would be to spoil the joy I experienced in seeing SENSE AND
SENSIBILITY.
     I'm hard-pressed to find the words to praise this movie.
Beautiful, funny, engaging.  Well-performed, gently-directed,
incisively written. (OK so I found some words.) I laughed a lot, I
nearly cried and in some parts I did both at the same time.
     Emma Thompson excels both in her role as Elinor and in the
adaptation of the  Jane Austen novel for the screen.  As Elinor she is
the embodiment of Sense, and she portrays perfectly the burden it puts
upon her.  There's one wonderful moment near the end of the movie where
she goes from standing and speaking, to collapsed and crying within a
heartbeat - you could almost hear the crack as the tensions built
within her snapped and crumbled.
     Kate Winslet is an utter delight.  She became a favorite of mine
in HEAVENLY CREATURES last year.  And she transfers her translucent
beauty and cunning acting skill perfectly to the role of Marianne.  She
too does a marvelous job of crying in parts.  But better still was the
way in which she demonstrated the growth of her character.  As each
development fell upon Marianne, she became a slightly different person
- and Kate portrays this wonderfully.
     Hugh Grant plays Edward Ferrars - a character outside of his
typical range.  Yet, he is still Hugh Grant, albeit slower - as if he
were dissolved into a highly viscous solution.  Take that as you will.
     Equal praise must go to the rest of the cast - e.g. the actors who
portrayed Col. Brandon, Willoughby and Mrs.  Jennings.  Every one of
them turned in a smashing performance and this would not have been half
the movie it is had they been lacking.
     Ang Lee has crafted a beautiful film full of entrancing colors -
azure, white, blush pink and deep mahogany.  I don't know what film
stock or lighting techniques he used, but the skin tones in this movie
are breathtaking.  He has filled accurate sets with beautiful costumes,
lavished with detail.  And his work with the cast speaks for itself.
     In comparing this to other movies ... it doesn't have the same
devastating emotional punch of HOWARDS END, but I think that may be
because it is more upbeat overall.  But it never gets 1/4 as sappy as
LITTLE WOMEN.  In fact, this movie is what LITTLE WOMEN should have
been.  And Hugh Grant fans might giggle to note that this movie depicts
or implies four weddings and one funeral.
--
Michael Doyle
maeldun@i-2000.com
To join "Mike's Midnight Movie Reviews" send a message to listproc@vidkraft.com
with no subject and the words "subscribe m3review" in the body.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Columbia)
Directed by      Ang Lee
Written by       Emma Thompson, from the novel by Jane Austen
Cast             Emma Thompson, Kate Winslet, Alan Rickman, Hugh Grant
MPAA Rating      "PG"
Running Time     135 minutes
Reviewed at      Mission Valley Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (20JAN96)
     Over-praised even more than Ron Howard's good-but-not-that-good
APOLLO 13, the last Jane Austen adaptation of the year (after CLUELESS
and PERSUASION) is a sweet, stately affair.  The story stars Emma
Thompson and Kate Winslet (HEAVENLY CREATURES) as two sisters-sans-
dowries, anxious to be married even if their cash-flow problems may
preclude same.  The suitors do come, of course, and all sorts of
silliness ensues as everyone tries to figure out exactly who is engaged
to whom.
     The charms of SENSE AND SENSIBILITY are many, thanks in great part
to the warmth of a fine cast.  The stronger performances include Winset,
Thompson, Alan Rickman, and Elizabeth Spriggs, my favorite, as the
lively Mrs. Jennings.  Sure, Ms. Thompson is too old for her part, but
she's a world better than the less-than-divine Hugh Grant.  The stam-
mering actor is too stiff the role of Bachelor Number One and his
presence completely weakens one of the story's core relationships.
     Taiwanese director Ang Lee (EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN) directs from a
screenplay by Thompson (!) that's very amusing.  In fact, the audience
that I saw this with laughed at almost every line, gesture, or action by
the characters.  Perhaps the reason for so much praise is due, in part,
to what this movie *isn't.*  SENSE AND SENSIBILITY is easy to like (and
easy to recommend) because it doesn't contain any blood, bullets,
hookers, strippers, cursing, swearing, superheroes, product plugs, sex,
drugs, rock `n' roll, or other self-destructive behaviors.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit the MOVIE HELL site http://www-nvision.com/hell/>

Author
Christopher Null
     Finally, a film to make Jane Austen proud.  The third adaptation of
her work this year (the first being CLUELESS's modernization of "Emma;"
the second, the dreadful PERSUASION), first-time screenwriter Emma
Thompson and director Ang Lee have crafted a magnificent and exquisitely
detailed piece of art which redeems the failures of the other two.
     SENSE AND SENSIBILITY tells the story of the Dashwood family, who,
after the death of Mr. Dashwood, lose all their wealth to the son of Mr.
Dashwood's prior marriage.  The four Dashwood women, the mother and three
daughters (Elinor [Emma Thompson], Marianne [Kate Winslet], and young
Margaret), must find a way to make ends meet as the elder daughters face
the daunting problems of love and romance.
     Competing for the affections of Marianne are the dashing playboy
Willoughby (newcomer Greg Wise) and the upright Colonel Brandon (Alan
Rickman).  Meanwhile, Elinor finds herself falling for Edward (Hugh
Grant), who, without spoiling the plot, isn't completely forthright with
Elinor about his availability.  Throughout it all, the high society
gossips make everyone squirm with their constant chatter.
     Sound like a 19th century soap opera?  It is, and an awfully good one
at that.  But on top of a nicely-crafted story, Thompson has enriched what
could have been a dull period piece (see PERSUASION for a frightening
example of this) with an unexpectedly hilarious series of vignettes that
underscores the endless procession of romantic misunderstandings and
entanglements that weave through the girls' lives.  And oddly, though the
romance and courtship of that bygone era is archaic, the scenes are
equally relevant today.  Of course, it's not all mirth and hilarity: 
judging from the bawling woman sitting next me, this film can really pull
the tears out, too.
     Thompson and especially Winslet (who was so exquisite in 1994's
HEAVENLY CREATURES) are perfectly matched as near opposites who find some
common ground as the film progresses.  Grant and the other supporting cast
members are also admirable.  Taiwanese director Ang Lee infuses the film
with some variety and cleverness, too.  In all, the film really comes
together as a whole.
     While some of the overly talky scenes tend to drag on too long (thus
pushing the film into 2 1/4 hours of length), making the mind often start
to wander, we're still left with a memorable film that brings out
everything we love about these kinds of stories.  And best of all, it
leaves us with the message that while nothing is ever as perfect as it
seems, things have a funny way of working out for the best.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Brian Koller
"Sense and Sensibility" takes place at the turn of the
nineteenth century in England, when respectable women did
not have careers, and young maids were obliged to wait
for suitors.  Looks and personality mattered then as now,
but most important of all was to have a generous dowry,
for then a woman would have many suitors to choose from.
The Dashwood family consists of a husband and wife and
three daughters, two of them at marrying age.  The eldest
daughter, Elinor (Emma Thompson), has sensitive eyes but is 
reserved in displaying her feelings.  In contrast, the lovely 
middle daughter Marianne (Kate Winslet) is willful and emotive, 
as is the precocious youngest daughter Margaret (Emilie Francois).  
When the father dies, his estate goes to his son John by an 
earlier wife, leaving the Dashwoods with no dowries and only a 
modest annuity.
Worse, John's wife Fanny proves to be selfish and greedy.
She talks her husband out of increasing the Dashwood's
annuity and instead plans to kick them out of their mansion.
The Dashwoods are visited by Fanny's brother Edward Ferrars 
(Hugh Grant).  Grant and Thompson take a liking to each other, 
and the Dashwoods hope for an engagement, but meddling Fanny 
sends Grant to London.  It also turns out that Grant is already
engaged, for five years, to a woman Grant no longer wants.
Evicted, the Dashwoods move in with their cousin Sir John Middleton,
a widower who lives with his mother-in-law Mrs. Jennings.
Middleton and Jennings are gregarious people.  They are
delighted to see the Dashwood clan and set about marrying
the two elder daughters off.
Soon, Marianne has a suitor, the older, stiff Colonel Brandon 
(Alan Rickman).  However, Marianne prefers the dashing young John 
Willoughby, who shares Marianne's passion for life.  Again the 
Dashwoods expect an engagement, but unexpectedly Willoughby 
leaves for London.  It is usual in a Jane Austen novel for the most 
obvious suitor to not turn out to be the best.  Austen prefers 
character to personality.
Determined to marry off the spurned Dashwoods, Mrs. Jennings
takes the two to London, where no one shows much interest
in them.  Marianne sees Willoughby at a party, but he is cold to 
her, as he has decided to wed a woman with fifty thousand pounds
dowry instead.  He needs the money, as he has been disinherited
for bad behaviour.
The Dashwoods return to Middleton's country cottage.
Marianne, still pining for the love of Willoughby, wanders into 
the fields during a thunderstorm, to sob and stare at Willoughby's 
neighboring estate.  Fortunately, Colonel Brandon comes to the 
rescue, carrying Marianne home.  Marianne becomes seriously ill from 
her exposure but does recover, and re-kindles her romance with Brandon.
Meanwhile, Grant is freed from his romantic obligations,
and visits the cottage to declare his love for Elinor.
There is a double wedding, a happy ending.  Willoughby, who is
not invited, can only gaze wistfully at the celebration.
The story is much deeper than this article allows, and the
characters, both major and minor, come alive with their
various personalities.  Although the film is over two hours,
not a scene nor line of dialogue is unwanted.  The costumes,
cinematography, even the hairstyles are exemplary.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Ben Hoffman
     On first hearing about SENSES AND SENSIBILITY, written by Jane
Austen 200 years ago, (her first novel), the screenplay by Emma
Thompson (her first screenplay) and directed by the Taiwanese Ang Lee
(THE WEDDING BANQUET, EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN), one could not help but
wonder what the film might turn out to be.  Put away your fears.  The
combination, along with some fine acting, has emerged as probably the
best film of the year.
     Lots of things have changed in 200 years.  They had no cars, no
TV, etc., and their lifestyles were very much different than is ours
today.  But emotions have not had a metamorphosis.  Then, as now,
there were good people and bad, the selfish and the generous, and
through it all was "love" and desire and decorum.
     SENSE AND SENSIBILITY is essentially about two sisters and the men
they desired and those who wanted the sisters to be their wife.  That
was not as easy as it sounds.  Money and station in life are here looked
upon very carefully by both the sisters, the men, the parents.
     All of this is carefully laid out in a complex but orderly
fashion.  Thompson wisely stuck as closely to Austen's book as film-
making would allow and, with a fine director, we have a masterpiece.
     Very briefly, the story is that the law in England at that time
said that the estate of the father went to his son.  When the father,
Henry Dashwood, (Tom Wilkinson) was dying he told his son by his first
wife.  John (James Fleet), how he wanted the estate handled.  The elder
Dashwood had been married before.  By his second wife, (Gemma Jones),
he had three daughters.  From John, he extracted the promise that the
widow and her three daughters would be well taken care of but it was
not long before John's wife, Fanny (Harriet Walter) began, after the
death of her father-in-law, to minimize the amount John had been
intending to give the widow and daughters, and helped to make their
life miserable.
     At the first opportunity, the widow and her children, with little
money of their own, moved away but before that happened, the eldest
daughter, Elinor, (Emma Thompson) had fallen in love with Fanny's
brother, Edward (Hugh Grant).  While it seemed as if they were
engaged, when Elinor moved with her mother and sisters, the expected
visits from Edward did not occur.  Elinor was hurt but took things as
well as she could.  The film's other love story is that of the younger
sister, Marianne (Kate Winslett) and the several men who fell in love
with her.
     Faithful to the period in every respect, the movie depicts the
lives, the yearnings of the people involved.  How far does one go in
declaring one's love?   Is a man 35-years-old too decrepit to marry a
27-year-old?   Is a woman in her late twenties "over the hill?"  These
and many other questions are encountered and resolved in a most
proficient manner, aided by such fine actors as Alan Rickman, Robert
Hardy, Elizabeth Spriggs, and Emile Franois and others.  All have
important roles and all do well by them.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Well, it is almost certain now.  E. M. Forster, monarch of art
house class film productions has been deposed.  With so many of his
major novels already adapted, it was only a matter of time before a new
monarch had to be chosen.  The new queen is Jane Austin.  Emma
Thompson, one of the two most popular art house actresses (the other
being Helena Bonham-Carter) not only stars in this adaptation of
Austen's SENSE AND SENSIBILITY but in this case she even tries her hand
at writing it.  Well, perhaps suggesting that a crown has been passed
is overstating the matter, but in less than a year we have seen
CLUELESS (inspired by EMMA) and PERSUASION, and we will shortly have a
serious adaptation of EMMA and a BBC version of PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.
The current SENSE AND SENSIBILITY certainly has the marks of being a
prestige film.  It is directed by Ang Lee of THE WEDDING BANQUET and
EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN and it has a lush and luscious score by Patrick
Doyle who has done so many of Kenneth Branagh's films, often featuring
Branagh's wife Emma Thompson.
     In Jane Austen's time "sensibility" was almost the opposite of
today's meaning of "sense."  The word meant following emotions rather
than logic.  Austen's novel is of two sisters who have very parallel
sorts of stories, but one of whom approaches life with sense and the
other with sensibility.  In the story Mrs. Dashwood (Gemma Jones) and
her three daughters find themselves reduced from having a comfortable
existence to being homeless when Mrs. Dashwood's ex-husband dies.  The
widow discovers her home has been left to her step-son, John Dashwood
and his wife, the aptly-named Fanny.  John was left with the
responsibility to take care of the women, but Fanny talks him out of
the expensive duty.  The family of four women eventually are invited by
a cousin to move into a Devonshire cottage much smaller than their
previous living arrangements and the daughters' prospects for finding
good husbands are much diminished.  Marianne, the middle daughter
(played by Kate Winslet of HEAVENLY CREATURES), a women of great
sensibility (in the Austen meaning) but little sense, is attracted to
the handsome John Willoughby (Greg Wise), who seems to love her.  The
eldest daughter Elinor (Emma Thompson), a woman of strong sense but
little emotional sensibility, is attracted to Fanny Dashwood's brother,
the pleasant but oh-so-diffident Edward Ferres (Hugh Grant).  But their
plans will go awry when each man is called away unexpectedly to London.
     I cannot claim to be much of a fan of Jane Austen and her stories
of what seem often to me to be overwrought accounts of love and
manners.  But Ang Lee tells this story so well and with such warmth and
wit that he overcomes the weaknesses in the plot.  He manages to make
Austen's characters far more interesting than what they do.  And it is
the minor characters who have the most interest.  Yes, there is some
depth to Elinor Dashwood as the logical spinster in the role Thompson
wrote for herself; Thompson is always very good with body language.
Also Winslet is good but not really memorable as the flighty, romantic
sister.  But the minor characters are the most engaging.  Gemma Jones
has a great air of sad dignity as Mrs. Dashwood.  Elizabeth Spriggs, a
freight train of a woman, is a popular busy-body.  Much too rarely seen
outside of British TV comedy is the rubber-faced Hugh Laurie who could
read the phone book and make it funny.  Here he has a small role, but a
funny one.  Alan Rickman is usually good actor and here as the patient,
disappointed suitor he matches the sad dignity of Gemma Jones.  Hugh
Grant plays almost the same likable foul-up that he played in FOUR
WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL.  The look of the film and especially the
costumes give a real period feel, though at least the print I saw
seemed to be faded and the film stock inconsistent from scene to scene.
     After I did not greatly enjoy PERSUASION earlier this year I was
not expecting to like SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.  In fact it was the first
film of Jane Austen that I can remember having enjoyed.  Rate it a +2
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael Redman
Based on Jane Austen's book and adapted by Emma Thompson (who also stars),
this is a tale of romance in the England of horse-drawn carriages and country manors.
Occasionally there is talk of "women's films" and "men's films": movies that
are aimed at one gender or the other. Most of the time these designations are
over-stated and the films are usually equally enjoyable by both. Every once
and a while there appears a story that resonates much more with one sex: some
buddy films, "The Bridges Of Madison County" and others. "Sense And
Sensibility" is definitely a women's film.
Not being of that particular gender, much of the film meandered by for me. I
didn't participate as the women of the audience audibly voiced their approval
or lack thereof as each new man entered the lives of the all female family.
However I could appreciate the story, overly-long as it is, the competent and
often inspired acting and the grand English countryside.
The plot involves a family with three daughters who are forced to move from
their mansion to a beautiful cottage on a rambling estate when the father
dies. The two older daughters fall in love with suitors and spend a lot of
time wandering through fields. Then one of the...zzz...zzz...oh, something
happens and the family works harder to get the daughters married off. But it
turns out that...zzz...zzz...something else happens and everyone cries.
It's truly a beautiful and touching film, but male readers should take a
woman friend to tell them how wondrous it is and so that they can find out
what happened when they dozed off.
[This appeared in the 2/1/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, PG, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
[drama]
Starring: Emma Thompson (Elinor), Kate Winsley (Marianne), Alan Rickman
(Colonel Brandon), Hugh Grant (Edward Ferreras), Greg Wise (Willoughby),
produced by Lindsay Doran, written by Emma Thompson, directed by Ang Lee,
based on the novel by Jane Austen.
I don't understand why a film made with a lot of class, and set in
historical time settings are considered so great (or at least present
themselves as such). "Sense & Sensibility" is another one of those films, but
it's not that it's bad, it's just a soap operas set in a different time
period, and a boring one at that.
This is the story of the Dashwoods, a family of women living in England
sometime in the 18th or 19th century. They are an "upstanding" family that
comes from a wealthy heritage. Although this is past the era of arranged
marriages, the people here don't exactly marry out of love. It's as if every
person is a robot going through the motions and can't really express what
they feel. The dialogue is dry and almost unrealistic. They do not speak in
Shakespeare-like speech, but the dialogue has an extremely highbrow,
snobbish, elegant tone to it.
Emma Thompson stars as Elinor Dashwood, the oldest of three daughters who
live with their widowed mother. They don't really have occupations because
they inherited a fortune, but many things happen to them because of this.
Elinor meets a handsome gentleman named Edward Ferreras (Hugh Grant) who she
is drawn to immediately and gets along with well. Basically, it isn't any
different from romance stories we see today, and it's a shame it does not
become the focal point of the film because it was quite interesting. 
The middle daughter, Marianne (Winsley), is attractive and the perfect age
for marriage. No wonder she meets Colonel Brandon (Rickman), but is even more
attracted to the rebellious Willoughby (Wise) who comes to her rescue when
she sprains her ankle while frolicking in the meadows (literally). Marianne
later finds out Willoughby is quite a coward (now there's a shock). In fact,
most of the events are even more formulated than this. 
Despite all these romantic elements and storylines, there really isn't any
one plot to the film. It is just the story of a close-knit family of women
who care for each other and must somehow make ends meet in this rigid
society. Just when it seems that one of them has fallen in love something
comes up and their lover is gone, or some other kind of tragedy ensues. We've
seen all of these characters before, and they are not any more interesting or
original here. 
 I have to give "Sense & Sensibility" credit though. It is not formulated
for the sake of dramatics and sappiness, it is true to itself. This should
make for some depth, but it doesn't work well here. Everything is too boring
and slowly paced to maintain interest. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SENSE AND SENSIBILITY is the latest Jane Austin movie to come to
the big screen.  Taking her first crack with a movie script, Emma
Thompson adapted the novel for the cinema.  For the director, we have
the wonderful and imaginative Ang Lee from EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN among
other highly acclaimed movies.  To compliment these, almost all of the
roles are well cast.  The result for me was an excellent movie, but
one, nevertheless, that disappointed me and found me checking my watch
during the slow parts.  Perhaps my disappointment lay in having
recently seen similar but much better film adaptations in PERSUASION by
Jane Austin and FEAST OF JULY by H. E. Bates.
     SENSE AND SENSIBILITY tells the story of two families joined by a
common father, Henry Dashwood (Tom Wilkinson).  At the start of the
story, the father dies and by law and by custom he passes his huge
estate onto his eldest son, John (James Fleet), but admonishes him to
take care of his sister, Mrs. Dashwood (Gemma Jones).  John's evil wife
Fanny (Harriet Walter) soon convinces him that the Dashwoods, having no
estate to take care of, can get along fine on the 500 pounds per annum
from the will and need no help from them.
     Mrs. Dashwood's family consists of two daughters of marrying age,
Elinor (Emma Thompson) and Marianne (Kate Winslet) and one about nine
(Emile Francois).  The Dashwoods stay briefly at the family estate
while Fanny counts the silver.  During this interlude, Fanny's younger
brother, Edward Ferrars (Hugh Grant), stops by for a visit.  He is a
modest man of minimal emotions.  He proclaims that, "All I want, all
I've ever wanted is the quiet of a private life, but my mother wants me
distinguished."
     Eventually, Edward falls in love with Elinor, but Marianne is not
impressed, declaring, "Can love really be satisfied with such polite
affections?  To love is to burn."  Fanny can not stand the idea of her
brother falling in love with poor relatives and gets the Dashwoods out
of her house and Edward off to London.  The Dashwoods rent a mere
"cottage" owned by their cousin, a boisterous, rich, but fairly crude
gentleman (Robert Hardy).
     At the cottage, they met two mysterious men, the war hero Colonel
Brandon (Alan Rickman) and the handsome young John Willoughby (Greg
Wise), who both fall instantly in love with Marianne.  They are jealous
of each other, and John claims that "Brandon is the sort of man
everyone speaks well of, but nobody talks to."  To further complicate
matters, Lucy Steele (Imogen Stubbs) drops by to confess her love for
Edward.  A soap opera of the highest caliber.
     Many wonderful scenes abound.  The best is a sad scene of Marianne
in blowing cold and gray rain while dramatic music plays.  Many small
scenes were wonderful too.  One of my favorites was the one where
Marianne and John Willoughby challenge each other in a sort of love
duet to recite Shakespeare's sonnets by heart.
     The best piece of acting is by Kate Winslet from HEAVENLY
CREATURES.  She is a stunning actress who shows more emotion that
everyone else in the movie combined.  I hope to see her in many more
films.  The brilliant Emma Thompson gives a perfectly acceptable
performance, but one of the least impressive of her career.  Hugh Grant
plays Hugh Grant and sticks to a single awkward expression.
     Emile Francois and Gemma Jones have small parts but do a lot with
them.  Imogen Stubbs, best in the great, but largely unknown movie A
SUMMER STORY, gives a fetching performance.  Alan Rickman and Greg Wise
play excellent mysterious roles.  Only James Fleet and Harriet Walter
seem miscast.  As villains, they are never believable and play their
roles as too much of a caricature.
     The best part of SENSE AND SENSIBILITY may be the costumes (Jenny
Beavan and John Bright), especially the men's hats with the large
flowing brims.  Made me want to run out to my local haberdasher - too
bad hats are no longer in high fashion.  The sets by Luciana Arrighi
are highly evocative of that era.  The music by Patrick Doyle has the
drama of some of the melodramas of the 30s and 40s.  The cinematography
by Michael Coulter does a good job of bringing out the inherit beauty
of the surroundings.
     Now for the problems with SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.  For some reason,
Ang Lee decides to hold back too much.  The emotional punch of
PERSUASION rarely occurs here; there just is not enough tension and
passion.  Lee keeps throttling his actor and actresses.  Given the high
energy of his other pictures, I remain nonplused why he approached this
movie the way he did.  The slow editing by Tim Squyres must also share
some of the blame.  In an otherwise enjoyable show, I found myself
getting bored at times.  Admittedly SENSE AND SENSIBILITY has a
wonderful ending and people do leave the theater with an upbeat feeling
even with all of its flaws.
     SENSE AND SENSIBILITY runs a long 2:15; my seat was complaining
well before the end.  It is rated PG, but is totally non-offensive G
fare.  I think it would interest kids over about eight.  Even though I
was quite disappointed by the film, I did like it a lot and recommend
it to you.  It gets *** in my book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Emma Thompson, Kate Winslet, Alan Rickman, Hugh Grant, Greg Wise, 
      Gemma Jones, Emilie Francois, Harriet Walter
Director: Ang Lee
Producer: Lindsay Doran
Screenplay: Emma Thompson based on the novel by Jane Austen
Cinematography: Michael Coulter
Music: Patrick Doyle
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     It's a curious thing that the best 1995 adaptation of a Jane Austen 
book happens to be of her worst novel.  SENSE AND SENSIBILITY was the 
author's first published work and, as is often the case with early 
writing efforts, displays an undeniable shallowness:  themes are half-
developed, characterization is uneven, and plotting follows a 
predictable straight-forwardness.  Austen's later books, including 
PERSUASION, which was developed into a wonderfully sumptuous film 
earlier this year, and EMMA, which received unusual treatment in 
CLUELESS, plumb the human soul far more deeply, creating characters and 
situations of greater versatility and vitality.  
     That's more in the nature of literary criticism than a film review, 
however.  SENSE AND SENSIBILITY is a wonderful motion picture, even 
given the weaknesses of the source material.  Emma Thompson's screenplay 
has remained faithful to the events and spirit of the book, while 
somehow managing to plug a few holes and infuse the tale with more light 
humor than is evident in Austen's original text.  The resulting product 
is a little too long (one-hundred thirty-five minutes), but still 
represents a fine time at the movies, especially for those with a bent 
towards historical romantic melodramas.
     As mentioned above, the story isn't all that complex or surprising, 
and those unfamiliar with Austen's work won't be left in the dark.  
We're introduced to the three Dashwood sisters:  Elinor (Emma Thompson), 
the eldest -- a old maid past marriageable age who keeps her emotions 
bottled up in favor of a constant show of public decorum; Marianne (Kate 
Winslet), the middle child, who is Elinor's opposite in temperament and 
attitude; and Margaret (Emilie Francois), an eleven-year old who seems 
to be following in Marianne's uninhibited footsteps.  The girls live 
with their mother (Gemma Jones) in a small country cottage to which they 
are "exiled" after their half-brother inherits their father's estate and 
decides there's not enough room for everyone.
     During the course of SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, three men come in and 
out of the Dashwoods' home:  Edward Ferrars (Hugh Grant), a charming, if 
somewhat inept, young gentleman who captures Elinor's heart; Colonel 
Brandon (Alan Rickman), a gallant neighbor who is hopelessly smitten by 
Marianne; and the dashing Willoughby (Greg Wise), who is the living 
embodiment of Marianne's every fantasy.  The story of who ends up with 
whom, and how they get that way, is told with deft skill and a 
pleasantly humorous romantic touch.
     As is so often the case in British productions, acting is more 
important than the script or the impressive production values.  Emma 
Thompson's Elinor can join the actresses' characters from HOWARDS END, 
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, and this year's CARRINGTON as examples of top-
notch, finely-nuanced performances.  Here, perhaps borrowing a leaf from 
Anthony Hopkins, she develops a poignant portrait of a woman who must 
conceal a broken heart beneath a proper, civilized exterior.  Thompson, 
who has never before played a character suffering from this kind of 
repression, proves she's as good at this as she is being the freespirit.
     Kate Winslet, who received her first international exposure through 
HEAVENLY CREATURES, fits perfectly into the period setting, recalling a 
younger Helena Bonham Carter.  Her youth and energy are perfect for the 
overly-emotional Marianne.  Winslet isn't as accomplished as Thompson at 
capturing the camera's attention, but rarely is she completely eclipsed, 
either.  She interacts effectively with her co-star as Marianne and 
Elinor learn from each other when it's best to temper emotions and when 
it's best to let them go.
     As expected, the supporting cast is excellent.  Emilie Francois is 
a marvelous find as little Margaret.  Hugh Grant brings his usual boyish 
charm to Edward, and Alan Rickman (DIE HARD), too often pigeonholed into 
villainous roles, shows for the first time since TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY 
that he's very much at home in a romantic part.  Greg Wise is suitably 
roguish, and veterans Gemma Jones (FEAST OF JULY), Harriet Walter 
(Harriet Vane in TV's LORD PETER WIMSEY MYSTERIES), and Robert Hardy 
(MARY SHELLY'S FRANKENSTEIN) give personality to characters with less 
screen exposure.
     The novel's flaws guarantee that SENSE AND SENSIBILITY cannot be a 
perfect motion picture, but it would be difficult, I think, to do much 
better with the material than Emma Thompson and director Ang Lee (EAT 
DRINK MAN WOMAN) have here.  With more Jane Austen on the way (versions 
of PRIDE AND PREJUDICE and EMMA), it's still too early to say which 
adaptation will stand out as the best, but SENSE AND SENSIBILITY makes a 
strong case.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
