Title
Review for Summer Catch (2001)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Frankie Paiva
One thing's for sure, `Summer Catch' sucks. It takes the cake as the worst
Freddie Prinze Jr. movie, remarkably taking the title from the horrendous `Down
to You'. But the fun you'll have mocking this movie, if you decide to spend
ill-fated money on it, is almost worth a matinee. Everyone is pretty much at
fault for the failure of this film, but the script in particular is just
shockingly awful. 
Ryan (Prinze Jr.) is a pitcher for the Cape Cod team of a prestigious New
England baseball league. Ryan is a hopeful local boy, and is under pressure to
impress the big league scouts at the games. His family is less than supportive
of him, he makes some rather interesting friends, and he has quite the short
temper.
But it wouldn't be a Freddie Prinze Jr. movie without a love interest. So in
comes Tenley Parrish (Jessica Biel), the daughter of a very rich family in town
for the summer. Ryan mows their grass, and the two are instantly attracted to
one another when they meet. Her father (Bruce Davison), disapproves of Ryan.
Together, they may just make it through the summer, and prove everyone wrong. 
That's got to sound just a tad familiar to someone. It's amazing that this film
was ever greenlit at all. Prize's star wattage was what probably closed the
deal. I still cling to the hope that someday Freddie will start taking projects
like `The House of Yes' again, but with the role of Fred in 2002's `Scooby-Doo'
coming up, it doesn't seem likely. Why Prinze doesn't mind being typecast
continually in these teen romantic comedies, no one knows. 
`Summer Catch' has a problem with not being very interesting. The script focuses
too much on the romance element, and overlooks the character development and
exciting baseball opportunities of the script. Some of the characters, like
Ryan's dad (Fred Ward), and a rival pitcher, are just so blatantly and
stereotypically evil you can't help but laugh. The baseball scenes are sleep
inducing, and don't even have the schmaltzy quality of an underdog Disney sports
movie. 
Prinze works with what he's given, but Biel is dreadful as a lead. She, however,
is also given the worst dialogue of the film. Still, her character changes
personalities about five times just to make the audience laugh. When she utters
the line, `Let's be together!' near the end of the film, I was in tears of
laughter. 
And so was the rest of the audience. At about the halfway point, where it was
most obvious things weren't getting any better, the laughter started. By the
climax, most of the packed house was about to lose it. It's so easy to snicker
at the film, that it becomes a sort of grand event. An interactive movie going
experience like no other. Releasing this movie must embarrass Warner Bros. 
Although I would never recommend paying money for this film, if you sneak in for
a double feature after seeing another movie, or have someone else pay for your
ticket, you'll be delighted by the sheer stupidity and utter lack of quality
that is `Summer Catch'. It's a summer movie that should disappear faster than a
well-thrown fastball. 
Read more reviews at www.moviepie.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
SUMMER CATCH isn't.  A lackluster twist on the old baseball classic BULL DURHAM,
the movie features a bunch of young heartthrobs cast to attract just the right
demographics.  It stars pretty boy Freddie Prinze Jr. who has one of least
impressive track records around.  The only movie that I ever remember liking him
in was SHE'S ALL THAT.
As directed by Michael Tollin and written by Kevin Falls and John Gatins, the
picture doesn't have a single original idea.  "Practice Like Champions Today"
reads the sign in the locker room.  The spoken dialog isn't much better.
The film has trouble deciding what kind of movie it wants to be.  Sometimes, it
wants to be a cleaned up version of PORKY'S.  To accomplish that with a PG-13
rating, the guys don thong bikini panties -- don't ask -- to show off their
derričres, and the girls are seen in bras and wet T-shirts.  At other times, the
movie thinks it's about the sport of baseball with serious scouts in the stands
hanging on every pitch.  Still other times, it tries to be a study of the
debilitating effects of class consciousness in America, as some of the actors
show 100-year-old English class sensibilities.
Ryan Dunne (Prinze), who mows lawns with his father, has his big chance this
summer.  Playing in a supposedly very important collegiate summer league, which
has less than a hundred fans, Ryan hopes to be picked up by a major league team.
 Ryan is one of the few residents of his Cape Cod town who have absolutely no
accent.  
After vowing in the opening to "swear off woman and booze," Ryan gets plastered
and falls asleep on the playing field with Dede (Brittany Murphy from GIRL,
INTERRUPTED).  Shortly thereafter, Ryan moves upscale, going from waitress Dede
to blueblood Tenley Parrish (Jessica Biel), who is a card-carrying member of the
local gentry.  Tenley wants to be an architect, but her cruel father is shipping
her off to San Francisco to join an investment banker firm.  She is an adult who
feels powerless to resists her father's instructions.  (When you've stopped
crying, you can continue reading.)  Her father is played by an overacting Bruce
Davison, who recently was so effective as the father of a rebellious girl in
CRAZY/BEAUTIFUL.  Ryan's clichéd, alcoholic father is played by Fred Ward.  The
only semi-decent performance in the picture comes from Brian Dennehy as Ryan's
coach.  
There isn't one scintilla of chemistry between the love birds and not much
between Ryan and the sport with which he is supposedly so infatuated.  The
ending will likely have baseball fans shaking their heads in disbelief.

Author
Bob Bloom
 SUMMER CATCH (2001) 1 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Freddie Prinze Jr., Jessical
Biel, Matthew Lillard, Fred Ward, Jason Gedrick, Brittany Murphy, Bruce Davison
and Brian Dennehy.  Screenplay by Kevin Falls and John Gatins. Story by Falls.
Directed by Mike Tollin. Rated PG-13. Approx. 110 minutes. 
 Summer Catch is a minor league effort, nine innings of banality with a lineup
of stock situations and stereotypical characters. 
 This feature is like a double header, two sets of clichés for the price of one.
Not only do we get the usual tired sports chestnuts, but the banal rich
girl-poor boy love story is tossed in for good measure. 
 An original moment in this loser is as rare as a Chicago Cubs World Series
appearance. 
 The screenplay by Kevin Falls and John Gatins, based on a story by Falls,
merely lobs its plotline at the audience. This is a story that needed sent down
for seasoning and more coaching. 
 Summer Catch centers around Ryan Dunne (Freddie Prinze Jr.), a Cape Cod youth
chosen to participate in the prestigious Cape Cod Baseball League, supposedly a
showcase for the best young amateur and college players in the country. 
 Ryan is a blue-collar kind of guy. He works with his dad taking care of the
lawns of Cape Cod's rich and famous. 
 He also, as we are informed early, his own worst enemy. He has the potential
and the talent, but always seems to self-destruct at the crucial moment. 
 So, Ryan tries to remained focused on baseball. Then he meets Tenley Parrish
(Jessica Biel), daughter of one of the blue bloods whose lawn he manicures.
Tenley, a name only a hack screenwriter could invent, is unlike her snobbish
counterparts and falls for Ryan. 
 If you can't figure out where all this nonsense leads, then you need a remedial
course in film viewing. 
 As always Prinze is pretty to look at, but his performance mainly consists of
facial expressions: puppy dog love, heartbreak, frustration, self-loathing or
determination. 
 Biel cries a lot, while Bruce Davison merely acts smarmy as her class-conscious
father. 
The only beacon is Matthew Lillard's fun-loving Billy Brubaker, the team's
catcher. 
 Summer Catch borrows situations and stylings from other baseball movies, such
as Bull Durham and The Natural. 
 No curve balls here, no sliders. Every pitch is predictable. A blind umpire
could call this movie. 
 Summer Catch is strictly rookie league moviemaking. It has as much chance of
making the movie hall of fame as the Dodgers have of moving back to Brooklyn. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Other reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on
golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom 

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
They say a voiceover is a sure sign of a weak film, but what about a movie
with multiple voiceovers in the first few minutes?  That's what you get with
Summer Catch, the third collaboration between Freddie Prinze, Jr and Matthew
Lillard (the fourth - Scooby-Doo - will be out next summer).  They're like
the Burt Reynolds (an unexplainably popular, blander-than-bland heartthrob)
and Dom DeLuise (a guy who people think is funny but really isn't) for the
new millennium.
Casting aside his fondness for making only crappy films with three-word
titles, Prinze (She's All That, Down To You, Boys and Girls, Head Over
Heels) has now ventured into the hitherto unknown realm of making crappy
films with two-word titles.  Catch is to baseball what The Replacements was
to football last year (and, in fact, baseball is to fall 2001 what football
was to fall 2000, with Hardball hoping to become this year's Remember the
Titans).
Prinze, who is by now completely interchangeable with MTV tool Carson Daly,
plays Ryan Dunne, the son of a blue-collar landscaper in Chatham,
Massachusetts who is about to embark on his first season of
semi-professional baseball.  The catch is he's playing for the hometown
Chatham A's in the Cape Cod League - a summer league tailored for kids who
have just left college in hopes of being chosen by Major League scouts for
their own farm teams.  So our Ryan has gone from mowing the grass at the
local ballpark to mowing down batters with his 95 mph fastball.
But that's not the only mowing Ryan is doing.  He's also in a relationship
with a rich girl named Tenley Parrish (Jessica Biel, 7th Heaven), who is
spending the summer in her family's vacation home in Chatham.  Of course,
her dad (Bruce Davison, crazy/beautiful) doesn't approve of his daughter
hanging around with the boy who cuts the grass.  But that hardly matters to
Ryan, especially when Tenley's outfits get skimpier and skimpier as Catch
progresses.
Of course, Ryan's problematic love life isn't the only thing on his mind.
He's got a history of self-destructing on the mound, and his hot temper
could cost him an opportunity to perform well at the obligatory Big Game.
A's coach John Schiffner (Brian Dennehy, Death of a Salesman) takes a
shining to the boy, but I think it has more to do with his plans to gobble
Ryan up like a chicken wing, as Dennehy is as big as the Green Monster.
In addition to Prinze's atrocious, half-hearted attempt at a chowdah accent,
you'll also be treated to a bunch of subplots involving Ryan's distant
relationships with his dad (Fred Ward, Road Trip) and brother (Jason
Gedrick, TV's The Beast), countless shots of people enjoying Sam Adams beer,
as well as various sexual hijinks involving the other players on the team
(including one with Beverly D'Angelo and That '70's Show's Wilmer Valderrama
that was lifted right from Bull Durham).  The only remotely interesting
character is Katie (Zena Grey, Snow Day), Tenley's younger sister who knows
a lot about baseball (a la the precocious kids from Titans) and tries to
become the team's mascot.
A movie about Katie would have been ten times more fascinating, assuming
director Michael Tollin and writer John Gatins wouldn't be involved.  This
dynamic duo produced 2000 low-point Ready To Rumble, which starred Lillard's
spastic doppelganger, David Arquette.  One can only imagine Kevin Falls'
(Sports Night, The West Wing) sole contribution to the script was the oddly
stirring speech given to Ryan by one of his local buddies.  It seemed
incredibly out of place in a film whose big laughs are centered around men
wearing thong underwear.
1:40 - PG-13 for sexual content, language and some drinking

Author
Michael Dequina
_Summer_Catch_ (PG-13) * (out of ****)
        Freddie Prinze Jr.'s movie career continues with _Summer_Catch_, and if
that's not enough to bring fear to the hearts of intelligent moviegoers
everywhere, this will: it's a sports-themed romantic comedy-drama.  "Romantic
comedy" as in giving his target teenybopper audience all that lovey-dovey crap
that first endeared him to the shrieking _TRL_ demographic with 1999's
_She's_All_That_; "sports-themed" as in Prinze trying to show to any guys in the
theatre that he isn't such a girlyman; and, most painful of all, "drama" as in
Prinze wanting to prove to his many (justified) critics that he, in fact, does
possess range.  I'm sure he has one, but this is acting, not kitchen appliances,
we're talking about here, and _Summer_Catch_ won't hold much, if any, appeal to
anyone outside Prinze's limited fan base.
        This fact is made all too explicitly clear in the opening stages of the
film when Prinze's Ryan Dunne runs around a baseball field... wearing only
women's thong underwear.  From this point, it's obvious that the appeal of the
story of _Summer_Catch_ is moot; one's enjoyment of the film is ultimately
tested by whether or not such an image of a bare-assed Prinze sets off one's gag
reflex.  But without such a scene, perhaps the story would have been just as
boring to teenage girls as it would be to anyone else.  Ryan is a pitcher for a
team in the Cape Cod Baseball League; for one reason or another, the current
season is his last chance to catch the attention of pro scouts.  But his focus
on the game is shaken when he falls for the wealthy Tenley Parrish (Jessica
Biel), for whose family he and his father do gardening work.
        Thus begins all sorts of purported drama revolving around class
differences, following your heart, believing in your abilities, and so on. 
Director Mike Tollin and writers Kevin Falls and John Gatins' already humdrum
material is made more vapid by the leads.  Biel, who rather distressingly looks
at least a full decade older than her 19 years, is at least only flat and
unconvincing in her handful of "dramatic" scenes, which is more than can be said
for the ever-embarrassing Prinze.  His attempt at an accent comes and mostly
goes, and as in all his previous films, he uses the same eyes bulging/mouth
agape look to convey the entire spectrum of emotions.
        Prinze's lack of any acting talent is the only source of laughs in
_Summer_Catch_.  The intentional comedic element in the film is either tired or
just plain stupid.  Falling into the former category is Matthew Lillard, once
again playing goofy sidekick to Prinze (which he will yet again do in next
year's _Scooby-Doo_).  In the latter category are the inordinate number of jokes
involving women's lingerie: Lillard is also seen in a thong; a heavy-set woman
is shown in revealing lingerie (just one of the film's oh-so-funny jokes at the
expense of larger women); and, most bizarre of all, an uncredited, lace-clad
Beverly D'Angelo plays a character who apparently likes to put fruits and
vegetables in her nether regions.
        True to sports movie formula, _Summer_Catch_ ends with a big game scene.
 Just like the rest of the film, there are no surprises to be had--except that
somehow, some way, the fluke that is Freddie Prinze Jr.'s film career has
managed to go on for another couple of hours.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Summer Catch (2001)
Freddie Prinze Jr., Jessica Biel, Fred Ward, Jason Gedrick, Matthew
Lillard, Bruce Davison, Marc Blucas, Brian Dennehy, Corey Pearson,
Wilmer Valderrama. Written by Kevin Falls and John Gatins. Directed by
Mike Tollin. 108 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 2 stars
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
A number of critics have decided that it's open season on Freddie Prize
Jr., slamming the young actor as an utterly talentless pretty boy on
career cruise control in sound-alike, disposable teen fluff like "Head
Over Heels," "Boys and Girls," "Down to You" and "She's All That." While
the Prinze oeuvre is hard to defend, his talent is not. I first saw him
in the independent dark comedy "The House of Yes," where he gave a
subtle, impressive performance as the younger brother in one of
America's freakiest families. Prinze has the acting chops; he just needs
to take a few supporting roles in some grown-up movies to show the
non-believers that he has what it takes.
"Summer Catch" certainly won't help his case. Inoffensive, but utterly
generic, the baseball-related romantic comedy does little more than kill
time. The story deals with the love affair between Tenley (Jessica
Biel), a wealthy Cape Cod girl and Ryan (Prinze), a local boy from a
working class family who dreams of becoming a big-time baseball star.
Ryan's preoccupation with his new honey-bunny drives her elitist father
(Bruce Davison) crazy and endangers his position as pitcher with a Cape
Cod Summer League team.
It's a wonder the kid has any time to pitch, as his time is occupied
with making out with Tenley, fighting with her Dad, bonding with his own
Dad (Fred Ward, who deserves better than this), fighting with his
brother (Jason Gedrick) and carousing at a neighborhood bar with his
teammates. The filmmakers desperately want to make a quirky,
character-heavy baseball movie like "Bull Durham," but haven't got a
clue how to get there. And so they glide from one cliché to the next for
108 minutes.
The only bit of originality comes from Marc Blucas in a minor role as a
center-fielder from Texas. In an early barroom scene, Blucas, best known
as demon-fighting Riley Finn from "Buffy the Vampire Slayer," hears a
young woman compliment a guy on his ass, then turns to teammate Matthew
Lillard and states, "He does have a nice ass. A bubble butt." When
Lillard gives him an "are you insane?" look, Blucas calmly says, "It's
nothing sexual," then goes on to evaluate the hind-ends of some other
players, including Lillard's.
Speaking of asses, Prinze does not bare his in the movie. The actor has
a no nudity clause in his contract, so two stunt-butts were employed for
a couple of semi-nude shots.
Blucas, whose character secretly dates a large woman throughout the
story, gets another unique moment late in the film. Sick of hearing
teammates make "fat chick" jokes, he climbs on top of a table and loudly
declares his love of amply-sized ladies. While his speech still ends up
objectifying women, it remains a nice change of pace in a numbingly
ordinary movie.
Trivial tidbit: "Summer Catch" marks a Scooby Doo summit. Marc Blucas
appears in "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" as Fred from the Scooby Doo
gang, while Freddie Prinze Jr. plays the same character in the upcoming
big budget film version of the old cartoon.

Author
Christopher Null
Kids today, they don't just want to see heartthrob and master thespian
Freddie Prinze Jr. loving on the ladies.  No, they want to see him doing
something that takes a little more in the acting department: namely,
playing baseball.
Through a series of drippy voiceovers, we are informed that there's no
better proving ground for Major League Baseball than the Cape Cod summer
baseball leagues, where college also-rans and hopeful dropouts go to
play in the hopes of attracting big league attention.  Our man Freddie
has landed a spot as a pitcher on the prestigious Chatham A's, where he
is hoping for his big break.
It's only after he is given ample time to show off his abs and scamper
about in a woman's thong (don't ask) that we learn what the real story
of Summer Catch will be: That Prinze is a poor townie named Ryan Dunne,
struggling to make a name for himself; that neither his father (Fred
Ward) nor brother (Jason Gedrick) pulled themselves out of their blue
collar jobs and resent anyone who tries; and that the local beauty
Tenley -- Tenley! (Jessica Biel) -- is so far out of his league that he
probably shouldn't even bother... but of course he makes a play for her.
Summer Catch also makes an abortive stab at another half a dozen
subplots -- the jealousy of fellow townie and brazen slut Dee Dee
(Brittany Murphy), the alienation felt by Ryan's non-baseball playing
best friend (Gabriel Mann), or the fat chick fetish of fellow player
Miles (Marc Blucas).  Worst of these is a ludicrous bit involving That
'70s Show's Wilmer Valderrama and Beverly D'Angelo, both of whom appear
in the film simply to provide a nutty Mrs. Robinson-like substory and to
remind you of how much better done that was in Bull Durham.
In fact, virtually all of Summer Catch feels like it's been done better
somewhere else.  For starters, the film has a major question of
identity.  It's definitely not a sports movie, and it fails pretty
miserably at being a romance.  The worst part is the amateurish script
(co-written by an Arli$$ writing alumnus and a guy that starred in
Leprechaun 3), chock-full of phony emotion.  By the end, it all becomes
a platform for each character to deliver a soliloquy to Ryan that he
must take to heart.  Dad is on hand to give fatherly yet drunken
advice.  Coach (Brian Dennehy, just loving the fact that he's got some
work on the big screen) is on hand to give the curmudgeonly
counterpoint.  Ryan's catcher (Matthew Lillard, playing himself again)
is on hand to tell Ryan to "play catch" with him and make fun of the fat
fetish guy.  Ryan's stoner best friend is on hand to give the
go-get-'em-tiger-we're-behind-you talk.  And the girlfriend is on hand
to give heartwarming-nuzzly-follow-your-dreams counsel.  Before long,
you start to wonder: Is Freddy Prinze Jr. is capable of having a thought
of his own?
The only real joy in the film is found in Biel's character, and not just
because of the skimpy outfits, which are also usually wet.  She's the
only one in the movie that is able to do much with her role, taking the
rebelling-against-daddy character to at least a passing grade.  When
she's on screen, the time flies by.  When she's not, you realize that
for some ungodly reason this movie is almost two hours long.  For a
PG-13 teen romance (despite near-constant sexual innuendo), one has to
ask Warner Brothers: what were you thinking???
For her part, Biel has fallen so far from her 7th Heaven roots that she
has almost become Denise Richards.  Hollywood is either about to eat her
alive... or vice versa.  Either way, good luck, Jessica.  As for
Freddie, if he keeps pumping teen romances out at the rate of two a
year, Prinze's next "summer catch" is liable to be a venereal disease.
Director: Michael Tollin
Producer: Brian Robbins, Michael Tollin, Sam Weisman
Writer: Kevin Falls, John Gatins
Starring: Freddie Prinze Jr., Jessica Biel, Matthew Lillard, Fred Ward,
Jason Gedrick, Brittany Murphy, Gabriel Mann, Bruce Davison, Brian
Dennehy
http://summercatch.warnerbros.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
