Title
Review for Ringmaster (1998)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie reviews and trivia quizzes, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Based on the wildly popular "Jerry Springer" TV show, this movie follows the
lives of two groups of people before they make their bizarre appearances on
the infamous program. One posse comes from the trailer parks and are to be
featured in the "I slept with my stepfather" segment, and the other is based
on some fly-girl whose girlfriends keep sleeping with her undevoted "dog"
boyfriend.
CRITIQUE:
The truth is that if I didn't have a day job, I would probably watch the
real "Jerry Springer" show every day. I find it quite entertaining, despite
its complete lack of redeeming value. Having said that, the show itself is
outrageous, funny, and always filled with goofy surprises, as opposed to
this film which features no laughs (is this a comedy or a drama?),
uninteresting and completely unbelievable one-dimensional stereotypes, and a
contrived plot which bores us stupid all the way. I never thought I would
utter the word boring in the same sentence as Jerry Springer, but this film
is an absolute yawn-fest, despite offering various scenes featuring
simulated blowjobs, lesbians, T&A and TV violence (who would've guessed
that?).
I wish they would have either A) made this movie much, much funnier, or B)
turned it into a complete drama and given us a real perspective as to why
people like this actually put themselves through these public forums of
embarrassment. Unfortunately, it doesn't seem as though screenwriter Jon
Bernstein spent more than a drunken weekend watching real "Jerry Springer"
reruns to complete his script, leaving us with a boring film, featuring no
laughs, one-dimensional characters, and no fun whatsoever.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Jerry Springer used to be the Mayor of Cincinnati, Ohio. For this film, he
won the 1999 Razzie Award for Worst New Star, tied with Joe Esterhas from AN
ALAN SMITHEE FILM: BURN HOLLYWOOD BURN.

Author
Matt Williams
At the turn of the millennium, the name Jerry Springer has become
synonymous with "trash tv" and everything that has gone wrong with our
culture.  It's only fitting, then, that Jerry gets his own movie. But
Ringmaster, a half-hearted attempt to translate the "ideal" Jerry
Springer show free-for-all to the screen, ends up an even worse movie
than the concept sounds!
Jerry Springer stars as Jerry Farrelly, talk show host.  His show,
Jerry!, lets its guests air their dirty laundry in front of a national
television audience, and also (occasionally) engage in brutal fistcuffs.
The first set of guests, for the show titled "You Did WHAT With Your
Stepdaddy?", are a pathetic bunch of trailer trash.  Angel Zorzak (Jaime
Pressly) is a sex-starved 19-year old having an affair with her
stepfather (Michael Dudikoff).  In retaliation, her 34-year old mother,
Connie (Molly Hagen) strikes up a relationship with Angel's fiancee,
Willie (Ashley Holbrook).
The second Jerry! show is entitled "My Traitor Girlfriends". Starletta
(Wendy Raquel Robinson) is having problems with her boyfriend, Demond
(Michael Jai White).  He'll sleep with anyone, including Starletta's
best friends, Vonda (Tangie Ambrose) and Leshawnette (Nicki Michneaux).
Now, obviously, these are the screenwriters' attempts at setting up the
"perfect" Jerry Springer show.  But, where's the fun in that?  I mean,
part of the lurid appeal of his TV show is that the guests are real.
Real people with real problems and real bad attitudes.  Here, it's just
a bunch of actors acting badly, and it shows.
I guess here you also get to see the enchanting lives the "typical"
Jerry Springer guests live before their on-air appearances.  And you
also get to gawk at the "glamorous" life behind the scenes of Jerry's
show.  In other words, nothing very appealing is here at all.
But nothing can compare to when the film starts preaching its "message".
You see, Jerry Springer is all about helping the poor.  Anyone who
dislikes the show is simply uncomfortable with watching poor folk talk
about their problems.  However, Ringmaster conveniently forgets to
mention the fact that the show also happens to be exploiting those same
"poor folk" it supposedly champions.  Oh well, they never claimed it was
a rational argument.
If you're a die-hard Jerry Springer junkie, you ought to stick with the
real thing.  For those of you non-fans out there, Ringmaster certainly
won't convert you.  If anything, it may make you despise Jerry Springer
all the more.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Neil Abramson.
Cast: Jerry Springer, Jamie Pressly, Molly Hagan, Wendy Raquel Robinson, 
Michael Jai White, Michael Dudikoff, John Capodice, William McNamara, 
Krista Tesreau.
1998 - 95 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity, sex, and nudity).
Reviewed November 28, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
"Ringmaster," the film debut of controversial talk show host Jerry 
Springer (who also produces), is an uproarious, raunchy comedy that is 
much better than I expected it would be, not to mention funnier, but a 
film that didn't seem to add up to much when it was all over.
The film wisely does not focus on Springer (who actually is the blandest 
character here), but on two groups of lower-class people that are 
thrilled to get to go on the "Jerry" show. The first group is a bunch of 
white trash living in a trailer park. Angel (Jamie Pressly), a slutty 
19-year-old, works as a maid for a motel by day (and who services the 
customers, as well), and in the evening carries on an affair with her 
stepfather (Michael Dudikoff), much to the chargin' of her equally 
promiscuous mother (Molly Hagan). The second group of people is a feisty 
black woman named Starletta (Wendy Raquel Robinson) who is angered at 
her cheating "dog" boyfriend (Michael Jai White). When both groups are 
accepted on the show, they come into contact with each other, in more 
than one sense of the word, while at their all-expenses-paid hotel.
"Ringmaster," is far superior than I had expected because the film 
wisely centered on the characters, rather than Jerry, and it did a 
pretty good job of telling both of their stories. All actors, who are 
mostly unknowns, did a servicable job in their rather thankless roles, 
and Wendy Raquel Robinson, as Starletta, was, by far, the standout. In 
every single scene she was in, I couldn't help but laugh at her endless 
energy and hilarious dialogue. Also added to the comic relief of her 
character was her beloved hair piece, which goes through quite a lot 
during the duration of the film! I also liked Molly Hagan, as the mother 
of Angel, who is not a very happy woman, due to the fact that she is 
getting older, and nothing seems to be going right for her.
The interactions between all of the characters was entertaining and 
consistently comical, with a rather heavy dose of tastlessness. Where, 
"Ringmaster," ran into problems, I think, was simply in the slight 
story, which is pretty forgettable, and in the climax, in which drama 
and moralizing takes over. Although there is a surprisingly truthful 
conversation between Pressly and Hagan late in the picture, a final 
speech given by Springer rang totally false. It was as if Springer 
wanted to tell the world a meaningful reason why he has stuck with his 
show for so long, when everyone knows it is only because it is 
outrageous and he has fun with it. His reasoning goes no further than 
that, and so his speech really put a damper on the fast and humorous 
pace that came before.
What it all comes down to is that, "Ringmaster," is an overall fun way 
to spend an hour and a half, but it is nothing special. Nothing occurs 
in the film to really buoy it over into what I would actually consider a 
very good comedy, but it is a pleasant one. It would help considerably 
if you didn't have to pay the admissions price to go see it.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Neil Abramson
Cast:  John Capodice, Michael Dudikoff, Molly Hagan, Jaime Pressly,
Wendy Raquel Robinson, Jerry Springer, Michael Jai White
Screenplay:  John Bernstein
Producers:  Gary W. Goldstein, Steven Stabler
Runtime:  90 min.
US Distribution:  Artisan
Rated R:  sexual content, language
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
I've watched The Jerry Springer Show on only a few occasions, and each
time I lasted for about ten minutes before I was forced to change the
channel.  I find the show sickening and depressing.  I wonder what kind
of people would display themselves in such a degrading fashion just for
a chance to be on television.  I went to see Ringmaster because I
thought that it might answer my questions; I hoped that, just maybe, it
would give a little insight into the individuals willing to make fools
of themselves on a national program.
Ringmaster did not answer my questions.  The only insight I got was
into Jerry Springer, who seems like a nice guy at first, until it
becomes clear that the film is just a big whack at self-promotion.  The
picture doesn't seem like entertainment so much as a message in the form
of a film:  Springer, in the climax, adds a personal observation, in
which he states that the poor have just as much of a right to make fools
of themselves as the rich.  I have some arguments with this, but I'll
get to those later -- let's talk about the film first.
It revolves around two groups of people destined to appear on the Jerry
show.  The first group features a young woman named Connie (Molly
Hagan), whose 19 year-old daughter Angel (Jaime Pressly) and husband,
Rusty (Michael Dudikoff), are having sex (their segment is entitled,
"You Did What With Your Stepdaddy?").  To get back at her daughter,
Connie performs fellatio on Angel's fiancée, Willie (Ashley Holbrook). 
This is when Connie calls the Jerry show to see about appearing.
The second group features Demond (Michael Jai White), who cheats on his
annoying girlfriend, Starletta (Wendy Raquel Robinson).  Of course, he
doesn't just pick anyone to cheat with:  he gets it on with Starletta's
best friends.  So, Starletta calls the Jerry show and they fly to LA. 
While they're there, Demond hooks up with Angel and Connie, and a big,
silly mess accumulates, ending in a violent and disgusting episode of
the Jerry show.  
The one thing I really have to give credit for is the acting.  I
haven't seen most of these actors in other films, but they are all very
believable here.  Hagan and Pressly, in particular, both perfectly
embrace the image we now label as "trailer trash."  White is also pretty
good (much better than he was in Spawn), as is Robinson, even if she is
really annoying.  The interesting thing about all of these characters is
how they kind of grow on you by the end; even though they seem hateful
at first, you can't help but empathize with them a little.
But that doesn't change the purpose of the film, which is to 1) inflate
Jerry Springer's ego, and 2) promote his television show.  In his
"personal observation" that I mentioned before, Springer actually
expects us to believe that he's exploiting these people because it's the
morally right thing to do.  Forget the fact that he makes gobs of money,
and that the people who appear on these shows are mostly just interested
in the chance to fly to LA and star in their own fifteen minutes of a
television show.  No, Jerry apparently thinks that his show is a good
thing.
Well, I think that it is not.  I'm trying to think of an instance in
which rich people commonly make fools of themselves; he might be
referring the Oscars, or other talk shows that feature celebrities
talking about their drug addictions and other problems.  The difference
is that these celebrities are aware of what they're doing -- it's a
performance for them.  The people on The Jerry Springer Show don't
realize what they're doing (according to this film), and Springer merely
exploits them for money.  "This is a slice of American life," he shouts
at a disgruntled audience member, "and if you don't like it, then bite
something else!"
If this is what most Americans' life is like, then I'm truly
embarrassed.  I'm not embarrassed because there are poor people, but
because, for some reason, being poor is associated with having no pride
or self-worth.  I wonder how the audiences overseas will feel if
Ringmaster gets distribution there -- will it change their opinions of
Americans?   Ringmaster might have been an interesting film had it been
honest about its subject matter:  alas, it is not honest, and the result
is a picture that will disgust and depress you.  Jerry Springer should
be ashamed of himself.  

Author
Michael Dequina
_Ringmaster_ (R) no stars (out of ****)
The overexposure of talk show host/referee Jerry Springer continues--and
hopefully ends--with this insipid bottom-brow comedy which, according to a
closing disclaimer, is _not_ "intended to depict any actual participant in,
or aspect of, _The_Jerry_Springer_Show_, which is broadcast on television."
 Funny, because the centerpiece of this film is a salacious, fight- and
profanity-filled talk show called _Jerry_, hosted by a guy referred to in
the film simply as, yes, "Jerry" (played by Springer, natch).  Mercifully,
although he is given above-the-title billing, Springer is made a mere
supporting player by writer Jon Bernstein and director Neil Abramson;
anyone who's seen the "Final Thought" segment of Springer's show knows how
well he _doesn't_ hold the screen.  Not so mercifully, though, Abramson
allots some of Springer's limited screen time for a painful country-western
musical number and--yikes--a fleeting but no less ghastly Springer sex scene.
Instead, Abramson and Bernstein cast their focus (using that term very
loosely) on two separate groups of people who are tapped to appear on
_Jerry_ for different topics, only to end up intertwining.  Receiving the
most screen time are a mother-daughter pair of trailer park trollops.  The
daughter (Jaime Pressly), who indiscriminately has (to use the President's
euphemism) "inappropriate relationships" with random guests at the hotel
she works at, is sleeping with her stepfather (Michael Dudikoff of
_American_Ninja_, er, fame).  In retaliation, the mother (Molly Hagan)
starts having her daughter's fiance (Ashley Holbrook).  Slightly more
amusing is the other group, a trio of ghetto stereotype girls (Wendy Raquel
Robinson, Tangie Ambrose, and Nicki Micheaux) who have all, at one point or
another, fallen into the bed of musclebound studmuffin Demond (charismatic
_Spawn_ and _Tyson_ star Michael Jai White, who can certainly find better
work than this).
What ensues is tons of "too hot for TV" tawdriness that, ironically,
enough, is not compulsively watchable as Springer's two _Too_Hot_for_TV!_
videos--nor nowhere nearly as funny.  Part of the reason is that we are
acutely aware that all the outrageousness is staged; regardless of whether
or not any of Springer's TV guests' tussles are rehearsed, those fights do
feature nonprofessionals inflicting real harm on each other--which is part
of the show's sadistic guilty pleasure factor.  But the main reason is the
amateurish sloppiness of the entire movie, from the acting to the countless
glitches in logic and continuity.  (For example, Springer's character's
last name, according to the credits, is "Farrelly," but in one
autograph-signing scene, he signs his last name as "Springer.")  Stay home
and watch the genuine article instead.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Artisan Entertainment
 Director:  Neil Abramson
 Writer:  Jon Bernstein
 Cast: Jerry Springer, Jaime Pressly, William MacNamara,
Molly Hagan, John Capodice, Wendy Raquel Robinson,
Ashley Holbrook, Tangie Ambrose, Nicki Micheaux, Dawn
Maxie, Michael Dudikoff
   Christian Slater confesses that at one point in his life he
was so high on cocaine that he almost committed suicide.
Robert Downey, Jr. is busted once again for cocaine use.  No
problem.  Not only does public notice of infractions 
embarrass the rich and famous not a whit: but Mr. Slater had
no problem getting the starring role in both the movie "Very
Bad Things" and the Broadway play "Side Man" while Mr.
Downey may do very bad things with Annette Bening in the
upcoming "In Dreams."  
   In an interview relating to his current film "Celebrity,"
Woody Allen cautions that far fewer than 1% of us will ever
be luminaries.  The usual rules don't apply to them.  They get
busted, they get written up in the tabloids, no problem.  When
ordinary people are caught doing naughty things, they pay a
heavy price.  So why would so many ordinary people would
give their lateral incisors for a chance to appear on the Jerry
Springer show, to make fools of themselves fist-fighting and
hairpulling their adversaries in front of 25 million people? 
That's the question that must be in the mind of every viewer
who eavesdrops on the two sets of contestants who are
chosen among the thousands of other prosaic people writing
in to the station begging to be interviewed by the nation's
leading daytime talk show host.  By the time the movie is
over we don't quite get a handle on the why, but we see
more than we want to know of the what and how.  In
"Ringmaster," Jerry Springer plays Jerry Farrelly, a thinly
disguised version of himself, a handsome, dignified man who
looks more like someone chosen to replace David Susskind
than a guy who acts as the moderator of a veritable circus of
clownish pugilists. If a Martian came to town (presuming that
only someone from another planet has never seen the TV
show) he'd wonder how such a decent-looking, almost
prosaic dude ever got to surpass Oprah in the ratings in such
a display of lowbrow antics.
   The story focuses primarily on trailer folks living near
Tampa, Florida, the 19-year-old Angel (Jaime Pressly) and
her 34-year-old mother, Connie (Molly Hagan).  We're not
surprised that they compete for the same men, given the
ridiculously small age difference. No sooner does Angel turn
her back on her unemployed second husband Rusty (Michael
Dudikoff) then Rusty and his stepdaughter Connie are at it. 
When Connie discovers the liaison, she doesn't throw the two
cheaters out. She gets her revenge by pursuing an affair with
Angel's slow-witted boyfriend Willie (Ashley Holbrook) and by
conning the three of them to join her on the Jerry show where
they can let out their frustrations in the most public way
possible.
   The film also features an African-American quartet due to
appear on the following day: Demond (Michael Jai White)
who strays from his girl friend Starlette (Wendy Raquel) by
being involved with Vonda (Tangie Ambrose) and
Leshawnette (Nicki Micheaux).  With all these characters and
a handful of producers to deal with, movie director Neil
Abramson scarcely has time to spotlight Jerry himself, though
we do get to hear a summing up of the showman's entire
philosophy when an audience member challenges the nature
of the TV program.
   A good deal of the movie is downright gross, particularly in
the very beginning when two well-endowed women tongue
kiss with each other and join their mutual boyfriend on his lap
to the wild cheers of the young, working-class peanut gallery. 
While the black women are portrayed as absolute
stereotypes--singing and dancing on the flight to L.A.,
shrieking and fighting and bonding and dissing their shared
boy friend--Molly Hagan turns out the one sentimental
performance.  She's 34, she has a trashy daughter who, in
her motel job, is prepared to be Monica Lewinsky to any
guest looking for a good time, and she must put forth all her
charm to get affection from the men in her life who think that
19 marks the limit of a girl's attractiveness.  She runs a small
concession near her trailer, perhaps depending on her
daughter to bring home enough to survive while at the same
time seething with resentment at playing second fiddle to
Angel.  For his part, Jerry uses the film to show, albeit in
patronizing way, how he is at once above all the brawling and
yet wants to give a regular slice of America a chance for 15
minutes of fame--or infamy.  Counterattacking an audience
member who could be a backer of the religious right and who
calls the contestants scum, Jerry launches a defense: "This is
a slice of American life, and if you don't like it, bite something
else." He seems truly to think that he is giving a well-earned
break to people who would go through life unsung and
unacclaimed were it not for their broadly televised display of
dirty laundry.
   All of this encourages me to make a confession.  I am the
only adult American who has never seen the Jerry Springer
show.  The movie does not influence me to hang around on
any afternoon to see even a single episode.  Yet I liked this
film for the vigor of the guests, for the abandon with which
they stake their claim to ignominy, for an understanding of
the emotional gap that influences these middle Americans to
give Jerry a call even if their only material gain will be their
first plane trip, their first stay in a first-class hotel, their first
time away on vacation with their contentious families.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Jerry Springer: Ringmaster (1998)
Jerry Springer, Jaime Pressly, William McNamara, Molly Hagan, Wendy 
Raquel Robinson, Michael Jai White, Michael Dudikoff, Tangie Ambrose, 
Nicki Micheaux, Rebecca Broussard, Dawn Maxey, Ashley Holbrook, John 
Capodice. Written by John Bernstein. Directed by Neil Abramson.
Rated R, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
The best thing I can say about "Jerry Springer: Ringmaster" is this: It's 
not as bad as it sounds. Thankfully, the story spends relatively little 
time with the slimy Mr. Springer, focusing instead on the comically lurid 
stories of two groups of people who end up as guests on his daytime trash-
talk show. Unfortunately, Springer is the star of the movie, so viewers 
are subjected to shots of a shirtless Jerry flexing his (ahem) muscles in 
front of a mirror, Jerry having sex (under the covers, thank God), Jerry 
half-singing a country tune in a honky-tonk bar, and Jerry delivering one 
of the most phony, self-serving speeches in the history of B-movies. 
While making the rounds promoting his show, his book and this film, 
Springer's defensive strategy has been to beat potentially hostile 
journalists to the punch. "Of course I have no talent," he says with a 
hapless puppy-dog smile. He freely admits that his show is nothing but a 
circus, telling an Entertainment Weekly reporter "Look, if I'm Satan, 
then we're all okay - - because then Satan ain't that bad." 
Springer isn't Satan. He's just another sorry huckster, shamelessly 
exploiting poor, undereducated people. It's easy to sneer at Springer's 
guests, but who is worse; those willing to sacrifice their privacy and 
dignity in exchange for a free trip to the big city and a few minutes in 
front of a camera or the guy who pays for their tickets?  
People who watch Springer regularly will be happy to hear that the movie 
captures the bizarro spirit of his "Too Hot For TV" videos, with fightin',
 cussin' and bare breasts galore, plus a few sex scenes to boot. Those 
dragged to the movie will be relieved to know that it's surprisingly 
entertaining on a "guilty pleasure" level.
"Ringmaster" takes a farcical look at two dysfunctional couples and their 
friends. Connie (Molly Hagan) works in a Florida donut shop. She suspects 
that while she's away, her current husband Rusty (Michael Dudikoff) and 
her 19 year old daughter Angel (Jaime Pressly) are having an affair. 
She's right. When not boinking her naďve, dim-witted fiancée, Willie 
(Ashley Holbrook), and the male guests of the motel where she works as a 
maid, Angel indeed is sleeping with her stepdaddy. When Connie catches 
Rusty and Angel, she does what any self-respecting mother would do: she 
seduces Willie to get even, hollers at her husband and daughter, then 
snags a booking for the whole group on Jerry's show. 
Meanwhile, Starletta (Wendy Raquel Robinson) is livid. Her boyfriend 
Demond (Michael Jai White) is having an affair with her best friend, 
Vonda (Tangie Ambrose), not long after she caught him with Leshawnette 
(Nicki Micheaux), another gal-pal. Again, using that special wisdom that 
comes only to people who believe professional wrestling is real, she 
decides the best way to handle the situation is to go on Jerry's show and 
confront the wrongdoers on national television. 
Once in L.A. for the show, all the characters meet up in a hotel the 
night prior to taping, with predictably lusty and combative results. The 
next day, they go to the studio for their fateful encounter with the 
geekmaster and all hell breaks loose, even before the inevitable on-air 
fistfights. 
It's all plays like a sprawling, unusually spirited episode of "Three's 
Company," except these people actually get laid. While most of the cast 
are just strident stereotypes, a few manage to humanize their characters, 
with Molly Hagan a stand-out as competitive mother Connie. She invests 
the character with a survivor quality that makes her manic behavior 
almost understandable.  
The most annoying moment in the film comes when an audience member 
verbally attacks the guests for degrading themselves and Springer jumps 
to their defense, making an impassioned, pathetic speech about the show 
being a forum for the "little people," allowing them the same moment in 
the sun that rich celebrities enjoy everyday. His righteous tirade is so 
irritating that it made me wish I could slip past his bodyguards and take 
a poke at the pompous ass myself.
Don't pay to see "Ringmaster." Sure, it has more than its share of fun 
moments, but wait until the movie hits cable, because every ticket you 
buy puts a little more money in the pants' pocket of Jerry Springer. And 
you really don't want anything of yours to end up in Jerry Springer's 
pants, do you?
