Title
Review for Van, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
     In Stephen Frears' THE VAN, unemployed Dubliners Bimbo Reeves (Donal
O'Kelly) and his pal Larry (Colm Meany) refurbish a run-down
fish-and-chips van and take it on the road, moving from place to place in
search of a productive place to do a little business for a short time.
Appropriately enough, that's the way THE VAN wanders along as a narrative.
The previous installments in author Roddy Doyle's Barrytown Trilogy --
Alan Parker's 1991 THE COMMITMENTS and Frears' own 1994 adaptation of THE
SNAPPER -- each provided an anchoring element for Doyle's humorous
episodes and colorful characters.  Instead of THE COMMITMENTS' energetic
musical numbers or THE SNAPPER's sweet father-daughter relationship, THE
VAN offers under-developed nods to the embarrassment of unemployment and
nationalist pride in the Irish World Cup team.  After about forty-five
minutes, Doyle and Frears settle into a routine of self-contained
anecdotes suitable for Reader's Digest's "All in a Day's Work."  One or
two at a time, it's amusing to take in such "Honey, you won't believe the
day I had" tales.  Over the course of an hour and a half, the anecdotes
grow a bit wearying.
     THE VAN is certainly the least effective of the three cinematic
Barrytown tales, yet it is still manages to provide some high-spirited
entertainment.  Most of the credit goes to Meany and O'Kelly, a pair of
appealing protagonists who lend a flustered enthusiasm to most of their
scenes.  The humor comes as much from reaction as it does from situation
in THE VAN, with Meany able to sell small moments like his very logical
reaction to a customer who comes up 10 pence short for his burger (Meany
takes a 10-pence bite before handing over the food).  When THE VAN does
pay off with a big laugh, it makes you realize that it might have been
great fun to watch these same characters in a more consistent story.
Instead, we have a cinematic snack truck, offering a few tasty bites
rather than a truly satisfying meal.

Author
David N. Butterworth
These passions enrich the lives of the Irish residents of Barrytown, a
fictional working-class Dublin neighborhood realized by writer Roddy Doyle.
His "Barrytown trilogy" of films began with "The Commitments" (a slick,
Alan Parker-helmed musical production), then continued with "The Snapper"
and now "The Van," both directed by Stephen Frears.  "The Van" continues
the hilarious tone of number two, this time with a story of two good
friends making a go of a lunchtruck business.
Contemplating a potential product, Larry (Colm Meaney) brings a
batter-dipped, deep-fried sausage to his wife in bed and asks her how they
make them.  "I don't think they make them," Mary (Caroline Rothwell)
replies, squinting at the grizzled, yellow piece of matter that
approximates a corndog on a really bad day.  "They just find them."
Frears is very much at home with the material.  An interesting director who
has graduated from gritty British beginnings ("My Beautiful Laundrette,"
"Sammy and Rosie Get Laid") to high-gloss Hollywood costume dramas
("Dangerous Liaisons," "Mary Reilly"), Frears still finds the time to work
on smaller projects that interest him.  With "The Van," the director
confidently guides Doyle's daffy tale, capturing all of the writer's
delightfully colorful language.  "Hey, you with the head," Larry says to
one customer.  "What do you want?"  "World peace," kids the young slouch.
"You're barred!"
Eric Clapton also contributes to the film's production, co-writing and
playing guitar on the evocative score.
"The Van" opens with Bimbo (Donal O'Kelly) finding himself "made redundant"
from the baking job he's held all his life.  Not content to simply pick up
a weekly dole check like his friend Larry, Bimbo seizes an opportunity to
be his own boss in the form of a run-down, engineless, grease-encrusted
"chipper" van that, on inspection, "looks like the inside of a leper."
Bimbo convinces Larry to go into business with him, and after several
hosings, scrapings, and coatings of paint, "Bimbo's Burger's" is born.  The
film then centers on the relationship between Bimbo and Larry, previously
men of leisure, and how their partnership presents new challenges to these
fast--and fast food--friends.
Larry and Bimbo don't subscribe to our American values of hygiene and
health consciousness, overlooking various code violations such as kicking
raw chipped potatoes into buckets and accidentally tossing Pampers into the
fry-o-lator.  "The Van" is so in-your-face greasy that you can almost feel
the whiteheads puckering under your skin while you're watching it--it's
easy to see why deep-fried Snickers bars were once a big hit across the
water!  Meaney's pickled beetroot complexion adds to the experience, and
many times in the film its spattered with hot lard.  "Jay-sus!"  (The swear
box is always full in Larry's house.)  Meaney is at his best playing
blustery, blood-vessel bursting Dubliners like Larry.  When Larry is forced
to wear a suit and tie, either for Christmas dinner or to go out to a wine
bar, he looks like a garden gnome.
"The Van" has ample opportunities for melodramatic subplots but sticks to
its guns.  Every time the two men fall out and heaviness threatens, they
resolve their differences over pints (make that imperial gallons) of stout.
The relationship between Larry and Bimbo is fresh and genuinely touching;
this is a film as much about friendship as it is about working class values
(Bimbo has a work ethic; Larry has an attitude).
In a deeper vein, both men have marriages that are uncommonly important in
their lives.  The wives' roles, while secondary in the film, provide depth
and charm to the project.  While the men faff and fuss, Mary and Maggie
(Ger Ryan) look on, providing a calming and steadying influence.
While the ending of "The Van" may seem a little anti-climactic, the journey
to that point is very funny, with just a smattering of real poignancy.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Some countries seem to specialize in certain movie genres.  As the
entire world knows, America can make special effects blockbusters like
no other country.  Then again, few countries can afford to bankroll
such risky ventures.
     For low key, working class comedies full of droll humor, few
countries can equal the Irish.  Novelist and screenwriter Roddy Doyle
can be placed in the center of contemporary Irish writers.  THE VAN is
based on the last of his Barrytown trilogy.  The first two novels were
made into the well received movies, THE COMMITMENTS and THE SNAPPER.
(Look on the back of the fish 'n chips and burger van in THE VAN, and
you'll see "Beware The Snapper" as a little in-joke to remind the
audience of the last movie while also poking fun at the merchandise.)
     "Got a bit of bad news today," says Bimbo at the pub to his old
buddy Larry.  "Let go.  Been made redundant."  Larry can empathize with
him since he's been out of work for years -- on the dole as they say.
     Keeping busy is hard for these middle age men, but they are
willing to try anything including golf in the pouring rain while
pushing around a rain gear covered toddler.
     Donal O'Kelly plays Bimbo, the more serious of the two.  Bimbo
does not find being out of work as easy to take as his more jovial
companion Larry, played by Colm Meaney from the other films in the
trilogy as well as CON AIR.  Together the two of them craft a good
spirited comedy.  Although it turns somewhat bittersweet towards the
end, the chemistry between them hums like a smooth running and happy
little engine.  Their story is rarely exciting, but always congenial.
     Director Stephen Frears (DANGEROUS LIAISIONS) has the good sense
to never try to make the movie more than it is, a small tale of two
friends coping through some troublesome times.  It is in the minutia,
which he handles with such a deft touch, that the show has its charm.
Larry feels his family needs to economize but isn't even willing to
substitute chicken for turkey for the Christmas dinner.  He asks
rhetorically, "What's Christmas without a turkey?"   (The beauty and
the challenge of the film is the thick Irish accents.  "Turkey" becomes
a long, involved, and particularly melodious word.)
     One of their friends offers to sell Bimbo a derelict fast food
van.  Larry's wife, Maggie (Ger Ryan), takes one look at the beat-up
wreck, caked in grime, and asks the seller, "What about the engine?"
Surprised, he shoots back, "What engine would that be Maggie?"  Yes,
the lack of a motor is one of its many deficiencies.  Figuring they can
pull it with their car, Bimbo buys it and gets Larry to be his partner.
"Bimbo's Burgers," they name it.  ("Bimbo" apparently does not have the
same connotation on their side of the Atlantic.)
     Except for one outlandish episode where a accidentally fried nappy
(which we Americans call a diaper) is sold as fried fish, most of the
humor is so understated that it rarely elicits more than a small giggle
from the audience.  This lack of any substantial laughs in a comedy
will probably be its downfall.  Those used to broad comedy with
slapstick humor are likely to be disappointed by this subtle story.
But those willing to cut it a little slack, will find our two unlikely
heroes quite appealing.
     Most of the show has to do with the trials and tribulations of
running a small business in which they have no experience.  (Since they
must move the van to locations where people will buy their products,
Maggie wonders, "Do heavy metalers eat chips?"  It turns out they do,
but they have other attributes that make them less than ideal
customers.)
     The beautiful cinematography by Oliver Stapleton, who did the
stunning work in RESTORATION, comes alive in the night sequences.  The
warm glow of the incandescent light of the interior of the van at night
makes Larry's and Bimbo's business somehow magical.
     The show ends abruptly.  Several scenes which you are convinced
are just around the corner, never occur.  Like a dream, the writer lets
each of us decide how we want it to turn out.  The visual at the
conclusion is the picture's best, and one worth savoring.
     THE VAN runs 1:36 but feels shorter.  It is rated R for constant
use of the F word.  (Larry's family has a "swear fund" jar, which is
unrealistically small.)  The film would be fine for teenagers.  I
recommend this little picture to you and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Colm Meaney, Donal O'Kelly, Ger Ryan, Caroline Rothwell, 
      Brendan O'Carroll, Stuart Dunne, Jack Lynch, Neili Conroy, 
      Ruaidhri Conroy 
Director: Stephen Frears 
Producer: Lynda Myles  
Screenplay: Roddy Doyle based on his novel 
Cinematography: Oliver Stapleton  
Music: Eric Clapton and Richard Hartley  
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight 
     Finally, the entire Barrytown Trilogy has made it to the screen.  
The process started back in 1991, when Alan Parker made THE COMMITMENTS.  
It continued in '93, when Stephen Frears filmed THE SNAPPER.  Now, with 
the addition of 1996's THE VAN, also from Frears, author Roddy Doyle's 
entire three-book series exists in cinematic form.  And the link that 
binds them together is actor Colm Meaney, the best thing about any of 
the movies.  Meaney's performance is especially noteworthy in THE VAN, 
where he's one of the few things worth watching during the draggy final 
thirty minutes. 
     THE VAN, which is a reasonably simple story about a couple of 
unemployed men opening a rolling fish-and-chip shop, is a tale of two 
halves.  The first half is an engaging, and at times lively, comedy 
about friendship and finding meaning in good, honest work.  It's about 
the benefits of regaining one's self-respect, and how that affects both 
the individual and the family.  And, best of all, the early portions of 
THE VAN boast quite a few effective comic moments that work because the 
characters seem real.  These aren't just cardboard cut-out Irishmen -- 
they're a couple of likable guys who are easy to root for. 
     Then, somewhere around THE VAN's halfway point, everything starts 
to go wrong.  The easygoing tone dissipates, and is replaced by 
something far less comfortable.  The film loses its way.  The humor 
becomes half-hearted and obligatory.  Cliches and tediousness rise to 
the fore, culminating in an ending that can only be described as jaw-
droppingly stupid.  This is the kind of conclusion that stands out as a 
hard-to-swallow writer's construct.  It's a sad way for a motion picture 
that started out with promise to crash land. 
     The film opens with the woebegone Bimbo (Donal O'Kelly) literally 
crying into his beer.  After twenty-five years of loyal service, he has 
been laid off.  Now, all he has to look forward to are endless 
afternoons of golf (a game he hates) and watching game shows like "Where 
in the World?"  His best mate, Larry (Colm Meaney) is an old hand at 
being unemployed.  Even though he doesn't much like it, he hasn't worked 
in a long time.  But, while Larry has gotten used to doing nothing all 
day, Bimbo can't take it, and he hatches a scheme to buy an old van to 
use as a fish-and-chip shop.  Once he has picked out the perfect vehicle 
(filthy, engine-less, and dirt cheap), he invites Larry to come on board 
with him fifty/fifty.  With Ireland's unexpectedly good performance in 
World Cup soccer, Bimbo believes that parking the van outside a bar 
where people hang out to watch the games should provide a solid customer 
base. 
     On the acting side, no one comes close to Meaney in this film.  His 
co-star, Donal O'Kelly, is okay, but lacks the screen presence to stand 
toe-to-toe with him.  O'Kelly's best scenes are those with his wife and 
kids, when there's no sign of Meaney.  In supporting roles, Ger Ryan 
(who appeared in THE COMMITMENTS) and Caroline Rothwell are solid as the 
wives, and Neili Conroy and Ruaidhri Conroy add a little spark as 
Larry's kids.  Both Conroys, unlike O'Kelly, can hold their own. 
     Three years ago, Frears did a wonderful job with THE SNAPPER, and, 
for a while, it appears he is going to repeat his success here.  But, 
although I know what goes wrong with THE VAN, I'm not sure why it 
happens.  Perhaps there just isn't enough story to sustain a full-length 
feature.  Or maybe the episodic structure of the film wears out its 
welcome.  Either way, the result is that watching THE VAN is like 
sitting through two completely different movies -- one is a great deal 
of fun and the other isn't worth the price of admission.  Unfortunately, 
unless you walk out, you have to accept the latter to get the former. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ben Hoffman
THE COMMITMENTS in 1991 introduced us to the mythical (but
representative) town of  Barrytown in North Dublin.   That was the
first of a trilogy written by Roddy Doyle. You may recall that it was
about an Irish soul band.  This was followed three years later by THE
SNAPPER, about a young woman who becomes pregnant but who will not
reveal who the father is.
The Commitmentswas directed by Alan Parker.  Both Snapper and THE VAN
are the work of Stephen Frears.
Barrytown is a quiet town on the surface but if you look around there
are many stories, funny and sad.  Take Bimbo (Donal O'Kelly) for
instance.  In a town where there are all too many unemployed, Bimbo
gets a pink slip . . . and now he is one of those without hope who hang
out in bars.  But Bimbo is not really one of them; he will work at
anything honest if he can only find something.
Out of the blue, Bimbo realizes that with Ireland qualifying for the
World Cup in football (soccer), there will be many people glued to
their TV sets, unable to cook.  If he can get a van and set it up as a
catering truck, he can make a good bit of change and be his own boss at
the same time,    He also wants to share his new enterprise with his
best friend, Larry (Colm Meany) whom he hires to work with him as a
partner.  Larry's first contribution is to name the van, BIMBO'S
BURGERS.
Another buddy, Weslie (Brendan O'Carroll) finds a van on an empty lot
filled with junk. The van looks "like the inside of a leper," to quote
Bimbo; filthy, rusty, and an engine that will not start up. However,
nothing is going to stop the two friends who have the car towed home
with the aid of hundreds of the town's children joyfully pushing the
vehicle as it is being towed. Bimbo and  Larry work on the van until it
is looking half human. Someone else gets the motor to run and away they
go to the pub where everyone will be watching the games.
It would be nice to report that all went well, that they got tons of
customers and that they made lots of money and lived happily ever
after.  Real life and movies do not work like that and so we are
witness to the trials and tribulations of two friends trying to run a
catering van when neither has any experience.
Not too far into the enterprise, they have a falling out and Larry
wants to quit not only the partnership but their friendship as well
while Bimbo decides what must be done to keep from losing the
friendship of Larry.
Interspersed between the sad parts and the frustrations, there is lots
of comedy provided by Larry who is a big blustering type.
Pity the poor worker who has a family to support, wants to work, but
can find no job.
Others in the cast include Ger Ryan, Caroline Rothwell, Neily Conroy, Ruaidhri Conroy, and Stuart Dunne. 
