Title
Review for Más que amor, frenesí (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/d3a0f34301178a48882568c0001d9721?OpenDocument
Apparently there comes a time in an urban twenty-something's life when
the mere sight of men dressed up in drag, singing in campy falsettos, is
enough to strike up the rebel spirit. If it's that time for you, don't
hesitate to drop seven bucks on Not Love Just Frenzy.
Películas Frenéticas, the collective pseudonym for the three directors
(Alfonso Albacete, Miguel Bardem and David Menkes) responsible for this
picture, bring us a frantic, Chasing Amy-esque tale of seven young
hipsters rampaging through Madrid on a coke-charged humping spree.
There's Max (Nancho Novo) the possibly homicidal gigolo, Monica
(Cayetana Guillen Cuervo) the nymphomaniac bartender-come-actress, Yeye
(Ingrid Rubio) the innocent idealist, Maria (Beatriz Santiago) the
lonely hepcat, Alberto (Gustavo Salmeron) the artistic and adventuresome
homosexual-whose-mother-doesn't-know, Alex (Javier Albala) the ambiguous
bisexual who complicates Alberto's life, David (Liberto Rabal) the
straight cokehead Alberto lusts after, Luis (Javier Manrique) the cop on
Max's six, and three drag queens thrown in for street cred. If this all
sounds complex, it isn't.
Once in play, these characters are about as predictable as they are
emotionally crude. Lest we forget the motivation of any given character
at any point in the film, each one explicitly states his or her
ambitions at every opportunity. Perhaps some subtlety is lost in
translation (many of the English subtitles are misspelled), but the
dialog of this flick holds about as much nuance as professional
wrestling commentary. Fortunately, the characters themselves are so
incomprehensibly flat as to eliminate the need for rich dialog. The one
exception here is Ingrid Rubio's portrayal of the sensitive and
wholesome Yeye, around whom most of the picture revolves. Though all of
the characters are presumed to have some kind of emotional depth, only
Yeye comes off as sincere-and this she does beautifully. Rubio's
charisma goes a long way toward compensating for the rest of the cast.
The film does have some redeeming moments, though, raising some fairly
interesting questions about what lies at the center of all this crazed
behavior and whether it's possible for scenesters like these to find any
meaning in their relationships. The suggested answer, unfortunately, is
probably not. Though the cinematography is mediocre at best, the good
looks of the cast make for tolerable viewing and the soundtrack is great
if you like house music.
This is a great movie if you're looking for a way to show off your
international panache to your whiny, sarcastic Goth friends, or if you
just want to watch people screw. Otherwise, stay home.
Director: Películas Frenéticas (Alfonso Albacete, Miguel Bardem, David
Menkes)
Producer: Fernando Colomo, Beatriz de la Gandara
Writer: Películas Frenéticas (Alfonso Albacete, Miguel Bardem, David
Menkes)
Starring: Nancho Novo, Cayetana Guillen Cuervo, Ingrid Rubio, Beatriz
Santiago, Gustavo Salmeron, Javier Manrique, Javier Albala, Liberto
Rabal
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
