Title
Review for Mononoke Hime (1997)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Curtis Edmonds
If Princess Mononoke ever gets an American remake, it will be a western.
I say this not to make some kind of point about The Seven Samurai
evolving into The Magnificent Seven (and I'm sure there are other
examples) but to say that Princess Mononoke is very much a frontier
movie.  I don't imagine that 15th century Japan was all that much like
18th century America, but (at least in this retelling) they both appear
to be frontier societies.
The first thing you need in a frontier society is the technological
progress that allows you to get to the frontier in the first place.  In
America, you have things like the rifle and the Conestoga wagon.  To
colonize Australia, you need a working chronometer and a knowledge of
how Vitamin C wards off scurvy.  To tackle the Japanese forests, you
need to know how to make iron and guns.  The iron in Princess Mononoke
is made at the fortress of Irontown, which serves as the prerequisite
Western town.  (It's even in the western part of Japan.)
But like all Western towns, Irontown is menaced by outside forces.
Unlike Western towns, Irontown is not menaced by outlaws or ranchers or
Indians, but by... er... well.. gods.  Irontown needs iron ore and wood
to make iron, and the forest has plenty of both.  Unfortunately, the
forest also has wolf gods and boar gods and the "spirit of the forest",
none of whom like the idea of people cutting down trees and mining.
In the middle of all this madness walks one lone, silent, honorable man
carrying a terrible curse.  But unlike the guilt carried by gunfighters
like The Outlaw Josey Wales or Shane or Bill Munny from Unforgiven, this
curse has a little more of a physical manifestation.  Prince Ashitaka
(Billy Crudup) carries a horrible, spreading infection, the legacy of a
battle with a boar god.  The boar god was wounded by an iron bullet
fired from an Irontown gun.  Instead of dying, the boar god was consumed
by nightmarish snakelike demons, which caused Ashitaka's wound.
Ashitaka travels to both Irontown and the forest to discover the cause
of the enmity between humans and the gods.
Irontown is a busy place.  It's an island fortress, ruled by Lady Eboshi
(Minnie Driver, with the haughty accent down pat), where the fires of
the forges burn all night.  In an American film, the capitalist owner of
the steel mill would be a villain, and a nasty one too.  In contrast,
Lady Eboshi is a real sweetheart, looking after her employees in a
manner that is both egalitarian and matriarchal.  She even hires women
-- straight from the brothels -- and people with disabilities.  (The
latter employees are lepers, building rifles in the ultimate sheltered
workshop, but hey, it's the 15th century for crying out loud, give her
some credit.)  It's a tribute to Lady Eboshi that the character who
steals the show is Toki (Jada Pinkett Smith), an outspoken, liberated
ex-brothel girl.
We get to the forest before we get to Irontown, though, and it's an
alien world.  It's ruled by the "spirit of the forest", which takes on
all different forms.  The deputy rulers of this forest are Moro the wolf
god (Gillian Anderson) and her three kids -- two wolf, one human.  The
human is San, the Princess Mononoke (the spunky Claire Danes), the
ultimate Woman Who Runs With The Wolves and a supercool ninja to boot.
(There's also a bunch of annoying little ghostly forest elves.)  The
forest gods are rightfully unhappy about their trees being cut down
left, right and center, and they're getting ready for a final battle
with the humans.
Ashitaka walks right into this sorry mess like Gary Cooper, with
Crudup's voice supplying the steely will and moral courage of a true
Western hero.  But unlike a good-guy bad-guy Western, Ashitaka isn't on
one side or the other. Instead, he's looking at the situation with "eyes
unclouded by hate", seeking an elusive harmony between the forest and
the city. Ashitaka sees the goodness inherent in both the forest and the
city and seeks to preserve both the lives of the villagers and the
mystery of the forest.
Observant readers (that's you, right?) will notice that so far in this
review, I haven't mentioned that Princess Mononoke is an animated film.
Nor have I mentioned the name of the director (Hayao Miyazaki) or the
word "anime".  I've done this intentionally.  Princess Mononoke is first
and foremost a good story with some decent characters, and if that's
what you're looking for, don't let the "anime" tag scare you.  People
who know more about Japanese animation than I do (that is to say, anyone
who knows anything about Japanese animation) already know about this
movie and can tell you much more about it than you probably want to
know.  Go see Princess Mononoke -- not just for the stunning animation,
but for what it says about the frontier of all our hearts.
Movie Reviews:
http://www.hsbr.org/buzz/reviewer/reviews/bdreviews.html
http://www.epinions.com/user-curtisedmonds
"Oh, if life were like the movies, I'd never be blue."
    -- Alan Jackson, "Here In The Real World"

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   They say that things were simpler when we were kids back
in the early fifties. That's easy to trumpet now, but when
you're struggling to add and subtract fractions in sixth grade,
life seems as complex as it would ever be. For relaxation,
you could always go to the movies on Saturday--every
Saturday in fact--to enjoy a cartoon, a serial, two features
and a newsreel.  And oh how redundant and violent the
animations were!  Elmer Fudd never could gun down the
carrot-eating Bugs Bunny with his shotgun and Tom never did
get to eat Jerry.  The moral of these cartoons was always
that it pays to be an underdog--or cat or bunny--because the
oppressor always got blown up trying to get you.  The
Japanese animes that have come our way during the nineties
are just as violent, but they're obviously more adult.  The
complexity is mind-boggling.  Satoshi Kon's "Perfect Blue" is
not that intricate, featuring a leading character who sinks into
psychosis and gets into an awful lot of trouble because like
Willy Loman, presumably, she seeks out a career that she
was not meant to bear.  
   By contrast Hayao Miyazaki's epic "Princess Mononoke" is
a veritable Fuji of a complicated, difficult story about as
multidimensional as a series of Marcel Proust recherches. 
But the time the tale is over, though, the pieces come
together.  You won't place the old moral that the underdog
will prevail in this one but rather a whole succession of
themes, universal in scope, among which is the idea that
warfare among competing clans (and even species) does not
necessarily take place between the forces of good and evil. 
The gods are not on anyone's side in this anime, because
both positions have validity and, in fact, a single human being
can possess elements of good and evil.  Sounds strangely
enough like the current reality, no?
   The story is set in feudal Japan, more or less the
fourteenth century, a time in which that archipelago was in
ways more democratic than it is today.  Women were helpers,
just like the western women of 19th century America who
would fight alongside the men, and spoke right up against
their boorish husbands.  Peasants and samurai were virtually
indistinguishable.  The laborers worked with their hands--ore
diggers, charcoal makers and drivers of oxen.  (In this film
they are from the Tatara clan).  The forests are devoid of
people--thick, pristine, a Rousseau-esque state of nature. 
But the ironworkers are homeless and have located in the
forest to mine the fields for iron where their presence is
opposed by the gods and creatures of the woodlands,
including the title character who has been raised by the wolf-
gods, who does not identify herself as human, and who hates
everything that moves on two legs.
   The film is dubbed in English for an English-speaking
audience with well-known actors assuming the voices of the
human beings and the animal gods. The story centers not on
San aka Princess Mononoke but on the hero and lover of
peace, Ashitaka (Billy Crudup). When Ashitaka kills a huge,
fierce and vindictive boar, he is cursed like Coleridge's
ancient mariner but instead of wearing the great big beast
around his neck, he receives an imprinted burn on his arm
which causes him great pain and is destined to kill him
unless.....He must leave his tribe (symbolized by his cutting
his hair) and make an odyssey to the Tatara workers led by
Eboshi (Minnie Driver), winding up in the middle of a complex
life-and-death struggle involving not only the ironworkers and
the forest gods but at least two feuding groups of human
beings as well.  
   What follows comes across as perhaps the most
sophisticated video game you've ever seen.  As with the
amusement park machines, when arrows hit their targets,
whole heads fly off, indicating that director Hayao Miyazaki
may have been inspired by some Monty Python episodes. 
Moro (Gillian Anderson), the Wolf Spirit, is a leading fighter
for the preservation of the pristine woodlands and he is
accompanied by the human woman he raised, San (Claire
Danes), who talks to the wolves and thus is called Mononoke
("spirits of things").  Not being wholly committed to feminism,
San is the bitter enemy of the other principal female, Eboshi,
who is intent on destroying San and killing all the gods--even
though such a feat would be somewhat more difficult than
slaying mere animals.
   Obviously a labor-intensive effort despite the dependence
on computerized digital animation, "Princess Mononoke"
excels in giving the viewer the broad panorama of nature,
from the cloud-covered hills to the verdant forests, with the
characters gliding through the air with the grace of Mikhail
Barishnikov floating across the Lincoln Center stage.  Arrows
fill the air, occasionally sliced into pieces by fearsome
samurai swords, and elks, wolves and other four-legged
creatures loyally guide their human cargo into the fray.  What
we're made privy to is the virtual world of the film's director, a
land more primeval than Thoreauvian, where human beings
must learn to reconcile themselves with nature instead of
trying to tame its majesty.  
   The plea for humanity to live in harmony with nature is in
no way an original supplication, but Miyazaki puts a decidedly
original and distinctive spin on the theme and has made fine
use of actors like Claire Danes, Billy Crudup, Minnie Driver
and Billy Bob Thornton, and the particularly resonant and
guttural tones of Gillian Anderson as the wolf Moro.  What
comes across best is the idea (previously mentioned) that in
warfare, good does not necessary fight against evil.  We are
continually baffled trying to label the wolf, the boar, the
humans like Eboshi who despise San and San herself, who
hates all human beings despite her being one of that very
species.  The 135 minutes that Miyazaki takes to put across
his many motifs are deserved considering the complexity of
his task and the movie, which avoids repetition despite the
many battles, does not fail to entertain.

Author
Scott Renshaw
PRINCESS MONONOKE
(Miramax)
Voices:  Billy Crudup, Billy Bob Thornton, Minnie Driver, John Di Maggio,
Claire Danes, John De Mita, Jada Pinkett-Smith, Gillian Anderson.
Screenplay:  Neil Gaiman, adapted from the screenplay by Hayao Miyazaki.
Producer:  Toshio Suzuki.
English Voice Director:  Jack Fletcher.
Director:  Hayao Miyazaki.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  136 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Somehow, somewhere, this whole "anime" wave has left me behind. Sure,
the Japanese animation style is distinctive, but it strikes me that the
form has not progressed radically in the 30 years since "Speed Racer." 
Though the backgrounds may have become richer, there's still a vaguely
Anglicized blandness to the character design, a strange lack of fluidity
to the acrobatic movements. When the Japanese smash PRINCESS MONONOKE made
its way to our shores, it was spoken of as the future of animation. I was
skeptical that it would bring anything that wasn't already the past of
anime.
     From an animation standpoint, I still think that's true, though
PRINCESS MONONOKE does have some striking imagery. The real revelation in
the film is the depth and complexity of its mythology and storytelling,
which manage to overcome the problems with the human story. Hayao
Miyazaki's tale begins with a prince named Ashitaka (Billy Crudup) of an
exiled tribe. In the course of defending his village from a boar-demon,
Ashitaka is infected with a malignancy that can only be cured by the Great
Forest Spirit. Thus Ashitaka begins a quest that leads him to an iron
mining town at the edge of a huge forest, a town led by the Lady Eboshi
(Minnie Driver). The town is in conflict not only with a rival warlord who
wants a share of the iron, but with the nature spirits who loathe the
encroachment of humans on their forest. Ashitaka finds himself caught in
the middle, especially when he becomes enamored of San (Claire Danes), the
human stepdaughter of the great wolf goddess Moro (Gillian Anderson).
     In case there is any confusion on the subject, let's be clear that
PRINCESS MONONOKE is a film for adults. Heads and limbs fly at a rate
approaching that of SLEEPY HOLLOW, and the manipulative monk Jigo (Billy
Bob Thornton) uses some salty language. It also maintains an adult tone in
the set-up of its mystical world, with gods who can be petulant, violent
and even just plain stupid (a cosmology far more in keeping with most
ancient civilizations' mythologies than Disney's benign pantheisms). Most
impressive, Miyazaki keeps his story free of the didacticism so common in
films with environmental themes. Lady Eboshi isn't portrayed as some
cackling, grasping villain representing "civilization bad" -- instead,
she's a philanthropist revered by the lepers and former prostitutes she
employs in her iron works. While the nature gods are understandably bitter
as they watch forests fall, theirs is not the only side of this
story. Rare is the tale that suggests industry could be a co-existing
entity in nature, rather than an inherent evil.
     PRINCESS MONONOKE is so engrossing as both legend and lesson that you
wish it could treat its characters with more care. The conflicts of its
principal characters (Ashitaka's struggle with his ever-more-homicidal
infected arm, San's struggle to reconcile her human and lupine 
backgrounds) are given only passing attention, leaving most of the focus
on the set pieces and the philosophy. The line readings by the English
actors are flat and constricted, performances set to a stopwatch of mouth
movements instead of to the needs of the scene. And then there's the
dialogue, which generally ranges from the annoyingly literalist 
(characters seem incapable of looking at a thing without calling out its
name) to the purely giggle-inducing (I don't believe I'll ever embrace
unreservedly a film that includes the line, "Forest Spirit, we give you
back your head"). PRINCESS MONONOKE at times appears to be an animated
variation on this year's more ballyhooed version of mythopoetics over
substance, THE PHANTOM MENACE.
     Still, there is something compelling about the look of PRINCESS
MONONOKE, more so than I was expecting. The design of the supernatural
characters is always intriguing, from the writhing worm-bodies of the
demons to the Pillsbury Doughboy-cum-tiki-idol sprites called the
Kodamas; the battlefields are arresting in their gore-spattered silence.  
Indeed, silence plays an unexpectedly effective role in this epic film,
giving it a sense of reverence. There's just the problem of those darned
people, whose homogeneity in word and countenance hinders an otherwise
stellar effort. Anime may be more or less what it used to be, but at least
the storytelling behind it is growing up.

Author
Jon Popick
Imagine that you're in the woods and you hear a noise.  Birds and other
animals scatter.  Something else is out there.  And it's getting closer.
If you think this is the latest Blair Witch spoof, you're dead-wrong
(and probably a victim of the non-stop internet ads announcing its video
release).  This story takes place some six centuries ago in feudal Japan
and the rustling in the woods is actually a giant boar covered with what
seems to be millions of earthworms.  Ashitaka sees this creature bearing
down on his village one day while riding his red elk through the
forest.  He believes the animal to be a threat (wouldn't you?) and slays
the beast, but not before it gives Ashitaka both an ominous message and
an itchy arm rash.
Instead of being hailed as a hero, Ashitaka (voiced by Billy Crudup,
Without Limits) is banished from the village as a result of the injury
to his arm.  Even though he is the Prince and the last in the bloodline
of a family that was driven from town 500 years ago, Ashitaka is told he
is suffering from an evil infection and booted out into the surrounding
forest to die.  While the infection may not actually be evil, it does
bestow Ashitaka with some strange powers.  When physically confronted,
he is able to knock the heads and arms off adversaries with a simple bow
and arrow.
Desperate to learn the mysteries of the giant boar and seeking a cure to
his affliction, Ashitaka heads for Iron Town, an industrial village
compromised of women that are nearly busting out of their tops.  Why
they don't call it `Cleavage Town' is beyond me, as it would certainly
be a boom for local tourism.  Ashitaka meets Lady Eboshi (Minnie Driver,
An Ideal Husband), the leader of Iron Town hell-bent on rampaging
through the lush Japanese forests to use its untapped natural resources
for iron production.
This puts Eboshi at odds with San (or Princess Mononoke), a human raised
by the Wolf Gods.  San (Claire Danes, Brokedown Palace) is intent on
stopping the progress of encroaching civilization, which could threaten
to disturb the forces of nature.  The main force of nature is a creature
called the Forest Spirit, which changes into the Night Walker at dusk.
Confusing?  Yes, but better than Night Walker, Texas Ranger.
The animated Princess Mononoke was a runaway box office success in Japan
a couple of years ago, second all-time only to a little film called
Titanic.  The battle between environment and industry probably played
well in Japan, but I just can't see too many Americans getting into the
story.  In order for a cartoon to succeed in this country, we apparently
need a linear plot and upbeat musical numbers.  Look what happened to
The Iron Giant.  Never mind the complicated story - the half-wits here
in America won't even be able to tell Ashitaka and San apart.  Okay,
neither could I.  They both looked like Speed Racer.  It's too long and
violent for children and seems to be targeted to the small segment of
our population that enjoys Japanese anime.
On the plus side, Mononoke's landscapes look pretty fantastic, but not
as good as Tarzan.  Writer/director Hayao Miyazaki  a.k.a. the Japanese
Walt Disney  has crafted a very intelligent story about the
co-existence of humans and the forest.  The version that will hit U.S.
theaters was dubbed in English and spiced up by Neil Gaiman, who created
a popular monthly comic called "The Sandman".  And there were these
really cool cuddly little tree-dwelling creatures called Kodama that
shook their heads and made a sound like the one that coincided with the
appearance of the Tiki idol in the Hawaiian episodes of The Brady
Bunch.  A bit heavy-handed, but still enjoyable.
2:17 - PG-13 for images of violence and gore

Author
Louis Proyect
In the opening scene of Miyazaki Hayao's animated feature Princess
Mononoke, we witness a battle between young Prince Ashitaka and a
giant demon warthog that is attacking his village. In the act of
successfully killing the animal, he receives a wound to his arm. In a
meeting with the village elders, he learns from a wise woman that the
wound is certainly fatal. It is only a matter of time. His only hope
is to travel to the forest home of the demon warthog to find out what
has driven it to hate and kill humans.
Thus begins a quest that is thematically related to many legends and
fairy tales, going back to the Epic of Gilgamesh. A young protagonist,
usually an adolescent like Ashitaka, goes on a voyage to save either
himself, herself or their people. This voyage--in many ways a rite of
puberty--leads to self-discovery and a happy ending.
Although Miyazaki is known as Japan's Walt Disney, it would be a
mistake to assume that Princess Mononoke resembles the sort of
saccharine product Disney studios offer up today. In many ways it is a
throwback to the darker vision of a Disney past, when his films had
the power to both frighten and enchant.
Ashikata departs to the East on his steed, a loyal elk in true
fairy-tale fashion, the rumored homeland of the demon hog. The only
clue to what drove the animal wild and turned it into a demon is the
iron ball that is discovered in its corpse. The wise woman of the
village tells him that if he discovers the source of the iron ball, he
will likely understand the root of his own suffering as well.
After a journey across mountains and through forests, he finally
arrives at the source of the iron ball. It is Irontown, ruled by
Princess Eboshi. Miyazaki's Irontown is a realistic depiction of one
of those towns that existed everywhere on the cusp of the introduction
of capitalist property relations in the 16th century. Its citizens
work in a foundry turning iron ore into guns and bullets. Eboshi
dreams of ruling the world. By bringing together wage labor and raw
materials, she will achieve mastery over all her enemies, including
the feudal Samurai warriors who are constantly attacking her heavily
fortified industrial compound. She is symbolic of an emerging Japanese
bourgeoisie, whose artisan-based workshop is a mere sprout in the
surrounding feudal countryside. Out of such sprouts, capitalism could
emerge anywhere, but for geographical reasons was allowed only to
emerge in Western Europe and Japan. In the first instance because
Western Europe was able to cannibalize the New World, in the second
because Japan took advantage of its insular features to resist the
cannibals.
Her only other enemy are the animals and spirits of the nearby
mountain, where the town's miners are systematically destroying trees
in order to get at the iron ore under the ground. Periodically
animals, including the warthog of the opening scene, attack the miners
and the soldiers who defend them. That is what the iron ball turns out
to be, a bullet that both gravely wounded the warthog and led to
Ashikata's own struggle against death.
Eboshi's main worry, however, is San, the teenaged girl who lives with
white wolves in the forest. She is Princess Mononoke, who has the
ability to talk to the animals. Her parents abandoned her in the
forest when she was an infant, where she was adopted by the wolf
goddess Moro, her mother now. During one of her raids on Eboshi's
fortress-factory, San is saved from death by Ashikata who takes her
unconscious body back into the forest. During the rescue, he is
wounded himself. Using the restorative powers of a pond deep within
the forest, San brings Ashikata back to health. However, the original
wound he received from the warthog has not disappeared. Its black
magic will prove difficult to overcome. The partnership of Ashikata
and San against the destruction of the forest, set against their
unsteady progress toward friendship and possibly love, will eventually
overcome this black magic.
Besides the three central characters--Princess Mononoke, Ashikata and
Eboshi--the most vivid character of all is the forest itself with its
animals and spirits. Miyazaki is one of the great animation artists of
the 20th century, whose landscapes still depend heavily on manually
produced cels, although he is not above using computers when
appropriate. Every scene in Princess Mononoke is framed by a
breathtaking natural tableaux, typically tree-covered mountains that
arch toward a brilliant sun and clouds, with birds coasting lazily
across the sky. Although the scenes of nature usually occupy less than
a minute, they are essential to the esthetic pleasure of the film and
its underlying theme: nature has transcendent if not divine status. To
kill it in a wanton fashion is evil. On one level, Miyazaki's
environmentalism has much in common with the "deep ecology" that has
sprung up over the past 2 decades. It depends heavily on spiritual and
religious understandings of the connection between humanity and
nature.
Key to understanding the underlying beliefs of Princess Mononoke is
the continuing strength of Shintoism in Japan, the pre-Buddhist
indigenous beliefs. The core of Shintoist mythology revolves around
tales of the sun goddess Amaterasu Omikami, the ancestress of the
Imperial Household. In the beginning, according to Japanese mythology,
a certain number of kami or divine powers simply emerged, and a pair
of kami, Izanagi and Izanami, gave birth to the Japanese islands, as
well as to the kami who became ancestors of the various clans.
Amaterasu, the ruler of Takama no Hara; the moon god Tsukiyomi no
Mikoto; and Susanoo (Susanowo) no Mikoto, the ruler of the nether
regions, were the most important among them.
Shintoist beliefs remain strong in Japan today, although there is no
organized Shintoist religion as such. Perhaps best way to understand
the persistence of precapitalist mythology in a highly advanced
industrial country is to imagine by analogy that Mexico had been an
island able to resist Spanish conquistadores. At some point, the
native Aztec feudal aristocracy emerges into a capitalist class, but
never loses touch with the pantheistic beliefs of its racial origins.
Among them is a belief in the sacredness of nature, something that is
obviously inimical to unfettered capitalist growth.
The concern about "absence of the sacred" not only permeates
Miyazaki's film, it also is strong among some of the ideological
leaders of the recent Seattle protests. Green idealists such as Jerry
Mander and Vandana Shiva decry the soulless pursuit of profit by the
modern corporation. Salvation would seem to be a return to the simple
life of pastoral villagers and nomads, who view themselves as part of
nature and not above it.
However, a deeper reading of Princess Mononoke would yield a somewhat
different view. Prince Ashikata's message is not that Irontown should
be destroyed, only that it find a way to co-exist with nature. In
addition, the artisans of Irontown are depicted as plucky and
resourceful, not simple wage slaves who hate their work. The most
skilled workers there, who are designing a more powerful rifle
directly under Eboshi's supervision, are lepers whom she has rescued
from outer society's fears and superstitions.
In a perceptive Oct. 24, 1999 Los Angeles Times profile of Miyazaki,
Charles Solomon notes that in contrast to the sneering Clayton in
"Tarzan" or the brutal Shan Yu in "Mulan":
"Eboshi is not a straightforward villain. Like the Japanese people
after World War II, the workers in Iron Town are trying to survive in
a troubled world; they don't mean to destroy their environment. 'If
you portray someone who's evil, then you off him, what's the point?'
Miyazaki asked. 'It's easy to create a villain who's a maniacal real
estate developer, then kill him and have a happy ending. But what if a
really good person becomes a real estate developer?'"
The questions posed by Princess Mononoke and the Seattle protests will
remain with us as long as the world is organized on the basis of
profit and private property. Some people opposed to the system will
long for simpler, precapitalist foundations while others will argue
that progress and material well-being can only be ensured by
relentless exploitation of natural resources. Marxism has often found
itself struggling to define itself within the two poles.
Perhaps Engels' characterization of the Iroquois confederacy and other
precapitalist societies might be a guide to understanding resolving
this apparent dilemma:
"The power of this primitive community had to be broken, and it was
broken. But it was broken by influences which from the very start
appear as a degradation, a fall from the simple moral greatness of the
old gentile society. The lowest interests -- base greed, brutal
appetites, sordid avarice, selfish robbery of the common wealth --
inaugurate the new, civilized, class society. It is by the vilest
means -- theft, violence, fraud, treason -- that the old classless
gentile society is undermined and overthrown. And the new society
itself, during all the two and a half thousand years of its existence,
has never been anything else but the development of the small minority
at the expense of the great exploited and oppressed majority; today it
is so more than ever before."
Clearly, what Marxists should aim at is the marriage of the values of
communal society--including its reverence of nature--with the
scientific and technological advances that modern class society has
made possible. The proper term for this is socialism.
For Marxist discussion: www.marxmail.org 
(a new URL--please take note)

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "PRINCESS MONONOKE" (Miramax Films)
Based on Japanese folklore, this captivating environmentalist
fable is the tale of a war between the beast gods of the forest and
the humans who are encroaching on their pristine territory. Set in the
15th century, a time of feudalism, the characters are desperately
grasping to understand and adjust to the coming industrialization and
how it will affect the balance of nature. In this English-dubbed
version, a young warrior, Ashitaka (voiced by Billy Crudup), is forced
to kill a fierce, demonic boar to protect his village. While dying,
the evil creature places a mysterious curse on him, signified by a
dark, twisting scar on his right arm. Defiant and determined to find a
cure, Ashitaka mounts his trusty red elk and travels to the boar's
homeland where he becomes involved in a dispute between Lady Eboshi
(Minnie Driver) and her feisty ironworkers and the forest creatures,
led by Moro, the Wolf Spirit (Gillian Anderson), and her adopted human
daughter, Mononoke ("spirits of things"), called San (Claire
Danes). The conclusion is a plea to humans to live harmoniously with
the world around us. Directed by Hayao Miyazaki, the Japanese version
is one of only two films to ever break $150 million at the Japanese
box-office - the other being "Titanic."  The fluid and superbly
detailed animation is technically awesome, emotionally powerful, and
unbelievably beautiful. I was particularly enchanted by the tiny,
ghost-like, head-clicking tree sprites. But - at a lengthy 135 minutes
- with scenes of graphic violence and a complex, philosophical
storyline to follow, it's definitely not meant for young
children. Heed the PG-13 rating.  Basically, it's art house fare. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Princess Mononoke" is a stunning,
spiritual 7 - but it is definitely too much of a good thing.

Author
Eugene Novikov
 Featuring the voice talents of Billy Crudup, Claire Danes, Gillian
Anderson, Minnie Driver, Billy Bob Thornton. Rated PG-13.
Princess Mononoke, the latest Japanese anime export from the legendary
Hayao Miyazaki (Kiki's Delivery Service, My Neighbor Totoro) is neither
a bad film nor the masterpiece so many are making it out to be (Roger
Ebert, why have you forsaken us?). It's a fantasy adventure that has
the frame of a deep, complex back story but never bothers to elaborate
on it, give it anything more than pseudo-substance. It's impressive
animation and fluid action sequences make it more than a passable two
plus hours, but it never becomes the great achievement it could -- and
perhaps should -- have been.
It begins with an enigmatic voiceover that introduces us to a "land of
gods and demons" but doesn't go any further. We are immediately taken
to the outskirts of a Japanese village, where young Ashitaka is
gathering his people because the wise woman has called everyone back to
the village: something evil's afoot. Riding along on his faithful elk
(!), Ashitaka finally spots the cause of all the commotion: a fierce-
looking demon covered in what seems like creepy-crawly worms. The thing
gives chase but Ashitaka manages to escape, unscathed except for a
wound on his arm where the creature touched him. When he gets back to
his village the wise woman (what the hell is a wise woman, anyway?)
tells him some grim news. Apparently, the wound on his arm is actually
a curse, one that nobody knows how to take off. It will eventually
spread all over his body and kill him; in the meantime, he must leave
the village, go to the forests of the wests and search for a cure. This
is his fate: someting he could not escape even if he wanted to.
So Ashitaka sets off and rides westward until he comes across Irontown;
a mysterious and remote human settlement smack in the middle of the
land that the gods and demons revere. The town is ruled by the
discreetly malevolent Lady Eboshi, who's at odds with the gods (and I'm
a poet and I didn't even know it) because of the forest she is
occupying and destroying. As Ashitaka soon finds out, actually, Eboshi
and the rest of her town are planning an all-out war on the gods of the
forest (who, incidentally, take the form of wolves, boars and apes) for
control of the forestg.
Ashitaka develops an affection for San a.k.a. the Princess Mononoke
(translation: the wolf princess; could we be any more subtle here,
folks?), a young girl raised by the wolf gods in a fashion that recalls
all too vividly a certain story by Ridyard Kipling. She is obviously
not about to side with the rest of the humans. Neither is he, but nor
is he ready to completely abandon his race. His intention is to try to
reach a happy medium: the character is nobility epitomized.
Well, the pictures sure are pretty: striking and rich in detail,
utilizing the distinctive anime style to good effect. Indeed, I can't
see the story working in standard Disney-style animation: it just
doesn't seem right, perhaps because we're not accustomed to seeing
serious stories presented in traditional animation. Then again, this
isn't even a very serious movie, but it sure does pretend to be.
There's a lot of dark mythology involved here, but it isn't sincere
mythology, just something made up as a backbone, something to hold the
movie together. There's not much more to it than a skeleton; the
stories are shallow, barren. I'd be in favor of increasing the film's
already lengthy running time in order to deepen the background.
I was never really bored, though my mind started to wander in parts.
Fortunately the film gets its act together for a compelling climax,
which is far and away the best part of the movie. There, it pulls
through not because of our emotional involvement in the story but
because of the visceral thrill it generates: the riveting score,
gorgeous animation and able direction finally manage to give the viewer
a rush, though by then it may be too little, too late. Then again, for
some people, maybe not.
Ultimately, the movie settles in your head rather than in your heart.
There are enough action set pieces and compelling visuals dispersed
throughout to keep you awake and interested but not enough depth to the
story to elicit a real emotional response. Too bad.

Author
James Sanford
         When it was released in Japan in 1997, the animated epic
"Mononoke Hime" captivated audiences -- it's currently second only to
"Titanic" in the list of Japan's biggest box office hits -- and
attracted the attention of American producers. But director Hayao
Miyazaki (whose other creations include "My Neighbor Totoro" and "Kiki's
Delivery Service") wasn't about to let his work be reshaped to suit U.S.
tastes. That's why, even with the addition of some familiar voices on
the soundtrack, "Princess Mononoke" retains its distinctively Japanese
flavor.
 Miyazaki's film is a far cry from the Disneyfied world of
animation. Its complex, winding plot does not pause for musical numbers
or comic relief, and the violence in the story is not bloodless. Most of
"Mononoke" is dark and unsettling, and yet it's weirdly lovely as well.
Even if you lose track of the story -- and it is sometimes a challenge
to keep up with all the developments -- the movie's steady flow of
exotic, powerful images remains riveting.
 "Mononoke" is set in Japan's Iron Age, "the days of gods and
demons," according to the narration. While saving his village from an
attacking Curse God (which looks like a gigantic, maggot-infested boar),
the young hero Ashitaka (voice of Billy Crudup) is wounded by the animal
and is forced to head west to search for a magical cure.
 While journeying through a world full of "angry ghosts,"
Ashitaka encounters the haughty Lady Eboshi (Minnie Driver), who runs
the community of Irontown and who has managed to round up a band of
warriors and lepers to help her destroy the elusive Forest Spirit. But
this magnificent semi-transparent creature is under the protection of
Eboshi's arch-enemy San (Claire Danes), a girl raised in the wild, who
bewitches Ashitaka.
 "Mononoke" delivers a none-too-subtle message about
conservation and respect for nature, but the film is so well-crafted it
never feels preachy. Although it's slightly disconcerting at first to
hear the easily identifiable Gillian Anderson speaking for the wolf
mother Moro or Billy Bob Thornton reading the part of the scheming monk
Jigo, the voice work is generally fine and most of the performers have
been smartly cast.
 Even without the dialogue, "Mononoke" would still be compelling
for its visuals alone. Inspired by Japanese mythology, Mizayaki and his
teams of animators have conjured up an eerie dreamscape full of monsters
both good and evil, as well as the tiny spectral "koodamas," curious
sprites with rattling, rotating heads. Whether you're a devotee of
animation or simply interested in Eastern culture, seeing "Princess
Mononoke" is a must. James Sanford

Author
Frankie Paiva
Japanese anime is a world of film that has been limited to obscure video store
shelves for far too long. The stunning detail that is in each cell of animation
cannot possibly be appreciated, or given the proper gratitude, by watching an
anime film on video. Recently, one of the first anime films to be released in a
while Perfect Blue was released into theaters. It did very good business and
opened the door right up for this animation classic. Princess Mononoke
(Mononoke Hime in Japan) was the biggest grossing animated film of all time in
Japan. Now with the help of English actors for the voices, it’s ready to set
sail across the ocean for the viewing pleasure of everyone who enjoys anime or
cinema in general. 
Ashitaka is a warrior who has been put under a curse by the forest God. It
leaves an ugly looking purple gash on his arm that will continue to grow until
it envelops his entire body, and then it will kill him. The elderly woman of
the village says that if he goes to the forest of the forest Gods that he may
be able to have the curse lifted. So off he goes riding into the forest until
he reaches the pool of the forest God. Nearby there is a mining colony called
Irontown led by Lady Eboshi. She wants to hunt and kill the forest God because
all of the animals that she kills and all of the trees that she cuts down are
being re-planted by people of the forest. If she kills him, all forest Gods
will become mortal again and will be easily killed.
He also meets Princess Mononoke. She lives with an extremely large wolf pack
and is trying to save the forest. Her destiny is to kill Lady Eboshi to save
the forest and all of the animals living in it. A tribe of boars also enters
the picture when they decide to charge and kill Lady Eboshi and her men. 
Princess Mononoke is worth seeing three or four times just to look at the
beautifully drawn animation. No detail was spared, in scenes where Ashitake
runs through the forest all of the shadows of the trees and branches are
perfectly laid out to where they would be in real life. The forest God is
quirky and cool looking and you don't even want to get me started about what it
looks like when people are engulfed with hate. The expressions on the
characters' faces make up for the usual lack of good dubbing. What a bad job it
is! Many people I talked to thought (and I agree with them) that while watching
the film, it’s painfully obvious which American celebrities are doing the
voices. Why not have Japanese people do the voices for the English version of
the film? It would sound a lot better and more authentic. While the storyline
sounds complicated, it’s not that hard to get. Besides, if you get lost there
is always the animation to look at. Mononoke has a great message, and the
premise of trying to balance nature with production to work together to form a
better economy is a great lesson. Especially for some construction workers who
treat trees as things that exist only for them to chop down. The ending is also
slightly confusing, but I won’t give anything else away. If you are fortunate
enough to have Princess Mononoke to be at a theater near you, go and see it. If
not, rent it on video and watch it on a really big screen. This animation
classic gets **** stars.
The Young-Uns: Several soldiers get either their arms or heads chopped off, but
it’s usually shown at a distance. (Remember this film is animated) there is
also some very scary looking boars and some mild language. Good Age 12 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://www.homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html 

Author
Jun Yan
Written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki
Re-released and dubbed by Miramax in 1999
More than half way through the movie, I was reminded of Tsui Hark's
classic Hong Kong movie "Once Upon a Time in China." What can a Kung fu
political movie possibly have in common with a full-length Japanese
animation, you might ask? Well, they both have a complicated and
melodramatic story, a large number of characters, exciting visuals,
somewhat ambiguous morals stands, and way too many conflicts.
The story of Princess Mononoke is actually the story of a young man
named Ashitaka, who is infected with a deadly curse on his arm after he
kills a boar-turned-demon that is terrorizing his home town. In search
for a cure of this curse that's slowly eating him away, he gets on his
elk and sets for the far and away land full of gods and spirits, demons
and monsters, all sharing and fighting over the biggest forest you have
seen on a screen.
The real Princess Mononoke (San, dubbed by Claire Danes), was not
seriously introduced after almost 1/3 into the movie. Before that, was a
mingled and busy introduction of a bunch of other characters, including
Jigo, a monk on a undetermined mission (dubbed by Billy Bob Thorton),
Lady Eboshi, the leader of an industrial town that destroys the forest
for iron and hire former brothel-girls to make firearms (dubbed by
Minnie Driver). The plot takes way too long to cut into the central
conflict with the forest spirit and the wild animals on one side and the
iron town and the hunters on the other. But the ambitious filmmakers are
not satisfied with just one conflict, so he throws in a group of vicious
samourai, a tribe of boars driven out of their own home land, a bunch of
skeptical apes, an army of hunters wearing animal skin. Non of these
groups are exactly allies or simply enemies. The audience, just like
Ashitaka, have a real hard time taking sides and root for any one of
them, because the movie takes a lot of time (too much, I think) to
convince us that Lady Eboshi, even though she wants to destroy the
forest and animals for her own gain, is also a good leader and
compassionate woman. The monk Jigo, even though he wants to cut off the
forest spirit's head and sell it as the fountain of youth to the
Empiror, is a rather humorous character. Although our environmentalist
urge pushes us toward the side of the wolf girl San, her wolf tribe, and
the forest, the wild animals are obviously not just the victims and
often show their hostility and sharp teeth to the hero.
The moral ambiguity makes the story interesting, but the noise from all
groups and so many side characters dilute the main conflict and make the
plot cluttered and confused. The most annoying is the ape tribe, who
showed up convenient to serve no other purpose but to slow down the
heroes and the story by throwing small objects at them and making mean
comments. I'd rather see Miyazaki completely abandon some of these
miscelleneous subplots and concentrate on the main story line.
Another consequence of the moral ambiguity is the feeble and naive plea
of Ashitaka -- Hatred is bad. Can't we all get along? The appeal of the
central character is significantly impaired. Ashitaka is perhaps the
most bland hero I've seen for a while. He is so boring, dull, and blah,
that I secretly cheered the ending that did not have the two lovers live
together happily ever after. In fact, there is almost no chemistry
between San and Ashitaka. With far less screen time, San still comes
through as more interesting than her boyfriend, benefiting little more
than a fierce presence. The most fascinating character, however, is the
powerful and mysterious Lady Eboshi, calm, intelligent, dominating,
seductive.
The biggest merit of this movie is its incredible visual imagination.
There is no substitute for the sheer rush of seeing the breath-taking
images of mythical spirits towering over the land, thousands of cute
little tree ghosts (looking very much like aliens in The X-files except
being white instead of green) raining down, trees dying and falling. I
repeatedly have chills running down my spine at every shot of the
ferocious battle between the Nature and humans. I have never seen any
image in animation so powerful that it blows my mind. The magic and
creativity and sheer power of the battle scenes make Disney's The Lion
King look like a joke.
I never thought animations can transmit the impression of natural
surrounding so well. Simply imitating reality is not enough. Here
Miyazaki and his team successfully replicate the FEEL of the Nature, and
the audience have the illusion of being actually engulfed in the
mythical forest.
Another interesting achievement is the fight scenes in this movie.
Albeit short and sporatic, the fights are exciting and well drawn. The
excessive gore and blood, however, seem a bit over done.
The English dialogue is competently done, from the script translation to
dubbing.
The conflicts between the advancing humans and wild animals actually
remind me of the conflict between white men and Native Americans, even
though that was probably not what Miyazaki had in mind. With a more
interesting hero and more concentrated writing, it could have been an
animation that is not only incredible-looking, but also
thought-provoking.

Author
Chris Meadows
Starring Billy Crudup, Claire Dane, Minnie Driver, Billy Bob Thornton,
Gillian Anderson (English version)
Hayao Miyazaki's past films (_Laputa: Castle in the Sky_, _My Neighbor
Totoro_, _Kiki's Delivery Service_, and so on) have garnered much the
same reputation among Japanese viewers that Disney films have garnered
over here: Masterfully-done family-friendly kiddie fare that almost
everybody will enjoy.  However, Miyazaki's latest offering, _Princess
Mononoke_ (_Mononoke Hime_ in the original Japanese) is something of a
departure from his past standards, and may surprise even Miyazaki fans.
As a darker film than Miyazaki's prior movies (with the possible
exception of _Nausicaa of the Valley of the Wind_), Mononoke earns its
PG-13 rating.  If it had been made as a live-action film, it would
almost certainly have gotten an R.  Set hundreds of years ago in the
Muromachi period of Japan, the movie includes samurai violence, blood
(literally _gallons_ of blood in one scene), and some minor sexual
themes (mostly flirtation and references to characters having formerly
been brothel girls).  Thus, it falls squarely into that uniquely
American no-man's-land of mass-market animated films _not_ meant for
children...which probably explains its near-total lack of studio
publicity.  Mirimax must have been uncertain how to promote a film
like this, so deeply-seated is the American "animation = kidvid"
prejudice.  Even though it was a chartbusting smash hit in Japan,
earning a place in the 2000 _Guinness Book of World Records_ (page
132) and grossing $156.6 million in Japan alone, it has languished in
near-total obscurity in the United States despite receiving almost
nothing but rave reviews.  Princess Mononoke is a spectacular film, a
feast for the senses and the mind, and it is a shame it has not been
better promoted.
[The remainder of this review contains some minor spoilers for the
film and its ending.]
Save for its ending, _Princess Mononoke_ is very much a tragedy (in
the literary sense).  It is a film in which there are no real
villains, save perhaps the Emperor, who is barely even mentioned but
whose desire to live forever is an important plot motivator.  There
are only human beings, gods, and demons, all of whom have
imperfections that cause them to clash in numerous skirmishes and,
eventually, a final battle that destroys and costs a great deal.
And yet, most characters also have redeeming or even heroic qualities
as well.  The Lady Eboshi (voiced by Minnie Driver in the English
version), whose Irontown is denuding the forest and killing off its
gods, is in some respects downright humanitarian, taking in and
personally bandaging lepers, rescuing brothel girls from their
contracts, and protecting her people from both forest gods and human
warlords.
Perhaps the only truly blameless character is Ashitaka (Billy Crudup),
who, cursed by the blood of a forest demon he killed to protect his
village, has now come west to unravel the causes behind its
demonization, and "to see with eyes unclouded by hate."  And so he
does, moving between camps of human and forest creature with
near-impunity, friendly to all sides but partial to none, causing
everyone who meets him to wonder, "Just whose side is he on, anyway?"
The answer is all of them...and none of them.  Ashitaka wants humans
and forest denizens to live together in harmony...which may not be
possible, even after the movie's end.
The film begins when Prince Ashitaka kills the boar demon and is
banished from his village forever.  He rides west, encountering
samurai and an enigmatic monk, Jigo (Billy Bob Thornton).  As he
continues his journey, he comes across and saves the lives of two men
who were thrown over a cliff during an attack on Lady Eboshi's caravan
by the wolf-goddess Mara (Gillian Anderson).  Along the way, he meets
San (Claire Dane), a girl whose parents abandoned her in fear after
Mara caught them defiling the forest, and who Mara raised as one of
her own.  (San is also the Princess Mononoke, though this is only
mentioned once in the entire film--if you blink at the wrong moment,
as have some reviewers, you might miss it.  "Mononoke" literally means
"the spirits of things;" hence the Princess Mononoke is the girl who
communes with the woodland spirits.)
After he returns the men he saved to Irontown, Ashitaka learns of
Eboshi's motives.  He soon has the chance to learn of San's and
Mara's, and that of the clan of giant boars from which came the demon
that attacked Ashitaka's village.  As the plot thickens, the danger
mounts, and human and creature armies clash in bloody battles, time
begins to run out for the forest creatures and Irontown alike...and
Ashitaka may be the only one who can bring anything positive out of
the whole mess.
_Princess Mononoke_ is a morality play, showing the consequences of
humanity's selfishness and disregard for the environment, and the
aftermath of war in often gory detail.  However, it does not overdo
its moralizing--it shows by example, not by exposition.  The ending is
not the unrealistically saccharine "...and everybody lived happily
ever after" often found in fairy-tales but rather a more realistic
reconciliation and realization of differences, which may bode ill for
the future.  (In fact, since Japan today is more or less one huge
urban area, it's probably safe to say that humanity did end up
triumphing over the wild sooner or later.)  The film remains
consistently adult in its story and outlook.
Though _Mononoke_ is an excellent film, there are nonetheless some
minor flaws.  Storywise, it is never adequately explained (though this
could be the dub's fault) why Ashitaka has to leave his tribe forever
for being cursed, unable to return even if the curse is lifted.  Also,
there is one animal clan, the apes, whose appearances only serve to
slow the flow of the plot and insert some mostly-unnecessary
exposition.  It is also never explained why San is a Princess, how
Lady Eboshi knows that she is a Princess, or why Lady Eboshi wants her
to "become human again."  Can it be that she is the girl's biological
mother?  Odd that she never reveals it if so...
As far as the script is concerned, Neil Gaiman's adaptation is
remarkably good at matching lines to animated mouth movements, but
some lines do come off a bit corny.  The acting in general is very
good; even my friend who claimed never to have seen a good dub was
impressed.  Although it's sometimes a bit hard to countenance a
Japanese Lady with an Irish accent or a spy-cum-monk with the voice of
a backwoods hick, I suspect that the original Japanese voices' accents
probably carried similar connotations of exotic nobility or hickness
to Japanese-speakers.
The animation is, as always for cinematic Studio Ghibli (Miyazaki's
animation studio) works, first-rate.  This is the first Miyazaki film
to mark the use of extensive computer effects; however, most of these
are in the area of "digital ink and paint" programs--the equivalent of
using a drawing pad and a computer program to make a sketch, rather
than a pen and a cel--rather than the CGI (computer-generated images)
effects that are mostly synonymous with "computer animation" these
days.  There are a few noticeable CGI effects; however, they mostly do
not distract from the overall look and feel of the film.
And that overall look and feel is sumptuous, and often like a
watercolor painting in motion.  The film is full of the lush greens of
the plains and forests, and is breathtaking to watch in its full glory
on a big screen.  Stylistically, _Mononoke_ is vintage Miyazaki,
meaning that his character designs have varied little since his
earliest film.  San looks very similar to past Miyazaki heroines, such
as Kiki, Nausicaa, Sheeta (from _Laputa_), and Clara (from _Castle of
Cagliostro_.
The score is also vintage Miyazaki--the composer, Joe Hisaishi, has
worked with Miyazaki on almost all his films since _Nausicaa_.
However, this time Hisaishi has had access to a full-fledged symphony
orchestra, whereas scores to prior Miyazaki films were done mostly
with synthesizers.  The score is rich and deeply stirring, with
recurring themes for several of the characters.  From the opening
strains of the very first piece of music, it establishes the
atmosphere of the film, and does it extraordinarily well.  This is a
soundtrack to go out and buy...as I did, as soon as I saw the film.
Given this spectacular showing, it will be very interesting to see
what Hisaishi does with the score to _Laputa_, which he was
commissioned to revise and rerecord for its upcoming release to video
or theaters (Mirimax is still trying to decide which) under the title
_Castle in the Sky_.
_Princess Mononoke_ is easily one of the best animated movies of the
year (either 1997, when it was originally made, or 1999, which saw its
release upon American shores), and very likely one of the best movies
of _any_ kind.  At the time of the writing of this review, it is still
playing in many major metropolitan areas; an updated listing of which
theaters can be found at
http://WWW.Nausicaa.net/miyazaki/mh/release.html>.  If you have
the chance, you should see this movie at least once.
[This review is copyright 2000 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for Usenet distribution and associated archival, including the
Internet Movie Database, but other distribution rights reserved to the
author.]
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Co-moderator, rec.toys.transformers.moderated
Robotech_Master    | Homepage: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/>
robotech@eyrie.org | PGP: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/rm.key.txt>   
robotech@jurai.net | ICQ UIN: 5477383 

Author
Fontaine Lien
I swear to you the fact that I saw this movie at its premiere and the
fact that I met my favorite actress, Gillian Anderson, at this
premiere really has nothing to do with me liking this movie.
My encounter with Gillian is a story for another place, but here I'm
going to tell you about "Princess Mononoke."  Actually, I don't even
remember a character in the story called Mononoke.  I guess I was too
distracted.
The gist is, I was a bit disappointed, because I am a big fan of This
Guy (I don't know his English name . . . he's the main artist and
creator of several popular anime flicks such as this one); but this
project did not exceed the quality of his previous works like "Totoro"
or "Grave of the Fireflies" (most of his films are wonderful, but for
your sake I suggest you visit IMDB instead of relying on my memory :)
It lacked delicacy and bittersweet qualities.  But, I think it is
proof of this film's merit that despite the fact that Gillian was
sitting only a few rows behind me, I was still held captivated by the
images and sound.
The sound.  The music was wonderful, alternating between the majestic,
the innocent, the humorous, and the tragic.  My favorite voiceover was
that of Claire Dane's.  True, everyone did a great job and you could
sense a lot of emotion (I don't know which one was Billy Crudup--I
assume it was the main character--or Jada Pinkett *Smith*) from each
character, but I'm sorry, was it necessary to give the monk a
hillbillie accent (courtesy of Billy Bob) or the Iron Fortress lady an
Irish accent (from Minnie Driver, of course)?  Gillian went all out,
but I just couldn't get used to the fact that it was Gillian's voice
behind that ferocious white wolf.  Yes, the fault is all mine.
The images were simply breathtaking, and I wouldn't expect any less
from this artist.  They need a little softening, but I'd take this
over a Disney toon any day (don't get me wrong, I loved "Mulan" :).
The plot was perhaps overly complex and resolved too quickly and
sloppily at the end.  The dialogue was poor, and they were hitting us
over the head with the "humans vs. nature" theme a bit too heavily (a
recurring theme throughout all the artist's previous films).  The
action was exaggerated, even for a cartoon.  But when I walked out of
the theater, I realized that I didn't care.  It didn't matter anymore
that I was disappointed; because in a way, I was satisfied.  It didn't
matter that I sat in the second row and my neck hurts like hell,
because I got the feeling I always get after watching one of this
guy's films (that by the way, I don't often feel after a Disney toon):
that there is beauty even in the tragic; that there is something
spiritual and unexplainable in the human soul and within the depths of
nature.
Rating: B+ (First viewing, 10/20/99)
*Watch for those tiny tree goblins.  They are *so* adorable.  They
look like tiny white aliens
*You want to hear about the premiere, you say?  Visit
http://www.geocities.com/area51/vault/3768/mononoke.html.

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE PRINCESS MONONOKE, an absolutely breathtaking motion picture, could
as easily be shown in an art museum as a theater.  With stunning images
like a Paul Gauguin painting and with a great mythic story of the type
that Richard Wagner would have loved to use for an opera, the movie
leaves you grasping without much luck for adequate words to describe it.
Although this has been a strong year for ground-breaking animation with
the release of THE IRON GIANT and TARZAN, nothing that has come before
it is in the same league as THE PRINCESS MONONOKE, an animated film,
written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki.  Although teenagers and possibly
quite-mature preteens will enjoy it, the movie is aimed at adult
audiences.  For the American version Miramax is releasing an extremely
well done dubbed version with an English script by Neil Gaiman and with
voices by named stars (Billy Crudup, Billy Bob Thornton, Minnie Driver,
John Di Maggio, Claire Danes, Jada Pinkett-Smith and Gillian Anderson,
among others).
One of only two films released in the Japanese market to ever make over
$150,000,000 (in a country with one tenth the number of screens as the
U.S.), THE PRINCESS MONONOKE beat out TITANIC for the all-time number
one spot in Japan.
The story, loosely based on Japanese folklore, features two valiant
youths, Prince Ashitaka (Crudup, last seen marvelously as Steve
Prefontaine in WITHOUT LIMITS) and Princess Mononoke (Danes), who fight
an epic battle for the forces of good.  The complex but enthralling
story is well summarized in the press notes as being "a war between
encroaching civilization and the beast gods of the forest which
threatens to unbalance the forces of nature."
Generally, environmentalism, however laudable, makes for lifeless and
pedantic stories (the lame JETSONS: THE MOVIE being one example).  Here,
however, the writer imbues the story with such vast portent that it
keeps you on the edge of your seat.  The central characters are so
empathetically written and drawn that you find yourself caring about
them passionately.
In the opening sequence, a beast comes charging out of the forest.  When
we first see it, it appears to be an almost formless mass of swirling,
flying maggots.  A brave warrior, Prince Ashitaka, kills the beast,
which turns out to be a wild boar the size of a house.  During the
battle, the boar bites the prince's arm, which means that he will soon
become a beast himself and die.  (There is, of course, an "unless.")
As he journeys far from his home to discover the evil that infected the
boar, he meets Princess Mononoke, a wild girl who was raised by a
barn-sized wolf.  When he first sees her, she has just sucked the blood
out of the wound of her injured wolf-mother.  After spitting the blood
on the ground, the princess, with her face covered in blood, looks at
the prince with a haunting mixture of power and innocence.
Although they will ultimately band together, she is initially suspicious
and wary of the stranger in her midst.  The troubled and nuanced
expressions on their faces throughout the story suggests part of their
pain and suffering as well as their dedication and courage.
Minnie Driver, playing against type, is the nefarious Lady Eboshi, in
some ways the leader of the forces of evil and in other ways a
benevolent protector of the downtrodden.  The complicated tale suggests
two sides to most issues.
In a serious drama, Billy Bob Thornton, as a good-old-boy warrior named
Jigo, provides most of the humor with his deliciously cornball
aphorisms.  ("When you're goin' to kill a god, let someone else do your
dirty work." and "Everybody wants everything.  That's the way the world
is, but I might actually get it.")
The drawings literally burst with imagination.  Among the best of these
is the luminescent figure known after dark as the Night Walker.  During
the day he is transformed into a playful-looking little creature known
as the Forest Spirit, something like a cross between a deer and a gnome.
The mesmerizing film is such a moving and rewarding experience that you
should not be surprised if you break out into loud applause at the end.
Right after talking, the first cardinal sin during a closed press
screening, the second sin is applauding.  Knowing full well that it was
a major faux pas, I couldn't help myself at ours.  Applauding loudly, I,
at least, was able to restrain myself from shouting "Bravo!" as well. I
wanted to.
THE PRINCESS MONONOKE runs 2:14, but there's nothing I would cut.  The
movie is rated PG-13 for images of violence and gore.  It would be fine
for teenagers, but those 11 or 12 will need to be able to handle the
gore to be able to see it.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
