Title
Review for "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, The" (1981) (mini)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chris Casino
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (1981)
Written by Douglas Adams, produced and directed by Alan
Bell, Executive producer John Lloyd, Music by Paddy Kingsland.
Cast: Simon Jones (Arthur Dent), David Dixon (Ford Prefect),
Mark Wing-Davey (Zaphod Beeblebrox), Sandra Dickinson (Trillian),
Martin Benson (Vogon Captain), Stephen Moore (voice of Marvin),
Richard Vernon (Slartibartfast), David Learner (Marvin), David 
Prowse (Bodyguard).
This started out as a radio series, then it became two novels,
then this six episode TV series came out, then it became three
more books, a play, a computer game, (appropriately) a bath 
towel, all of which was done by creator Adams, and now a film version 
will be out in 2000 (and you can all bet your bottom dollar that I will
be the first one to post a review on this newsgroup of that
movie), and the plot will follow in a second.
When I was thirteen, I went over to my aunt 
Beth's house, and she had a copy of this book. She suggested
I might enjoy it. I doubted it, but out of curiousity
I picked it up and read it. Five years later, I'm hooked
on this quirky but lovable British piece, and I've become
quite a fan of creator Douglas Adams. In fact, find
me one novel of his I haven't read five thousand times,
I will find a medal for you.
Arthur Dent, a perfectly ordinary Earth man (played
quite well by Simon Jones, whom this role was written
for) discovers after his home is demolished to make
way for a bypass, that his best friend Ford Prefect
(Dixon, who has the right look for Ford) is
not from Earth, and together they hitchhike aboard
a Vogon ship shortly before the green, slimy Vogons
destroy the planet Earth to make way for a hyperspace
bypass. Anyway, after they are read some awful poetry,
they are thrown off into deep space and rescued
by Ford's semicousin, Zaphod Beeblebrox (an
appealing Wing-Davey), the two-headed, three
armed hippy President of the galaxy, his human
girlfriend, Tricia "Trillian" McMillan (Dickinson, 
who is appealing to look at, but has a voice worse than 
Fran Drescher, which is why I wish Adams had stuck
with his instincts and let her do English Rose),
and the depressed, hilarious cyborg, Marvin
the Paranoid Android ("Life, don't talk to me about
life!"). All five of them meet Slartibartfast (A
funny role for the late Vernon), a planet maker
on the planet of Magreathea (forgive the spelling),
and stop by the Restaurant at the End of the Universe
for dinner as they try to find the question to the
ultimate answer, which is 42.
        This has something for everyone. It's
sci-fi, and if you don't like that (which I do),
it's funny, and it even has amusing little 
jokes about stuff like digital watches, towels,
inteligent supercomputers, etc., that Adams
has said to've picked up from personal experiences.
        The miniseries rates lower than four stars
simply because the movie version in 2000 will obviously
have so much more computer generated technology
to make it look more realistic (which this, sadly, does
not most of the time) and it will make the effects here look like
absolute rubbish, which they weren't at the time. This
is going to look like crap compaired to the film.
But that's okay, I'll still love it anyway.
