Title
Review for Man Who Haunted Himself, The (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
The Man Who Haunted Himself (1970) *1/2 out of ***** - C: Roger Moore.
A conservative British businessman (Moore) while driving home from work
suddenly starts to drive recklessly and moments later crashes his car in a
near fatal accident. While in the emergency room, he dies, but then is
quickly brought back to life. After he becomes well again, he returns to his
normal life. However, he slowly starts to discover that he sometimes seems
to be in two places at once, as people greet him and mention recent events
to him which he cannot recall taking part in. Is there a double of himself
running around London? Or is he going insane?
Well, it's never very clear, and that's the film's major flaw. For 70
minutes of the film, Moore's character just keeps wandering around hearing
about how he is supposedly doing all these wild things, and he never does
anything to investigate. He could very easily have changed his daily routine
just slightly, in order to prove that he wasn't at a certain place at a
certain time. He even has witnesses who can back him up and explain where he
was at times in question. But he just keeps wandering around.
Maybe the American version of this film has been cut, which would certainly
explain the ending, or lack of one. Moore finally confronts his double,
which is explained that the double is reflective of his wild side, the side
of his personality which he has repressed all his life and now it wants to
party. Or something like that. So, for some reason, the two Roger Moore's
jump into their cars and chase each other. During the chase, the "good"
Roger Moore starts to hallucinate some really weird stuff, and then drives
his car into a lake. The "evil" Roger Moore stops to watch, and as the
"good" Roger Moore dies, the "evil" Roger Moore doubles over in pain. Then
the end credits roll. What?! I don't get it.
The film has a good story, but its executed with such stupidity and bad
logic that it quickly grows tiresome. It could be decently remade today,
perhaps as a TV movie or even possibly as an "X-Files" episode. With a smart
writer, this could have been one creepy, entertaining flick. But as it
stands, it's just ridiculous.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.
