Title
Review for Blue Velvet (1986)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
David Gardiner
I don't think anybody has ever come away from a viewing of David Lynch's
Blue Velvet feeling neutral towards the film. You are either incensed or
revolted or fascinated or shocked into a dazed silence. It takes your
emotions and screws them up into a ball and wrings them out like a wet
tea-towel. It is a film that "gets to you", no matter who you are, no matter
how hard you fight against it. It is truly, deeply, inescapably unsettling.
Where does its power to unsettle come from? It isn't just violence or foul
language or cruelty or sexual perversion (although it has all these in
abundance). It's a film that actually gets in and messes with your mind.
Blue Velvet, like the most powerful and enduring folk tales, is a huge
allegory, ripe with symbolism and suggestion, full of archetypes and
universals drawn from our group unconscious, the place where our deepest
fears and loathings and our secret desires and guilty passions and
obsessions have been carefully hidden away. It puts forward a view of the
individual, and by extension of human society, to the effect that what you
see is not what you get.
Lumberton, in the film's opening scenes, is presented as idyllic Middle
America; fine, friendly hard-working people, white picket fences bright in
the sunlight, flowers blooming in the well-tended gardens, their saturated
colours almost dazzling to behold, a vision of small-town normality and
wholesomeness. A smiling fireman on the running-board of a gleaming red
fire-engine waves cheerily as he goes by. Then, misfortune intrudes: the man
hosing his garden has a seizure or stroke of some kind, symbolised by the
kink in the hose that stops the flow of water, but it is a natural,
biological event without moral significance. However, as he lies in his
helpless agony, tended only by the dog and the little toddler, the camera
zooms down to the grass, and to what is going on beneath the grass,  in a
shot that I think provides the key to the entire film: for just below the
surface sickening and unspeakable things are happening  -  ugly and sinister
bugs are tearing one another apart. There are violent and repellent things
going on just out of sight, things we will never know about unless we seek
them out, unless we dig. It is an image, I think, that we are meant to apply
to ourselves as much as to Lumberton, or any other version of a human
society. It is the film's overarching metaphor.
The development of the story involves the finding of  a severed human ear by
the central character Jeffrey (Kyle MacLachlan) and his attempts, with the
help of High School student Sandy (Laura Dern) to unravel the mystery behind
its amputation. This quest turns into something closely resembling an
archetypal fairy-tale, in which he finds the beautiful woman Dorothy
(Isabella Rossellini) being held prisoner in a grim and forbidding tower
(apartment block) by the ogre-like incarnation of pure evil Frank (Dennis
Hopper) who is involved in drugs, kidnapping, prostitution and almost
certainly murder, and who is subjecting her to the most bizarre acts of
torture and sexual humiliation. Dorothy is eventually released from her
nightmare existence, though not directly by Jeffrey, and not without
suffering an almost total breakdown which leaves her wandering naked through
the town's darkened streets. So we might want to say that this is no
straightforward fairy-tale, but rather it is one that turns sour, becomes
corrupted and debased. It is a fairy tale whose "happy ending" still leaves
us with a sickly feeling in the pit of our stomach.
To rescue the damsel in distress the hero in the fairy-tale of old usually
had to go through some pretty extreme tests and adventures, and Jeffrey's
lot is no different. His decision to become the "bug man" (literally as well
as metaphorically) and to root-out the horrific evil that is holding Dorothy
in its grip takes him to the very depths of the hell that is Frank's
universe. It would be difficult to imagine anyone more evil than Frank, or
events more spine-chilling than the goings-on at the brothel where he is
holding Dorothy's son and her husband prisoner. Once or twice the limits of
credibility seem to be stretched beyond breaking point, as when the
policeman in the yellow jacket, although dead, remains standing until
Jeffrey brushes against him, but overall the film manages to maintain a
delicate ambiguity with regard to objective reality. We never quite know
whether to believe in Jeffrey's Odyssey or not, whether to view it as
literal narrative or as a dream-sequence, or as some kind of grotesque
daydream / fantasy in which Jeffrey has cast himself in the role of hero but
of which he slowly loses control as the wanderings of his mind become more
and more fevered, forcing him to acknowledge aspects of his own personality
that he would rather have left unexamined. For of course Jeffrey finds in
himself the seed of Frank's sadism: most clearly when Dorothy (whose
personality has also been twisted by her exposure to Frank) asks him to hit
her and he obeys, and, we suspect, at some level enjoys doing it. Jeffrey's
shining armour dulls considerably in the course of his journey through the
underworld: his self-image undergoes what we take to be a permanent change.
We are probably mistaken if we accept very much of David Lynch's material at
face value. There are certain shots which he seems to use in a very peculiar
way, as markers, or even quotation marks, to plant clues as to where we
should adjust our perceptions. The whole quasi-dream-sequence involving
Frank and Dorothy is contained between two near-identical zoom shots into
and out of a human ear. These must signal something special about this part
of the narrative, but what exactly the "specialness" is Lynch is happy to
leave to our individual interpretation. In a parallel way he uses the same
shot of the waving man on the fire-engine both at the beginning and the end
of the film, like book-ends to the entire work. Is he trying to suggest that
perhaps no time has passed but we have simply taken a diversion into an
alternate reality and returned to where we started, or even that this
apple-pie-America world is a sham like the one inhabited by Jim Carrey in
The Truman Show fourteen years later, or perhaps that it is just as much a
conceptual make-believe as the one in which Frank mimes to the Sandman and
enjoys his drug of choice through a face-mask while he sexually assaults his
victims. I personally favour this latter theory. Lynch is saying to us:
"Don't kid yourself, none of this is real. We see the world the way we want
to see it, the way we expect to see it. You wouldn't want to know what it's
really like".
It's worth remembering that the Surrealists, whom Lynch acknowledges as his
influences, regarded what they were doing not as an exercise in shocking or
surprising their audience or in the random juxtaposition of incongruous
elements for the sake of effect, but as a species of realism, an attempt to
depict a superior or "super-reality" to which we can not  normally have
access, either because of the layers of socialisation , acquired experience
and learned responses through which we see the world or because of the
nature of the human personality itself, which Freud and others had
represented as being like an iceberg, with its greater part hidden and
inaccessible to conscious thought. If we look at Blue Velvet with this kind
of model in mind I think we realise that Lynch is drawing our attention to
things about ourselves that we might not want to examine too closely: that
we are not the mild, reasonable, kind-hearted individuals that we believe
ourselves to be, but rather we are barely-contained seething bundles of
primitive drives and bestial urges of all kinds. That you don't have to dig
very deep to get to the ugly black bugs with bloody claws and gaping jaws
tearing apart and consuming everything that comes within their grasp. I
think it is this unpleasant and disconcerting view of the human condition
that causes many people to shy away from the film and perhaps to reject it,
but what you have to grant Lynch in my opinion is that whether you like what
he says or not he says it with masterly skill and style. This is one of
film's true masterpieces  -  love it or hate it, I defy you to ignore it.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Of all of David Lynch's films, I find myself ranking "Blue Velvet" on
a lower meter. It's a good, blazingly original film that is also
wholly uneven, obscene and tasteless to the core. The latter terms are
not meant as a critique - Lynch at his best is always obscene and
tasteless. But I also find "Blue Velvet" to be underwhelming, as say
compared to "Eraserhead" (his greatest film) or the neo-noir/horror
picture "Lost Highway." It's just that their themes are more complex
and disturbing than this perverse take on suburbia.
"Blue Velvet" was released back in 1986 and was highly controversional
for its time, mainly due to graphic scenes of torture and sex. There
was also much talk about the sequence where Isabella Rossellini
(Ingrid Bergman's daughter) is naked and publicly embarrassed, while
teeth marks and cigarette burns cover her entire body. There is no
question that Lynch has always had trouble protraying women in a
positive light (take a close look at Patricia Arquette forced
stripping at gunpoint in "Lost Highway"), but this particular sequence
is pure misogyny serving no purpose in the entire film. Consequently,
Rossellini also endures several beatings by a helium-sniffing psycho
named Frank (a truly classic performance of psychotic rage by Dennis
Hopper). There are also numerous close-up shots of ants and
cockroaches littering the screen as if they were aware of something
beyond our knowledge. Of course, the wonderful opening scenes of the
film, including the shot of ants scowering the e!  arth, suggest an
evil lurking beneath a conservative town of white picket fences, rose
gardens, people mowing their lawns, etc.
The story in "Blue Velvet" revolves around a potential murder mystery
that is never quite explained or resolved (at least, not to my liking
though Raymond Chandler's novels are often so complex that even he did
not know what they were about). Kyle MacLachlan plays a college
student named Jeffrey, who is visiting his picture-postcard hometown,
Lumberton. One day, he discovers a severed human ear on an open
field. He contacts the police and then decides to investigate on his
own. This all leads to the apartment of a distraught singer (played by
Rossellini), who occasionally sings "Blue Velvet" at a
nightclub. Enter the deranged killer Frank who tortures and humiliates
the poor singer, and the scenes between the two of them are as
startling and effective as any other scene in the film. They contain a
raw, vicious power that is unparalleled in the history of cinema, but
they are often tempered with a joke or some sly humorous poke in the
arm. There is such an intense buildup of em!  otions that eventually
Lynch throws it all away by winking at the audience - in effect
saying, hey, this is not as bad as it looks. This reminds me of a
similar scene in "Wild at Heart" where a similar psycho played by
Willem DaFoe humiliated and sexually teased Laura Dern to the point
where it was lessened by an unnecessary joke.
As Jeffrey veers further into this S & M world with the help of a
policeman's daughter, Sandy (Laura Dern), things get much weirder
especially when Dean Stockwell shows up as a Kabuki transvestite. Both
Stockwell and Hopper must hold the record for spouting more
obscenities on film than Eddie Murphy.
"Blue Velvet" is a fascinating, intriguing film but it is not
completely successful. The elements of the mystery are so warped that
I gave up after a while trying to follow it. It is true that some of
Lynch's later work was more confounding and that it did not bother me
much, but this mystery is actually more conventional and, dare I say,
realistic so I did expect to be able to follow it. The performances
are mostly shouting matches, especially between Hopper and Rosselini
though their scenes lend the necessary realism to their strange,
sexual bond. Kyle MacLachlan and Laura Dern merely react than act,
except for one exquisitely subtle scene at a cafe. I also think the
music by Angelo Badalamenti is far too offputting, though the songs by
Julee Cruise enhance the theme of a town with dark secrets ready to
explode. Plus, the uplifting ending negates the darkness that preceded
it, though I did like the shot of the bird with a wasp in its
mouth. That shot actually adds a sly perv!  erse touch, but I could
have lived without the annoying sappiness of it all.
For whatever strange reason I cannot comprehend, I still liked "Blue
Velvet" because nobody has ever produced or directed anything like it
prior to its release. There isn't anything you can easily compare it
to. It is definitely Lynch's wildest endeavor and, somehow, strangely
compelling. Being a huge Lynch fan, I will probably look at the film
again ten years from now, and perhaps call it a masterpiece as many
have. For now, this is just fairly good Lynch fare.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: David Lynch
Starring: Kyle MacLaughlin, Isabella Rosselini, Dennis Hopper, Laura
Dern, Dean Stockwell
I have a big problem with this film: I don't like it.  I mean, I found
it to be brilliant and all, but it's just not a film I would watch
willingly again.  I know I'm a critic and all, and I'm supposed to like
brilliant films, but I just didn't like this one.  But I'm going to
attempt to give it a very positive review, because it was very good, and
try to find out why I didn't enjoy it.
The film starts off brilliantly: a shot of typical suburbia - kids
crossing the street, firemen waving as they go down the road on their
truck, and a man watering his garden.  But this guy suddenly has a
stroke and collapses to the ground.  As he falls, his dog jumps up and
begins being squirted in the mouth by the hose.  The camera moves down
and we see bugs and stuff in the grass he has been watering.  Like this
first shot, we're going to see what's on the inside of this beautiful
suburbia.
While this wasn't surreally bizarre, we get another weird twist: the
protagonist (Kyle MacLaughlin, who seems to be in almost all of Lynch's
films), who is also the stroke-victim's son,  is walking thorugh a
pasture and finds a severed ear.  That's right - an ear.  He takes it to
the cops, who show little interest in it, so he begins snooping around
like some Encyclopedia Brown, equipped with the one detective's daughter
(a young Laura Dern).  He finds out that there's this woman (Isabella
Rossellini) who may have ties to the ear.
He steals her key while posing as a bug killer, and then sneaks into her
apartment after she sings, you know, "Blue Velvet" at a club.  He hides
in her closet when she comes in, and witnesses a horrific act.  A
gangster in suburbia (Dennis Hopper) comes in, literally swearing every
other word, gets high on some kind of chemical, and proceeds to rape
her.  Of course, he does this every night, so she should be used to it
(just kidding).  He leaves, she finds Kyle, and begins forcing him to
strip, then they have sex.  Soon enough, they have a sado-masichistic
relationship going on.
Of course, Hopper finds out, and takes both of them on a joyride through
the underbelly of suburbia, including some drinking, and a visit to a
brothel, run by the supra-effiminite Dean Stockwell (who Hopper just
calls "fucking suave!" repeatedly).  They then beat him and leave him
for dead, but he's not dead.  And at the end, Kyle has to save
Rossellini and himself from Hopper, in a totally bizarre ending.
What's cool about this film is the contrast it makes between suburbia
and the mafia.  I mean, it's pretty much the perfect front.  And
MacLaughlin's journey through it is pretty fascinating.  Lynch uncovers
suburbia for all its hypocrisies in "Blue Velvet," especially with the
kind of ironic ending.  And another strong point is the cinematography,
which is absolutely gorgeous and dreamlike.  I credit Lynch for his
great directing with this film.
The acting is, however, kind of half and half.  Or really three quarters
and a quarter.  Isabella Rossellini is fantastic, as always, in the role
of the abused lounge singer.  In the most controversial scene, she is
dropped off by the mafia totally stark naked and on Laura Dern's porch. 
Apparently, Lynch didn't restrict anyone from leaving the site, and
Rossellini has been scarred ever since.  Her performance is really
great.  And Dennis Hopper is so fueled with energy (he coins the phrase
used in "Clerks," "I'll fuck anything that moves!") and he becomes the
perfect hatable bully.  Also great is Laura Dern.
But Kyle MacLaughlin.  I mean, the guy's nice and all, and he has acted
well in some parts of his career.  But here, like in most of his work,
he's just not good.  There's this scene where he talks about Guiness
beer where I swore he would turn to the camera and promote it.  That's
how corny he sounded.  He's just not a very good lead for a brilliant
film.  But he somehow is in a lot of Lynch's work.  I don't get it.
This film is probably one of the more weird films I've ever seen.  I
pretty much didn't like it because, well, I saw it in the prime of my
"Pulp Fiction" obsession.  I was expecting some pulp.  But the thing is,
I'm just not a huge fan of Lynch.  I mean, I appreciate the guy, and I
often rave about him.  But I just don't always enjoy his flicks.  Oh
well.
Roger Ebert famously gave this one star.  I agree with some of his
review, but I get the point Lynch was trying to make.  Suburbia is not a
place to escape the problems of the world, because there's an underbelly
to every microcosm.  Even if I didn't like it, I can appreciate it.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jason Overbeck
Blue Velvet inspired critical praise and discuss when released in 1986.
Siskel gave it four stars and Ebert gave in one. Ebert said that
director David Lynch was "more sadistic than the (Dennis) Hopper
character." To put that in prespective you need to know that Hopper
plays a sick twist who kidnapped this woman's (Isabella Rossellini)
husband and son, and now is using her as a sex slave. Hopper is also a
druged-up maniac who enjoys humiliating Rossellini, like a truly
draining scene where she is inflicted with public nudity. Ebert felt
that the story if handled satire-free would have been a dark and
emotional film, but with the satire the film was demeaning.
This is a demeaning film toward Rossellini, who seems to reach very
personal emotions in front of a crowd. We're the crowd. This film is
very hard to take for those not comportable with themselves and their
desires. This film is very voyueristic and disturbing to even the most
kinky voyuers and yet it is so emotionally powerful and contains such
richly, dark satire, that even the wary should take a look.  
The story begins with a perfect, yet shallow, suburbian street. The
street seems to be saturated with bright watercolors. A nice, old man
waters his lawn, looking warm and deep. This nice man collapses and we
follow him down. Then we go further down below the grass and see hungry
insects eating away like grotesque monsters. And there the satire
begins.
The man's son (Kyle MacLachlan) shows up to visit his dad and on a nice
day stroll he finds a severed ear on the ground. This propells him to
the police and further investigation for himself. Along the way he meets
a nice girl his age (Laura Dern) and they're both entralled to
investigate for themselves. The plot evolves in a surefired way and
never mis-steps, with scenes of taunt suspense and a truly wicked set of
characters led by Gar (Dean Stockwell) and Frank Booth (Dennis Hopper).
Anyone put off by the plot description should not indulge in this film
because it is really much worse than I made it sound.  The violence and
sex is gruesome and troubling and the fears described in this film are
equal to ERASERHEAD's fear of children.  On the flip side if you do
deside to visit this film you will have a chance to see one of the best
films of the eighties, and one hell of an emotional experience.
The director and screenwriter David Lynch is quite a weird person and
seems to be in touch with the dark voyueristic side of himself. I saw a
recent documentary called THE PREETY AS A PICTURE: ART OF DAVID LYNCH in
which he shared his paintings and love of art. A typical day in the life
of Lynch seemed to be carving a scull of plaster, filling it with ham
and cheese and photographing the ants hollowing it out. "All forms of
decay are worth looking at" explains Lynch. The Decay of ham or in BLUE
VELVET the decay of suburbian life.

Author
Kevin Patterson
Blue Velvet (R, 1986)
Written and directed by David Lynch.
Starring Kyle MacLachlan, Isabella Rossellini, Dennis Hopper, Laura Dern.
        Blue Velvet  is definitely not a movie for the faint-of-heart. While
there may be less actual graphic material than, say, a raunchy sex comedy or a
gangster movie, what we do see is played for maximum effect. The basic story
is that young Jeffrey Beaumont (Kyle MacLachlan), after finding a grotesque
piece of evidence for a criminal investigation-a disembodied human ear-lets
his curiosity get the better of him and begins conducting his own
"investigation" on the side. His plan goes awry as he sneaks into the
apartment of lounge singer Dorothy Vallens (Isabella Rossellini), witnessing a
bizarre, sadomasochistic sexual encounter between Dorothy and Frank Booth
(Dennis Hopper). Rather than being repulsed completely by what he discovers,
Jeffrey becomes intrigued by Dorothy and is increasingly receptive to her
self-degrading attempts to seduce him.
        Drawn into the perverse, corrupt world of Dorothy and Frank, Jeffrey
descends into the darkest corners of his own psyche and ultimately has to
climb back out. At the same time, there is a more conventional suspense-movie
plot in that Jeffrey "knows too much" about Frank Booth and his underworld
goons and faces the very real possibility that they will decide to bump him
off sooner or later. But it is really Jeffrey's trip through psychological
hell that is the film's center. There is perhaps no director better suited for
this material than David Lynch, who employs his talents for bizarre, surreal
imagery here not to create other-worldly realities as in Eraserhead  or Twin
Peaks,  but to make our own reality both oddly idiosyncratic and extremely
disturbing. Few directors could have Jeffrey demonstrating the "chicken walk"
to his girlfriend Sandy (Laura Dern) in one scene and Frank inhaling nitrous
oxide and brutalizing Dorothy in the next without having the film collapse
into some kind of circus act gone horribly wrong. But Lynch pulls it off,
sustaining a consistency in mood and tone that convinces us that this is all
part of the same reality, lending to the film a hypnotic pull that keeps the
audience with Jeffrey every step of the way.
        Not surprisingly, Blue Velvet  has stirred up a lot of controversy.
Some viewers, for example, have been outraged at Lynch's juxtaposition of the
raw despair and brutality of the scenes with Hopper and Rossellini with
tongue-in-cheek portrayals of small-town banality. In these viewers' minds,
Blue Velvet  is trying to be a black comedy about material that is not the
least bit funny. I can't make a claim to any special knowledge about what was
going through Lynch's head, but I think that such an interpretation is
misguided. Lynch is a director who works through images, who shows rather than
tells what the characters are experiencing. By showing us the harsh, violent
reality one minute and the benign surface the next, we are made painfully
aware of the obliteration of Jeffrey's innocence and of his long-held
conceptions of the world around him. The silly humor of the other characters'
naivet* may even provoke laughter in the viewer, but it is a sort of nervous,
uncomfortable laughter; the cheerful cluelessness of the town's residents is
funny only at a superficial level because we are reminded so bluntly of the
darkness that it masks.
        As for the more typical argument that the film is offensive because it
depicts offensive behavior, I can only respond that most movies are "violent"
or at least depict evil and fear in one form or another. In an age of
action-movie moral relativism, when hundreds of faceless enemies are blown
away in the name of justice, Blue Velvet  should, if anything, be commended
for exposing this kind of violence in all its sick ugliness. The film does not
flinch from what is happening or apologize for its characters' behavior;
rather, it explores MacLachlan's character with considerable sophistication,
asking just what led him into all this in the first place and how easily he
might be tempted into joining in on Hopper's twisted fun. For all of Lynch's
"artsy" touches, the film is actually quite realistic in its exploration of
the age-old issue of good vs. evil, portraying its main character as a real
person with real flaws and moral conflicts rather than pitting two archetypes
against each other and letting them sort it out with a bunch of explosions.
        Blue Velvet  is not a pointless trash heap or a tasteless black
comedy, then, but a compelling study of the darker aspects of humanity and one
of the most powerful renderings ever of the timeless story of temptation,
fall, and redemption. It may be puzzling upon a first viewing as to what
exactly Lynch is trying to "get at," but, once fully understood, it is a
remarkable film that deserves to be remembered as a classic.
Grade: A+

Author
Dennis Schwartz
BLUE VELVET (director/writer: David Lynch; cinematographer: Frederick
Elmes; editor: Duwayne Dunham; cast: Kyle MacLachlan (Jeffrey Beaumont),
Isabella Rossellini (Dorothy Vallens), Dennis Hopper (Frank Booth),
Laura Dern (Sandy Williams), Hope Lange (Mrs. Williams), Dean Stockwell
(Ben), George Dickerson (Detective Williams), Jack Harvey (Tom
Beaumont), Priscilla Pointer (Mrs. Beaumont), Brad Dourif (Raymond),
1986)
It's a strange world-- alright, an artificial nostalgic world that David
Lynch depicts of close neighbors, friendly dogs, of red roses growing
against a white picket fence, a clear blue sky, and the nice suburban
homes that are shown in the beginning and at the end of the film. There
are also the cheerful sounds of the radio DJ announcing the time "at the
sound of the falling tree." There is also a dark side to life that David
Lynch (Eraserhead/The Elephant Man/Dune) wants to show you in the
underbelly of normalcy and that's what gets explored in this fantastic,
original American film of his.
Jeffrey Beaumont (Kyle MacLachlan) is a young college-aged man returning
to his home town of Lumberton, USA, after his father had a stroke and he
must run the family hardware store. The routines of suburban life
changes for him when he picks up a severed human ear in the field by his
house and brings it to his neighbor Detective Williams (George
Dickerson).
Jeffrey meets Detective Williams' attractive daughter, the high school
student Sandy (Laura Dern), outside her house and she intriguingly tells
him that she overheard her father talking about the case, and that they
are investigating the singer Dorothy Vallens (Isabella Rossellini ), who
resides in an apartment in the neighborhood. Jeffrey feels adventurous
and romantically inclined toward Sandy and talks her into showing him
the building where the singer lives. He then devices a plan so that he
can sneak into the apartment and snoop around.
Hiding in the slatted closet, Jeffrey gets an eyeful of the attractive
singer parading around in panties and bra and sees her have one of the
weirdest sexual encounters ever in filmdom, as a deranged gangster,
Frank Booth (Dennis Hopper) enters her apartment and begins a
sadomasochistic tryst with her. He beats her, orders her not to look at
him, yells obsenities at her, inhales some kind of drugs from a
cylinder, and rapes her. Upon coming out of the closet, Jeffrey
discovers that she actually enjoys being abused as he begins a
sadomasochistic romance himself with the mentally unbalanced woman, as
she performs fellatio on him and gets him to beat her. He does what she
asks him to do, even though he didn't want to love her that way. The
singer's child and, possibly, her husband are being held captive by
Frank. It is also possible that the severed ear, is her husband's.
She will sing in her nightclub act the titled song from the film, where
Jeffrey watches her perform.
Jeffrey has entered into a dark world of madness, a world that most of
the people of Lumberton could never imagine exists in their community.
His curiosity becomes his admission to a world of drugs, kidnaping,
murder, violence, and sexual perversions. Frank will take him on a joy
ride where he is forced to meet some crazed thugs who intimidate him and
Ben (Dean Stockwell), an effeminate drug dealer and pimp, will
humiliatingly slap him. He will end the joy ride by being severely
beaten by Frank as a warning to keep away.
Hopper is madly funny and menacing in one of his all-time best
over-the-edge roles. He is the energy of the film. He has lines like
"let me f*ck everything that movies!".  In what goes for conversation,
he asks MacLachlan, "What kind of beer do you like?" MacLachlan:
"Heineken" Hopper: "f*ck that shit, Pabst Blue Ribbon!"
There were many quirky moments in a film that was as straight as a curve
ball. The romance Kyle has with the innocent Dern is cleverly compared
with the maddening passion of his romance with the not-so innocent
Rossellini. The conversations with Dern, who constantly looks like she
lost something in the translation, while with Rossellini, it is
unbridled sex she has on her mind. One conversation between Dern and
Kyle goes like this: Laura: "I don't know if you are a detective or a
pervert!" Jeff: "That's for me to know and you to find out."
This is a highly personal film. For those looking to criticize it these
might be some reasons to do so: it relies on shock to tell its
forgettable story, it fails to develop character emphasizing style
instead, and the acting seems more staged than spontaneous. Some might
be overwrought upon viewing the naked singer, as she appears on the lawn
of the detective's house and seems to be irrationally babbling. They may
be looking upon it as the mocking of a helpless woman. True. It was
shocking to see, but I didn't feel that Lynch glossed over this scene
lightly. I think it set a mood for how painful and humiliating life is,
and these incidences do happen more regularly in contemporary America
than some would care to admit. All these possible flaws in the film,
still do not detract from how visually powerful the story was and how it
had such a unique feel to it, as if it were capturing something about
the American heartland that hasn't been told in this way before.
I loved the film for its intransigencies. What it has going for it in
large measures is a sense of freshness, imagination, and an almost
seamless melding of beauty and violence. It is a dark visionary tale
encompassing the conventional lives of the protagonists when pitted
against their antagonists, and it offers a genuine sense of terror with
a devilish peek at the sexual subconscious, as even the innocent find
under unusual circumstances they will do something they might ordinarily
not do. This non-commercial film should satisfy Lynch's fans and those
looking for a film that doesn't pull its punches. Others might dislike
it for being so plainly weird and shock-orientated, admiring it only for
its craftsmanship. I think they will have sold this film short; after
all, strange stuff happens all the time, and the most interesting people
are the so called "normal" ones. When such a normal character becomes
tempted by evil and battles inside for his integrity, the battles
usually prove interesting. I believe that is what happened in this film,
and though its motivations are ambiguous, it does hit some kind of sore
spot for respectable society to consider, without turning up its nose at
all the revolting things this story brought to the surface.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by David Lynch.
Cast: Kyle MacLachlan, Laura Dern, Isabella Rossellini, Dennis Hopper, 
Hope Lange, Dean Stockwell, Jack Nance, Brad Dourif, Frances Bay.
1986 - 120 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, profanity, nudity, and sex).
Reviewed September 1998.
David Lynch's "Blue Velvet" was one of the most influential films of the 
1980's, and arguably jump-started the idea of independent filmmaking. 
But aside from that, it is also one of the most original, invigorating 
films I've ever seen.
In a tour de force opening sequence, which has been widely praised, 
brightly-lit, picture-perfect clips are shown of a small town: a man 
watering his green lawn, a milkman waving as his truck drives by, 
flowers blooming beside a picket fence...and then the happiness of the 
scene vanishes as the man watering his lawn collapses on the ground, and 
the camera slowly burrows down through the glass until it comes upon a 
mound of bugs, symbolizing the dark secrets buried in the seemingly 
perfect town.
The film then switches to a college student (Kyle MacLachlan) returning 
to his hometown of Lumberton to stay for awhile and visit his father in 
the hospital. While walking through a field, he spots a human ear lying 
on the ground, which leads to him meeting up with the town's sheriff's 
teenage daughter (Laura Dern), and convincing her to help him out to 
solve the mystery of the ear, which involves a nightclub singer 
(Isabella Rossellini), murder, and a sadistic kidnapper/drug dealer 
(Dennis Hopper).
One of the many pleasures of "Blue Velvet" is watching this 
multi-layered, intricate mystery unravel and develop, and it would be 
criminal to give anything else away. It is completely unpredictable, and 
the characters, just like the plot, are true originals. MacLachlan is a 
perfect center for the movie, Rossellini is superb as the tortured 
singer, Hopper is very, very creepy as the kidnapper, and Dern is 
outstanding, giving one of her best performances to date, and bringing 
much depth to her role, as well as her sweet, tender relationship with 
MacLachlan.
"Blue Velvet" also involves a masterstroke of style and atmosphere. 
Lynch wonderfully gives the movie a film noir feel, but it also has a 
small-town, postcard essence, which mixes together brilliantly to create 
a look and feel never before seen on film. 
The opening scene, as already noted, is flawlessly realized, and is a 
perfect contrast to the darker elements of the story, and town. It is 
also a picture that could not be placed in a specific era. Some elements 
are right out of the 1950's, but it could also very well be set in the 80's.
The same thing goes for its location. The town is called Lumberton, but it
pretty much is set in 
Anywhere, U.S.A.
There is no doubt that "Blue Velvet" contains many disturbing moments, 
and much of it involves sadomasochistic behavior, sex, degradation, and 
elements of an even darker nature. But it is at this level that "Blue 
Velvet" succeeds in becoming a true masterpiece in all senses of the 
word, because these terrible things occur in this quiet, peaceful little 
town, which harkens back to the opening of the film. It makes the point 
that no town, no matter what, is perfect, because there will always be 
something dark hiding right behind the surface, and it is called human 
nature. 
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by David Lynch (Eraserhead)
     Most of the people who follow Lynch, his devoted cult of watchers, got
hooked with the two season "Twin Peaks" television series.  For them, the
line "She's dead... wrapped in plastic" will always have a special place in
their heart.  The newer generation of Lynch watchers were witness to Wild at
Heart and Lost Highway.  The older generation, his mainstream watchers,
probably saw The Elephant Man and Dune.  His very first devotees: Eraserhead
and Stick Figures Getting Sick.
     Although Lost Highway was my first exposure to the director, it was not
what made me fall in love with him.  What made me love the director, love
his talent for storytelling, his dark humor and quiet essayistic nature, was
his 1986 independent smash Blue Velvet.
     Blue Velvet was described to me by an avid Lynch fan that works at
Bristol-Myers Squibb in New Jersey as "about as weird as they get."  Being a
student of the strange, that piqued my interest.
     It opens up with a picturesque small town, then shows a man having a
stroke.  His son, Jeffery Beaumont (MacLachlan) comes home from college in
order to comfort his mother and aunt.  What he finds instead is the most
primal thing that we all love: a mystery.
     This mystery comes while walking in a field.  He sees a wine bottle
near a shack, begins throwing rocks at it, and bends down to pick another
rock up only to find a human ear.
     He informs the police, who really can't do much in the way of
investigating.  On his way out of the house of the detective working on the
case, a woman walks out of the darkness and asks: "Are you the one that
found the ear?"
     This is Sandy Williams (Dern), the detective's daughter, who becomes
equally enraptured in the mystery.  She informs him that she listens in on
conversations that her father has had, and that the name Dorothy Vallens
(Rossellini) has come up a number of times.
     Together, the two set it upon themselves to unravel the mystery behind
the ear.  Along the way Jeffrey is drawn into a dark and violent world,
filled with machocistic women and sadistic killers (Dennis Hopper showing
his true acting prowess).  At the same time Jeffrey finds himself torn
between two women: a completely erotic relationship with Dorothy Vallens and
an increasingly strong love for Sandy Williams.
     Blue Velvet is out there in both style and substance.  As a mystery, it
excels the art form, throws out the templates and draws brand new ones.
Every modern cinema mystery of quality I have found has had some traces of
this film in it.  As a raw story, it comes off as completely surreal.
Although you have a gritty realism to the story itself, Lynch succeeds in
shocking the unshockable: the entire film seems like a terribly realistic
nightmare.
     As far as style is concerned, the entire film is done in a very
subversive directorial style.  Lynch over-lights his days for an industrial
look, an America so superficially beautiful it begins to get on your nerves.
At night, he employs classic noir techniques: little to no lighting to make
the film terrifying.  He also films violence in slow-motion in order to make
it seem stranger, uses classic symbolism and makes fun of it at the same
time.  Also, from a sound aspect, whenever something truly climatic happens,
instead of a false note of music, the film's volume increases and a droning
sound comes on, adding to the sense that this is all a dream and that, more
than anything, you want to wake up.
     The story is best expressed as a brilliant satire of small-town life,
which Lynch has a tendency to be fascinated with (i.e. Twin Peaks).  The two
storylines -- one of the mystery and one of the romance between Jeffery and
Sandy  -- intertwine like snakes and both contain a dark, off-kilter humor.
At one point, as Jeffery is going to sneak into Dorothy's apartment at night
to search it, Sandy remarks to him: "I don't know whether you're a detective
or a pervert."  Jeffery smiles and responds: "That's for me to know and you
to find out."
    The surreal nature also inserts itself into the suspense.  Perhaps the
oddest scene in the film comes as Frank Booth beats up Jeffery to the tune
of "Candy-Colored Sandman."  Although I have not seen this film for about
two months, the look in Frank's eyes is still present in my head as he
recites to Jeffery: "In dreams I walk with you \ In dream, I talk to you \
In dreams, you're mine... all the time."  The look, reader, is one of pure
evil.
     The only flaw in the film that I have been able to discern with about a
dozen viewings is that of the archetypes that are employed, which is only a
personal opinion seeing as the characters were designed to be that way.
     All fans of mysteries and independent films should see this one.  If
you're a Lynch fan and have missed it, make sure you check it out.  If
you're not a Lynch fan, watch it and you will become one.

Author
Nick Schaden
        "Blue Velvet" opens with images of the perfect "Beaver Cleaver" town:
painted white fences, open blue sky, a friendly waving fireman in slow
motion.   Nothing could be farther from the truth.   That is the
underlying theme in David Lynch's "Blue Velvet", one of the most
controversial and critically acclaimed movies of the 1980s.
        "Blue Velvet" paints the picture of Jeffrey Beaumont (Kyle MacLachlan),
a young college student returning to his hometown as a result of his
father's illness.   On a walk through the woods on the way to the
hospital where his father resided, Jeffrey finds a human ear in the
grass. The human ear is somehow connected to Dorothy Vallens (Isabella
Rossellini), a singer in a local bar. Jeffery decides to investigate,
with help from a high school girl (Laura Dern).   Their adventure goes
through many twists and turns, eventually meeting one of the most
hideous, evil villain in movie history, Frank Booth (Dennis Hopper).
        I don't talk more about the actual "adventure" because doing so would
reveal the full plot of "Blue Velvet", one of the most disturbing and
innovative in film history, in my humble opinion.   In sum, while the
plot on the surface may seem quite simple, the underlying theme director
David Lynch is trying to show is much deeper.  Lynch works hard, winking
to emphasize the irony of an idyllic American
town with perversity and darkness beneath it all.
        Now the big question: why is "Blue Velvet" one of my favorite movies?  
I think the greatest strength of the movie is the art.   Director David
Lynch pulls into the movie, using visuals and sound unlike any other
movie, magnifying the mystery and horror of the movie's nature.  
Second, it's bold, horrific, and probably the most original (and
shocking) drama/mystery I've ever seen.   Finally, the theme is deep and
thought provoking, with many scenes from "Blue Velvet", imbedded deep
into my mind.
        With all my praise, I highly recommend this movie with a very serious
warning: this movie is VERY disturbing, and not for everybody.   It has
very graphic portrayals of violence, sex, and other bizarre subjects,
let the viewer beware.   However, for those who can handle it, it's a
wonderful and captivating movie.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Of all of David Lynch's films, I find myself ranking "Blue Velvet" on a lower 
meter. It's a good, blazingly original film that is also wholly uneven, 
obscene and tasteless to the core. The latter terms are not meant as a 
critique - Lynch at his best is always obscene and tasteless. But I also find 
"Blue Velvet" to be underwhelming, as say compared to "Eraserhead" (his 
greatest film) or "Lost Highway." It's  just that their themes are more 
complex and disturbing than this perverse take on suburbia.
"Blue Velvet" was released back in 1986 and was highly controversional for 
its time, mainly due to graphic scenes of torture and sex. There was also 
much talk about the sequence where Isabella Rosselini (Ingrid Bergman's 
daughter) is naked and publicly embarrassed, while teeth marks and cigarette 
burns cover her entire body. There is no question that Lynch has always had 
trouble protraying women in a positive light, but the sequence is pure 
misogyny serving no purpose in the entire film. Rosselini also endures several
 beatings by Dennis Hopper as a helium-sniffing psycho. There are also 
numerous close-up shots of ants and cockroaches littering the screen as if 
they are aware of something beyond our knowledge.
The story revolves around a murder mystery that is never quite explained or 
resolved. Kyle MacLachlan plays a college student visiting his 
picture-postcard hometown, Pemberton, when one day, he discovers a severed 
human ear on someone's lawn. He contacts the police and then decides to 
investigate on his own. This all leads to the apartment of a distraught 
singer (played by Rosselini), who is always singing "Blue Velvet" at a 
nightclub. Dennis Hopper plays the deranged killer who tortures her, and the 
scenes between the two of them are as startling and effective as any other 
scene in the film.
As Kyle veers further into this S & M world with the help of a policeman's 
daughter (Laura Dern) things get much weirder especially when Dean Stockwell 
shows up as a Kabuki transvestite. Both Stockwell and Hopper must hold the 
record for spouting more obscenities on film than Eddie Murphy. 
"Blue Velvet" is a fascinating, intriguing film but it is not completely 
successful. The elements of the mystery are so warped that I gave up after a 
while trying to follow it. It is true that some of Lynch's later work was 
more confounding and that it did not bother me much, but this mystery is 
actually more conventional and, dare I say, realistic so I did expect to be 
able to follow it. The performances are mostly shouting matches, especially 
between Hopper and Rosselini. Kyle MacLachlan and Laura Dern merely react 
than act, except for one exquisitely subtle scene at a cafe. Plus, the 
uplifting ending negates the darkness that preceded it, though I did like the 
shot of the bird with a wasp in its mouth. 
For whatever strange reason I cannot comprehend, I still liked "Blue Velvet" 
because nobody has ever produced or directed anything like it prior to its 
release. There isn't anything you can easily compare it to. It is definitely 
Lynch's wildest endeavor and, somehow, strangely compelling. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com 
or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Dragan Antulov
Some times in 1990 I stumbled on some Bosnian weekly
magazine which featured the article about the best and most
influential movies of 1980s. The article was based on the
Top 10 poll conducted among the young film critics of former
Yugoslavia. I was more than pleasantly surprised to see two
entries - movies that I happen to adore and consider very
special, unlike most of the audience, which forgot them, or
mainstream critics who rejected them because of the content
or some other petty controversies. One of those two
masterpieces was CONAN THE BARBARIAN, 1981 fantasy epic by
John Millius. The other one was BLUE VELVET, dark,
disturbing thriller made in 1986 by David Lynch.
At the time, Lynch was hardly known outside the critics'
circles, mostly because of his "artsy" reputation, brought
by ERASERHEAD, his extremely disturbing debut feature that
later developed a cult following among alternative cinema
aficionados. His reputation of director who likes disturbing
content and revolting images was strengthen by his first two
mainstream movies - THE ELEPHANT MAN and DUNE. The latter
one turned out to be commercial disaster, and the jury is
still out whether because of Lynch's unconventional style,
or meddling producers. One of those producers, de
Laurentiis, should be forgiven for that transgression,
because two years later he atoned to the movie lovers
community by giving Lynch another chance. It was more than
that - the chance was used by Lynch who made BLUE VELVET,
very personal film that proved not only the best in his opus
but also one of the best movies of the decade. BLUE VELVET,
unfortunately, didn't became popular by itself - Lynch had
to make his ground-breaking TV series TWIN PEAKS first; he
became a household name, attractive enough for general
audience, and thus brought attention on his earlier work.
It isn't surprising that those who had enjoyed TWIN PEAKS
have the same feelings about BLUE VELVET. The movie and the
TV series have a lot in common, but most noticeable of
common elements is a subject - small all-American town that
hides some sinister secrets. The plot of the movie begins in
Lumberton, small town inhabited almost exclusively by
middle-class people who live in suburban idyll. One of those
people is Mr. Beaumont (Jack Harvey) who suffers stroke, and
his young son Jeffrey (Kyle MacLachlan) must visit him in
hospital. While returning from one of such visits, he finds
a severed human ear in a field. He picks it up and brings it
to Detective Williams (George Dickerson), his close
neighbour. Detective is very grateful for that find, but,
being the by-the-book policeman, declines to satisfy
Jeffrey's growing curiosity by providing information about
investigation. Sandy (Laura Dern), Detective's young and
attractive daughter, seems to be more helpful by giving some
hints to Jeffrey. Those hints mostly concern Dorothy Vallens
(Isabella Rosselini), beautiful and mysterious bar singer
who lives on the wrong side of tracks. Armed with that
knowledge, Jeffrey decides to begin investigation of his own
and devises daring plan to sneak into singer's apartment and
observe. However, that plan misfires, because Dorothy
discovers Jeffrey hiding in her closet and takes him at
knife-point. Scared, embarrassed but also aroused, Jeffrey
is suddenly forced to hide again, because Dorothy gets
another visitor. That visitor is Frank Booth (Dennis
Hopper), sick, violent and extremely dangerous man who loves
sadistic sex and uses blackmail in order to make Dorothy
"doing things" for him. Despite the shock, and against
Sandy's better judgement, Jeffrey decides to investigate
further, bringing his own life and life of his dearest in
danger.
One of the reasons why BLUE VELVET seems to be so appealing
to so many people - at least those who are way behind their
teen years - is the fact that it takes some very universal
subject - loss of innocence. But such subject is here
explored in a very personal story, with a lot of
autobiographical elements. Even the title seems to be very
symbolic - borrowed from a song by Bobby Vinton, that used
to be huge hit in 1963. That very year symbolised the loss
of innocence for entire generation, especially Americans who
had to experience the trauma of JFK assassination. That
event and that year symbolised the fading away of the
idealised, idyllic America embodied in small towns and white
fences, that we see in beginning of the movie; it was
replaced by dark, violent world of depravity, confusion,
violence and corruption of Vietnam and Watergate. Lynch as
an artist probably didn't care much about trials and
tribulations of those times - but his personal confusion
and painful transition to maturity corresponded with
similar, although more collective experiences of other
people who used to live in those times. However, in order to
make movie as personal as possible, Lynch deliberately
decided to be ambiguous about time period. That was acquired
with a very detailed work of production designers Patricia
Norris and costume designer Gloria Laughride - apart from
hairstyles, this movie could have taken place in early 1960s
without anyone noticing it.
No matter how meticulous, the work on the production design
and costumes was second in importance to the work of
Frederick Elmes, photographer who had much more important
task - of expressing Lynch's own obsessions through the
precise use of lighting and colour. Most of the photography
was good, especially in the scenes that used to shock some
critics with its explicit and mercilessly precise depiction
of violence and utter depravity. World, or to be more
precise, underworld of BLUE VELVET is dark, sinister place,
but also a place where extremely bad and unpleasant things
(unlike in cheap horrors) do come to light. It is an also
world of sharp contrasts - between childlike innocence and
violent depravity; boringly law-abiding citizens and
interesting, but deadly villains; people who know the
difference between right and wrong and those who get
themselves lost; angels and demons; Madonnas and whores.
Despite those sharp contrasts, BLUE VELVET has characters
who defy single- dimensional moral alignment. Jeffrey
Beaumont, author's alter ego is played by Kyle MacLachlan,
actor who made his character some kind of a prequel to his
Agent Cooper personality in TWIN PEAKS. This young man wants
to do the right thing, but at the same time he is curious,
and that curiosity leads him not only to personal danger,
but to the danger of losing his own moral compass. His
motives might look noble from the outside, but from the
inside they aren't so certain - idea to "sneak, hide and
observe" could be explain by prosaic voyeurism (and Lynch
himself hinted that in one of his interviews), and later
with his obvious sexual attraction to Dorothy. Dorothy,
played by Isabella Rosselini in the best known role of her
entire acting career, is a woman whose character is
something more than a simple victim - she is violated in an
almost unimaginable way. That is symbolised in one of the
shots in the final part of movie, when her nude body, that
should have been attractive in any other context, actually
becomes unbearable to watch. (That very sequence later
enraged some critics who accused Lynch for downright sadism
towards her female lead). Her own actions and feelings
towards Jeffrey, that might look like a product of deranged
mind on the road of depravity, are actually desperate
attempt to find some sense, even in utter despair and evil.
Dorothy's opposite is Sandy, young, blond, clean
all-American girl, whose role in this movie is to be the
voice of reason and the only link to the "normal" world for
Jeffrey. But, her own motives are also unclear - she too
seem to be thrilled by their investigation, and Jeffrey
would never entered into adventure without her interference.
Laura Dern, who plays Sandy, is very good in one of her
first major roles. Her interaction with MacLachlan is simply
unbelievably realistic; since the first time two of them
meet, we are sure that they would end as couple.
Such great movie also requires a great villain. That role
was given to Dennis Hopper, veteran actor and director who
became his great renaissance as character actor in mid
1980s, mostly due films like BLUE VELVET. If there was an
example of role tailor- made for certain actor, Frank Booth
is one of them. Hopper played him with such intensity that
he managed to outshine almost anything in his career. From
the moment he enters picture, we are certain that he means
bad news - his menacing look, intensive use of vulgar
vocabulary and, finally, outbursts of irrational violence.
However, such evil attracts other evil - Frank has group of
trusted henchmen, played by Lynch's own trusted merry men -
actors like Brad Dourif and late Jack Nance. Role of Frank
was so associated with Hopper himself, that he tried to find
excuses for the character of Frank in some interviews,
citing his love for Dorothy as a cause for all twists in the
movie.
BLUE VELVET was a more than good or very good film, it was
an excellent film. Unfortunately, single element kept it
from the top and deprived it of the cinematic perfection.
That was the score of Angelo Badalamenti, Lynch's
semi-official composer. Although good per se, the
sentimental Badalamenti's themes were silenced by more
popular and catchy songs of Bobby Vinton and Roy Orbison.
But, despite that almost unnoticeable flaw, BLUE VELVET
still remains the movie that deserves to be adored and
re-watched, same as masterpieces that actually reached the
perfection.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring Kyle MacLachlan, Laura Dern, Isabella Rossellini, Dennis Hopper,
George Dickerson, Hope Lange, Brad Dourif, Jack Nance, and Dean Stockwell.
David Lynch's "Blue Velvet" begins and ends with colorful, bright shots of
flowers and happy Americans mowing their lawns in a seemingly perfect American
town. However, what lies inside this nominally safe atmosphere is a "strange
world" of drug dealers, sadists, and murderers. The opening and closing shots
are a wonderful contrast to the rest of the gloomy, disturbing film. They show
not to make assumptions from first glance and that oddness is common in all
places under all circumstances. Odd would be a perfect adjective to describe
this film, its characters, its direction, and its story. Thankfully,  the
obscurity that "Blue Velvet" relies on is enough to make this film enjoyable.
Since its elements are so originally weird, you never know what will happen
next. This is the main goal of a movie; to be spontaneous and surprising. "Blue
Velvet" miracuously succeeds at this even though it contains mediocre acting.
Lynch creates such a hypnotic world that it is hard to resist his style of
story telling.
The film starts off with the discovery of a severed ear by a college boy (Kyle
MacLachlan). From this point MacLachlan finds himself involved with a lounge
singer (Isabella Rossellinia) who has lost her son and husband to a kidnapping.
The plot is much more detailed than the aforementioned and this is what makes
David Lynch's story telling so amazing. MacLachlan becomes involved in a
forbidden relationship, in another relationship that could have been taken
straight out of a high school flick, and he is put into the shoes of a drug
dealer who has some wild adventures with some wild friends. Through these
multiple stories, MacLachlan lives multiple lives and as we follow MacLachlan,
we are introduced to a variety of interesting subplots. Lynch masterfully
builds these subplots but he does not piece them all together in the very end
and make a convenient crowd pleasing conclusion. Instead he leaves some
ambiguity and forces those curious enough to get the real meaning to watch the
film several several times.  Lynch has been known to do this with a number of
his films meaning he may be too esoteric for some hoping to get a Hollywood
ending where the good guy gets the girl and everything turns out fine. However,
for fans of odd difficult indies, "Blue Velvet" could be just what they are
looking for.
It is very hard to discuss "Blue Velvet" without discussing the performance of
Dennis Hopper's sadistic Frank. Most of the other actors in the film were not
very memorable. Kyle MacLachlan lacked one important aspect for his role, a
personality. Laura Dern was consistently annoying. But Dennis Hopper stole
every scene he was in. His evil character was just plain old frightening in his
mannerisms from his obsession to velvet to his incessant breathing from a gas
mask. Frank is a character that comes along once in a blue moon. Many producers
know this and have inevitably begun to typecast Hopper as the bad guy. Just
like his villain in "Speed", Hopper is over the edge with cursing and screaming
every chance he has to speak. This harshness is exactly what Frank is, so weird
and twisted that it is hard not to look at him, even if he theatens you to look
away.
"Blue Velvet" has characters and stories you will never see in a movie again.
For this sole reason it is recommended. But also see it to admire Lynch's
obsession to avoid the norm. Even if this film is a little too weird for you,
it's hard not to congratulate a guy for trying something new and sticking to
it.
