Title
Review for Kazaam (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Maxwell "Max" Connor (Francis Capra) has it rough.  His mom, Alice
(Ally Walker), works two shifts every day but one.  She comes from the
"you wash your mouth" school of parenting.  She has a boyfriend Travis
(John Costelloe) whom she plans to marry, but Max does not like him.
He wants to find his father, Nick (James Acheson), who abandoned the
family a decade earlier.  When Max does locate him, Nick is a tough guy
("You get no second chances in life, no second chances") who initially
rejects Max.
     As last year's movie KAZAAM starts, some local bullies are chasing
Max into an abandoned building.  He hits the buttons on a boom box,
and, voila, an instant genie named Kazaam (Shaquille O'Neal) appears.
"You know who I am?" says Kazaam.  "I am your genie."  But Max is not
impressed.  "In that case," he tells him.  "I wish I was as big as you
but not so stupid!"
     The script by Christian Ford, Paul Michael Glaser, and Roger
Soffer comes alive only in Kazaam's periodic rap lyrics.  The rest are
laughably bad.  "You smell like hippopotamus butt," Max yells at Kazaam
in one of the film's typically trite snippets of dialog.
     Capra, who played the rebellious younger brother in FREE WILLY 2,
keeps his performance totally in cliche territory as the tough,
street-wise kid.  Max's first wish is for sky-high junk food.  The
others are a little better.
     Only Shaquille O'Neal works at his part, the rest of the cast
barely work up a sweat.  The show works only as a showcase for O'Neal's
modest acting talents.  For all its failings, there is something to be
said for a movie where at least one person, O'Neal, is clearly having a
great time.  Too bad he wasn't able to transfer his enthusiasm better
to the audience.  And too bad the show did not have a better script and
supporting cast.
     KAZAAM runs 1:33.  It is rated PG for some cartoonish violence.
The show would be fine for kids five and up and perhaps younger.  My
son Jeffrey, age 8, likes the movie a lot.  He said his favorite part
is when Kazaam flies his bicycle.  I cannot recommend the film, and I
think * 1/2 is more than generous.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Shaquille O'Neal, Francis Capra, Ally Walker, James Acheson, 
      John Costello
Director: Paul M. Glaser
Producers: Scott Kroopf, Paul M. Glaser, and Bob Engelman
Screenplay: Christian Ford & Roger Soffer based on a story by 
      Paul M. Glaser
Cinematography: Charles Minsky
Music: Christopher Tyng
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     Some motion pictures aren't worth the celluloid they're printed on.  
KAZAAM, a genie-in-a-boombox fable featuring basketball superstar 
Shaquille O'Neal, is such a film.  This is as witless as movies come -- 
an unamusing, moronic blend of horrible acting and inept screenwriting.  
I doubt that many people born before 1987 will find anything worthwhile 
about this, one of Disney's worst live-action offerings.
     Those who endure KAZAAM's torturous ninety minutes will find 
themselves desperately wishing that writers Christian Ford and Roger 
Soffer had generated a script exhibiting a moment's intelligence or 
originality.  Alas, this film doesn't even rise to the level of a bad 
made-for-TV movie.  By comparison, the old Barbara Eden series, I DREAM 
OF JEANNIE, was the height of wit and sophistication.
     The story, which has loose connections to Disney's animated hit, 
ALADDIN (but doesn't deserve to be mentioned in the same breath), 
details the trials and tribulations of one young boy and his pet genie.  
Max Connor (Francis Capra), an obnoxious, self-centered, twelve-year old 
punk, finds Kazaam (Shaquille O'Neal), a genie confined in a boombox, 
when some bullies from school chase him into an abandoned building.  At 
first, Max doesn't believe in Kazaam's supernatural powers, but, when 
the big, strangely-garbed man rains fast food all over the young boy, he 
changes his mind.  So, as Max considers what his wishes should be, he 
and Kazaam bond.  And, as the genie dabbles in rap music, Max defies his 
long-suffering mother (Ally Walker) to track down his no-good father 
(James Acheson), who abandoned him ten years ago.
     There's no doubt that KAZAAM was designed exclusively to draw upon 
the popularity of O'Neal.  This is his second feature role (he played a 
top basketball prospect in BLUE CHIPS), and he hams it up big time, 
exhibiting a lot of energy, but not nearly as much talent.  
Unfortunately, O'Neal gives the best performance in the film, which says 
all that's necessary about the level of acting.  Francis Capra, who was 
believable in Robert De Niro's A BRONX TALE (he played the younger 
version of the protagonist), is woeful here, apparently trying to do his 
best to imitate Jonathan Taylor Thomas.  His Max is annoying from the 
beginning, and it's difficult to imagine anyone caring about, let alone 
sympathizing with, this kid.  Ally Walker and James Acheson, as the 
divorced parents, are as flat and uninteresting as a blank sheet of 
paper.
     KAZAAM, like most Disney live-action features, does its share of 
too-obvious product placement.  Pepsi and M&M's both get a generous 
number of shots.  Of course, the whole film is an ad for O'Neal -- 
basketball star, headline-grabber, rapper, movie producer (he gets an 
"executive producer" credit), and actor.  Apparently, there's nothing 
this guy can't do.  
     KAZAAM consistently pushes all the wrong buttons.  The feeble 
moralizing about friendship only speeds the curdling of an already 
offensive mixture.  This is artificial, formulaic film making at its 
most blatant, and far worse than anything previously turned out by 
director Paul M. Glaser (who, after his stint as Starsky in STARSKY AND 
HUTCH, directed THE CUTTING EDGE, among other efforts).  KAZAAM deserves 
to be slam-dunked down a garbage chute, never to be heard from again.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
