Title
Review for Last House on the Left (1972)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
As pure, unmitigated horror, "Last House on the Left" often succeeds, but it is
lacking a central aspect in any horror film - sympathy for the victims
tormented by the evil. In this case, the victims are two, giggling,
marihuana-stoked teenage girls (Sandra Cassel, Lucy Grantham) who are on their
way to New York City to see the band, Blood Lust ("They dismember chickens".)
They stop in the city looking to score some pot when they inadvertently hook up
with three psychos, the oily Krug (David Hess), the bland Weasel (Fred J.
Lincoln), the scared Junior Stillo (Marc Sheffler) and the potty-mouthed Sadie
(Jeramie Stillo).  
"Last House on the Left" starts off badly for the first hour with horrendous
acting and even worse cinematography making it appear as if it were an
Afterschool Special. The film improves when the victims are forced to have
sexual intercourse, bludgeoned, and then stabbed out in the woods where nobody
can hear them. The actual process by which the  psychotic group makes these
victims suffer is unsettling and reinforces, I think, Wes Craven's initial
theme - to make us act with revulsion at the violence taking place from
real-life murderers, not bogeymen. There is even a moment when the killers look
at themselves with disgust after stabbing one girl who attempted to run away.
Unfortunately, Craven hardly makes us care for either of the victims, and so it
makes it harder to have any sympathy. 
Then the film takes a curious turn and, by sheer coincidence, there is a spin
of events involving one girl's parents who happen to live near the woodsy area
where the crimes took place. The killers pretend to be religious students whose
car broke down. The parents take them in, before realizing who they are. All of
this is very loosely based on Ingmar Bergman's fabulously beautiful
masterpiece, "The Virgin Spring," which at least developed its characters
amidst a powerful theme involving God and why He lets these things happen.
Craven's film hardly merits that much scrutiny. 
"Last House on the Left" was released back in 1972, and was considered so
intense that they almost did not release it. Craven found some leader with an R
rating on it and released the film. It is still banned in the UK, Australia,
and New Zealand. Although it has some intense moments, it is not nearly as good
as "The Hills Have Eyes" or any of the director's later films. Its revenge plot
lacks thrust and significance and is handled all too crudely and quickly (there
is a chainsaw fight, an oral sex act that goes horribly wrong, and so on). The
songs played on the soundtrack are played at the most inappropriate moments and
detract from whatever tension there is. And some silly slapstick involving two
bumbling cops does not help matters either (one of them is Martin Kove, later
the memorable villain in "Rambo: First Blood II" and "The Karate Kid"). An
interesting debut from horrormeister Wes and its supposed intentions and form
of inspiration are admirable, but there is precious little to recommend. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at faustus_08520@yahoo.com
or at Faust667@aol.com
