Title
Review for Bedroom Window, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Steve Guttenberg, Elizabeth McGovern, Isabelle Huppert, Paul
Shenar, Carl Lumbly, Wallace Shawn, Frederick Coffin, Brad Greenquist,
Robert Schenkkan, Maury Chaykin 
Written and Directed by: Curtis Hanson 
Running Time: 113 minutes 
Curtis Hanson (L.A. Confidential) wrote and directed this effective
Hitchcockian thriller.  Sylvia (Isabelle Huppert) witnesses a vicious
attempted murder from the bedroom window of her lover Terry (Steve
Guttenberg).  When Terry learns that the attacker murdered someone
minutes later, he knows Sylvia must come forward with what she saw. 
However if she testifies, their secret affair will be out.  So Terry
decides to go to the police in her place, relating the details of what
she saw as she described them to him. 
When Terry goes to court for the matter, the defense attorney (a
suitably slimy Wallace Shawn) tears his testimony to shreds.  The
police, now realizing that they've been lied to, want to know how Terry
could possibly know since intricate details of the case.  Terry then
becomes the lead suspect in the case, with no way out in sight. 
Guttenberg is miscast as the lead here, as he can't quite shake his
Carey Mahoney / Police Academy mindset.  He plays his role with a
constant smirk on his face, seemingly never taking the matters at hand
seriously.  He's not bad here mind you, but he's just not completely
conveying the emotions of someone in the situation his character is in. 
Also miscast is Elizabeth McGovern who plays the girl that was
attacked.  At one point late in the film McGovern is supposed to convey
sexyness, but well... she just... can't.  McGovern just has that
"innocent farm girl who's been protected from all the evils in the
world" look to her, and sexy just doesn't work for her.  Not on this
level anyway. 
I give director Hanson and his crew a lot of credit for not only the
sheer entertainment value of the film, but also for how the film looks. 
The story takes place in Baltimore, but Hanson was able to use locations
there that make the city seem foreign, as if the story was happening in
Italy or Spain.  I've visited Baltimore before and thought it just
looked like a nice metro American city.  Hanson was able to show me
otherwise, and that look adds to the intrigue of the story.  [Note: I do
have to deduct some of those technical kudos however, as in one scene
where Guttenberg is driving somewhere you can clearly see a crew member
in red wandering around behind the car.  Inexcusable.] 
While there are some suspenseful moments in the film, what gave me the
chills as I was watching The Bedroom Window was noting that the two
people I'm watching (Guttenberg and McGovern) have vanished off the face
of the Earth.  Now THAT'S scary. 
The Bedroom Window is available on DVD from Anchor Bay Entertainment. 
The disc contains the film in its original theatrical aspect ratio of
2.35:1 (and is enhanced for 16x9 televisions), and includes the original
theatrical trailer. 
The trailer for this film is interesting to see (as is the DVD insert,
which is a reproduction of the original poster and box art), because the
ad campaign for this film actually says "In the tradition of the master
of suspense".  This wasn't a quote from a critic, this is what the PR
company decided would be the best way to advertise the film.  While I
have no real problem with this... shouldn't Alfred Hitchcock's name have
been mentioned?  The general public going to see this film at the time
wouldn't have had any idea who the "master of suspense" is. 
Featuring a good transfer for a little film from over 13 years ago,
Anchor Bay gets a big hand for continually restoring and releasing the
smaller films out there that might have otherwise been forgotten.  If
you like suspense thrillers, then this is a good disc to add to your
library. [R]
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
AOL Instant Messenger: FilmJax
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  In the best film thriller I have seen
     in a while, Steve Guttenberg pretends to have witnessed a
     crime his paramour actually saw.  Before long, he is swept
     into an ever-worsening vortex of trouble and danger.
     I recently gave a fairly negative review to an attempted nightmarish
thriller, THE HITCHER.  The plot of that is one of a teenager driving
cross-country who picks up a psychotic hitchhiker and spends the rest of the
movie fighting this creep who always does just the right thing, who has
super-human strength, and who apparently has the ability to cloud the minds
of officers of the law.  Several people commented that they found it a very
tense film and one asked me what more I wanted from a thriller.  I just saw
a film that has some superficial similarities to THE HITCHER but does just
about everything right that I thought THE HITCHER did wrong.  The film is
THE BEDROOM WINDOW and it does right nearly everything that I thought THE
HITCHER did wrong.
     Steve Guttenberg plays a young executive at a Baltimore construction
company who has a short affair with his boss's wife.  From his bedroom
window she witnesses an assault on a woman on the street below.  Leter that
evening another woman is murdered nearby.  Sylvia, the boss's wife, cannot
report what she saw to the police without her husband finding out about the
affair so she describes the assailant to Guttenberg and he tells the police
that it was he who saw the crime.  This begins a chain of events that start
out simply inconvenient for Guttenberg but get worse and worse, eventually
achieving truly nightmarish proportions.
     THE BEDROOM WINDOW, unlike THE HITCHER, has genuine characters with
motivation and personalities.  The killer, when finally discovered, is far
more exciting as a character than is Rutger Hauer in THE HITCHER because he
is real and makes mistakes.  Guttenberg's desperation is also effective and
believable because, while he rarely does the smartest thing he could do, the
character always has good reasons for what he does.  As a side note, the
action of the film takes Guttenberg to the fells Point Saloon, which might
well be a tip of the hat to Guttenberg's first major role in DINER.  That
film took place at the Fells Point Diner.
     THE BEDROOM WINDOW has characters the audience cares about getting into
believable messes.  I rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
