Title
Review for Ref, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Denis Leary, Judy Davis, Kevin Spacey.
Screenplay:  Richard LaGravenese and Marie Weiss.
Director:  Ted Demme.
     Good scripts are so rare in Hollywood that it should be a felony
when one gets wasted.  Sometimes it's dreadful miscasting; sometimes
it's a director without an ounce of vision.  The dilemma in which I
find myself in such cases is how to temper my response to the things
the film failed to do with acknowledgment of its strengths.  Last
year's TRUE ROMANCE was one of those films, and THE REF is another.
There are a lot of laughs in THE REF, more than most recent comedies
have provided, yet I found it consistently and infuriatingly falling
short of the comic plateau it might have achieved in more skilled
directorial hands.
     It's the night before Christmas in the affluent Connecticut suburb
of Old Baybrook when THE REF begins, but plenty of creatures are
stirring.  The town is abuzz over the first actual crime in memory, a
botched burglary committed by career criminal Gus (Denis Leary).  When
he escapes the scene and finds the whole state looking for him, Gus
kidnaps Caroline (Judy Davis) and Lloyd Chasseur (Kevin Spacey) so that
he can hide out in their house.  The problem for Gus:  the Chasseurs
are perhaps the most unhappily married couple since John and Lorena
Bobbitt.  While Gus waits for a chance to make his escape, the
incessantly bickering Chasseurs drive him to distraction, a situation
made even worse by the subsequent arrival of their delinquent son
(Robert J. Steinmiller, Jr.), a horde of relatives, two local police
and a drunken Santa in a pear tree.
     The script for THE REF, by Richard LaGravenese (THE FISHER KING)
and Marie Weiss, is full of comic and dramatic potential, only some of
which ever makes it to the screen.  On the surface, there is a scathing
comedy which plays like "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" meets "The
Ransom of Red Chief."  Comic Denis Leary gets the lead billing in his
first starring role, but it is the sparring of Spacey and Davis which
carries the film.  Their acid-filled tirades in the film's first half
hour are extremely funny, and the two characters are surprisingly
well-rounded.  With the arrival of the extended Chasseur family comes
the potential for even more outrageous comedy as the Christmas eve
dinner degenerates into a primal scream group therapy session.  But THE
REF never makes the leap to the outrageous.  Leary and his director Ted
Demme, who collaborated on a series of promo spots for MTV a couple of
years ago which popularized Leary's ranting, chain-smoking stand-up
persona, seem too concerned here with separating Leary from that
persona.  Consequently, he plays a number of scenes far too low-key,
and in fact fades into the background almost completely in the last
half hour.
     The disappearance of Leary also hurts the film's dramatic subtext,
as Leary's Gus recognizes in the Chasseurs the kind of dysfunctional
family which led to his own life, and responds in surprising ways.  A
number of early verbal confrontations are exceptionally well-written,
as all three of the principal characters make their case, and it is to
the credit of LaGravenese and Weiss that at various times all three
appear to be completely right and completely wrong.  Yet while the
title of THE REF apparently refers to Gus's action as intermediary
between Caroline and Lloyd, that dynamic disappears when the guests
arrive.  Insults fly, and Leary merely stands around looking
exasperated.
     There are too many funny things going on in THE REF for it to be a
complete failure.  I found the town's ill-prepared police force and its
disgusted chief to be a hilarious subplot, and their handling of a
piece of videotaped evidence is a winner.  Spacey and Davis exchange
some of the most caustic dialogue since THE WAR OF THE ROSES, a style I
always enjoy.  Unfortunately, Demme seems unwilling to let the throttle
out, and a comedy which had been racing along nicely stalls before it
hits the finish line.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Denis Leary, Judy Davis, Kevin Spacey, Robert Steinmiller Jr.,
           Glynis Johns 
Director:  Ted Demme 
Producers:  Ron Bozman, Richard LaGravenese, and Jeff Weiss 
Screenplay:  Richard LaGravenese and Marie Weiss 
Music:  David A. Stewart 
Released by Touchstone Pictures 
     Ever had a bad day?  Of course you have.  We all have.  But in THE
REF, Denis Leary experiences what it's like when Murphy's Law is in
full force.  This man just can't catch a break.  As a statement that
crime doesn't pay, this film sure gets the point across, and in a
manner that O. Henry would appreciate.
     Gus (Denis Leary) is an expert burglar undone by a "Road Runner"
type alarm system installed in the safe of his latest victim, the owner
of an upscale Connecticut mansion.  Fleeing a nasty encounter with a
guard dog named Cannibal, Gus hijacks a couple at a local convenience
store.  Unfortunately for him, his choice for hostages, Lloyd and
Caroline Chasseur (Kevin Spacey and Judy Davis), are in the midst of a
knock-down, drag-out fight that promises to continue well into this
chilly Christmas Eve, no matter how much Gus demands that they shut
up.  The bickering gets louder after the trio reaches the Chasseur
house, prompting Gus to declare that he has stumbled into "the fifth
ring of hell."  And the evening is just beginning....
     Usually, the burglar is supposed to be the bad guy, and his
hostages the victims, right?  Not in THE REF.  It quickly becomes
apparent that no matter who's holding the gun, Gus is the one in for a
long night.  The manner in which the situation develops isn't scripted
with great ingenuity or originality, but the dialogue sparkles.  Not
only is it funny, but it's occasionally insightful.  As delivered by
Judy Davis and Kevin Spacey, the barbs thrown by husband and wife
crackle with energy.
     Denis Leary is surprisingly subdued.  Until the last minute of the
picture, there aren't any of his trademark fast-talking, wisecracking
tirades.  He plays the role of Gus with the perfect blend of self-
deprecating sarcasm and sheer disbelief at the situation he's gotten
himself into.  One wonders if Gus has ever read "The Ransom of Red
Chief."
     The unwanted relatives that show up around the film's midpoint add
another dimension of hilarity to THE REF, and keep the overall story
from growing tired.  The same cannot be said of various snippets that
occur away from the Chasseur house, such as a subplot involving the
local police chief which is developed but never concluded.  While
occasionally amusing, these scenes do little more than distract from
the verbal war between Lloyd and Caroline.
     There's a sense that a lot of THE REF was snipped in the cutting
room.  While this undoubtedly helped the pacing, it also opened a few
noticeable plot holes.  This is not a seamlessly constructed movie, but
as long as you're not expecting great art, it's unlikely to
disappoint.
     The dramatic scenes aren't generally effective, but the comic bits
more than make up for most of the deficiencies.  Those searching for
something that examines a crumbling marriage with greater depth and
sensitivity would do better watching Judy Davis in HUSBANDS AND WIVES.
THE REF is designed more for those willing to empathize with Gus, a man
having the kind of day that most of us don't even like to have
nightmares about.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by Ted Demme
Written by Richard LaGravenese and Maria Weiss
Starring Denis Leary, Judy Davis, and Kevin Spacey
MPAA Rating "R" (presumably for F-O-U-L language)
Running Time Approx. 110 minutes
     Just in time to fill the void left by GRUMPY OLD MEN comes THE
REF, a gleeful celebration of cynicism and "bad will toward men" that,
for my money, is a bona fide Christmas classic.  THE REF *works* and, as
a Spring seasoner, it's the classiest current comedy out.
     Dennis Leary is "Gus," a burglar whose Christmas in Connecticut is
heisting for the holidays.  But Gus gets a lump of coal after botching
a burglary on Christmas Eve.  Alarms go off, his partner gets scared,
and Gus is left fleeing on foot.  To better his escape, Gus hijacks a
married couple (Davis and Spacey) and directs them to their home.
     One problem: the couple is returning from their marriage counselor
and they *cannot* stop fighting.  Even after being tied-up and held at
gunpoint.
     Things quickly go from worst to awful with the arrival of the
police, the teenage son, and the in-laws.  The film climaxes in a
hilarious dinner/present-opening scene with Leary posing as marriage
counselor "Dr. Wong".
     Everyone in THE REF is madder than hell and they spend the entire
film venting it at each other.  Normally, this would make for a very
oppressive occasion--holiday film or otherwise.  But director Ted
Demme, nephew of Jonathan, keeps the tone carefully balanced between
hateful and humorous.  Even the most caustic comments are amazingly
amusing.  Anyone who's ever held their tongue for the holidays will
delight in this fiercely frank farce.
     With only a couple sight gags and a minimalist plot, THE REF
succeeds on the virtues a great script and a great cast.
     Denis Leary is an exasperated marvel, cursing in bewilderment and
punctuating every double-take with a variation of the f-word.  Judy
Davis is a gem, playing her "wicked wife" very close to her character
from HUSBANDS AND WIVES.  And Kevin Spacey is a surprise standout as
the henpecked husband who gets to speak his mind *and* whack a
Christmas tree with a fireplace poker.
     The three wise leads--who share equal screen time--are backed by
a super supporting cast that includes Richard Bright, Robert
J. Steinmiller Jr., and Glynis Johns.  The latter once played the mother
in MARY POPPINS.  Here, she's the "Mom from Hell."
     The screenplay, by Richard LaGravenese and Maria Weiss, is black
comedy at its best and has enough great lines to warrant a second
viewing.  Or third.  Or fourth.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The plot of THE REF has a lot of potential.  A married couple from
Hell (Judy Davis and Kevin Spacey) is having over their extended
family, which are just as awful, for Christmas.  A robber (Dennis
Leary) kidnaps the married couple but even his gun can not keep them
from fighting and yelling at each other.
     The good news is that there were many times where the dialog in
this black comedy had me laughing out loud.  Periodically, the director
(Ted Demme who I think is Jonathan Demme's brother) would pick up the
pace a la SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION and the film would really hum.  The
actors responded very well to the increased pacing and came alive.
Most of the time, however, the movie would start clicking and then some
invisible hand would reach out and grab a lever and slow it down for no
apparent reason.
     The characters would have been better if the script (Richard
LaGravenese and Marie Weiss) were written a bit more sympathetically.
I did not care about anyone in the show.  Well, I guess maybe the thief
had some possibilities for likeableness.
     I read one review that said he thought the show was the funniest
comedy he had ever seen, BUT when he saw it a second time he only
barely liked it.  He realized later than the first time, the theater
was packed and the second time, it was pretty empty.  I saw it in a
sparsely occupied movie house.  I think this show would work better
with wall-to-wall people laughing.  Go Saturday at 7pm I guess should
be the strategy.
     THE REF runs 1:30 and is rated R.  If you see this show and love
it, I would not be surprised.  The dialog had a lot of promise and some
big laughs.  Nevertheless, I thought the pacing was off and the
characters were drawn too purely dark.  I give it ** and a marginal
thumbs down.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tak
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Gus, a hapless jewel thief (comedian Denis Leary), kidnaps a
bickering married couple (Judy Davis and Kevin Spacey) on Christmas Eve
and ends up becoming a hostage himself in the couple's home.  Forced to
play referee to their frantic feuding and to deal with their delinquent
son, annoying mother-in-law, etc, he finds himself at the mercy of this
All-American dysfunctional household and wishing for a "silent night"
anywhere else on the planet.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     The first time I saw THE REF was at a preview screening, a packed
house, filled with people out for the evening.  I left thinking THE REF
was "...the funniest movie I'd *ever* seen."  In fact, I it as my first
"many times at full price".
     So, this weekend, I got all psyched up after writing this review
and talked two friends into seeing a matinee on a sunny Saturday
afternoon.  Boy, was I disappointed.  I had to rewrite this review.
('Nother two hours down the drain).  I dunno if it was the non-capacity
crowd or my high expectations, but it wasn't as fun.  My friends liked
it, but they didn't rave about it like my friends at the screening.  I
think the crowd totally made a huge difference.
     On a better note, it's entertaining to watch people verbally slug
it out with each other.  The dirtier the fighting, the better.  Both
times I saw it, people in the theatres were laughing out loud.  And
although Denis Leary is a formidable talent here, he didn't steal the
show.  In fact, my favorite scenes are from early in the movie, where
the whole interplay is among Gus (Denis Leary), LLoyd (Kevin Spacey)
and Catherine (Judy Davis).
     Denis Leary is absolutely perfect.  His style perfectly
complements his exasperated, frustrated, pissed-off criminal
character.  He swears up a storm, snaps off zillions of one liners, and
rants non-stop.  And it's not really Denis Leary material--you don't
have to be a fan to enjoy THE REF.  In fact, the movie wasn't written
with him in mind at all, though it was a perfect match.
     The rest of the cast had their moments--the sheriff, a drunken
fruit-cake bearing Santa, in-laws that are funny because you recognize
them, and Gus's inept "...fucking waste of life..."  sidekick.  But it
wasn't the same caliber--just your normal lame-o hollywood idea of
funny.  Fortunately we're never away from the bickering for too long.
     The dialog in THE REF is fast-paced, and snappy from the very
first scene where we're introduced to the bickering couple at their
marriage counselor's office.  There's a slight tendency to get a bit
preachy that I noticed the second time around.  Denis Leary almost says
"Now kids, don't try this at home", as well as some speeches about
recognizing your privilege.
PS: Watch for the wrestling scene with the grandma: In Premier, Leary
    says he *really* got elbowed in the balls during filming.  Ouch.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     THE REF is really funny.  Though I'd recommend you go see it at
night, or whenever the theatre'll be crowded.  The experience will be
ten times better.  In either case, you'll enjoy THE REF.
-- 
Mark Takacs        mtakacs@netcom.com
Seattle, WA         "Only Amiga!"
WWW HomePage
