Title
Review for Lolita (1997)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Samuel Goldwyn Films
 Director: Adrian Lyne
 Writer: Stephen Schiff, novel by Vladimir Nabokov
 Cast: Jeremy Irons, Melanie Griffith, Frank Langella,
Dominque Swain, Suzanne Shepherd, Keith Reddin, Erin J.
Dean, Joan Glover
   Monica Lewinsky was twenty-one when her affair with Bill
Clinton began.  By chronological age she's no Lolita, and
what's more supporters of the president maintain that she is a
manipulating seductress who plied her wiles successfully on
Mr. Clinton--who should not be considered the ogre.  Those
who want the president impeached and removed from office
maintain that he took advantage of someone half his age, a
bimbo in thrall to his position as his country's premier alpha
male.
  The Lolita of novelist Vladimir Nabokov's creation, like
Monica, is a seductress who had at least one lover before she
threw herself on the considerably older man.  Like our
president, the professor did not need much encouragement to
respond affirmatively.  The difference is that the title character
of Vladimir Nabokov's novel is jail bait, a twelve-year-old who
is a half dozen years below the legal age for responsible
consent.  
  Pederastry, even with willing partners, is illegal everywhere,
considered a particularly heinous offense if the underage
subject is horrified by his or her victimization. Pedophilia
makes an intriguing topic for films.  Studios have shown a
general unwillingness to tackle the subject for fear of pickets,
but now that "Lolita" has been shown on Cable TV without
serious incident, we may get to see more studies of the
phenomenon. Already writer-director Todd Solondz is soon to
deliver "Happiness," about a WASPish dad who gains release
from his demons by raping his son's schoolmates. Compared
to child rape, Humbert Humbert's actions, borne out of
genuine caring and passion for his young bedmate, is, well,
kid stuff.  Perhaps that's why some critics have already
judged Adrian Lyne's take on the subject to be dull--even
though this version sticks more closely to Nabokov's novel
than Stanley Kubrick's 1962 adaptation which has James
Mason in the role now inhabited by Jeremy Irons, Shelley
Winters in the Melanie Griffith guise, with Frank Langella now
substituting for Peter Sellers and Dominique Swain in for Sue
Lyon.  But dull it is not.  This "Lolita" is a thoroughly
entertaining piece eliciting much of the novel's comic look at
Middle-American types and capturing a good deal of its lyric
dialogue.  If this version has weaknesses, they are in Lyne's
apparent mistrust of audience sophistication.  Lynn plays up
the obvious and substitutes vulgar poses for more innocently
suggestive fare.  Chief among these flaws is Lolita's ribald
mastication of a banana where sucking a lollipop would have
been more appropriate and in the sexually suggestive
preparation of an ice-cream soda (extra chocolate syrup) by a
profoundly Middle-American type in a 1950's-style
luncheonette.
   The story, which takes place in the early 1950s, centers on
the relationship of a shy but cosmopolitan man and a 12-year-
old nymphet with whom he develops an overwhelming
passion.  When French literature professor Humbert Humbert
(Jeremy Irons) arrives in a New England town for a teaching
job, he runs into a sex-starved widow, Charlotte Haze
(Melanie Griffith) whom he marries only to be close to her
young daughter Lolita (Dominique Swain).  When Charlotte
comes upon her new husband's diary, one which poison pens
her coupled with amorous scribblings about her daughter, she
is determined to leave him but conveniently gets killed in an
auto accident.  Humbert takes Lolita out of the summer camp
to which her mother sent her, only gradually informing the girl
that her mother is dead.  Meanwhile, the two lovers are off on
an auto tour of the American hinterlands filled with the funny
and sorrowful adventures of the immature but ecstatic
Humbert and his precociously manipulating charge.  
   Lyne keeps Humbert in pajamas a good deal of the time,
suggesting the sexual embraces rather than graphically
depicting them.  In one of the movie's funniest scenes, the
maneuvering Lolita cons a raise in her allowance by
seductively moving her hand across Humbert's clothed thigh:
having succeeded in doubling her ration, she parlays her little
victory into what is essentially trading sex for money, sealing
her lover's doom by leaving him for a sinister playwright,
Clare Quilty (Frank Langella), whose pedophilia extends far
beyond Humbert's.  
   No person can fill the role of the hapless Humbert Humbert
better than Jeremy Irons.  The fifty-year-old British actor tends
to be typecast as the shy, befuddled, brooding academic, in
one instance winning Best Actor plaudits from the New York
theater critics for his dual role in "Dead Ringers."  His
Humbert notably embodies the rise and fall of a man who has
been traumatized by the death of his adolescent sweetheart,
given new life by his passion for a nubile adolescent, and
wholly corrupted by an obsession which was doomed from the
start. Dominique Swain portrays her character's duality as
both a refreshingly immature kid who can easily make friends
with her peers in camp and a apt manipulator of an adult
whose academic background gives him knowledge but not
wisdom.  The Nabokov story, which has been appropriately
respected by scripter Stephen Schiff, is being released as a
film at an opportune time when our country's leader is up to
his neck in misery brought about by a similar obsession.  If
only these hapless Humberts looked for real wisdom to the
ancient Greeks whose playrights and storytellers knew only
too well the agony that can result from immoderate emotions.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
LOLITA
Cast: Jeremy Irons, Dominique Swain, Melanie Griffith, Frank Langella
Director: Adrian Lyne
Screenplay: Stephen Schiff based on the novel by Vladimir Nabokov
Australian theatrical release: April 8, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
4 stars
One might describe Lolita as simply a road movie with a pedophile and a
young girl - at least, that would be the easy way of explaining it.
There is a bad taste that lingers all through this film; even in its
sweetened moments, there is a sense that nothing will end righteously.
Behind the films characters and behind its doomed central romance, there
is a cynical but simultaneously passionate depiction of the nature of
forbidden love.  Director Adrian Lyne takes a lengthy amount of time
building the relationship between his two protagonists, before coming in
for the kill in the last forty-five or so minutes of the film.  He molds
the bad taste into an immoral atmosphere, all the while making sure that
the sins he examines are told in an engaging and profound manner.  The
result is an enticing and literate mixture of triumph and disaster,
sorrow and pleasure.  Told with subtlety and elegance, Lolita is a
gentle but expressive experience, and one that is portrayed vividly and
openly.
You can bet your bottom dollar that no film this year will have created
as much controversy as this one.  With the large amount of media
spotlight on the film, it's almost as if seeing Lolita is a crime - and
for all the wrong reasons.  I don't understand why many individuals and
organizations were so intent on having the film banned - do they think
that if we ignore the issue of pedophilia, it will go away?  As my
colleague Peter Thompson explained on the Sunday TV program, "if Lolita
discourages even one person from pursuing his or her desires at the
expense of another person, of any age, it will have more than justified
itself."  And justified itself it has.  I don't believe that Lolita
encourages pedophilia at all - it really discourages it, since the film
ends with a painful and heart-breaking tragedy, which is one of the
foremost reasons to see it.
Professor Humbert Humbert (Jeremy Irons) is a quaint middle aged
pedophile, and he's not a monster or a freak as many screen pedophiles
are.  Humbert fell head over heals in love as a teenager, and the death
of his girl friend at a young age marred him for life.  So much so, that
he has never stopped searching for her.  As he matured, his romantic
interests did not, so when he stumbles upon the beautiful 14 year old
Dolores "Lolita" Haze (Dominique Swain) he is instantly mesmerized.
Humbert lodges in the home of Lolita's mother Charlotte Haze (Melanie
Griffith) and then marries her, just to stay close to his true object of
affection.
When Charlotte is conveniently removed from their lives, Humbert and
Lolita's relationship advances.  Lolita realizes the manipulative power
she has over Humbert, and what began as meaningless flirting
materializes into a contingency of sexual manipulation.  As Humbert
becomes obsessed by the seductive young girl, he takes away from her the
very thing he was attracted to - her innocence.
Jeremy Irons is perfectly cast as professor Humbert, a character whose
every action needed to performed with a weighty but gentle presence.
Irons fulfills that criteria beautifully, and gives a performance that's
virtually faultless.  Every look and every move that Humbert makes is
carried with subtle expression and gorgeous artistry; Jeremy Irons is
completely convincing and incredibly moving.  I wouldn't hesitate to say
that he is one of the best actors working today.   On the other side of
the spectrum - in age, and in experience - Dominique Swain (who appeared
in John Woo's Face/Off) is fine.  She animates Lolita with needed
energy, and only ever looks slightly unconvincing in her final scene
(though the damage made is minimal).  Together, Irons and Swain make an
obliging screen couple, although their togetherness is intentionally
never entirely comfortable to watch.
Stephen Schiff's screen adaptation of the classic novel by Vladimir
Nabokov retains its literacy and coherency.  The film never adds
subplots for the sake of having subplots - everything is edited
precisely and its key scenes never run too long.  The photography by
Howard Atherton provides some nice visual touches, especially in the
final few scenes that, together, provide a disturbingly provocative
climax.  Shot, edited and performed with elegance, Lolita is a powerful
and artistic film with a grim core.  Ignore the droves of people who
condemn it, and listen to those who take it seriously - Lolita is a
painfully beautifully piece that, aside from the controversy it has
gathered, is really not about politics at all - its about a relationship
that cannot feasibly end happily.


Author
Mikkel Lodahl
Well, I might as well admit it from the start: I haven't seen Kubrick's
version
of Lolita, so you can take that into account when you read the following. I
am, however, in the process of reading the book as I write this, so I've
decided that I have a more or less adequate frame of reference to review
 this flick fairly. So, without much further ado:
The plot revolves around a Mr. Humbert Humbert. As the film opens, we
are treated to a wailing, 40's-style car, trying to drive in a straight line
down
a country road, but failing miserably to do so. In it, Humbert (Jeremy
Irons)
is in a dazed and confused state of mind, a gun lying on the seat beside
him,
and blood on his clothes. I find myself thinking: "Hey!"
Cue overvoiced monologue. Humbert tells the audience about his first love,
Annabelle, whom he met when he was living with his parents at a hotel
somewhere
in southern Europe (sorry, didn't quite catch the country). At this point he
is fourteen.
Humbert states that: "Whatever happens to a boy on the summer of his
fourteenth year,
can shape him for the rest of his life." The film quickly shows us that
Humbert and Annabelle
has an (at the very least) semi-sexual relationship. And then it kills her
off stating: Typhus.
Humbert, devastated at the loss of his first love, still lives on, and the
movie next joins
him some three decades later as he arrives in America, where he is to live
with a friend,
eventually taking a position as a teacher at a local college. However, his
friend's house is
no more, so instead he goes to live at a friend of his friend, the widow
Charlotte Haze
(Melanie Griffith). Upon arriving at the house, Charlotte puts some rather
un-subtle moves on
Humbert, who dismisses them with British properness. He isn't really
thrilled about the place,
and thinks about excusing himself and finding a hotel instead, but then he
eyes Charlotte's
daughter, Dolores (called Lolita, and played by Dominique Swain), and is
instantly attracted
to her, even though she is only a twelve-year old. He promptly decides to
stay.
During the next month or so, the sexual tension rises between the bubble-gum
blowing Lolita
and Humbert, while Charlotte and Lolita have a host of fights. Humbert
manages to get in a
few sexual advances at Lolita when Charlotte's not looking, and she doesn't
reject him openly.
Humbert's fairy tale ends, though, as Charlotte decides to send Lolita to a
summer camp.
Humbert, not wanting to be suspected, grudgingly keeps silent. Lolita
accuses him of being a traitor,
and he starts feeling sorry.
The day Lo's going to summer camp, Humbert wakes up late, and rushes to the
window.
Lolita is just about to get into the car, when she looks up at the house and
sees Humbert.
She dashes from the car, to the great irritation of Charlotte, and runs up
to Humbert's room,
where she gives him one passionate kiss, then runs down again. Humbert,
astonished, sees the
car drive away. He walks into Lo's room and throws himself into her left
clothes, hoping to catch
an essence of her.
The maid arrives at that point and hands him a letter, which he opens and
reads. It is from
Charlotte, who basically says that if he still is there when she comes home
from driving Lo
to the summer camp, then she takes it as a declaration of love. They are
soon married.
It is not a happy marriage, though. Humbert doesn't want to have sex with
Charlotte, and,
as such, gives her sleeping pills in order to get her off his back, but they
soon prove to not
be enough. He then goes to a doctor and casually asks about what might put a
cow in a
coma. The doctor sympathizes with Humbert, and gives him a new sort of
sleeping pills;
the sort the doctor himself uses on HIS wife.
Humbert returns home, but finds that Charlotte has discovered some entries
from his diary,
which describes her in a very bad tone, and contains some very loving
comments about Lolita.
She yells at him, telling him that he'll never see Lolita again, and that
she'll leave him. He
stammers through a weak explanation about it being an outline for a novel
("I used you and
Lo's names for easy reference!") and says that he'll fix them a drink. He
mixes two drinks, all the
while talking to her from the kitchen, but as he is about to go into the
living room again, a phone rings.
He answers it, and then says to Charlotte: "Honey, there's a man here
claiming you're dead."
He runs to the living room, where Charlotte is nowhere to be seen, then
dashes to the street.
Charlotte has been run over by a car, while going to the mailbox to mail
some letters. Humbert is
shocked, yet he quickly recovers, and decides to go to fetch Lolita, after
burning the letters.
Humbert arrives in the girl summer camp and is rather alarmed when a boy
named Charly is sent
to get Lolita. Lolita is cheerful, though, and the two embark on a trip to a
nearby hotel, Humbert
telling Lo that her mother is sick and in the hospital. Lolita shrugs it
away and moves on to tell
Humbert that she's been unfaithful to him, "not that it matters". Humbert
asks her why it shouldn't matter.
She replies that he doesn't care for her anymore; explaining it with him not
having kissed her yet.
They pull over and they start making out, but are interrupted by a passing
police officer, but
 although they are forced to break off their kissing, the officer doesn't
take any special notice.
The two arrive at the hotel, but a priest convention is taking up a lot of
hotel space, so Humbert and
Lo have to share a room with one bed. Lolita wants to tell Humbert about
something Charly, the only
boy at the summer camp, taught her, but Humbert refuses. Humbert allows for
her to get undressed
and go to bed without him looking on, and he takes a stroll through the
lobby. He is, however, uncomfortable
around the priests, and slips outside. Once outside, a mysterious man
adresses him, claiming to be
"with no-one." The man hints that he knows about Humberts intensions towards
Lolita, but disappears before
Humbert can confront him. Humbert retreats to the bedroom again, where he
lies down beside the now
sleeping Lolita.
The next morning, Humbert wakes up, finding Lolita besides him. She is giddy
and wants to tell him
about what Charly taught her. She whispers it in his ear, and he grins,
saying that he had never done
that. Lolita dares him, then notes: "One's got to show you everything." She
then rolls on top of him,
and they laugh at each other.
Cut to later. They are checking out of the hotel, and driving on. Stopping
at a gas station, Lolita wants
to call her mom at the hospital, but Humbert tells her she's dead. Cut to a
cheap motel that night. Lolita
is sobbing in one room; Humbert staring into the ceiling in another. Lolita
eventually comes running in to
be comforted by Humbert.
Now begins a long journey that ends with Humbert arriving at the city where
he is to teach. Upon arrival,
he applies for a teaching job in prep-school instead, and he gets it. Lolita
begins attending that school, too.
All is well at first, but Lolita begins a rebellion against Humbert, who
doesn't want her to fraternize too much
with her friends at school. Nevertheless, Humbert allows her to be in a
school-play, written by an author
named Quilty (Frank Langella) who bears a striking resemblance to the
mystical man that confronted Humbert
at the hotel.
Eventually Lo and Humbert get into a fight, which ends with Lolita running
out and away. Humbert begins a
search for her, and locates her in an icebar the same evening. There, she
has decided that they ought to go
on another journey. Humbert willingly agrees, and as a voiceover confirms
that he is signing his own death
sentence by agreeing, the journey begins.
Humbert notices that they are being followed, but Lolita thinks nothing of
it. At some point during the journey,
Lolita falls ill, and Humbert takes her to a hospital. Although he wants to
stay, the doctor sends him home,
and when he arrives the next day, Lolita is gone. He goes into a hysterical
frenzy, but manages to control himself
once the police arrive.
Embarking on a search for Lolita, Humbert travels around, but is unable to
find her anywhere, and thus,
returns to his teaching position. Once there, he gets a letter from Lolita.
She writes that she is now married
and pregnant, but that they are missing money. Humbert, obsessed with taking
revenge on his rival goes to
Lolita personally, but discovers that it is not the man she has married that
she betrayed him for. Lolita tells him
that the man she really loved was Quilty, though she left him because he
wanted her to be in an "art movie.
Two boys, two men, and two girls." Humbert gives her the money she needs,
begging her to come and live
with him. Lolita refuses, stating that her husband needs her. Accepting
that, Humbert takes off to
find and murder Quilty.
He eventually tracks Quilty to a big mansion, where he corners him and,
after a bit of cat-and-mouse
playing, shoots him several times. Quilty remains all the time blissfully
unaware that he is about to die,
as he is clearly either influenced by drugs or simply a madman. Humbert
takes off again, and we're back
where we started. He drives to a hill, cops hot on his tail, and looks out
over a small city. He delivers one
final voice-over as we cut to the credits.
First, let me apologize for the rushedness of the last part of my synopsis.
I didn't want to go into as much
detail after Humbert got what he wanted, but on the other hand, I needed to
mention the rest of the plot
after so much detail on the other half.
I found the movie to be quite good. In fact, rather good. In fact, very
good. While there were quite
a few details the movie failed to mention, which has mention in the book, I
don't think it failed a lot there.
It would be hard to cramp all the details in a feature film.
The movie is built up in a way that lays most weight on two characters,
Humbert and Lolita, so the
whole picture more or less falls flat if they fall flat. Fortunately, they
don't. Even though I haven't seen
Jeremy Irons in a lot of other films, I was looking forward to seeing him,
because he's always delivered
sterling performances, but here is an exception. His performance here is not
sterling; it's stellar. He perfectly
conveys Humbert's strangely fascinating obsession with 'nymphettes' (as
Humbert calls them), and I truly
sympathize with him when it all falls through. The voice-overs especially
are extremely well read, and the
final scene, where he confronts his anti-thesis (more on that later) Quilty,
is fantastic.
Dominique Swain came from nowhere as far as I know, but she is perfectly
cast as Lolita, playing her
with just the right mixture of innocence and insidiousness. Plus, she looks
the part. I'll admit that I, while I
mostly confine myself to worshiping Natalie Portman when it comes to young
actresses, was really swayed
over by her performance. There is spectacular talent in the young woman, and
I can only hope that it will be
used in the future.
The rest of the cast delivered for the most part decent performances, but
Melanie Griffith stood out as a rather
nice performance, giving an almost likeable personality to the irritating
housewife she was given.
Frank Langella was okay in his scenes, too, but I had a feeling of routine
acting from his part. Of course,
it might have been him being outshone by Jeremy Irons, so I'm willing to
guess that he did the best he could
with his rather limited material.
The directing was good, although I never really got the surrealistic
nightmare-like scene, which is exactly
why I haven't mentioned it in my synopsis.
Now to the anti-thesis thing. The reason I can sympatize with Humbert, is
that he has a genuinely likeable
personality. He is gentle and compassionate, and actually has very few flaws
(although they are pretty big).
It is that way I like to think of myself too, so that's more or less the
reason I like the guy. Quilty, however,
is not like that. He is the mass-producing artist to Humbert's compassionate
painter. While Humbert might
use a few years on a single painting, Quilty might spare not more than a few
days on each. With painting being
a metaphor for 'nymphette', of course. Quilty is a pedophile; Humbert's a
childlover. The difference may
not be obvious, so let me clarify: Quilty wants sex with children for a
kick - Humbert sees children romantically,
and truly loves them. And, just as a normal man would love a grown-up woman,
he loves a child, taking
all parts of the relationship with it. Including the sex.
In fact, the whole story is, in my eyes, not about sex with children or
anything like that; it is about a man's
obsession with a woman (alright, girl) and how he is taken to the extremes
of his emotions. I think the story
is more of a love story than a lust story. It is the romantical Humbert
Humbert in one corner, and everyone
else in the other. Even Lolita, the girl he loves, goes against him. It is a
tradegy of Shakespearean proportions
in my humble opinion. I suppose I'll take more than a little pounding for
that remark.
Ennio Morricone is mostly known for his western soundtracks, but here he
does a good job too. The music
lies in the background, as well it should do in a movie like this, and helps
set the mood right. Every once in a
while, and old song from the era pops up as Lolita hears it, and they are
quite well chosen. The soundtrack
in itself is not exactly spectacular, but it is okay. Buy it if you really
like 40's music or if you're a fan of
Ennio Morricone, else, hear it first.
I started my rambling with saying that I thought the movie to be very good.
As I've thought a little bit
about it, I've redicided: I think it is excellent. I understand that it
didn't reach theaters in the US, to which
I can only say I am sorry. I would have loved to see this movie on the big
screen, but even here in Denmark,
it only got into certain theaters, and not any in my vicinity. I recommend
this to anyone who loves a good story
about obsessiveness, as well as to people who enjoy great acting (and who
doesn't?).
Best line: "Please concentrate, Mr. Quilty. You are about to die!"
-Humbert

Author
Michael Dequina
After seeing Adrian Lyne's much-talked-about screen version of Vladimir
Nabokov's _Lolita_, I can easily see why it's taken the better part of two
years for the film to find an American distributor--but it's not for the
reasons you might think.  Lyne's take on the classic tale of pedophilic
lust is just about the opposite of what one would expect from the director
of bankable, tawdry zeitgeist-tappers _Fatal_Attraction_ and
_Indecent_Proposal_.  It is nicely composed, careful, tasteful... to the
point of frigidity.  For all the taboos it covers, _Lolita_ is strangely
staid and uninvolving piece of work, a film whose only commercial prospects
with in the manufactured controversy surrounding it.
Unlike Stanley Kubrick's blackly comic 1962 version of Nabokov's novel,
Lyne and screenwriter Stephen Schiff take a stately approach to the
controversial story.  This works for the general setup, especially the
elegant prologue, in which the sexual proclivities of professor Humbert
Humbert (Jeremy Irons) are explained: when he was 14, he was deeply in love
with a same-aged girl who eventually fell ill and died; ever since, he has
lusted over nyphets.  Flash forward to 1947, and Humbert finds his ultimate
object of desire in Dolores Haze, a.k.a. Lolita (Dominique Swain), the
feisty 14-year-old daughter of Charlotte (Melanie Griffith, her shrillness
working for once), the widow in whose home he rents a room.  To remain
close to Lolita, Humbert impulsively marries Charlotte, which sets off a
chain of events that leads to Humbert taking stepdaughter Lolita, now his
very willing lover, on wild road trip across America.
Once _Lolita_ hits the road, Lyne's glacial style keeps the audience at a
distance and saps just about all the energy from the film.  The film soon
settles into a cyclic stop-and-go rhythm where Lolita's naturally childish
behavior incenses Humbert, he pines for her, she uses it to her advantage
and gets him back, only to anger him again.  Lyne is understandably
discreet with the sexual encounters between Humbert and Lolita, and his
adherence to taste is admirable.   However, the most effective moments in
_Lolita_ are those where Lyne doesn't play it safe and dares to unsettle
the audience, which is what he's built his entire career on.  Particularly
effective is a disturbing scene where a mad--with lust, and in the literal
sense--Humbert tries to fuck a confession out of a hysterically laughing,
lipstick-smeared Lolita.  It's a creepy scene, one bound to get under
moviegoers' skin.  But it's likely the only one that will elicit any type
of emotional reaction from the audience--not even the inevitable tragic
conclusion packs much of a punch, if any.
What makes  _Lolita_ all the more disappointing is that it is clearly less
than the sum of its parts, which all-too vividly display signs of life the
entire film the could have had.  Irons gives a beautifully nuanced
performance; while the audience is repulsed by his actions, one cannot help
but have some understanding for what he feels and why.  The
then-15-year-old Swain, who went on to co-star as John Travolta's
Lolita-ish daughter in _Face/Off_, more than holds her own, playing Lolita
as equal parts victim and vixen.  Ennio Morricone's score is hauntingly
sensual, as is the soft lensing of cinematographer Howard Atherton.  It's
unfortunate that their superlative work is in the service of a mediocre
vehicle.
With films such as _Fatal_, _Indecent_, and _9_1/2_ Weeks_ under his belt,
Lyne seems to pride himself on making provocative films about sexuality.
_Lolita_ should have been the most provocative of them all; all the
individual ingredients were in place for a thoughtful, daring, yet
nonexploitative work.  Alas, his _Lolita_, with its distant earnestness and
leisurely pace, might as well have been a Merchant Ivory production.  (airs
August 2 on Showtime; "officially" opens in theatres September 25)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Greg King
Adrian Lyne's previous films (9 And 1/2 Weeks, Fatal
Attraction, etc) have dealt with the nature of sexual attraction and
obsession, and his adaptation of Vladimir Nabokov's controversial 1958
novel Lolita further explores these themes.  However, free of the
strict moral and censorship code that shaped Stanley Kubrick's 1962
version, Lyne is able to explore the novel in far more detail.  Where
Kubrick largely alluded to the nature of the relationship between
Humbert and his precocious 12 year old step daughter, Lyne is able to
explore it in franker terms.
However, Lyne's intelligent and sensitive handling of the
provocative material and his sense of restraint is unexpected.  Lolita
is nowhere near as sexually explicit or torrid as its detractors would
have us believe, but is rather a more poignant and evocative tale of a
tragically doomed and illicit love affair.  Many writers, including
James Drearden, Harold Pinter, and even David Mamet, have attempted to
write a more contemporary flavoured adaptation of Lolita, but Lyne
found the perfect collaborator in former Vanity Fair film critic
Stephen Schiff, whose lyrical and melancholy script seems to capture
much of the book's flavour.
The two central performances are powerful and complex and
enhance the movie.  Jeremy Irons brings his usual pained and haunted
expression to the character of Humbert Humbert, the refined English
professor who comes to New England to take up a teaching assignment in
1947.  Humbert is still marked by the loss of an adolescent love that
has haunted him for the past quarter of a century.  He is initially
reluctant to take up lodging with the man hungry widow Charlotte Haze
(Melanie Griffith), until he spies her beautiful young daughter
Dolores (newcomer Dominique Swain).
Despite her childish demeanour, Dolores arouses long forgotten
feelings in Humbert.  He eventually marries Charlotte, just so he can
be close to Dolores, and successfully manages to avoid most of his
husbandly duties.  For a long time Charlotte misreads the attraction
between Humbert and her daughter.  Following the death of Charlotte,
Humbert and Dolores set out on a journey across an America slowly
recovering from the war and emerging with a recognition of its own
identity and culture.
Irons brings sophistication and urbane charm to the role, and
makes Humbert something of a sympathetic figure.  He convincingly
conveys Humbert's ever increasing sense of guilt and remorse.  His
voice over narration provides insight into his obsession, and also
adds some touches of droll humour.  Lyne uses some neat cinematic
tricks to illustrate Humbert's disquieting inner nightmares as he
begins to lose control of the relationship.  Irons gives a confident
and convincing performance in this tricky role, whereas James Mason
always seemed uncomfortable.
In a remarkably assured debut performance, Swain (who went on
to play Nicolas Cage's daughter in the action thriller Face/Off) is a
wonderfully seductive and manipulative nymphet.  Swain beautifully
mixes childlike innocence with an earthy quality and a smouldering
sexuality that sears across the screen.
Frank Langella (from Dave, etc) is truly creepy as the
enigmatic and predatory Quilty.  In the early stages, he is mainly
seen in shadows and gloomy lighting, which gives him a sinister,
mysterious and somehow menacing quality.
Lyne's adaptation of Lolita finally reaches our screens,
following a year of protracted debate over whether it is pornography
or art, and whether it should be banned.  Not since Martin Scorsese's
The Last Temptation Of Christ has a film had so much free
pre-publicity, which certainly won't harm it at the box office.  Far
from glorifying paedophilia, as most of the film's detractors have
claimed, Lolita ends badly and tragically for all concerned.  In fact,
the most disturbing scene is the Taxi Driver-like violence at the end
when Humbert confronts the monstrously amoral Quilty in his own
mansion.
The film is visually rich, and has a beautiful, glossy, almost
romantic surface that seduces the audience, despite its dubious
subject matter.  Howard Atherton's exquisite cinematography brings to
life the rich American landscapes through which Humbert and Lolita
travel on their odyssey.  Ennio Morricone's lush score further
enriches the movie.

Author
Luis Canau
Lolita
Directed by Adrian Lyne
USA/France, 1997 
C - 137 min.
Cast: Jeremy Irons, Melanie Griffith, Frank Langella, Dominique Swain, Suzanne
Shepherd, Keith Reddin, Erin J. Dean, Kathryn Peterson, Muse Watson
Humbert Humbert (Irons) is a British teacher coming to the US. When he visits
the house of Charlotte Haze (Griffith), when considering to rent a room, he
only decides to stay after seeing her young daughter, Dolores, better known as
Lolita (Swain), for whom he his immediately attracted. The 12-year-old girl -
who will prove to know much more than what is normal for her age, in what
concerns the ways of the world - not only seems to correspond, but she
encourages that feeling. Humbert does everything to be close to the nymphet,
even pretending to like her mother, whom he, in fact, detests. The man and the
precocious little girl go on a sinful journey across the United States,
followed by someone, whom we know from the beginning to be Clare Quilty
(Langella). Lolita becomes an obsession for Humbert, and she takes advantage
of it in the pursuing of her interests. 
Much ado about nothing. It's predictable that, when the movie will be released
in the US or in the UK (if...?), there will be a general feeling of deception.
The movie is bad, and all this expectations, created around it, this senseless
polemic, only make things worse for a viewer seeing the movie after hearing
too much about it. Ironically, the story is about a precocious girl who
dominates completely an older man. It is not about a man taking advantage of
the "innocence" or the "inexperience" of his stepdaughter. Technically, of
course, it is child abuse, but nothing prevents a movie with this subject to
be good ("Lolita", 1962). The exaggerated morality behind the problems the
movies has to find distributors, should also be reflected in other subjects.
Murder, for instance. Distributors should also avoid movies with people being
killed. Homicide is a crime and morally reprehensible world-wide.
The recent American "Child Pornography Act", similar, in its intentions, to a
law already existing in the UK, forces cuts in mere representations of sexual
acts with the participation of minors. This means that body-doubles can't be
used, not even by digitally superimposing the head of a child in the body of a
full grown and responsible woman, paid only to expose her body (which is,
undoubtedly, a very amusing idea). 
This "Lolita" isn't subtle like Kubrick's. The sinful actions are called by
their names, and in spite of being said that this (European) version was
re-cut according to the aforementioned law, there are, in fact, sex sequences,
even if very innocently shot (from the neck up, for instance), and there are
others with sexual provocation from the naughty minor. Besides that, there are
still some shots with nudity, using a body-double, filmed in a very
frenetically way, to avoid  showing her face. We can rest assured that
Dominique Swain's constitutional and legal rights were fully respected, and,
even a bad screening (film not properly covered on the projector) proves it,
when she takes off her blouse remaining "protected".
In the US, the MPAA rated the movie R for "aberrant sexuality, a strong scene
of violence, nudity and some language". Fair enough. The strong scene of
violence and the nudity must be related with Frank Langella running naked.
The movie is one of the greatest sleeping pills recently shown. About two
hours and fifteen minutes of suffering, from a movie that seems to try to be
as pretentious and kitsch as it can. Irons voice off doesn't help in telling
the story, or in drawing the characters contours. Only tries to give some
irritating "poetic" sentences. Even if it is more faithful to the original
Vladimir Nabukov novel - as his son, Dmitri, also admitted - the narrative
doesn't flow naturally. It isn't always important, or enough, to "respect" a
book. Kubrick's movie had the script signed by Nabokov, but Kubrick used his
personal vision (as always) to put it on the screen. 
Adrian Lyne takes care of Melanie Griffith ASAP. This is probably the most
unbearable part of her career. The characters lack some shades of grey. They
are very direct, and don't seem to hide any bit of their personalities, which,
in the case of Lolita, would be important. Irons is, again, the tortured,
suffering man, feeling a love beyond his control, that he used us in one too
many films, as "Damage", "M. Butterfly", or even, in a way, "Dead Ringers".
Swain doesn't seem to know what she is really doing, or the ambiguity her role
should have. But, well, she's a minor, and can't be responsible. 
The director tries to show some of the sensuality that turns Humbert's head
around, which is something not quite necessary, since we understand he's
totally caught by her, since he first sees her. Still, Lyne uses, ad nauseam,
shots of Dominique Swain with her legs above something (normally a table), to
show her panties (who knows if the wrong projection helped on this?) He also
gives a 'thriller treatment' to some sequences, like when filming near the
floor, following characters ankles while they're running (they seem to run
from a psychopath), or in a nightmarish scene, with distorted image (but with
a nice sound design). This might look better in "Fatal Attraction" or
something, but seems artificial in this movie.
In spite of not intended to, "Lolita" provides some good laughs. The sequence
of the revenge against Quilty is one good example. 
Luis Canau___________________________________________________________

(please change EUnot to EUnet/p.f. troque EUnot por EUnet)
HP de Cinema: http://home.EUnet.pt/id005098/cinedie (in Portuguese)
P r o -  w     i      d      e      s      c      r      e      e     n 

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
First thing to note: I haven't read the Nabokov.  Yes, arguably it's a
big gaping hole in what I would like to believe is my well-readness,
but there it is.  No Nabokov yet, but that should change.  Second
thing: I haven't seen the Kubrick film.  The Adrian Lyne film is the
first version of the story I've seen, for good or bad.  This movie then
exists in a sort of vacuum for me.  While bits and pieces of the story
seep in just from living in this world, these fragments are
disconnected and distorted, without real reference to their origins or
meaning.  Seeing this movie, then, brushes all this cultural debris
aside: it's a complete thing, in many, many ways unlike and removed
from the one-line synopses.
I suppose I'm left with talking about my impressions of the film rather
than how closely it follows the novel, or how this one follows the
previous one.  So: this is a good movie, pulls you into the unfolding
story and puts you in Humbert's obsessions, is able to evoke a certain
sympathy for his situation as well as horror.  It's a good film.
Humbert's interior world is brought into view in any number of ways.
The most obvious is the occassional voice-over, necessary for this sort
of film to explain and delve into his mind, and all rendered through
Nabokov's prose.  It works well, and adds to the poetry of this film.
We also listen to the mistakes in hearing Humbert experiences as he
moves through the everyday world, in particular his interview with
Beardsly Prep School.  Other touches are the gauzy sunlight and
filtered photography as Humbert sees Lolita -- yes, cliches, but well
constructed ones -- and the moths dying in the electrified bug trap as
Humbert talks to Clare Quilty for the first time, particular horror in
the mundane.
We also have a first rate cast.  Jeremy Irons is fantastic as a man
held in this nymphette's power.  He shows desperation, helplessness,
obsessive devotion.  It's all in the eyes and in small gestures.
(According to at least one review I've read, this film doesn't go much
into Humbert's cunning, as depicted in the novel.  This may be true: to
a large extent, Irons's Humbert is swept along by events, in some ways
a spectator to his actions, truly helpless.)  Dominique Swain is also
good, depicting both childish playfulness and petulance, as well as
growing realization of her power over Humbert, and perhaps a bit of
cruelty.  It's surprising this is her first acting job. (Lyne
apparently chose her after seeing an amateur tape submission for the
role: Swain reads lines from the novel, in between shooing away the
family dog from jumping on the dining room table.)  Add to this a
creepy Frank Langella as Quilty and Melanie Griffith as the mom.
Anyway, "Lolita" will be shown on Showtime this Sunday.  It'll also
open formally in theaters sometime in late September, according to this
week's issue of "Time Out".

Author
Shane Burridge
I did not really want to like this film.  In a display of petulance 
befitting its title character, I spent the best part of two years rehearsing 
my gripe about how Adrian Lyne deserved to fail spectacularly for having the 
chutzpah to tamper with such a classic.  It wasn't just me.  It seemed 
everyone had a bone to pick with LOLITA - its long-delayed and highly 
publicized search for a distributor was ample proof of that.  There were the 
Nabokovians who didn't want to see their beloved classic - which rated #4 on 
1998's 100-Best-Books-of-the-Century list - fall into the hands of the 
director responsible for such pop-sleaze as 9 1/2 WEEKS, FATAL ATTRACTION, 
and INDECENT PROPOSAL.  There were the usual lobbyists who objected to the 
film's subject matter presumably on the pretext that it would somehow 
endorse underage sexual activity (this argument is true inasmuch as cartoons 
promote the wilful dropping of pianos onto pedestrians).  And then there was 
a smaller arena of controversy - for all I know, I was the only person in 
it, which reads as thus:  I just didn't like the thought of someone 
monkeying around with a story that had already been established as a film 
classic by Stanley Kubrick.  For years we've always thought of Kubrick's 
LOLITA as the one, the only, definitive film version, shot in tasteful black 
and white, boasting sharp performances by James Mason and Peter Sellers, and 
forever fixing in our minds the image of a B/W Sue Lyon and her heart-shaped 
sunglasses as the novel's heroine.
And then along comes Lyne.  I remember feeling furious when I first read of 
his intentions for a remake.  But maybe it's just as well that there has 
been a two-year hiatus as a cooling-off period, because by the time of 
viewing I was ready to accept Lyne's LOLITA as an alternative, not a 
replacement.  And here's the news, which surprises me more than anyone - I 
saw LOLITA and loved it.
Sticking faithfully to the text and events of the book (although Lolita is a 
couple of years older in the film, one concession Lyne felt obliged to make 
to take off some of the heat), LOLITA is a sumptuous, mesmerizing piece of 
work.  I can't think of anything else quite like it, although Visconti 
springs clearly to mind in the opening scenes.  Unlike Kubrick's cool, black 
comedy, Lyne's LOLITA displays a much broader emotional tapestry - with 
remarkable ease he moves between scenes of drama, humor, eroticism, and 
romance.  The storyline parallels Kubrick's version closely, reminding us 
that the 1962 film probably wasn't as much of a departure from the book as 
it first seemed: Humbert Humbert (Jeremy Irons) falls in love with 14-year 
old Lolita (newcomer Dominique Swain) and marries her mother (Melanie 
Griffith) just to be near her.  A few weeks after the marriage, he becomes a 
widower and finds he has 'Lo' all to himself.
The performances Lyne draws from Irons and Swain are arresting - these two 
have more intense screen time together than any other recent couple that 
springs to mind, and sparks are always flying.  Right from the tortured 
timbre of Iron's opening narration it's plain to see that this is a tale of 
the heart.  It's interesting because the romance is purely on Humbert's 
behalf (the film's prologue does well to establish his motivation as the 
pursuit of an ideal rather than lust-driven obsession), and even when Lolita 
draws her role in the story to a close with the unconsciously cruel remark 
about "the only man I was ever crazy about" (which he knows isn't him) he 
finds himself evermore besotted with her.  Nowhere in this story does either 
one of them say that they love one another - instead, all we hear is is the 
refrain "I'm sorry".
The on-screen relationship between Swain and Irons was always going to be 
Lyne's most difficult task, but he pulls it off well.  The obvious tack is 
to make Humbert the innocent one and Lolita the manipulator, but this is 
just as liable to elicit charges of unfair sexual politicking: that young 
teens are being grossly misrepresented as knowing carnal creatures.  
Instead, Lyne shows us how gauche Lolita is - the kind of thing that would 
be anti-erotic to anyone but idealistically-blinded Humbert.  Swain moves 
everywhere with lanky, lumpy gestures; she sprawls over furniture, chews 
gum, fidgets, sneers at her mother, thinks only of herself and depends on 
two favored expressions - sleepy and sassy. She is indifferent, a behavior 
that Humbert confuses with a power he believes inherent to all nymphets, yet 
far from naive - she for one has not mistaken their escapade for some wildly 
romantic journey.  If Nabokov's book is a portrait of the hedonistic 
bubblegum heart of America then Swain's Lolita ably incarnates his themes, 
and Irons' Humbert is suitably by turns amused, irritated, and bewildered.
Looking at the thoughtful and detailed work that Lyne has done with LOLITA 
it is easy to believe that this is his best film - certainly since his debut 
FOXES which in itself was not without Lolitaesque colorings.  He is able to 
include head-and-shoulder-only lovemaking scenes between Swain and Irons 
without making it offensive (at the point that Humbert is ready to 
acknowledge that their relationship would be seen as nothing more than the 
corruption of a minor, Swain interrupts and diverts him with the facetious 
remark "the word is incest").  It isn't sordid or exploitative, and while it 
may be romantic, and even arousing, it is held in check by a sense of 
mistrust.  Ennio Morricone's lush score and  Howard Atherton's beautiful, 
drowsy cinematography wrap LOLITA in a doomed wistfulness.  It's a good 
example of how human emotion can really be amplified in a cinema with the 
right use of images and sound.
It's a shame that LOLITA had such a troubled history.  I even feel guilty 
myself for doubting that it could have been anything other than an attempt 
to cash in on a controversial title.  And yet here I am, ready to move 
Kubrick's version to one side of the pedestal to make room for another.  As 
Lolita herself might have said, who woulda thunk it?


Author
Steve Rhodes
After a long and highly publicized sojourn in release purgatory, the new
version of LOLITA has finally made it into wide release at the theaters.
The immediate question is was it worth all the fuss?
Directed by Adrian Lyne in his usual flashy manner, the film lacks the
literary feel and substance of Stanley Kubrick's 1962 classic starring
James Mason, Shelley Winters, Sue Lyon and Peter Sellers.  Lyne
(FLASHDANCE, FATAL ATTRACTION and NINE AND 1/2 WEEKS) manages to turn
Humbert Humbert into a sympathetic character.  The blame for the affair
is laid at the hands of his 14-year-old stepdaughter, Lolita.  In this
bit of perverted ethics, the stepfather is made into a poor guy who
suffers a fatal attraction to young girls.  And Lolita is a sexual
predator, who continually seduces her stepfather.  In one typical
instance, she demands a raise in her allowance, among other things.  He
sits there "helpless" as she increases the sexual foreplay until he
agrees upon the exact figure she dictates.
Jeremy Irons with his sad, pensive eyes specializes in playing tragic
characters.  As Humbert Humbert, especially in the narration, he puts
just the perfectly hopeless spin on the role that Lyne wants.  Irons,
who is never less than riveting, rises way above the rest of the
presentation.  His narrations of Vladimir Nabokov's rich text from the
novel are the film's high points.
The major problem with the production is the casting of Dominique Swain
as Lolita.  Her overly "cute" mannerisms almost single-handedly sink the
picture.  Precocious to a fault, she acts every scene in ways that would
never occur in real life.  She loves to sit behind Humbert while they
are driving and stick her toes in his eyes, almost causing accidents.
She "accidentally" drapes her body over his in contorted ways that are
awkwardly staged.  Fidgeting constantly like someone who mainlines
sugar, she never stands still long enough to become the alluring
creature that the part demands.  One of the least natural of actresses,
her acting shows through on every scene and gets in the way of our ever
taking the film seriously.
The other two principles in the cast, Melanie Griffith as Charlotte Haze
and Frank Langella as Clare Quilty, are perfectly satisfactory but
little more.  In the original, Shelley Winters made the part of Lolita's
mother, Charlotte, convincingly loathsome.  Griffith, on the other hand,
plays a pleasant wife with no noticeable faults other than wanting to go
to bed with her husband, who prefers her daughter instead.  He uses
heavy sleeping pills to avoid his "husbandly duties."
Much is made of Lolita's innocence.  She tosses her braces retainer
everywhere to remind you of her youth.  When she can't figure out where
to put them, she twirls them in her mouth like a big piece of candy.
These displays of mock immaturity are directly contradicted by her
actions, so few are credible.
Exquisitely filmed by Howard Atherton with a lovely gloss, the movie has
meticulously constructed period sets.  But Lyne has little sense of
proportion.  He flaunts his reconstruction of "Magic Finger" beds and
"Tee Pee" motels so often that one might think the movie was a
Smithsonian documentary.  Already too long, the film should have had
most of these period homages cut.  What purpose is served with detailed
close-ups of the production of an old-fashioned ice cream float?
The movie ends badly in every sense of the word.  Do we really need all
that gratuitous gore?  And a corpse blowing blood bubbles?  Please!
LOLITA runs 2:17.  It is rated R for aberrant sexuality, violence,
nudity and profanity and would be acceptable for teenagers only if they
are both older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 6 November 1998 for $8.75 with Andrea and Lothlorien at the
Lincoln Plaza Cinemas
Setting all the considerable controversy aside, this new version of
*Lolita*, based on Vladimir Nabakov's novel, is one of the most
beautifully filmed movies of the year. Backwards tracking shots while
simultaneously zooming in on a car in sea of grassy fields. Lingering
twilights as the lamps of kitschy motor lodges turn on. The darkness
of a character beside his car against the whiteness of a western
desert. All of it accompanied by the haunting score by Ennio
Morricone. Director Adrian Lyne spreads one of the most sumptuous
visual meals of 1998.
Then there's the controversy: The little matter of a middle-aged man's
sexual affair with a 14-year-old girl, the daughter of a woman he
marries just to be around the young woman. There are people who see
both sides very clearly; Humbert Humbert (Jeremy Irons) is seen as
either manipulating Lolita (Dominique Swain), working the situations
to his advantage; or Lolita has willfully seduced and broken the heart
of a much-older man who still suffers the loss of the girl he loved in
his own adolescence. Personally, I am in the former camp, but Stephen
Schiff's adaptation makes it clear: Both Lolita and Humbert realize
the powers they have over one another.
Set in the late 1940s, Humbert Humbert meets Lolita and her mother
Charlotte (Melanie Griffith), marrying her to be near the daughter who
intoxicates him. Charlotte discovers her husband's journal and is
felled in the street by a car accident. He retrieves Lolita and, only
after having successfully bedding her, does he reveal that her mother
is dead.  What ensues is a private struggle set against the vastness
of America, as the unorthodox couple, posing as father-daughter, cross
the country.
What stands out here, besides the filming, are the
performances. Irons, with his long face, is perfect as the obsessed
leacher. Griffiths' natural affinity for tartiness imparts the needed
annoyances that define Charlotte. The standout is Swain's gum-chewing
Lolita, alternating from "nymphet" to hurt child to viper to
dullard. It's fascinating to watch Swain act like the exasperating
14-year-old she is one moment, and raw sexpot the next. The most
startling scene is one in which she seems to be innocently sitting on
Humbert's lap, reading the Sunday comics, rocking back and
forth--until you realize exactly she's not on a rocking chair.
Swain's performance is the key to the ambiguity that clouds
objectivity with Humbert's rationalizations.
Frank Langella, who's body sure has changed since playing the sexiest
Dracula ever, plays Clare Quilty.
Original music by Ennio Morricone; cinematography by Howard Atherton;
costume design by Judianna Makovsky. Film Editing by David Brenner and
Julie Monroe.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Adrian Lyne
Writer: Stephen Schiff (based on the novel by Vladimir Nabokov)
Starring: Jeremy Irons, Dominique Swain, Melanie Griffith, Frank
Langella
Much ballyhoo has been made over this new version of "Lolita," made in a
time when one would think that a faithful adaptation of the infamous
novel could be made, over its use of pedophilia, and as such, it's
important to address it straight-forwardly, before any other ideals such
as goodness and themes can be discussed, as this film has been in film
limbo for a number of years, lying around in vaults san a distributor,
and having critics waiting to either hail it a masterpiece or call it
anticlimactic horseshit.  When seeing this film, after all the hoopla,
keeping in mind that there are people, namely me, who are fans of the
novel, who have been eagerly awaiting this flick since its
creation...well, you just have to wonder why no one really picked it up
for distribution.
What's even worse is that seeing this "Lolita," especially the first
time and if you're familiar with anything "Lolita," is admittingly very
anticlimactic.  This is a real pity because when you really sit down to
watch this film, ignoring all the crap that has preceeded it, it's
really quite a film, perhaps the best film by director Adrian Lyne
(although, really, look at its competition: "Flashdance," "Fatal
Attraction," and "Indecent Proposal"), at least besides "Jacob's
Ladder."  I've seen this "Lolita" twice: the first time, I wasn't so
blown away.  It seemed overly dramatic and surprisingly unaffecting.
The second time, not really thinking about how I've waited for what
seems like forever to see it and how I'm seeing it on a TV set on a
premium cable channel and not a giant movie theatre, it really affected
me emotionally.
The story itself is a surprisingly heartbreaking one, which is why it's
such a good novel, and why this is such a good film.  The story of a
pedophile obsessed with a young 14-year old girl named Dolores a.k.a.
Lolita is great because it's not trash for the perverted but because
it's about human obsession with things that are out of one's reach.  Its
protagonist, the comically-named Humbert Humbert, is not your average
pedophile, but a seriously wounded human being who embodies how we are
all destroyed by our sick obsessions and idosyncrasies.  The character
of Lolita is almost a symbol of the forbidden apple in Christian
mythology, something that will destroy us but that we can't live
without.
These ideas are all worked into this film nicely, but done in a way that
is not heavy-handed at all, but instead lyrical and emotionally
devastating.  The focus of this film, and the reason for making it, it
seems, was to really penetrate the emotional depths of the novel and
bring them to life on the screen in beautifully dramatic images, and
scenes which are blatantly over-stylized.  The tone of the book is a
comical one, but it's also a tragic one, and Humbert, telling the story
from his perspective, blows every single thing out of perspective.
Humbert exists in a fantsy world of his obsessions and desires, and this
reflects the way the entire film has been designed.  We get a sense that
perhaps it's by doing this that Humbert has really trapped himself into
a fate that will ultimately leave him haggard and destroyed.  He weeps
uncontrollably and never lets himself get over his original 14-year-old
love, and allows himself to embody her as Lolita.  He lets his feelings
for her navigate all his decisions, and by the end, he has nothing but
overly-dramatic feelings for her.
The story recognizes the extreme of this, almost out of a test, seeing
if the readers will really sympathize with someone who is socially
deemed a pervert, and one almost wonders while reading the book if the
author, Vladimir Nabokov, wrote the book as a means to bring into focus
his own sick obsessions, and perhaps bring them to peace.  The weirdest
thing about this film is that by the end, when Humbert has reached the
finale of his obsessional journey, we can easily sympathize and even
identify with him.  The opening and final images of the film are the
same, and who hasn't done a similar action, that is wandering about
without any sense of reality or anything else but a deep sadness in us?
This is the second time the novel has been adapted for the screen, the
first time being filmed in - shock - 1962, by Stanley Kubrick, who
couldn't possibly have brought the novel to the screen with as much
faithfulness as Lyne has been able to do, but did the next best thing:
he economized for everything and came up with a droll black comedy about
obsession in general.  In that film, he used the traps of society as
benefits.  The studio demanded the final scene, that of a heinous
murder, come first in the film so to portray Humbert first as a murderer
and second as a pedophile...and when you see it, it gives the film depth
of a man trapped by obsession.  The censors wouldn't allow anymore than
a couple glances and subtle dialogue to show the, um, relationship
between Humbert and Lolita, so Kubrick decided to play it as comedy, but
still allow the tragedy to seep through.
Looking at these two versions, especially after reading the novel (and
we all know that when we've read a novel and see a film adaptation, we
are bound to be angered by any size differences), it's really impossible
to compare them.  They both go for different things, and one has a lot
more room to be as sexually frank as the novel was.  And although it's
true that several scenes are similar, and are thus up for comparison,
overall it's unfair to say which one is better and which one is worse.
I have never been one for saying the level of greatness of a film
adaptation of a novel is deemed by how faithful it is, and I won't say
that here.
However, this film is pretty amazing, mostly because hey, I loved the
book, and this film nearly reminded me of it.  It doesn't have nearly as
much wit (a couple comical scenes, and even a lot of good chuckles, but
just not totally witty), but it does have the same emotional toll that
the novel had.  Some of that is in the casting of the two leads.  Jeremy
Irons, with his deep, soft British voice and gentle look, is an amazing
Humbert.  He's droll in a very unique way, and, well, no one can look
distraught the way he does.  He brings a wonderful sympathy to the role
that goes beyond pathos and really comes up as being easy to identify
with the audience.  And when he looks at Lolita with love, and she looks
at him with lust, you know that he's her prisoner for as long as he
lives.
And Dominique Swain, who plays the title character, is rather
incredible.  She pulls off the tough role even better than Sue Lyon did
in the original, wonderfully balancing the qualities of seduction,
bratiness, and self-centeredness that marks the character.  It's easy to
see why she surrenders to Humbert: she loves the attention, and knows
that she can have her way with him at any time.  When he denies her
something, she blackmails him effortlessly (a scene involving a rocking
chair and a little foot action is damn near classic), and when he stands
up to her, she weeps and runs away, leaving Humbert to follow her.
There are two other minor characters in the film, one who's a road block
in the beginning, and the other who's a reappearing threat to the
relationship.  The former is Charlotte, Lolita's mother, played by
Melanie Griffith.  In the book, Charlotte is a monster of a woman:
overbearing, constantly scolding her child, overly-religious, and
ultimately selfish.  And she's the one obstacle Humbert has to overcome
to obtain his goal, at least in the beginning.  As played by Shelly
Winters in the original, she represented all these qualities; as played
by Griffith here, she's about half of them.  It's annoying to watch a
film and play a game where you try to see who could have done the role
way better than the one on screen without mentioning the actor who
played them first.  And even though Griffith is not really bad, persay,
she's nothing more.
The other is Clare Quilty, the writer who is also trying to seduce
Lolita, and succeeds, but at a price.  Langella takes a totally
different direction than the one Peter Sellars took in the original.
Quilty was a comic character in the original: a threat in the form of
many forms, popping in states of rambling, German, proning, and
eventually drunk.  Langella takes the other route, allowing all of the
creepiness to be unearthed, and the result is a character who exists in
shadows and low shots, and who meets a wonderfully ironic ending, the
exact opposite of what we thought of him.
As you can see, most of these are not improvements or mistakes done on
the part of Lyne and his screenwriter, Stephen Schiff, but just parts of
a whole new look at the novel, at least cinema-wise.  This version is
beautiful, and perpetually saddening.  The camera movements are
stylized, and each shot is breathtakingly rich.  The acting is for the
most part wonderful, and when we watch it, we really get a sense that
for Humbert, who is telling the story, the only two people on earth most
of the time were Humbert and Lolita.  More importantly, it takes us
right up the brink of emotion, then jumps right over it.  By the end,
with Humbert sadly driving recklessly in his car, following what he says
is the only part of his life he doesn't regret, we feel that we all lose
to something we can never have.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
