Title
Review for Alaska (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 8/14/96 (wide)
Running Length: 1:48
MPAA Classification: PG (Dangerous situations, mild profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Thora Birch, Vincent Kartheiser, Dirk Benedict, Charlton Heston, 
      Duncan Fraser, Ben Cardinal
Director: Fraser C. Heston
Producers: Carol Fuchs and Andy Burg
Screenplay: Andy Burg & Scott Myers
Cinematography: Tony Westman
Music: Reg Powell
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     With a title that sounds like it belongs to a James Michner novel, 
ALASKA represents the latest children-and-a-cuddly-animal adventure.  As 
such, it includes a raft of requisite stock elements:  the kids are 
brighter and braver than the adults, there's a mammoth natural obstacle 
for them to overcome, and the wildlife they meet is inevitably helpful 
(no need to be afraid of a bear with Reg Powell's cheerful music 
playing).  The problem with this sort of script-by-numbers method of 
screenwriting is that rarely are even the most prominent characters 
invested with any depth or individuality.  ALASKA gives us cardboard 
people who struggle to engage our sympathies on even the most basic 
level.
     Another characteristic of this sort of movie is great 
cinematography.  Tony Westman, ALASKA's director of photography, offers 
up a portfolio of breathtaking, panoramic shots.  Admittedly, it would 
be difficult to mess up the look of a film set in such a gorgeous 
locale, but Westman takes full advantage of his surroundings.  In fact, 
this film is almost more successful as a travelogue than as an adventure 
-- too often, I was paying attention to the background while action was 
taking place in the foreground.  Remove the badly-developed characters 
and silly plot contrivances and film this using the IMAX process, and 
you might have a winner.  
     The story, such as it is, hinges on formulaic situations and 
difficult-to-swallow implausibilities.  Children under 10 might be 
impressed, but anyone who appreciates a degree of complexity in their 
motion picture entertainment will be galled by some of the film makers' 
choices.  There are some involving action sequences that enable the 
viewer to forget, however momentarily, about what got the characters 
into this hard-to-swallow situation.  Unfortunately, these scenes, which 
include riding rapids and climbing mountains, aren't involving enough to 
allow perceptive audience members to forgive the weakness of the linking 
material.
     When ALASKA opens, airplane pilot Jake Barnes (Dirk Benedict) and 
his two children, Jessie (Thora Birch) and Sean (Vincent Kartheiser), 
have moved from Chicago to Alaska following the death of Jake's wife.  
In the "starting over" department, Jake and Jessie are doing okay, but 
Sean misses his old life, going so far as to wish his father had died 
instead of his mother.  Then, one night, while Jake is winging his way 
home, he runs into a storm and crashes somewhere around a peak called 
Devil's Thumb.  When the rescue effort fails to locate him, the two 
intrepid children, accompanied by a baby polar bear cub they save from a 
poacher (Charlton Heston), set out to find Jake.
     One might wonder why an actor of Charlton Heston's status would be 
slumming in this sort of film, especially considering that the only 
other recognizable name is Dirk Benedict, a C-level personality best 
known for roles in TV's BATTLESTAR GALACTICA and THE A-TEAM.  The 
mystery really doesn't run all that deep, however:  the star of epics 
like BEN HUR and THE TEN COMMANDMENTS is director Fraser C. Heston's 
father.  
     The two children, Vincent Kartheiser (THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD) 
and Thora Birch (NOW AND THEN), are reasonably fresh faces, although 
both can boast previous screen exposure.  Neither is especially good or 
bad as a performer, although the script challenges their physicality 
more than their acting range.  Unfortunately (or fortunately, depending 
on your point of view), they are constantly upstaged by their four 
legged companion. 
     ALASKA would have been marginally better without the heavy dose of 
Native American mysticism that has been injected into the screenplay.  
The poachers are also an unwanted distraction -- why add human villains 
when the terrain itself is enough of a hazard?  Yet, even had the 
writers trimmed these elements, ALASKA still would have been trapped by 
the confines of a formula-driven genre.  It would be a welcome pleasure 
to witness the results of someone taking a real chance with a movie like 
this.  As such, ALASKA is a lost opportunity.  This film plays it safe, 
and, as a result, will follow the similar-but-better THE AMAZING PANDA 
ADVENTURE on the fast track to the "family" section of the video store.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Alexander F. Relyea
        Fraser Heston's new film ALASKA has scenery befitting an IMAX film  
with cinematography to match.  Unfortunately, the horrid script and the
sometimes laughable acting make you wish for more scenes without people.
ALASKA is apparently an attempt to cross FLIPPER with CLIFFHANGER, 
featuring Vincent Kartheiser (THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD) as the
Stallone character.  This works about as well as one might expect,
and the result is too much bad acting, too many plot holes, and not
nearly enough shots of the beautiful Alaskan scenery.
        ALASKA features Dirk Benedict as Jake Barnes, a former jumbo jet
pilot from Chicago who came to Quincy, Alaska with his two children
following the death of his wife.  Instead of flying for an airline,
Jake now flies a supply run for the small towns of Alaska.  His 
daughter Jessie (Thora Birch) is thrilled with the move because it
helps her become one with nature, and she is quite adept at handling
a kayak.  His son Sean (Kartheiser) is absolutely miserable.  There's
nothing for him to do, and he's expected to clean up when he spills
motor oil.  He drowns his sorrows in video games and his passion for
the Chicago Cubs (there is a pitiful attempt to create some cub 
symbolism throughout the movie which most audiences will mercifully 
miss).  Charlton Heston also appears from time to time as a poacher 
called Perry.  His role only ties in peripherally to the other 
characters, and although he's supposed to be evil incarnate, he 
comes across as scary as Paul Hogan in FLIPPER.
        The film begins with brief introductions of all the major 
characters, and most of the minor ones.  Soon after Sean tells Jake
"I wish you had died instead of Mom!", Jake is compelled to fly 
emergency medical supplies to some small town.  In the ensuing storm, 
Jessie loses radio contact with her father, and he subsequently crashes.
The search and rescue helicopter finds a gum wrapper and an old shoe
but can't find Jake's *bright yellow piper cub.*  They also manage to 
miss the flare that Jake fires.  After learning that the search is 
being aborted, Sean decides to search for his father himself.  Jessie 
insists on coming along, and the search is afoot.
        The kids quickly find a poacher's camp, and there they find an 
imprisoned polar bear cub.  Naturally Jessie, our budding
environmentalist, convinces Sean to help free the bear.  For some 
reason the bear, cleverly named Cubby, decides to follow the kids, and
is in turn pursued by Perry who wants him back.  Meanwhile, there are 
a number of foolish plot contrivances including the search and rescue
pilot realizing that Sean and Jessie have gone to look for their 
father by finding a bunch of backwoods equipment *on their kitchen
table.*  Cubby effectively adopts Sean, and the relationship is 
consummated in a weird dream sequence which I did not recognize as such
until the credits.
        I won't bore you with the details of the trials and tribulations
that the three face on their way to rescue Jake (without a travois or
any form of radio), but Heston isn't as generous.  The poorly written
script treats Sean most harshly, but Kartheiser's overdone performance
earns him no sympathy.  Perry's function appears to be one of spouting
platitudes, and his opening soliloquy is bound to cause titters.  The
soundtrack is a nightmare, written as if the bombastic score will 
enhance a flat story and fill the holes in the plot.  ALASKA is only
worth watching if you ignore the eminently forgettable characters, and
consider the film as sponsored by the Alaska Department of Tourism,
and it is on that basis that I give it *1/2 of ****.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     If you are looking for an inspiring family film with lots of
breathtaking scenery, and you are tired of kids' shows where all of the
humor revolves around bathroom jokes and where they are filled with
foul language, I have just the picture for you - ALASKA.  This is a
simple, but effective film that should delight all but the most
cynical.
     Father Jake Barnes (Dirk Benedict) and his two kids, twelve year
old Jessie (Thora Birch for NOW AND THEN) and fourteen year old Sean
(Vincent Kartheiser from INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD), have recently moved
to a small and remote fishing village in Alaska.  Jake turned in his
wings as a 747 pilot to become a bush pilot after the death of his
wife.
     Jessie loves the wilderness.  In one of the first scenes of the
show she and one of her Inuit friends are shown on kayaks sailing up a
magnificent fjord.  She is also her Dad's ground control officer from
their cabin.  Birch's acting skills are barely tapped in the show, but
her charm and energy do come through.  I hope she gets more parts in
the future.
     Sean, on the other hand, keeps skipping school to hang out at the
local video arcade and hates being "stuck in the boonies."  Resenting
his dad's new job, he ridicules him with, "Dad, you used to fly 747s,
and now you deliver toilet paper."  I am not a big fan of kids whose
acting consists of being hard luck cases.  Too often, they look like
they are just complaining and not acting.  I had this problem with
Kartheiser's performance.  It is too one dimensional for me.
     In one of the innumerable magnificent cinematographic (Tony
Westman) scenes, their dad's small piper cub is seen gliding among vast
snow capped mountain ranges.  In another, we have polar bears
frolicking on the snow and slipping or, well, more like skiing down a
snowy mountain.  Actually, the cinematography, the bears and the state
are three of the stars of the film.  Watch especially how beautiful the
aerial shots are when they circle around the subject.  The music by Reg
Powell with its choirs and trumpets add to the majesty of the images.
     In a predicable, but intelligent script, Jake's plane goes down
during a storm as he is courageously trying to make an emergency run
for someone.  The body of the movie is about Jessie and Sean hiking
deep into the wilderness to find their dad when they realize that the
authorities have basically given up.
     What adds charm and interest to the show is a baby polar cub,
named Cubby, and a pair of effective villains, Perry (Charlton Heston)
and his pilot Koontz (Duncan Fraser).  The villains are poachers who
are trying to bring back Cubby to some rich clients in Hong Kong.
Perry is a cocky hunter who admonishes Koontz that "This isn't hunting.
This is business."  Perry tells another guy that, "These young people
were brought up on MTV and video games.  They know nothing of nature."
The director of the picture is Charlton's son Fraser Clarke Heston
(from NEEDFUL THINGS).
     I like the low key humor in the show.  When they come upon the
poacher's hideout in the wilderness, Jessie wants to do something which
Sean puts down with, "Maybe you should write him a note.  Dear
Poachers, This is very bad.  I'm telling."  When climbing down a
mountain, Sean asks, "Are you sure this is how they do it?"  Jessie
retorts, "It's how they do it on ESPN."  In perhaps the best piece of
dialog, when the dad first sees Cubby, he remarks to Sean, "What's
that?  It's either a polar bear or the whitest dog I've ever seen."
Sean quickly replies, "It's a dog.  Can I keep him?"
     The Inuits are shown as wise and a bit mystical.  The grandfather
Inuit, Ben (Gordon Tootoosis), advises Sean, "When I was a boy, you had
to hunt a bear with just a spear, and you took his spirit or died
trying."
     I did find it strange that the film juxtaposed a segment that
glorified the Inuit's hunting with "Go a boy and come back a man" with
one that made white men seem like the devil incarnate for hunting.
Granted there were other differences, but still why have the first part
in a film with basically an anti-hunting message.  At any rate, I
consider this only a small problem.
     This film gives wholesome a good name.  It has a dramatic and
stirring ending.  It is not great cinema, but our whole family
certainly enjoyed it.
     ALASKA runs a bit long at 1:50.  It is rated PG for a couple of
dammits.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence.  Nevertheless, kids
under five might be scared by the villains or by the lost in the
wilderness theme.  In our audience there were lots of quite young kids,
and none seemed scared.  Jeffrey (age 7) thinks the film is super and
gives it four thumbs up.  I recommend the film and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     ALASKA is about as basic as film-making gets, and that is not
entirely a criticism.  Disney used to make a series of films called "True
Life Adventures," wilderness yarns chock full of great scenery, cute
critters and just enough Darwinian conflict not to be alarming to the
little ones in the audience.  Those films were basic -- a vista, an
animal, a fight, repeat -- but most of the time they were also effective.
That is the vibe ALASKA is looking for, and might actually have matched if
it hadn't had so many darned humans.  There is some lively adventure in
ALASKA, but when most of the real fun comes on four legs, it is difficult
not to lose patience with the two-legged cast members.
     ALASKA stars Thora Birch and Vincent Kartheiser as Jessie and Sean
Barnes, teen-aged siblings recently re-located from Chicago to the small
Alaskan fishing village of Quincy after the death of their mother.  Their
father Jake (Dirk Benedict), a former commercial airline pilot, now runs
an air taxi service, and it is on one of his runs that he encounters a
fierce storm and crashes.  Search and rescue teams are unable to locate
him, but Sean and Jessie refuse to give up on their father, and set out
themselves determined to find him.  What they find first is a wilderness
full of dangers, including treacherous climbs, white waters and a nasty
wildlife poacher named Perry (Charlton Heston).  They also find a friend
in an orphaned polar bear cub who joins them on their journey and becomes
a sort of spirit guide.
     I won't waste too much time on the trite and silly elements of
ALASKA, because fortunately scripters Andy Burg and Scott Myers do us the
same favor.  The film's set-up is a riff on FREE WILLY, with a troubled
youth (Sean is annoyed about his new home), a bond with a lovable animal
and even a dash of Native American mysticism; it also provides the
well-worn trope of the lost parent.  Vincent Kartheiser does the surly bit
with a bit more obnoxiousness than one might hope for, and Thora Birch
(the young Melanie Griffith in NOW AND THEN) makes a generic smarter
younger sister, but they are on a par with the rest of the acting in
ALASKA.  It even has the best bad actor in screen history as its villain
(who, coincidentally enough, happens to be the director's father).  And
yes, it does perplex me how Sean made it through three days of rock
climbing, wading in icy rivers and plodding through the frozen tundra in
his Adidas high-tops.
     No, the problem with ALASKA isn't that the people are one-dimensional
characters or mediocre actors.  The problem is that they are people.  The
reactions of the children (and parents) all around me told me exactly what
they wanted to see every time Cubby the polar bear was on the screen.
Even after Coke has turned computer-generated frolicking polar bears into
a corporate logo, the real thing is still adorable; I dare anyone not to
smile ad a cuddly cub doing a belly slide down a snowy embankment.  That
bear is sympathetic and entertaining in a way his human co-stars can never
hope to be, and he is the real star of ALASKA.  He just doesn't have any
supporting players.
     That points up a significant drawback in a film which is supposed to
be a wilderness adventure, namely that there is not enough wilderness,
especially in the first half.  There is plenty of photography of majestic
locations (of a strangely flat variety by cinematographer Tony Westman),
but Fraser C. Heston doesn't quite know what to do with it.  It is fine
for a family adventure like ALASKA to turn in only a rudimentary plot
provided it delivers the thrills, and they finally start coming with about
half an hour left.  That last half hour is very exciting, though, with a
white water sequence as impressive as anything in THE RIVER WILD and a
literal cliff-hanger of a climax.  By then, over 70 minutes into ALASKA,
young viewers could be getting might restless.
     The last shots in ALASKA find our polar bear hero trotting off with
two other bears to form a happy adoptive family.  _That's_ a story I
really would have enjoyed, and I couldn't help wondering why ALASKA hadn't
tripled its polar bear content much earlier.
