Title
Review for Forbidden Planet (1956)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the most widespread forms of amusement among movie fans is
"Kevin Bacon game" - connecting various, often quite different, films
based on the actors who appeared in them. Movie fans who like to
explore the essence of films play another kind of "Kevin Bacon game" -
connecting various films based on ideas or characters that appeared in
them. One of the most spectacular of such sequences, in which we can
trace the original ideas centuries back, is the sequence that begins
with William Shakespeare's THE TEMPEST and ends with STAR TREK. There
is an important link between 16th Century play and 20th Century cult
SF-series, and that link happens to be SF-film with the cult following
of its own. This film is FORBIDDEN PLANET, 1956 space opera directed
by Fred M. Wilcox.
The plot of the film is set in 22nd Century. Starship is sent from
Earth to solar system of Altair. Captain J.J. Adams (played by Leslie
Nielsen) has the task to investigate apparent lack of communication
with scientific colony that had settled on its fourth planet two
decades ago. When the ship approaches the planet, the expedition
receives warning by Doctor Morbius (played by Walter Pidgeon), the
only remaining member of the expedition. He claims that he doesn't
need outside help and that the starship should leave. Adams
nevertheless orders the landing and his expedition is greeted by
strange, exotic, yet barren world. The only thing that stands out are
structures inhabited by Doctor Morbius, his young daughter Altaira
(played by Annie Francis) and exotic household appliance called
"Robbie the Robot". Morbius reluctantly agrees to help Adams in his
investigation, explaining that all the members of his expedition, with
exception of his family, succumbed to mysterious force which caused
very violent and messy deaths. Stranded on the barren planet, Morbius
had begun to explore its underground and found ruins of mighty and
ultra-developed civilisation of Krell, people who mysteriously
perished centuries ago. Their superior technology persevered, allowing
Morbius to create many technological wonders, including "Robbie",
despite his lack of formal engineering skills. While some members of
the starship crew are intrigued by this finding, most of them are
aroused by attractive yet sexually inexperienced Altaira, including
Captain Adams. However, after a while, Adams would find that this
bizarre planet has lifeforms different from Morbius family and more
inimical to his ship and crew.
At first glance, FORBIDDEN PLANET looks like an embodiment of
everything that is bad about Hollywood's 1950s science fiction. The
predictions of future are laughable, starships look like flying
saucers, their crews are made entirely out of white males who speak
with American accent. Comic relief in the form of Cookie (played by
Earl Holliman) is an incarnation of all cliches of the period. "Robbie
the Robot", on the other hand, doesn't just look obsolete - he looks
like too obvious attempt by producers to attract juvenile audience,
and, compared to this, Lucas and Spielberg look like masters of
subtlety. Even on purely technical level director Wilcox manages to
shoot himself in the foot when one shot during Altaira's
skinny-dipping scene reveals Annie Frances wearing swimsuit. However,
despite these flaws, FORBIDDEN PLANET is considered one of the most
important science fiction films ever made.
The importance of FORBIDDEN PLANET is in the influence it had on
numerous filmmakers till this day, mostly in the form of basic plot.
That speaks a lot of about ingenuity and intelligence of screenwriter
Cyril Hume, who, unlike many other SF writers, didn't use the premise
as a simple excuse for standard action/horror plot, but actually built
the real, intriguing story on it and led it to its logical and
effective conclusion. Thanks to that, even the viewers who are
accustomed to CGI graphics, different standards of sex, violence and
language would actually appreciate this film. Despite antiquated
special effects, slow rhythm, old-fashioned morality of the
characters, FORBIDDEN PLANET doesn't insult viewer's intelligence. It
is exactly what is supposed to be - a science fiction film from
beginning to the end.
Even on technical levels, FORBIDDEN PLANET is successful film. Special
effects were best of its age, and even today some of the scenes might
impress the viewers. There was even some room for experimenting, and
musical of Bebe and Louis Barron is the very first example of
completely electronic soundtrack for Hollywood feature film. This
experiment resulted in eerie, surreal atmosphere that seems quite
appropriate for the film. Although the actors in this film don't
usually belong to Hollywood major league, they do quite a decent job.
That includes young Leslie Nielsen of comedic POLICE SQUAD fame as
starship captain, and despite his usual deadpan delivery, this non-
comic role is rather impressive; "trekkies" wouldn't have much trouble
seeing shades of proto-Kirk in Nielsen's version of Adams. On the
other hand, Walter Pidgeon is also quite effective as Morbius, and
Anne Francis as his attractive daughter delivers seductive combination
of sexuality and childlike innocence. Hume's dialogue, despite some
usual cliches, has enough room for some rather entertaining double
entendres.
All in all, FORBIDDEN PLANET, even after almost half of century, is
not only important but very entertaining and intelligent piece of
science fiction cinema and it should be recommended to all fans of
that particular genre.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Among the ranks of 50's science-fiction movies, 
FORBIDDEN PLANET is considered to be one of the best, which 
makes me more determined than ever to stay away from the other 
ones. You can tell from the first minute what quality entertainment 
the movie holds, as a giant pie-plate flying saucer on a string flies 
by and the narrator tells us that, by the year 2200, space colonization 
will have spread out to other solar systems.
        That's where Captain Adams (Leslie Nielson) and his crew 
come in. They've been sent out to check on a mission that hasn't 
been heard from in twenty years. And when they get to the 
atmosphere of this coincidentally Earth-like planet, a voice on the 
radio warns them to stay away. They don't, of course, landing the 
pie plate to find a giant robot waddling toward them. It's Robbie the 
Robot ("As Himself," the opening credits inform us), who looks like 
a giant jukebox with human legs. "Do you speak English?" Robbie 
asks them. "If not, I speak over 187 languages and their various 
dialects and subtexts." A stone-faced Nielson replies, "Colloquial 
English will do just fine, thank you."
        Robbie leads them to his master, the morbid Dr. Morbius 
(Walter Pidgeon), the only inhabitant of the planet. Or is he? Out 
walks his beautiful daughter, Alta (Anne Francis), who was born 
during the one year timeframe before some mysterious, unseen force 
killed off all the colonists except for Pidgeon, who was "immune." 
Now he and his daughter are living with the robot, who does all the 
housework, can create any substance and has the strength to topple 
a house.
        No, he's not a dangerous monster that's going to terrorize 
the crew (that comes later), he has a "built-in safety device" that 
prevents him from killing people. Morbius demonstrates by asking 
Nielson if he can borrow "that formidable-looking sidearm of yours" 
and ordering Robbie to shoot Nielson with it, an order the robot 
cannot compute. Seems like an amazing piece of machinery, right? 
But, as Morbius tells Nielson and his space crew, "Don't attribute 
feeling to him, gentlemen. Robbie is simply a tool." With no men 
on the island for Alta to chase after, you have to wonder if that 
last phrase has more than one meaning. 
        Don't think me a pervert, because we're given more than 
ample evidence that Alta is sex-starved. When she sees Nielson's 
men, she announces seductively, "You're lovely." And the feeling 
is more than mutual, as the Lieutenant replies, "From over here, the 
view looks like heaven," right in front of her father. (Lucky for him 
Morbius can't order the robot to shoot him with the formidable-
looking sidearm.)
        The subplot involving Alta's naivete involving men and 
the men's innate horniness involving her continues for a while, as 
the bad Lieutenant gets her to kiss him under the pretense that it's 
a healthy Earth custom, after which she says, "There must be 
something seriously the matter with me because I haven't noticed 
the least bit of stimulation," quite an ego blow to the poor 
Lieutenant.
        It's Nielson she has the hots for, which she realizes after he 
chews her out for putting all his men in such a sorry state. "I am in 
command of eighteen competitively-selected, super-perfect physical 
specimens with an average age of 24.6 who have been locked up for 
376 days," he bellows, ordering her to put on something a little less 
revealing. And apparently, it's not just the humans who are drawn 
to Alta. She has the wild animals under her control and even Robbie 
the Robot looks a little flustered after she calls him several times 
before he finally waddles in, apologizing for his tardiness by 
admitting, "I was giving myself an oil job." What a dipstick.
        The movie continues with a predictable revelation -- the 
planet was once inhabited by an advanced race of people who 
perfected advanced technologies but were exterminated by that 
unseen force, which also attacks Nielson and his crew, who shoot 
back a few animated phasers at it. Throughout the movie, the music 
score buzzes with other-worldly music that makes even the cheapest 
Casio keyboards sound symphonic. The special effects are bad even 
for that time and you already know what the dialogue is like. Suffice 
it to say, the acting is just as laughable. Leslie Nielson is almost as 
funny in this serious role as SPY HARD and the NAKED GUN 
movies combined.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
