Title
Review for Heavenly Creatures (1994)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Eric Grossman
     If it were not true, HEAVENLY CREATURES would probably be
considered too unbelievable to be a movie.  Unfortunately, the story is
true.  In New Zealand during the year 1952, two bright, imaginative and
resentful fourteen year-old girls, Pauline and Juliet, became so
obsessed with each other they resorted to murder to stay together.
     New Zealand filmmaker Peter Jackson skillfully directs this
picture giving us the right balance of surrealism and reality that
allows us to both sympathize with the girls and realize how insane they
are becoming.  The story centers around the intelligent but withdrawn
Pauline Parker (Melanie Lynskey).  When Pauline meets the new kid in
school, Juliet Hulme (Kate Winslet), a worldly, upper-class young woman
who does not mind correcting her French teacher's grammar, the two
quickly find that they are soul mates.
     The girls become inseparable, sharing their love for movie stars,
famous singers and for each other.  As their bond increases, so do
their flights of fantasy, including a surreal, imaginary world called
Borovnia.  Borovnia is a medieval kingdom that the girls use to escape
Pauline's mother, Honora, who tries desperately to bring Pauline back
to reality.  Juliet's father, more concerned about his daughter's
apparent lesbianism than her bouts with tuberculosis, also tries to
separate the two.  The idea of separation is too much for the girls to
bear and that is what leads to the film's tragic ending.
     Lynskey and Winslet give powerful performances as does Sarah
Perise who plays Honora.  The film has an "independent" look but
 it is most effective.  Jackson and cinematographer Alun Bollinger make
great use of wide-angle lenses, warm lighting and moving camera to
keep a sense of kinetic surrealism.  The special effects used to create
the world of Borovnia are superb.  One of my favorite effects was the
life-size, clay-people who would dance and sing around the Borovnian
castle.  We see Pauline's psychosis deepen as she begins to imagine
these clay-people outside of Borovnia.  There is even a scene where she
imagines one of them slaying the psychiatrist her parents take her to
see.
     As strange as this all seems, nothing compares to the story's
coda.  Popular British crime-novelist, Anne Perry, recently revealed
that she was in fact Juliet Hulme.  After watching the film, this
reality seems incredibly perverse and ironic.  If any Anne Perry fans
were wondering why their favorite author could write murder so well, it
is because she herself has done it in very, cold blood.
     HEAVENLY CREATURES is a compelling story skillfully told.  Just
one word of advice.  Don't see it if you're depressed or do not wish to
become depressed.  This is a sad, tragic, painful story but it is
another potent illustration of just how dangerous obsession can be.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  12/94 
Running Length:  1:38 
Rated:  No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, sexual themes, violence) 
Starring:  Melanie Lynskey, Kate Winslet, Diana Kent, Sarah Peirse, 
           Clive Merrison, Simon O'Connor, Jed Brophy, Kirsty Ferry 
Director:  Peter Jackson 
Producer:  Jim Booth 
Screenplay:  Peter Jackson and Frances Walsh 
Cinematography:  Alun Bollinger 
Music: Peter Dasent 
Distributed by Miramax Films 
"All the best people have bad chests and bone diseases.  It's all 
frightfully romantic." 
            - Juliet Hulme, HEAVENLY CREATURES 
     HEAVENLY CREATURES is based on the true story of Pauline Rieper
(Melanie Lynskey) and Juliet Hulme (Kate Winslet) set in Christchurch,
New Zeland from 1952 to 1954.  These two teenagers (Pauline was 15 in
1954; Juliet was 17) formed an intense and, some argued, unhealthy
friendship.  They were inseparable, and when a case of tuberculosis
forced Juliet into quarantine, they wrote voluminous letters to each
other, both as themselves and as fantasy characters they created.
Eventually, their parents became concerned about the nature of this
friendship (homosexuality being regarded as a very negative "condition"
during the '50s), and attempted to prevent Pauline and Juliet from
seeing each other.  The tragic ramifications of this action, as
described in the real Pauline's journal, are related in Peter Jackson's
original motion picture.
     When released earlier this year in New Zeland, HEAVENLY CREATURES
created a stir, re-awakening interest in the long-buried story.
Journalists, hungry to capitalize on the Rieper/Hulme case, went in
search for either of the two women.  While Pauline was never located,
Juliet was discovered to be prospering in Scotland as a bestselling
murder mystery author using the pen name of Anne Perry.  Considering
the events chronicled in HEAVENLY CREATURES, this makes a bizarre and
ironically appropriate postscript.
     This uniquely powerful film accrues much of its momentum through
character interaction.  Pauline and Juliet are so well-scripted and
solidly portrayed that the viewer cannot help but be captivated by
their relationship.  While it is intentionally left ambiguous whether
either of these girls is a lesbian (one sexual encounter does not
define a lifestyle), no such uncertainty accompanies the exploration of
how hopelessly tangled their lives and emotional well-being have
become.
     Fantasy plays a crucial role in HEAVENLY CREATURES.  It's up to
the individual viewer to decide how psychotic Pauline and Juliet are
(they share visions of the "4th World", a "heaven without Christians"
inhabited by clay people, where the tunes Mario Lanza perpetually fill
the air).  Certainly, these two are more at home living in a world
apart from our own, where romance and happiness reign.
     Thirty-three-year old Peter Jackson, whose films include BAD TASTE
and BRAINDEAD, has brought an unusually comic and colorful perspective
to what one might naturally assume to be a painful tale.  With the
influence of MONTY PYTHON'S FLYING CIRCUS very much in evidence,
Jackson moulds the fantasy world into a place of richly-constructed
images where the boundless creativity of his characters can find its
release.  The levity of this place also represents a stark contrast to
the shocking sequence that both opens and closes the film.
     Melanie Lynskey (appearing in her first film) and Kate Winslet
(also a relatively new face) are convincing as the two friends, and the
chemistry between them carries HEAVENLY CREATURES during some of its
slower moments.  The supporting cast, which includes Diana Kent as
Pauline's mother, Sarah Peirse as Juliet's mother, and Clive Merrison
and Simon O'Connor, is excellent.
     It's said that every person's closet contains at least one
skeleton, and this is certainly true in the case of Anne Perry.  As a
dysfunctional family tale, the disturbing HEAVENLY CREATURES offers no
facile answers as to what might have been done differently to prevent
circumstances from degenerating as they did.  Revealed in unforgettable
fashion by a capable director, the events that unfold in this film are
not easily forgotten.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     HEAVENLY CREATURES is a true story based on a murder in 1954 New
Zealand by two fifteen-year-old girls.  The movie starts with the
murder and then switches in a flashback to the year before and brings
you up to the time of the murder plus tells what happens afterward in a
textual epilogue.  The script uses the actual diary of one of the girls
to narrate the show.
     The movie stars Melanie Lynskey as the pudgy brunette who lives in
a working-class household.  Kate Winslet plays the attractive blond who
lives in a manor house and whose parents are upper-class intellectuals.
The two, quite dissimilar, girls become instant buddies when they meet.
Later, they develop romantic attachments with each other.  They spend
most of their time together in a fantasy land of knights and ladies,
and they commit all of their story to a novel they write together.
They also live the novel.  They share a hatred of their parents, and
they make a mockery of their school.
     What is right with this movie is the true story and the excellent
performances by both of the lead actresses.  Lynskey reminded me a lot
of the actress from ANGEL AT MY TABLE which was also set in New
Zealand.  Watch the scorn on Lynskey's dark eyes when she gets angry at
her parents or at her teachers.  The romance between the two girls is
quite convincing and well done.
     Sad to say that the writer and director, Peter Jackson, could not
decide what kind of movie he wanted to make so he made three.  The
first is the murder story and the hatred and alienation of the two lead
characters with the adult world.  This works very well.  It could have
easily been a *** 1/2 movie if he had stuck to that.  I guess he
decided that would not sell enough tickets.
     The movie tries to be a comedy as well - a sort of true story
HAROLD AND MAUDE.  This works for some people.  The woman in front of
me spend almost the entire movie in one belly laugh after another.
Just having Lynskey smile or frown would set her off.  I found it funny
a few times, but as a comedy it was a * show.
     The saddest part was that they spent a lot of money on special
effects and made a significant part of the movie in a sword and sorcery
show ala WILLOW or EXCALIBUR.  This was an abysmal failure for which I
would have given it no stars at all.
     So they had some great material and they blew it!  I give HEAVENLY
CREATURES ** and do not recommend it.  It runs too long at 1:38.  It is
correctly rated R, but I think older teens could see it if for some
reason they so desired.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: November 25, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

HEAVENLY CREATURES (director/writer: Peter Jackson; Frances Walsh;
cinematographer: Alun Bollinger; editor: Jamie Selkirk; cast: Melanie
Lynskey (Pauline Parker), Kate Winslet (Juliet Hulme), Sarah Peirse
(Honora Parker), Diana Kent (Hilda Hulme ), Clive Merrison (Henry
Hulme), Simon O'Connor (Herbert Rieper), Jed Brophy (John/Nicholas),
Kirsty Ferry (Wendy Rieper), Gilbert Goldie (Doctor Bennett), Peter
Elliott (Bill Perry), 1994-New Zealand)
A real-life chilling tale of matricide is put forth in a complex
build-up of an obsessive and passionate relationship between two very
imaginative adolescent girls, set in Christchurch, New Zealand, between
1953 and 1954. The 33-year-old director, New Zealander Peter Jackson
(Braindead/Dead Alive), previously known for making gore films, has come
up with a stunning melodramatic story, spoiled only by the director's
excessive camera shots of the girls' fantasy world, which was more arty
than enlightening.
The film opens with two girls running and screaming, while covered in
blood, seeking help for the mother of one of them. It then retraces the
events that led up to that incident, as the story pulls back to the
schoolroom in Christchurch and we see one of the girls who was covered
in blood, Pauline Parker (Melanie Lynskey), as she sits in class. Soon,
the headmistress enters and introduces a new classmate, Juliet Hulme
(Kate Winslet), who was the other girl. In the French class, Juliet
boldly corrects the teacher's grammatical mistake, to the dismay of the
teacher. In the Art class, she is paired off with Pauline, and so begins
the intensive friendship for these opposites. Pauline is shy but bright,
heavy-set and plain looking, from a working-class and uneducated family,
with a scarred leg from a few operations due to weak bone structure;
while, Juliet is pretty and slender, worldly, aggressively sure of
herself, from an upper-class, well-educated family, but is suffering
from tuberculosis. Both girls have a vivid imagination and share a love
for the great tenor Mario Lanza, don't mingle with the other school
girls and find security being together.
They grow to depend on each other, each hurt by things that happen in
their dysfunctional families that affect them the wrong way. Juliet's
parents have abandoned her at times, using the excuse, "It is for the
good of your health." While Pauline is embarrassed by the lack of
culture in her house and that her mother (Sarah Peirse) is always
nagging her.
Pauline starts a diary and begins the New Year of 1953 by saying she
will try to be kinder to others. In 1954, after a great many changes
take place in her life, she writes in the diary: Eat, drink and be
merry, for tomorrow you might be dead. It is this diary that the police
find, with all her inner thoughts in it, that helps convict the girls of
their crime.
The girls spend a lot of time together, living in their fantasy world,
which is a royal dynasty they created and composed of plastic figurines.
They base their lives on the characters they have created, imagining all
sorts of conspiracies and upheavals. It is their escape from the
dullness of their conservative environment, as they convince themselves
of their need to be writers, which they think only they can understand
why they so desperately want to be at this young age. They envision
bliss in the "4th World," a "heaven without Christians," where Mario
Lanza's songs can always be heard.
Pauline's parents don't know what to make of their daughter's behavior.
One incident disturbs them greatly, when her father, Herbert Rieper
(Simon), catches her in bed with their boarder (Jed). Other than that,
they are mainly concerned that she do well in school. But Henry Hulme
(Clive Merrison), Juliet's father, visits Pauline's parents and tells
them he is disturbed that the girls have developed an unhealthy
realationship, hinting at lesbionism. The girls do have one such episode
plus there is a scene of them innocently kissing each other, but it is
left unclear as to what their natural sexual inclination in a
relationship is. Dr. Hulme recommends a child psychiatrist for Pauline,
but Juliet's mother (Diana Kent) has a more liberal attitude toward her
daughter, and it soon becomes apparent why. She is having an affair with
a Mr. Perry (Elliott), which will cause a divorce, and lead to Juliet's
downfall.
When Juliet is isolated in the hospital for her tuberculosis for several
months, the girls become consumate letter writers and seal a bond that
they will be together forever. They come up with the idea that they
write addressing themselves as their fictitious characters, which
increases their mutual dependence.
Juliet's parents insist that she live in South Africa after the divorce,
with a relative.
Not being able to accept this separation, the girls come up with a most
irrational plan, as they blame Pauline's mother for their problems (I
guess because of her visit to the shrink and the hatred Pauline has for
her). They decide to kill her by hitting her over the head with a sock
that has a rock in it and making it appear like it was an accident from
a fall.
By tossing fantasy and reality together in such a haphazard manner, it
creates a world of disturbing visions, one in which the film holds the
viewer's interest throughout. It feels like we can't quite grasp what is
on the girls' minds, even if we are privileged to hear Pauline's
troubling voiceover, explaining her diary notations, even if we are
caught by the exilaratingly romantic moods of the girls and their
imaginative games they play. In one early scene, they romp in the woods
dressed only in their underwear. But when the tragedy hits, we can only
ascertain that the girls have lost sense of reality due to their extreme
reactions to the news of their impending separation.
The acting by Winslet and Lynskey is superb. Their secretive bond is
convincingly carried out into a murder. The film is also visually
stunning, but the moral of the story is never made clear and there is
bit too much pretentious fantasy art thrown into the script.
In the epilogue, we are told that the girls received a maximum of five
years in the juvenile detention system, and that when they were
released, a condition of their parole was that they would never see each
other again. Because of the renewed interest in the girls when the movie
came out, reporters discovered that Juliet was living in Scotland and
prospering by writing mystery novels set in Victorian days, under the
pseudonym Anne Perry. The reporters could not locate the whereabouts of
Pauline, though they know she is living somewhere in New Zealand.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ben Hoffman
     One of the things that makes HEAVENLY CREATURES a standout film is
that all concerned with the making of the film were aiming for
authenticity.  The movie not only tells the story of a horrifying
occurrence in Christchurch, New Zealand, some 40+ years ago but it
brings you right into the story as you watch, fascinated, what now
appears to be an inexorable series of events that lead to its climax.
     Long searches for the exact actors to portray the characters,
research into photos and newspaper articles on the atrocity, selection
whenever possible, of the actual homes and gardens and schools , add to
the richness of the finished product.
     Back in 1952, in the city of Christchurch, New Zealand, Pauline
Parker (Melanie Lynskey) goes to school where as a bright but plain
youngster she leads an uneventful life.  Things change for her when
pretty, brash,  Juliet Hulme (Kate Winslet), just arrived from England,
enters the same ninth grade class Pauline attends.  Opposite in many
ways, there is nevertheless an attraction.  When they discover that
they both like to write, that they both have great imagination, the
friendship deepens to the exclusion of all the other students.
     Because of a series of incidents, the parents of both girls become
aware that the friendship has become more like an obsession.  As
Juliet's parents, the Hulmes,  (Diana Kent and Clive Merrison) are
about to get a divorce and Mr. Hulme is returning to England, they
decide the best way to break up the relationship between the two girls
is to have him take his daughter, Juliet, to live with relatives in
South Africa.  Juliet insists that Pauline absolutely must go with
them but Pauline's family uses the excuse of not allowing their
15-year-old daughter to leave the country. Those are some of the
occurrences that lead to the tragedy, much of it documented in a diary
Pauline had been keeping.
     Scary, intriguing, well acted; what else could one ask?
     Peter Jackson directed and co-wrote the screenplay with Frances
Walsh.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Peter Jackson
Writers: Peter Jackson and Frances Walsh
Starring: Melanie Lynskey, Kate Winslet, Sarah Pierse, Diana Kent, Clive
Merrison, Simon O'Connor, Elizabeth Moody
If you've ever seen Jackson's "Dead Alive" or "The Frighteners," you
know that his big forte is the comic horror film.  So why is he doing a
thoughtful study on two girls' obsession with one another?  Why is he
doing a film where the two protagonists try to kill the one's mother? 
And why is there only blood at the beginning and end?  You'd think
Jackson would defintely be the wrong choice for the director of this
film...until you see it.
"Dead Alive" put him on the map because his gorefest was flawless, and
the best ever filmed.  "Heavenly Creatures" put him on the map because
it's an amazing character study, filled with great style, and some
amazing black comedy.  Almost universally acclaimed as one of the best
films of 1994, Jackson showed he can make critically-acclaimed art out
of film, and not just good arty gore.  And it's true that "Heavenly
Creatures" is probably one of the best films of the 90s.
The "Heavenly Creatures" of the title are Pauline Parker (Melanie
Lynskey) and Juliet Hulme (Kate Winslet, in her first film role), two
teenage girls living in New Zealand who meet in their all-girl prep
school, and quickly become good friends.  But soon they discover they
have a lot in common, and are soon becoming totally obsessed with one
another.  They begin hanging out together during all their spare time,
listening to opera singer Mario Lanza, frolicking in their undies, and
soon writing medieval fantasy stories of a place they wished they could
share together.  They are, what they call themselves, the Heavenly
Creatures, isolated from everyone else.  And, of course, better.
But while their relationship is one of the closest I've ever seen (going
far beyond simple lesbianism), they have some obstacles.  For one, their
parents think they're far too close, and need to be seperated a bit,
especially Pauline's mom, Honora (Sarah Pierse), who soon finds that her
relationship with her daughter is faltering terribly, especially when
they catch her in bed with the live-in worker, Herbert (Simon
O'Connor).  The parents soon want them to be totally seperated, but
they're so close that it's almost impossible to tear them apart.
To answer a particular query, yes, there's a lesbian scene later in the
film.  It's not gratuitous at all (there's no real nudity), and it's not
just like the required lesbo scene: it's a wonderfully directed scene
where we see they share far more than it would seem at first.  I mean,
these girls are so close that when Pauline is having sex with Herb,
she's thinking of Juliet, and how she has "betrayed" her.
By the end, there's a murder plot to keep them together, even though it
would undoubtedly tear them apart when the facts were uncovered.  But to
those of you who would bitch about the stupidity of this, it's all done
in the spirit of psychology...and in the spirit of the fact that this is
a true story.  Pauline Parker was writing popular mystery novels under a
pseudonym, when she came out to say that she was the Pauline in the
famous case of these two, prompting the development of the film.  Just
an interesting back story.
And what a film it is.  Peter Jackson may tone down the gore to a bare
minimum (remember, there's a murder to be comitted here), but his style
is as outrageous as it always is.  He presents a surrealistic world for
these two to live in, complete with a bit of morphing and animation for
the world that they create and shelter themselves in when things are
bad.  He presents everything from the two girls' view, even little
fantasies (there's a great scene where a priest is talking to Juliet
about joing the church, when one of the knights from their fantasy world
comes out and hacks him up).  Not to mention the sets and colors, which
always create the perfect mood for each scene.  His direction has never
been better.
And the acting is awesome.  Melanie Lynskey, native New Zealander, is
great as the depressed, mopey Pauline, creating depth in her character. 
And Kate Winslet is jaw-drop amazing in her performance that even bowed
Emma Thompson over (and got her her role in "Sense and Sensibility"). 
Kate is one of the most talented actresses working now (as well as one
of the most attractive), and her performance is full of energy, life,
and depth.  These two share amazing chemitry, making it believable that
they should never be torn apart.  Also good is Sarah Pierse as Pauline's
strict mother, creating in her a bit of sympathy.
"Heavenly Creatures" is definitely one of the most engrossing and best
films of the 90s, and the film that will put Jackson in the history
books.  If you still haven't seen it, I highly reccomend you get your
arse out there and find it.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One of the few remaining "sacred cows" of film is imagination.
Nearly all films about imagination profess reverence.  Currently we
have the remake of MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET telling us how wonderful
childhood imagination is and the original film version made the point
even more strongly.  It is extremely remarkable when we get a film
seriously portraying a downside to imagination.  Films on this theme
include THE CURSE OF THE CAT PEOPLE and EQUUS, but not much else that
comes to mind.  Now an intelligent film has been made on this theme.
Even more surprising is the source, director Peter Jackson who
previously created BAD TASTE, BRAIN DEAD, and DEAD ALIVE.  What is
surprising is not just the theme but that the intelligence from one of
very few filmmakers who up to this film I would have accused of making
films that work only on sheer shock value.
     HEAVENLY CREATURES is a dramatization of a famous New Zealand
tabloid murder from the 1950s.  Life is not easy for Pauline Rieper
(played by Melanie Lynsky), an awkward and insecure schoolgirl from a
working-class family in Christchurch.  She is equally unhappy at home
and school and looks for some magical escape route.  Enter a transfer
student, Juliet Hulme (Kate Winslet), a bright, artistic, and magnetic
English schoolgirl from a cultured academic family.  Juliet immediately
wins Pauline's admiration for being willing to stand up to the
teachers, even correcting the French teacher's grammar.  Friendship
with Juliet awakens Pauline's imagination and intellect.  The two
outward opposites become ever-closer friends, dependent on each other
and even sexually attracted.  Together they concoct an escape fantasy
world of imagination--a middle-European realm they call Borovnia, ruled
by characters they name Charles, Deborah, and their serial killer son
Dielo.  Clay figures Juliet creates of these characters come to life in
their imagination and in startling special effects scenes.
     Jackson's screenplay, which he co-authored with Francis Walsh,
captures the rapid shifts from exhilaration to depression and back.
The two romantically fixate on Mario Lanza as the great tenor and the
king of their fantasy world.  One chance comment from one about Orson
Welles, and he is the paragon of all the world's evils--the prototype
of the mad, knife-wielding Dielo.  And with this same melodrama, they
react when their alarmed parents attempts to separate the two girls.
     The story has much more going on than initially meets the eye.
There are subtle signs of class conflict between the two families.
There is an intellectual elitism in the two girls, very much like the
elitism Maggie Smith's character exploits in THE PRIME OF MISS JEAN
BRODIE.  And, of course, there are the homophobic attitudes of the two
families anxious to separate the two girls who they see as having been
drawn too far into their relationship--with some justification.
     This is a film with more visual creativity than many fantasy
films.  In the imagination of the girls, and on the screen, fields
transform into gardens with giant butterflies and unicorns.  We travel
inside Borovnia--with its golem-like characters based on Juliet's clay
figures.  Jackson keeps his camera constantly moving as if even the
viewer is a hyperkinetic teenager.  Peter Jackson has gone from an
unpromising beginning of making nearly unwatchable films to in one leap
become a talent who deserves watching.  I rate this film +2 on the -4
to +4 scale.  It would be interesting to get the reactions of the film
from the two women who were the subjects.  Pauline Rieper (later
Parker) still lives in New Zealand.  Juliet Hulme is living in Britain
and is now a popular novelist under her current name, Anne Perry.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Melanie Lynskey, Kate Winslet, Sarah Peirse, Clive
Merrison, Diana Kent.
Screenplay:  George Welsh and Peter Jackson.
Director:  Peter Jackson.
     Earlier this year, I commented on thematically similar films where
the later release suffered in comparison to the first.  WYATT EARP
languished in the wake of the less reverent but far more entertaining
TOMBSTONE; BLOWN AWAY was blown away by the gleefully brainless SPEED.
Last month, I had the chance to screen an independent film called FUN,
which involved two troubled teenagers who form an intense friendship
which leads to murder.  It was not a great film, but good enough that I
wondered if my evaluation of HEAVENLY CREATURES might be influenced.
But where FUN was occasionally stagy and ponderous, HEAVENLY CREATURES
is dazzling, a perversely original psychodrama.
     HEAVENLY CREATURES opens in 1952 in Christchurch, New Zealand,
where 14-year-old Pauline (Melanie Lynskey) is a student at an all-girl
parochial school.  Sullen and withdrawn, Pauline finds a surprising
soul-mate in Juliet Hulme (Kate Winslet), a vibrant and imaginative
English girl newly arrived with her academic father (Clive Merrison)
and socialite mother (Diana Kent).  The two become inseparable friends,
creating tales together of a fantastic "fourth world" called Borovnia.
Gradually, however, Juliet's father and Pauline's mother (Sarah Peirse)
begin to believe that the two girls have formed an "unwholesome
attachment."  As the families begin efforts to keep the girls apart,
they retreat even deeper into their fantasy world, and hatch a plan to
be together forever, a plan which involves killing Pauline's mother.
     The strongest elements in FUN were the performances of the two
young lead actresses, and ironically the same elements provide the only
minor weak link in HEAVENLY CREATURES.  Melanie Lynskey is the better
of the two, playing the more complicated character, but it seems she
settles into expressing every emotion by glowering beneath her nest of
unruly dark curls; Kate Winslet is occasionally a bit much, arching her
eyebrows and punching her oh-so-proper upper crust diction.  However,
their scenes together are quite effective, and they show a natural
rapport.  Lynskey in particular comes alive beautifully, and the
intensity of their relationship never seems implausible.
     It is also illustrated with astonishing creativity by Peter
Jackson, best known for the marvelously demented DEAD ALIVE.  HEAVENLY
CREATURES begins with a sequence in which the girls, covered with
blood, run screaming through the underbrush, intercut with dream-like
black and white footage of the girls on a cruise ship.  From the first
frames, Jackson slams us into a world of chaos and delusion, and even
through light-hearted scenes there is a sense of foreboding as we await
the inevitable conclusion.  This is the real triumph of HEAVENLY
CREATURES:  although it is alternately a drama, a fantasy and a
mystery, it is an absolutely coherent whole.  Because we know where
this relationship will lead, there is an undercurrent of menace in
dark-humored sequences where Pauline visualizes revenge fantasies.  It
also presents the disturbing premise that given the right (or wrong)
circumstances, the fantasy world every adolescent creates could explode
into the real world.
     Those circumstances involve a delicate issue, one also raised by
FUN.  Since there is a sexual element to the relationship between
Pauline and Juliet, it would be possible to misinterpret the film as
suggesting that their crime, Leopold and Loeb-like, was just another
manifestation of their "deviance."  But Jackson is up to something more
subtle than that.  A key scene involving Pauline's encounter with a
psychologist, and the doctor's subsequent ominous pronouncement of the
word "homosexuality" to her mother, points out that while nothing the
girls were doing was truly harmful, it was treated as such.  In a case
of power of suggestion, the girls begin to believe that they are
mentally ill because that is the way their behavior is defined by
society.  Through both his audacious direction and an insightful
script, Peter Jackson has crafted a powerful character study that is
unlike anything you'll see this year.

Author
Bryant Frazer
     Two teenage girls sit outside their school building, comparing
childhood memories.  The one, Juliet, admits gleefully, "I have scars
on my lungs!"  Turns out she spent all too much of those early years in
a sick bed, fighting off infection.  The other, Pauline, lifts her
skirt and drops her stocking to display a scar that runs the length of
her lower leg.  Doctors spent an eternity trying to excise something
unclean from that young leg.  As Pauline goes all weepy recalling the
specifics, Juliet comforts her: "All the best people have bad chests
and bone diseases.  It's frightfully romantic."
     Of course, they're friends in a Peter Jackson movie, so you may
suspect there's something sinister going on. "In the 1950s, Pauline
Parker and Juliet Hulme were branded as possibly the most evil people
on earth," Jackson says in the press materials for HEAVENLY CREATURES,
which is based on the real-life diaries of Parker and the independent
research of Jackson and co-writer Frances Walsh. "What they had done
seemed without rational explanation."
     Let's say the new film is a "departure" from the director's
earlier work, which included the lowbrow comedy BAD TASTE, the wildly
scatological Muppet massacre called MEET THE FEEBLES, and the exuberant
zombie masterpiece BRAINDEAD (known in the U.S. as DEAD ALIVE).  Even
so, you *know* you're watching a Peter Jackson movie.  The delicately
grotesque caricatures, the skewed puritanism of 1954 New Zealand, and
the stifling strictures of family life were all in evidence in
BRAINDEAD, though one could hardly have imagined that Jackson could
make his visions palatable for a general art house crowd.  But that's
what he's done here--and it's absolutely brilliant, one of the finest
films of 1994.
     HEAVENLY CREATURES is really the story of Pauline (Melanie
Lynskey), a quiet schoolgirl of 14 who lacks friends but possesses a
sharp and wild imagination.  She quickly falls into friendship with a
new student, the brash and fanciful Juliet (Kate Winslet).  The two of
them easily forge a relationship where they depend on each other for
the magic that is clearly missing from their lives.  Pauline watches
happily as Juliet corrects her teacher's French grammar, and kisses a
stranger outside a movie theater.  They share an affinity for "the
world's greatest tenor," Mario Lanza.  They share a certain horror at
the sight of Orson Welles.  They spin endless tales tracing the lineage
of an imaginary royal family, and sculpt clay figures to represent the
nobles of their fantasies.  In one scene, the two of them dance around
the New Zealand countryside in their underwear, finally collapsing on
the ground, exhausted from their own enthusiasms.
     The relationship only becomes stronger from there, as the two
discover a passage into what Juliet calls "the fourth world," a
Gilliamesque fantasia of immaculate landscapes where their clay
characters come to life and dance, copulate, and mete out justice to
some of the authority figures populating Pauline and Juliet's world.
(Pauline's diary entry explains to us that the two can perceive the
fourth world only by using an obscure portion of their brains that
"about 10 people" possess.) As the two bond through their fantasies,
their relationship becomes more and more intense (to the exclusion of
the rest of the world) and erotic (to the chagrin and embarrassment of
Pauline's parents).  The tension rises as their friendship is
threatened, and Pauline begins to go out of her mind with grief at the
thought of losing her best and only friend.
     The performances, which border on the farcical, go a long way
toward the success of this story.  Jackson has always had a talent for
coaxing actors to play to the cheap seats while still keeping their
essential humanity about them, which is the key to making sure
audiences care about the human beings as horrible things happen.
Although certain scenes in this film cross the line into the grotesque,
they are made more powerful by the restraint and quiet beauty in
evidence.  HEAVENLY CREATURES is antithetical in many ways to the
theory which drove Jackson's earlier films--break the taboos,
everything in excess, too much is not enough.  Jackson achieved
catharsis by refusing to observe any boundaries in his seemingly
out-of-control films.  But BRAINDEAD, written by Jackson, Walsh, and
Stephen Sinclair, certainly took pains drawing its characters, and the
last half of that very gory film works as a very black metaphor for
young Lionel's difficulties dealing with Mum, Uncle Les, and the rest
of his frightening family.  And even MEET THE FEEBLES devoted a
tremendous amount of expository time to something very much like
character development (on the other hand, it also devoted a lot of time
to showing Muppets being blasted into clouds of blood by machine
guns).
     At this point in his career, you really have to admire Jackson's
relationship with cinema.  Having exhausted the possibilities of the
gross-out, he has turned his energies to something more delicate, and
more affecting.  This kind of film is a highwire act--if it's not
constructed perfectly, the results are disastrous.  The story needs a
wholly remarkable and absolutely believable friendship at its core, the
kind you can believe supersedes all other human concerns.  Jackson
delivers, offering up characters who feel the same glee at thumbing
their noses at society that the director must have felt as he made
those early, low-budget affronts to good taste.  At the same time, the
film's structure demands rational and beautiful segues from the real
world into fantasia, a ballet of sensibilities that Jackson pulls off
without a misstep.  He has created a dark and transcendent love story,
a graceful and complicated interweaving of innocence and obsession that
begs our sympathy and compels us to understand the beautiful motives
that can underly the most dreadful of human schemes.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     Two of the most common and popular themes explored in the movies
are the importance of friendship and the power of the imagination.
These subjects are usually explored in movies that are considered to be
the most uplifting.  Peter Jackson's psychological drama HEAVENLY
CREATURES explores these same themes, but finds a dark and disturbing
side to them.  The result is one of the most fascinating and provocative
films of 1994.
     HEAVENLY CREATURES tells the true story of a close friendship that
develops between two 14-year-old girls.  It is a friendship that
eventually turns tragic when the girls almost inexplicably are driven
to commit a horrible crime.  Jackson and his co-screenwriter Frances
Walsh vividly recreate this friendship providing a glimpse into the
complex psychology that eventually leads to tragedy.
     The film opens as a British girl named Juliet Hulme (Kate Winslet)
arrives in New Zealand where her father has just taken a position as a
professor at an area university.  Juliet is enrolled in the same school
attended by Pauline Parker (Melanie Lynskey), an extremely introverted
girl with few friends.  Juliet and Pauline quickly develop a strong
connection that leads to an intensely close friendship.  Each girl
possesses a vivid imagination and they attempt to escape from the
pressures of adolescence by creating an elaborate fantasy world.
     Jackson helps us to get more deeply into the minds of Juliet and
Pauline through a number of methods.  The most traditional is to allow
Lynskey to narrate the film using actual excerpts from Pauline's
diary.  It is very fortunate that these diaries exist as they provide
many insights into the friendship and what it meant to Pauline.  This
narration lends an aire of credibility to the film that would have been
severely lacking without it.  The narration is used sparingly enough
that it never seems like a crutch being used to avoid more natural
character development.
     A more unorthodox method used to help us learn more about these
characters is the *visual* portrayal of the fantasy world created by
the girls.  Juliet and Pauline created clay figurines to represent the
various characters inside their fantasy world and Jackson uses
state-of-the-art special effects to vividly bring these figurines to
life.  Through these fantasy sequences, we begin to see the first signs
of trouble as the girls begin to mentally intertwine romance with
violence.  These sequences are convincing but appropriately subtle,
allowing the special effects to always remain a tool used in service of
the story instead of the other way around.
     The most significant question raised by the film is whether or not
the final tragedy was a result of an unnaturally close friendship or
was largely a result of outside influences.  The film suggests that
tragedy might have been averted had the girls' friendship been
permitted to develop in a natural manner.
     Both of the girls had suffered from illnesses earlier in their
lives which  colored their view of the world before they even met.  In
an early scene, Juliet expresses a romantic view of the illnesses,
providing another indication of the girls mixing romance with the
negative.  We also learn that Juliet had felt abandoned as she was
often sent away from her family "for the good of her health."  During
the time frame shown in the movie, Juliet is bedridden for a while when
she contracts tuberculosis.  During this illness, Pauline and Juliete
are only able to communicate via letters.  It is through these letters
that they create the most vivid details of their fantasy world.
     The girls share a feeling of alienation from adults, particularly
their own parents.  The parents become concerned about the closeness of
the girls' friendship and make some efforts to weaken it.  There are
also several scenes in which parents or teachers are shown attempting
to stifle the strong creativity that is a major part of both Juliet and
Pauline's personalities.  At one point, Pauline's parents suggest that
her interest in writing is inappropriate and there are also several
scenes in which they are scolded by teachers for being creative instead
of precisely following instructions outlined in the lessons.  This
mistrust of adults in their lives is also manifested as they create
their own adult role models by including various celebrities in their
fantasy world.  Their images of such idols as tenor Mario Lanzer and
actors like James Mason and Orson Welles become their heroes.
     The film addresses the parents' concern that Juliet and Pauline's
relationship might be homosexual in nature.  The film is set in the
early 1950s and this idea is so horrifying to the adults that they
could barely even say the word.  The movie does not completely rule out
the possibility that the relationship *was* homosexual, but it doesn't
fully embrace the idea either.  Instead, Jackson and Walsh portray the
girls as sufficiently unsophisticated when it comes to sexuality that
they really would never be able to recognize a sexual component to
their relationship if it existed.
     In the end, the film leaves the viewer with the thought that the
constant meddling into the friendship might have been a major cause of
the tragedy.  Each girl felt that the other was the only person who had
ever given them the support and love that they needed.  As they see
threats to their friendship and are confronted with the danger of
separation, they eventually reach a point where they come up with a
horrifying solution.
     Much of the success of this film is dependent on the performances
by Lynskey and Winslet.  Both are relatively inexperienced actors
making their feature film debuts (both are given "and introducing"
credits on this film.)  They are both perfectly cast and give
tremendously affecting and realistic performances.
     As Juliet, Winslet creates a character that is bright and bubbly
on the outside, but who also clearly has a dark side that sits right
below the surface.  Even when she is being completely polite and
friendly, it can seem like her thoughts are far more sinister.  Only
when she is with Pauline does she seem completely and sincerely happy.
Lynskey externally appears cold and unhappy.  When she feels crossed,
she shows an angry sneer that seems to go all the way down to her
soul.  When she is with Juliet, though, her entire appearance appears
to brighten into an embodiment of happiness.
     Among the most important accomplishments of Lynskey and Winslet's
performances is to fully grab the audience's sympathy.  The film allows
us to truly come to *like* these girls and to desire to see their
friendship survive.  Their final tragic action is all the more
disturbing for this reason.  In some ways, we almost feel like we can
*understand* their motivations.  That makes the ending seem truly
upsetting.
     In addition to Lynsley and Winslet, the other major discovery of
this film is director Peter Jackson.  He manages to find exactly the
right tone and style for this movie.  The best example of Jackson's
expert direction are  breathtaking early scenes showing the development
of Juliet and Pauline's relationship through frantic sequences of play
all wonderfully scored with recordings by their idol Mario Lanza.
Prior to this film, Jackson had some experience as a horror movie
director which probably helped to prepare him for the seamless
incorporation of the fantasy sequences in this film.  Finally, the
widescreen photography by Alun Bollinger is frequently creative but is
never distracting.
     HEAVENLY CREATURES is a fascinating psychological study that leaves
the viewer with a great deal to think about.  It is a film that is not
easily forgotten after you leave the theater.  The film is also
important as an introduction to two major new acting talents and as
proof of the talent of an important director.  It is an incredible
film.
