Title
Review for Kiss of the Spider Woman (1985)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
William Hurt, monotone-voiced star of "The Big Chill", "The
Accidental Tourist", "Children Of A Lesser God", and "Broadcast
News" in the '80s, also played the lead in this picture and won
his only Best Actor Oscar. Starring opposite the now-deceased
Raul Julia, Hurt was required to spend the majority of the shoot
in a small "cell" with his co-star, talking and talking. This is
a story that would have died a slow death if not for its
extensive character development. Fortunately, Hurt's emotional
character is so well-acted that the film has a hypnotic effect in
spite of its restrictive environment.
After the opening credits, the cinematographer gets a chance to
provide the viewer with some eye candy as he completely pans
around the South American prison cell where the characters wile
away their time. Molina is a homosexual thrown in prison for
corrupting a minor. His cellmate, Valentin (Julia), has been
imprisoned for his political activism. Their predicament is not
fun, but Molina (Hurt) tries to make the best of it by talking
endlessly about crappy old movies.
Little happens. This film is a fine example of a character study.
We learn about their lives and sins after the interesting opening
shot. Molina hams it up, fondly remembering those bad movies,
dressing and acting the part of a cliched gay man. However, he's
a sympathetic character from the start and, while he doesn't pull
punches about his homosexuality, he is never obnoxious about it.
Incidentally, Hurt was the first actor to ever win an Oscar for
playing a gay man (Tom Hanks in "Philadelphia" was the only
other).
For the first ten minutes, the two men are introduced to us
through their conversation. Valentin, simply unwilling to listen
to what his cellmate is talking about, is filled with anger and
fear. Their opposite personalities clash until Molina later shows
true compassion for his "partner". A tender scene unfolds when
Valentin is poisoned and becomes badly sick, losing control of
his bowels while still dressed. Director Victor Babenco shows
good taste and restraint here when the flamboyant Molina
undresses him to clean and comfort him. Molina gains both
Valentin's trust and ours when he helps the sick man, but doesn't
try to take advantage of him.
Later, we learn that Molina is working with the warden to get
Valentin to talk about his political contacts. Gaining Valentin's
trust and friendship by sharing food brought by his mother and
taking good care of him while he was sick, Molina begins to
regret his betrayal. He also knew about the attempted poisoning.
Still, he goes through with his treasonous acts in order to get
early parole.
Two difficult scenes called for the men to engage in acts of
passion. At a late juncture in the film, Molina encourages
Valentin to "do what you want with me". We know what happens
off-camera, of course. Handled with tact, this scene was pivotal
to the plot, but it stayed away from exploitation and
offensiveness. The other scene required a kiss between the two
stars. Also done with tenderness and class, this is the last
contact the two friends have in the film. Molina contacts
Valentin's girlfriend when he is released as the warden's
henchman follow in hot pursuit. He is tragically shot to death by
the suspicious girlfriend. The final scene features Valentin,
beaten and tortured in prison, dreaming about being reunited with
his girlfriend.
So, where does the Spider Woman fit in? Well, Sonia Braga plays
three roles: Valetin's girlfriend, the star of Molina's "movies",
and as the Spider Woman. Molina tells a story about a shipwrecked
man comforted and loved by the fictious Spider Woman. This
imagery is strong and well-filmed. Molina dies while in love with
his former cellmate, Valentin is in love with his girlfriend, and
the girlfriend--who is still in love but has given up on her man.
A sensitive movie, Hurt toes the line of over-the-top
flamboyance, yet forces the viewer to forget that he is only
acting. This was Hurt's finest performance (ditto for Julia) and
Hurt was recognized for it when he won the Academy Award. What
really touched me about this film was the similarity between it
and a script I once wrote while in college. My script was also
about two jailed men with mysterious backgrounds and the primary
focus was on good dialogue. Babenco's product was award-worty
and, while mine wasn't, I related to what he was trying to do.
This is one of more underrated prison films ever made. In a muted
manner, it's comparable to one of my favourites, "The Shawshank
Redemption". Not much happens for most of the two hours, but it's
absolutely mesmerizing at times. Calling it slow would be unfair,
but it IS true that "Kiss Of The Spider Woman" probably won't be
appreciated by the average '90s movie fan. It is simple and
intelligent and should be viewed with an open mind, so that the
characters played by Hurt and Julia can be allowed to haunt the
viewer as much as they haunt themselves and each other.
USELESS TRIVIA--William Hurt must be fun to work with. He's
played opposite two Oscar-winning actresses, Marlee Matlin
("Children Of A Lesser God") and Geena Davis ("The Accidental
Tourist"). Holly Hunter, his co-star in "Broadcast News", went on
to win the Best Actress prize for "The Piano" in 1993.
THE RYAN RATING SYSTEM SAYS...
10/10--absolutely outstanding
 9/10--excellent
 8/10--pretty darn good
 7/10--sure, go on and give it a peek
 6/10--so-so; ye ol' recommendation point
 5/10--not quite worth the dollars
 4/10--only if you have a free pass
 3/10--don't go, PLEASE don't go
 2/10--avoid even if you DO have a free pass
 1/10--"Showgirls" territory; truly crappy
 0/10--bang your head off a wall instead
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Author
Ralph Benner
                 Reading Manuel Puig's KISS OF THE SPIDER WOMAN, I kept
having this nagging doubt: Is Molina, the self-described homosexual window
dresser imprisoned in Buenos Aires for corrupting minors, a real
homosexual or a candidate for a transsexual operation? The question
actually comes so easily as to wonder why all the people who love the
novel and the movie -- with William Hurt as heroine Molina -- aren't
asking it themselves. Puig's book is, of course, stacked against Molina in
such an obvious way -- eight lengthy footnotes are included, explaining
away homosexuality by the likes of Freud, Anna Freud, Lang, D.J. West,
Marcuse -- that how could it be possible to interpret Molina as anything
else? That's what's fraudulent about the book: It provides these archaic
references -- almost as a collective apologia -- about a character that
simply isn't there. Closer to the disguised truth, the novel is
unwittingly ahead of its time while the novelist is not. The tip-off that
we're dealing with someone more than just an old queen comes less than
twenty pages into the book: Molina says, "Since a woman's the best there
is...I want to be one." If a post-adolescent said this to entice and
shock, we'd accept it as part of the process of being an emerging gay --
acting out the vernacular one hopes he'll soon discard. But Molina is no
chicken; he's middle-aged and adamant. Making a clear separation between
himself and faggots, he says, "As for my friends and myself, we're a
hundred percent female. We don't go in for those little games because
that's strictly for homos. We're normal women; we sleep with men." As
shaky as transsexuality may be on physical and psychological grounds, one
of the essential criteria for candidacy as a transsexual is just what
Molina feels: he doesn't consider himself a man, and much less a
homosexual. It's a sad craziness that he calls himself a faggot and
engages in homosexual behavior, but doesn't feel homosexual; in fact, he
hates homosexuals. And never once does Molina betray his inner-most
feelings; you sense that the character is more faithful to himself than
the guilt-soaked author is. Puig allows Molina his fantasy: being pumped
by a "real man" named Valentin (in the movie Raul Julia), a revolutionary
who battles the oppressive Argentine military rule (it's roughly 1976) and
who is jailed in the same cell. Puig extends the fantasy to the ultimate:
He explicitly has Molina state that, after having had his desires
fulfilled, he's ready to die -- and happily! This makes for fermented 40s
melodrama and by no means an accident, but as mechanism and message, it's
nonsense. First of all, as plot device, Puig has already put Molina in
prison for having sex with a minor before the story starts. Except to tell
Valentin why he's been jailed, Molina never speaks about it, we never get
to "see" the minor so that we can judge for ourselves what is meant by
minor, and, most telling, just what would a "one hundred percent female"
be doing with a boy anyway? Secondly, given that Puig is unmistakably
writing more a sexualized polemic than movie-inspired escapism -- had it
been escapist reading, or strictly a compassionate plea for tolerance of
differences, it would likely not have been banned in Argentina -- the
novel's unwitting harbinger to the political Homocaust, and the movie
explicit exemplification. That spider weaving its fateful web for Molina
is the trap of hopelessness -- and who the hell could ever die happily
with that kind of resolution? 
        The late Puig, who answered the perpetual question "Are you gay?"
with "I'm a person," shows a detached sympathy for Molina that isn't
dishonest, exactly, but it suggests the psychologically wormy: Puig, like
many Latin homosexuals, might have been trying to kill what's inside him,
while at the same time revelling in and giving one's self over to gay
melodrama, flaunting contradiction as self-preservation. What's dishonest
is that he sets Molina up to be what's not really in his own head -- a
silly old queen -- and then strips him of his affectations at the end,
turning a 40s heroine into a modern hero, a startling role reversal that
may have worked had he been a flaming sissy who wanted to be a manly gay.
(Which seemed to be the rage during the Jeep & Jeans 80s.) But how can
this be when Molina wants desperately to be a woman? One f... and he's a
butch martyr? The novel isn't persuasively analytical to the degree and
intent Puig rather desperately aims for, unless the reader accepts all the
footnoted psychobabble. And if a reader does, how can he reconcile it to
the character? Though there's a ton of detail designer chat from Molina,
it's all in reference to the lullabies he dreams up to pass the time while
in jail; the info, voluminous and amusing, basically tells us nothing.
KISS OF THE SPIDER WOMAN really isn't a novel at all -- it's a
full-of-holes screenplay in search of actors who have to fill in what's
missing. 
        Feeling trapped as something you're not and living in a place
where much of what makes life worth living is not freely available is a
fairly accurate way to describe the vibes of Buenos Aires. The city is
said to be the most European-looking in all of Latin America, and I think
a travel agent friend hit it on the head when he cracked, "It's Vienna on
a bad day." You're seized immediately not just by the derivative music,
architecture and transportation or lifestyle, mannerism and dress but also
by the heavy moldiness: the dark wood paneling, oversized furniture, dank
draperies and yellowed lace dollies are so omnipresent and oppressive that
you want to hit an exit almost as soon as you enter interiors of
restaurants, hotels, government buildings, stores. (And that there could
ever be a miniature Harrod's says much about the yearning of Argentines to
be something other than what they are.) Even Buenos Aires's manicured
boulevards seem to cut off your oxygen supply, and this may explain why
the cemeteries -- and especially the one in which Eva Peron is said to be
buried in -- are the city's most interesting tourist sights. (You don't
feel fresh-air constricted in Vienna.) Though everything and everyone
looks securely built, you somehow don't trust, you hesitate because you
sense the atmosphere of all pervasive insecurity -- psycho Gothic, like
the tombs. These faked Europeans myopically rush -- and I mean rush, even
faster than New Yorkers -- to wherever it is they go. This rush doesn't
only typify impersonal big city living, it also a permeation of the
dreaded historical Latin American inevitability: that, sooner or later,
the military takes over. If the tango is the national symbol of sexual
dramaturgy, it can also represent the deeply-rooted cult of fascism:
Peron, his Eva are felt in such strong, intangible ways that the tragedy
of Argentina having no recorded moral history is strengthened. While
leathers, sweaters and beef are Argentina's most prized exports, the
arched, slick dance of priggish ritual is the metaphor for a nation
unwilling to import honesty. In conversations with city dwellers, no one
wants to remember the "killing fields" past; their dour, swarthy faces
retrograde into paranoia at any discussion of the tactics of past regimes.
This is what makes APARTMENT ZERO, a perfect companion piece to KISS OF
THE SPIDER WOMAN, particularly unsettling because it gets closer to
verity: when the central character struggles to do the right thing but
instead succumbs to murder and porno, he becomes the symbol of a willfully
sick nationalism.
        A few too many nincompoop critics and moviegoers missed completely
the meaning behind the elaborate fictitious movie Molina describes to
Valentin. This special lullaby is entitled "Her Real Glory," ostensibly
Nazi propaganda about the Germans occupying France and how one dimwit,
rich-hating French chanteuse falls in love with a Nazi officer after he
shows her movies about how world hunger and depression have been caused by
the Jews. (Reminiscent of Hitchcock's WWII propaganda shorts, recently
released on home video.) Can it really be possible for people not to see
that Puig's mocking Eva Peron and her fascist husband Juan? Eva was a
third rate actress when she married Peron, an army colonel, in 1945. Eva
became the living icon for the poor of Argentina -- she had a passionate
hatred for the rich (though that didn't stop her from living lavishly) --
and not too unlike Leni in "Her Real Glory," died the death of a heroine.
(Eva expired from cancer in 1952.) Not even our best movie critic caught
Puig's clever subversion -- but Argentina did and banned the book. It
didn't help Puig any that a previous book of his, about Peron, THE BUENOS
AIRES AFFAIR, was laughably censored: any overt reference to Peron was
left blank. Puig is condemning what is a grievous lack of critical
Argentine biography, of truthful historical introspection. Whatever
happens to Molina and Valentin, representing as lullaby the vast numbers
of oppressed and forgotten, nothing will come of it, no record will be
made of it. When Molina's body is dumped in garbage, who will know of it?
Probably not even his mother.
        Because of the raging politics of the Homocaust at the time, every
major American movie company passed on filming the novel, despite the fact
-- or maybe because -- director Hector Babenco, who did the 1981 stunning
Brazilian muckraker PIXOTE, wanted Burt Lancaster as Valentin and Richard
Gere as Molina. Refusing to give up, Babenco asked Raul Julia, who agreed
and suggested what otherwise would seem like an impossibility: William
Hurt as Molina. Begging for every dollar, deferring salaries against
future profits, they headed to Sao Paulo to film, only to be met by more
resistance. Members of the Brazilian film industry kicked up quite a fuss
because Babenco was neither filming in Portuguese nor using Brazilian
actors for the two leads. Then there was the political consideration which
foolishly demanded that the prison in KISS originally set in Buenos Aires,
be changed to a nameless South American city in order to reduce potential
alienation of the now-civilian government of Argentina, as well as to
avoid endangering potential grosses from the massive Argentine movie-going
public. As if these handicaps weren't enough, Babenco had never made a
movie in English. But he knows the terrain of crud: as with PIXOTE with
its barf-inducing horrors of juvenile dormitories and toilets, he brings
to KISS the decaying textures of grime and slime of cell walls and when
one of the character's suffers from diarrhea, he approaches
Smell-o-Vision. He's a master at shocking sex scenes, taking Pixote's
Oedipal suckling and Molina & Valentin's anal intercourse and makes them
deeply haunting, almost lyrical.  (He was equally prodigious at squalor in
IRONWEED, though more as a cold, Depression muralist: keeping us at a
distance, that movie is like a month of Saturday nights with candidates
for A.A.)
        Something else works for Babenco -- his clarity in showing that
hypocrisy knows no rationale. It's this element that helps make PIXOTE the
most powerful docudrama of its kind; it shoved an updated, more
frightening kind of Pharisaism at us, one every major city is now dealing
with -- throwaway kids. Through subversion and subterfuge, KISS has
principals using and discarding each other, only it's never quite so
explicit as in PIXOTE. Molina's homosexuality is used by the prison and
government officials in order to get Valentin to open up about his
underground organization and activities; Molina is using his sexuality as
a tool to get out of prison; Valentin is using Molina's vulnerability --
knowing Molina wants the love of a "real man" -- in order to get a message
to his compatriots; and, finally, the homosexual issue is used to make a
statement about the worth of people different from the norm. It's obvious
that Babenco uses Molina as a warning about God Squad Fascism, and in the
process just about usurps Puig's caution against Argentina's more
traditional brand of it. Babenco narrows the warning and updates it:
Molina gets it because he's "a f...ing fag." The novel isn't as overt as
that, but what it does say I didn't believe -- that he's somehow a hero
now that he's been good and screwed. As I see it, Molina sacrifices
himself because every fiber of his being said he was a woman but trapped
in a man's body. 
        Unfortunately the majority of moviegoers who view KISS haven't
seen PIXOTE, which has a character named Lilica, who's around 17 and is a
swish, and who probably is by now a drag queen. (If he hasn't been cut
short by AIDS.) Watching William Hurt as Molina, I thought, It's Lilica
all over again, but this time it's not for real. And I mean that literally
because the actor playing Lilica is gay, while of course Hurt isn't. This
bothered some of the nincompoops: Richard Corliss, for example, cries that
Hurt "does not have one queenly bone in his body. It's not just that he's
playing a homosexual; he's playing a raging queen. And he doesn't have the
voice for it, he doesn't have the gestures for it. It's a terrible piece
of miscasting." Corliss conveniently forgets the glories of acting -- he
doesn't want to see our better actors take risks. What he seems to want is
for Michael Greer to reprise his performance from THE GAY DECEIVERS or
Zorro David to pull another Anacleto from REFLECTIONS IN A GOLDEN EYE. Is
Richard Burton to be condemned in STAIRCASE because he didn't have a
"queenly bone in his body"? Because of FRAIDS, there are many who don't
want to see a raging queen in a movie, though MTV has given Rupaul the
chance to broaden his audience in a way the late Divine only got from John
Waters. I would argue that right now only a straight actor without a gay
bone in his body could play a raging swish. Of course the audience is more
comfortable with a Dustin Hoffman in TOOTSIE, or a Robert Preston in
VICTOR/VICTORIA or, most recently, Robin Williams as MRS. DOUBTFIRE --
because the audience knows they're not turning serious on us; in other
words, they're safe. Or safe in the way Peter Finch's homosexual doctor
was in SUNDAY, BLOODY SUNDAY or Tom Hanks in PHILADELPHIA. Maybe what they
are carping about it that Hurt at times goes too far, moving beyond their
own personal comfort levels. Said Puig: "You won't recognize him in this
film -- he's totally changed. A real transformation. He plays Molina with
red hair, flowing gowns. Very risky." Indeed. And it's this daring, this
true gutsiness, that I most admire in his work here. 
        Surprisingly, Raul Julia holds his own against Hurt, which must
have been quite a challenge: watching and having to respond to Hurt's
tricks might have tempted a co-star to just hand the picture over to him.
Julia doesn't; he thwarts Hurt a bit, and when Julia's character is
rightly perplexed by Molina, frustrated by his steadfast belief that
fantasy is better than reality, the confusion and irritation are terrific
balances; we can truly feel his exasperation. And, unlike our willful
suspension of Hurt's obvious lack of ethnicity, Julia looks the part, and
performs the infamous Latin sexual ambivalence with astonishing assurance.
        KISS OF THE SPIDER WOMAN fascinates more for what's not on the
screen or the pages than for what's on them. The relationship between
Molina and Valentin is bogus -- a self-destructive misfit's fantasy -- but
it might have been meaningful, funny, ironic had just once either of them
had said or hinted that Molina, after getting out of prison, should get
himself an appointment with a sex change specialist. It would then have
given him something, a real hope, to be happy about, instead of becoming a
victim of the very spiders he conspired with. Romantically sacrificing
yourself to your own self-hatred isn't very heroic if what you hate really
isn't what you are.     

Author
Brian Koller
Department of remarkable coincidences: of the four
films that Sonia Braga and Raul Julia have both
appeared in, in three of them they both received
Golden Globe nominations, while not receiving any
Academy Award nominations.  "Moon over Parador" was
over-rated, while "The Burning Season" was made for
TV.  There are no such excuses for an Oscar snub
for "Kiss of the Spider Woman".  While William Hurt
received his only Best Actor Oscar, Raul Julia
gives an equally outstanding performance.
Of course, Hurt had the more challenging role.
He plays a homosexual who fantasizes about being a
glamorous woman, while imprisoned in an South American
country for 'corrupting' a minor.  His cellmate
is political prisoner Raul Julia, who is devoted almost
completely to his cause of overthrowing the despotic
government.
At first, Julia detests his effeminate, flirtatious
cellmate, who insists on retelling and embellishing a
Nazi propaganda film that he once saw.  (This film stars
Braga, who also plays Julia's lover.)  However, Hurt's
kindness to Julia gradually leads to their friendship.
Hurt was well cast.  His facial expressions are perfect
for conveying the deeply felt emotions of his character,
and never falls into the easy trap of making the role
campy.  Julia's rage and despair are also well delivered,
and there are strong supporting performances by Jose Lewgoy
and Milton Goncalves, who play malevolent government agents.
"Kiss of the Spider Woman" also received Oscar nominations
for Best Picture, Best Director (Hector Babenco), and
Best Adapted Screenplay (Leonard Schrader).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
