Title
Review for Tora! Tora! Tora! (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
For many people, especially those who were confused by
complicated politics of Cold War and its traumatising
consequences like Vietnam or nuclear race, previous global
conflict - World War Two-  was considered to be the "good"
war. For the last half a century, that sentiment was shared
by Hollywood. Reasons are simple - that conflict affected,
directly or indirectly, almost every country on the globe,
thus providing material for interesting drama and
spectacular action. But, most of all, World War Two could be
seen as the last global conflict between clearly defined
forces of Good and Evil. Such simplistic formula is precious
for Hollywood screenwriters, and the fact that the most of
the audience already knows who to cheer for, makes their job
much easier. As a result, very few Hollywood movies actually
tried to approach events of World War Two from the
perspective of cold, objective historian. One of such rare
exceptions is TORA! TORA! TORA!, spectacular 1970 US-Japan
co-production about the event that still haunts relations
between those two nations.
The subject matter of the film, as well as the approach, is
clearly indicated in the opening titles. The purpose of the
movie is to give detailed description of the Japanese attack
on Pearl Harbour, based solely on documents and verified
historical accounts. That historical event is still very
traumatic for American people, despite the fact that it
paved the way to the great national triumph. So, it was very
unusual from the American authors not only to to co-operate
with their Japanese colleagues, but also to even give them
opportunity to express their own view on the subject.
Perhaps it was because the never ending Vietnam nightmare
brought any well-established truths into doubt. In any case,
the result is perhaps the most honest movie ever to be made
about WWII.
TORA! TORA! TORA! is actually combination of two movie that
document the event from two perspectives - Japanese and
American. Each segment is written directed by different
directors (Japanese by Kinji Fukasaku and Toshio Masuda,
American by Richard Fleischer), yet works very good as a
whole. First it documents political events that led to the
Japanese decision to attack; then the long Japanese
preparations for attack and unsuccessful American attempts
to predict and prevent their hostile intention; finally, we
see the attack itself and its immediate and devastating
consequences. In those segments we could see a huge contrast
between Japanese and Americans. Japanese are presented as
hard working, patriotic, brave and intelligent warriors that
carefully prepare for their daring raid, leaving nothing to
chance. Americans are, on the other hand, portrayed as bunch
of incompetent idiots, with few exceptions whose common
sense can't defeat sheer idiocy of military and political
red tape.
In entire film, there was very little room for some strong
roles. As in many other docudramas, the characters are here
simply to illustrate historical facts, not to work as
mechanism of plot. The only exception is So Yamamura who
gives very realistic, yet humane portrait of Admiral
Yamamoto, Japanese fleet leader who organised the attack
against USA despite having more than serious doubts about
bringing his country to war. However, the most attractive
thing in TORA! TORA! TORA! are the scenes of the attack,
spectacle that was recreated with great care for the
authentic details. That couldn't be done without use of
genuine locations and equipment, especially planes. Another
thing that helped the authenticity of this movie were
"Oscar"-winning special effects, that make the scenes of
utter destruction very convincing, even by today's
standards. Historical accuracy, something seldom seen in
Hollywood, recommends this movie to any viewer who would
want to learn something about World War Two.
