Title
Review for Thiassos, O (1975)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
reiher@onyx.Jpl.Nasa.Gov
[This is a review of a film that I saw at the recent AFI Los Angeles Film
Festival.  More reviews of films I saw there will probably follow.  For a
summary of the festival, see rec.arts.cinema.]
     There's a small, unusual genre of films I call Red Tragedies.  Red, as in
Communist.  What is a Red Tragedy?  Well, by and large, Communists do not give
much thought to individuals.  Their concern is the collective.  So, clearly a
Red Tragedy is a tragedy that happens to all of a country's workers, not just
to one bourgeois (or, worse, aristocratic) person or family.  And there's only
one event sufficiently shattering for a Red Tragedy - the failure of a
Communist revolution.
     That's why the genre is small.  The filmmaker has to be in sympathy with
Communism, to begin with.  Then, he has to live in a country where the
Communists failed to take over.  (Countries where they did have neither the
need to bemoan the failure, nor, as we have seen lately, much general sympathy
for the idea that such a failure would be a tragedy.)  Moreover, the existing
government has to be sufficiently liberal to permit someone to wail about the
failure of a revolution.  And, finally, there actually has to be enough money
in the country to make a film.
     1900 is probably the most famous Red Tragedy.  Bertolucci tried to make us
feel the classical tragedy of the failure of the peasants to take over  Italy,
instead of the Fascists.  Having Fascists around to stack the deck certainly
helps put a Red Tragedy across, but Bertolucci's film, while greatly
entertaining, was not a success in the U.S., and probably didn't convert
anyone.
     THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is a Red Tragedy from Greece, made by Greek
director Theo Angelopolous.  I doubt if it will find much favor in the U.S.,
either.  It's just as long as 1900, has no familiar actors, has much the same
point of view, and isn't particularly entertaining, at least not for audiences
yearning for more kung-fu reptiles.  However, this film was not made with
wowing American audiences in mind.  THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is a Greek film for
Greek audiences.  Anyone else must watch it as an outsider, separated from the
themes of the film by culture and history.
     The plot of THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is Aeschylus' Orestia superimposed
lightly on the fortunes of a group of actors travelling around Greece
performing a bucolic tragedy.  The film starts just before the Second World
War, and continues through the troubling times Greece faced after the war, when
a civil war broke out between the right and left wings.
     The leader of the company is the Agamemnon figure, his wife is
Clytemnestra, and they have two children actually named Orestes and Electra.
(You'd think that Greek actors would know better than to choose those names for
their children.)  The company's leader favors the leftists in Greece.  The
wife's lover is a Fascist.  When war breaks out, Agamemnon goes off to fight.
And the classical tragedy plays out.  Slowly.  Very, very slowly.  THE
TRAVELLING PLAYERS is ten minutes short of four hours, if they don't give you
an intermission.
     Angelopolous has made a very unengaging film.  The characters have no
reality.  They exist almost as icons, except that most of them do not carry any
meaning, either.  Certainly, they never give the impression of being real
people, and Angelopolous didn't seem to intend that they should.  They are
practically placeholders, human hooks to hang not a story, but a political and
historical lesson on.  Nor is there much that could pass for action.  Shots are
fired, people are murdered, adulterers adulter, but these incidents are not
punched up to excite or entertain.
     Combining with the remoteness of the characters and the distancing of
conventional plotting, Angelopolous has a distinctive cinematic style that is
rather Brechtian in the way it distances audiences from the story.  In the
entire three hours and fifty minutes of THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS, Angelopolous
uses only 80 shots.  Some of these shots are 8 minutes or so.  This style has
some obvious implications.  We see none of the conventional handling of
conversations, for instance, where two-shots showing both actors are
interspersed with close-ups of the performers.  Of course, there aren't very
many conversations in THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS, anyway.
     Angelopolous' camera is not static, however.  He uses many complicated
camera movements in this film.  But they, too, are very, very slow.  He will
take 30 seconds or a minute to pan around 180 degrees.  It is an unnatural, and
sometimes disturbing, slowness, not at all like the way people move their heads
to look at things.  At its worst, this style makes the viewer want to leap up
and forcibly push the camera to where it's obviously creeping.  At its best, it
encourages the viewer to take a closer, unblinking look at details that are
usually lost by snappier photographic styles.
     Perhaps the most amazing thing about THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is that,
despite the extreme length, despite the unengaging characters, despite the
overstretched plot, despite the long takes and languid camera,  THE TRAVELLING
PLAYERS is still not really dull.  It's not fascinating, exciting, pulse-
pounding, but it's not quite dull, either.  I never felt like going to sleep,
leaving the theater, conversing with my neighbor, or doing anything other than
watching the film.  Angelopolous has a hypnotic effect, of some kind.  That the
camera work is quite beautiful undoubtedly helps, but the director clearly has
the sort of talent that allows him to work in a style that would not work for
almost anyone else.
     Also, Angelopolous achieves some fine moments in the film.  Perhaps the
best is a showdown in a dance hall between leftists and right-wing supporters
during the civil war.  In a single extended shot, Angelopolous uses music and
dance to show the conflict between the factions, the final triumph of the
conservatives, the violence behind that triumph, and the frightening ideology
the right wing represents.  It's one of the finest five or ten minutes of film
I've seen this year, and serves as a summary of the whole film.  Another fine
moment is when an American soldier marries a Greek girl.  A traditional wedding
song sung by an old lady is cheerfully, brainlessly corrupted into
boogie-woogie by the American guests.  It's a perfect example of the heedless,
naive way that Americans ignore, usurp, and unwittingly crush foreign cultures,
without even realizing that they are doing anything wrong.  Unfortunately,
these highly insightful moments are separated by lengthy scenes that have no
intellectual or emotional impact, to speak of.
     Still, THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is moderately effective, as a Red Tragedy.
My knowledge of the Greek civil war is limited, and worked from the typical
anti-Communist assumptions of Americans.  Angelopolous' presentation of the
victors as little better than re-labeled Fascists, and the American and
British intervention as hardly an improvement on the German occupation, was
provocative, if nothing else.
     THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is perhaps the quintessential film that's not for
everyone.  It takes patience, and a willingness to accept a foreign style.
This is not a film that was made for universal audiences.  An American must
look at this film as a window on a foreign culture, more so than most foreign
films.  THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is a Greek film about Greek issues for a Greek
audience.  If one can accept its conventions and viewpoint, it returns the work
put into watching it.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TRAVELLING PLAYERS, THE (THIASSOS, O) (director: Theo Angelopoulos;
screenwriters:Theo Angelopoulos; cinematographer: Ghiorgos Arvanitis;
cast: Eva Kotamanidou (Elektra), Petros Zarkadis (Orestes), Maria
Vassilou (Chrysothemis), Stratos Pahis (Elektra's Father), Aliki
Georgouli (Elektra's Mother), Greece-1975)
Daringly enough, this leftist sympathizing political drama was made
during the remaining days of the rightist Colonels' regime. It is one of
those extra long (230 minutes) and slowly paced films, that is a chore
to stay tuned into. One deserves to get a C in audience 101, for just
remaining awake while watching it. It doesn't help that the characters
are not appealing and do not draw us into their story. The thing here is
history as mixed in with the loose telling of Aeschylus' Oresteia
tragedies-- characters are even named Orestes, Electra, and
Chrysothemis. It's lesson in modern Greek history goes from 1936-1952,
as a travelling actor troupe performs a single folk play, Golfo the
Shepherdess, in different towns all over Greece. We see them in towns
that appear to be shabby and depressing, as the years keep changing, as
does the political climate. The times are torn with Nazis, WW11, Axis
Occupation, civil war (between the Right and Left wings), British
Occupation, and the impending election of Marshal Papagos, representing
a military monarchist regime. He is the one who defeated the Left-Wing
during the civil war. Things certainly look glum; the only cheer comes
from the actors, as they are transported through the far-out regions of
Greece and sing their rhythmic songs of freedom, love, and sadness with
a dignity and verve that enraptures the film in a very moving mood. You
can feel the pulse of the times through the music and realize that big
events are happening to the people of Greece.
The film assumes a lot for a foreign audience viewing it, that they
would be knowledgable about Greek political happenings and of the Greek
tragedies and of its history. The modern Greek history of betrayal,
revenge, and redemption are both the subtle and underlying themes of the
story, as seen through the eyes of the weary acting troupe. The film
begins in 1952, in the town of Aegion, where the acting troupe visited
last in 1939. The actors get caught up in the political manifestations
themselves, as the film traces what happened to the troupe in the past;
the wife of  the troupe's leader takes a Fascist lover and has a bastard
child, while the husband is a leftist and goes off to fight in the war.
Their son Orestes is being buried in 1952, after he became a rebel
soldier who died in prison. In the most moving scene of the film, the
actors bury him and start applauding him for the life he lived as he is
buried; it is as if they were saying, what a performance you gave in
life.
Most of the film was unfortunately not as stimulating and was too trying
a task to follow in all its different kind of historical rejoinders,
even though this is a worthy film, visually bringing real life into
focus, in a way that is unique and psychologically absorbing. There is
no doubt about it, this is a Theo Angelopoulos film, not relying on
cohesiveness of plot or dialogue to tell its story for the record of
history. His camera moves around for many different and enticing angle
shots but his takes go on forever, touching every little gesture and
staying with them for minutes at a time without any action taking place,
making the film a very difficult watch for most non-Greeks.
The highly stylized scene in a restaurant-bar, best caught the feelings
of the two opposing sides in the civil war and of those who just tried
to remain neutral. The leftist were unarmed, seemed jovial, and danced
with their women; while the rightist all wore their hats with the brim
covering their eyes and danced with the men, and fired their guns in the
air. They were the menacing winners. The neutrals just tried to please
those in charge at the time.
Theo Angelopoulos is a great filmmaker, but this first feature of his to
achieve international recognition is not a great film as much as it is a
vital telling about political intrigue. It is a film that is relevant; a
good peek at modern Greece and how it is politically divided. It is a
chance to see how overreaching and meddling the British and the
Americans are seen by the Greek left. It is, also, the story of the
Communist's failure to gain control of the country, and the implications
there are for a state that stays in power by suppressing its people. My
hat is off to anyone who can say they were enthralled with this entire
film, not the pieces of it here and there like I was.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
