Title
Review for Castle, The (1997/I)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Michael Dequina
  Although Roger Ebert has called it "this year's _Full_Monty_," I'm not
entirely certain that this Australian import will connect with American
audiences like that flashy British sensation of two summers ago.  In fact,
the comparison is entirely unfair, for this lower-key, character-driven
comedy is, for my money, better than that overrated fluke Best Picture
nominee.  The castle in question is the Kerrigan house, a modest abode
situated next to the runway of an airport and underneath a bundle of power
lines.  When a proposed airport expansion threatens to claim his happy home
and those of his neighbors, patriarch Darryl (Michael Caton) dares to take
his case to court.
To be honest, this simple and straightforward "little guy versus the
system" tale does not pack too many gutbusting laughs.  In their place are
smaller but ultimately more rewarding delights: a consistent stream of
giggle-worthy lines and situations and, best of all, a wide variety of
sharply defined personalities.  Proud and loving Darryl is indeed the main
character (played without a single false note by Caton), but the rest of
the Kerrigan family and the other peripheral characters are allowed to
carve out their own memorably quirky niches.  Making the strongest
impressions are Darryl's trading post-obsessed, "ideas man" middle son
Steve (Anthony Simcoe) and Darryl's incompetent lawyer (Tiriel Mora).
_The_Castle_ is as light and disposable as it appears to be, but there's no
denying how efficient (the film runs a scant 89 minutes), crowdpleasing,
and heartwarming an entertainment director Rob Sitch and writing
collaborators Santo Cilauro, Tom Cleisner, and Jane Kennedy have created.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com________________________________________________________
NetZero - We believe in a FREE Internet.  Shouldn't you?
Get your FREE Internet Access and Email at
http://www.netzero.net/download/index.html

Author
Michael Redman
There's a new age saying I have a few problems with. "There's nothing outside
yourself", meaning that everything is within the individual, is a mantra to
some. While I can accept that most things are colored by a personal world
view, even the Dalai Lama recently reminded us that you can have all the
compassion possible, but if bullets come, you should get out of the way.
The aspects of life that are undeniably from within are emotions. Happiness,
sadness, satisfaction: these are all created by the person not the outer
world. One individual can be overjoyed surrounded by poverty; another, in
despair living in a mansion. (I am willing to admit that it might be a tad
easier in the mansion.)
Tow-truck driver Darryl Kerrigan (Michael Caton) is living the good life.
Everything is wonderful and grand. His house in Colloroo, Australia is on a
toxic landfill, in the landing path of the airport next door and next to
buzzing power lines. It's the ultimate fixer-upper with every section an
unfinished project in the works. But it's his home and it's a marvelous one.
He even has a pool room. Never mind there's only about two feet of space on
any side of the table.
Darryl is as proud as can be that his daughter Trace (Sophie Lee) has a degree
from an institute of higher learning. He doesn't care that it is from a beauty
school and she sports the worst hairdo in the country.
Every moment is a blessing. Each night he compliments his wife (Anne Tenney)
on what a marvelous dinner she has prepared. ("This meal is wonderful, what do
you call this?" "Chicken.") His vacation home is a shack on a mostly dried up
lake. To him it's an incomparable palace.
They are the down-under equivalent of "white trash", but they're happy with it
and that's all that matters.
He may be living in denial, but he's riding Cleopatra's pleasure barge down
the river.
When the federal government sends him a notice that it is taking his home to
make room for an airport expansion, he is convinced they can't do it. He
decides to fight and isn't very successful in the first court appeal. His
defense of "It isn't right" doesn't impress the magistrate. Not one to give up
the noble fight, he works his way up to the Supreme Court.
In another blow to the over-budgeted Hollywood tradition, this charming little
film was made on a remarkably low budget and is picking up a sizable audience.
Like the "Blair Witch Project", it's a triumph of substance over money.
Shot in just 11 days with a Super-16 camera, the tale of innocent struggle is
an easy-going story of the triumph of the small fry. Much like the making of
the film itself.
A team of four created the film, voting on who was to be director (Rob Sitch).
Santo Cilauro was chosen to be cameraman because, "The guys sort of realized I
was handy with the old wedding camera."
The characters are a bit quirky to be completely believable, but they're easy
to warm up to. Every time the family finds a bargain in the classifieds - and
they find a lot of them - it's a victory. Even if they don't have the least
idea what they're going to do with that remarkable deal on a pulpit.
Australia has a reputation for enchanting films. Picnic At Hanging Rock,
The Man From Snowy River and many more are unassuming movies about human
beings. As much fun as special effects are, it's a pleasure to sit in a movie
theater and watch something quiet and cheerful.
Of course the film has its flaws. The voice-over narration at the beginning
goes on for far too long. A chance encounter with a well-dressed man in a
courthouse telegraphs the rest of the film. A few of the scenes are somewhat clumsy.
But if feels good and sometimes that's all you need from a movie.
(Michael Redman has written this film for over 24 years and was ready for a
feel-good film so maybe he's not completely unbiased about this one. That's
life. Email your stories about great second-hand bargains to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 8/26/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
Y2K articles: http://www.indepen.com/

Author
Frankie Paiva
Are you a fan of those little English comedies that are filled with good humor,
charming characters, and interesting plotlines? Well this movie has it all for
you...the sweet, innocent Kerrigan family who resides next to the local airport
is being evicted. The airport wants to expand, but dad Darryl (Caton) isn't
willing to give up without a fight.
He hires Dennis Denuto (Tiriel Mora, one of those people with a familiar face
that you swear you've seen before) a sort of divorce lawyer to handle the case
for him and bring it to court. Dennis is not exactly the world's best lawyer
and loses the case when the judge asks him what his legal documents behind his
accusations are, he replies The Constitution, all of it. 
The film is filled with all kinds of these sweet characters, loving, naive
people who react and take action without influence from the outside world.
While I will admit the film is funny (certainly not like or as much as Waking
Ned Devine which recently was released on video) and the running time is short,
(so as the Kerrigan's quirkiness does not lose it's appeal) I can't really
figure out how much I liked this film, but it made me feel good walking out of
the theater, and for that I give it ** 1/2 stars.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"I reckon we're the luckiest family in the world," Darryl Kerrigan
(Michael Caton) says with utter sincerity.  He, his wife, Sal (Anne
Tenney), and their family live a quirky Ozzie and Harriet lifestyle in
Australia in Rob Sitch's THE CASTLE.  The most popular domestic film in
Australia when it was released in 1997, the movie has finally reached
the American shores with a nationwide release.
Australian comedy tends to be full of good natured, self-deprecating
humor, and THE CASTLE is firmly in that genre.  A broad parody without a
pretentious bone in its body, the movie stays on target from beginning
to end.  Their jokes aren't anywhere near earth-shakingly funny, but few
miss their mark.  The show is almost guaranteed to keep a smile on your
face (and a sappy song in your heart.)
So what, other than his family, is the source of Darryl's happiness? His
home, a.k.a. his castle.  The youngest son, Dale (Stephen Curry), serves
as the show's syrupy narrator.  He explains some of the reasons his
father is so proud of the family's home.  First, it is "worth almost as
much as he paid for it."  Second, there is the real estate admonition
that the 3 most important things are "location, location, location."
Their house, being right next to the airport runway, could not be more
convenient for traveling -- not that they've ever even left the county.
Finally, they are right under monstrous power lines, which serve to
remind his dad of man's progress.
The first act introduces us to the family.  The father dotes on his wife
and seizes every opportunity to compliment her, especially at mealtime.
When she serves something as plain as chicken, he remarks on how
ingenious it was of her to sprinkle that seasoning on top.  When there's
ice cream for dessert, he's sure she did something special to make it
taste so wonderful.  She says she just scooped it.  These many mealtime
sequences work so well because the people are so genuine that the movie
plays like a quirky documentary with shades of the funniest documentary
in years, HANDS ON A HARDBODY
The middle brother, Steve (Anthony Simcoe), wiles away his hours reading
about potential bargains in The Trading Post.  His father always asks
the cost of the item, obscure paraphernalia like jousting sticks being
typical, and always retorts that the seller "is dreaming" about the
given price.  The price must have been right on some of the goodies,
since their house is filled with junk and with the wife's tacky
arts-and-crafts creations.
The rest of the family consists of the recently married daughter, Tracy
(Sophie Lee), a graduate of the Sunshine Tech hairdressing college, and
the older brother Wayne (Wayne Hope), who is in prison for 8 years for a
robbery.  They're all good, grown kids, even Wayne.
In the second act, the family's home is threatened.  The billion-dollar
company that owns the airport tries to seize their house and those next
to them in order to expand the airport facilities.  Being partly a
government agency, they have the right under Australian law to take the
land once the owners are adequately compensated.  The problem is that
the father doesn't want to sell for any price.
With full faith that all he need do is explain his case to a judge,
Darryl bases his argument on common sense rather than the law.  "It's
not a house, it's a home," he informs the judge.  "A man's home is his
castle."  QED.  Not impressed with such emotional logic, the judge rules
against him.
The story is at its funniest in the next act, when Darryl attempts to
enlist the help of the incompetent lawyer, Dennis Denuto (Tiriel Mora),
who lost Wayne's case.  Dennis tries his best not to take the case
reasoning that this is a federal issue, and he is a small-time local
lawyer, handling only minor state cases.  Eventually, he accepts and
decides to challenge the constitutionality of the seizure.  The
Roman-numeral-challenged Dennis bases his arguments to the appeals
court, not on any specific statute, but on the "vibe" of the
constitution.  The judge just stares at Dennis in disbelief.
The last act takes some predicable twists before arriving at its
mandatory happy ending.  The fast-paced story has enough sweet humor to
keep our interest, and the filmmaker makes sure to end the picture
quickly so there is no danger of its overstaying its welcome.  This
light-hearted entertainment is the type of movie that you can call cute
without any tinge of sarcasm.  If you're in the mood for cute, then this
is your movie.
THE CASTLE runs a fast 1:22.  It is rated R for some profanity and would
be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Stephen Rowley
"The Castle" is the debut film for the writing team of Rob Sitch, Tom
Gleisner, Santo Cilauro, and Jane Kennedy, who will be familiar to
Australian audiences for their television work. The four were writers
and performers as part of the Melbourne comedy outfit The
D-Generation, and after that group achieved its ultimate form (in all
senses of the word) on the much-missed "Late Show," they went on to
the current affairs satire "Frontline" (known in some countries
overseas, apparently, as "Behind the Frontline"). That was an
excellent show, if occasionally overly preachy and shy about admitting
its obvious indebtedness to America's "The Larry Sanders Show."
(Ironically, I remember seeing one report here attack "Larry Sanders"
as nothing but a "Frontline" rip-off). By this time, the group had
established themselves as a miniature production company, maintaining
extremely tight creative control. On "Frontline," three of the four
played major roles in addition to their writing; all of them directed
episodes, and Cilauro took charge of the camerawork. Such tight
supervision (and reluctance to surrender any creative processes to
outsiders) is a double-edged sword, as it may be accompanied by an
insular refusal to acknowledge problems. Certainly "Frontline," in its
last season or so, occasionally seemed unable to diagnose and correct
its faults.
It was therefore a pleasure to find the group doing such fine work in
"The Castle". The film tells the story of the Kerrigans, a working
class family in the northwest suburbs of Melbourne (it says something
about Australian society, however, that the family is shown to own
five cars, a boat, and a holiday house, and still be understood to be
working class). They live directly adjacent to Melbourne's Tullamarine
airport, but can't understand why they got their house so cheap; to
them, the modest little home is a castle. When the airport wants to
expand, however, their home is subject to a compulsory acquisition
order. The Kerrigans, led by Daryl Kerrigan (Michael Caton) decide to
fight, eventually taking their case to the High Court in Canberra. As
a TV report puts it late in the film, it's "Daryl versus Goliath."
The comedy in the film comes from the contrast between the naive,
uneducated Kerrigans (if they lived in the country, you'd call them
"down to earth") and the smug, upscale lawyers and judges they come up
against. Sitch and co spend a long time establishing the family, and
this material skates on thin ice with its apparent mockery of the
working class Australian. Yet the tone is maintained well beautifully,
and it becomes clear that the Frontline team genuinely like their
heroes. Sitch has claimed in interviews that much of Daryl Kerrigan's
behaviour is modelled on his own father, and it becomes clear that
"The Castle" is not intended as a joke on other people: we're supposed
to recognise ourselves in the Kerrigans, whatever our background. Much
of what we laugh at in "The Castle" is found in Australians of all
backgrounds: the obsessive scanning of the Trading Post ("Now what
would you want with a pair of jousting sticks?"), the obsessive
multiple car ownership, the sports mania, even the briefly glimpsed
Ugh boots. This self-deprecation (like the disdain for authority
figures) is such an Australian theme that it is likely to puzzle any
overseas audiences (as will culturally specific references such as the
allusions to the Mabo case). Fortunately, "The Castle" has been such a
hit on home soil that it will not need any cross-over success in
overseas markets.
Sitch's direction is appropriately actor oriented: this is not a
technically impressive venture. The hand-held look used to create a
cinema verite look on "Frontline" has wisely been abandoned, replaced
by a bare bones, unobtrusive style. Shot in eleven days, this is the
kind of film where a pan comes across as a major cinematic innovation.
It is, therefore, the cast that really sell the material: all the
actors portraying the Kerrigans are great, with Caton a stand-out.
Tiriel Mora, a "Frontline" veteran, is appropriately harried as the
well-intentioned but inexperienced lawyer (asked what section of the
Constitution his case is based on, he responds "ah... it's just the
vibe.") Many other familiar faces from Australian films and TV turn up
in the supporting cast: Charles (Bud) Tingwell plays the kindly QC who
steps in at the Kerrigan's direst hour; Sophie Lee plays the
Kerrigan's oldest daughter; Eric Bana is her new husband; and Bryan
Dawe plays one of the opposing lawyers. John Flaus, Lynda Gibson, and
Tony Martin (as Bud Tingwell's son!) turn up in cameo appearances. As
far as I could detect, none of Sitch, Gleisner, Kennedy or Cilauro
made so much as a walk-on, though a news reporter's voice heard late
in the piece sounds suspiciously like Kennedy.
Stephen Rowley
sbrowl@Not!arbld.unimelb.edu.au
(To e-mail me, remove the Not! from my address)
Movie reviews & essays at Cinephobia:
http://www.werple.net.au/~lerowley/cinephob.htm

Author
Scott Renshaw
     THE CASTLE is the kind of comedy that never could have been made in
Hollywood.  Scratch that -- it could have been made in Hollywood, but it
would have been a disaster.  The use of a voice-over narrator would have
turned into a crutch instead of a source of inspired brilliance.  The
working class characters might have been either salt-of-the-earth or
grotesque, but never the perfect blend of both.  The tale of a little guy
fighting the system would have been wrapped up by a wildly cheering
courtroom gallery, instead of a delightfully profane two-word summation.
And the neat and tidy 82-minute running time would have been bloated by
another 15 or 20 minutes.  Thank the gods of cinema that THE CASTLE was
made in Australia, where director/co-screenwriter Rob Sitch has turned the
1997 Aussie smash into the brightest, most raucous comedy to hit America
in 1999.
     The protagonist of THE CASTLE is Darryl Kerrigan (Michael Caton), tow
truck driver and proud owner of a house at 3 Highview Crescent on the
outskirts of Melbourne with his wife Sal (Anne Tenney) and sons Steve
(Anthony Simcoe) and Dale (Stephen Curry).  It matters little to Darryl
that the house is built on landfill next to the airport -- it's his home,
his pride and joy, his castle.  He's appalled to discover that the
government plans a forced relocation of the Kerrigans and their neighbors
to make way for an airport expansion.  Darryl, however, isn't going to
give up his castle without a fight, and launches a challenge -- legal and
otherwise -- that goes all the way to the Australian Supreme Court.
     It's no small task to laugh _with_ a collection of characters and
laugh _at_ them at the same time, but that's exactly what Sitch and his
three co-writers have accomplished.  In America, the Kerrigans would be
referred to as "white trash" -- dog pens in the back yard, a huge aerial
antenna on the roof, unsightly additions cobbled together when time
permits, a son (Wayne Hope) in jail.  Sitch turns the smiling bad taste of
the Kerrigans into perfectly-pitched comedy.  Making ideal use of Stephen
Curry's flat narration as Dale, the film-makers show us a family of simple
people who think they're living a life of royalty where beer steins are
high art and a meat loaf is a meal fit for a king.
     Yet it is exactly that skewed perspective that makes THE CASTLE so
endearing even as it sends you rolling on the floor with laughter.
Michael Caton's pitch-perfect performance as Darryl is a portrait of
brighter-side-looking that re-defines the term.  There's a beautiful
sincerity to the way he looks with awe on the combination hose/scrub brush
created by "idea man" Steve, to his love for the family's pre-fabricated
vacation home at a less-than-picturesque lake, to his simple speech at his
daughter's wedding.  It's a performance so warm that anyone who might look
condescendingly at the Kerrigans should feel ashamed.  A man's love for
what he has -- rather than envy of what he doesn't have -- has rarely felt
this genuine.
      Of course THE CASTLE is also a David vs. Goliath story, pitting
Darryl against the Big Corporation assisted first by a small-time attorney
(Tiriel Mora), then by a veteran barrister (Charles "Bud" Tingwell) moved
by Darryl's plight.  Yet the film is never really about that battle in the
way that you'd expect.  There are some marvelous comic moments as Darryl
takes on his adversaries, but the richness of THE CASTLE comes from the
fact that his victory is one of perspective even before a verdict is read.
Sure, in some ways it's a one-joke film, and perhaps some viewers will
grow weary of that one joke.  It just happens to be a joke told with the
kind of skill we just don't see very often.  An audience trained what to
expect from comedies by Hollywood will find expectations in this Down
Under comedy turned -- most appropriately -- upside-down.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
`You can't buy what I've got,' proclaims glowingly proud Aussie Darryl
Kerrigan.
And why shouldn't he be happy?  Darryl (Michael Caton) has a tiny home
with several below-code additions that's located next to both power
lines and the airport.  His wife (Anne Tenney) is a wonderful cook and
home decorator.  His oldest son Wayne (Wayne Hope) is currently
incarcerated for a botched gas station stick-up.  His only daughter
(Sophie Lee) has married a kickboxing Greek (Eric Bana).  His
budding-entrepreneur son Steve (Anthony Simcoe) spends his time
inventing odd items and searching the classified sections for bargains.
And his youngest boy Dale (Stephen Curry, who is also the film's
narrative) makes his contributions to the family by randomly digging
holes in the yard.
Darryl's dream life is abruptly halted when he receives a letter stating
that the expanding airport is buying his land out from underneath him.
An angered Darryl tries to fight City Hall, but fails miserably.  If it
sounds like a TV show, it almost is.  The Castle was written by four
seasoned sitcom scribes and directed by Rob Sitch, also an old hand at
television sitcoms.  They knocked out the script in two weeks and shot
the film in eleven days with one camera.  But the film is as fresh and
funny as any lengthy American production.  (1:22  R for adult language)

Author
Brian Takeshita
Let's say you live at the end of an airport runway.  Large jetliners
continuously pass over your house, rattling your windows and allowing
few moments of peace.  Let's say the ground beneath your feet is also
contaminated with toxic substances, and high voltage power lines run
across steel towers only yards from your home.  Now let's say an
airport conglomerate wants to buy your property in order to lengthen
the runway, and offers you more than it's worth.  Wouldn't you jump in
the air and have your bags packed before you landed?  Of course you
would.
But what if this bit of land was your idea of paradise, and the house
your castle?  That's what they are to Darryl Kerrigan (Michael Caton),
and although he's happy that a multi-national corporation would like
to buy his home, sorry, it's not for sale.  Unfortunately, the
corporation wields quite a bit of influence over the Australian
government, which serves Darryl and his family with what amounts to an
eviction notice.  Not about to take this lying down, Darryl enlists
the help of his inept attorney friend Dennis Denuto (Tiriel Mora) and
makes a determined, albeit pathetic, attempt to fight back.
THE CASTLE, an Australian comedy by Rob Sitch, is perhaps one of the
simplest movies I've seen in recent memory, yet also one of the
funniest.  In fact, it is this film's reliance on simplicity which
makes it so successful.  The good guys and the bad guys are clear, the
humor is straightforward, and the storyline is as uncomplicated as it
gets.  It's the perfect setup for a relaxing, hilarious good time, and
as much as I hate to admit it, I liked the fact that I didn't have to
think all that much while watching this film.  I just sat back and
enjoyed myself.
The situation is one we've seen before:  Regular Joe fights back
against the government, or big business, or whatever.  What makes this
film different is its characters.  Darryl thinks he's got the best
life in the world - he tells his family that living next to power
lines is a constant reminder of the success of mankind, he asks who
would ever want to go out and eat in a fancy restaurant when he's got
the meat loaf feast prepared by his wife Sal (Anne Tenny), and he
swells with pride when his son Dale (Stephen Curry) digs a hole in the
yard.  Steve Kerrigan (Anthony Simcoe) constantly combs the buy and
sell ads looking for "investments" like jousting sticks and overhead
projectors, while Wayne Kerrigan is in jail, as a result of Dennis
Denuto's incompetent courtroom maneuvers.  The great thing about the
Kerrigans is that they aren't so stupid that they get annoying.
They're just a group of simpletons whose naive nature is perfectly
harmless and even endearing.  We look upon them with a little bit of
pity, but a whole lot of affection.  
Screenwriters Sitch, Santo Cilauro, Tom Gleisner, and Jane Kennedy pit
this lovable bunch of unlikely crusaders against a stoic court system
and a condescending business conglomerate, further polarizing the
extremes and deepening our feelings for the Kerrigans.  Sympathy for
their situation, the laughter they bring us, and the family's
wonderful characterization, simple as it may be, leaves us with a
degree of emotional investment that causes us to actually care about
what happens to them.  I suppose one might wonder how deep
characterization can go when your characters are as inane as the
Kerrigans, but trust me, it works.
I particularly noted that the writers did not have to use slapstick in
order to get laughs.  Don't get me wrong - slapstick, when executed
well, can be genius.  It's just that too often, a film will resort to
it's use as a shortcut to amusing the audience, not always
successfully.  Instead, the jokes in THE CASTLE are all hinged upon
the dialog uttered by these people who have no idea that they are
totally skewed to the rest of the world.  When they are by themselves,
the are funny, and when they are with normal people, they are
hilarious.
One of the few problems I saw with this film was a detour taken about
midway though.  The Kerrigans go out to a vacation spot for seemingly
no reason other than to pack in a few more jokes and increase the
film's running time.  Luckily, it's a funny little detour that, while
slightly distracting from the film's main drive, is still quite
enjoyable.
With all the levity abound in THE CASTLE, the film still manages to
take on a pretty heavy concept, that of the innate right of a citizen
to keep his property, an issue which has been bandied about in courts
across the civilized world with differing outcomes.  I'm not certain
the courtroom monologue near the end of the film would actually hold
up in real life, but it brings to the forefront the essence of the
constitution (of Australia) and certainly sounds impressive at any
rate.  And, for that matter, it's more than I would have expected out
of a light hearted film like this.

Author
Eric Lurio
This is, in a way, payback. There have been lots of movies based on TV shows
recently, not all that many of them have been particularly good, and yet they
have been exported to many countries that have not been subjected to the
original TV shows. 
Are they comprehensible? Do they make any sense as cinema on their own? Does
the `Coneheads' movie, for example, stand on it's own if you're not a fan of
the old series of skits?
Well, what if some other country decided to dump one of IT's TV spinoffs on
our shores? How would it fare? Would we understand it?
`Frontline' is an Australian TV show. It's basically a satire of current-
events shows. `Weekend Update' writ large. It's reportedly very popular down
under and the spin-off feature did wonderfully at the box office.
It begins with an introduction `I'm Dale Kerrigan(Stephen Curry) and this is
my story.'
We are then introduced to the family father Daryl(Michael Caton), mum Sal(Anne
Tenney), brother Steve(Anthony Simcoe) and sister Tracy(Sophie Lee) [another
brotherWayne(Wayne Hope) is, of course, in jail]. In typical Saturday Night
Live fashion, they are all complete morons.
The Kerrigan clan live right next to the airport. About ten feet away. They
love their house. They love each other. They are the happiest family in
Austraila, if not the entire southern hemisphere. It's revolting!
So of course some bad men have to spoil all this bliss! In this case, the
airport decides to condemn the land on which they live in order to expand the
airport. 
And we are treated to a lesson in how the Aussies protect their rights....
Since Dad is a moron, his lawyer has to be one too. Dennis Denuto(Tiriel Mora)
isn't the densist soliciter in Oz, but he's close. 
The neighbors are also dumb, and if it wasn't for a deux-ex-machina in the
form of Lawrence Hammill (Charles 'Bud' Tingwell), an extremly emminant
lawyer.
The humor grates a bit, but on the whole, it is tolerable. 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Only right-wing extremists would refer to government
workers as jack-booted thugs.  In the U.S. such people
usually stand up for the "right" to maintain an arsenal of AK-
47s in their homes and their "right" to keep all their income
rather than re-distribute a portion to those not as well-off as
they.  For the government to take away your assault rifles is
one story: to confiscate your home is yet another.  While a
man's place is his castle, governments do generally have the
right to appropriate it (with just compensation) for a
legitimate, substantial public purpose, such as the
construction of a highway.  But who cares about just
compensation?  A house is not a home.  A home is a place
that hopefully embodies an investment of love and gives its
occupants a sense of identity and stability in a fast-changing
world.  To allow the authorities to commandeer such a prize
without a fight is dishonorable.  We may not feel sympathy
for a guy who stashes grenades and artillery in his attic
beyond the pale of the authorities.  We do feel compassion
for the little fella who wants only to maintain
his anchor to a specific place in a world that seems to fall
increasingly adrift.  In "The Castle," writers Santo Cilauro,
Tom Gleisner, Jane Kennedy and Rob Sitch together with
director Sitch enter Simon Beaufoy ("The Fully Monty")
territory with a feel-good comedy that champions a
hardy Australian scrapper while lightly satirizing and
patronizing him at the same time.
   "The Castle," which has been the subject of some curious
marketing by Miramax, was a popular favorite at the 1998
Sundance Festival, was picked up by the Weinsteins for $6
million, then put on the shelf for months only to receive a
modest marketing effort when finally released in a limited
number of theaters.  Only some impressive box office figures
may save the movie from going straight to the videotape: a
shame, because "The Castle" makes good use of the popular
David vs. Goliath theme--providing lots of broad smiles if not
belly-laughs while elevating sit-comish themes (such as those
practiced by "Married With Children") to more literary levels.
   Director Rob Sitch focuses most of his attention on Darryl
Kerrigan (Michael Caton), a lower-middle class occupant of a
modest but love-filled home located just a block or so from an
airport on one side and a high-voltage tower on the other. 
He's obviously a bargain hunter, as the story illustrates time
and again, as Darryl pooh-poohs attempts to sell him useless
gadgets at inflated prices.  Unfamiliar with life on the fast
track, he is unimpressed by western society's rampant
materialism and humankind's desire to show off its
appreciation of the (materially) finer things in life like fancy
food, vintage wine, and high-tech wizardry.  To him, a cheese
sandwich would probably be far-out. Each night he praises
the cooking of his loving wife Sal (Anne Tenney), scarcely
believing the joys of eating broiled chicken, meat loaf,
and ice cream scooped right from the tub.  His warmth
carries over to his dense children Steve (Anthony Simcoe),
Tracy (Sophie Lee), and the movie's narrator Dale (Stephen
Curry), and even though the eldest son Wayne (Wayne
Hope) is in jail for armed robbery, he keeps his family picture
proudly on the stone wall above his cot.
   When the government demands that Darryl vacate his
home in order to expand the airport, Darryl files a class-
action suit with his bumbling local lawyer, Dennis Denuto
(Tiriel Mola), is inevitably trounced in court by the defendant's
high-priced attorneys, and fulfills the dream of people
throughout the democratic world by taking his case "all the
way to the Supreme Court."
   While the victory of the little guy has been exploited by
movies like "Waterboy" and while Rob Sith's characters
sometimes seem not much brighter than Bobby Boucher and
his mom, these characters inspire genuine warmth in the
audience despite the insistence of the filmmakers on
satirizing their provincial ways.  Dan Quayle would have no
problem pointing the Kerrigans' robust family values. There's
not a person on the right side of justice who can be
unsympathetic. Darryl's neighbors, especially the clueless
Lebanese immigrant Faroud, put their trust in him to save
their homes.  Despite Darryl's naivete (in court he cannot
decide whether he is an appellant or a respondent), he is
persistent, yet has none of the obsessive qualities of
"Election"'s Tracy Flick. 
   Not even his opponents can hate him, even when he calls
their lawyer a dickhead, and what woman with a heart can fail
to be taken in by her husband's glorification of her ability with
an ice-cream scoop?  Sure: people of his social class will fill
their basements with kitschy objects like oversized beer mugs
while the rich load their studies with Picassos.  Heaven
knows, the working class are as ecstatic with their objets d'art
as the affluent are with their investments.  This is what
makes this satire loving, not caustic, and its humor irrefutably
pleasing.

Author
Ross Anthony
The Castle. A Miramax Films Release. Copyright Š 1999. Photo: Emmanuel
Santos
By Ross Anthony
"Love who you are and fight for the right to be the imperfect you," is a
seriously wholesome theme smack in the center of this quirky Australian
straight-faced comedy.
A tow-truck driver loves his paneled pool room and pre-fab house despite the
747's thundering overhead. But when the airport decides to expand the runway
and buy out the neighborhood, this man (as optimistic as he is average)
stands in the way.
Narrated by his third son, a character who ironically has nothing to do with
the plot, "The Castle" is a live action "Wallace and Grommet" without the
Grommet (and action for that matter). But it is full of dry and subtle humor
simultaneously ribbing and admiring the rural blue collar middle class. "I'm
going to take the Coronado, so if you can move the Mustang and the Duster, I
can get it out of the driveway -- and don't sideswipe the Torino."
Fine performances by all involved. "The Castle" is not a blockbuster; it's a
little film that accomplished everything it set out to do.
Starring Michael Caton, Anne Tenney, Stephen Curry, Sophie Lee, Anthony
Simcoe and Charles Tingwell.
Directed by Rob Stitch. Written by Santo Cilauro, Tom Gleisner, Jane Kennedy
and Rob Stitch (in 11 days I'm told).
Produced by Debra Choate.
Presented by Miramax/Village Roadshow/Working Dog.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Greg King
The Castle is not another quirky local comedy.  Rather it is a
genuinely funny and touchingly honest tale that is firmly rooted in
the typical Australian spirit of mate ship and barracking for the
underdog, themes that it shares with the criminally ignored Mr
Reliable.
 The first big screen outing for the creators of tv's
Frontline, the popular current affairs satire that has successfully
blended razor sharp humour and biting satire with a format that is
close to straight drama, The Castle is a real winner.  While not quite
as sharply written as Frontline, this simple yet affecting and amusing
comedy taps into readily recognisable and endearing characters, who
are brilliantly created and richly detailed.
The Kerrigans are a typical working class family who enjoy the
simple pleasures of life.  Their modest little home in the northern
suburbs of Melbourne is filled with warmth, humour and love, even if
it does back up to the adjoining runway on the nearby airport.  They
also enjoy the serenity of their small lake side holiday home in
Bonnie Doon, even though it is located beneath high voltage power
cables.  Tow truck driver Darryl Kerrigan (Michael Caton) is the head
of this close knit family of honest battlers, a simple optimist and
philosopher who is constantly full of praise and makes every one in
the family feel important and worthwhile.  Even their wayward jail
bird son Wayne (Wayne Hope) is still considered an important part of
this nuclear family.
When Darryl is served notice that his house is to be
compulsorily acquired to allow for airport extensions he goes in to
fight.  Every man's home is his castle, but for the Kerrigans their
quarter acre block is much more, as their family home is full of
memories and rich resonant echoes of their past, emotional ties that
no amount of money or compensation can replace.  Darryl is not too
sure how to fight for his house, but he knows that it is not right
that anyone can just legally take away a man's home, and although he
suffers some early setbacks in the courts, he is not about to give up.
We see events unfold from the rather naive perspective of Dale
Kerrigan (tv veteran Stephen Curry), the youngest son who idolises his
father and who doesn't always comprehend the intricate machinations of
the complex legal struggle.
In the wrong hands this material could have gone terribly
wrong, and it would have been so easy to laugh at the Kerrigans and
their naive optimism and simple view of life.  But such is the
strength, intelligence and compassion in the marvellous script from
writers and co-creators Jane Kennedy, Tom Gleisner, Santo Cilauro and
Rob Sitch (who also directs) that the Kerrigans become an endearing
lot, and audiences laugh with them and share in their struggle.  We
empathise with the family and their plight and we thrill as they
somewhat foolishly take on greedy developers over a principle.
Much of the film's charm comes from the casting, which is well
nigh perfect, and the natural performances from veteran actors who
were enthusiastically encouraged to improvise and explore their
characters more fully.  Caton (best known for his role as Uncle Harry
in tv's long running soap The Sullivans) is perfectly cast as Darryl,
and he gives a generous and warm performance, maintaining a subtle
balance of understated humour and quiet strength.  Tiriel Mora is
marvellous as Dennis Denuto, the small time lawyer and family friend
who finds himself out of his depth when dealing with the complexities
of constitutional law and high powered corporate lawyers in silk
suits, and he brings dishevelled charm and earthy humour to the film
in a scene stealing performance.  Veteran Charles (Bud) Tingwell, an
old favourite who found a whole new audience through his
collaborations with the film's writers on The Late Show, brings
dignity and intelligence to his role as Lawrence Hamilton, the retired
QC who takes the Kerrigan's fight all the way to the High Court.
         While the emotionally draining Shine is taking Australian
films to the world and reaping richly deserved accolades, this more
modest local production is easily one of the best films produced by
the local industry in quite some time.  The Castle is a simple yet
honest and topical story that audiences can relate easily to, and it
succeeds beautifully through an assured mix of sheer charm, humour and
enthusiasm.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
released by Miramax Films
starring Michael Caton, Anne Tenney, Stephen Curry, Anthony Simcoe,
Sophie Lee, Wayne Hope, Tiriel Mora, Eric Bana, Charles 'Bud'
Tingwell, Costas Kilias
written and conceived by Santo Cilauro, Tom Gleisner, Jane Kennedy, Rob
Stich
directed by Rob Stich
Over the past few years, there have been only a few notable Australian
imports (Shine, Kiss or Kill), but after watching Rob Stich's The
Castle, which was the highest-grossing Australian film of last year,
their future is looking brighter. At the screening of The Castle which
I attended, two of the film's stars (both very nice) were in
attendance, surely trying to help spread word-of-mouth and make the
film a Full Monty-sized hit. And while The Castle is a funny,
heartwarming movie, it is not as poignant as The Full Monty, the film
to which The Castle has been often compared.
At the beginning of The Castle, Dale Kerrigan (Stephen Curry), a
scraggly teenager, introduces us to the members of his oddball
family. Darryl (Michael Caton), the father, is the backbone of the
family. He is a constantly cheerful man; always trying to keep the
family happy. If Darryl is the backbone, then Sal (Anne Tenney), the
mother, is the other bones. She does the cooking and errands around
the house.
Steve (Anthony Simcoe), Dale's older brother, is what Darryl calls an
"ideas man". He also spends most of his time looking through the
classifieds for useless things to buy and sell. Then there is
Tracy (Sophie Lee), a hairdresser who has just gotten married. And
lastly, there is Wayne (Wayne Hope), the son whom Darryl says "got
stuck with the wrong crowd", and commited a robbery.  He is locked up
in prison, but Dale visits him weekly.
What keeps the family together is their home, which Darryl calls his
"castle". It is situated right next to the airport runway, and
sometimes, says Darryl, you think the planes are going to land right
on top of you. The conflict of the film comes when a man informs them
that the goverment is planning an airport expansion, and their house
will be taken over by a compulsory acquisition.  Darryl then hires
small-time lawyer Dennis Denuto (Tiriel Mora), to try anything he can
to fight the government.
The Castle used four writers, was shot on a shoestring budget over an
11-day period, and for the most part, works very well. The film is a
light, British-style comedy, and is very funny at times. It is
essentially a feel-good movie, and I can't think of a single character
that was unlikable (although I hear that all Aussies are nicer than any
American). Many films need to take a lesson from movies like The
Castle, that prove that nice guys finish first.
Michael Caton gives a fine comic performance, reminiscent of early
John Cleese, and the film, while somewhat short, is very entertaining
the whole way through. The Castle sometimes borderlines on being too
cheerful, but too much of a good thing isn't all that bad.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST

