Title
Review for High Road (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     The issue of whether Thomas Pallotta and Jack Meredith are twisted
sons of bitches is not up for debate.  A better point of contention is,
are they geniuses, and what happens to them next?
     After seeing their ultra-low budget production of THE HIGH ROAD, a
drug- and booze-infused trip around the state of Texas, I'm almost
unable to comment.  What might be described as EASY RIDER meets
DRUGSTORE COWBOY, the movie is certainly a success in terms of
experimental filmmaking, and it definitely has the potential of becoming
a cult classic on the midnight circuit.
     While following go-nowhere (and I *mean* it) twentysomethings on an
inspired-by-nothing journey is nothing new, Pallotta's camera direction
and eye for locations is more reminiscent of David Lynch than Dennis
Hopper.  Making the most of almost no money (how they got such a
fantastic score is beyond me), Pallotta proves that his directorial
style is a force to be reckoned with, should the Money Men come
knocking.
     Although the road movie has seen a resurgence of late, what sets
THE HIGH ROAD apart from recent klunkers like THE DOOM GENERATION is the
deadpan goofiness with which Pallotta and company have infused the
film.  Full of sex, drug, and alcohol cliches, all delivered in monotone
by the cast of amateurs, the movie is one long running joke about being
high, yet in some bizarre way manages to be as anti-drug as anything
I've ever seen.
     With production values at the low end of low-budget, much of the
film's sound is drowned out by room/car tone and tape hiss.  It's
unfortunate, even if it is expected.  The performances from the four
leads are all, oddly, exactly the same, due to what Pallotta refers to
as "the hyperrealism of the Huston/Bunuel approach."  I'm not sure if I
know what that means, and I'm not even sure if I spelled "hyperrealism"
right, either... but, as with most experiments, sometimes it works, and
sometimes it doesn't.
     Thankfully, THE HIGH ROAD works more often than not, and any fan of
the genre will definitely be entertained.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
