Title
Review for Man Without a Face, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the riskiest and hardest moves in any actor's career
is transition from the image of popular entertainer to the
image of true artist. Mel Gibson saw that in early 1990s,
when he tried to reach beyond his status of action
superstar, shown in MAD MAX and LETHAL WEAPON movies. His
first attempt, role in Zeffirelli's HAMLET, ended
disastrously. Luckily, there was a second chance for him,
and in 1993 he took that chance with THE MAN WITHOUT A FACE,
coming-of-age drama based on the novel by Isabelle Holland.
That film was also his directorial debut that laid the path
that would lead to his BRAVEHEART triumph two years later.
Like his colleague Jodie Foster in LITTLE MAN TATE, Gibson
decided to direct a movie with a young boy as protagonist.
The plot takes place in small town in Maine 1968. Chuck
Norstadt (played by Nick Stahl) is a 12-year old boy who
lives together with his mother (played by Margaret Whitton)
and two half-sisters. Being misunderstood and ignored by his
family, he seeks rebellion in the idolatry of his late
father, military pilot. His great ambition in life is to go
to the military boarding school. That move, at the peak of
anti-war movement, isn't just unpopular - it is very
unlikely, because Chuck needs tutoring. Help comes in a form
of Justin McLeod (played by Mel Gibson), former teacher with
a terribly scarred face, who lives a hermit. McLeod begins
teaching Norstadt and two of them become friends.
Unfortunately, that only enflames the hostility of the town,
and vicious rumours about teacher's dark past emerge,
threatening the relationship between Chuck and McLeod.
At first glance, THE MAN WITHOUT A FACE looks surprisingly
good for someone's directorial debut. But, those who are
likely to nitpick Gibson's work would find that the
directing seems somewhat too baroque for a simple drama that
would be most suitable for TV films. The most attractive
element in this film is acting. Gibson plays very good and
thankful role of a misanthropic hermit who gradually regains
love for humanity. That role was very carefully played, in
order not to overshadow anyone else, including Nick Stahl,
who was good in his part. The result is a well-acted,
competently directed coming-of-age drama that doesn't drowns
itself in cliches and cheap sentimentality.
Unfortunately, the screenplay by Malcolm McRury had touched
the issues of homosexuality and paedophilia, and that was
enough for this film to be criticised not for its own flaws,
but for the shortcomings of its director. Before making this
film, Gibson was branded as homophobic, because of an
interview he had given. In the peak of Political
Correctness, it was simply inconceivable arrogance for a
notorious homophobe to direct a movie dealing with such
issues. But the real reason why some left-leaning critics
attacked the film wasn't in Gibson's treatment of
homosexuality (which wasn't mentioned or implied on until
the very last scenes in the film). It was the fact that
Gibson gave a story about anti-establishment rebellion from
a rather conservative point of view. The film is set in
1968, but the thing that bothers Chuck is not the old
establishment; Chuck is disgusted with the new social
freedoms that are enjoyed at the expense of newer
generations (with Chuck's own family being the victim of
endless divorces), and the character of Carl (played by
Richard Masur), Chuck's potential stepfather, could be seen
as the caricature of Baby Boomers and all their ideals. The
subtlety with which the conservative ideas were introduced
in this Hollywood film didn't hurt the film, but the very
fact such ideas found their place on screen in that
ultra-liberal era was enough to make this film better than
its reputation.
Review written on September 15th 1999
