Title
Review for Impromptu (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
I like this film, despite a few people not thinking it is ( either ) good or
worth it.
And perhaps much of it is because I like to 'study' historical characters in
the field of the arts, compared to their artistic endeavors.
In this film, we can see a little of FRANZ LISZT, FREDERIC CHOPIN, GEORGE
SAND, and a few other artists which stuck together, as the scenes in Europe
tend to do.
Franz Liszt is a part of the 'high' society which has helped him become
famous for his talented ability to stand up to the already famous pianist
Chopin.  And as a member of that society which champions as patrons of  the
arts, he is also affected by the many women, in search of a match to set
them up for life.  The writer George Sand ( a woman ) happens to be on the
outside circles of this group, and does her writing in her own manner
despite herself, and manages to do alright, even competing with  the women
who are always in a position to outdo each other.  The game is fun as long
as no one steps on anyone's toes.  On a given evening, Sand discovers the
music of Chopin, and proceeds to write one of her books, which gets quoted
all around, but is hidden from Chopin by his lover since she doesn't want to
lose him.  The lover manages to use quotes from the book and keep the
composer's attention, until one day he happens to discover why it is that
this other woman is infatuated with him.  He
reads the book, and voila, a new relationship is born.
While there may not quite be a lot of truth, or guarantee that it is all
quite correct, there is a nice touch of the 'muse' which drives many artists
to create what they do, and in this area, the film is excellent.  This is a
film for both literature, and music lovers, for it treats both quite
importantly.  And as such, it also puts down the mistress system as a bit
corrupt on its own feet, and that even women are adapt at playing this game.
At the time, I presume that it was the thing to do, and was expected to be
done without second thought by any woman.  Whereas the English Restoration
lifestyle openly flaunted the 'cuckold' theory, here they are at least a bit
more modest, except when the lights are out.  The ladies even suggest
several times that they had had affairs with other men, in some orgies,
which has always been very well known enjoyment of the European upper crust.
Judy Davis as George Sand is very good, as is Julian Sands as Liszt.  And it
certainly is ten million miles from the Ken Russell treatment of the same
subject.  This is serious about the art, where Ken's is a bit more on the
unusual side, if not too extravagant.  All the ladies in this film have a
good time as the courtesans they are, and the film plods
along an incredible barrage of gossip and small events, which make it
difficult to follow at times.  It's difficult to realize that a subtle shot
of two women in the background chatting, will eventually come up as an
agreement to get something done.  But it all ties together well in the end.
A FILM FOR MUSIC ( AND LITERATURE ) LOVERS. Someone says to
DELACROIX....paint something 'dead' this time.... you have to know the
romantic artists for this film to make better sense.

Author
Frank Maloney
     IMPROMPTU is a film staring Judy Davis.  It is itself an impromptu
on the beginning of the famous liaison of George Sand, the French
novelist, and Frederick Chopin, the Polish composer and pianist.  If you
find those attributions necessary, you may not feel drawn initially to
IMPROMPTU because you have not been infected yet with these fascinating
personalities and artists.  If you find the attributions irritating and
inadequate, you are the primary audience for this film.  However, I urge
people of the first category to see IMPROMPTU, too; it is a wonderful
film, funny, alive, visually and musically rich, driven by complex
performances by some really wonderful actors.
     George Sand is played by Judy Davis, an actor I am not familiar
with, but one I want to see again soon.  Sand was a woman who achieved
notoriety in her day by adopting a male nom de plume, wearing men's
clothes, smoking cigars, being a sportswoman, conducting her love
affairs openly, and being her own person; she was a kind of one-woman
cause celebre in 1830s and 1840s.  In IMPROMPTU Sand invites herself
to a country house party to meet and seduce Chopin, for whom she has
developed an obsession on the strength of his music.  The socially
ambitious duchess has invited him, his great friend Franz Liszt (played
by Julian Sands), Liszt's lover (Bernadette Peters), Eugene Delacroix,
the painter, and Edward de Muset, the poet and Sands' great (but now
former) love, invited them for a fortnight in the country.
     I believe this wonderful set-up is the invention of the screen
writer.  (You will note the lack of many names in this notice--my source
material was destroyed before I could write this and I have a
Emmenthalerisch memory (full of holes).)  The house party is hilariously
disastrous, Sand's wild children contributing not a little to the final
catastrophe.
     Back in Paris, Sand continues her pursuit of Chopin, who is
depicted here as prim to the point of prissiness.  Meanwhile another
claimant has entered the lists for the reluctant Pole.  And Sand is
having problems with a past that continues to make claims on her,
ludicrously and ridiculously.  Through all this bedroom-farcical comedy
runs a serious and tender love story that is finding itself as the movie
unfolds.
     And through it all, Davis is preposterous, impossible, tender,
desperate, strong, weak, cunning, naive, awkward, and graceful, full of
guile and honesty, till she near to breaks your heart with a performance
that nearly turns IMPROMPTU into a one-woman show.
     Fortunately, for the viewer who believes that two great
performances are better than one, Peters is more than up to the
challenge of holding her own on screen.  For once, Peters gets a chance
to *act* and in a major part.  Her character, a titled lady who left her
husband to be Liszt's muse (and winds up being the mother of his
enormous flock of infants, whose crying he escapes by his continuous
touring and concertizing), is turned from being a light, sophisticated 
Parisienne into a shrew and harpy by the unhappiness and unfairness of
her life as a "conventional" mistress and upper-class bohemian, her
life as a woman who has children, stays home, and whose role is to
"inspire" her man to greatness.  In the end, it ruins her, but allows
Peters to register the most mature performance that I have ever seen 
from her.
     But then this is a great ensemble cast with wonderful, memorable
performances from every single member.  The cast is mostly English and
the Frenchness of the script is perhaps a little thin.  The country
nobleman who unwillingly hosts his wife's artists is an English squire
of the old school, interested in hunting, not art; perhaps such types
are also French.  I don't know.  But this is a very English film, IMHO,
for all the French locales and names.  The squire-type even says "Bon
appetit" with an English accent.  I was also slightly distracted by the
resemblance between the handsome young man who plays Chopin and the
Chekhov-character from the original Star Trek days, the smile, the
physical business, the East Slavic accent, quite striking, actually;
fortunately this Chopin is a better actor by far than the scene-chewing,
"wodka" drinking Mr. Chekhov.
     These minuscule cavils aside, I cheerfully recommend IMPROMPTU to
you.  It is a first-rate movie rich in performances.
