Title
Review for Enid Is Sleeping (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Old proverb among show business people says that a comedy is
a serious business. Watching the declining quality of
American cinematic humour in the last decade, the author of
this review tends to agree. The best comedies are those that
were made with some serious efforts. One of those is ENID IS
SLEEPING, relatively obscure 1989 comedy that succeeds to
entertain the audience despite being based on rather
outdated idea.
Set in a small New Mexican town of Las Moscas, this film is
tale about Enid (Maureen Mueller), woman that has a unique
talent to make a life miserable to anyone around her,
including her husband Harry (Judge Rheinhold) and her long
suffering younger sister Jane (Elizabeth Perkins). After a
while, two of them try to seek refuge in each other, but
when Enid catches them in flagranti, hell breaks loose.
Acting in self-defence, Jane accidentally kills her sister.
Luckily, Harry happens to be a cop, so he devises a plan to
get rid of the body. As usual, things don't work out as
planned, and dead Enid continues to torment Jane and Harry
with same ferocity as live one.
Although many viewers would tend to associate this film with
WEEKEND AT BERNIE'S, ultimate cinematic disaster dealing
with similar theme, this dark situation comedy works beyond
its "high concept". This is probably due to the fact that
almost anyone involved in the production gave his or her
best. Screenwriters A.J. Tipping, Maurice Phillips and James
Whaley created solid script, and Phillips as director was
superb, both in pacing and wonderful use of New Mexican
locations. But the biggest job was done by wonderful cast.
Elizabeth Perkins outshines anyone with her adoring
portrayal of weak, victimised woman suddenly turned into
criminal. Judge Rheinhold (another 1980s comedian whose peak
was BEVERLY HILLS COP series) is also very good as her
pathetic partner, same as Jeffrey Jones, Brion James and
Michael J. Pollard in minor roles. But, probably the most
charming element of the film is beautiful, sentimental
musical score by Craig Safan that works as some kind of
semi-ironic commentary of the events in the movie. Although
the film does have somewhat disappointing ending, the end
result is really funny and entertaining film.
