Title
Review for Man Who Knew Too Much, The (1934)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alfred Hitchcock
Writers: Charles Bennett and D.B. Wyndham-Lewis
Starring: Leslie Banks, Edna Best, Peter Lorre, Frank Vosper, Hugh
Wakefield, Nova Pilbeam, Pierre Fresnay, Cicely Oates, D.A. Clarke-Smith,
George Curzon
Hitchcock's earlier British films (he went to Hollywood in 1940) are
neither as glamorous or ambigous as his older films, but were still amazing
as they told simple stories in the most complex and amazing ways possible. 
"The Man Who Knew Too Much" is one of the best films he ever made, showing
him in the top of his filmmaking craft, as he structures a film which could
thrill and entertain as well as be a great example of fantastic filmmaking.
 It's a story which could have been made into a little piece of flat pulp,
but was instead made into a stunning film which is intriguing from start to
finish.
"The Man Who Knew Too Much" starts by introducing the protagonists to us,
two Olympic stars, Bob and Jill Lawrence (Leslie Bank and Edna Best,
respectively), who are vacationing in French Morrocco with their loving
daughter, Betty (Nova Pilbeam).  One night at a club, a man is shot and
before he dies, he tells Bob and Jill that a revolutionary group is
planning to kill a public official during a performance at Albert Hall in
London.  Soon enough, Betty has been kidnapped and the ransom is that they
don't tell the authorities.
Bob takes it upon himself to find the kidnappers and rescue his daughter
without harming either of them.  His clues lead him to the rebels, who are
headed by a mysterious man named Abbott (mysterious only because he's
played by Peter Lorre, in his first performance in English following his
triumph in Fritz Lang's "M," where he played a child killer), who soon also
takes Bob into his custody.
The film was the first Hitchcock film to really become a big hit, and it
made a name of him for being a master of suspense (which he was).  What
Hitch was best at doing was creating a plausible yet chilling suspense
sequences, which are often the big set pieces for disection by film
analysts (I can't tell you how many times we saw that party sequence from
"Notorious" in my film classes...).  Here, in my opinion, is one of
Hitchcock's greatest sequences, a masterpiece of film montage which shows
Jill in Albert Hall on the night of the shooting sitting as an anonomys
audience member, and piecing how the murder is going to happen by looking
around.  As the music builds, she figures out exactly when the assasin will
kill his target, but she can't scream or the kidnappers will kill her
daughter.
Another famous sequence takes place in what has to be one of the very first
(if not the first) visceral shootout in a film.  The sequence is long, but
is scary and realistic, and, interestingly enough, mostly told from the
perspective of the bad guys.  The entire experience of watching it is never
boring or redundant though, due to Hitchcock's great ability to edit and
design a sequence.
But these are not the only two great things about this film.  "The Man Who
Knew Too Much
 is a great story, filled with a surprising amount of characterization, and
a storyline which is smart without becoming too brainy.  The characters in
this film are not forced to do what they do because Hitchcock wants
suspense scenes; Hitchcock knew how to create a film without trapping the
characters in the confines of the genre, and this is easily shown by this
film.
Accompany the brilliant direction by Hitchcock with a smart script and
great acting, especially by Lorre (who's just the Man, in my humble
opinion), and "The Man Who Knew Too Much" comes out as one of the greatest
suspense thrillers of all time.  While it may be trite (the film clocks in
at a mere 74 minutes), it never feels rushed, and the story never fails to
intrigue you with its great characters and storytelling.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
