Title
Review for Bordello of Blood (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jason Overbeck
You don't see a movie about vampire hookers to view a masterful plot or
incrible characters, you see it for blood, laughs and T&A.  You get
plenty of those three in this film with plot on autodrive as Dennis
Miller offers up funny one-liners and cynical observations.  This movie
works very well until the third act which is a complete disappointment.
Super vampire opens a bordello, with vampires in place of the
prostitutes, and they kill the men and drink there blood.  There is
nothing new here but Dennis Miller shows up as a private eye to
investigate the disapperance of a loser who frequented the bordello, on
only one occasion.  Miller is sharp in this film, walking off with the
movie and shaping the T&A and blood around his very funny comedy act.  
I have meantioned Miller alot and neglected most of the other film,
including a plot element with a priest.  Who cares abut that? You go to
see this movie for a good time and it delivers.  Seeing this film is the
same reason that folks see midnight showings of The Rocky Horror Picture
Show.  You see enough to enjoy the film and walk out feeling somewhat
empty, but if you're a Miller fan your belly might be sore.

Author
Joe Blenkle
 I wasn't too excited about the first "Tales From the Crypt" movie -
Demon Knight. That's why the latest installment - Tales From the
Crypt: Bordello of Blood was a surprise to me. I've never been a real
"Crypt" fan with the goofy ghoul "The Cryptkeeper" who introduces each
tale, a little too much for my tastes.
Fortunately in this movie his parts were held to a minimum and were
much better done than in the first movie. But the real surprise in
this movie was a halfway interesting story that was entertaining in
spots, as well as funny.
Of course a big part of this was due to the fact that it starred
Dennis Miller, who spent six years honing his comedy skills on
"Saturday Night Live." Miller's part of Rafe Guttman, a down and out
private investigator, made the film. I don't think this role would
have worked without him.
Tales From the Crypt: Bordello of Blood is simply dumb fun, but it is
well done dumb fun. Of course with "Bordello" in the title, one can
expect nudity - and you won't be disappointed - but surprisingly none
of it is by lead actress Erika Eleniak, who has bared it all in
Playboy and appeared in a number of movies including Under Siege, A
Pyromaniac's Love Story, and The Beverly Hillbillies. Eleniak plays
Katherine Verdoux, an assistant to TV bible thumper Reverand Current
(Chris Sarandon) and Guttman's prospective love interest in the movie.
To briefly outline the plot, after Verdoux's punker borther Caleb
(Corey Feldman) disappears, she hires Guttman to find him and the pair
track him to a funeral home that is really a bordello - filled with
vampires - including evil personified in Lilith (Angie Everhart), an
ancient blood-sucker who will stop at nothing to get what she
wants.
The movie becomes too predicatble of course, for anyone who watched
the "Crypt" shows on TV. The good guys win, the good guys lose, the
good guys win...or did they? It's still fun though and Miller has got
some great lines in the movie that has the audience just short of
rolling in the aisles. 
Be warned, however, there is lots of blood and gore, including ripping
hearts and other assorted body parts out of bodies. But for you
conniseurs of beautifil and scantily clad women, there is also a
liberal dose of them in the movie.
Again, if you're looking for just dumb fun, this movie is for you, but
otherwise wait for it to come out on video. It's fun enough to watch a
few times and may make a worthwhile addition to your collection.
Tales From the Crypt: Bordello of Blood is a Universal Pictures
presentation Dennis Miller, Erika Eleniak, Angie Everhart, Chris
Sarandon, Corey Feldman, William Sadler and John Kassier (voice of the
Crypt Keeper). Produced and Directed by: Gilbert Adler. Screenplay by
A.L. Katz and Hilbert Adler. Running time: 87 minutes.
--
This review, photos, upcoming attractions, links and more can be found
on my movie review web page at: http://www.calweb.com/~jblenkle/movies
- stop by and visit! Guest reviews welcomed - email me at
jblenkle@calweb.com

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
The second outing from the "Tales From the Crypt" crew: the prim
Katherine (Eleniak) works for moneyed evangelist Reverend Current
(Sarandon).  However her brother (Feldman) has gone missing and
she turns to sleazy two-bit detective Guttman (Miller).  He in
turn is lead to a funeral home which is a front for a brothel run
by arch-vampire Lillith (Everhart) ...
There is a big problem at the heart of the "Tales from the
Crypt" formula , TV and movies, which is difficult to put a
finger on.  But the epicenter is this: for the writers (4 on
"Bordello of Blood") and producers (11!)  this is not so much an
attempt to create a new story as it is to slavishly imitate a
genre.  Or perhaps to slavishly imitate their idea of a genre.
Thirty years ago, cheap and nasty four-colour comics titillated
15 year-olds.  Now those 15 year-olds have translated the comics
to the big screen, with much sentiment and little creativity.
In fact "Bordello of Blood" is not much of anything. Even at
the very concise runtime of 87 minutes (around 80 if you cut out
the superfluous shrieking bookends by that muppet with Tourettes,
the Cryptkeeper) it has barely enough to do.  The creators are
simply trading on the resonances of the movie, wanting you to say
"This is just like those old schlocky horror films and comics!
Great!"  But as the current revival of old TV favourites (Brady
Bunch, Flintstones, the Saint etc.)  demonstrates, bringing a
small idea to the big screen with big production values does not
necessarily make that idea big.  More the converse - a movie
length production demands movie size ideas and story, not just
money.  Those are things that "Bordello" ain't got.
Occasionally "Bordello" does spark, never to the extent that
its predecessor "Demon Knight" did, largely when some meta-joke
occurs.  Confronted with the vampiric bordello, the detective
Guttman starts theorising "duchovnian riffs".  Teenybopper
heartthrob Corey Feldman shows up just long enough to be
slaughtered mercilessly.  The cast is competent if unspectacular,
Eleniak and Everhart being present purely for their looks.
Sarandon alone shows some life, perhaps being not a great actor
but a good one.
About the worst thing you could say about "Bordello of Blood"
is that it's self-indulgent and largely harmless.  Perhaps the
"Tales" producers will retire the series or at least think more
before hauling it out next time.  [*/misfire] and velvet-covered
furniture on the Sid and Nancy scale.
"Tales from the Crypt Presents: Bordello of Blood"
Directed by Gilbert Adler.
Starring Dennis Miller, Erika Eleniak, Angie Everhart, Chris Sarandon,
   Corey Feldman.
Released 1996.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews/]

Author
James Berardinelli
TALES FROM THE CRYPT PRESENTS BORDELLO OF BLOOD
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 8/16/96 (wide)
Running Length: 1:27
MPAA Classification: R (Gore, violence, nudity, sex, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Dennis Miller, Erika Eleniak, Angie Everhart, Chris Sarandon, 
      Corey Feldman, William Sadler, voice of John Kassir
Director: Gilbert Adler
Producer: Gilbert Adler
Screenplay: A.L. Katz and Gilbert Adler
Cinematography: Tom Priestley
Music: Chris Boardman
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     It's curious how one of the most inventive made-for-cable TV series 
(HBO's TALES FROM THE CRYPT) could turn into one of the most toothless 
movie series to haunt multiplexes.  BORDELLO OF BLOOD is the second 
TALES FROM THE CRYPT feature, following in the dismal wake left by 
1995's DEMON KNIGHT, one of that year's worst pictures.  At least this 
followup keeps to the basic sprit of the program that spawned it.  
BORDELLO OF BLOOD is a macabre, jokey affair that could give BUFFY THE 
VAMPIRE SLAYER a run for its money as the silliest undead story of the 
decade.
     Comic Dennis Miller is on hand as Rafe Guttman, the hero of the 
piece.  Miller, who got bumped off early in THE NET, stays around much 
longer here, which is fortunate, since his wisecracking is BORDELLO OF 
BLOOD's most obvious asset.  Miller makes this movie; without him, I 
would be fishing for nice things to say.  Several of his one-liners are 
legitimately funny, and the offhand manner in which he confronts the 
vampires is worth at least a smile.  His supporting cast includes model-
turned-supposed-actresses Erika Eleniak (UNDER SIEGE) and Angie Everhart 
(JADE).  Chris Sarandon plays a rather dull televangelist.  The film 
makes a lot of jokes at the expense of the religious right, but, 
considering that it's such an easy target, the humor seems recycled.
     Frankly, there isn't much of a plot.  The exposition exists for 
three purposes:  to gather a lot of half-naked women together, to 
display as much gore as can be crammed into ninety minutes (actually, 
FROM DUSK TILL DAWN's total probably tops BORDELLO OF BLOOD's), and to 
give Miller an arena for his verbal ripostes.  The whole thing works in 
a campy sort of way, but this movie definitely should not be confused 
with "good" cinema.  Just because it's bad, though, doesn't mean that it 
can't have a certain entertainment value.  Presumably, that's exactly 
what the film makers intended.
     Angie Everhart plays Lilith, the most evil creature in the history 
of mankind.  She runs a bordello out of a mortuary.  Men go in, but they 
don't come out -- at least not in one piece.  All of Lilith's ladies of 
the night have strange puncture marks in their necks, although none of 
their male clients seem to notice.  They are, I presume, too worked up 
by Lilith's unique method of French kissing.  It's a heartfelt sort of 
activity.
     Anyway, one night, a couple of grungy teenagers out looking for a 
good time wander into Lilith's lair.  When one of them fails to come 
home, his sister, Katherine (Erika Eleniak), employs a down-and-out PI, 
Rafe Guttman, to locate him (note: in movies like this, private 
investigators always have to be "down-and-out").  Rafe pays a visit to 
the bordello, and, after getting away from an overeager, topless 
dominatrix vampiress, he decides that something unusual is going on.  A 
leap of intuition reveals the truth, and Rafe returns to the bordello, 
armed with holy water pistols.
     I'm almost embarrassed to admit that I liked parts of BORDELLO OF 
BLOOD -- it is, after all, a pretty sick motion picture.  Alas, the 
sense of bloody good fun gets stretched too thin.  There's not enough 
material here to sustain the running length, and the film goes through 
dead patches (most of which occur when Miller isn't on screen).  All of 
the stuff with Chris Sarandon is a waste of time that should have been 
relegated to the cutting room floor -- except that would have trimmed 
BORDELLO OF BLOOD to an unacceptably short sixty minutes or so.  
     So, although this movie is an improvement over the dreadful DEMON 
KNIGHT (then again, almost anything would be), it still hasn't convinced 
me that TALES OF THE CRYPT belongs on the big screen.  As for the film's 
commercial potential, I'm afraid it hasn't got much.  At best, much like 
BUFFY, it will attain cult status.  More likely, however, it will vanish 
into theatrical oblivion, only to be resurrected in a few months on 
video store shelves, where the promise of naked female flesh and copious 
gore will generate a healthy rental life.  Such is, after all, the 
deserved fate of movies like this.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
