Title
Review for That Darn Cat (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Just so our points of reference are clear, the original THAT DARN CAT
was hardly a classic.  The folks at Disney have been using that word as
though they have a trademark on it, tossing it at everything it has ever
committed to celluloid and becoming their own worst enemies as these
"classics" are remade as gaudy nonsense like 101 DALMATIANS.  1965's THAT
DARN CAT, however, was simply a cute little caper featuring Disney's two
principal live-action studio players of the 1960s, Dean Jones and Hayley
Mills, and hardly a sacred treasure.  The second life of THAT DARN CAT
is very different from the first, but it's hard to say whether it is an
improvement.  It is a strange sort of family film: clever and amusing in
some surprising ways, but disappointing at delivering the goods to keep
the kids entertained.
     Christina Ricci stars as Patti Randall, a somewhat sullen teenager
growing disgusted with her sleepy Massachusetts town of Edgefield.  Her
best -- in fact, only -- friend is her cat D. C., a frisky feline with a
nose for trouble.  During one of his midnight wanderings, D. C. comes upon
the hideout where a kidnapped woman (Rebecca Koon) is being held.  The
woman is able to slip her wristwatch over D. C.'s neck with a message
scratched on the back, and when Patti discovers the watch she sees a
chance for a little adventure.  She takes the watch to the F.B.I., where
the task of following up is assigned to rookie agent Zeke Kelso (Doug E.
Doug).  Kelso and his team attempt to follow D. C. to find out where the
kidnapped woman might be, but keeping up with that darn cat is easier said
than done, particularly in a town not nearly as sleepy as Patti might
think.
     The script for THAT DARN CAT is attributed to "S. M. Alexander and L.
A. Karaszewski," better known to credits-watchers as Scott Alexander and
Larry Karaszewski, the team behind the oddball bio-pics ED WOOD and THE
PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT.  You can certainly see those bloodlines in the
eccentric characters who populate the film, and who give Edgefield its
edge.  A lonely old woman (Estelle Parsons) makes prank phone calls from
her room; two rival service station owners (John Ratzenberger and Mark
Christopher Lawrence) engage in guerrilla warfare against each other's
shops.  There are brothers Melvin and Marvin (Thomas F. Wilson and Brian
Haley), two over-zealous security guards, and homely butcher Lu (Megan
Cavanagh), who delivers her affections to Melvin in the form of tender
cuts of meat.  Even Dean Jones himself turns up as a flat-broke former
millionaire, with Dyan Cannon as his cosmetic surgery-obsessed wife.  And
we haven't even mentioned Doug E. Doug's twitchy turn as the F.B.I. agent,
whose facial tics grow a bit aggravating but is simply hilarious when he
goes into full prowl mode in his attempt to "think like a cat."
     That's quite a switch from the 1965 version, where the cat had
infinitely more personality than any human in the film.  I'm also not sure
that was a wise decision.  The cat in the new THAT DARN CAT actually plays
a fairly miniscule role in the proceedings, and while that leaves plenty
of goofy goings-on which might entertain adults, kids may be somewhat
disappointed by the film.  Director Bob Spiers (British television's
"Absolutely Fabulous" and "Fawlty Towers") maintains a fairly languid pace
for much of THAT DARN CAT's running time, focusing on quirky character
vignettes rather than funny feline frolicking.  In fact, there's no
particular reason for a cat to have anything to do with this plot; it
would have been just as easy for Patti to find the watch herself and
gradually discover the dark side of Edgefield.  Spiers does pull out some
strange and original physical comedy, like Agent Kelso's unexplained 
ability to do a gravity-defying backflip over a fence or his enthusiastic
dive into a garbage bin, but most of the humor comes from silly behavior
which might leave the little ones restless or unimpressed.
     Spiers suddenly seems to become aware of the relative absence of
broad, fast-paced slapstick in the final twenty minutes, which consist
almost entirely of an extended car chase between Patti and Kelso and the
kidnapers.  After 70 minutes with scarcely a bit of John Hughes-ian
bodily injury humor to be found, THAT DARN CAT turns into "The Dukes of
Hazard," with cars flying through the air, glass shattering and gas
stations exploding into a fireworks display.  Yet even during that chase,
Alexander and Karaszewski are able to toss in bizarre asides like the
mourner who watches a coffin spring open and exclaims, "That's not him!"
THAT DARN CAT makes some unfortunate choices -- particularly turning the
search for the kidnapers into a mystery which results in a predictable 
"Scooby-Doo" style unmasking -- but for a remake of a Disney film from an
era which thrived on formula, this DARN CAT is surprisingly unpredictable.
If this were not the kind of film where most of the audience _wants_
predictability, that quality alone would be enough to recommend it.  It
pains me not to recommend THAT DARN CAT, a film which would be a welcome
change of pace for any parent who has had to sit through hyperactive
kiddie fare like 101 DALMATIANS or SPACE JAM.  I only wish it had more
energy, more for the children, more of that darn cat.  It could have been
one of the rare live action Disney films to deserve the term "classic."

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I'm so upset," says Mrs. Flint (Dyan Cannon).  "I'd cry, but my
tear ducts haven't worked since my last eye job."  Her maid has been
kidnapped and is being held for ransom.  This is one of the better
pieces of dialog in Disney's remake of THAT DARN CAT, but it, like the
rest of the humor in the show, elicits little laughter.  The film is so
bad that I found myself wishing it had a laugh track.  With a laugh
track I could at least pretend the movie was funny.
     I am careful to warn my readers about films.  For this one there
is a simple admonition: Get coffee.  Unless you imbibe significant
amounts of caffeine before entering the theater, you stand a good
chance of not being able to stay awake through the many long and dull
parts.  We had four adults in our party, and two of them kept nodding
off.
     The original 1965 movie version of THAT DARN CAT starred Hayley
Mills and Dean Jones.  (Jones, playing Mr. Flint, has a small part in
the remake.)  It was not the sort of classic film that might suggest
that a remake was in order nor did the remake's producer, Robert
Simonds, have any fresh ideas for the project.  The film appears to
have been made solely for a quick profit.  Simonds seems to have
figured that any Disney film featuring a animal had to be a success.
The remake is devoid of imagination and creative energy.
     The putative star of the show is a cat named D.C.  D.C. is owned
by angst-filled teenager Patti Randall (Christina Ricci).  Patti
explains that she wears all black because that is how her soul feels.
Ricci gives a lifeless performance.  Perhaps she should have heeded my
coffee advice.
     D.C. roams the town every night at 8:00, and on one of his
excursions he finds the kidnapped maid.  The maid gives D.C. her watch
on which she has started writing the word "help."  Patti takes the
watch to the FBI and shows it to Agent Zeke Kelso.  This part, which
was acted by Jones in the original, is played for broad humor by Doug
E.  Doug in the remake.  Although I hated Doug's performance, I do give
him credit for being the only actor to exert any effort.  The others
are on autopilot.
     Even the cat in the picture is given nothing challenging to do.
Most scenes of D.C., played by a cat named Elvis, have him running
across rooftops.  Except for the one scene where he growls, his single
expression is as boring as the rest of the picture.  I have three cats,
and all are more emotive than D.C.
     As a cat lover, my favorite scene in the picture an FBI agent
ordering D.C. to move.  "Go, go, go!" he demands, but the cat is
unimpressed.  Patti looks the agent sternly in the eye and says,
"You're not a cat person, are you?"
     Most of the film relies on sight gags that you have seen a million
times before.  There is a board in the fence that swings around and
hits people and animals on the head.  People fall down stairs.  One
character tries walking but finds that he has a trash can stuck on his
foot.  Etc., ad nauseam.
     In a typically unfunny scene Kelso comes to Patti's rescue.  "You
smell really bad," says Patti.  "What happened?"  The agent explains,
"Got into a fight with a dumpster and lost."
     When everything else fails, go for explosions and car chases.
Director Bob Spiers, whose previous experience was directing television
series, tries to end the show with a bang, but the lengthy chase scene
is as repetitive and tiring as the rest of the picture.
     The show's biggest conundrum is the script.  It has no ingenuity
and yet is by the same creative writing team of S. M. Alexander and L.
A. Karaszewski who won the Golden Globe award for THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY
FLYNT.  They also did the script for ED WOOD.  Both of these scripts
are wonderful and highly creative.  Although I do not understand it, I
think there may be a hint in the press kit.  Every one associated with
the film has a lengthy biography except for them.  It just says they
live in LA and have been writing together for ten years.  No mention is
made of their previous pictures.  Could it be because they whipped up
this screenplay without much thought, and now want to disassociate
themselves from the project?
     Too often critics are too easy on kids' movies.  If the pictures
are lifeless but harmless, they give them two stars.  This version of
THAT DARN CAT has nothing to challenge minds of any age, and the jokes
are pathetic.  Whereas I do not doubt that many kids will like it, it
could and should have been so much better.  Why shouldn't we aim a bit
higher for our youngsters?  Intelligent scripts can be both successful
and funny, as the one for TOY STORY proved.
     THAT DARN CAT runs 1:39.  It is rated PG for some explosions and
one mild expletive.  It would be fine for most kids although the loud
noises might scare some kids under 4.  My son Jeffrey and his friend
Kerry, both about 8, give the show thumbs up.  Their favorite line is
the one about coughing up a hairball.  I give this pitiful excuse for a
movie thumbs down and a single *.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
