Title
Review for Happy Accidents (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 IFC Films
 Director: Brad Anderson
 Writer:  Brad Anderson
 Cast: Marisa Tomei, Vincent D'Onofrio, Nadia Dajani, Tovah
Feldshuh, Holland Taylor, Richard Portnow, Sean Gullette, Cara
Buono, Lianna Pai, Tamara Jenkins, Jose Zuniga, Bronson
Dudley, Anthony Michael Hall
   If you know good music you could probably listen to a piece
you've never heard before--a symphony by Brahms or Beethoven,
an opera by Mozart or Puccini--and figure out who composed it. 
The same is true of film directors but to a limited extent.  Who
would have guessed that Brad Anderson, who scared the wits out
of his audience with "Session 9," could turn out a fluffy comedy
like "Happy Accidents"?  On the other hand, we do see that in
both cases an active imagination is at work.  In "Session 9,"
Anderson tells a horror story that breaks away from the standard
genre of devils-outside to take on the "Repulsion"-like terror of a
mind breaking down--the demons within.  With "Happy
Accidents," Anderson takes on a similarly atypical story, this one
about love rather than the abhorrence felt between men in
"Session 9," and asks the question: Can a woman love a man
enough to overlook  what she considers a sick mind?  
   Anderson's romantic tale hits us with a twist near its conclusion
that could knock out socks off were it not that "Happy Accidents"
dwells so interminably on a single concept that by the time we
learn the truth, we find it difficult to care.  When Ruby Weaver
(Marisa Tomei) runs into Sam Deed (Vincent D'Onofrio) on a park
bench in New York, she is so taken in by his gentle demeanor
that she overlooks the co-dependency situations with other men
that drove her to a therapist (Holland Taylor) and invites him to
share her flat in just a week's time.  After Sam invites Ruby to
listen to some music--bringing some records to her place rather
than taking her to a concert--they switch off the nostalgic stuff, put
on the contempo, and dance wildly all the way to her bed.  It is
there that she notices a bar code tattooed to his underarm, at
which point he explains that he's  a time traveler who has come
back from his existence in the 25th century--which prompts her to
give him his walking papers.  But when she discusses the
situation with her best friend Gretchen (Nadia Dajani) and later, in
the film's best scene, has a heart-to-heart with her mother Lillian
(Tovah Feldshuh) about savoring the passion because "it doesn't
last," she decides to go along for the ride.
   Though Marisa Tomei and Vincent D'Onofrio were both born in
Brooklyn (which should make them soul brother and sister as far
as I'm concerned), they are miscast.  D'Onofrio is forty-one years
old playing a role he should have been given just after his capacity
in "Full Metal Jacket," while Tomei, going on thirty-seven, is simply
past the time of girlie chats, of looking endless at pictures of the
"freaks" they had dumped, leaving their pictures in what they call
the ex-files.  Besides, Marisa Tomei is in her usual bimbo role, first
as a telephone operator who gets fired because she spends too
much time chatting with her 411 clients and promptly lands a job
teaching English to foreigners!  What sort of training did she get
in TEFL?  And how could she possibly keep up in some heavy
discussion of the laws of physics with art-gallery-loving friends who
are far too sophisticated for her--including Anthony Michael Hall in
the role of a famous actor who believes he is seeing some cool
improvs as Sam discusses his life in the 25th?
   Credit must be given nonetheless to director Anderson for a
good attempt at putting across a decidedly lower-budget sci-fi pic
than Gregory Hoblit's excellent time-travel saga "Frequency," but
quirkiness of plot and engagement of audience do not always go
hand in hand.   The dialogue is often incisive but the film could
easily lose fifteen minutes by dispensing with the repetitive
discussions of time travel and making the chemistry between two
middle-aged people more credible.                                          
Not Yet Rated R.  Running time: 110 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
HAPPY ACCIDENTS, written and directed by Brad Anderson (NEXT STOP WONDERLAND),
is a cute and quirky tale that would best be classified as a science fiction,
romantic comedy.  Starring Marisa Tomei and Vincent D'Onofrio as lovers Ruby
Weaver and Sam Deed, the movie's serious flaw is that the chemistry between them
is never quite credible.  Individually, they both deliver interesting
performances, Tomei as a hopeless codependent and D'Onofrio as an awkward guy
who is either a "back traveler" from the year 2470 or a nut case, but together
they never make a believable couple.  Other than the light comedy, what makes
the story work is the intrigue as to whether the movie will ever reveal the
truth, if any, behind Sam's time-traveling claims.
Sam explains to Ruby that he is from Dubuque, Iowa -- just not her Dubuque,
Iowa.  He is from the Atlantic seaboard Dubuque in the future.  The son of an
anachronistic freedom fighting father, who still believed in procreation the old
fashion way, Sam has come to the past to find Ruby.  Ruby, the daughter of a
codependent mother, has spent her whole life dating men who need fixing.  On the
surface, Sam appears to be just another one of her losers.
Sometimes the movie plays like a variation on the old Peter Sellers's movie,
BEING THERE, but it is the best when it's the freshest.  The most original scene
in the movie comes when, in a diner, Sam turns the explanation of time travel
into a tactilely erotic experience for Ruby.  Even if the film is a near miss,
at least it's just the easy-going type of material that is appropriate for a
world recently turned horribly upside-down.
HAPPY ACCIDENTS runs 1:40.  It is rated R for "language" and would be acceptable
for teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, September 21, 2001. 
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Happy_Accidents_ (R) *** (out of ****)
        While at its core a romantic comedy, Brad Anderson's _Happy_Accidents_
defies conventional categorization, and that's undoubtedly the reason why it's
taken so long to make its way to screens (shot and set in 1999, the film fell
off the radar after premiering at the 2000 Sundance Film Festival).  That very
unconventional quality also what makes the film so well worth seeking out.
        And seeking out is what it'll take to find _Happy_Accidents_, for in
keeping with its low-budget indie roots, the film is appearing only in a handful
of arthouses--a shame, since this is as commercial a romantic comedy as
mainstream Hollywood has put out all year, not to mention an even more
satisfying one.  Marisa Tomei has her first worthy role in years as Ruby Weaver,
a hopelessly romantic single in New York City with an unfortunate knack for
hooking up with guys with problem.  One day at the park she meets Sam Deed
(Vincent D'Onofrio), and not only is the attraction instantaneous, it looks like
he could be the perfect, normal guy she'd always wanted.  Alas, bliss is
short-lived when Sam drops the whopper to end all whoppers: he claims that he is
originally from Dubuque, Iowa... in the year 2470.
        That Ruby's reluctant decision to hang on to Sam is completely
believable owes a lot to D'Onofrio's performance.  He delivers the increasingly
convoluted back story with the right balance of wry humor and earnestness that
keeps the audience continually off-balance as to whether Sam is telling the
truth or downright insane.  D'Onofrio is also so naturally warm a performer that
one cares for the character regardless of his mental state, and he strikes
quirky but no less potent sparks with the ideally cast Tomei, who nails both
Ruby's comic neuroses and genuine, soul-deep romantic yearning.  Unlike
Anderson's previous comic meditation on romantic fate, _Next_Stop_Wonderland_,
one is given convincing reasons why these two could, indeed, be destined to be
together, as Sam often insists.
        That idea of balance is the key to the success of _Happy_Accidents_. 
Anderson strikes the right note in the humor, relying on a subtler, more
natural, situation- and personality-driven comedy than broad, buffoonish
physical gags.  Similarly modulated are the sci-fi touches; Sam's stories of
"the future" are outlandish but follow a certain plausible logic that could very
well account for their truth.  Most impressive about _Happy_Accidents_ is how
Anderson is able to make the two seemingly incompatible genres of sci-fi and
romantic comedy mesh into a seamless whole that remains completely convincing
even at its most disbelief-tempting.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
My filmcritic.com colleague Norm Schrager nailed Session 9, Brad
Anderson's throwback to spooky horror films from the 70's.  It worked as
an eerie homage without being self-referential or smugly postmodern. 
Genre aficionados will acknowledge the similarities in tone to Stanley
Kubrick's The Shining and George Romero's Dawn of the Dead without being
taken out of the engrossing narrative (i.e., a psychologically addled
waste management team clears out an abandoned lunatic asylum;
unspeakable dread ensues).  In a double-whammy for 2001, Anderson shoots
and (mostly) scores again with his eclectic riff on time-travel episodes
from The Twilight Zone, appropriately titled Happy Accidents.
Much like Session 9, the cards are played very close to the vest here. 
Is boyish, eccentric "Sam Deed from Dubuque, Iowa" a futuristic voyager
from the year 2470 or just your run-of-the-mill psychologically
disturbed nutcase let loose on the present-day streets of NYC?  As
played by wonderful character actor Vincent D'Onofrio (Full Metal
Jacket), it's up in the air whether or not we should accept his detailed
monologues about life after the polar ice caps have melted.  The
question proves to be moot, at least for a time.  Even if the whole
thing proves to be a creative delusion, one agrees with the character
judgment passed down on him by his new girlfriend, Ruby (Marisa Tomei):
"He's a freak, but he sure tells a good story!"
Neurotic Ruby thinks she may have found True Love after a series of
nightmarish dating disasters (the Junkie, the Fetishist, the Artist, the
Frenchman, etc.), but isn't quite sure how to handle "Sam Deed" when he
starts explaining the barcode on his arm, his elaborately constructed
fake identity, his pathological fear of dogs, his ability to speak five
different languages, and his mission to change a crucial moment in time
that may have ramifications on time's alternate realities.  (Don't
ask.)  It's all a bit much to take in.  Ruby's close friend Gretchen
(cuz ya can't have a love story without the token friend, though Nadia
Dajani invests the thankless role with warmth) chalks it up as a sexy
role-playing game, but her cautious therapist (Holland Taylor) warns her
that co-dependency is rearing its ugly head again and she's in over her
head with yet another doomed relationship.  Who ya gonna believe?
Despite her winning an Academy Award, Marisa Tomei has always struck me
as an annoying and unwelcome screen presence, one that undermines the
pleasure of watching Happy Accidents.  Her brassy New Yawk attitude
never really meshes with her desperate desire to appear "cute" to her
adoring fans.  Being loud and flashing a (disingenuous) smile does not
necessarily equal "substantial and sexy."  It takes more than a crack
team of hair and wardrobe people to imbue her with personality.  Then
there's that damned voice, which strains to be oh-so-adorable.  Look,
this stuff is purely subjective.  Some people feel this way about
Richard Gere, others cannot bear to watch Robin Williams' hyperactive
schtick.  For my money, it's M. Tomei with a bullet.
Happy Accidents is a romantic comedy filtered through Twelve Monkeys
(or, more appropriately, Chris Marker's La Jetee, especially with those
still framed "memory" photographs Anderson employs as a stylistic device
throughout).  Modern Manhattan is filmed with an otherworldly, vaguely
alien eye with a color scheme oddly reminiscent of Logan's Run.  As the
stranger in a strange land, D'Onofrio walks slightly out-of-step,
wonderfully affable but often inscrutable with his wayward expressions
and bemused detachment.  This is science fiction told mainly via the
power of suggestion (though it often falls into the sci-fi trap of
having entirely too much forced exposition -- we want deeds, not words!)
At least twenty minutes too long, Happy Accidents eventually gets around
to a race-against-time scenario that puts "Sam Deed" to the Ultimate
Test.  No movie can live in ambiguity forever, but Anderson seems
terminally unable to provide satisfactory conclusions to his otherwise
well structured recent narratives.  (Let's pretend the loathsome and
predictable Next Stop Wonderland never happened, shall we?)  There are
also some slow, repetitive stretches as Ruby and Sam go over the same
arguments again and again over whether or not he's crazy.  The premise
is strong enough to sustain interest, but it's enough to throw a nod in
the general direction of Rod Serling for wrapping up his ideas in
half-hour time slots, commercials included.
Director: Brad Anderson
Producer: Susan A. Stover
Writer: Brad Anderson
Starring: Marisa Tomei, Vincent D'Onofrio, Nadia Dajani, Holland Taylor,
Sean Gullette, Jose Zuniga
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
