Title
Review for Frantic (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
      Richard Walker (played by Harrison Ford) is in Paris for a medical
 convention.  He banters with his wife on the way to the hotel, checks in,
 and takes a shower.  When he comes out of the shower his wife seems to have
 stepped out.  Room service brings in an ordered breakfast and Walker eats
 it and takes a nap.  When he wakes up, still no wife.  He goes to the lobby
 to look for her.  One by one, he checks out possibilities of what could
 have happened to her.  Soon his worst fears are confirmed.  He learns that
 she has been kidnapped.  The police are surly; the American authorities can
 do nothing.  Walker has to take matters into his own hands.  This is not
 too original a plot and, in truth, much of FRANTIC has a ring of
 familiarity.  In some ways it follows the classic style of a Hitchcock
 thriller.  The one-word title, the innocent bystander hero, a genuine
 McGuffin, even rooftop struggles.  Where it strays from being Hitchcockian
 is in its nearly humorless approach and its cold-fish hero.  Harrison Ford
 is nowhere near a personable one as a Cary Grant or a James Stewart.  That
 makes the acting a few steps closer to reality, but the viewer is left to
 guess what the character must be feeling rather than feeling with the
 character.  We are drawn to Harrison Ford, but at arm's length.  With
 Hitchcock and the right actor we would actually be living the adventure
 with the character.  On the other hand, with most Hitchcock films it would
 be easier to pick holes in the plot.  Even a VERTIGO has a plot that
 entirely hinges on a man recognizing a specific Spanish villa from a
 description from somebody's dream.  Following the initial events that set
 the action of FRANTIC in motion, events follow a suspenseful but logical
 course.  (The major unexplained point of the film is how an action that was
 not intended to be a kidnapping--and seemingly could easily have avoided
 being turned into one--was so botched.)
      Ford's search for his missing wife takes him to, if not Paris's
 underbelly, at least somewhere below Paris's waist.  His best clue leads
 him to Michelle, a sinuous drugged punker played by Emmanuelle Seigner, who
 provides a somewhat less innocent bystander to the plot and provides the
 attractive female lead required in any Roman-Polanski-directed film.  As a
 cliche-buster, however, Walker reacts with total disinterest to Michelle's
 attempts at seduction.  First, last, and always, he is in this to get back
 his wife (played by Betty Buckley, who played a sympathetic teacher in
 CARRIE, a sympathetic mother in EIGHT IS ENOUGH, and an unsympathetic
 singer in TENDER MERCIES).
      FRANTIC is a surprisingly straightforward thriller from director and
 co-scripter Roman Polanski, who is usually known for for more convoluted
 and psychological storylines.  Rate it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FRANTIC  (France-USA, 1988) *** 1/2 Directed by Roman Polanski. Written by
Polanski and Gerard Brach. Cinematography, Witold Sobocinski. Editing, Sam
O'Steen. Production design, Pierre Guffroy. Music, Ennio Morricone.
Produced by Thom Mount and Tim Hampton.  Cast: Harrison Ford,  Emmanuelle
Seigner, John Mahoney, Betty Buckley, Jimmie Ray Weeks, Yorgo Voyagis,
David Huddleston, Gerard Klein, et al. A Warners release. 120 minutes.
Rated R.
>From its first shots, FRANTIC generates and keeps up  such terrific
suspense that it makes most (if not all) other thrillers of the 80s  taste
like porridge. The suspense is  deliberate, slow, stretched out in an
utterly commonplace atmosphere --and  it is exceptionally effective. San
Francisco doctor Walker ( Harrison Ford) arrives in Paris, with his wife
Sondra (Betty Buckley, ) for a medical convention, with a bit of tax-exempt
sightseeing on the side and  a second honeymoon  away from the kids. They
are exhausted  by the  long trip  and jet-lag.  On the "peripherique" --
the belt-road around Paris-- their taxi has a flat. Even  this red herring
happening carries suspense. They  later totter into the Grand Hotel. The
bleary-eyed  couple of generic American tourists are dutifully determined
to start their stay with  croissants and a roll in bed. But bed and
breakfast are not to be. While Ford is showering noisily, with gleeful
anticipation of things to come, the phone rings and his wife  answers. When
the man  steps out of the shower, the lady  has vanished.
You' re made to feel  all along that something ominous is going to happen,
but since you don't know what this might be, every moment, object and tiny
event is laden with suspense.
Director Polanski  has assimilated  better than any other filmmaker the
techniques of Alfred Hitchcock, where the most common thing could be
uncommon, where the blandest face could become sinister, where the
extraordinary lies within the ordinary. Later, Polanski    also pays
additional,  discreet homage to the Master in  ways that Hitchcockians will
spot -- from the ironic use of the Statue of Liberty to a rooftop scene.
But there's a  difference in attitudes. Hitchcock mocks  gently both his
principals and their entourage, while Polanski  practices a restrained
irony only on the surrounding people and places . He is entirely serious
about his  protagonist Harrison Ford.
Tension mounts  unrelentingly  as Ford goes from puzzlement to questions in
the lobby ,  from  fruitless inquiries on the spot to the police station,
then to the US. Embassy.  Finally  he is forced to embark  on his own,
desperate, frantic search.
Every imaginable frustration  stands  in his way, and every  stumbling-
block is genuine and observed with sardonic precision  --even black humor
-- by the script and its execution.  Ford speaks no French and is at the
mercy of the good will of interpreters. The hotel personnel is amiable but
skeptical : wives have been known to fly the coop --  not a big deal in
France. The familiar quirks and annoyances of daily life in Paris add to
the difficulties   --like people on the phone who don't want to be
disturbed and hang up. Complicating   Ford's miseries are the  peculiar,
private and official Gallic  attitudes toward any problem. Compounding this
are their specific attitudes toward  Americans, whom they see as
un-Cartesian, unsophisticated simpletons. Underlying that is the familiar,
slightly sadistic pleasure (which the entire planet shares) in getting back
at the Yanks who have had it so good for so long. Let the Americans stew.
The cops treat  Ford with haughty superiority. The American Embassy people
-- once  the breathless Ford  has run  through the gauntlet of security
measures-- are cold , indifferent and unhelpful. The doctor is on his own,
in a Paris   shown with superb calculation and naturalness,  neither as Gay
Paree nor as an artificially sinister metropolis.
Against all odds, Ford --who ought to be distracted to  perdition with
worry -- somehow   keeps his wits. Taking his main clue from a wrong
suitcase, the  harassed, dead-tired  husband doggedly follows it and
becomes involved in a nightmarish investigation . It    leads him to  odd
but very real places, and to  fringe people. Among them  stands out a
black-leather young woman, Michelle (Emmanuelle Seigner). She's  sexy, with
long legs that Polanski's  camera caresses with low-angle shots, but Ford
does not .
The film is smart.  It   gives you some of the conventions of "film noir"
but it  does not  get into  all-out cliches. The girl 's erotic presence is
palpable (her dancing is like vertical copulation), but  this  is  not used
as a distraction or a love interest.  Keeping  up mercilessly the suspense
of the search is what matters.
There does come a point where some  filmic overkill sets in --and I mean
this more figuratively than literally-- where, in plot  twists and in
persons introduced, too much is too much, especially by the standards of
Alfred Hitchcock who would have built up developments more soberly while he
would have kept going with character development. (That's why I think of
the construction of his  pictures as "clean." )  Even so, the first part of
Frantic is  masterly, the second part  confident of itself, and the third,
in spite of its gimmickry, still has some good touches.
Harrison Ford, a true professional whose talent and versatility tend to be
forgotten because of his  Han Solo and Indiana Jones roles, confirms here
the appeal of his unpretentiousness. Newcomer Emmanuelle Seigner gets off
to a pretty indecent  start. She's the granddaughter of the legendary Louis
Seigner, star of the Comedie Francaise. The supporting cast, especially the
hotel and police people, are perfect in their realism: the more you know
France the better those actors are. Polanski chose them and directed them
with impressive precision.
Roman Polanski was born in Paris in 1933 of Polish-Jewish parents who
returned to Poland three years later. Soon after came the occupation by the
Nazis, the persecution of Jews and the deportation of his family to death
camps. Roman, who had escaped the Germans, survived. Later he studied and
made films in Poland, became famous. A cosmopolitan who knew well big
cities, he used them in his works with moody authenticity:  London in
Repulsion, Paris in The Tenant, New York  in Rosemary's Baby, Los Angeles
in Chinatown.
The production values of Frantic are outstanding. Polanski  surrounded
himself with a who's who of  collaborators. French scenarist (and director)
Gerard Brach worked here with Polanski for the ninth time. Among his
fifty-odd screenplays are The Two Of Us ("Le Vieil homme et l'enfant"),
Quest For Fire, The Name Of The Rose, Jean De Florette ,  Manon of the
Spring, Maria's Lovers. Editor Sam O'steen  had already three Oscar
nominations (Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?, Chinatown, Silkwood).
Designer Pierre Guffroy had won two Oscars (Tess, The Discreet Charm of the
Bourgeoisie). Composer Ennio Morricone is a legend in his field. Director
of photography Sobocinski, a Polish collaborator of Andrzej Wajda, proved
again what an incredible source of  great cinematographers Poland is,
especially  the  film school at Lodz, Polanski's  alma mater.
Curiously,  this is the second movie called "Frantic," at least in English.
The first  (called in France Elevator to the Gallows) was also a thriller,
also made in France, also set in Paris. It was  one of the very first works
of the French New Wave, and the first fiction feature  by Louis Malle, who,
curiously, as in the case of Polanski, was one of the few European
filmmakers to be very successful with the pictures that they made in
America.
Oddly, except for a small, faithful following, Frantic has been underrated
and paid little attention to from the time of its release on.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel
