Title
Review for Three Kings (1999)
Number of Reviews
36

Author
Steve Rhodes
With lots of bullets that go zing, landmines that go boom, and vehicles
that explode into fireballs, THREE KINGS would seem to have all of the
ingredients, including a big name star (George Clooney), for a
traditional summer movie. That the studio has released the picture
instead in the fall, along with other Oscar hopefuls, shows that they
want us to view the picture as something significant.
Regardless of its hype and its respected writer/director, David O.
Russell (SPANKING THE MONKEY and FLIRTING WITH DISASTER), THREE KINGS is
really just a big-budget Hollywood action picture, filled with lots of
violence and explosions, masquerading as an art film.  The film's showy
look, like that of a cheap motel television in which the color and the
brightness are turned to maximum, serves notice that THREE KINGS expects
to be taken as something more than just another shoot 'em up.  With his
home movie-making proclivity for fast pans and zooms, the director
manages to keep the audience's attention, which is important since the
story frequently drifts aimlessly, getting lost in the desert as often
as the movie's protagonists.
Set on a day just after the end of the Gulf War, the plot is the age-old
one about gold and greed.  During the end-of-war festivities among the
jubilant American troops, some of them are still on the job rounding up
the captives.  One of the prisoners has a buried-treasure map partially
concealed in his anal passage.  The map points to many bunkers, one of
which is said to contain Kuwaiti gold bars stolen by the Iraqis during
the occupation.
"This is a media war, and you better get on board," an angry Colonel
Horn (Mykelti Williamson) lectures Special Forces Captain Archie Gates
(Clooney).  Two weeks from retirement, the Captain has made the mistake
of taking care of the wrong media person.  When he was supposed to be
shepherding Adrianna Cruz (Nora Dunn) around the war sites, he was off
having sex with another reporter instead.
Adrianna, the story's only wholly comedic character, is not one to be
messed with.  Never happier than when she's been captured by enemy
troops and can film the event, she reveals the secret to her success.
"I try to be substance based and not style based," she explains.
Still, she's a pest to have around so she is banished for most of the
movie, sent on a wild goose chase by the captain.  Once the captain
hears of the gold, he doesn't want anyone to know that he and his three
companions are heading into enemy-controlled territory to steal it for
themselves.  (If you've ever attempted to pick up a bar of gold, as I
have, you know how ludicrous this movie's version is.  They clearly make
the bars about 10 times lighter than they are in order to make their
movement easier.)
Along with the captain on the adventure in the desert are the map's
finders, three reservists.  Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg) is a Detroit
father who works in retail, Chief Elgin (Ice Cube) is a Detroit airport
baggage handler and Conrad Vig (Spike Jonze) is a redneck from Garland,
Texas.  They are all ready to quit their day jobs in order to live a
life of luxury.  All except Conrad, that is, who doesn't have a day job.
He wiles away his hours back home shooting guns at junked cars.
Like college kids at a Fourth of July party, they fire off their weapons
and listen to loud music as they buzz across the sand in a military
vehicle on their way to vast riches.  The fly in the ointment is that
the seemingly heartless captain proves to have a hidden heart of gold.
Expecting a quick in-and-out job, they instead become embroiled in the
internal Iraqi politics of the pro- and anti-Saddam factions.
Along the way there are some funny moments mixed in with the gore that
is carefully designed to having every one in the audience grimacing.
Do we really need to see an inside, slow-motion view of the damage a
bullet can do to our internal organs?
The movie's funniest moment comes when one of the reservists gets
trapped and ends up rifling through a box of stolen cell phones.
Finally finding one with enough juice left in its battery, he attempts
to get the operator to connect him with "Desert Storm."  She needs more
specifics, as in a number.  He explains that it's "that big army in the
desert."
Although it's never a bad film, it rarely rises much above a typical
action one, even given its pretentious filming style.  A movie in need
of pruning, it still provides good entertainment value.  Go with low
expectations, and you'll be satisfied although perhaps not impressed.
And if you want to wait for video, the movie, with its "artistic"
imitation of a bad color television, will lose nothing when shown on a
smaller screen.
THREE KINGS runs 1:51.  It is partially in Iraqi with English subtitles.
The film is rated R for graphic war violence, language and some
sexuality.  It would be acceptable for teenagers only if they are older
and can handle horrific images.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Gary Jones
Kelly's Heroes in Iraq - that's what you might think having seen the
trailers and other publicity for Three Kings, but you'd be wrong, even
though the films shares the same plot premise of renegade soldiers from
a conquering army trying to liberate (for which read "steal") a fortune
in gold from the vanquished army's looted treasure.
Three greedy but likeable grunts - Mark Whalberg, Ice Cube, and Spike
Jonze - are joined by officer George Clooney on their mission to help
themselves to Saddam's gold. (Eagle-eyed readers will have spotted that
there are actually four main characters. If you want to know who the
three kings are supposed to be, just check out the poster.) Clooney is a
born movie star, and although he's had some trouble finding the right
vehicles, Three Kings will at last make his agent very happy. Mark
Whalberg has shaken off his pop-star turned actor tag - he's now an
actor, and a very good one, which is a bit more than can be said for Ice
Cube, who might be wise to retain the option of going back to the day
job. Spike Jonze (the director of Being John Malkovitch which I'm
looking forward to seeing soon) provides light relief as Wahlberg's
trailer-trash sidekick. Guided by a map retrieved from a prisoner whose
methods of hiding documents looked extremely uncomfortable, the four go
AWOL and set off into the desert.
Despite its large budget, Three Kings maintains an indie sensibility,
with startling flashes to the soldier's lives back in America, a
wickedly black sense of humour, and some wildly varying picture quality
- as if the film stock from some sequences had degraded in the Iraqi
heat. Director David O. Russell presents his action sequences in
refreshing new ways. One shootout in particular is horrifically
entrancing, played out in near silence as the camera follows bullets
from gun to victim with blurred and jerky slow-motion whip-pans. And in
a couple of shots that have caused some controversy because of their
rumoured use of a real cadaver, we see, from the inside of the body,
just what a bullet does. (It turns out that the rumour was false -
Russell had told the cadaver story to Newsweek, got the publicity he
wanted, then admitted he'd lied.)
Apart from the film's technical qualities, what makes it particularly
impressive is the way the story makes serious points about modern
warfare and makes them well. I know it's just an action movie, but this
action movie really does manage to deliver a savage critique of US
foreign policy during and immediately after the 1991 Gulf War. The
thieving incursion of the four soldiers is seen as a metaphor for the
wider conflict, and Three Kings does what few films do, let alone
mainstream blockbusters - it considers the effects of war on a civilian
population. In 1991, George Bush urged Iraqis to rise up against Saddam
Hussein and strongly implied that America would give the rebels more
than just moral support. In Three Kings, the members of the raiding
party are faced with the consequences of that promise and have to choose
whether or not to break it. 
The issue of western involvement in the Gulf is also addressed in a
scene in which Whalberg's character is tortured by an Iraqi. The mild-
mannered interrogator asks what the Americans are doing in his country.
When given the usual (and pretty reasonable) response that it is to
defend Kuwait, he suggests another reason for American interest in
Kuwait by a rather nasty use of some crude oil. Even the manner in which
the oil is administered is suggestive of unwanted western influence. 
The script (by Russell from John Ridley's story) is full of dark humour,
such as when the soldiers discuss the terms they should use to describe
their Iraqi foe: a black soldier understandably objects to the use of
"sand niggers" and "dune coons", and is happier with "towel-heads". The
film occasionally lets itself down and threatens to turn into a dull
Hollywood action movie, and the ending is indeed a bit hackneyed and
sentimental, but Three Kings is still a fine film which delivers its
ideas in a package perfectly designed to capture the imagination of the
post-Tarantino audience.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
Dennis Schwartz

THREE KINGS (director/writer: David O. Russell; screenwriter: based on a
story by John Ridley; cinematographer: Newton Thomas Sigel; cast: George
Clooney (Special Forces Capt. Archie Gates), Mark Wahlberg (Sgt.Troy
Barlow), Ice Cube (Staff Sgt. Chief Elgin), Spike Jonze (Conrad Vig),
Nora Dunn (Adrianna Cruz), Cliff Curtis (Amir ), Saďd Taghmaoui (Captain
Saďd), Mykelti Williamson (Colonel Horn), Jamie Kennedy (Walter), 1999)
The Persian Gulf War of 1991 is put to celluloid and made into this
action-packed adventure story and intelligent political satire of the
once seemingly popular war, that would supposedly regain the American
sense of "feeling good" about itself that needed resurrection after the
Vietnam debacle. This was a war that made Americans proud of the
technology developed such as, smart bombs, and of how casualty free and
quickly the war was won, as it was watched on TV.
David O. Russell (Spanking the Monkey/Flirting With Disaster) sets his
contemporary story in Iraq during the immediate aftermath of the Gulf
War, as he lampoons the motives behind U.S. foreign policy, questioning
what President Bush's war really accomplished, even if it did succeed in
liberating Kuwait. He has made an unconventional but traditional
anti-war Hollywood movie, in the likes of films such as, Catch-22 and
M*A*S*H. This one has a potent bite to it, just like the others, but
maybe because it is filmed so soon after the bubble for American success
has busted, that it seems to have such a deliciously absurd bite to it.
With Saddam Hussein still in power, and the fact that there are military
personal still in harm's way over there at a great cost to this country,
as this country is stuck with the problem of making sure Saddam doesn't
rebuild his army with nuclear weapons. It makes one wonder who the
Americans really have helped with this war aside from some rich
Kuwaitis. What the film clearly shows, is that the bulk of the Iraqi
people, not the inner circle of the dictator, seem to be bearing the
brunt of the war's dire consequences.
The story begins as three army reservists called up to fight the war,
but not seeing any action, come upon a map of hidden gold bullions
stolen by Saddam Hussein from the Kuwaitis, stuffed up a prisoner's
crack in his butt and decide to go after the gold on their own. They
are: Sgt. Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg), who sees this as an opportunity
to provide his wife and infant back home with some financial security,
Conrad Vig (Spike Jonze-director of Being John Malkovich), a high school
drop-out who wants to be like Troy, so much so, that he would follow him
anywhere, and Staff Sgt. Chief Elgin (Ice Cube), someone who believes he
can put a magical circle of Jesus around himself and be protected from
any harm. Their plans change when a cynical veteran of the Special
Forces, Captain Archie Gates (George Clooney), who is about to retire
from the service, gets wind of what these men have found and takes
charge of the smelly situation, and the three become a quartet of
rogues.
These self-seeking fortune hunters, who have forgotten about their army
duty in favor of doing what's best for themselves, decide that they
should have the stolen gold instead of Saddam or Kuwait. They go out in
a stolen Humvee across the Iraqi desert to find the hidden bunker that
holds the gold, and they find the gold alright, but they also find Iraqi
rebels intent on rising up against Saddam. Saddam's army is busy putting
down the rebellion, an uprising in which President Bush is sending out
mixed messages, where on the one hand he tells the Iraqis to revolt and
America will help, but on the other hand he decides not to help them,
and does nothing to stop Saddam from killing those who were foolish
enough to believe the American president. This helps these rogues to
take advantage of the situation, as Saddam's loyalists look the other
way when they take the gold, and instead will focus solely on the
rebels.
The Americans escape with forty million in gold-as the Iraqi soldiers
let them go unharmed- but they get caught in a cross-fire between the
rebels and Saddam's soldiers, and the Americans wrestle with their
consciences, as Captain Gates, their philosophical leader, decides to
change his mind and to become altruistic and help the rebels get out of
harm's way, despite the problem it now leaves them with of escaping with
the gold, as Saddam's men start to go after them, and will capture Troy
in the shootout.
Troy is brought back to the bunker of Saddam's elite forces and is
tortured, as the Iraqi soldier (Saďd Taghmaoui) tells him that America
only fights for the oil and has done a tremendous amount of killing and
mutilation (including killing his child and crippling his wife) with its
bombing policy, and for him to believe that the Americans have come to
the aid of Kuwait for the sake of justice is laughable, if justice alone
was the reason for their help, then America would have to become
policeman for the world and would always be coming to the aid of
victimized countrys. He compares what his country did, in stealing the
gold, with what Troy and his group are now selfishly doing for
themselves.
The premise of the film is excellent; the story succeeds as both an
entertaining action film and as a searingly funny black comedy, it is
even effective as a valuable history lesson. There are plenty of odd
touches that give the film a fresh feel to it, such as, an exploding
cow, footballs that explode, a slow motion shot tracing the horrorific
damage a bullet does when it enters the body, as it shows that most
victims die from sepsis that results from a release of bile into the
bloodstream, and finally, to the scene of a rebel bunker full of stolen
Kuwaiti luxury cars being comically bartered to the Americans by the
rebel's chief officer.
The actors are brilliantly cast and make up for the lack of depth of
their characters by giving engaging performances: George Clooney is both
heroic and devilish, presenting a commanding stature for his
authoritative role. Wahlberg, as the naive all-American boy with a dark
side to him, serves the film well. Jonze is a real hoot and comes across
as the kind of dim soldier whom it is easy to feel sorry for and not get
too upset with him over his obvious mental defects. Ice Cube is solid.
Nora Dunn as Adrianna Cruz, a CNN-type of reporter, out for the hard
facts of the war, but given the run-around by the military brass,
captures the essence of this media war in all its gamesmanship. What
results is a brave film, one that has a surreal and trippy feel to it,
with some mortifying comedy dished out and some serious questions being
raised about a war that can't come to a proper conclusion anytime too
soon, as Russell explores a recent part of American history that
surprisingly hasn't been touched upon by other films, as of yet.
The war is covered with more personal detail than I got from watching it
on CNN. I feel that the filmmaker has caught the mood of most of the
soldiers, who don't understand the politics of the war and just want to
go home in one piece, of the career brass who are in it for promotions,
the media reporters who want to not only get the story but be the first
one to get it, and the politicians who can find a rational for whatever
they do. The film ultimately shows that anything is possible in the
amoral climate of a dictatorship and a consumer country out to protect
its own interest. The Three Kings turns out not to be a film about
wisemen, as a Biblical allusion, of which the title alludes to, but is
about four typical Americans who must make difficult choices that go
against their grain of nature. The reward for the audience, is seeing an
exciting film, with beautiful cinematography, in addition to seeing a
film that has a grave purpose to it and is funny in a serious way.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Greg King
THREE KINGS (M).  
(Warner Bros/Village Roadshow)
Director: David O Russell
Stars: George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze, Nora Dunn, 
Jamie kennedy, Mykelti Williamson, Said Taghmaoui, Cliff Curtis, Liz
Stauber, Holt McCallany
Running time: 114 minutes.
In the 1970 war film Kelly's Heroes, Clint Eastwood led a
ragtag bunch of soldiers who looted Nazi gold as they made their way
across occupied Europe as part of the allied invasion.  David O
Russell's smart action thriller takes a similar premise, but sets it
against the background of the Gulf War of the early 1990's and imbues
it with a healthy dose of cynicism.
In 1991 the Gulf War conflict was winding to a close, as
President Bush and Saddam Hussein negotiated a peace treaty.  However,
for four disenchanted soldiers, another war was just beginning.
Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg) and Conrad Vig (Spike Jonze, the
director of Being John Malkovich making his acting debut) are bored
with the lack of action they have seen.  When they find a map
supposedly leading to Saddam's bunkers laden with the spoils of war,
they set out to plunder some gold bullion and set themselves up for
life.  Along for the trip is the deeply religious Chief Elgin (Ice
Cube) and veteran soldier Archie Gates (George Clooney), who is on the
verge of resigning his commission anyway.
Unlike Kelly's Heroes, which was purely a caper film, Three
Kings is a war film with a conscience and a political message, and
Russell actually pushes the material in a markedly different
direction.  Somewhere along the way these flawed heroes get caught up
in the aftermath of the war as they end up trying to lead a group of
refugees through dangerous territory to the border and freedom.  They
cannot stand by idly and watch as Saddam's army takes out its
vengeance on these refugees and dispossessed nationals.
Clooney is good as the laconic Gates and gives probably his
best screen performance to date, while Wahlberg is also dynamic as the
brash Barlow.
A cynical exploration of America's involvement in the war,
Three Kings is the Iraqi/Gulf War equivalent of Platoon.  Written by
John Ridley (U-Turn, etc) and Russell, the film questions America's
involvement in the Gulf conflict, as well as the role played by the
media in sensationalising the war.  The film examines the cynical way
in President Bush abandoned the Iraqi people to their fate once the
Kuwaiti oil was safe guarded.  This politically contentious and
controversial sub-text gives Three Kings far more depth, substance and
intelligence than the average Hollywood action flick.  The film marks
something of a change of pace for Russell, better known for the low
budget independent films Spanking The Monkey and Flirting With
Disaster.  However, he also brings a quirky sensibility and stylish
visual quality to the material that sets it apart from most genre
films.  Russell suffuses the action with lots of graphic violence,
slow motion action, stylish camera work, a streak of black humour, and
an inventiveness that is rare in mainstream movies.

Author
Bill Chambers
THREE KINGS *** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (3kings@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze
written and directed by David O. Russell
The soldiers of Three Kings have taken their cue from movies about
Vietnam. (Fitting, since the media-saturated Gulf War became a pop
entertainment.) While driving through a long, flat Iraqi desert (in a
Humvee with a Bart Simpson hood ornament), one of the men under
Special Forces Sgt. Maj. Archie Gates' (who's steering) command
requests a Beach Boys tune. These men want their Apocalypse Now
moment, only instead of surfing, they bop to the music and skeet shoot
out the back of the vehicle, armed with automatic rifles. 
Our three kings (okay, four) are good fighters, but they don't
necessarily take Operation Desert Storm seriously-it's a reprieve from
their hellish day jobs. They are Gates, new father Sgt. Troy Barlow
(Wahlberg), Sgt. Chief Elgin (Cube), and Pvt. Conrad Vig (music video
director Jonze). At story's start, President Bush has declared a
ceasefire, and American troops are tying up loose ends. Barlow, Elgin,
and Vig discover during a round up of Iraqi captives an "ass-map" that
points to a bunker filled with gold bullion. 
Gates leaves his jurisdiction to commandeer the situation; he
proposes-demands-that Barlow, Elgin, and Vig join him on a treasure
hunt. Ditching his escort, a relentless reporter named Adriana Cruz
(Nora Dunn), is easy. So is finding the treasure, until the four men
realize the magnitude of discord still breathing in Iraq: Saddam's men
are threatening the dictator's detractors (citizens of his own
country) with violence. 
When Gates and company arrive at the bunker with a stolen truck, ready
to loot, the unarmed rebels want help. (Bush encouraged them to rise
up against the government, but provided no military support for such
cause.) Gates convinces the vault's guards that this is a post-war
mission, and even accepts their assistance in loading the truck. The
situation could go off without a hitch: the former enemies bear no
grudges. But the money hungry Gates has a conscience, and when one
female bystander is shot by a sadistic grunt before these Americans
have left the scene, he orders Barlow, Elgin and Vig to open fire on
the surrounding Arab forces. The result: Barlow is kidnapped, and the
filmmakers imply that these would-be kings are seeing more action than
they ever did during wartime. 
Barlow is eventually locked in a dank room and wired up to a shocking
device. His interrogator lost his family to the bombs, and he wants
Barlow to imagine the demise of his own wife and child. (He does, in
chilling, lasting images.) I liked these scenes best, because the
political became personal. It's one thing to champion the plight of
thousands; it's another to see a ceiling cave in atop a baby in a
crib. Russell has shocked us before: his first film, Spanking the
Monkey, is about a young man's affair with his bedridden mother. (It's
great.) His second, Flirting With Disaster, features a character who
has an armpit fetish. One could argue that it's easier to make an
audience react to such sexual deviance than explosions, though;
Russell disturbs us in Three Kings by being no-nonsense about the
violence. When Barlow conjures the detonation of his suburban home,
Russell mutes the sound-we're paying attention to the debris instead
of THX bombast. 
Three Kings is Russell's first visually arresting picture.
Stylistically, it stands apart from other war dramas. Newton Thomas
Sigel's cinematography of the exteriors is overexposed and extremely
grainy, which is, of course, entirely appropriate. One practically
breaks out in sweat staring at the screen. (A friend enthusiastically
added, "It's like having sand in your eyes.") This also helps to blur
the fact that the actual locations are far removed from the Persian
Gulf facade. (Three Kings was shot in Arizona, California, and
Mexico.) Russell throws plenty at Sigel's camera for it to observe-as
was the case with Russell's previous efforts, the most absurd moments
are also the film's most realistic, even the most poignant. (We watch
a bullet puncture an organ from the inside.) 
If anything, Three Kings settles down and stops surprising us. Its
climax is pure Hollywood, no doubt the answer to why a major studio
felt comfortable getting into bed with the indie-minded Russell.
Subsequently, the characters become more cartoonish-Barlow's
post-torture revelry felt phony, and Chief, a strong presence in the
first third, fails to escape the
God-fearing-ultra-serious-anti-racist-black-man-of-power cliché-so
much for Cube avoiding token status. (The Arab players, on the other
hand, duck stereotype.) Clooney, too, transforms into a blandly heroic
protestor-marching with the rebels, I waited for him to shout, "Let my
people go!" Hayseed Vig notwithstanding, the protagonists are very
intelligent, and self-serving, too; I had a glimmer of hope, based on
Russell's filmography, that our antiheroes would revert to their
greedy selves at some juncture. (It's not spoiling much to write
that.)
Then again, what historical importance would such nastiness serve?
(There's already enough cynicism in the film's mentioning of Kuwait's
oil-infested waters.) Russell offers the masses a primer on the
oft-dismissed Gulf conflict, and pulled off a neat trick: a war tale
full of battles that takes place after a truce has been declared. If
he set out to make something socially/culturally/politically/globally
significant, he succeeded. With flair.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
Three Kings opens just as Desert Storm is winding down, but still, manages
to emblemize the whole war in that one opening scene, where the conflict is
pared down to its most ridiculous: the American soldier fighting the Iraqi
soldier for possession of one small little hill (mound) in the middle of the
desert. With an opening like that the movie can only get more ridiculous. It
does. It even gets side-splitting ridiculous at times, via a steady run of
one-liners, but none of it is without purpose. Journalist Adrianna Cruz
(Nora Dunn) sums it all up nicely: "The war is over and I don't know what
the hell it was about." No one seems to, especially the soldiers, our three
(four) 'kings,' whom we meet mid-celebration via the freeze-frame/subtitle
trick (Pulp Fiction, Trainspotting, Lock, Stock & 2 Smoking Barrels, etc)
that's still cool, but just barely. First there's the American soldier from
the opening scene, Troy (Mark Wahlberg), vying for main-characterhood with
Archie (George Clooney), the disillusioned special forces guy. Next there's
Chief (Ice Cube), something of a holy roller qua LL Cool J in Deep Blue Sea,
but a bit more effective. Last there's the wholly uneducated Vig (Spike
Jonze), acolyte of Troy, token Texan.
As the trailer spells out, too, soon enough the four of them get a lead on
Saddam Hussein's stolen gold, and--making the cinematic leap that stealing
from a thief isn't wrong--they set out one hot, final morning to quietly
'recover' it. But of course everything goes wrong, not the least of which is
that their consciences kick in, and they begin to figure out 'why' they're
there after all: to save refugees (i.e., be the Schindlers of the Persian
Gulf). It's no big leap from there to the convention that when the thief in
the movie is both sympathetic and gets the 'loot' early on, then that loot
will have to be traded in for something more lasting. It even happens like
that in Trapped in Paradise, a movie without all the moral clutter of a
morally-dubious war, the kind of war which, in Lethal Weapon, produced
Shadow Company, the bad guys who did essentially the same thing our three
(four) kings are doing in Three Kings.
Nevertheless, though, we know who the good guys are, who the bad guys are.
War movies tend to work like this whether they want to or not. It takes an
especially cool hand like Kubrick's to rise above it (Full Metal Jacket).
Three Kings isn't Kubrick, not quite, although it does have its own brand of
camera/editing work, which, when combined with the sepiatone cinematography
qua the Courage Under Fire flashbacks, manages both to rush everything past
and wash it out in a way we suspect accurately captures the American
soldier's experience. Or, rather, it seems to capture what we imagine the
memory of that experience must be like, which is quite a feat in itself for
director David O. Russell.
But of course this 'thirsty' cinematography could be called Peckinpah, too,
and, with Three Kings, convincingly so, as the story of these four soldiers
is almost uncomfortably similar to The Wild Bunch (Clooney as Holden, etc),
even going so far as to leave the simpleton/hick back to the guard the
prisoners, or, on a larger scale, having the good bad guys get righteous
when it really counts. And then of course too one of their own gets taken
hostage, tortured, all that. At least it strays from the path a little when
Troy--the hostage--has a few bonding-type scenes with his captor, which
writer John Ridley and Russell wisely back out of just as it was starting to
feel Crying Game-ish.
In the end, though--and beneath all the fancy camerawork perhaps meant to
appeal to an audience usually not tuned into social issues--Three Kings is
more or less a social statement: that America was motivated into the Gulf by
greed. In case we miss this, the three (four) kings become aware for us,
when they have to see firsthand the results of that war ('their
actions')--or, when Troy is forced to drink oil, which is a touch
heavy-handed, but so be it. The point gets made, at least. And it's not the
only one: after Wag the Dog, of course the media has to play a role here, in
a war fought on CNN. In this case, however--as with Electric Horsemen--that
role is a redemptive one, which dovetails nicely with the Biblical allegory
operating behind the scenes, ever so quietly. At one point a tanker of milk
even spills out into this Euphrates valley, tempting us to make all kinds of
allegorical connections. Before we can, though, Russell's rushed on to the
next scene, opted to let it all accrete when he could have dwelt on it,
which, like nearly everything else in Three Kings, was the correct decision,
the proper amount of restraint, not the easy way out. It shows. The only
thing missing is the Buffalo Springfield the trailer promised, but it's more
than made up for, simply by the pleasant surprise that the trailer only
covered the first third of the movie. Which is to say there's a lot more to
Three Kings than you go in expecting, but, too, just enough conventional
stuff that you never get lost.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones
for more like this, check out http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
I remember critics talking about David O. Russell's first two films,
the quirky indies "Spanking The Monkey" and "Flirting With
Disaster". The former is about a coming of age story of a boy in the
midst of an oedipal relationship, and the latter is about a young man
who goes across the country searching for his birth parents. Both are
said to be somewhat autobiographical. Both are comedies.
Russell would seem to be an odd choice to write and direct "Three
Kings", a story about four Gulf War soldiers who go searching for
millions of dollars in gold that Saddam Hussein has stolen from
Kuwait. However, despite a number of flaws, David O. Russell's
Hollywood debut is a solid, successful effort.
"Three Kings" is not really a war movie. It begins just as the Persian
Gulf War has come to an end, and the U.S. army is taking their final
prisoners of war. As we learn through title cards which appear on the
screen, Archie Gates (George Clooney) is a soldier who's retiring in
two weeks, Chief Elgin (Ice Cube) is on an all expenses paid vacation
from Detroit, Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg) has a wife and young baby at
home, and Vig (Spike Jonze, director of the upcoming "Being John
Malkovich") would like nothing more than to be Troy Barlow.
The day the war ends, Troy and Vig find a handwritten map while
searching an Iraqi war prisoner (I'm not gonna tell you where they
find it on him). Upon further inspection by Chief Elgin, the three
realize that it is some kind of treasure map, which should lead to the
gold which Saddam is believed to have stolen from Kuwait. Archie, who
is supposed to be helping out ambitious news reporter Adrianna Cruz
(Nora Dunn), gets wind of their little secret, and declares himself
the leader.
The four soldiers go AWOL, take a Humvee and jet out across the
deserts of Iraq. But when they reach the city which has the gold, they
realize they're in for much more than they bargained for. The war is
over, but the Iraqi citizens are still in great danger. President Bush
has told them to rise up against Saddam, but how are they supposed to
do that with no food and few weapons? The soldiers decide to put their
greed aside for a while, and "Three Kings" becomes more dramatic than
comedic.
The morals of these four men catch up with them, and without thinking,
they break the cease fire treaty while trying to save some
villagers. Their new mission is to transport almost 100 Iraqi women
and children over the border to Iran. However, when Desert Storm hears
about this illegal mission, they set out across the desert to find
them.
"Three Kings" has some very powerful moments, and it is the first film
to portray the Persian Gulf War, where many soldiers were bored by the
lack of action. "Three Kings", however, is very, very graphic in its
scenes of violence. Some of the shots are done one frame at a time in
slow motion, and the bullets are seen numerous times inside a
character's stomach. I don't think that was the lesson that filmmakers
should have learned from "Saving Private Ryan".
During some parts of the film, I was thankful that it was a comedy. In
quite a few scenes, such as when Troy has been captured and is being
interrogated by an criminal, it would be very tough to watch if they
weren't intercut with a few comedic riffs involving the other 3
soldiers.
The buzz on "Three Kings" has been great, but it's a slick, satisfying
film rather than a masterpiece.  David O. Russell has done a fine job
with this entertaining and self conciously hip movie, but dont expect
it to win Oscars like some say it will.
"Three Kings" manages to squeeze out fine performances by George
Clooney, Mark Wahlberg and Ice Cube; all three of whom have had their
ups and downs. Up and coming actors Spike Jonze and Jamie Kennedy have
a couple of annoying little characters, but they each have their own
brand of humor and it works.
The ending is a big upper, which should please audiences, but I think
that Russell should have followed this powerful film with something
more real. Unsung heroes are called unsung heroes because they never
are realized for what they are. If these "Three Kings" ended up behind
bars for doing something that everyone else was afraid to do, then we
would be seeing a more interesting and powerful piece of
filmmaking. But, hey, "Three Kings" is a still wonderful entertainment
so I should just shut up. Highly recommended, but not for the
squeamish.


Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
'Remember "Catch 22" and "M*A*S*H*" - those black comedies
that captured the surrealist insanity of W.W.II and the Korean War?
That's what David O. Russell attempts in this astute blend of
action/adventure, drama, humor, and scathing political
commentary. George Clooney stars as a cynical career soldier - an
American Special Forces Captain - who's ready to retire. In March of
1991, he and his cohorts (Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze) are
ready to return home from the Gulf War when they unexpectedly come
into possession of a map that indicates the location of a stash of
Kuwaiti gold bullion stolen by the Iraqi army. "Saddam stole it from
the sheiks," Clooney says, "and I have no problem stealing it from
Saddam." They take off at dawn, planning to return by noon. But it's
not that easy, particularly with a feisty war correspondent (Nora
Dunn) snooping around. There's chaos, confusion, and carnage - but
don't expect any stupendous battle scenes. Encounters with the "enemy"
are primarily skirmishes as Iraqi rebels, encouraged by George Bush's
exhortations to overthrow Saddam Hussein, courageously fight the
brutal Republican Guard, only to discover that the politically
expedient cease-fire has made the Americans unwilling to offer
humanitarian aid to the civilians caught in the turmoil. "We're
fighting Saddam and dying - and you're stealing gold," one angry rebel
astutely observes, igniting a moral dilemma for the greedy
treasure-hunters who are cornered into doing the right thing.  On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Three Kings" is a suspenseful 8,
raising serious questions about the morality of the United States
position on military intervention and putting a human face on the
atrocities of war.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        It's March 1991, George Bush is in the White House, the Gulf War
has just ended, and nobody--least of all the weathered U.S. forces who roam
the arid, alien landscapes of Iraq--has a clue as to why it even started.
        Prior to the ceasefire, Saddam Hussein has appropriated and
stockpiled anything of value, creating mountains of limousines, Cuisinarts,
and mobile phones.  Into this scene come four downtrodden GIs (played by
George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, and Spike Jonze; I guess "Four
Kings" didn't quite have the same biblical bent) who are about to see their
first real taste of action.
        Thus begins David O. Russell's "Three Kings," a post-Persian War
war satire framed around a hunt for stolen Kuwaiti gold that would have
John Wayne shifting uncomfortably in his army fatigues.  Unlike the Duke's
'rah-'rah action films, there's an innate pessimism that pervades "Three
Kings"; Russell's screenplay (from an original story by John Ridley) is
most effective in chronicling the randomness of war and the absurd
situations it creates, much in the spirit of Mike Nichols' splendid
"Catch-22" from 1970.
        Take the surreal scene in which NBS reporter Adriana Cruz (a
surprisingly effective Nora Dunn) laments over the ecological aftereffects
of man's absolute folly at a watering hole littered with helpless,
oil-soaked pelicans.  Although deftly played for laughs, it's a difficult
scene to stomach.
        That's true of a lot of the film.  In his thirst for satire,
Russell will occasionally go overboard in his graphic depiction of the
brutality of war--witness Wahlberg's torture at the hands of a Republican
Guardsman.  But for the most part, Russell's sleeve-worn political
viewpoint and disturbed visual style--a frenzied motif of grainy, hand-held
camerawork that's almost monochromatic in its starkness--cuts to the core.
        "Three Kings" further showcases the director's ability to work
something uniquely rich and extraordinary from material that has been
visited many times before.  In a number of ways this film shows a logical
maturation over his previous two directorial efforts, "Spanking the Monkey"
and "Flirting with Disaster."  He's certainly working with a much bigger
budget this time around, but continues to wring strong performances from
his leading players.
        Ultimately it's the director's confidence behind the camera that
makes "Three Kings" a powerful piece of filmmaking--as dry, bleak, and
brutal as the barren Iraqi desert.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Jeremiah Rickert
Starring: George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze, and Nora
Dunn
Written and Directed by: David O. Russel w/John Ridley
     The advertising for this film would have you believe that you are
about to see a caper-film.  The ads portray the kind of talky disco
swagger that we have come to associate with the films of Quentin
Tarantino.  Tarantino's films, however disjointed on the surface, still
contained a linear narrative to follow.  Three Kings never finds this
straight line, and instead is a very schizoid, music-video of a film
that never really finds its own place or purpose.  At the end, the
single biggest thought that crossed my mind was, what did I just see?
Was it a drama, comedy, action adventure, caper-film, political
statement, what was it?  My only answer was that it is a film that
people praise because they don't have any idea what else to say about
it.  Now that just about every major reviewer in the country has raved
about it, those who thought the movie was so much artistic vomit, will
only bewilder and perplex.
     This film is basically Kelly's Heroes (1970) for the Gulf War.
While searching Iraqi prisoners after a cease-fire, a pair of American
soldiers, Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg) and Chief Elgin (Ice Cube)
discover a map that seems to have directions to some Iraqi Bunkers out
in the desert.  Meanwhile Special Forces Captain Archie Gates, (George
Clooney) has been fed up with his cease-fire job of escorting  Christina
Amanapour-like reporter Adriana Cruz (Nora Dunn) around the battle
sites.  He is  told by his superior that "This is a Media War, and you'd
better get on board." While cavorting with a female reporter who is a
rival of his charge, he hears about some Kuwaiti gold, and of course, he
and the guys who found the map come together and come up with a plan:
let's zip out in the desert and search these bunkers, there and back in
a day, so we can quit our cruddy jobs back home.  Also along for the
ride (and the comic relief) is the adorable country bumpkin Conrad Vig,
played by Music Video director and dancer (Fatboy Slim's "Praise You")
Spike Jonze.  Vig's character is a familiar archetype in these films:  a
brainlessly cute hayseed who of course is destined to die.  Gates hires
a buddy to lose Cruz out in the desert and heads off after his booty.
     Once the players on in place, they grab a Hummer and head out to
make their fortune.  This would not be possible normally, but Russell's
victorious Allied Army is portrayed as an extremely unorganized bunch of
frat boys (and girls) who while away the hours drinking and dancing to
rap music.  Everyone is so distracted by enjoying all of the rich
trappings of American excess, that our heroes have no problem slipping
out to get the gold.  Russell seems to be saying that the Gulf War and
those who fought in Desert Storm lacked any kind of moral imperative.
Any notions of patriotism are quite sincerely lacking.
     On the way to the bunkers, the boys fire their guns in the air
skeet-shoot with nerf footballs, carefree and overconfident that
everything will go as planned.  However, the operation hits a speed bump
when they stumble into the middle of a conflict between Saddam's loyal
soldiers, and rebels who are taking up George Bush's appeal to rise up
against Saddam.  George Bush is name-dropped so often that his name soon
becomes a sort of ironic punchline.  I half expected someone to mention
his 90% approval rating with a nod and a wink to the audience.  Bush is
portrayed as a great betrayer when Clooney and gang, limited by a
cease-fire agreement with Saddam, refuse to become involved in the
civil-war.  They are only interested in the Gold and nothing else.  The
steely reserve begins to soften and soon they find themselves duking it
out with The Republican Guard, and getting rescued themselves by Iraqi
rebels.  Once here they have no choice but to help.  It isn't because of
morals, it is because they have painted themselves into a corner and
cannot finish the job on their own. It's up to them to get the rebels
safely into Iran before the hammer is dropped on them, and in return the
rebels will help them carry the gold.  After that, it's a race to the
border.
     Politics show up in a less-than-subtle way after Barlow is
captured.  He is subjected to shock-torture and we get to listen to an
Iraqi talk about how his child was murdered by an American bomb.  The
interrogator also pours oil down Barlow's throat, asserting the cliche
notion that the war was only about oil. This is just short of the
director showing up and saying "Man, we Americans are sure bullies."
Luckily after being locked in a closet with all sorts of big-money items
such as Levis and Electronic Appliances, Barlow finds a cellphone and
after failing to directly contact the Allied Forces, decides to call
home.  My main problem with this scene is the fact that a cellphone will
lose a connection going under an overpass or a tunnel, yet Barlow has no
problem calling out of a closet in an underground bunker.  Go figure.
Wahlberg, however, gives his best performance, and his character was the
only really sympathetic of the bunch.
     Three Kings is filmed with a dizzying combination of slow-motion,
quick pans, and jump cuts.  At times the contrast is cranked, giving the
film a washed out "documentary" quality that we saw in Saving Private
Ryan too recently for it to be used here.  Russell also generously shows
what actually happens to a body when it is shot, complete with rupturing
gall bladders and organ-piercing slugs from an "inside" view of the
body.  Some of the bloodletting is portrayed with comic undertones, and
some is portrayed with an urgent kind of heavy-melodrama.
     By the time the real army comes looking for these guys, they have
pretty much broken every major military rule in the book,  Luckily,
however, the reporter they tried to ditch is around to film everything,
thus Gates seems to have learned all about the "media war" and how to
use it to his advantage.  The final images of the film are the "What
ever happened to..." blurbs that used to show up at the end of several
of the teensploitation films of the 80s.
     Overall the film was all over the map, never once deciding on
whether it was a comedy or a drama, or whatever.  Perhaps Russell wanted
it this way, but it doesn't make it a great artistic achievement.  The
characters really never change.  Afterwards they may have been a little
shaken up by what they saw, but they still were just out to steal some
gold, and everything they did was supposed to lead to pulling off their
caper, no matter how they tried to dress it up as "just helping out."
They are portrayed as a microcosm of the rest of the Allied efforts in
the Gulf.  Only $$$$ matters, nothing else.  Unlike films like M.A.S.H.
and Saving Private Ryan, we aren't given ordinary humans trying to cope
with inhumane circumstances, we are given greedy pirates who try to take
advantage of the power and position that their victorious Army has given
them.  I really cared if Hawkeye Pierce managed to keep his humanity
intact, and I really cared if Capt. John Miller survived the war.  I
didn't care about the leads in Three Kings.  Again, perhaps that is what
Russell intended, but that doesn't make it great cinema.  It plays more
like a really long tantrum.
Of the $7.50 I paid for this film, it was worth $0.00 (Nada)

Author
Eugene Novikov
 "Are we shooting?"
Starring George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze, Nora
Dunn, Jamie Kennedy. Rated R.
If Three Kings is a comedy, it's the most important one since Dr.
Strangelove. It is being vociferously promoted as a "war comedy," and to
a certain extent, I suppose it is one. It is decidely not satire and it
is far from the offbeat, poignant humor of Life is Beautiful. No -- the
comedy here is rather broad (though definitely not dumb). The amazing
thing is not that it manages to be funny without being stupid but that
it effectively balances an inordinate amount of humor with intelligent,
subtle political and social commentary. It's an unrestrained, riveting
film, three-dimentional and skillfully made. It's in the spirit of
M*A*S*H, but not really.
It's also the second movie ever to deal with The Gulf War (Courage Under
Fire being the first). Actually, it takes place immediately after the
war, when groups of American soldiers are hanging out in Iraq during the
just-declared ceasefire. Bored and thinking of their families, four of
these soldiers decide to go on a renegade mission. After finding a map
in the unlikeliest of places, Archie Gates (George Clooney), Troy Barlow
(Mike Wahlberg), Chief Elgin (Ice Cube) and Vig (Spike Jonze) leave
their base without authorization to look for some gold. This isn't just
any gold: this is gold that Saddam stole from the people of Kuwait.
Kuwait wants it back, understandably, but the foursome have no intention
of returning it. Instead, they hope to strike it rich so when they
return home neither they nor their families would have to worry about
money ever again.
Let's backtrack for a second. As the movie opens, Mark Wahlberg walks on
to the screen, looks at the camera and yells "Are we shooting?" For
those in doubt about just what he is talking about (and it's a neat
trick, foreshadowing the unconventional experience we are about to
have), he backs up his question with "Are we shooting people, or what?"
You see, none of these soldiers have seen any "action" during their
whole involvment in the war, so when, in the film's opening sequence,
they get to shoot an Iraqi soldier they take a sick pleasure in it. One
of them remarks "I didn't think I'd get to see anyone get shot in this
war. Take a picture."
Be careful what you wish for -- you just might get it. The "action" they
were looking for would come after the war was over. They come to look
for the gold in the remains of a village. There, they discover Saddam's
troops attacking Iraqis who decided to rebel against Saddam, just like
George Bush instructed. They are not allowed to do anything about it due
to the ceasefire. Archie's humane instincts prevail over his military
common sense, however, and the four Americans wind up being the ones
responsible for breaking the ceasefire and the ones stuck with the
cumbersome task of transporting refugees to the Iranian border in order
to get the gold they so desperately want.
Three Kings is about priorities. What are our priorities as a nation?
What would happen if a soldier's priorities differed from those of his
nation? Whose is he to follow? These questions are posed in a superb,
solidly constructed storyline with brilliant, funny dialogue and
exciting action sequences. This is a movie where everything seems to
work; all the elements come together to make a convincing, brilliant
whole.
The standout performance, surprisingly, is that of Ice Cube who manages
to turn a minor, seemingly insignificant character into one of the most
interesting and compelling in the film. For possibly the first time in
his feature film career, George Clooney is also outstanding;
appropriately energetic and darkly funny. Wahlberg plays the most
volatile of our four protagonists, and he does it with an almost Woody
Allen-ish level of neurosis: paranoid, self-absorbed and always looking
for the solution most profitable to himself.
Directed by David O. Russell (Flirting With Disaster), this movie is
sometimes brutally violent, but those scenes are staged in such creative
ways and are so fluid and exciting that with a few exceptions, we barely
notice. Russell uses an interesting method a few times throughout Three
Kings in which he uses a real cadaver to "demonstrate" what happens when
a bullet pierces a certain part of the human body. Though this elicited
some groans from the audience, those not weak of stomach are likely to
find the effect "cool." I'm not sure I disliked this eccentric (if
that's the right word) little trick, but I'm equally not sure how it fit
in with the rest of the film.
Three Kings is exhilirating and smart, a great film which manages to
involve us in the action and make us think. It's a better war drama than
a certain overrated 1998 Steven Spielberg movie (all right, Saving
Private Ryan), a better comedy than Life is Beautiful and one of the
very best films I've seen this year.

Author
Christian Pyle
"Three Kings"
Written and Directed by David O. Russell (from a story by John Ridley)
Starring George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze, Nora Dunn, and
Jamie Kennedy
Official Site:  http://www.three-kings.com/
Grade:  B+
I remember an episode of "Donahue" soon after the Gulf War.  Phil came out and
stoked the crowd by declaring, "We kicked ass!"  Everyone cheered like their
team had just won the Super Bowl.  But then Phil started listing the number of
civilians killed by American bombs and all the issues left unresolved at the
end of the war, and the audience seemed very confused.  Somehow we expected
this war to be as simple as a "Die Hard" movie.
At the beginning of "Three Kings," the war has just ended.  While stripping a
prisoner, Troy (Mark Wahlberg) and Conrad (Spike Jonze) find a map sticking out
of his butt.  Special Forces Major Archie Gates (George Clooney) discovers that
the map shows the location of a fortune in gold that Iraq stole from Kuwait. 
Archie is ticked off because his current assignment is babysitting a reporter
(Nora Dunn), so he's open to a little pilfering that will allow him to retire
in style.  Along with Chief Elgin (Ice Cube), the guys set out into enemy
territory to retrieve the gold, brandishing like a weapon a letter from
President Bush that gives them permission to seize any contraband.  (And, by
the way, yes, there's four guys-I don't know which one isn't a king).  
When they find the gold, they also discover that the war isn't over for
everybody.  In the village where the gold is hidden, Iraqi troops are killing,
torturing, and starving the villagers.  The reason:  President Bush urged the
people to rise up against Saddam Hussein, implying that they would have
American support.  However, the American withdrawal left them at the mercy of a
dictator who wants to crush the rebellion.  
When Archie and company arrive, the enemy troops are so eager to see them leave
that they help the Americans load the gold.  Of course, our heroes are so moved
by the villagers' plight that they load up the people, too.  A battle breaks
out, and any chance that the guys can return quietly to base is lost.
"Three Kings" shifts tone drastically when its heroes discover the misery
created by America's too-simple war.  The movie begins with satiric bite,
chomping away at the assumptions of the American military.  My favorite moment
has Troy instructing his white-trash friend Conrad on the appropriate racial
slurs for their enemy.  When the guys take up the cause of the rebellion, the
tone becomes melodramatic, tugging at the audience's heartstrings with images
of children in danger and of peace-loving families threatened by aggression. 
The switch may be disconcerting to many viewers, and fans of one part of the
movie may not care for the other.  My taste is for the satire.  Director David
O. Russell has a flair for edgy comedy, but his turn to melodrama seems overly
manipulative.
Despite any flaws in its method, "Three Kings" deserves high praise for raising
questions about war and foreign policy.  Very few American films-especially
ones with high-profile stars-take on complex political issues that audiences
would rather not think about.  "Three Kings" forces anyone who sees it to
consider what America's role in the conflicts between other countries should be
and whether any conflict can ever be completely resolved.
Among the stars, Spike Jonze earns particular mention.  Although he is better
known as a director (of music videos and the new feature "Being John
Malkovich"), Jonze proves himself an able actor.  While his higher-billed
costars bring out their familiar, audience-tested personas, Jonze takes a
stereotypical redneck character and brings him to life.  Although he begins as
a dull-witted racist, Conrad becomes the most interesting and appealing
character of the film.
Bottom Line:  "Three Kings" plucks your heart strings too roughly, but it
challenges your mind to think about important issues.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Jeff Bogart
* * * * out of four
Yes, you counted those stars right, I just came home from seeing this film and
I have to say it was amazing. Because the acting was very good? Yes. Because
the directing was different and intriguing? Why not. But mostly because it made
a powerful political statement and used it well in the film. 
It was a different film, it had so much to it. I could sit here for a while and
type in how it was hilarious sometimes yet still managed to move me
emotionally, but I'd rather move on to the reasons that made it, in my opinion,
a great movie.
Alot of it was intense, meaningful images and situations. For those of you who
saw it, an example would be when they made Wahlberg drink the oil. Only because
of what it said about our involvement in the war (it will make more sense if
you've seen it). 
Many of the sequences had some nice camerawork, and I've heard it (the
camerawork) compared to that you'd see in an MTV music video and such, but if
that were true it would mean that the camerawork was all wrong for the films
ideas. But it really wasn't. It fit so well 
It wasn't awkward, even considering it was a part in a war film (even though it
took place after the war had ended). It didn't seem at all out of place. It
added to the scene in most cases, sometimes it was just fun to look at (i.e.,
the sky moving fast in the background). 
This film was much more than I'd expected walking in. In many ways it was bold
at what it spoke of. About how we told them to rise up against Sadam Hussein
and that we'd defend them, when in actuality we did not come through. In this
film we don't see massacres, we see single people being slaughtered. We see
horrible things becoming of people and being done to them, sometimes to
characters we've come to know. Alot of the images will stick in my head for
while, and probably will for other viewers of this brilliant film.
Sometimes a film can add in comedy, but this films comedy didn't feel like
comic relief, it felt as if it were a part of the film and in many ways
essential to the characters and plot itself. To sum this up, Three Kings is a
spectacular achievement and this years best film I've seen to date, it includes
alot more depth than the trailers give it credit. I highly recommend this film.
Expect more than the previews offer.     A+
Check out the new and improved Movie Page
better quality, easier to load, more reviews.
just go here: http://moviepage.hypermart.net/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Warner Bros./Village Roadshow
 Director: David O. Russell
 Writer:   David O. Russell, story by John Ridley
 Cast: George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike
Jonze, Nora Dunn, Jamie Kennedy, Mykelti Williamson
   President George Bush expected to win the election of
1992 and who could blame him?  Americans traditionally
give another spin to an incumbent chief, Democrat Bill
Clinton was effectively portrayed as a draft-dodger, the
economy was in decent shape, and most of all Bush emerged
a hero after winning the Gulf War against Iraq.  Whatever
went wrong with the campaign, Bush would have lost by even
greater numbers if "Three Kings" were released during the
contest for the high office.  Written and directed by David O.
Russell ("Spanking the Monkey," "Flirting with Disaster,"), this
film combines Russell's experience in doing quirky indie
features with his adeptness at the action-adventure genre to
portray the American president as a man who essentially lost
the war.  How so?  Although Kuwait was effectively freed
from its occupation by Saddam's Iraqi troops, Bush may have
lied to the rebels in Iraq who wanted to see Saddam toppled. 
According to the story by John Ridley, Bush had promised
that if the anti-Saddam people rose up in revolt against the
leader they hated, the Americans would support them--just as
JFK had promised aid to Cubans who'd rise up against
Castro.  But Bush, like Kennedy, demurred on his promise,
leaving those naive enough to believe him to be slaughtered
by Saddam.
   "Three Kings" is not a knee-jerk anti-war picture. It does
not give the message that combat is futile.  After all, the U.S.
did succeed in its stated mission to liberate oil-rich Kuwait
and to keep the pipelines flowing unhampered to the West. 
Instead, by effectively combining a Saturday Night Live kind
of irony and wit with some special effects that are more
germane to Illustrated Man science encyclopedias, Russell
effectively criticizes America's callous, overly pragmatic
aims in the war.  The White House comes across as a force
interested only in an economic success--keeping black gold
gushing and flowing into Western gas tanks and factories--
while turning its back on the downtrodden people of that
hapless Middle Eastern nation.  
   But "Three Kings" is no sermonizing bit of agitprop in favor
of more aggressive action.  The picture portrays the war as
violent, though not in the ruthless manner of Steven
Spielberg's wonderful "Saving Private Ryan"--but rather as a
panorama of utter craziness, from the booze-filled celebratory
parties of the American troops to the frenzied pot pourri
involving rebellious Iraqis against the loyalists, and Americans
against the former.  As in the Vietnam War, one could
scarcely blame the U.S. for confusing the two groups, hardly
able to sort out friend from foe.
   The picture opens just after the war allegedly ends with a
cease-fire in 1991, an agreement that should have meant the
termination of all gunplay.  But the desert sands stir when
Captain Archie Gates (George Clooney), learning of the
existence of gold that Saddam had stolen from Kuwait
which lies stores in a bunker, decides to cut himself in to
some of the bullion. Grabbing three soldiers who have
extricated a map of its whereabouts from an Arab's anal
cavity, he sets out with Sgt. Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg),
Sgt. Chief Elgin (Ice Cube), and Private Conrad Vig (Spike
Jonze--who, incidentally directed the even quirkier movie to
be released soon, "Being John Malkovich").  Rationalizing
that they would not really be stealing since the gold is in
possession of their country's arch enemy, they lose an
aggressive reporter, Adriana Cruz (Nora Dunn) and go off to
find the bullion.
   In a Kafkaesque scene, the Yanks watch helplessly--
ignored by pro-Saddam troops who are concentrating on
rebels in a village--until an enemy soldier shoots a girl's
mother.  From point on, chaos reigns as the gold-digging
quartet discover scruples they never knew they had and risk
court martial by shattering the cease fire and discharging
rounds against the Iraqi soldiers.
   Using special film stock to show the disorientation of the
troops, Russell adds some poignant scene including one in
which an Iraqi, having captured Troy Barlow, speaks to him
about his own pain--how his one-month old son was blown to
bits by American bombs released over his village while
Barlow's little daughter is safe with her mother in Arizona.
   Director Russell wears his morality on his sleeve, playing
with the old philosophic inquiry about whether disobeying
orders can be more ethical than complying with directives
from on-high.  He startles us at several points, showing what
happens to a man's body when a bullet pierces the skin.  In a
kind of World-Book scientific exploration, he essentially x-rays
a soldier at the moment of a bullet's impact, showing how the
cartridge penetrates organs releasing bile and a subsequent
host of bacteria--which leads the victim to be overcome by
sepsis and ultimate death unless swift action is taken.  
   Filmed in Mexicali and parts of Arizona and California,
"Three Kings" is a treat for a sophisticated audience: an
opulent film with indie conventions running throughout yet
one which could satisfy a larger audience of action-adventure
fans.  Like Andrew Fleming's comedy "Dick," however, "Three
Kings" may baffle those who are too young to have lived
through the Gulf War, who have not read much about it, and
who may be perplexed by the confluence of forces which
sometimes fire upon one another, at other times ignoring the
opposite side.  Ice Cube is growing as an actor while George
Clooney and Mark Wahlberg turning in predictably
professional turns in the first major American movie to deal
with 1990's combat.

Author
John Sylva
The year is 1991.  War has broken out between the United States and Iraq,
causing the battle known as Desert Storm.  Flash forward to the end of the war.
 Many men have died, some wounded, some survive without injury, except for
their painful memories that haunt them with images of death and sadness.  Most
survivors would travel from Iraq back to the U.S. to visit their loved ones,
reassuring them they are fine.  This doesn't go for four certain U.S. troops. 
What do they do instead of heading back home?  Go out to steal gold.
Three Kings focuses on four soldiers who have one duty they wish to accomplish
before returning home to the U.S. after Desert Storm has ended- Get rich. 
Major Sargent Archie Gates (George Clooney), Sgt. Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg),
Conrad Vig (Spike Jonze), and Chief (Ice Cube) team up to read a map they found
while strip searching an Iraqi soldier, that leads to Saddam Hussein's gold. 
This task is easier said then done, as the four encounter difficult obstacles
throughout their journey to obtain the gold, and must question what's more
important to them- being rich, or saving the lives of the innocent people who
are being threatened by Iraqi troops.
Three Kings has a strong ensemble cast, with every actor putting forth the
necessary effort to create three dimensional, likable characters.  It's safe to
say Mark Wahlberg gives the most impressive performance of the four
protagonists, as the film's most touching and best scenes are left for him to
carry.  Wahlberg's character appears to be the center of attention of Three
Kings, as he is a nice, realistic, family man, whom we care about because the
film introduces his wife and daughter, and shows the close bond the family has.
 In a powerful scene where Wahlberg's character is taken prisoner, and finds a
phone to call his wife, we see the upset and hurt in his wife's eyes as she
hears her husband being beaten.  A similar situation took place in 1998's
extraordinarily powerful Saving Private Ryan, where a mother learns two of her
sons have died.
Clooney, Jonze, and Cube all turn in solid performances, yet their characters
aren't deep enough to bring them any Oscar or Golden Globe nominations. 
Clooney acts with the same cockiness he does in all of his films, always adding
an extra touch of sarcasm, or throwing in smirks here and there, making his
characters seem real.  As usual, Clooney recites parts of his dialogue without
believability, but that has just come to be a common factor in any of his
performances.
When Desert Storm took place, I was only five years old, but although I was
still extremely young, I remember the impact of the war on America.  I remember
my parents watching the television every night, hoping for updates, asking me
to leave while death tolls were discussed on T.V..  I learned from Three Kings
what all the fuss was really about, how Saddam Hussein's people were so very
loyal, how the American troops had difficult decisions to make, and how strong
the impact of the war was on soldiers' families.
David O. Russell, known mainly for the 1996 romantic comedy Flirting With
Disaster, pens and directs this moving and often entertaining war drama. 
Russell's script contains a few major flaws that bring Three Kings down to the
"B" level, as these flaws aren't just a few out of place lines, but flaws that
if Three Kings didn't have vibrant direction, a strong, positive message, and
Oscar worthy acting, this movie could be a total disaster.  The script can't
decide whether it wants to be a saddening, realistic war drama, or play cops
and robbers with its characters, as it does both, but not without roughness. 
One moment Three Kings will be effectively showing the feelings of the Iraqi
and Arab people, making the viewer feel sorrow and guilt, but at the next
moment, the film features our four main characters selfishly only caring of
their own priorities.  The entire gold plot line isn't one that is necessarily
vital to the film, as the best, most moving times are when Three Kings is doing
the usual war movie stuff- having battles, throwing some belly laughs at the
viewer, and letting you feel the pain of those involved in the war.  When gold
stealing is the main focus of the film, the interest level for me dies down
quickly, as the entire plot line is only an excuse to call Three Kings a dark
comedy.
Russell's direction isn't nearly as weak as the flaws in his screenplay,
however.  His techniques of showing the actual damage done to a human being
when a bullet tears through their skin is simply mesmerizing.  Russell also
effectively shows what is actually happening in war battles.  Unlike Saving
Private Ryan, Three Kings often puts the battle scenes into slow motion, so you
can see the bullet actually enter the victim's body, allowing the viewer to
understand that person's pain.  Russell's offbeat camera angles are eye candy,
as the camera darts to and fro constantly, giving you all angles of the action.
 The entire film seems to be a khaki color, with the only contrast being in the
blue sky, which also makes for visually magnificent sequences.
Three Kings is a clever film with some creative aspects not explored in last
year's war hits, Saving Private Ryan and The Thin Red Line.  Instead of only
making you sympathize with its main soldiers, it makes you feel for almost
every character on screen, never letting the viewer judge a character.  Every
character is explored enough so that even if they are on the "bad" side, in a
light, they seem like the good guys.  The wiser route with Three Kings would be
to eliminate most of the gold plot line, and focus more on human drama, yet the
screenplay flip flops between the two themes too often to make the film as
touching and moving as it potentially could have been.  
The Bottom Line: A strong film with good acting and cinematography, although
the morals of the film don't need a robbery plot line to shine through, and
touch the viewer. 

Author
Michael Dequina
_Three_Kings_ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
        At the end of the Gulf War, a group of four--_not_ three--American
soldiers (George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, and Spike Jonze) head
out to the Iraqi desert to claim millions in stolen Kuwaiti gold as their
own.  Much like their seemingly simple journey, there is more to
_Three_Kings_ than one expects.  Writer-director David O. Russell,
heretofore best known for the idiosyncratic indies _Spanking_the_Monkey_
and _Flirting_with_Disaster_, establishes a quirky sense of humor in the
film's lighthearted early treasure hunting stages, then midway shifts
gears into a thoughtful--but never heavyhanded--examination of the
post-war plight of the Iraqi people.  The shock comes in not the
suddenness of the transition but in how the change is barely noticeable. 
Russell juggles comedy, drama, traditional war and action-adventure movie
elements in _Three_Kings_, and their seamless blending makes for a studio
picture uncommon in its unique sensibility and personality.  
The latter, of course, owes a great debt to the ensemble.  As the
ringleader of the gang, Major Archie Gates, Clooney is his typically
charismatic self, and it's a testament to his costars' work that his
formidable screen presence never dominates.  Wahlberg and Cube more than
hold their own as Sgt. Troy Barlow and Chief Elgin, respectively (even if
the latter is saddled with a fairly limited role), and more secondary
players like Nora Dunn (as TV reporter Adriana Cruz) and Jamie Kennedy
(as the slightly-off soldier Walter Wogeman) are given their share of
moments to call their own.  But the surprising standout is Jonze, who, in
his acting debut, proves to possess talents that go beyond his claim to
fame in music video directing.  His funny and ultimately moving work as
Pvt. Conrad Vig, who intensely admires Troy, is the film's true buried
treasure.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Jack Choo
At first glance, THREE KINGS looks to be just another war movie, the 90s
version of all those favourite war movies with names I cannot remember. The
90s version, it definitely is, just another war movie? Not in your dreams!
Imagine PULP FICTION approach to SAVING PRIVATE RYAN, thats THREE KINGS for
you. Believe it or not, it bears the cool of the former and the stark humane
meaning of the latter.
The story brings us to the twilight of the Gulf war, with the allied troops
victorious. Majpr Archie Gates (Clooney) leads an enterprising bunch of
grunts to a rather unorthodox post-war looting spree; the millions in gold
bars secretly stowed away by Saddam in a desolate village in the desert. As
the rest of the troops are celebrating their victory and getting ready to be
shipped home, this `wild bunch goes AWOL on an armed Hum-Vee (the vehicle
of choice of the US army). They soon find out that they have much
resistance, as they get tangled with the local rebellion against Saddams
forces. Frequently switching their modes between looters and Robin Hoods
Merry Men, they become consciously attacked by their own morals.
As the film begins to roll, it seemed to have a rather `light mood to it.
`Special effects such as when Gates describes to his men how a bullet can
kill simply paves the way for a light-hearted funny action movie. THREE
KINGS is much smarter than that. As the conflict becomes more and more
complex, the audience will be trapped in a limbo, trying to stay focussed on
that light-mood/serious-mood that the film seem to portray. I personally
found this analogous to the same feelings of the main characters involved in
the film; trapped between their initial plan paved by greed and their own
sense of humanity. This simply made the entire experience of watching THREE
KINGS truly brilliant.
Action sequences are not shot as your old-fashioned war films nor anything
like Steven Spielbergs in-your-face war violence. They are carefully built
to generate tension with just the right tight close-ups and pauses, right
before the action starts. Not John Woo for sure but more of Sergio Leones
Spaghetti western style (tons of them starring Clint Eastwood). Great
performances by Clooney and Wahlberg but the brilliance have to lie in the
conception of this film; the screenwriter and the director.
THREE KINGS ranks among the best films of the year, well, for me at least.
Highly recommended.
Visit my website! : http://members.tripod.com/jackchoo

Author
JABII
If there's one new idea that I could quickly become irritated by, it's major
motion pictures being shot with a home video camera. This idea, which proved
popular in "The Blair Witch Project", is now being used in the Gulf War film,
"Three Kings" for no apparent reason. Well everyone, if you thought we were the
good guys in Desert Storm, you were wrong. According to "Three Kings" the
Americans are evil intruders, save four renegade soldiers.
Archie Gates is a commander at the end of his career. He therefore has nothing
to lose when three soldiers Troy Barlow , Chief Elgin , and Conrad Vig discover
a map to a stash of gold stolen from the Kuwaities by Saddam. While stealing
the gold back however, they break the cease fire by killing several of Saddam's
troops. Soon, they've teamed up with a group of rebels and their only concern
is to save the people of Iraq. During this entire affair, we're treated to an
utterly pointless subplot which involves one soldier, Walter Wogaman leading a
reporter on a wild goose chase.
There are so many irritating details in this movie that I'm not entirely sure
where to begin. The utterly pointless violence in some scenes is quite
irritating. For example, Clooney describes what a bullet does once inside the
body to his cohorts. During his description, we're treated to a scene actually
displaying the gruesome subject. We are also given the chance to see such
things as a cow exploding (this is apparently very funny), a mother being shot
in the head, a baby and mother being blown to bits, and a child being crushed
by debris.
The grainy, home video like shooting is apparently supposed to add realism,
though I think it is present only to make the film appear more "arsty".
However, about half way through, the filming suddenly shifts to regular
Hollywood style. Almost all the humor in "Three Kings" falls flat, being
completely out of place in a movie as violent as this. The script is also
predictable and rather poorly written.
There are a few redeeming qualities here. The acting is solid all around, and
some of the gun fights are truly interesting when shot in slow motion. These
few things aren't nearly enough to save this sub-par film however. I grant it
two stars, and a recommendation to steer clear unless you're looking for a nap
or a sick stomach.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is in the hours after the cease-fire in the Persian Gulf War.
Iraq is still in a state of chaos and barbarity even as the war ebbs
from it.  We focus on volunteer soldiers, none of whom actually fought
but jubilant over the victory. Nevertheless their duty continues as
captured Iraqi soldiers are being strip-searched before being
interned.  One is found carrying a map in a well-protected place.
Sergeant Troy Barlow (played by Mark Wahlberg), Staff Sergeant Chief
Elgin (Ice Cube), and Private Conrad Vig (Spike Jonze) realize that the
map must show where the Iraqis have hidden gold bullion looted from
Kuwait.  They decide to make a little extra-curricular expedition to
liberate the gold for their own purposes.  Special Forces Captain
Archie Gates (George Clooney) has been escorting TV journalist Adriana
Cruz (Nora Dunn), but when he gets wind of the treasure map he decides
to ditch Cruz and push his way into the expedition and a share of the
gold.
     The village where the gold has been stored is a hotbed of Iraqi
rebels who have been promised American support if they would fight
against Saddam.  They are overjoyed to find four armed Americans show
up at last to help them defend themselves.  However despair returns to
them when Iraqi soldiers show up.  The leader of the soldiers offers
the Americans a compromise.  The yanks can take the gold and leave the
rebels to the Iraqi army.  They even are happy to help the Americans
load "Saddam's gold" onto the American vehicles in order to be rid of
the conquering army and to proceed with their sadistic duty against the
rebels.  The Americans are only too happy with the deal until Gates
realizes what his complicity in the betrayal of Iraqi rebels will mean.
He decides he cannot leave the villagers to their fate.  This sets in
motion the most deadly chapter of the war for the four volunteers.
     Essentially the plot could have been a Western with just a few
substitutions. However the plot is less important than the background
of THREE KINGS.  The film really becomes a serious political
examination of Americans in the war, America's clumsy and dangerous
foreign policy, and just how it affects other cultures.  In it bleak
characterization of political policy it stands with films like THE
KILLING FIELDS.  In the eyes of this film as the Iraqi government
suppresses and tortures its own people, the Americans blunder around in
quest of low oil prices.  Meanwhile opportunistic news reporters fight
for new stories of what is happening, losing interest once a story has
already been covered by someone else, trying to get ahead in the world
of news industry politics.  And even while this is happening people
like the Iraqis struggle to get American style appliances like blenders
and cellular phones in the callous struggle for another culture's idea
of the good life.  This is very dark and very angry.
     Adding to the deliberate pain of watching the film is the
photography of Thomas Newton Sigel (who filmed THE USUAL SUSPECTS).  He
intentionally washes out the color to give a feel of the hot sun to the
Mexican locales standing in for the Iraqi desert.  Occasionally the
photography becomes a bit gimmicky, predominantly in the more violent
scenes.  David O. Russell directs his own screenplay to be certain to
get each little angry note.  The Iraqi rebels come off the best, but
American policy, the Kuwaiti consumerism, the supposed stupidity of
American Southerners, and the Army bureaucracy, all get their turn
under fire.
     THREE KINGS may not be a pleasant film to watch, but it is
intelligent and certainly has to be the best film about the Persian
Gulf War yet.  I give it an 8 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +2 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
Three Kings is the story of Major Archie Gates (George Clooney), Army
Special Forces, and his role in the Gulf War.  When Major Gates hears
that three recruits have found a treasure map embedded in the derriere
of an Iraqi prisoner, he takes immediate action.  He confiscates the map
from the recruits, telling them that it's a matter of national
security.  Then, with the aid of a company of airborne infantry troops
and three Apache headquarters, he leads a daring raid to capture the
stolen Kuwaiti gold and return it to its rightful owners, thereby
earning the thanks of Congress, a promotion, and a Silver Star.
Well, OK, so that's not how the movie actually goes.  But maybe it
should have.
Three Kings is showing up on a lot of year-end top ten lists now, for
reasons that I just can't fathom.  My difficulty in liking Three Kings
stems from a pivotal disagreement I have with a central premise of the
movie:  that soldiers are stupid.
Three Kings has almost a Clintonesque loathing for the American
military, and its prejudice against men in uniform shows up most clearly
in the stupid things that its characters are made to do.  Clooney's
character is supposedly a Special Forces soldier, which should imply a
high degree of training and intelligence.  However, the script has him
team up with three incredibly green reservists on a mad dash through
enemy territory to steal several tons of gold... without a thought as to
the logistics of the thing.  (How do you get that much gold in a
Hum-Vee?  How do you get it home?)  Gates apparently expects that the
Iraqis will hand over the gold -- and such is the irrationality of the
script that that's what happens.
Gates's compatriots don't have much going on upstairs themselves.  Mark
Wahlberg, young and naive and clueless in Boogie Nights, has the same
characteristics here, except that he gets to keep his clothes on.
Wahlberg's character attempts to call for help at one point on a
captured cell phone, and can't remember the name of his unit.  "You
know," he tells the operator.  "The big army.  Out in the desert."
Director Spike Jonze is saddled with a character that's sub-moronic
(the movie's one truly funny scene shows Jonze back in civilian life,
blowing away stuffed animals with a shotgun) and and accent that is
supposed to be Texan but is not.  Ice Cube's sergeant is the most level
headed of the crew, but he nearly makes a fatal error when the crew
comes under chemical attack.  And these are the soldiers that Major
Gates has watching his back.
Here's a further example:  on the way out of camp, the recruits so some
skeet shooting with Nerf footballs.  This, you would think, would not be
the best way to start a mission that's supposed to be covert.  Clooney
recognizes this as silliness, and proceeds to try to train his troops.
To do this, he uses a dairy cow... which just happens to be wandering
around alone in the desert... and no one thinks that it just might be
booby trapped.
Three Kings superficially resembles The Blair Witch Project, with a
small band of unprepared innocents heading out into the great unknown to
seek out an evil  There's a lot of handheld camera work in Three Kings,
and some of the scenes are even shot using a really cheap camera.  (The
desert sunshine washes out the colors on the cheap film.)  But instead
of twig figures and piles of rocks, the symbols of evil in Three Kings
are garish, amateur murals of Saddam Hussein plastered on the walls of
the various bunkers in the movie.  One even shows Saddam wearing an
incongruous mortarboard, just as if he had graduated from the Baghdad
Institute for Evil Dictators.
But the filmmakers, again displaying their liberal prejudices, spend
much more time reviewing the supposed evils of the United States.  The
US is as much of a Great Satan in Three Kings as Saddam.  Characters
continually wonder what the purpose of the war is.  President Bush is
(with the advantage of hindsight) repeatedly excoriated for his failure
to support the Iraqi rebels in a coup attempt against Saddam.  The whole
"blood for oil" slander is repeated, graphically, by an Iraqi terrorist
pouring motor oil down Mark Wahlberg's throat.  (To its credit, however,
the movie allots at least some of its satire to the silliness of the
news media -- an easy target if ever there was one.)
There haven't been a great deal of Gulf War movies made.  The only one I
can think of offhand was Courage Under Fire, which celebrated the
heroism of a female helicopter pilot (Meg Ryan) whose memory was under
attack by chauvinist brutes.  Likely, we won't see many more.  The Gulf
War was such a shattering triumph for America and its allies that it's
difficult for Hollywood liberals to use it to denigrate the American
military and American values.  Three Kings accomplishes that difficult
feat to a degree, but that's a reason to bury it, not to praise it.
This boring, overlong, pretentious movie does a disservice to the
American soldier and the American audience alike.
Movie Reviews:
http://www.hsbr.org/buzz/reviewer/reviews/bdreviews.html
http://www.epinions.com/user-curtisedmonds
"JANUARY 1, 1000:  This was the historic day that humanity celebrated
the dawn of our current millennium. The occasion was marked by feasting,
dancing, and the public beheading of a whiny, tedious group of people
who would not stop insisting that, technically, the new millennium did not
begin until January 1, 1001."  -- Dave Barry

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Writer/director David O. Russell's follow-up to his indie hit Flirting
With Disaster is a shockingly well-done action flick, centering on four
Army soldiers that try to heist gold originally stolen by Saddam Hussein
from Kuwait prior to the Gulf War.  The film is a politically incorrect
blood-bath, which works to cover the giant plot holes that would ruin an
ordinary film.
It's March 1991 and the Gulf War has just ended.  As Iraqi troops
surrender to the mighty American forces, Sergeant Troy Barlow (Mark
Wahlberg, The Big Hit) finds a map jammed up the ass of one POW.
According to Special Forces Sergeant Major Archie Gates (George Clooney,
Out of Sight), it is a secret Iraqi Ass Map that reveals the location of
untold Kuwaiti riches seized by Iraq, including several million dollars
in gold bouillon. Gates is two weeks away from retirement and looks at
the potential score as reward for a career in the military, as well as a
good way to avoid his latest detail  a media escort to NBS reporter and
5-time Emmy runner-up Adrianna Cruz (Nora Dunn, Saturday Night Live).
Back in Detroit, Barlow is an office schlub and the father of a newborn
baby, so he quickly agrees to accompany Gates (who is not his superior
officer) on the heist, which should only take a few hours out of their
boring post-war afternoon.  His company mates, Chief Elgin (Ice Cube,
The Player's Club) and Vig (Spike Jonze) round out the group, the latter
two practicing skeet-shooting with Nerf footballs on the way.  They see
a cow blow up from a cluster bomb and they discuss the proper term for
people native to the area (`Dune Coon' vs. `Sand Nigger' vs. `Camel
Jockey').  And when they find the Iraqi village that is believed to
contain the bunker full of gold, they are surprised to find that
Saddam's soldiers are more concerned in quelling citizen uprising than
they are with the four marauding American servicemen.
In the bunker, the men find stack after stack of stashed wares  from
coffee makers to microwaves to food processors  and the deeper they go,
the better stuff they find, culminating in dozens of suitcases full of
heavy gold bars.  They're able to drag it out of the bunker, but because
this happens only thirty minutes into the film, circumstances
temporarily veer the four off of their original plans of thievery.  The
soldiers are confronted with the horrors of war as Iraqi citizens,
inspired to retaliate against Saddam's troops by President Bush, are
being massacred.  They see oil fires, tortured of prisoners of war, the
murder of innocent children and oil-soaked birds  all of which make the
gold bouillon seem unimportant.  Well, maybe less important.  They're
still Americans.
Co-written by John Ridley (U-Turn), Three Kings is a devastatingly dark
war film.  There is a scene where the filmmakers use a real cadaver to
demonstrate the effects of a bullet ripping through your innards.  There
is a shootout that may even be cooler than Keanu dodging bullets in slow
motion in The Matrix.  The direction and editing are absolutely
top-notch, using a variety of styles from montage to repetition from
different angles.  The slick cinematography (Tom Sigel, Fallen, The
Usual Suspects) will bring back memories of Star Wars as the troops walk
across the vast desert (not to mention those Tusken Raider-looking
things).
Want to know who survives?  Take a look at the title, Three Kings, which
implies that there are three main characters.  But there are really four
(Clooney, Wahlberg, Cube and Jonze).  Now take a look at the three names
above the title.  Sorry, Spike  the name of the film predicts your
demise before the first frame is shown.  May as well have changed the
name to Three Kings and Spike Jonze Gets Killed.
There are a few other problems, namely the likelihood that they would
have been able to get that much gold out of the continent without anyone
noticing.  The plausibility of three soldiers agreeing to follow a man
they don't report to is also kind of questionable.  The roles are sort
of pigeonholed  the retiring guy (Clooney), the young kid (Wahlberg),
the black guy (Cube) and the hillbilly (Jonze).  And don't get me
started on the part where Clooney's Gates actually becomes ER's Dr.
Ross, sticking a very Pulp Fiction-like needle into the chest of comrade
that has just had his lung deflated by enemy bullets in order to relieve
his chest pressure (using the cadaver to show air filling the chest
cavity and slowly crushing the other lung).  But these issues are pretty
minor in the grand scheme of this fantastic new film.  (1:53  R for
graphic war violence, adult language and some sexuality)

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Warner Bros on March 3, 2000; certificate 15; 115 
minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by David O. Russell; produced by Edward L. McDonnell, Charles Roven, 
Paul Junger Witt.
Written by David O. Russell; from a story by John Ridley.
Photographed by Newton Thomas Sigel; edited by Robert K. Lambert.
David O. Russell's "Three Kings" is the first war movie I have seen that 
takes the camera into an imaginary bullet wound to show it filling up with 
bile. What's more, the moment seems perfectly normal in the context of the 
film. This is a fast-talking, cheerfully deranged depiction of army 
intervention in Iraq, which plays with style, structure and tone in the 
dangerously excited manner of a fire-eating juggler.
The story takes place in 1991, just after the end of the Gulf War. In a camp 
of American soldiers who are rounding up prisoners and waiting to go home, 
Major Archie Gates (George Clooney) discovers an "ass map" -- a treasure map, 
that is, found between a captive's butt cheeks. Gates orders a goofy 
hillbilly, Private Conrad Vig (Spike Jonze), to take it out. "Can't I have a 
glove, Sir?" he asks. "No," Gates replies, "That's how the chain of command 
works."
Gates and Vig consult two reliable young comrades, muscle-bound family man 
Sergeant Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg) and firm, shrewd staff sergeant Chief 
Elgin (Ice Cube). Together the quintet deduce the location of the loot to be 
an Iraqi army bunker near Cordoba, and guess that it will be several million 
dollars worth of Kuwaiti gold bullion. Their plan: To steal it. If they get 
caught: They'll say they were on a legitimate mission to rescue their allies' 
property from the enemy.
Since we never see movie characters plan heists and then follow them through 
without a hitch, we know this scheme will somehow go wrong. Our heroes' 
obstacle comes when they're about to leave the village in which the 
gold-filled bunker is situated. Iraqi guards are making clear they plan to 
harm civilians, and it would be wrong to leave them to do so.
There is a scene of agonising effectiveness here, as the action goes into 
slow motion to mark the cease-fire's dissolution into chaos. A mother is shot 
in full view of her husband and children. Soldiers resume fighting. Watching 
this at a delayed pace accentuates the tension, the horror, and the reality 
of each bullet, and all we can do is sit there, watching, feeling helpless.
Of course, that's all the American soldiers can do for most of the time. 
George Bush may have urged Iraqi citizens to rise up against Saddam Hussein's 
evil regime, but he's not letting his troops help them, because the Gulf War 
wasn't about liberating people, and was fought to make sure Kuwait could keep 
supplying oil to the Western world. Most people already realise and are 
resigned to that, but "Three Kings" angrily indicts Bush for it, with a 
second half that is dramatic and political. The film surrounds Gates, Vig, 
Barlow and Elgin with hypocrisy and devastation as they attempt to get back 
to their base, fight off hostile fire, save the lives of refugees and salvage 
some bullion.
That's a little anticlimactic, as the opening chapters are full of 
brilliantly crude slapstick satire, and at times thereafter the film becomes 
inappropriately slowed down when accommodating its serious stuff. Russell, 
who wrote and directed, should have found some way to blend the different 
elements in less jarring fashion. It is creative to follow an elaborate 
practical gag about pretending to be Saddam with realistic footage of refugee 
orphans, but it isn't necessarily wise, because it means the audience is 
still laughing when we should be settling down for sober thought.
What "Three Kings" conveys brilliantly, throughout everything light and 
heavy, is the utter confusion of war -- in the opening words ("Are we still 
shooting?"), the disorganisation of the U.S. forces' barracks, and the mad 
dash to safety the film spends most of its time on. We can decipher what's 
going on during immediate moments, but the general experience is 
intentionally perplexing and dizzying. Ambiguous individual point of view 
shots contribute to this, as does unstable, screw-loose pacing.
Newton Thomas Sigel's cinematography is the most crucial element in putting 
us in the middle of the unpredictability. In the tradition of a lot of recent 
Hollywood war dramas, it's shaky and grainy, but its underdeveloped film 
stock is a much more original touch, making the frame extremely sensitive to 
light. There are huge contrast changes all the time, and the film seems to be 
REACTING to situations, and SEEING images, rather than creating them.
The four main actors work subtle wonders, too, performing in ways that 
balance each other's efforts nicely. Clooney has authoritative star power; 
Jonze, who has also done good work as a director, is pleasing in what is 
essentially a jester role; Wahlberg is charming and boyish; Cube reassures us 
that there's someone sensible in this motley crew.
As of yet, the only other theatrical motion picture dealing with the Gulf War 
has been Edward Zwick's "Courage Under Fire", from 1996. So it's amazing, 
when you think about it, that Russell has so soon found the courage to make a 
bizarre comedic commentary on the subject. Shame on Warner Bros for marketing 
it as a dumb action flick, in ads that juxtapose serious-sounding lines with 
explosions. They're shooting themselves in the foot, as fans of that sort of 
thing will be put off when they learn what the movie is actually about, and 
most other people will the alienated by the commercials. "Three Kings" 
deserves better treatment -- uneven patches notwithstanding, it's original, 
powerful, and very unexpected.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Frankie Paiva
I am constantly talking about hype. You know, the stuff that Hollywood sends
out to all of the people who see a movie. It's called marketing, it's called
milking the heck out of everything the critics say, and it's about aiming
towards an audience and offering them something (supposedly) new. So any film
that might break away from the Hollywood formula (and there are so few of them)
it is immediately loved and cherished...at least it's supposed to be. Three
Kings is a film that made me think, what's wrong with me? They is a majorly
critically acclaimed film and is said to be one of the early Oscar
contenders...but I didn't really like it that much. For all of the gloss and
glamour I was left to wonder what this movie would have done without so much
critical hype.
It's the end of the Gulf War. Treaties have been signed, and troops sent back.
There's an air of celebration in the air. But when Troy Barlow (Wahlberg) finds
a map in a guy's butt that leads to a place that has millions in Kuwait gold,
and he shows the map to Archie Gates (Clooney) who wants to retire in style,
the war isn't over for any of them. Teamed up with Chief Elgin (Ice Cube) and
dim-witted Conrad Vig (Spike Jonze) they set out to recover the gold and use it
for their own purposes. 
But when they break into a bunker where the gold is, their consciences catch up
with them. Iraqi troops come in and slaughter most of the people, they also
begin to attack the Americans. The group decides to help all of the people they
can, get then out of Iraq, and help them cross the Iranian border so that they
can be free of Sadaam. But getting there won't be easy.
Another movie (American Beauty being the other) that is a depressing Oscar
contender. I think that the cinematography and art direction both deserve
Oscars. But as for the rest of this edgy film, (perhaps a screenplay nod) I
didn't see any other big wins. Sure the way the film was shot was awesome and
totally cool (OK, I know those aren't the best descriptive words) but no one
stood out to me as being Academy material. The film does however paint a
portrait of what is wrong with war, and why we shouldn't have any more wars
because of all the pain and suffering people endure. While some people may say
that this film is too violent, I think that almost every scene of violence was
there for a reason. If we could just get to the root of hate, the world would
be a better place. So if your looking for an interesting look into the Gulf War
(I recomend you refresh yourself on what happened by looking it up on the
Internet before you go) Three Kings is the one, but for me, it only gets ** 1/2
stars.
The Young-Uns: The film is probably too violent for most people, it is a war
movie after all. Language and a sex scene also appear. You should also have an
understanding of the Gulf War. Good Age 15 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic 

Author
Jack Choo

At first glance, THREE KINGS looks to be just another war movie, the 90s
version of all those favourite war movies with names I cannot remember. The
90s version, it definitely is, just another war movie? Not in your dreams!
Imagine PULP FICTION approach to SAVING PRIVATE RYAN, thats THREE KINGS for
you. Believe it or not, it bears the cool of the former and the stark humane
meaning of the latter.
The story brings us to the twilight of the Gulf war, with the allied troops
victorious. Majpr Archie Gates (Clooney) leads an enterprising bunch of
grunts to a rather unorthodox post-war looting spree; the millions in gold
bars secretly stowed away by Saddam in a desolate village in the desert. As
the rest of the troops are celebrating their victory and getting ready to be
shipped home, this `wild bunch goes AWOL on an armed Hum-Vee (the vehicle
of choice of the US army). They soon find out that they have much
resistance, as they get tangled with the local rebellion against Saddams
forces. Frequently switching their modes between looters and Robin Hoods
Merry Men, they become consciously attacked by their own morals.
As the film begins to roll, it seemed to have a rather `light mood to it.
`Special effects such as when Gates describes to his men how a bullet can
kill simply paves the way for a light-hearted funny action movie. THREE
KINGS is much smarter than that. As the conflict becomes more and more
complex, the audience will be trapped in a limbo, trying to stay focussed on
that light-mood/serious-mood that the film seem to portray. I personally
found this analogous to the same feelings of the main characters involved in
the film; trapped between their initial plan paved by greed and their own
sense of humanity. This simply made the entire experience of watching THREE
KINGS truly brilliant.
Action sequences are not shot as your old-fashioned war films nor anything
like Steven Spielbergs in-your-face war violence. They are carefully built
to generate tension with just the right tight close-ups and pauses, right
before the action starts. Not John Woo for sure but more of Sergio Leones
Spaghetti western style (tons of them starring Clint Eastwood). Great
performances by Clooney and Wahlberg but the brilliance have to lie in the
conception of this film; the screenwriter and the director.
THREE KINGS ranks among the best films of the year, well, for me at least.
Highly recommended.

Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by David O. Russell
Starring George Clooney, Mark Whalberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonez, and Nora Dunn
Twenty years, one month, and sixteen days before Three Kings was released,
Apocalypse Now sprang onto the war movie landscape, quickly jumping into the
upper echelon of a highly critically appreciated genre.  Now, Three Kings hits
screens, with a similar destiny.
Before anyone objects to the comparison, let me say that it is more by nature
of style than by substance.  This is not to say that Three Kings lacks in
substance to any degree: it doesn't.  This is merely to say that Three Kings
exhibits the same sardonic wit, noirish cinematography, and eclectic
soundtrack that served to provide an ironic twist to the Vietnam War in
Apocalypse Now.
The comparison does not end there, however.  In Apocalypse Now, we are greeted
with a single man on a completely amoral mission.  In Three Kings, it is four
people.  In Apocalypse Now, we have the eventual growth of morals and regret
out of a war that seemed to serve no purpose.  In Three Kings, we have the
same.
Three Kings IS the Apocalypse Now of the 1990's.
Hands down the finest war movie I have seen since Saving Private Ryan, Three
Kings is a disturbing masterpiece.  While taking a look at the soldier's who
have never seen action, who have never taken life, and their desire to blindly
do so, it also realizes the careful contemplation given to the line between
life and death, between killing and not pulling the trigger, once that line
has already been crossed.
The movie concerns four dissatisfied soldiers who discover a map to the
bunkers where gold bullion stolen from Kuwait lies.  As they find the map,
they make a frenzied attempt to get the gold while trying to shake front-line
reporter Amanda Cruz (Nora Dunn) from their tail.
The gold is hidden in the midst of a heavily guarded desert village, where a
rebellion is being quashed as they speak.  Since the Americans have signed a
cease-fire with Iraq, it is expected that the Americans will merely do nothing
as Iraqi civilians get slaughtered.
For the most part, as a country, this is what we did.  However, Vietnam vet
Archie Gates (Clooney) makes the decision to not allow the Iraqis to have free
reign.  From there on it, the film becomes a highly contemplative (and
action-packed) commentary on where morals should and do lie in war.
Congratulations should go to about everyone on the film.  Mark Whalberg
exhibits the same kind of brilliant acting as he did in Boogie Nights. 
Clooney proves that Out of Sight was not just a fluke and that he actually
does have acting gumption.  Ice Cube tackles a serious role remarkably well
considering that the last movie he acted in was I Got the Hook Up.  However
the real star lies in the role of Conrag Vig (Spike Jonze), hick to the bone
that finds that he actually has morals out in the desert.  Normally, whenever
you see a completely ignorant character on-screen, you hate them.  But, Spike
Jonze (in his first major role) somehow manages to turn it in an endearing
quality.  Also, cinematographer Newton Thomas Sigel, who also did The Usual
Suspects, provides some of the most disturbing imagery captured on film in
recent years (up to par with last year's The Thin Red Line).
Three Kings IS, as said, the Apocalypse Now of the 1990s.  It is the finest
ironically-comedic war film of this decade and the second finest war film of
this decade (Saving Private Ryan being the first).  I don't care if you see at
New York City's Sony Theatre, where it costs $9 for a matinee.  It's worth
every penny you spend on it.
MovieKritic2000: Reviews for the Generation of a New Millenium
http://www.geocities.com/moviekritic2000/
Help support MK2K, become a member of http://www.epinions.com/.  It's free and
you can post opinions on books, movies, music, travel, software, and just
about anything else under the sun.
To subscribe, email MK2K-subscribe@listbot.com
To email the critic, email MK2K@usa.net


Author
Homer Yen
There's a terrific scene when George Clooney describes
what happens when a person gets shot.  The worst part,
he says, isn't even the pain that is felt when the
bullet enters the body.  It's what happens afterwards,
as the bullet fragment completely wreaks havoc to the
body's internal organs.  An unseen chain reaction
begins to happen, and its ultimate effect is far
graver than anything that can actually be seen.  
This scene is especially appropriate to the backdrop
of the story, which takes place just after the end of
Operation Desert Storm.  While many soldiers happily
accepted their mission to 'liberate Kuwait' from Iraqi
occupation, they didn't necessarily know or understand
the ramifications of their actions.  When the American
bullet pierced the body of Iraq, damage was done in
ways that the allied forces probably never knew about.
 Why might that be?  Probably it was because we fought
such a high-tech war that, for a large part of it,
soldiers never even had to leave their bases. With
America's vast array of spying equipment and arsenal
of missiles that could accurately hit a stop sign on
any street corner, Desert Storm was very much a
faceless war.
"The Three Kings" is a fine film about a small group
of soldiers who venture out beyond where most soldiers
have gone during Operation Desert Storm and see things
that others never did.  When an Iraqi prisoner of war
is searched, a map is found that shows where the Iraqi
government has hidden millions in stolen Kuwaiti
bullion.  But instead of reporting it, the soldiers
decide to fetch the gold for themselves.  Troy Barlow
(Mark Wahlberg) will risk his life because he's a new
father and the money will come in handy.  Chief (Ice
Cube) wants to be a part of it because he feels that
God has put the gold within his reach for a reason. 
And Archie Gates, a Special Forces soldier (George
Clooney) is strictly motivated by greed.  Also along
for the ride is Conrad Vig (Spike Jonze), an extremely
naďve boy who idolizes Barlow and wants to see some
combat action.  They don't tell their superiors what
they are about to do and also must dodge an
inquisitive and news-hungry reporter at the base (Nora
Dunn).  But the plan is simple.  Locate the bunker
with the gold, enter the bunker, take the gold, and
leave.  By claiming that they were sent to retrieve
the gold, the Iraqi guards will probably ignore them
while they load up.  
As they are about to leave with their booty, they see
that Iraqi soldiers have shot an innocent woman.  She
is one of many citizens who are doing what they can to
rise up (as President Bush urged at the end of the
war) against the current regime.  Other villagers will
undoubtedly be executed.  A tense standoff between
American and Iraqi soldiers occurs.  `Stick to the
plan,' yells Barlow.  But Gates has made up his mind. 
He can't let these people be slaughtered.  He decides
to help them, an act that greatly risks his military
standing, all of the gold, and even his life.
Like all good war films, the story that drives the
movie is not about war, but rather the moral
implications that arise as a result of it.  `Three
Kings' makes no effort to hide its strong political
undercurrents and clearly has something to say about
how we handled our involvement.  There are terrific
moments of truth and observation.  At the same time,
it shows how war is truly Hell.  The sunlight has been
bleached into an almost hallucinatory effect. 
Meanwhile gun battles are presented in slow motion to
make it shocking rather than some visceral display of
pyrotechnics.  And thanks to strong performances from
the cast, the film continually brims with enthusiasm,
energy and intelligence.  Korea had M*A*S*H, and
Vietnam had Platoon.  Now, the Gulf War has `Three
Kings.'

Author
Ross Anthony
Three kings and a joker (all US military) stumble across an "ass map" during
a cease-fire during the Gulf War. The map (which was found in an Iraqi
buttocks) could very well reveal the location of a great deal of gold. In an
attempt to return home rich, the four find themselves having to choose
between material or humanitarian wealth. It's a tough choice, so with death
on their heals they go for both.
Strangely resembling a journalistic version of "Saving Private Ryan," "Three
Kings" is really more like Tarantino in the Middle East. The grainy
overexposed footage goes a long way toward making you feel that this is
really happening. And the gruff point-blank bullets to the flesh make
blaring contrast to deadpan, stumbling humor. Oddly, it's not the humor that
takes you out of this "reality" the director carefully creates -- it's the
hyper-stylized cinematography especially present during an exchange of
gunfire. The camera stabs like a bayonet from the shooter to the target as
if to follow the bullet. A brave directorial option.
Thrown into the mix (none too subtlety) are sharp messages of politics and
humanitarianism. In one scene an American soldier who really believes he's
there to liberate Kuwait has oil forced down his throat in an attempt to
illustrate the truly "crude" reasons for his (the American) presence.
Though altruism prevails, the film is still a war comedy. And laughing at
such tragedy may be too much for some people to take (especially those who
have experienced combat first hand or their surviving loved ones).
Nonetheless, it's a strong, bold film with an incredible pace (which levels
off midway), outstandingly creative direction, rock solid acting (Wahlberg
is great), an aggressive (only slightly imperfect) script, and a fiercely
subtle sense of dark humor.
Three Kings. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze and Nora Dunn,
Cliff Curtis.
Screenwriter/Director David O. Russell.
Produced by Charles Roben and Paul Junger Witt and Edward L. McDonnell at
Warner Brothers.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: At least there's a satisfying ending
His brother, Donnie, was right, Mark Wahlberg can't sing. But he can
play the average middle class guy, in this case a homesick soldier,
well. Ice Cube finally delivers a good performance and George Clooney is
subtle and superb in Three Kings, in which greedy Ugly Americans learn
all about moral courage. I've said this several times on CNN, the better
movies should offer you characters that you can believe in. They should
push your buttons (good or bad) and provoke some kind of reaction --
whether it's laughter or anger -- and Three Kings provoked both in
Cranky.
The setting is the 1991 Gulf War, cheered by those too young to remember
Vietnam, because "we kicked Sadaam's ass," and reviled by us old folks,
liberal and conservative alike, because we didn't finish the thing and
take Sadaam Hussein down for good. David O. Russell's script for Three
Kings, inspired by a true event during the Vietnam War, doesn't dance
lightly around the politics and violence of the situation. Soldiers are
ordered to do nothing as Iraqi troops gun down their own civilians --
this after we said we'd support any uprising against said troops. Things
organic and non-organic, explode as necessary and always to make some
kind of story point. Nothing gratuitous, here, so points to Russell for
that. Politically, being the old fart that I am, my stomach was turning
to the point that it got in the way of enjoying the flick. Across the
board, after the fact, everyone I spoke with after the screening was
positive towards the movie. So I'll stay the hell away from the
political soap box as much as possible and get on with the nitty gritty.
The Gulf War, as we see it, is populated by enlisted men who are not
exactly the best and the brightest, enemy troops who are even dumber,
jaded Special Forces officers who want a bigger payoff and bulldog tough
television reporters with inferiority complexes. The humor in Russell's
script runs close to satire (and satire has killed three very funny
movies this year alone). His directorial style is hard core, liberally
tossing film processing and camera tricks at you, to the point that they
intrude on the telling of the tale. The strength is in his script, which
allows for redemption and a happy ending that we all hold so near and
dear to our hearts.
Our grunts are Army Sgt. Troy Barlow (Wahlberg), who has spent the war
doing cleaning up after the hi tech troops. As the film starts he still
hasn't notched his first kill. Still, he's the moral center, and looked
up to by Pvt. Conrad Elgin (Spike Jonze), who is illiterate,
undereducated and unemployable back home. Rounding up surrendering
solders they discover a map that Staff Sergeant Chief Elgin (Ice Cube)
believes to show the location of bunkers containing gold and other goods
Sadaam Hussein has boosted from Kuwait. Rather than turning the map over
to their Commanding Officer, they fall under the spell of Special Forces
Captain Archie Gates (Clooney) who convinces the grunts that, with a
borrowed truck and a couple of hours of AWOL time, they can go home and
never have to work a day in their lives. Materialistic to the core, it's
off to raid the bunkers.
Adding a bit of humor to the location is a CNN type reporter, Adriana
Cruz (Nora Dunn). Clooney's character is supposed to be leading her to
the good stories (just what we train our Green Berets to do) but Clooney
is shtupping one of Cruz' much younger, and prettier, rivals. Labeling
both of 'em as burnout cases would be kind, but would be true. The
conflict between the two  she's annoying, he doesn't want to play the
PR game, even under orders -- helps take some of the edge off the rest
of the flick.
This isn't a "greed is good" flick, though that's how it begins. Yes,
the gold is found. Yes, our boys stand by and do nothing as Iraqui
troops trash their own civilians (it was part of the cease fire deal, as
explained ad nauseum). Yes, the violence is graphic and sobering and
shut up the laughing audience very quickly. And, yes (finally) they do
the right thing, made even more poignant because the rest of the Army
doesn't want to.
I've been staring a the keyboards for two hours now folks. This thing is
pissing me off politically and I promised I'd stay the hell away from
that. So, goodnight.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Three Kings, he would have paid...
I'll say it again. Despite skipping the bleach, Three Kings is well
made, well acted, and it sure as hell got a reaction out of this guy.
That's what I say I want 'em to do. That's what Three Kings did and why
the flick hits the "recommended" level. I also know my history, folks.
Films that piss me off like this invariably become monster hits, so
don't bother with the flame mail. I've seen it all before.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
THREE KINGS
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze, Nora
Dunn, Cliff Curtis, Said Taghmaoui, Jamie Kennedy.
Screenplay:  David O. Russell.
Producers:  Charles Roven, Paul Junger Witt and Edward L. McDonnell.
Director:  David O. Russell.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  111 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In THREE KINGS, writer/director David O. Russell seems intent on
creating the quintessential debunking of the "official" Gulf War story.
Eight years ago, the war was treated as a great boost to national pride in
the midst of a recession, a pseudo-exorcism of the Vietnam demons and a
vision of the great bloodless techno-battle that would become the way of
warfare.  It was all night-vision and smart-bombs, desert shields and
protections of sovereignty -- a just war waged against a power-mad
dictator.  We were swept up in the images, watching our forces hammer away
towards a foregone conclusion.
     There's more than a little irony to the fact that THREE KINGS is just
as visually striking as the Gulf War, and nearly as shaky in its
substance.  The story focuses on a quartet of U.S. Army soldiers eyeing a
personal windfall as the war reaches its conclusion in March 1991.  Sgt.
Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg), Staff Sgt. Elgin (Ice Cube) and Pvt. Conrad
Vig (Spike Jonze) discover a map they believe leads to a fortune in
plundered Kuwaiti loot.  Special Forces Capt. Archie Gates (George
Clooney) also learns of the map, but believes there's far more to be had
than cell phones and Rolexes -- specifically, bunkers filled with millions
in gold bullion.  The four men begin a journey into the heart of Iraq to
cash in, but they soon discover a nation still at war, and find that their
mission objectives keep shifting as they learn more.
     As a moderately revisionist history lesson, there's no question that
THREE KINGS both engages and enlightens.  Russell paints a picture of
American troops as rowdy kids celebrating victory in a war they barely
fought, while the brass concerns itself primarily with feeding reporters
stories to keep them happy.  Meanwhile, Iraqi citizens initiate rebellion
against Saddam Hussein after being promised support by America, then find
themselves slaughtered by Iraqi troops when it becomes clear that no
cavalry will be on its way.  THREE KINGS becomes a journey of discovery
for the four soldiers, their quest for personal gain gradually giving way
to a belief that they can't obey the orders that would have them abandon
Iraqi rebels to their deaths.
     Provocative moral dilemmas abound in THREE KINGS, which should be the
stuff of compelling drama.  Somehow, it just isn't.  The messages are
similar to those familiar from anti-war films like PATHS OF GLORY, M*A*S*H
and PLATOON -- war is even more hellish when policy has little to do with
humanity -- yet the characters are not nearly as strong.  While Clooney,
Wahlberg and company perform capably, Russell doesn't give them much to
work with beyond surface characterizations:  Gates the jaded veteran, Vic
the simple-minded hick, Barlow the naive family man, etc.  They're too
often placed in situations where other characters explain to them the real
horrors of the war, turning chunks of THREE KINGS into an informative
but stagnant lecture.  Russell wants to put a personal face on an
impersonal war, but he can only create an urgency of situation, not
urgency connected to the people in the situation.
     He can also create plenty of urgency with his stylistic flourishes,
of which plenty abound.  THREE KINGS is a genuinely eye-catching piece of
work in which Russell makes bold choices to drive home a point, from the
graphic internal images of a wounded body to the slow-motion punctuation
of bullet wounds as video game warfare tears through real flesh.
Unfortunately, the same impulse to drive a point home leads to scenes in
which a scene described in dialogue is simultaneously portrayed on screen.
Hearing an Iraqi soldier (Said Taghmaoui) describe his infant son's death
during a bomb raid is wrenching; watching the infant crushed by debris is
startling; combining the two is pure overkill.
     In retrospect, I'm not sure why I still admired THREE KINGS as much
as I did.  It's certainly an unconventional film, zig-zagging between dark
comedy and raw drama with surprising effectiveness.  Every once in a
while, Russell will do one of those little things that remind you how
invigorating cinema can be.  There's just not enough to shake the sense
that THREE KINGS is too enamored of its sense of historical importance.
All that remains is getting swept up in the images, watching Russell's
forces hammer away towards a foregone conclusion.

Author
Jamey Hughton
Three Kings is the most unusual war movie you will ever see, and surely
one of the best. This brilliant Gulf War action / comedy is brimming
with razor-sharp comedy, deliriously exciting action and thoughtful
drama - with just a pinch of good old-fashioned Hollywood patriotism
thrown in to boot. In most films, all of these elements would create an
awkward and overstuffed dilemma for the audience. But, in Three Kings,
the finished product is expertly polished and wonderfully engaging. In
simple terms, the movie is flat-out great.
Any dedicated filmgoer with a true sense of passion for cinema is sure
to appreciate Three Kings. Where director David O. Russell could have
opted for a mere conventional approach, he transforms the film into
sheer outlandish brilliance. But, the thing is, the messages conveyed in
the film are also straightforward enough to please the average action
fan. It depends on your critical eye, but you may leave the theater
thinking either `That was awesome!!' or `That was unique, original and
totally absorbing. Why couldn't Hollywood be this brave more often?'
Russell doesn't waste any time with revealing his true intentions. The
film begins in 1991, just as the Gulf War has come to a close. American
soldiers are celebrating their dismissal with loud music and alcohol,
but not everyone is so anxious to return home. Sergeant Troy Barlow
(Mark Wahlberg), Chief Elgin (Ice Cube) and Private Conrad Vig (Spike
Jonze) have stumbled upon a map that supposedly leads to a hidden stash
of gold bullion (stolen by Saddam Hussein from Kuwait). Major Archie
Gates (George Clooney), only two weeks from retirement, gets wind of
their plans and wants to join the expedition to the Iraqi bunker where
the bullion has been stored. The four soldiers set out with the
intentions of getting filthy rich.
The gold is recovered, yes, but other problems arise. The Iraqi rebels,
encouraged by President Bush to rise up against Saddam, are attempting
to fight for their freedom. But they were also informed that they would
get the support of American troops, and that has not happened. Gates
sees that the rebels are suffering, and suddenly the game plan has
changed: the soldiers are to stay and help the people from the grasp of
Saddam's army, and then they will continue on their way. Gates, Barlow,
Elgin and Vig get far more than they had originally bargained for - each
addressing certain moral issues that they feel strongly for, but have
never spoken up about.
Three Kings is probably the funniest movie I've seen all year, handling
it's comedy with a wry pleasure that most will find courageously
liberating. In the same respect, the film is heartbreaking and tragic as
well, offering many scenes of graphic war violence that are frightening
to watch transpire. Russell (who last directed the critically acclaimed
comedy Flirting With Disaster), with a watchful eye, balances everything
in a miraculous fashion. His screenplay, while containing a few periodic
lulls, is sure to remain one of the most striking and enjoyable of the
movie year.
The characters here are not emotionless cardboard stand-ups. You
actually feel for them. Clooney, who has always been a likable hero in
films like Out of Sight and From Dusk Till Dawn, is strong and
charismatic as always. Now that the actor has left ER, he is in dire
need of a theatrical hit (and if this won't deliver for him, nothing
will). Wahlberg is a convincing performer, and rapper Ice Cube adds some
impressive, subtle sub-texts to his character (even if his facial
expressions remain rather monotonous throughout the movie). The
supporting cast is led triumphantly by Spike Jonze, who is indeed the
`fourth king', even though the title may prove otherwise. Although at
first glance Private Vig appears to be just an annoying hillbilly
weasel, Jonze (a director himself) adds layers of unexpected personality
to the character - perhaps even emerging the standout.
The film has a fuzzed-out appearance that only assists in making the
desert climate more realistic. Russell's camera angles are nothing short
of glorious, including an interesting scene in which we see the effects
of a bullet ripping through a soldier's torso. For a film to be so
successful in so many areas is almost disarming, but Three Kings pulls
it off with incredible style. This is one of the most thought-provoking,
insanely original movies of the year. I recommend you drop any gold
bullion you may be carrying and rush to see it.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
         MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton
         http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
http://MovieThing.com/members/movies/MovieViews
Comments Appreciated:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
David O. Russell is a man to be reckoned with. He starts his career off with
a "comedy" about incest between a mom and son called SPANKING THE MONKEY.
Follows it up with yet another very original story packed with a slew of
interesting and quirky characters called FLIRTING WITH DISASTER (8.5/10).
And now this film, which at least one critic (Roger Ebert) has called a
"masterpiece".
PLOT:
Operation Desert Storm has just ended. Now, four military men find a map
leading to the gold stolen by Saddam Hussein in a prisoner's ass, and decide
to take it upon themselves to find the stash and retire in wealth upon their
return home. But what do you know...things are never that simple.
CRITIQUE:
This film is like no other "war film" that I have ever seen. Sure, it does
actually take place after the war, and isn't necessarily based on action or
heavy machine gun shootouts, but you can still consider it a war movie
considering the goings-on in the film. It's got a style, a feel, a unique
look, unlike any of those other murky combat flicks. Could it be the fact
that it actually toys with comedy as much as it does drama?
Perhaps...although I personally found some of the humor to be misplaced in a
film with so many disturbing images. Having said that, this film is no
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN (8/10) in that regard either, it actually presents us
with various original scenarios featuring gun fights which I have never
encountered before in any film. Very interesting to watch. It also decided
to show us, in graphic detail, what a bullet does to someone after it enters
their body. Kind of icky to see, but interesting nonetheless.
That aside, this film basically offers us a unique war perspective with some
decent action scenes, a creative style, some good humor, a spic-and-span
ending, but not much more than that. The acting performances were also very
good, with George Clooney really coming into his own with this picture.
Wahlberg also comes through, despite another gratuitous shot of him running
around without his top (Who am I kidding, if I had half the six-pack that
bastard's got stacked, I'd be going to work without my shirt every day!).
Even Ice Cube and Spike Jonze (That's right, the music video director!) got
into the act with some pretty effective scenarios. The film as a whole
worked for me because I was never bored while watching it, enjoyed its
creative take on many Hollywood staple scenes, and was even a little touched
here and there. Not a great film, but certainly one worthy of earning your
hard-earned cash in the local movie houses.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Director David O. Russell has written and directed his first three pictures
all by himself, although this one has a "story" credit to John Ridley, the
man who wrote the novel "Stray Dogs", upon which Oliver Stone's U-TURN was
filmed. Russell got his first picture made when he was in his mid-thirties,
and apparently spent 18 months exhaustively researching the Gulf War and its
aftermath before writing this movie.
Director/actor Spike Jonze's real name is Adam Spiegel. He recently married
famed director Francis Ford Coppola's daughter Sofia. His only two other
"acting" performances before this movie were as a "Airbag EMT Beltran" in
1997's THE GAME and as a "teenage drug customer" in 1993's MI VIDA LOCA (No,
not the Ricky Martin music video!). He's best known for having directed many
unique music videos such as "Sabotage" by the Beastie Boys, "Buddy Holly"
from Weezer, "Da Funk" by Daft Punk and "Praise Me" by Fatboy Slim. And yes,
that is him dancing around like an idiot dance teacher in the video. He will
be making his directorial debut in this fall's BEING JOHN MALKOVICH.
Rumors were floating around when this picture opened about the use of an
actual cadaver during the "let's show the bullet inside one's body" scene.
It turned out to be a completely unfounded rumor, since no dead body would
ever be used for such an unnecessary exercise.
George Clooney is the nephew of singer Rosemary Clooney and the cousin of
actor Miguel Ferrer. George's middle name is Timothy. He says he will never
get married, nor have any children, but Michelle Pfeiffer and Nicole Kidman
have bet $10,000 each that he will be a father before he turns 40 (2001).
Ironically, Clooney's first role was in a 1984 TV series called "E/R", and
ten years later, he returned to TV drama with another small hit called "ER".
Ice Cube, real name O'Shea Jackson, started rapping when he was 14 in South
Central Los Angeles, where he pushed his notion of gangsta rap, a genre he
virtually invented and defined with his old group N.W.A., to new levels.
Actor Mark Wahlberg will also co-star alongside George Clooney in his next
picture called THE PERFECT STORM, and have George as a producer on his next
project after that.
This film was shot in three places: El Centro, California, three weeks among
deserts and sand dunes; Mexicali, Mexico, its unobstructed landscape served
as the backdrop for the film's opening sequence; and Casa Grande, Arizona.
This film was originally titled THE SPOILS OF WAR.

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
Wars simply don't make godly sense. Hype and political propaganda aside,
the Persian Gulf war was no exception.  THREE KINGS, in using Operation
Desert Storm as its setting, pulls no punches when depicting the
confusion, political duplicity, and moral dilemmas engendered by that
conflict.
Writer/director David O. Russell (FLIRTING WITH DISASTER) researched
heavily before embarking upon this project and his preliminary efforts
have paid off handsomely.  He has crafted the most irreverent war story
since M*A*S*H hit the silver screen in the 1970's.  The opening scene also
had definite traces of CATCH-22 influence.
Archie Gates (George Clooney, OUT OF SIGHT) is a Special Forces captain
who has been relegated to the sidelines during this high tech,
computerized engagement.  His current assignment involves nothing more
than baby-sitting the media faces who are swarming the area looking for
stories, all of which have long been done and overdone.
With the discovery of a map secreted in a captured Iraqi soldier's anal
cavity, (said hiding place serving as the butt for many a joke), Archie
gives himself a new "assignment."   The map indicates the position of
Iraqi bunkers where it is rumored Sadaam Hussein has hidden an obscene
amount of gold bullion stolen from Kuwait.
With the war now over, Archie and a small band of American GI's decide to
liberate the gold from Sadaam's forces.  Of course, their intentions are
purely self-serving.  But as they travel deeper into Iraq to collect their
spoils of war, they begin to witness firsthand what American policy has
done for and to the people of Iraq.
The film slowly takes a serious turn, pointing an accusative finger at
the Bush Administration which was allegedly responsible for the lies and
false hopes that were fed to the Iraqi people.  Encouraged to rise up
against Sadaam Hussein with promised support from the American government,
the Iraqi people were left "twisting in the wind" as Sadaam's army
brutally put down the internal rebellion with no interference from the US
forces who stood idly by.  Seeing this, Archie and the others are forced
to question their own principles and character.
Mr. Russell continues to shift the story from seriously comic to
comically serious, the emphasis changing as frequently as the political
winds of favor.
Mr. Clooney again displays the sardonic humor we've seen from him in the
past.  His Archie is a grizzled combat veteran who doesn't have the
faintest idea why he is in the midst of a barren and desolate desert with
a bunch of know-nothing volunteer reservists, but as long as he is, he
figures he might as well profit from the experience.
Mark Wahlberg (BOOGIE NIGHTS) is surprisingly effective as Sgt. Troy
Barlow, new father and genuinely decent guy.  In perhaps the most riveting
sequence, Troy is tortuously interrogated by an Iraqi soldier.  During the
experience they learn how closely their lives parallel.
The film has a distinctive stylized look about it.  Alternating between a
realistic look, a bleached-out, "shaky-cam" documentary look, and a
jazzed-up, special FX look, the visual style of THREE KINGS is just
disconcerting enough to keep us on edge.
The film does include some scenes of which the easily squeamish should be
aware.  After all, this is a war setting.  In war, bullets are fired.
This movie, more than most, shows in graphic detail the devastating damage
a bullet can do to a human body.
The salient point of the movie is that even in the midst of a devilish,
hellish environment, it is available to maintain one's morality and
compassion.  As individuals, we always have a choice.  As believers, our
view of right or wrong is based upon a standard that is unmovable.  As we
commit ourselves to the upholding of that standard, our actions and
decisions will reflect the goodness of the One Who created it.
Archie claims that the most important thing in life is necessity.  That
is only true if we define "need" properly.  The greatest need that any of
us have is a knowledge of truth.  Armed with a knowledge of truth and the
conviction to act upon that truth, our decisions become sound and our
lives have impact and meaning.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) David O. Russell uses the Gulf War as a backdrop for his
ironic, thoughtful film about war, freedom, and greed.
The three title characters (plus a fourth), all U.S. army, find a map to
Kuwaiti gold in a dead Iraqi soldier at the end of the war. Major Archie
Gates (George Clooney) leads his small team on an expedition to find the
gold. The map takes them into the heart of Iraq, where they finally meet
people who aren't soldiers. Some are villagers, some are police, and
some are resistance fighters, and each group has a different take on
America.
The civilians are inclined to greet the Americans as heroes. The
villagers believed the political promises of President Bush, and are
expecting to be governed justly by the occupying force. Archie doesn't
know how -- or whether -- to break the bad news to them, that there is
no occupying force and that Bush could not care less about the
oppression of Iraqi peasants.
They get a strange reaction from the police force, which is an internal
branch of Saddam Hussein's army. Archie is savvy enough to predict that
the police will ignore the Americans and go about their business of
repressing the civilians. Though the G.I.s (Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, and
Spike Jonze) fear for their lives when the Iraqis show up with guns,
their commander turns out to be right -- the police ignore them.
Greed tells the Americans to be grateful for this strange behavior. Now
they can grab the gold and leave. But their curiosity, valor, and
outrage are also stimulated. Should they take the money and run?
Shouldn't they protect the civilians? Should they attack the police? If
they intervene, are they creating more war?
The plot contrives to bring the Americans through several war movie
vignettes -- the resistance fighters, capture and torture, a
resettlement camp -- and Russell brings irony and social commentary into
each one.
For example, one of the Americans is tortured by an Iraqi soldier who
rips on the social bankruptcy of American culture. He forces his
American prisoner to drink crude oil by cramming a compact disc into his
mouth as a makeshift funnel. Oil -- the stuff America was fighting for
-- becomes something to be reviled. And a compact disc -- a symbol of
the high technology good life -- becomes complicit in the torture of an
American. (The irony goes deeper when you remember that the American is
played by former recording artist Marky Mark [Wahlberg]).
One could make the case that Russell has put in too many metaphors, or
too much irony. You could say that this movie's message is heavy-handed.
On the other hand, I'm more inclined to hate a movie that DOESN'T
capitalize on the chance to make a statement, that's all plot and no
meaning. So on the whole, I'd prefer Russell's approach.
Along with the thoughtful commentary, Russell provides a uniquely
appropriate look. The film seems overexposed and bleached. The only
colors are desert yellow and anemic sky blue. The cinematography feels
dazedly sunstroked, giving the movie's irony an almost surreal logic. 
THREE KINGS sounds like a great movie, and indeed many critics call it
one of the year's best. But somehow, as soon as the credits rolled, the
whole experience evaporated. By the time I hit the parking lot the film
and its impact might as well have been mirages.
"Now if you take the top off, you'll find a little red button. Whatever
you do, don't touch it." 
-- Desmond Llewelen as Q, Goldfinger

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by David O. Russell.
Cast: George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze, Nora Dunn, Jamie 
Kennedy, Mykelti Williamson, Cliff Curtis, Said Taghmaoui, Liz Stauber, Judy 
Greer.
1999 - 111 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sex, and gore).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 4, 1999.
Since the Gulf War ended in 1991, only two major films have been made about 
it. The first, 1996's "Courage Under Fire," starred Denzel Washington as a 
discharged Lieutenant investigating the worth of the first woman (Meg Ryan) 
ever to be given a Medal of Honor posthumously. Now comes "Three Kings," 
fashionably-directed by acclaimed indie filmmaker David O. Russell (1994's 
"Spanking the Monkey," 1996's "Flirting With Disaster"), which is not your 
usual war picture, and about as far as could be from something akin to Steven 
Spielberg's "Saving Private Ryan."
Set immediately following the end of the Gulf War in March 1991, when the 
infantry is planning to return home to their families, Major Archie Gates 
(George Clooney), on the eve of retiring from the military, discovers a 
document that points the way to a stash of Kuwaiti gold that is worth 
hundreds of millions. The map, originally found by Sgt. Troy Barlow (Mark 
Wahlberg), a young, married man who has a one-month-old baby at home; Sgt. 
Chief Elgin (Ice Cube), a former airport baggage tranferrer; and Pvt. Conrad 
Vig (Spike Jonze), a happy-go-lucky southern redneck, sticking out of the 
backside of an Iraqi soldier, holds the key to bright, wealthy futures for 
all four of the men. Continuously followed by pushy news reporter Adriana 
Cruz (Nora Dunn), who is determined to get exclusive first rights to the 
story, the four are faced by many other hurdles in their way, including not 
letting their superiors know about the illegal operation, and storming the 
bunkers, still overrun by the enemies.
With a highly inventive, no-holds-barred style that plays itself out like a 
"how-to" class on evoking freneticism, "Three Kings" is such an 
invigoratingly energized motion picture that it's almost difficult not to get 
caught up in the goings-on. Not your typical war film by any stretch of the 
imagination, and more unconventional than your average $50-million studio 
picture, the film is a graceful mixture of several different genres, 
including comedy, drama, and action, with a few minor war battles thrown in 
for good measure. Cinematographer Newton Thomas Sigel wisely has chosen to 
give the film an over-developed look as if the film has been sitting out in 
the sun too long, so as to emphasize the gritty nature of the characters and 
dire situations, and the eclectic soundtrack is also cause for praise, which 
features such pop icons as The Beach Boys, and easy-listening rock, thanks to 
The Eagles. The conflicting elements that cause the tone to waver from dark 
to comedic gives the film a constant air of unpredicatability, as the viewer 
is never exactly sure where the film is headed from moment to moment. 
The characters, although thinly-written, are inhabited by a cast of 
first-rate actors that take their roles and improve upon their limited 
development in the writing department. George Clooney, as in last year's "Out 
of Sight," has more than proven his previously questionable leading-man 
status and can surefootedly carry a picture (just as long as it doesn't have 
'Batman' in the title). Cool, calm, and determined, Clooney occupies his 
character with such ease (similar to 1996's "From Dusk Till Dawn") that it 
often seems like he doesn't even have to try. 
Mark Wahlberg, in his first impressive turn since 1997's "Boogie Nights," is 
absolutely fabulous as the conflicted Sgt. Barlow, a man who, at first, shows 
very little compassion to the fates of the people around him, until he puts 
the death and destruction around him into context with his own life back 
home, where his sweet wife (Liz Stauber) is eagerly awaiting his arrival. 
Equipped with the most powerful, humane character in the whole film, Wahlberg 
fits the role perfectly, and goes even further with it. 
In slighter roles, Ice Cube is fine as Sgt. Elgin, but not given nearly as 
much chance to satisfactorily develop a character, while Spike Jonze 
(arguably the fourth king) is on hand basically for comic relief. Luckily, 
Jonze is often quite amusing, and likable enough that his antics never fully 
wear out their welcome. 
Jamie Kennedy, who seems to always get stuck with the supporting roles (aside 
from the first two "Scream" films), is more memorable here than in the recent 
"Bowfinger," and has a few hysterically funny scenes in which he acts 
alongside Nora Dunn. In a film inundated with male performers, it is Dunn who 
is, by far, the standout. Sassy, high-spirited, and portrayed with 
pitch-perfect professionalism, it is the foul-mouthed, but wisely 
uncaricaturized character of news reporter Adriana Cruz that is the most 
noteworthy, and it would be criminal for the Academy to forget Dunn when the 
nominations are announced next February.
"Three Kings" might have been nothing more than a passable diversion had the 
film not be handled with such technical creativity and skill. The major 
plotline, about four men attempting to possess Kuwaiti gold, is not very 
important or interesting on its own, but interweaved with writer-director 
David O. Russell's underlying themes concerning human compassion and 
kindness, the film really does have a reason for being. Although imperfect, 
"Three Kings" has enough vigor and intelligence to satisfy both audiences 
that prefer action, and those that enjoy more thought-provoking fare.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THREE KINGS (1999) ** 1/2 . Written and directed by David O. Russell 
from a story by John Ridley. Photography, Newton Thomas Sigel. 
Editing, Robert K. Lambert. Production design,, Catherine Hardwicke. 
Music, Carter Burwell. Producers, Charles Roven, Paul Junger Witt, 
Edward L. McDonnell. Cast:  George Clooney (Special Forces Capt. 
Archie Gates), Mark Wahlberg (Sgt. Troy Barlow), Ice Cube (Staff Sgt. 
Chief), Spike Jonze (Conrad Vig), Nora Dunn (Adriana Cruz), Jamie 
Kennedy (Walter), Mykelti Williamson (Colonel Horn), Cliff Curtis 
(Amir), Said Taghmaoui (Captain Sa'id) et al.  A Warners release. 114 
minutes. R (language, shocking violence, sex)
In a film as with all else, novelty for novelty's sake isn't much. 
But then again, novelty of any kind may open doors for other creators 
and works. David O. Russell's first feature, the low-budget Spanking 
the Monkey, was daringly original. It and made the writer-director 
more than just promising. His next film was Flirting With Disaster, 
neither daring nor a minor landmark, but clever (though without 
brilliance or depth), inventive (but not really original), and 
amusing.
The title Three Kings is ironic. It calls to mind We Three Kings from 
Orient Are.  But these kings don't bear gifts. They are taking gold 
away. In any case they are four, not three. A redneck yahoo from 
Texas is excluded from the title --which goes to show how logic is 
sacrificed at the altar of catchy titles.
Desert Storm is ending. Is the Gulf War really over? Is there a 
truce? What's up, Doc? It's all muddled, but the U.S. soldiers are 
celebrating anyway their return-home-to be. They live it up like 
fraternity boys, with booze and clowning and rap music. It's a 
near-orgy, minus sex. But wait a moment. Special Forces Captain Gates 
(George Clooney, in fine mettle) is in a tent, vigorously copulating 
with the female assistant to Adriana. Adriana is an ace reporter for 
a TV network (invented).
The lively though not lovely start also includes encounters with 
"ragheads," captives treated like dirt, Iranians in uniform and 
others. Sometimes the soldiers shoot first, then wonder if the 
natives were friendly (anti-Saddam), foes or simply guys surrendering 
Ugh.
All this sets the tone. Mostly, it introduces the plot. An anal 
(don't ask) document on (in) a captive officer turns out to be the 
map of gold bars looted by Iraq from Kuwait. That's the stuff dreams 
(cf. The Maltese Falcon and Treasure if Sierra Madre) are made of. 
Neat, ain't it?
The next, inevitable step is for Captain Gates to lead a quartet of 
men (the old movie mix of motley guys) to the "liberation" of the 
golden stash. It could buy endless visits to Disney, Inc. at home.
Then comes non-stop action, compounded by a baffling mix of elite 
troops still faithful to Saddam --or still afraid of him,  deserters, 
an anti-Saddam Resistance (which was news to me), innocent women and 
children caught in cross-fire, underground treasure troves. Not only 
gold bars but Kuwaiti jewelry, absurd refrigerators, radios and tutti 
quanti). Plus occasional people from whatever is the "other" side 
being interrogated under torture. And later, another stash, this time 
of luxurious, shiny Kuwaiti limousines and sports cars. Enough, 
enough.
In addition, the Americans are being stalked by news-supergal Adriana 
(and her cameraman). She's been Emmy-nominated multiple times, but 
has always been a bridesmaid,  never a bride. This is her big chance: 
The Scoop.
Shot with a real (or a pretend) 16 millimiter hand-held movie camera 
(unless it is supposed to be video), the sights have that typical 
graininess, jerkiness and relative un-sharpness of news footage. A 
clever idea which adds immediacy to the action. But analyze it and 
you'll have to conclude that it's still the old Eye of God, except 
that it is not mounted on a studio tripod. (There are also shots of 
sea-birds soaked in oil as a result of blown-up oil wells by the 
Iraqis. Looks to me like footage from the Werner Herzog apocalyptic 
documentary).
In addition (again) the four soldiers must be AWOL, given the time 
frame. In re-addition, we get the old cliche characterizations of the 
group's individuals.
 From the point of view of the narrative, the well-intentioned desire 
to show the madness and chaos of war and its aftermath results in 
much murkiness and confusion. The audiences of this movie will no 
doubt be heavy with young persons who were pre-teens or early teens 
during the Gulf War --and know next to nothing about it. I suppose 
that like most viewers of action flicks they don't ask themselves 
questions but bask in the physical scenes before their eyes. But 
those non-kids who do exercise their logic and whatever they know of 
history, are bound (as I did) to spend much time trying to figure out 
who's who,what and where.
Violence is most graphic, gory and too often gratuitous here. It is 
effective in its use of firearms, mines, poison gas, vehicles and all 
--but it lacks Sam Peckinpah's ballet-ism or even the montage of 
Bonnie and Clyde's slow-motion rain of bullets. Everything seems to 
be larger and faster than life. and faster. Sort it out if you can: 
most of the males, on all sides, are primitive or ferocious. So much 
for humanism.
The narrow subject is greed, which is OK. But, like a savage kind of 
M*A*S*H, there's a pretty continuous thread of comedy running 
through, with mixed results. And, shades of umpteen movies about 
fortune-hunting, the conclusion lapses into deja vu sentimentality. 
The three American survivors will give up their gold in exchange of 
authorities allowing a procession of "good" (read anti-Saddam) Iraqis 
to enter a sanctuary at the Iranian border.
Makes you feel good, as it had in other, different films, doesn't it?
The high-budget transformation of locations in the American Southwest 
and in Mexico into the Arabian desert is remarkable. The performers 
are good, including those who play Iraqis. So is the varied music 
score by Carter Burwell.

Author
Shay Casey
Year: 1999.
Starring George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze, Nora Dunn,
Jamie Kennedy, Mykelti Williamson, Cliff Curtis, Said Taghmaoui.
Written by John Ridley (story) and David O. Russell (screenplay).
Directed by David O. Russell.
Rated R.
If someone had told me five years ago that George Clooney, Marky Mark, and
Ice Cube were going to make a war movie together, I'd have assumed it would
be a farce. If someone had told me it was going to be a serious war movie, I
'd have laughed in his face. I'd have been wrong. Surprising as it may be,
the Georgey-Marky-Icey war movie, entitled "Three Kings," is most definitely
a serious movie. What's more surprising is that it's good. Damn good. I don'
t know when these three made the transition from being sitcom and rap music
stars into being serious actors, but it happened, and the results are
astounding.
Clooney stars as Sergeant Major Archie Gates, an aging soldier, close to
retirement, who is dissatisfied with the relatively unimportant role he
played in the recently-ended Gulf War. While the other American soldiers
celebrate the war's completion, he and three other soldiers, Sgt. Troy
Barlow (Mark Wahlberg), Chief Elgin (Ice Cube), and Conrad Vig (Spike
Jonze), stumble upon a map while searching an Iraqi prisoner. Thanks to Sgt.
Gates' special forces training, they discover that the map actually details
the location of an Iraqi bunker where several bundles of Kuwaiti gold are
stored. The four (not three, as the title might have you believe) soldiers
decide to go AWOL from the army and collect the gold for themselves. Their
mission is simple: get the gold, get out, and go home rich as kings (get
it?). When they get to the town, however, they find that the residents there
are being starved and slaughtered because they tried to rebel against Saddam
Hussein's rule and are no longer being offered help by the U.S. military
because of the peace treaty. Gates and his team now have to decide whether
they can ignore the pleas of the Iraqi citizens and take the gold, or if
they will stay and help, putting their own lives in danger.
George Clooney gives the performance of his life here, and it's to his
credit that he takes a pressure-filled role and runs with it. He's
confident, assured, and best of all, he doesn't shake his head back and
forth constantly! It seems old George has dropped the nervous head-wagging
tick that irritated me throughout the duration of "Batman & Robin," and he's
way better off for it. Mark Wahlberg (OK, I'll stop calling him Marky Mark
now) gives a fine performance and becomes the idealistic center of the film.
When he is kidnapped and subjected to torture in a strange interrogation
sequence, we see his innocence destroyed, and it's difficult to watch
because of Wahlberg's sympathetic portrayal. As for Ice Cube, I'll give him
this: He made me forget I was watching a rapper on screen. Give credit to
all three lead actors. They are able to successfully shed their former
identities and not only give us three believable soldiers to follow around,
but also three guys we might actually want to follow around. Heck, add in
Spike Jonze, a music video director who does a good job despite being given
the most clichéd role in the film, and you've actually got four actors who
shed their former identities to create likable characters (which is why it
probably should have been called "Four Kings," but why complain?).
Director David O. Russell tells a wacky kind of story, one that's both
straightforward and disjointed at the same time. (Bear with me here . . .)
It has a fairly simple underlying plot, about four soldiers off to steal
gold, but Russell throws in so much that "Three Kings" ends up discussing
anything and everything you could've imagined about the Gulf War. The film's
politics are all over the place, and I loved it all the more for its
craziness. This is a Hollywood release, so "Three Kings" has its share of
sentimentality, but the film is still a challenging work, and it's willing
to take chances even at the risk of offending people. For example, we don't
get the cliché of the "evil Arab," which seems to have come out of American
moviemakers' desire to always have some ethnic group or nationality branded
as the enemy.
Considering that it's an American film starring almost nothing but American
actors, "Three Kings" remains remarkably even-handed. As is often the case
in war, morals become muddled and confused, which is exactly what Russell
does here. There are no good guys or bad guys, just people, ones with
families and emotions. It's kind of refreshing to see a film that doesn't
paint an idealistic picture of soldiers, but instead attempts to show how a
war affects not only the men fighting it, but also civilians, women and
children alike. Special care has been taken to make sure "Three Kings" doesn
't become a gung-ho action flick, and though there is enough action to
please those looking for it, the film clearly has a greater purpose. "Three
Kings" is a film that resonates with the viewer, and the MTV-style editing,
unlike that of the woeful "Stigmata," actually serves that purpose. Russell
takes his camera inside a human body to show the effects of a bullet wound,
as ducts fill up with bile and a lung deflates. A particularly jarring
sequence involves the initial gun battle in the Iraqi village. Russell films
this in almost painfully slow fashion, following each individual bullet
fired by both the Iraqis and the Americans. The result is not only a
stylistically fascinating sequence, but a clear illustration of how a bunch
of guys holding guns will eventually snap and trigger a shoot-out, though
nobody is really at fault. Russell includes these stylistic touches
throughout the film, and though he may go overboard at times, it never feels
terribly unnecessary.
The script, aside from being admirably even-handed, provides a good mix of
humor and drama. For every emotionally rending scene (and there are plenty
of them, complete with crying children), there is a funny "slow-down" scene
to counter it. This structure can be annoying if the funny scenes don't
work, but fortunately, "Three Kings" has humor that hits more often than it
misses. A particularly amusing sequence involves a desperate reporter (Nora
Dunn) who thinks she's getting the story of her life, but has actually been
led on a wild goose chase by Clooney. The opening scenes, with soldiers
partying, contain several deft touches of comedy, and director Russell
demonstrates a certain dry wit here that is very welcome. His script is also
able to juggle discussions of several different issues, many of which come
out during Wahlberg's interrogation. The Iraqi captor questions Wahlberg on
several different topics, including Michael Jackson's skin color and George
Bush. The conversation has a sort of twisted, Tarantino-esque quality to it,
and it is strangely intriguing, despite ending up on a topic that's wildly
different from the one it started with. Unfortunately, the film's only real
problem comes up in political discussions such as this one, and it's the
same problem that comes up with his stylistic camera work: he goes to far.
The interrogation scene is a perfect example of this, as Wahlberg's
questioner asks what the war was about, and then proceeds to pour oil down
Marky's throat to illustrate his point. First of all, does it have to be
this obvious what the director's political message is? Can't Russell trust
us to understand his ideas without (in a very apt metaphor) cramming it down
our throats? Furthermore, exactly who doesn't know that the Gulf War was
about protecting American oil interests in Kuwait? There are several scenes
in which the political commentary reaches the point of overkill, and the
film's ending is just a little too happy, but these are relatively minor
complaints when compared to the film as a whole.
"Three Kings" is an important film, if only because we hadn't had one like
this made about the Gulf War yet. (I know, it technically takes place after
the war, but you know what I mean, dammit!) It's remarkable for the
relatively unbiased view it takes of the war, and for the non-stereotypical
nature of the villains. A quick word of warning: Please don't believe the
movie trailers for "Three Kings," which would have you believe the film is a
comedy. It has some humor, and it's certainly satirical, but it's more of a
drama than a comedy. Many of the film's scenes will seem entirely too
violent if one expects a laugh-out-loud farce, and much of "Three Kings" is
downright disturbing. The film intends to shock, but not, I think, without
good reason. After all, war is hell, for both sides, and "Three Kings" doesn
't shy away from that fact.
For more reviews, go to
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Land/4252/movies.html
