Title
Review for Siege, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
34

Author
azat@my-dejanews.com
New Hollywood product The Siege started this weekend in many theaters
across the USA. The plot of this movie, as well as several other
Hollywood movies (i.e. True Lies), is based on the issue of Arabic
terrorism. Because of the trend in American industry to depict Arabs as
fanatic terrorists, this movie received negative evaluation from several
Muslim and non-Muslim American Organizations, which called up to boycott
this movie. In order to decide myself I went to see The Siege last Saturday
afternoon.
First scenes took place somewhere in the Middle East in the desert with
violent CIA kidnapping of a sheik (presumably a leader of one of the Arabic
guerilla groups). After that action is transfered to New York City and
stays there for the rest of the movie.
Main characters include ?main-good-guy? - one of FBI chief officers (Denzel
Washington), ?controversial-but-good-guy-must-die-in-the-end? - CIA
operational officer (Annette Bening), ?main-bad-guy-must-die-in-the-end? -
her lover Palestinian fighter Sarik, ?auxilliary-good-guy? -
Lebanese-American FBI officer (Tony Shalhoub), ?stupid-good-guy? - army
general (Bruce Willis, who degraded now to supporting character roles). Most
of the time those characters verbally confront each other delivering standard
Hollywood dialog lines with a slight percentage of action montage which was
shot at a technical level somewhere between shooting the train of Lumiere
brothers and Soviet action movies.
First New-York based scene - Arabic-sounding music over panoramic view
of Manhattan canyons - leaves the audience in a quite a dismay. It is
strange  because, as we all know, and as it is also shown later in the movie,
Muslim Middle East population in New-York City is mainly Brooklyn-based.
Muslims of  Manhattan live in Harlem and South Bronx, belong mainly to the
Nation of Islam and have nothing to do with either Sunnis or Shiah or ?Arabic
terrorism?.
Then follows quite standard Hollywood disaster escalation: warning
bombing with the blue paint in the bus (there is quite elaborated and
plain stupid discussion why the paint is blue and not green) - explosion
of a city bus in Brooklyn - Broadway movie theater (where was a police,
which should be immediately mobilized to control all the public places)
- FBI building in New York City (certainly not a landmark, because it is
first time I heard of it).
The standard Hollywood trick - FBI vs CIA - is developed in this movie
ad absurdum - during whole movie the main obstacle in the investigation
is not a sophistication of terrorist conspiracy, but a stupid
opportunism of the CIA officer who is covering her lover - Palestinian
guy, sponsoring J-1 visas (which is simply impossible - by rules of INS
there should be an ORGANIZATION sponsoring them) used later by
terrorists.
Just note - this naive CIA officer sponsored a suicide-terrorist - who was
never arrested (except brief detention) not only in the first half of the
movie, but even when the whole Muslim Middle East population was apprehended
and incarcerated to a stadium (it is quite strange that in the following
demonstrations there were no participating Yankee fans demanding their
stadium back). High-ranked FBI agent could not save his son from detention,
but CIA agent could hide her lover - clue figure in investigation as every
character in the movie knows - until the very end of the movie!
The depiction of ?main-bad-guy? is plain stupid. I never saw such a bad
actor in major Hollywood movie. Besides the fact that he drinks wine (is
not he supposed to be a Muslim fanatic?) with his CIA lover, his face
knows only one very artificially looking expression of self-confident
arrogance and the lines he delivers is always plain political message.
Poor Annette Bening (?controversial-but-good-guy-must-die-in-the-end?)! The
supporting stuff of the movie had really bent over to mutilate her face,
haircut and clothes. They made her so disgusting, that I refuse completely to
understand why all the good and bad guys in the movie are so sexually
attracted to her. Is it a new kind of perversion to fall in love with a woman
dressed like a bum? The only explanation I have is that the director was
afraid that people will cry rivers of tears when she dies in the end. Well,
he certainly overshot - her death left the audience absolutely unemotional
(probably, because of the strange twist in director's mind - he decided that
the last words she should say should be 'inshallah' - which means 'if God
will permit', which is by itself has nothing to do with the situation and it
is strange for a CIA officer so fluent in Arabic).
There were quite a few moments that made the audience to react - a
couple of ordinary jokes made by Lebanese FBIer caused a couple of
laughing bursts in the audience. In the dull boring landscape of the
movie a joke comparing the radiotracking to a microwave should really
look like a gem.
Summarizing, this movie is very weak even at Hollywood standards. I
would disagree with both views: that The Siege is against
white-and-black view of Muslims (as the creators claim) and that it
hurts Muslims (as Muslim groups claim) simply because it is so vanilla stupid
that I am really surprised that it made $14M during its first weekend.
Indeed, American audience is attracted by bad reviews like a naive teenager is
attracted to bad guys.
P.S. There was a moment that touched me personally only in the evening when I
returned home. During Al-Fatiha (most favourite and popular Muslim prayer) I
suddenly remembered with sheer poignancy one moment in the movie - when the
only apprehended member of one of the terrorist groups (about half a dozen of
other ?bad guys? died during suicide explosions, massive killing in a gas
station and in the Brooklyn apartment) was delivering the same words that
every Muslim pronounces at least 10 times a day. He said ?[Allah], lead us by
the straight path, not the path of those who went astray? just before he was
brutally tortured, killed and sent to heaven by USA army general (Bruce
Willis). Since this guy appeared only first time in this movie, apparently he
was punished for praying.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Brian Takeshita
A frequent error is the categorization of a terrorist as a soldier or a
common criminal.  A soldier commits acts of violence sanctioned by one
nation-state against another.  A common criminal commits acts of violence
for personal gain.  A terrorist employs random violence as a means to a
political end.  If the target nation does not affect the desired change in
policy, the violence continues.  It is the fear resulting from the fact that
the terrorist may strike at anyone (even total innocents), anywhere, at
anytime that gives the figure his label.  Edward Zwick's THE SIEGE explores
the possibility of this kind of violence taking place right here in the
United States.
You'd think the opening bit was ripped right from the headlines.  Arab
terrorists kill American citizens abroad, and the U.S. responds by
retaliating against the sheik whom supposedly ordered the attack.  However,
unlike the real-life tomahawk cruise missile strike against Bin Laden's camp
and manufacturing facility, the film version depicts special operations
troops kidnapping Sheik Ahmed Bin Talal.  In retaliation, the terrorists
bring the fight to the New World.  Unwittingly involved is FBI Assistant
Special Agent-in-Charge Anthony Hubbard (Denzel Washington), who works out
of the Bureau's New York office at One Federal Plaza.  While investigating a
series of bombings in the Big Apple, he encounters CIA agent Elise Kraft
(Annette Bening), also trying to uncover information.  Generally, the FBI is
charged with problems inside the U.S., while the CIA takes care of problems
in the international realm.  Even spies from other countries are off limits
to the CIA as long as they are in our country.  Hubbard therefore finds it
highly unusual that an Agency spook is nosing around what he considers his
territory, but as the two form a tentative professional relationship,
Hubbard becomes more and more aware of an increasingly complicated series of
allegiances and possibly illegal actions involving terrorism and the United
States government.
The original tagline for PATRIOT GAMES was, "There has never been a
terrorist attack on American soil."  However true, it was pulled before the
movie's release because it sounded too much like a dare.  Revisiting the
scenario of foreign terrorists committing acts of violence in the United
States, THE SIEGE is almost an invitation in itself, because it shows just
what kind of turmoil could be produced if an effective terrorist network
were to set up operations here in America.  Admittedly, the terror wrought
upon New York is a bit excessive (who's going to believe that a few bombs
are going to cause New Yorkers to jump at the backfire of a bus or to
curtail their shopping by two-thirds?), but the basic premise is still valid.
I liked the fact that this film rises above the basic action-thriller fare
of good guy G-Men against bad guy terrorists by exploring some of the
effects on society and law and order.  It provides a very possible
hypothesis that violent activity on the part of a few Arabs would escalate
into a series of hate crimes against the Arab-American population, and that
in an effort to find the terrorists, the civil liberties of the minority may
be violated by the government itself.  In fact, about halfway through the
film, when the President authorizes the declaration of martial law within
New York City, the liberties of all Americans are put at risk.  Although it
may actually be a side effect of a terrorist campaign, the demise of social
order in America is a scary thought and a goal which would not be beneath
many international terrorist groups.
Throughout, the film maintains a conflict between Hubbard, who wants to use
the FBI to pursue the terrorists within the letter of the law, and General
Devereaux (Bruce Willis), who is in command of the army and of the mind that
the greater good would be better served by suspending the law and pursuing
the terrorists more forcefully.  What results is a fascinating debate over
the appropriateness and constitutionality of the declaration of martial law
and the invocation of the War Powers Act, utilizing philosophy and
historical examples to make points on both sides.  It actually gets rather
heady at times, but it's a credit to screenwriters Zwick, Lawrence Wright,
and Menno Meyjes that they don't underestimate the intelligence of the audience.
I don't know if it's his tone or inflection or something else, but Denzel
Washington has a way of spitting out dialog that makes whatever he says
sound great.  This, combined with his innate acting ability and his
experience in playing the mid-level authority figure, makes his performance
in THE SIEGE convincing and enjoyable.  Annette Bening gives one of the more
assertive portrayals of a female character I've seen recently, and the
chemistry she shares with Washington is palpable.  It's somewhat unfortunate
that her character's fortitude is broken at a certain point, but it allows
us to watch Bening play a little more range.  Bruce Willis is pretty much
relegated to a tough-guy role, always standing straight, and with a
permanent scowl fixed upon his face.  However, the tension that exists
between Devereaux and Hubbard is a major drive behind the film's
development.  Notable is Tony Shalhoub who plays FBI Agent Frank Haddad, a
Lebanese immigrant.  The role calls for evidencing both a kind of filial
pride for his heritage, and contempt for those of his own race who might
interfere with his integration into the American society.  Difficult to say
the least, Shalhoub does it with a naturalness you can almost reach out and
touch.  Perhaps best known for his role as Antonio the cab driver in the NBC
sitcom "Wings," Shalhoub gained notoriety for his dramatic abilities in the
wonderful film BIG NIGHT.
Whereas Denzel Washington seems to be Edward Zwick's favorite actor (he
directed Washington in GLORY and COURAGE UNDER FIRE), James Horner seems to
be his favorite composer.  I therefore found it odd that Zwick chose the
prolific score-writer Graeme Revell (seven films this year already) over
Horner for THE SIEGE until I realized that this film contained a lot of
Arabian-themed music, and Horner's record has shown more of a propensity for
scores either neutral in ethnicity or Irish-sounding at most.  Revell does a
good job at providing appropriate music to punctuate key scenes and allowing
the score to enhance the movie as a whole.  It's nowhere near as intrusive
as in some of the other films we've been getting throughout the year.
Missteps in THE SIEGE can be found in a couple of the excesses it takes.
For example, it's pretty clear throughout that the film is meant to be more
of thriller than an action flick.  Unfortunately, there's a scene where the
army just cuts loose against some Arab immigrants in a blatant display of
firepower and explosions, obviously meant for the sole purpose of being
eye-catching.  In the middle of the city (and against no real opposition),
Zwick even has the army use a Cobra attack helicopter to shoot rockets into
a building no farther than 50 feet from friendly troops.  Verisimilitude
really goes out the window at that point.  The film also gets a little
preachy toward the end, focusing on the ability of different races to get
along.  A noble gesture, the film just puts the message across a bit too
obviously.  These flaws are glaring, but they don't detract too much from an
otherwise good film that makes you think about issues you may not have
considered since history class.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   My apartment overlooks the Brooklyn Bridge on the wrong
side of Manhattan so I'm accustomed to surprises...police
barricades when suicide jumps are threatened, traffic jams
that would stagger the imagination of even New Yorkers,
marches by people on all sides of the political spectrum.  But
nothing quite prepared me for the shock of discovering U.S.
troops marching across the link between the two boroughs,
with tanks rolling in from the area in which Adams Street
meets High Street just to the east of the overpass.  Has it
finally happened?  Are we experiencing the first coup d'etat in
U.S. history?  "Just a movie," my more collected neighbor
assured me, "Just a movie."
   And what a movie! Plenty of action, briskly paced, with lots
of firepower, a couple of car chases, exploding buildings,
choppers, and of course the ultimate battle--not between the
U.S. and its external enemies but between rival U.S.
agencies.  Denzel Washington, the great crowd-pleaser who
will likely make "The Siege" number one in the first
weekend's box office, is easily the big reason to see the
movie.  He gets to stand up for the Bill of Rights, a good deal
of the rest of the U.S. Constitution, and for the rights of
Brooklynites of Red Hook, Borough Hall, and Cobble Hill to
walk the streets at midnight if they so desire without being
confronted by half the tanks in the army's stockpile.  
   Plot-wise, however, "The Siege" is messy.  Edward Zwick
directs the picture from a screenplay written by a committee
of three without much thought of a center.  New York City
appears to be under a siege in a series of terrorist attacks
not experienced since the Oklahoma City bombing.  It
becomes clear from the beginning that the trouble is being
caused by Arab extremist groups, just twenty criminals in all,
who make no demands but who are intent on blowing up
themselves and as many others as they can get for the
benefit of the TV cameras.  In one case they release a group
of young kids from a bus before blasting it simply because
FBI Agent Anthony "Hub" Hubbard asks them to do so.  In
yet another situation a suicide bomber crashes his van into a
federal building in downtown Manhattan killing six hundred
people.  Though Hub pulls off some daring arrests and
manages to destroy some of our nation's enemies before
than can do further damage, the president believes things
have gotten entirely out of hand and declares martial law in
New York City, authorizing General William Devereaux (Bruce
Willis) to send tanks into the streets of Brooklyn, to enforce a
curfew, and to round up scores of suspects for placement in
a camp similar to those used by the U.S. government against
Japanese-Americans in the early forties.  Masses of people,
infuriated by the abridgment of constitutional liberties, take to
the streets.  In a that seems inspired by consultants from the
American Civil Liberties Union, the army and particularly its
commander, Devereaux, become the bad guys while the FBI
and to a lesser extent the CIA come up smelling of roses.
   The one problematic character in the whole piece is Sharon
Bridger, aka Elise Kraft (Annette Bening), an attractive, forty-
something CIA agent who gains information largely by
sleeping with the enemy.  I'd challenge the experts from
Columbia University's department of Middle East studies to
figure out just where she stands on the politics of the
situation.  Surely the typical member of the movie's audience
will draw a blank trying to calculate a pattern.  At times she
even seems as though she is siding with our adversaries. 
Sure, she explains the usual predicament of U.S. foreign
policy, which is that this country often sides with the wrong
guys.  (We sided with the mujahadeen against the Russian
interlopers in Afghanistan. Now we condemn the Afghan
Taliban movement while we throw money at the Russians. 
We even once helped Saddam Hussein during his struggle
with the Iranians!) But just what information has she obtained
from her nighttime encounters with these terrorists?   And
why is blowing hot and cold, so to speak, with Special Agent
Hubbard?
   Tony Shalhoub turns in a good performance as a
Lebanese-American who works with the FBI but who
threatens to turn in his badge when his son is arrested and
incarcerated as a potential terrorist.  Annette Bening looks
charming throughout, if as confused as the audience.  And
Bruce Willis's role is underwritten and predictable.  See the
movie for Denzel, though, and watch the fireworks
throughout.  But don't expect to cheer when the U.S. Army
gets its comeuppance from the FBI.  Nothing in this
convoluted plot makes us exercise our propensity for movie-
theater self-righteousness.

Author
Victory Marasigan
It's a classic film scenario: What if terrorists struck on U.S. soil?  The
movies have long exploited the timely idea, using it like political
propaganda to show off America's strength and selfless heroism.  Films
like the Die Hard series and True Lies have turned one of this country's
biggest fears into popcorn entertainment, where the bad guy is easy to
pinpoint by his foreign accent, and the good guys are defined by their
snappy one-liners.  The outline of Edward Zwick's much-ballyhooed The
Siege appears to promise yet another flag-waving, foreigner-bashing
bulletfest, but thankfully, the film is nowhere nearly that shallow. 
Denzel Washington's FBI agent Anthony Hubbard is thrust into the thick of
an international conflict when a bomb threat is made on a New York City
bus.  He gets the wheels turning on an investigation, only to discover
that the CIA (personified by mysterious agent Annette Bening) has already
taken the case into its own hands.  After civilians are lost in a series
of horrific explosions, the entire nation's eyes look toward New York, and
Hubbard and his crew find themselves trying to fend off an imminent
declaration of martial law. Working both with and without the CIA's
go-ahead, Hubbard attempts to find out who is behind the attack before the
situation really gets out of hand, and before innocent American citizens
end up being sequestered like animals. 
Packed with white-knuckle tension and genuine pathos, The Siege is truly
an enthralling ride.  Washington's acting is on target, as always; his
Jack Ryan-esquie screen persona fits like a glove.  Tony Shalhoub is just
as good as Hubbard's partner, a family-man who finds that even he is
unable to escape the racial discord brought about by the terrorist
incidents. 
The most jarring aspect of the film are its bombing scenes, which are
executed with an authenticity that is quite uncomfortable to watch.  Some
are shown in explicit detail, others only in aftermath.  Images like these
are fodder for the world news on a nightly basis, but to see them taking
place in New York City is irrepressibly unnerving.  To add to the tension,
the filmmakers make it abundantly clear that a terrorist bomb can go off
anywhere, anytime -- even in a movie theater.  Lowbrow as the film's scare
tactics may be, they certainly draw us in by forcing us to realize that
although the situation on the screen isn't real, it easily could be. 
Of late, a great concern about the film has been its apparent racist
depiction of Arabs as terrorists.  But The Siege smartly pushes beyond the
superficial constraints of its main plot to delve deeper into the issues
of racial, religious, and cultural prejudice than most mainstream
"thrillers" have before it.  These issues are in fact integral to the
story, and although it is blatantly preachy at times, The Siege somehow
avoids making its moral ring out like self-congratulatory claptrap. 
For all its merits, The Siege is not perfect.  The film would have done
well to explore the Arab and Muslim culture even more fully.  As it
stands, the film comes dangerously close to making its Arab characters
more symbolic than real.
The film also suffers from some questionable characterizations.  Bening is
unconvincing as CIA agent Elise Kraft, inhabiting the role like a
schoolteacher with a sexy-cool night personality.  Bruce Willis'
one-dimensionally acted turn as an army general is too obvious a foil to
Washington's self-righteous Hubbard.
Does the film trivialize such real tragedies as the Oklahoma City bombing? 
Yes and no.  On the one hand, it is quite arrogant to think that the real
horror of terrorism could be evoked succinctly in a movie.  Conversely, to
not address tragedy in some capacity would be to dishonor those who have
died. 
It should be understood that The Siege is but a work of entertainment, not
an attempt at a modern morality tale.  That being said, it is still very
likely that moviegoers will come away from the film more open-minded than
when they went in. 

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Denzel Washington, Annette Bening and Bruce Willis.
Directed By Edward Zwick
Running Time: 1 hour 55 minutes.
With the look, and sometimes feel, of a typical, 'no-brainer' Hollywood
action movie, The Siege is surprisingly so much more. A well crafted film
from the unknown veteran Edward Zwick, and with an superb cast, The Siege is
a much better film than it should be. The story centres around New York,
which is suffering from a massive bombing attacks from Arab terrorists. FBI
agent Anthony Hubbard (Washington) and his team are trying to solve which
terrorist group is committing these acts, and to stop them. Helping him is
Elise Kraft (a stand-out Bening) who has a somewhat shady history. The
attacks become so great, however, that martial law is soon declared on the
city, led by General Devereaux (Willis), and many injustices are being
caused on innocent Arabs living in the city. Hubbard soon wants to stop the
terrorists, and the American army.
Zwicks third collaboration with Washington, after Glory and Courage Under
Fire is a thought provoking, exciting thriller. The cast and director help
immeasurably to make the film an enjoyable spectacle. Washington is suitably
edgy and tough as the run down FBI agent who gets increasingly pissed as the
events around him unfold. He can convey all emotions from fear to sadness,
which is lucky because the film demands all of them. Bening is as usual
excellent, giving a much, _much_ better performance than this film really
deserves. While many great actresses feel embarrassed doing films like these
and deliver an lazy performance, Bening gives it her all as usual, treating
this film like any other she's done. It's a shame that she is just known as
'Warren Beattys wife' at the moment, she is so much more than this. The weak
link comes as Bruce Willis, still desperately trying to prove he's a thesp,
and not John McClane. He gets an A+ for effort, but a C for execution. He's
performance is not a total shambles, but when put against Washington and
Bening both on seemingly very good days, it was going to be tough for him.
He hasn't got much screen time, but when he is on screen he makes little
impact, which is a shame. Also, his hair seems to get crazier in every
movie. But one relatively unknown actor who gives probably the best
performance, especially for a supporting one, is Tony Shalhoub, superb as a
translator on Washingtons team. He leaves a big impression on the audience,
and delivers a thoroughly enjoyable and memorable performance. Sadly, he
somewhat pales when put next to Denzel and Annette.
Zwick handles the subject matter superbly, with fast paced action and tons
of dramatic tension. The initial encounter with the terrorists involving a
bus is incredibly frightening and well handled, and the scenes of panic when
martial law is enforced are also well handled. The way the film looks at
Arabs is well handled by screenwriter Lawrence Wright, although the dialogue
could be a bit stronger, which is one of the films failings. Also, it's good
to see the way the government handle the middle east situation in a
believable way, not the usual 'kick all their asses in' (portrayed in True
Lies.) The music is suitable suspenseful, the special effects and
pyrotechnics well done.
In the end, The Siege is a great thriller, that will appeal to many ages.
Although it may be a bit too patriotic for world wide audiences, it's great
to see an action movie with a little bit of thought behind it. Recommended.
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!
"You know, for kids"- Norville Barnes

Author
Michael Dequina
Denzel Washington and director Edward Zwick have had an amazing track
record together, working on two of the most powerful war films in recent
cinematic history: 1989's aptly named Civil War epic _Glory_, and 1996's
underappreciated Gulf War mystery _Courage_Under_Fire_.  For _The_Siege_,
their third collaboration, Washington and Zwick work with a fictional
war-like situation, and the mediocre result is dismayingly unworthy of
their combined talents.
_The_Siege_ would appear to take an original spin on a basic political
thriller.  After the efforts of an FBI team led by special agent Anthony
Hubbard (Washington), aided by shady CIA operative Elise Kraft (Annette
Bening), fail to end a rash of terrorist bombings in New York City, the
White House takes drastic action--deploying a squadron of Army troops to
enforce martial law in the Big Apple.
This should be the point at which _The_Siege_ takes off, but it instead
takes a turn for the worse.  What had been a rather thoughtful thriller
with some effective suspense sequences (notably a scene with a bomb-rigged
bus, which is prominently featured in the tell-all trailer) becomes
formulaic and, at times, insufferably didactic and sappy.  After some
investigation, the bombing culprit(s) is determined to be Arab, so the
troops round up the entire Arab-American population and hole them up in a
stadium.  This not only leads to some scenes of races uniting to protest
the injustice, but one of the detained is the son of Hubbard's partner
Frank Haddad (Tony Shalhoub), setting the stage for tiresome "concerned
father" moping and a teary father-son reunion (oops, did I spoil something
for anyone there?).
At the center of _The_Siege_'s problematic final act is Bruce Willis and
his character General William Devereaux, who leads the Army in New York.
Writers Zwick, Lawrence Wright, and Menno Meyjes never figure out what do
to with the character.  Devereaux is shown in the White House earlier in
the film expressing his reluctance to be involved in the enforcement of
martial law, yet by film's end he's become a gung-ho, power-mad zealot,
getting in touch with the _Judge_Dredd_ within and angrily declaring, "I AM
THE LAW!"  An understandably confused Willis, wearing a ridiculously
godawful wig (his hair stylist, Bunny Parker, should be shot), plays
Devereaux as only he can--as if he wandered in from the set of his latest
action opus.  Apparently that bug is contagious, because the overwrought
standoff climax (complete with, yes, a preachy speech) the writers cook up
is straight out of a standard-issue Hollywood actioner.
On the other hand, Bening and especially Washington deliver reliably
strong, passionate performances.  However, as stunning on the whole as
Roger Deakins's cinematography is, his camera is inexplicably unforgiving
on these two powerful screen presences.  Washington looks more than a
little chunky, and the usually luminous Bening looks shockingly haggard.
That mix of the largely good with some glaring bad spots pretty much sums
up the rest of _The_Siege_.  (opens November 6)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Mac VerStandig
One of the most interesting scenarios that is posed by United States law 
is the option for the military to take control in a time of crisis, and 
declare a state of martial law. Being that this has never been done for 
a period of time long enough to encounter the various circumstances it 
would raise, martial law remains a mysterious threat to the American 
people. It could be a saving grace or it could be a nightmare. With that 
known, martial law could have provided one of the greatest settings that 
is possible for a movie. And then, imagine this moving having 3 great 
actors like Denzel Washington, Bruce Willis and Annette Bening. The 
Siege had potential written all over it. And, to some degree, it met 
it's potential. However, for the most part, The Siege turned out to be 
little more than an average films with a few high points.
The year is 2000. (Although that is never actually stated, the Oklahoma 
City bombing is often mentioned as having been 5 years earlier.) That 
gives a time in the future so that we may suspend all belief, but it 
also allows for a present day society. Somewhere in the middle east, an 
Islamic leader is taken hostage by the US military. This is classified 
information though, and ranks as high as the president are not informed. 
New York City is suddenly taken by surprise as a series of massive 
terrorist attacks all take place in Brooklyn. FBI/NYPD officer Hubbard 
(Denzel Washington) is at the very front of the investigation. His 
partner is the Lebanese-American Frank Haddad (Tony Shalhoub). And CIA 
agent Elise Kraft (Annette Bening) is brought in to assist. On top of 
that, General Devereaux (Bruce Willis) of the US military, is in New 
York offering his assistance as well.
The biggest problem in looking into these terrorist bombings, is that 
they are all suicide bombings. Other than the fact that the bomber is 
always Islamic, the FBI/CIA/NYPD/Military have nothing to work with 
because the suspect is always dead, and therefore there are no links 
left back to the mastermind. Even worse, it is feared that there may not 
be a mastermind, but rather the "mastermind" is the Islamic faith.
Through a series of events, Brooklyn is declared to be a dangerous area 
and a war is declared against terrorism. However, unlike previous events 
in American history in which the president declared a "war on 
terrorism," this war is quite literal. General Devereaux is put in 
charge, and New York quickly becomes a city under siege. Every street is 
covered with military, and traffic isn't caused by cars, but rather 
tanks. AK-47 Assault Riffles become as common as candy during the 
holiday season.
What you have in The Siege should be every American's worst nightmare. 
The basic rights that are often taken for granted, are revoked. Freedom 
of speech is quick to go, and from there life is a rapid deterioration. 
The mere thought of a martial law is intensely frightening. The Siege 
has 3 big name actors that help make this one of the most intense films 
of the year. Denzel Washington and Bruce Willis are brilliant. Often 
given the opportunity to deliver monologues and speeches, they are the 
most powerful part of this film. Not since Michael Douglas declared 
greed to be good in the 1987 award winning film Wall Street, have lines 
been delivered that well. However, Annette Bening is a huge 
disappointment. Not only is she remarkably not believable in what 
appears to be a simple role, but she is frustrating to watch. You are 
reminded of the little kid in a school play who just can't remember that 
one line. But, on a brighter note, the relatively unheard of Tony 
Shalhoub in incredible. Though never given a huge scene, or monologue of 
a comparable nature to Willis or Washington, he gets the job done in 
stylish fashion.
The last problem that The Siege encounters, is the incredibly racist 
message. The Nation of Islam is the villain. Not a member of the faith, 
although members are singled out, but rather the impression given is 
that the entire faith is somewhat at fault for terrorism. Throughout 
Washington D. C. this film has been protested. Upon exiting the theater, 
I was given a flyer by a protester explaining what the true beliefs are 
and how the movie distorted them. To find a movie as ignorantly racist 
as this, you would have to go back to 1915 and D. W. Griffith's The 
Birth of a Nation. And yet, that managed to survive all these years 
because it was a ground breaking masterpiece. Unfortunately, the siege 
doesn't have those values to it.

Author
Joy Wyse
The Siege is one of those movies that should have been better than it is. 
The concept is very good, but a very weak script keeps it from fulfilling
its potential.  Also, the casting of the `Stars' greatly affects the plot.
  To say that the movie stars Bruce Willis is a joke.  He appears in
exactly 18 scenes, briefly in an opening sequence, and then he doesn't
appear again until the second half is well underway.  When he does appear,
he almost seems to be laughing at the audience, realizing how
insignificant his role is.  It is one of those roles usually played by a
character actor.
The biggest problem seems to be that Hollywood simply doesn't want to make
a woman the star of a film like this.  If the story had been told from
Annette Bening's point of view, it could have been a superior movie.  As
it is, the viewer is totally confused, even after it's explained.  There
is no way that I can spoil the ending by revealing what transpires.  If
anything, it will help you understand what you are seeing.  We all know
that our government isn't perfect, but we hope that it's better than any
other country's way of life.  We also know that the FBI, the CIA, the
police, the Army, etc. don't tell each other what is happening, and each
wants credit for anything good that occurs, but none of them want to take
the blame.
The true question asked by The Siege is:  What happens when a country such
as the United States of America assists a government against their
oppressors and then, suddenly withdraws that support?   It also makes us
take a serious look at constitutional law.  As Americans we often take our
rights for granted.  If you can sift through the sieve [rather the siege]
you will find a moral.
There has been a lot of press about ethnic groups who object to the way
they are portrayed in the film.  I don't think that they have seen the
film yet because, it shows how ALL ethnic groups band together here in the
USA when a wrong is being done.  It is so reminiscent of what happened to
the Orientals in California following the bombing of Pearl Harbor. 
I do not want to see this movie again, although I might watch it on TV
some night just to try to see if it makes sense to me now.  I give it a C-.

Author
Homer Yen
You won't find a more determined and passionate FBI agent than Hubbard
(Denzel Washington), who now has the very difficult task of
confronting a new wave of terrorism that is spreading across New York
City.  But what makes his job virtually impossible in stemming the
tide is that the perpetrators, in this case Arab fundamentalists, are
all suicide bombers that do not hesitate to take their own lives as
long as it means the utter destruction of some building or the
meaningless death of innocent civilians.  What's worse, these
terrorist cells work independently of one another, which means that
there is no way to bring down the operation in one fell swoop.  The
first act of aggression is truly terrifying and leaves a lump in your
throat as you watch the scene unfurl.  Hubbard will summon all of his
resources to combat the situation.  
The fact that the suspected terrorists are Arabs brings Agent Elise
Kraft (Annette Benning) onto the investigation.  She has special
knowledge of the Arab sector, but also seems to have an ulterior
motive for being there.  Continually trying to circumvent Hubbard at
every turn, she wants to help the determined agent, but has her own
agenda to follow.
The first 40 minutes is actually quite intense, and really sets the
stage for possibly a great and thrilling movie.  But knowing that
Hubbard would be fighting several terrorist cells, I could see that
this film would suffer from a glaring weakness.  And it did.  Great
movies always have a great villain that masterminds the evil scheme. 
Remember `Speed', a movie about a mad bomber and a bus (played with
malicious intent by Dennis Hopper)?  But here, the fundamentalists are
all suicide bombers all too ready to take their own lives.  Once we
learn who they are, they are soon dead, either by bombing themselves
or shot down by the local police.  The all-important
hate-the-villain' factor is completely missing.
Terrorism and violence escalates.  The city streets are becoming
deserted.  Hubbard still can not locate the remaining terrorists
cells.  A state of martial law is thus declared and the film
completely shifts gears, now emphsizing a message over the manhunt. 
Suspicious of all Arabs, they are herded into interrogation camps
where they are harassed and humiliated.  It seemed like a strange turn
of events for the audience member.  I can't imagine that this movie
ever intended to be a statement on our constitutional rights.  If it
was, it was upstaged by a marvelously intense beginning.
I give credit to Washington who infused energy into his role and
Benning, who showed sass and smarts as well.  Bruce Willis, however,
had a thankless role as the General that oversaw the city during its
state of martial law.  His role asked him to do nothing but verbally
punch out military rhetoric and patriotic jingoism.   But the real
problem with this movie is that it hits the ground running, but
ultimately gets lost because the story abruptly shifts gears and
because the terrorists want to die.  `The Siege' starts with a
blitzkrieg of suspense, but its power wanes considerably over the
final 90 minutes.


Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Edward Zwick
Cast:  Denzel Washington, Annette Benning, Bruce Willis, Tony Shalhoub,
Sami Bouajila, Ahmed Ben Larby
Screenplay:  Lawrence Wright, Menno Meyjes, Edward Zwick
Producers:  Lynda Obst, Edward Zwick
Runtime:  118 min.
US Distribution:  20th Century Fox
Rated R:  violence, language, nudity
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
>From the ashes of jingoistic American action movies rises The Siege, a
film bold enough to admit that we've got a few problems of our own. 
Director/co-writer Edward Zwick has created a suspense film that
illustrates almost exactly what a suspense film should be:  The Siege
doesn't skimp on story in favor of spectacle, and it doesn't let us down
with the spectacle, either.  It tells the story of a malevolent
terrorist attack on New York City, and is successful not simply because
of good production values and great performances, but because the story
is pointed and inherently frightening.
The film centers around Tony Hubbard (Denzel Washington), an FBI agent
who becomes aware of terrorist activity in New York when a paint bomb
explodes on a city bus one day.  This turns out to be a precursor to a
real bomb, which ends up killing about fifty people.  With pseudo-help
from CIA agent Elise Kraft (Annette Benning) and his partner (Tony
Shalhoub), Hubbard discovers that several Arab terrorist cells are
operating in New York, and their attacks become more and more vicious as
the film progresses.
In steps the military, headed by General Devereaux (Bruce Willis).  The
US Government, despite Devereaux's warning, orders that martial law be
declared on the city, and that every man of Middle Eastern descent be
held and questioned until the terrorists are found.  As expected, chaos
erupts, and the plot thickens -- Hubbard doesn't believe that martial
law is the right way to go about solving the problem, and the military
subsequently finds him -- along with the terrorists -- a threat to the
good of the nation.
That's a lot of plot, even for a two-hour movie.  One of The Siege's
greatest strengths is its economical use of time and story -- Zwick (who
previously directed Washington in Glory and Courage Under Fire) keeps
the film at a breakneck pace, but never so fast that you get confused. 
It's a sharply-made film, and always suspenseful (the bus scene, even
though it's in the preview, is very well-done).  There are some truly
harrowing images; when the military rounds up all the Arab men in the
second half, one can't help but be reminded of the Japanese
concentration camps in the US during World War II.  Even more disturbing
is the way this all looks so much like the Nazi's method for rounding up
the Jews.
Because Zwick and his writers created such a subtle and intelligent
script, the disquieting nature of this prominent theme is only obvious
when you really think about it.  The Siege is extremely bold in its
themes; it reminds us of the principles on which this country was
founded, and also reminds us that we are just as capable of the horrors
that some of the most loathed groups in world history have committed. 
That's not a wishy-washy statement for some summer-blockbuster.  What
makes the film thematically successful is Zwick's subtlety and approach
-- only in the end does he come right out and tell us how crazy all of
this is.  Until then, you might actually think that martial law is a
good solution to the problem.
The Siege is packed full of superb performances, and at the top of the
list is Washington.  Although his character could have been
better-developed (is he married?  does he have kids?), Washington is
such a magnetic and powerful actor that he forces us to care just
because he's so good.  Benning is also surprisingly strong, and
thankfully her role is not a typical Token Female role.  Some have
criticized Willis' performance, but I found it brilliantly subdued --
you never get the feeling that he's enjoying what he does, but you
understand his patriotism.
But that's where the film falters.  In the last thirty minutes, it
becomes clear that Zwick was reaching for ways to keep his characters
involved in the story.  In reality, this story would focus on many
different people, but, as a film, we need focus on one or two
characters.  What begins as a riveting, realistic picture sadly
regresses into silliness, because Hubbard's involvement becomes
impossible to believe, especially when the military finds him as a
threat.  The character dynamics also become annoyingly simple, as
Devereaux is reduced to a demon and Hubbard turns into a preacher.  
The Siege is too smart to resort to shoot-outs and personal vendettas. 
As good as most of the film is, the last fifteen minutes are all wrong. 
It's so refreshing to sit through a film that takes an unflinching look
at our own values as a country, but Zwick should have let the subtlety
of the first half resonate in the second half.  Nonetheless, I highly
recommend The Siege, because it seems Americans have become dumbed-down
in movies that tell us how great we have it.  And while I admit that we
do have it pretty good, I think it's a smart that we take a look at
ourselves every once in a while, just to keep from forgetting that we,
too, are capable of evil.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Earlier this year when John Frankenheimer's RONIN was released I
was reflecting that it was a pity that nobody was making good political
thrillers like his THE MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE and SEVEN DAYS IN MAY.  Now
just a few weeks later I think I actually have the thriller I would
have hoped for from Frankenheimer, but it has come instead from Edward
Zwick who has directed such films as GLORY and LEGENDS OF THE FALL.
But he has not done a political thriller since his excellent 1983 TV
movie SPECIAL BULLETIN, also on the subject of terrorism.
     The nightmare that everyone has feared has finally come about.
Islamic fundamentalist terrorists want to force the hand of the United
States government when a militant religious leader is kidnapped.  The
siege starts with a harmless paint bomb on a cross-town bus and
mysterious anonymous demands to "release him."  Anthony "Hub" Hubbard
(played by Denzel Washington) is an FBI agent working with an anti-
terrorism unit of the New York City Police.  But the investigation
leads him to the mysterious Elise Kraft (Annette Bening).  Kraft is
working for the National Security Agency and the Central Intelligence
Agency, also fighting terrorists.  Somehow she is not willing to be
totally cooperative with the FBI.  Kraft, however, has contacts in the
Islamic community from her days spent in the Middle East.  Hub needs
her contacts and is able to obtain her cooperation without her
confidence.  While the CIA's goals may be the same as the FBI's, their
policies conflict and Hub is surprised how they are more competitors
than they are peers.  Both of their approaches are called into question
when the terrorist acts turn violent and there is more and more public
pressure on the President to counter the terrorists.  The President
declares a State of Emergency and calls in the military.
     Army General William Devereaux (Bruce Willis), a quiet
intellectual with a strong belief in civil liberty, cautions what a
mistake giving control to the Army would be.  As he puts it, "The Army
is a broadsword, not a scalpel."  But there is growing sentiment to do
something about the rising toll from the terrorist attacks and martial
law may be declared.  Now there are three different government factions
superficially cooperating but each struggling for power and pulling in
its own direction.  The issue becomes whether to defend the people at
the expense of their constitutional rights, or to protect the rights at
the expense of public safety.  Middle East foreign policy also comes
into question in interesting and morally ambiguous ways.  While this is
an action film, it never sacrifices the intelligence of the background
story.  While some of the moral issues do get resolved into a right and
a wrong, most are not resolved.  The gray areas of the questions pose
make THE SIEGE more interesting than Zwick's last film.  The much-
lauded COURAGE UNDER FIRE leaves little doubt at the end who is right
and who is wrong.
     Denzel Washington plays a certain kind of role with real
integrity.  But Hub Hubbard is essentially Nathaniel Serling from
COURAGE UNDER FILE or Hunter from CRIMSON TIDE.  Washington's character
of Hubbard is not much of a stretch for him, and is as familiar and
pleasant as a McDonalds hamburger.  I think of him as a better actor
than Bruce Willis, but that certainly is not true in THE SIEGE. Bruce
Willis's General William Devereaux is written as a complex character
and a man with conflicting attitudes and agendas.  Some will look at
his as being a little stiff in this film but underneath there are a lot
of factions warring within this man.  There are a lot of surprises in
Devereaux in this film and Willis makes them believable without
telegraphing them.  Of the roles in which I have seen Willis this
performance is second only to the one in IN COUNTRY.  Annette Bening is
also an enigmatic figure here.  Her alliances and past in the Middle
East has obviously left her very disturbed and both she and Willis
outshine Washington.
     There has been some discussion as to whether this film is unfair
to the Arabic community in this country. The filmmakers took something
of a chance placing the terrorists in a particular ethnic community.
It may not be for me to say, but the film has a balance of positive and
negative people from that community.  It will be interesting to see
what protests result.  This is a film that takes some chances, but I
think that the result is worthwhile.  I give it an 8 on the 0 to 10
scale and a +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Kong
A while ago, I saw an interview with ex-X-Files writers Glen Morgan and
James Wong. In the interview, Morgan and Wong, who wrote some of the most
memorable episodes of the show, were asked how they came up with some of
their bizarre ideas. The two looked at each other and answered with a short
story. What they did when out of ideas was look out their office window and
just ask, "what if?" about something ordinary. From there the two start
asking "what if?" about things related and that's how they spin the tales
that they do. This sounds like the same technique The Siege writers took
when they wrote the movie.
What if terrorists started terrorizing New York? What if the terrorists
were Arabs? What if society started turning against Arabs? What if Arabs
were taken and locked into concentration camps? What if the US law
enforcement agencies could not handle the terrorist activities? What if the
US Army was called in to handle the terrorists? What if you lost your
freedom and your civil liberties?
For the first two-thirds of The Siege, it was a wonderfully entertaining
film. This portion of the film follows FBI agent Anthony Hubbard (Denzel
Washington) and Frank Haddad (Tony Shalhoub) as they try to track down the
terrorists bombing New York City. This part of the film shows crackling
good hard-boiled detective work. The two meet a suspicious CIA agent, Elise
Kraft (Annette Bening), who may or may not be on their side.
The exact point when The Siege falls apart is easy to spot; it's when Bruce
Willis enters the film. I like Willis as an actor, and his acting is not
the reason The Siege starts to unravel. The character that Willis portrays
ruins the film. General William Devereaux is in charge of the Army presence
that is brought into New York City to shut it down and squeeze until the
terrorists come out. I'm not sure what happened, but it seemed that the
writers at this point just ran out of ideas. From this point on everything
is contrived, including the awful ending.
Ultimately, the major failings of The Siege is that it strives to be
politically correct. Because the filmmakers did not want to offend anyone,
The Siege ends up alienating everyone. The writers, Lawrence Wright, Menno
Meyjes, and Edward Zwick, know they are going to take heat for portraying
Arabs as terrorists, so they also write about Arabs who are taken into
interment camps. The problem is that the writers deal with both the
terrorists and prisoners at arms-length. We never get to know or feel for a
prisoner and we never get to know or feel for why the terrorists are doing
what they're doing. The script turns the Arab people into a lumped group of
"they" or "them" instead of having characters that we can relate to.
I was somewhat disappointed in The Siege when I look back and see the
powerful movies that have come from the collaboration between director
Zwick and actor Washington, such as Glory and Courage Under Fire. The Siege
does not reach the heights that these movies obtained.
The performances are all top-notch; even that of Bruce Willis. Washington,
as always, is intense and believable onscreen. He is given a few speeches
where he shows just how good of an actor he is - including a speech near
the end of the film where he talks about freedom and the Constitution.
Bening is good as the ever unclear, good or bad, CIA agent Elise Kraft.
The one performance that I enjoyed - even more than Washington's - is Tony
Shalhoub's performance. Shalhoub is able to switch, effortlessly, between
serious and playfully comic. Where Willis is too serious, Washington too
uptight, and Bening too crafty, Shalhoub is level and sane. Shalhoub brings
both humor and humanity to his character. Kudos to Tony Shalhoub for his
splendid performance in The Siege; he made the film watchable.
But, in the end, The Siege falls into mediocrity because it's not brave
enough to take a stance. Instead, The Siege wanders and tries to please
everyone, but fails miserably. Catch The Siege on video for the
performances of Denzel Washington, Annette Bening, Bruce Willis, and Tony
Shalhaub.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Edward Zwick.
Cast: Denzel Washington, Annette Bening, Tony Shalhoub, Bruce Willis, 
Sami Bouajila, David Proval, Helmi Kassim.
1998 - 112 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, profanity, brief nudity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed November 7, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
In 1989, director Edward Zwick began his career with the powerful Civil 
War drama, "Glory," but since then, he has made continuous 
disappointments, to me at least, with 1994's "Legends of the Fall," and 
1996's "Courage Under Fire." Those two films weren't bad, just not very 
good, but with Zwick's latest film, "The Siege," he has finally made 
one.
"The Siege," is a modern-day action-thriller that focuses on terrorism 
that is sweeping through New York City. Investigating the matter is FBI 
agents Anthony Hubbard (Denzel Washington) and Frank Haddad (Tony 
Shalhoub), who are first hit by the ordeal when a city bus explodes with 
several innocent people on it. Later, a bomb goes off in a Broadway 
theater, killing even more. They soon meet CIA operative Elise Kraft 
(Annette Bening), who may very well hold the key to the identity of the 
Arab terrorist. 
There are some movies that simply don't need to be made, and, "The 
Siege" may very well be one of them. Oh, sure, Zwick thinks he is making 
a "meaningful" action film, since he has added lots of exposition scenes 
in which the audience is basically lectured on the horrors of terrorism, 
but what he really has made is actually no more substantial than, say, 
"Die Hard," which also starred Bruce Willis. This time, Willis is 
horribly wasted as a General of the U.S. Army, who puts a state of 
martial law over NYC during the climax. Whatever points, "The Siege," 
earnestly tried to make, were obviously lost in the translation from 
page to screen, or maybe, Zwick never really had anything serious to say 
in the first place. The role of the Arab community is offensively 
stereotypical, just as women were in the recent, "John Caprenter's 
Vampires," by placing them all in the category of "bad guys."
"The Siege," contains three fine actors---Washington, Bening, and 
Shalhoub---but Washington is stuck with a character that contains not an 
ounce of even remote development. Bening has slightly more to do, and 
has an intriguing character to work with, while Shalhoub pretty much 
steals the show, even though, again, he has no real character.
By the climax of, "The Siege," with Washington giving a sermon to Willis 
on the so-called "message" of the story, I felt like I had wandered into 
a sequel to, "On Deadly Ground," in which Steven Seagal gave a 10-minute 
speech at the end about preserving the environment. "The Siege" is 
constantly heavy-handed, not entertaining or insightful, and just goes 
to prove that not even the best actors can save a film that lacks a 
satisfactory screenplay.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE SIEGE (1998) *** Directed by Edward Zwick. Written by  Lawrence Wright,
Menno Meyjes, Zwick. Story, Wright. Produced by Lynda Obst, Edward Zwick.
Executive producer, Peter Schindler. Photography, Roger  Deakins. Editing
by Steven Rosenblum. Production design, Lilly Kilvert.  Music, music by
Graeme Revell. Cast:: Denzel Washington (Anthony Hubbard), Annette Bening
(Elise Kraft), Bruce Willis (General William Devereaux), Tony Shalhoub
(Frank Haddad), Sami Bouajila (Samir Nazhde), David Proval (Danny Sussman),
et al. A  20th Century Fox release. 110 minutes. R (violence)
Back in 1951, the longshoreman-philosopher Eric Hoffer published his first
book "The True Believer : Thoughts on the Nature of Mass Movements" -- a
short, great treatise which made "True Believer" a catch-phrase that's as
valid now as ever. It's also at the root of The Siege.
Fanatics such as Mao's Red Guards or Europe's Red Brigades have been
treated in films abroad but rarely in American political thrillers.
Hollywood's richest fodder was the villainy of the Soviets. With the  Evil
Empire now gone, replacements are needed. Militant Islamic fundamentalists
can partly fill this void. This is what The Siege does.
Technically, all its production values are impressive, from sets,
photography, music score, crowd scenes and skillful editing. The latter
takes effect right away, with a montage that alternates between violence
and visual poetry.
A sheik who masterminds terrorists is driven in a Mercedes through the
beautiful emptiness of desert sands. In a bloody ambush, he is abducted by
the mysterious attackers. Cut to almost lyrical high shots of a mosque in
New York City, where a muezzin (the Muslim man who calls the hours of
prayer) chants beautifully from a minaret, as the faithful pray, and as a
panoramic view of the Big Apple appears.
In  the city's One Federal Plaza, Anthony "Hub" Hubbard (Denzel Washington)
leads the FBI's New York anti-terrorist unit. Anonymous threats demand the
sheik's liberation. Words become acts, a string of bombings:  of a bus, a
Broadway theater, the Federal Building itself. An attack on a school is
thwarted. The body count is in the hundreds.
The FBI reacts with surveillance,chases and arrests. It's a duel of Good
vs. Bad, manicheistic but not in the simplistic way of westerns with their
immediately identified evildoers and heroes.
The side of Good focuses on Hub and his Lebanon-born buddy Frank Haddad,
well-played by Tony Shalhoub who was US-born in  a Lebanese family. The
other lead role goes to CIA operative Elise Kraft, (Annette Bening).
The FBI is a melting-pot of Oriental-Americans, African-Americans and
Everything-Else-Americans. Hub mobilizes them, barks his orders, puts the
agents go instantly into high gear. These use high-tech plus deductive
reasoning. You might think that the ethnic rainbow's political correctness
is too neat, its lighting efficiency too much, but we outsiders cannot tell
whether we are witnessing real life or movie life. What matters is that
there is convincing verisimilitude on the screen.
The lead trio are forceful,look good and credibly intelligent. There may be
some deja vu with the two men but there's none in Elise's  quite original
role. It underlines both the rivalry and the cooperation between FBI and
CIA. Ms. Bening's physical appearance is carefully calculated. Her makeup
does not hide her age; she is attractive but not glamorous, lively but not
artificially cute. Her persona is full of interesting ambiguities, of
role-playing and true feelings, of using charm and sexuality to infiltrate
the terrorists. She may also have the best pragmatic line in the film when
she admits that no politics and policies can be simon-pure, that there are
no clear-cut rights and wrongs, that one "has to choose the right that is
the least wrong."
The film's first part is a fine thriller. The second half expands in ways
that have caused controversy and indignation among Arab-Americans. As the
terrorist menace swells, the American President (Clinton, in genuine TV
appearances) is under pressure. He has to resort to martial law, with
General Devereaux (Willis) in charge.
An unpleasant, dour man who dislikes Hub and Elise, Devereaux has tunnel
vision, sees himself as the country's savior, and proves to be another type
of True Believer.  Set on rounding up as many Arab-American male New
Yorkers as possible-- including the US-born--he does with a cold gusto that
includes executing a suspect.
New York in a state of siege is like an occupied country. The procedures
remind you of the treatment of Japanese-Americans during WW II;  of the
stadiums full of arrestees in Pinochet's Chile (cf. the movie Missing); of
the Nazis' Kristallnacht in November1938 rampage against the Jews, and of
the later herdings that led to death camps.
The developments pit Frank, Hub and Elise against the unbearably arrogant
Devereaux. Crucial questions are raised, but they take on a melodramatic,
rather simplistic, rhetorical shape that hurts the movie. It would have
been better to debate the issues in depth and to give some dimensions to
the Arab-Americans. But then there would not have been all the slam-bang of
Part II -- and there's something in Hollywood that abhors physical
inaction. The joke here is that the long second half is filmically much
less exciting than the first.
The Siege's subject is inherently tricky and touchy. Even before iys
release, the film sparked protests by Arab-Americans, including the Arab
Anti-Defamation League. It is roughly the same situation as for Godard's
Hail Mary and Scorsese's The Last Temptation of Christ. Both movies were
boycotted even before they came out . (Later, in Paris, there was even  a
fire bombing  of the theater showing the Scorsese).
It is a given that in real life there are Good People and Bad People of any
creed, race and color--perhaps with the exception of Icelanders who seems
to be all good. Islamic terrorists however, what with the almost daily
headlines, have special visibility in the West. (Arabs in general even
stand out visually  because of the women's clothing). Even though the movie
goes to some lengths (some of them awkard) to stress that the the acts of a
few taint unfairly the many good people, you can't blame Arab-Americans for
worrying.
On the other hand, director Zwick is a liberal whose heart generally seems
to be in the right place. Witness his Glory and his Courage Under Fire
(both with Denzel Washington). In a sense, his making The Siege, flaws and
all, was something of an act of courage under fire.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Matt Williams
What steps are necessary to control domestic terrorism? How far do you
go to combat an evil that hides among us?  Those are among the questions
that are asked by The Siege, a political thriller which goes a bit
deeper than your traditional shoot-em-up to explain and question the
ethics involved in battling an unseen enemy.
Denzel Washington stars as FBI agent, Anthony Hubbard.  "Hub" is the
leader of an anti-terrorism task force in New York City, who is thrust
into the spotlight when a series of devastating terrorist attacks rock
the city.  As the incidents and the civilian body count rise, he is
placed under increasing pressure to find and eliminate the terrorist
cell.
As the incidents continue to escalate, the federal government begins to
question whether standard law enforcement can hope to stop the bombings.
The spectre of martial law is raised, under the leadership of one
General Devereaux (Bruce Willis).  Devereaux is personally against the
idea, but if ordered to enforce martial law, he is determined to let no
obstacle stop the army from destroying the terrorist threat.
Contributing to the confusing situation is the mysterious CIA agent
Elise (Annette Bening).  She apparently has tangential contacts with the
terrorist cell, but how deeply is she (and the CIA) involved with the
terrorists themselves?
Though it starts out apparently as a standard fight-the-terrorists
thriller, The Siege eventually unfolds into an ethical debate.  The
Arabic-speaking population of New York (in which, it is presumed, the
terrorists are hiding) become targets of suspicion and derision. Hate
crimes against the community begin to rise, and the entire city is
polarized.
Denzel Washington falls once again into a role where he gets to act out
his righteous indignation.  I suppose he gravitates toward those roles
because he plays them so well (as he does here), but, at least just
once, I'd like to see him argue the "wrong" side of a moral dilemma.
Anyhow, his performance here is as captivating as always.  Even though
his character isn't that interesting by itself, his sheer presence grabs
your attention while he's on the screen.
Bruce Willis is in a mostly thankless role as the reluctant general. He
gets to speechify a bit upfront, but for most of the film he's placed in
the "bad cop" role (opposite Washington's "good cop"). Annette Bening is
an interesting wild card, and she's able to hold her own opposite
Washington.
As the bad guys, the terrorists in the film are rather shallow.  They're
really used as merely a plot device, rather than actual villains.  The
true conflict is the ethical one...not the cop vs. terrorist storyline.
The moral questions at the center of the film are truly intriguing, and
deserve contemplation.  However, in order to wrap the film up with a
tidy neat ending, the plot makes a few "lucky coincidence" leaps.  It
still flows all right, but the film loses a bit of moral
resonance...it's like playing with a stacked deck.
Still, The Siege is exciting and thought-provoking.  It's designed to
stir up some questions (something which it certainly does), but it also
entertains as well.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 29 December 1998 by myself at the Cineplex Worldwide for $3
*The Siege* gives us a "what-if" scenario ripped from today's headlines.
As one of its characters says, "everybody uses the Palestinians." What
would happen if terrorism hit hard on the domestic front, and the army had
to declare martial law in New York City?
Apparently, it would be laden with inter-agency squabbling with impromptu
roundups and concentration camps for suspect minorities.
>From the get-go, the Arabs are the enemy, and in retaliation for blowing
up the US facility in Darhan, Saudi Arabia, the US abducts Sheik Ahmed Bin
Talal, a terrorist mastermind. In demanding his release, his supporters
start a terror campaign in New York City. Buses, a theatre, even a federal
building, are blown up. Parents take their kids out of schools, and
backfiring buses send people running for cover.
The FBI is, as always, Hollywood's choice of good guy, and leading the
investigation is Anthony Hubbard (call him Hub), played by a stalwart,
earnest Denzel Washington. Tony Shalhoub plays his fellow FBI officer
Frank Haddad, a Lebanese-American. The minority buddy thing works here.
Certainly better than *Lethal Weapon 4*.
Had the movie merely been a beat-the-clock investigation while the Army
rounded up Arabs in Brooklyn, it might have worked better. However, there
is the sometimes confusing three-way conflict of Annette Benning's
character, CIA personnel named either Elise Kraft or Sharon Bridger. Her
love of Arab culture, knowledge of Arabic, and carnal knowledge of Samir
Nazhde (Sami Bouajila) throws in the additional twist of "whose side is
she on, anyway?" Also tossed in is the bickering in DC over how to
proceed, whether to declare martial law at all.
The Siege touches on a lot of themes, and the most important of these is
how we view "the enemy among us," but it is done without a real
examination of Arab culture. For example, Haddad has a family event,
clearly muslim, to which he invites his co-workers, but it is not clear
what the event it. Meanwhile, in the opening scenes, a "menacing mosque"
is revealed to be in Brooklyn, with the World Trade Center in the
background. The best scene, in which Haddad tries to locate his son after
he's been taken from his home, shows the turmoil of being from an alien
culture, and realizing that you are not as assimilated or accepted as you
thought you were. "I am not your partner; I'm a sand nigger," he wails to
Hub while seeking his incarcerated son.
After the requisite countdowns and car chases, there's the obligatory
victory of Right over Wrong, as Hubbard trumps army bad guy General
William Devereaux (Bruce Willis in a remarkably restrained performance
that is not annoying).
While *The Siege* is not a bad film--the tension is well sustained,
especially in the exploding bus scene--it is formulaic and simplistic. The
use of location shooting for Manhattan and Brooklyn goes a long way to
make it a bit more compelling and realistic.
Sidenote: Annette Benning has never looked worse. Her "Pope Joan" crewcut
does not suit her. She also maintains a monotonously incredulous look
that begets a disappointed latte consumer than a CIA operative. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Someone once wrote that in order to preserve liberty, freedom may have
to be suspended occasionally and someone wrote back that he who would
suspend freedom for the sake of liberty deserves neither liberty or
freedom.  Interesting semantics.  In my country, Canada, we had a
national crisis in 1970 when a group of separatists using terrorist
tactics and who kidnapped and murdered a government official, were
rounded up when our Prime Minister used the war powers act and order was
quickly restored.  I happen to agree with that call simply because civil
liberties are already suspended so why not put that power in the hands
of people who are trying to restore order rather than the ones who try
and take it away.
In 'The Siege', not only is martial law brought to the forefront for the
prevention of terrorism, but it also shows that no solution is perfect.
The film is a good mix of domestic law enforcement countered by the
debate of what measures are acceptable in fighting terrorism.
Director Edward Zwick ('Glory', 'Legends of the Fall' and 'Courage Under
Fire') has crafted a suspenseful and meticulously loud batch of social
commentary to get this debate under way.  Denzel Washington stars as an
FBI agent in New York City who works to combat recent acts of terrorism
popping up all over the Big Apple.  He meets a covert (oops!, not
anymore) CIA operator (Annette Bening) investigating the terrorism from
a clandestine approach to the situation and eventually the two of them
work together.  The terrorism unfolds as the U.S. holds a middle eastern
leader as a suspect in other terrorist acts.  Washington butts heads
with a fanatical army general (Bruce Willis) who wants martial law
brought about to satisfy his own hunger for power.
'The Siege' has a very interesting message in that for every violent
action there is an equal and swift reaction as people begin
demonstrating as martial law rips apart civil liberties and Arab males
between 14 and 30 are rounded up and then put into concentration
camp-style incarceration.  One thing I admired the film for was the use
of dialogue and situations to explain and avoid any defamation aimed at
Arab-americans.  One scene has a meeting where a group of civil figures
from all points, law enforcement, the media, the army and Arab
anti-defamation leagues explain their desire that not all of them should
be stereotyped for the actions of a few.  Washington's partner in the
FBI (Tony Shalhoub) is shown as a law abiding and law enforcing
Arab-american who loves his country and puts his life on the line
everyday to serve it.
Denzel Washington does it again.  This is his third teaming with
director Edward Zwick after his Oscar-winning turn in 'Glory' and his
impressive leading performance under Zwick in 'Courage Under Fire'.
Washington is one of those actors who can rely on his own voice, look
and personality to get into character each time and still manage to look
different.  Without the benefit of make-up, heavy accent or other
altering factors most of the time, Washington can hold his own with any
of the world's top performers.  He has proven to be both sensitive and
tough on screen and his performance in 'The Siege' is totally different
than his excellent work earlier in the year in Spike Lee's 'He Got
Game'.
Annette Bening is the only wrinkle in the film.  I didn't really buy her
as a CIA agent and Bruce Willis is rather forgettable as the fanatical
general.  But these factors are compensated for by telling a gripping,
plausible and tense story.  Although terrorism has struck the United
States in the past with the Oklahoma City incident and the World Trade
Center bombings, it is reasonable to assume that these incidents while
tragic and unacceptable, have so far been isolated incidents and 'The
Siege' is  filled with the intention of deflecting the possibility of
such a thing ever occurring REGULARLY (terrorism) on American soil and
to be prepared for it if it does.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
James Brundage
I figured it would happen. Directors on streaks of good movies always falter
at some point, and now was the time for Edward Zwick. After directing Glory,
Legends of the Fall, and Courage Under Fire, three fine thriller-dramas
about honor and war, one of the few studio directors left that had literary
content left in him (aside, of course, from the obvious Kubrick and
Spielburg), has now turned his attention to the straight foreword action
movie The Siege.
The Siege tells the story of four terrorist cells reigning fire upon New
York City (Brooklynites aiming at Manhattan, of course). It starts with nice
action and keeps the nice action. It even throws in an element of mystery
with Annette Benning's character, a CIA operative working illegally in New
York. The characters are good, the action well paced, and the terrorists
standard action film villains, never without a bomb or an uzi or a handgun.
Then we have to bring in Bruce Willis. Sure, he's the good-luck charm for
apocalypse movies, and on straight foreword he's the way to go, but when
you're looking to make literary content, he's just not supposed to be at the
top of your list.
Having lived near New York, I was looking forward to seeing terrorists take
it down, and enjoyed the film up until the bring in the nasty old military.
The story was much more fun and intriguing before good ole Bruce shows up.
The military comes and you do an about face. The bombers of the city become
the unintentional heroes, the people to be pitied, and you put Bruce Willis
as ... a villain? Exactly how did the second half make it past the Beverly
Hills screeners, is my question?

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Director Ed Zwick teams up with Mr. Denzel Washington (A gracious man
according to one of my friends who ran into him on the streets of
Montreal last month, munching on a hotdog and a baseball cap planted
firmly on his once-a-garbage-man head.) for the third time in 10 years
for this modern thriller. They previously worked together on 1989's
GLORY (For which Denzel won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor)
and 1996's COURAGE UNDER FIRE. 
PLOT:
Super-straight FBI agent Anthony Hubbard (Washington), works alongside
his Lebanese-born partner, and  CIA agent Kraft (Bening), to solve the
maze of terrorist attacks plaguing the city of New York. When the
terrorists commit acts beyond the scope of the FBI and the local New
York City police department, the US Army is asked to intervene, led by
able General Devereaux (Willis). The entire city is placed under
martial law, and all Arab-American suspects are persecuted and grilled
for information. The siege is set.
CRITIQUE:
Mediocre, preachy, self-righteous, thriller starring the great actor
Denzel Washington, which manages to hit some high points, but delves
into too many lulls and plot holes, along with a weak ending, to
maintain my high interest throughout. This film was pretty interesting
for the first half, but once the Army, and the wooden acting by Bruce
Willis came into the picture, things just seemed to drag on without
much real intensity. The final resolution with Willis also seemed quite
anti-climactic and too politically correct for my taste.
This movie has apparently angered many Arab groups and after having
seen the film, I guess I could see why that is. In my humble opinion,
there have been too many terrorists represented as Arabs in movies,
without enough reciprocracy for the rest of their cultural makeup (And
that's about as political as you'll ever get to see JoBlo, so enjoy it
while you can!) But I digress. On the other hand, this film does seem
to want to portray the entire big picture, instead of this simple
minority, and I guess that on that level, it does so intelligently and
effectively. I never really did understand why and what the Annette
Bening character did for a living (She seemed to be absolutely
everywhere in this film, but without much clear explanation as to how
she received clearance for anything), or why anyone, anywhere at
anytime would trust her in this film (But somehow, they all do?!)
Add to that the fact that Bruce Willis seems to have forgotten his
acting chops back in PULP FICTION (7.5/10) and NOBODY'S FOOL (8/10),
and reverted back to his old style of impersonating a piece of mahogany
lumber for this role (good choice, Bruce!). But when you really get
down to it, Denzel Washington is the glue that holds this long-winded
picture together. Year after year, this man continues to reassure us of
his magnificent acting talent, and emotionally lure us into each and
every one of the characters that he inhabits (Okay, so I'm not counting
VIRTUOSITY (5.5/10) !!). Otherwise, Annette was just annoying, while
Shalhoub was passable in his see-through role as the token "nice-guy"
Arab rep. Overall, the movie did pack some thrills, some action, some
interest, little originality, little effect and little sweet movie
aftertaste. I suggest you catch it on a cheapie night in the theatres,
or more sensibly, wait for it on video and enjoy it during those long
winter months.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Denzel Washington was once used in a Newsweek cover story about the
biological basis of the perception of beauty. He was cited as a key
example in a scientific explanation of why he is considered an
extremely handsome man. He's been happily married to the same woman
since 1982.
Annette Bening has been married to the "man with the golden nuts",
Warren Beatty since 1992. They've had three kids together. Apparently,
Warren saw Annette in THE GRIFTERS (6.5/10) and was so impressed with
her work (The shots of her naked goodies probably had nothing to do
with it, eh Warren?), that he sought her out for the romantic role
opposite him in BUGSY (7.5/10).
Bruce Willis was born in Idar-Oberstein, West Germany.
Director Zwick executive-produced the famed baby boom TV drama
"thirtysomething" (1987).
Tony Shalhoub was born in Green Bay, Wisconsin, and married to actress
Brooke Adams (Who once turned down an offer to be one of the original
Charlie's Angels.) He played Antonio Scarpacci for several years on TV
"Wings" sitcom.
This film was previously titled AGAINST ALL ENEMIES and MARTIAL LAW.

Author
Marty Mapes
***1/2 (out of 4) It seems that Director Edward Zwick knows how to push
my liberal buttons better than any other working filmmaker.
Zwick's films have often made me angry. LEGENDS OF THE FALL was so
enthralled with Brad Pitt that it treated Aidan Quinn very badly, and
COURAGE UNDER FIRE was laced with patriotic military messages I was
unwilling to swallow. Yet both films were very well made and solidly
thought out, so even as I got angry I couldn't condemn them. On the
contrary, I liked the intellectual and emotional challenge they
presented, enough so that I was really looking forward to Zwick's next
film, THE SIEGE.
Zwick did manage to sneak in a few right-wing jabs. Bill Clinton and
Charles Manson are mentioned in the same sentence, and a clever bit of
editing portrays Clinton's foreign policy as ruthless and dishonest.
Bruce Willis gets to say "card-carrying member of the ACLU," and later
makes a speech that sounds remarkably like Oliver North. But the overall
shape of the movie is not so right-leaning.
The first act of the film has Hubbard (Denzel Washington) leading the
New York FBI in search of a suspected terrorist. A fake bomb has gone
off in a bus, and Hub thinks the terrorists will strike again, this time
with a real bomb.
Hub learns that CIA agent Elise Kraft (Annette Bening) is also tracking
the terrorist, which is odd because the CIA is not supposed to operate
within U.S. borders. Hub has Kraft removed from the evidence hangar, in
one of the movie's unconventional yet exciting confrontations between
the FBI, the CIA, and later, the Army.
Another bomb does go off in NYC, this time a real one, also in a crowded
bus. Hub and his FBI team can't work fast enough for the public's taste.
Hub and his crew work tirelessly, but public fear is just as vigilant.
Among those in power, there is talk of bringing in the Army and
declaring martial law. For now it is only talk.
Hub does make progress. Several suspected terrorist cells are identified
and confronted. But before he can crack the case...
The terrorists strike again, this time with a hugely destructive bomb,
driven in a van through the front door of the FBI headquarters, killing
hundreds of agents and employees (but not Hub and his team).
With no FBI to speak of, the Army is called in and martial law is
declared. General Devereaux (Willis) leads the operation. When he sets
foot on Manhattan he makes a "detention speech" for the cameras. He
explains that the suspect is male, of Arab descent, between the ages of
16 and 40. He asks for the city's cooperation in complying with military
detention and questioning of ANYONE fitting the description.
Now the film becomes a three-way game of cat and mouse, set against a
surreal Manhattan-as-prison backdrop, as the CIA, FBI, and Army all
close in on the suspected terrorist, each claiming jurisdiction.
The insightfully written power struggle between three factions of the
U.S. Government is what is most interesting about this film. Each
faction has its own motive and style. The Army, represented by Willis,
is interested in order and "justice," preferably through violence and
force. The CIA, represented by Bening, is interested in deleting its own
connections to terrorist training camps in other countries, camps whose
graduates are the ones responsible for the bombings in New York. The
FBI, led by Washington, are the film's heroes, interested in solving the
case with as little collateral damage as possible.  
Arab-American groups have protested that the film portrays them badly,
and they are not wrong. However, at different times during the film, I
agreed and disagreed with them to different extents. For example, the
terrorists of the film actually ARE Arab-Americans, and for quite a
while, that's all we know about them. Clearly, that reinforces a certain
prejudice held in the U.S.
On the other hand, the film gives a voice to the Arab-Americans who are
treated with prejudice in this country. When the "detention speech" is
given, it comes from the mouth of Devereaux, whom the movie presents as
something of a monster. When the film shows detention camps for
Arab-American men, the camera sympathizes with them and shows the
audience that this sort of prejudice is un-American.
The subject matter itself is complicated, and I don't think there was a
way to handle it without rousing some sort of anger or backlash.
Nevertheless, I think Zwick handled it fairly and intelligently. He
certainly wasn't one-sided, and he seems more interested in EXPLORING
the prejudice - examining its roots and its effects - rather than merely
exploiting it or condemning it without thought.
It is Zwick's examination of controversial subjects, his unwillingness
to spew the easiest, most politically correct answer, that makes me
respect Zwick's work. THE SIEGE was no exception. It was a stimulating,
challenging film, and I'm looking forward to his next project, whatever
it may be.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Fontaine Lien
        "The Siege" is a hard-to-categorize film.   You can't say it's a
popcorn movie, because its special effects are actually a part of the plot: 
in other popcorn movies, the special effects IS the plot.  Doesn't quite
qualify as a detective movie either, since the detectives in the film spend
most of their time responding to incidents rather than investigating (with
the exception, of course, of the brilliant coup towards the end of the
movie); not an action movie either, because there's a lot less action going
on here than in the other action movies.  Of course Bruce Willis's
appearance and performance automatically disqualifies this film from
being Oscar-caliber drama (psychological, sociological, the whole deal). 
Rather, this film is a semi-successful melting pot of many of these
things.  There are some intense action scenes and some not-so-intense
ones; some scenes utterly devoid of meaning and some that cling to you
for a long while. 
        The film's strongest point is its shrewd tension buildup, something
you don't get that often in your everyday Jerry Bruckheimer film (I say
that having just seen "Enemy of the State").  There are some truly
surprising twists and turns, with the last one being the best, charged with
intense emotion.  That one second when you realize who Samir really is is
pure movie-going joy.  Another surprise that made me (and everyone else)
jump was the bus explosion.  Even it's inclusion in the trailors didn't
prepare me for the sudden explosion at a time of obvious tranquility and
compromise.  Well done, folks.
        There are some pretty strong performances in this film, the best
coming from Denzel Washington.  He really puts his heart into the
character Anthony Hubbard, giving him the desperation and the devotion to
make film work.  Annette Benning gives a strong performance (as
Sharon/Elise) as well, but I was even more impressed by the work of
seasoned actor Tony Shalhoub (Frank) who also appears in the upcoming "A
Civil Action" and has had a notable gueststarring role on The X-Files' "Soft
Light" episode.  He deftly portrays the man of ethnic minority who finds
the country he's loyal to suddenly turning against him--a sad story heard
too many times in the history of this nation.  If one thing ruined this film,
it was Bruce Willis's character Demereaux.  Although he must exist to
represent big government, Willis's performance did not make the character
come alive at all.  It is as if Willis, with his ubiquitous smirk, was guest-
starring as the Jackal.  Nothing new here.  His smirk (and lack of any other
facial expression) worked fine in movies like "Armageddon" (Hi, Jerry.),
but not here.
         The film is by no means perfect (boy have we heard that line enough
times ).  It starts off pretty slow, trudges along the way sometimes,
and falls prey haplessly to cinematic cliches occasionally.  That's unwise,
if it was a film not MEANT to have cliches.  A shame really, for a movie
that could have been really great, an "action" film that has something to
say, for once.  Nevertheless it presents some valid points, such as where
do we draw the line between upholding the absolute law and the taking
away of personal freedom and individual rights?  When is the government
too big for its own good?  And what will happen to democracy and the
voice of the people then?  A poignant question proposed in the film by
Washington: "[What if it weren't the Arabs?]  What it if were African-
Americans, Italians, Jews?"  What if it was any one of us?  "The Siege" is
not the sudden attack of sound and movement that its title suggests it is. 
It's a gradual infiltration of our mind, the gradual realization that there
just might be a chance that something horrifying might be happening to
this country.  This is a well-timed film in an era of paranoia, when
distrust of the military continues to mount; a good history lesson when Ex
parte Milligan  and the Reconstruction period are just pages in textbooks;
a film that doesn't aim for the pleasant experience but rather hits you in
the face with brutality.  Satisfactory, despite the Clinton jokes.
Rating:  B- (First viewing, 11/27/98)
* It's Not a Joke, Damnit - I'm tired of hearing villains uttering this line
in the face of obvious doom: "Is this some kind of a joke?"

Author
Curtis Edmonds
I came away from The Siege as a big proponent of martial law.  Not because
of anything that took place on the screen, mind you, but because of the
people sitting behind me at the theater.  They didn't talk throughout the
whole entire movie, but they did interject annoying little comments at
every suspenseful moment.  I wouldn't have minded one little bit if a squad
of Green Berets had dragged them out of the theater and placed them in one
of the mini-concentration camps we see in The Siege, where they would be
condemned to watch Hudson Hawk over and over again to make them properly
respectful of the movie-going experience.
Given the opportunity to command, I think we'd all like to use the nation's
military in creative, fun ways.  Elderly drivers on the interstate would be
less of a problem if "Slower Traffic Keep Right" was enforced by tanks.
Marine guards stationed at ATMs would discourage those who habitually take
more than a minute to make a withdrawal.  If the Corps of Engineers can
control flooding, surely they can fix my dripping faucet.
The concept of martial law is a powerful temptation, and the makers of The
Siege  have given wholeheartedly.  What they have done is take a perfectly
good police procedural movie -- Law and Order writ large -- and turn it
into a movie about the inappropriate use of military officials.  Although
General Bruce Willis and his merry band of soldiers do nothing more
creative with their military firepower than block the Brooklyn Bridge with
tanks and torture terrorist suspects, they manage to derail The Siege and
twist it into nothing more than a civil libertarian's paranoid fantasy.
The Siege starts off oh-so-promisingly with Denzel Washington leading a
team of FBI counterterrorism experts through New York City in pursuit of
Palestinian terrorists fond of wearing plastique underwear.  There really
isn't anything bad to say about the first half of the movie -- plenty of
explosions, plenty of good police work, all the elements of a good action
film.  The Siege is pretty good about busting up some of the action-movie
cliches, although one expects that a really smart terrorist group would
have at least considered blowing up the obligatory post-arrest party at the
local cop watering hole.
Washington does his usual, effective job as the FBI's top man against
terrorism.  He's charming when he has to be, tough as nails, honest yet
capable of some trickery.  However, this is his third or fourth movie where
he's played a cop -- Fallen, most recently -- and it just seems that he's
wasting his time and talents here.  (No one really wants to see Denzel
typecast the same way that Sidney Poitier and Yaphet Kotto are, do they?)
Denzel's foil throughout is Annette Bening, who plays a CIA officer who
knows a whole lot more than she's telling -- which is nothing.  Bening was
a very brave choice for the casting director, who could have put a Demi
Moore clone in the role -- someone who would have played rough and tough
with the big boys.  Instead, Bening is smart, vulnerable, a little ditzy,
and completely believable.  However, the great surprise of this movie is
Denzel's partner, Tony Shalhoub.  Those who have seen him only on TV are in
for a treat.  He delivers laughs with deadpan humor, but he also handles
the emotional scenes well after his son is kidnapped by the Army later in
the movie.
The real problem The Siege has is that it can't invent an effective way for
the police to counter terrorism.  This, of course, isn't just a movie
problem, and it's probably not the fault of the filmmakers that they can't
figure out a good way for their characters to hunt down terrorists.  (The
movie starts with the real-life bombing of American military barracks in
Saudi Arabia, another terrorist crime that hasn't been solved.)  With the
lack of anything else better to do, The Siege brings in the troops to scour
Brooklyn and round up Arab-Americans.
And it is at this point that The Siege stops being a good action movie and
starts becoming a preachy lecture on constitutional rights and why they are
good.  I'm hopeful that Americans have, by now, internalized the notion
that concentration camps and military rule are Bad Things, and that the
message presented by The Siege really isn't necessary.  What we're left
with is Willis and Washington screaming at each other, time after time, in
a debate that isn't even remotely realistic.  Even the last action sequence
falls flat, as the Law of Economy of Characters catches up with the
movie.
Terrorism is a crazy, mixed up phenomenon, and it shouldn't be surprising
that The Siege is a crazy, mixed up movie.  To its credit, it deals with
the issues of terrorism on a more intellectual level than conventional
action movies dare to do -- and in coming with a half-baked, poorly thought
out solution, maybe it isn't far wrong in its analysis of the problem.
It's an admirable effort that falls just short of being good, which, I
suppose, is not a crime.
At least, it's not a crime in the same way that talking during a movie is a
crime.  Where are the Green Berets when you really need them, anyway?
Movie Reviews: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Curtis+Edmonds
Hollywood Stock Exchange: http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"Tabasco sauce is to bachelor cooking what forgiveness is to sin."

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Edward Zwick, Lawrence Wright, and Menno Meyjes
Starring: Denzel Washington, Tony Shalhoub , Annette Bening, Bruce
Willis 
Ingredients: FBI lawman, terrorism, US Constitution issues
Synopsis:
An honest and upright FBI lawman named Hub (Denzel Washington) is in
charge of fighting Middle Eastern terrorists bombing New York. But Hub
loses his authority when the President allows a power hungry US Army
general (Bruce Willis) to declare martial law over the city in response
to escalated bombings. The general abuses his powers. With the help of
his partner Frank (Tony Shalhoub) as well as a CIA agent named Sharon
(Annette Bening), Hub continues his investigations in a bid to solve the
bombings and regain his rightful authority. 
Opinion:
After watching this movie, I found an orange paper on the front
windshield of my car, on which was printed: "The stereotyping of Muslims
as terrorists ... leads to prejudice, hate, and bigotry."  Good point.
THE SIEGE plays suspenseful, sinister music during Muslim prayer, and
has bad guys perform a Muslim ritual prior to putting on white shrouds
and running amok trying to bomb innocent city folk. 
THE SIEGE tries to entertain us on a number of different levels, and
succeeds in one. As a drama about the plight of innocent Americans being
put in concentration camps, THE SEIGE doesn't develop much sympathy for
the victims because none of the victims are main characters. For
example, when a character shouts, "I must get my son out of the
concentration camp," it comes as a relatively emotionless surprise
because we don't even know his son. It would have been more dramatic if
the movie had thoroughly introduced us to the son, so that the audience
could bond and feel for the family's plight on a sympathetic level.
Similarly, when Hub yells at the general about the inhumane treatment of
Tariq, who is Tariq? A vicious terrorist? Or an innocent patsy fingered
by the real villain? Tariq's identity hasn't been developed, nor do we
know by the end of the film. He's just some unfortunate stranger. If
you're going to do a film about injustice, then "victim" parts should be
allowed to develop emotional "tug," rather than just provide surprise
material for Hub's power struggle with the army. 
On the intellectual level, THE SEIGE leaves a few things murky. Annette
Bening gets a huge part as Sharon, the CIA's sole expert. But it's not
clear whether Sharon is acting alone or on behalf of the CIA's present
goal, which is not explained either. In one scene, CIA Sharon acts as an
Army translator, so what's her actual mission?  In the movie there is
also a lot of wrangling back and forth about the fate of a mysterious
shake (sheik). But the discussion peters out, and we never get to see
the sheik. 
On the good side, the acting is done well, and there are a few scenes
with some chasing around and or featuring fancy spy hardware. As a drama
about Hub's authority struggle with the army, THE SEIGE does okay.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Denzel Washington, Annette Bening, Bruce Willis, Tony Shalhoub,
Sami Bouajila.
Screenplay: Lawrence Wright and Menno Meyjes & Edward Zwick. Director:
Edward Zwick
In this tedious movie about terrorism and counter terrorism, we have
little to keep us interested throughout the movie except for the
constant berating of Denzel Washington as FBI agent, Anthony Hubbard.
The unconvincing, pretentious, smug role of Bruce Willis as a
questionable, unfeeling General or the silly, unintelligent part of
Annette Benning as CIA agent Elise Kraft who makes one too many wrong
calls, does not make this movie any better. When there are too many
security agencies involved in any single plot, one runs the risk of
spoiling the broth  and the result is this movie suffers from too many
people trying to get in on the act.
The Siege makes a point at the end about the misuse of power, and the
abuse of human rights when a city is placed under marshal law. However,
I feel the only thing this movie promotes is fear in people's heart.
With scenes that would no doubt encourage and inflame, Islamic extremist
fundamentalist groups to further terrorise the free world. With images
of buses, theatres, schools filled with innocent people blown to pieces,
one can only wonder why one would want play out such possibilities! I'm
sure someone like Bin Laden is probably somewhere in Saudi Arabia
thinking, that's a great idea  why don't we just blow up the FBI
headquarters in New York by driving a truck full of TNT through the
front entrance.

Author
Michael Redman
There's a siege mentality in the United States today. The federal government
believes that militia groups are dedicated to bringing it down. The militia is
convinced that Washington is a threat to their lives and freedom. Liberals see
a rapid erosion of the Bill Of Rights under the guise of law and order.
FBI agent Anthony Hubbard (Denzel Washington) is under attack from all sides.
Terrorists are blowing up New York. Hardened CIA operative Elise Kraft
(Annette Bening) is attempting to take away his case. The US Army is invading
the city. It's not a good day for our hero.
As the film opens, an unidentified US agency abducts Sheik Ahmed Bin Talal,
the suspected head of a Palestinian terrorist organization. Soon bombs start
going off in New York. Hubbard is called in to deal with the situation but
butts heads with Kraft who has a hidden private agenda.
When the situation worsens, the President invokes the War Powers Act, declares
martial law and sends in the Army to occupy Brooklyn. Although General William
Devereaux (Bruce Willis) argues against the decision ("The Army is a
broadsword, not a scalpel. You don't want us in an American city."), when the
tanks roll across the Brooklyn Bridge, he's gung-ho.
All Arab men are rounded up and imprisoned in internment camps much like
Japanese-Americans were during World War II. Military vehicles patrol the city
streets. In order to prevent the terrorists from killing innocent people, the
Army moves in and kills innocent people.
Washington turns in his usual excellent job as the admirable yet all-business
G-Man. Bening's character is enticing but remains something of a mystery
throughout the film. Willis is adequate although his role is a minor one. Tony
Shalhoub as Hubbard's Arab-American partner is a stand-out and provides the
brief touches of humanity and humor in the story.
Based on the previews, you might expect the movie to be either an intelligent
examination of the dangers of military involvement in internal matters or a
Bruce Willis action film. It is neither.
What could be an opportunity to examine the tricky issues of individual
freedoms versus law enforcement is missed when director Edward Zwick ("Glory",
"Courage Under Fire") plays it safe.
Which liberties are worth giving up in order to feel safe? In the real world,
is the Department Of Justice's wish list for new powers as dangerous as it
sounds? (They succeeded in allowing "roving" wiretaps.) Hubbard's assertion
that the terrorists have won if "we throw out the Constitution" is a powerful
statement but the film only gives us easy answers.
There are a few impressive dramatic scenes, but they don't hold the film
together as either a shoot-em-up or a thoughtful suspense tale. The fight
between the CIA, FBI and Army for control shows some promise but doesn't go
much further than the simplistic. The story seems incomplete: there are too
many loose ends unresolved. You'll leave wanting the rest of the story.
(Michael Redman has written this column for well over 23 years and sometimes
believes that he is under siege by just about everyone. Email your paranoias
to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 11/12/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "THE SIEGE" (20th Century-Fox)
In this instance, the whole is less than the sum of its
parts. Denzel Washington is a superb actor, an Oscar winner for
"Glory" and nominee for "Cry Freedom" and "Malcolm X," as is Annette
Bening, an Oscar winner for "The Grifters," and Bruce Willis has
proven his ability in thrillers such as "The Fifth Element" and
"Twelve Monkeys" and faced disaster in the "Die Hard" trilogy.
Director Edward Zwick has not only helmed "Courage Under Fire" and
"Glory" but he's also the co-creator of TV's "thirtysomething" and "My
So-Called Life." With credentials like these, one expects more than a
tepid political potboiler. Based on a story by Lawrence Wright, the
convoluted plot revolves around an FBI agent (Denzel Washington), a
United States Army General (Bruce Willis), and a burnt-out,
murky-minded CIA agent (Annette Bening) who team up to find an
underground cell of Islamic terrorists who are causing chaos in New
York City, blowing up a bus in Brooklyn and threatening children. In a
panic, the President imposes martial law and suspends citizens'
Constitutional rights, allowing the Army and the National Guard to
supplant local law enforcement for the duration of the operation,
thereby creating a police state. The implications deepen when all
people of Arabian descent are considered suspicious and rounded up,
like the Japanese-Americans during World War II, posing questions
like: Does one have to become monstrous to fight a monster? How far do
you go to protect freedom? While it all reads well, it doesn't play
out on the screen. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Siege"
is a formulaic, forgettable 4. It's not dramatic enough to deserve
merit, not suspenseful enough to attract an action-oriented audience,
and so preachy as to be almost ludicrous.

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Siege (1998) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Denzel Washington, Annette
Benning, Bruce Willis and Tony Shaulabob. Directed by Edward Zwick.
 The most apt way to describe The Siege is to paraphrase a classic line
from cartoonist Walt Kelley's famous comic strip, Pogo: We have met the
enemy and it is us.
 The Siege is a political thriller that raises many questions, most
importantly: Does the security of the nation supercede the rights of the
individual?
 The Siege is a flawed melodrama that gives itself a self-important weight
it cannot sustain throughout. Directed by Ed Zwick (Glory),
 The story, as the old movie ads dealing with topical subjects used to
proclaim, is ripped from today's headlines.
 Arab terrorists are creating havoc in New York. They first blow up a bus.
Later, an attempt at a school is thwarted. A strike at a Times Square
theater kills hundreds. The last straw is the bombing of a federal office
building in Manhattan in which 600 people are killed.
 The president declares martial law and sends in the military to patrol the
streets of Brooklyn, since it is believed this is where the terrorist
enclaves are located.
 The borough is sealed off, and all Arab men between certain ages are
detained in a makeshift detention camp in a sports stadium.
 The gung-ho general (Bruce Willis) put in charge of the operation uses
whatever means necessary, including torture, to gain information from
suspected terrorists.
 Meanwhile a straight-arrow FBI agent (Denzel Washington) and a mysterious
CIA operative (Annette Benning) who, of course, knows more than she lets
on, work separately to resolve the case so Willis and his GI Joes can be
withdrawn and Brooklyn can return to normal - if that's possible.
 The problem with Zwick's film is a lack of subtlety. It emblazons its
IMPORTANT MESSAGE in letters big enough for filmgoers in the back row to
read. The film's simplistic moral: freedom good, persecution bad.
 It doesn't help matters that at times Willis' troops are shown acting like
boot-jack Nazis, pushing people at gunpoint into trucks and carting them
away.
 However, in fairness, Zwick does show the Arab-American community in a
favorable light, as its leaders seek to cooperate with the authorities to
end the bombings.
 Actually, the acting honors are stolen by Tony Shaulabob, as Washington's
partner, a Lebanese-American with a wry wit and dry sense of humor. When
his 13-year-old son is interned, Shaulabob's disillusionment with his
adopted country is shattering.
 Washington is the film's moral compass, a righteous, dedicated official
who wants to end the bombings, bring the perpetrators to justice, but by
means that are within the letter of the law.
 Benning's character seems unfocused. One minute she seems to be a step
ahead of Washington and his agents, the next she appears uncertain of her
objective.
 Willis is cold and rigid as the soldier who carries out his distasteful
duty with a bit too much enthusiasm. Considering that earlier in the film
he gave a short speech indicating his disdain for such an assignment, that
he would perform it with such gusto appears inconsistent with his
character.
 The Siege is no political diatribe. It tries to be fair to all sides, and
makes an effort to offend no one. This nullifies some of it impact.
 Also, its pace is slow and uneven. At just under two hours, The Siege, at
times, seems to become one.
 Taken for what it is, The Siege is a decent endeavor. Better editing and
more spine, though, could have raised it higher.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Christian Pyle
Edward Zwick's "The Siege" raises more questions than it can convincingly
answer or even clearly articulate.  Its subject is the rising threat of
terrorism in American cities. Denzel Washington is Anthony "Hub" Hubbard, who
runs the FBI's anti-terrorism task force in New York.  His investigation into
Arab terrorist cells intensifies when suicide bombers take out a busload of
people.  Hub focuses on a mysterious CIA operative (Annette Bening), whose goes
by both "Elise" and "Sharon."  As the terrorist attacks continue and the body
count rises, the question of martial law is raised.  Enter General Devereaux
(Bruce Willis), who opposes martial law at first but who, as soon as the
President decides to send in the Army, begins herding Arab immigrants into a
prison camp and attacking every link that Hub uncovers in the terrorist chain. 
Hub listens as Devereaux tortures and murders a suspect.   
The future Zwick and screenwriter Lawrence Wright offer is all too possible. 
What would happen, they ask, if terrorism became as much a fact of daily life
in New York as it is in cities like Beirut and Belfast?  What would happen to
our civil liberties if soldiers patrol our streets with machine guns?  These
questions "The Siege" answers in realistic detail.  It implies tougher ones,
though:  what can be done to combat terrorism without sacrificing justice and
freedom?   if we encourage terrorism abroad (from Bening's character we
discover that the CIA trained the bombers), will it inevitably come back to us?
"Siege" avoids the tougher questions by endowing its hero, Hub, with a
uncompromising sense of clear right and wrong.  This comforting fantasy of Sir
Galahad confronting the evils of the modern world is an escape from the
thought-provoking issues the movie raises.  Still, Zwick deserves credit for at
least addressing the issue with as much realism as he does where so many movies
(Willis' "Die Hard" series, for example) offer only a comic-book view on
terrorism.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Siege (1998)
Denzel Washington, Annette Bening, Bruce Willis, Tony Shalhoub,
Sami Bouajila, David Proval, Lance Reddick, Mark Valley, Liana Pai, Jack 
Gwaltney, Chip Zien, Victor Slezak, Will Lyman, Dakin Matthews, John 
Rothman, E. Katherine Kerr, Jimmie Ray Weeks, Amro Salama. Screenplay by 
Lawrence Wright and Menno Meyjes & Edward Zwick. Produced by Lynda Obst 
and Edward Zwick. Director:  Edward Zwick. 116 minutes.
Rated R, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
According to writer/director Edward Zwick, "The Siege" was intended as a 
cautionary tale that would show Americans that it can happen here; that 
given the right amount of fear and prejudice, coupled with blind trust in 
government, a police state could develop within our shores. The premise 
is certainly provocative and the film starts off strong, but sadly 
degenerates into a cartoonish open-air version of "Crimson Tide," with 
"Tide's" Denzel Washington going mano a mano with Bruce Willis instead of 
Gene Hackman. Even a bracing performance from Washington can't save a 
film that features a strutting action hero in a bad rug spouting tripe 
like "I AM the law!" The sluggish production is 116 minutes long, but 
feels like three hours.
When a group of Arab fanatics begin a series of strikes in the heart of 
New York City, FBI Terrorism Task Force chief Anthony Hubbard (Denzel 
Washington) is called into action. Following a false-alarm bomb threat 
and hostage situation, Washington encounters the real thing when 
terrorists blow up a Brooklyn bus, killing more than two dozen people 
(Washington, by the way, suffers only superficial injuries, despite his 
close proximity to the explosion).
As the investigation begins, Hubbard meets undercover National Security 
Agency operative Elise Kraft (Annette Bening), a Middle East specialist 
with excellent sources in the community. After the mandatory exchange of 
insults, the two band together to search for the men behind the nightmare.
The ringleader might be a sheik, whose abduction is shown in the film's 
opening scene. General William Devereaux (Bruce Willis) claims the 
government does not have the man in custody, but is he telling the truth? 
FBI sharpshooters kill three terrorist cell members hiding out in 
Brooklyn and believe the case is closed, but just as they celebrate their 
victory, a massive explosion at a Broadway theater kills dozens. The 
attacks escalate, building to a suicide assault on FBI headquarters that 
closely resembles the Oklahoma City massacre. 
The president declares martial law, and in short order the streets are 
filled with tanks, as Devereaux's troops scoop up any adult Arab males 
they can find and corral them in detention camps. Watching ordinary 
citizens hauled away because of their race and witnessing Devereaux's 
increasing paranoia, Hubbard and Kraft begin to wonder who the real enemy 
is.
With more care, the story could have worked. Washington, a gifted actor 
who has difficulty playing villains, but shines when playing heroes, is 
at his best here, and Bening is good, even though her character's motives 
are maddeningly unclear. She talks like an incredibly sharp, informed 
operative, but often behaves like an infatuated schoolgirl dilettante. 
There are no questions about the motives of General Devereaux, though. 
The character is straight from cookie-cutter central, and Bruce Willis 
adds no shading to the man, swaggering around barking terse, smug remarks 
as if he was hosting a Planet Hollywood opening. 
Before the release of the film, Arab and Muslim groups complained about 
negative stereotyping. Zwick's film is careful to establish the 
terrorists as a small, unrepresentative group, but, for the most part,  
the production fails to depict Arabs as real people. FBI agent Frank 
Hadddad (Tony Shalhoub), an American of Arab descent, is allowed a few 
moments of actual human depth, especially when his son is throw into the 
detention camp, but the bulk of the Arabs remain faceless victims, 
waiting helplessly to be rescued. 
As the film proceeds, its tone becomes increasingly cartoonish, building 
to a cornball climax with all the subtlety of a "Billy Jack" potboiler. 
What a drag. "The Siege" had potential. Had Zwick taken the time to 
develop well-drawn characters and a genuinely thoughtful script, he might 
have achieved his lofty ambitions, but in the end this grim exercise 
plays as just another stock action movie that leaves a bad taste in the 
mouth. 

Author
James Sanford
 "The Siege" is already under attack by Arab anti-defamation groups, thanks
to its alarming -- and misleading -- trailer which shows U.S. army troops
rounding up Arabs and forcing them into internment camps ringed by
barbed-wire fences. However, anyone who shows up to protest what they assume
is going to be an ultra-right-wing fantasy about the benefits of martial law
will feel rather silly if they actually watch the film, which all but bends
over backward to portray Middle Easterners in a favorable light. "The word
'Arab' is not synonymous with the word 'terrorist'," an off-screen voice
assures us at one point.
 But at the same time, "The Siege" also errs in making most of its Arab and
Arab-American characters faceless and nameless. Rather than being depicted
as real people, they're shown largely as a mass of bodies being pushed
around, waiting to be rescued by sympathetic outsiders. It's almost as silly
as the infamous "Cry Freedom," which tried to relate the story of  Steven
Biko through the eyes of a white English family.
 In many ways, "The Siege" is a movie operating at cross-purposes with
itself, a tell-tale sign that too many writers worked over the script. In
this case, three are credited, although the writing is so uneven you can bet
many more cooks stirred this particular potboiler. Thanks largely to
director Edward Zwick ("Glory," "Courage Under Fire"), "The Siege" does
manage to pull off a few genuinely startling moments, such as when a meeting
of leaders is mysteriously disrupted by one pager after another going off,
or when tanks roll through the streets of New York.
 In the film, New York is targeted by terrorists, and FBI agent Anthony
Hubbard (Denzel Washington) and his partner Frank Haddad (Tony Shaloub) are
forced to accept the assistance of mysterious Elise Kraft (Annette Bening),
who's had more than diplomatic relations with some Arab suspects. In fact,
Elise's idea of pillow talk includes asking about the location of terrorist
cells in the vacinity of Manhattan.
 When the combined efforts of the FBI and the CIA fail, the President sends
General Deveraux (Bruce Willis) and scores of troops to seal off Brooklyn
and enforce martial law. Though Deveraux appears to be level-headed at
first, soon he's become a maniac who bellows "I am the law" and feels no
shame about torturing civilians. Consistency is not one of "The Siege"'s
strong suits.
 Then again, the movie is more successful at creating tension than in
building credible characters, which sometimes leaves Washington and Bening
looking borderline silly as they try to rationalize Hubbard and Kraft's
schizoid personalities. As in too many of his other recent appearances,
Willis is present only to preen, in this case underneath one of the worst
toupees since Burt Reynolds' heyday. Perhaps "The Siege" should be
picketed -- by former fans anxious to see Willis break out of his terminal
self-adoration and begin acting again.
James Sanford

Author
Steve Rhodes
Life has been like a horror movie lately for FBI agent Anthony 'Hub'
Hubbard (Denzel Washington) in THE SIEGE. Just when he thinks he's
killed the last terrorist monster, another one rises up to smite the
city.
"New York City brought to its knees" the television news wails as retail
sales plummet 72%.
"This is New York City," Hub blusters with inner doubts showing all over
his troubled brow. "We can take it."
As most of his schemes prove sadly ineffectual, Hub goes from cockily
confident to completely overwhelmed to intensely angry as the carnage
mounts in the worst series of terrorist attacks in our nation's history.
THE SIEGE, a riveting tale of terror, is by director Edward Zwick, who
worked with Denzel Washington previously on the mesmerizing COURAGE
UNDER FIRE and GLORY. Beautifully edited for maximum tension by Steven
Rosenblum, the movie keeps you on the edge of your seat. Zwick knows how
to time and stage scenes to keep the audience on constant alert. Even
when they know something will happen, as in the bus bombing, Zwick
manages to time it in a quite surprising way.
The complex thriller involves warring federal agencies, all trying to
control the chaos caused by multiple terrorist cells at work in New York
City. Hub leads the FBI team, but he comes up against Elise Kraft
(Annette Bening), a tough veteran of the CIA's covert activities against
Saddam Hussein. The negative chemistry between the two of them and later
between them and a self-righteous General William Devereaux (Bruce
Willis) form one of the most interesting of the story's subplots. Hub is
never happier than when he and his guys get to draw their guns on the
CIA, operating illegally in this country, and on the megalomaniac
general.
Hub tries hard to uphold the laws while Elise, trained in covert
activities, wants to do absolutely anything to stop the terrorists. He
complains that she doesn't know the difference between right and wrong.
"It is easy to tell the difference between right and wrong," Elise tells
Hub. "What is difficult is finding the wrong that's more right."
Denzel Washington delivers another of the richly intelligent
performances that he can do so well. Bruce Willis plays Bruce Willis.
But it is Annette Bening, who steals the picture with her best dramatic
performance ever.
"These guys are the real deal," Elise warns Hub about the terrorists
early in the picture. It is not until much later that he fully
comprehends what she meant. Bening's precise and delicately emotive
portrayal of a woman who reveals as little as possible about herself
makes for a fascinating enigma.
As a frantic Hub tries to talk to the bomb-laden terrorists holding up a
city bus full of passengers, the prescient Elise sizes up the
terrorist's real motivation. "They're not here to negotiate," she warns
Hub. "They're waiting for the cameras."
BIG NIGHT's Tony Shalhoub is excellent as Frank Haddad, an Arab-American
FBI agent, who is Hub's right-hand man. The story's respect for Frank
and his family somewhat counterbalances the story's controversial
subject matter, the treatment of the Arab-American population.
As the slaughter of innocent Americans mounts, the pressure builds to
turn to the military as the savior of last resort, but General Devereaux
argues strongly against this tactic. When the country reaches its limit,
the president invokes the War Powers Act.
General Devereaux soon has tanks rolling across the Brooklyn Bridge, and
he orders his men to go house to house rounding up Arab suspects and
putting them into concentration camps. "This is the land of opportunity
gentlemen," the general confidently tells the terrorists via television.
"The opportunity to turn yourselves in."
It is in this section that the movie is most in danger of losing its
audience. The film touches on issues of discrimination that will likely
prove uncomfortable for many viewers. Discrimination is like that, it is
something easier to ignore than ponder.
The movie makes judicious use of comedy to break the tension as in
Frank's microwave envy. It seems that spooks have some really nifty
microwave equipment that allows them to eavesdrop on conversations and
more, but the FBI has never been able to get its hands on the
technology. The film's running joke has Frank constantly coveting it.
The movie is even able to get a laugh out of Hub's humor-challenged
management style.
Any movie about terrorist bombings that contains relatively few
explosions, as THE SIEGE does, deserves a special award for its lack of
pyrotechnic overkill. Most directors of action films, even dramatic
thrillers, seem to have their pay based on an incentive scheme directly
linked to the noise level and number of explosions. Zwick creates his
tension the old-fashion way -- with actors actually acting. This can
best be seen in the film's carefully choreographed conclusion. It is
masterful more for what it doesn't contain than what it does.
THE SIEGE runs 2:00. It is rated R for violence, language, and brief
nudity and would be fine for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
"The Siege" does the one thing in a movie that I find inexcusable: it
stacks its deck.  Meaning that it is contrived to have an easy way out
of a problem where there isn't one.  Instead of taking their very
interesting basic idea and following it through to its logical
conclusion, the filmmakers cheated.  They gave us an easy, disposable
bad guy where there should not have been one.
The film's premise is if nothing else timely.  It features Denzel
Washington as an FBI agent who grapples with the presence of a set of
terrorist cells in New York City.  These guys mean business: they thumb
their nose at negotiations, blowing up a bus midway through what looks
like a possible end of a standoff.  They want the release of an Iraqi
cleric, kidnapped covertly by the U.S. and being held in secret by the
army.
Denzel almost immediately runs into "Elise" (Annette Bening), a CIA
operative who either knows a lot more or a lot less than she actually
does, and the two of them engage in a very tough-minded tug of war over
possible leads and sources of information.  The scenes between them are
sharp and convincing; someone did their homework about how the
Palestinians wind up being the middlemen in everyone's intelligence
game.  Bening in particular is very good, always smiling when she
shouldn't.
But then the movie begins to step wrong with the introduction of
General Deveraux (Bruce Willis), who is brought in when martial law is
invoked, and proceeds to set up internment centers for suspected
terrorists.  The parallels are obvious: they're trying to invoke the
same sense of shame as when the U.S. interred Japanese- and German-
Americans.  But it doesn't work this time, because the movie attempts
to switch tracks on us and have the Willis character be the obvious
villain: Get rid of him and the story's over, and in fact that's more
or less what happens.
Why did this annoy me?  Because it's dishonest: if the movie had simply
been a procedural along the lines of "The Peacemaker", it would have
been a more than passable thriller.  But instead it mixes its
messages.  The Willis character is supposed to be, I guess, a warning
about how America is often its own worst enemy, but that gets buried by
the lockstep plotting that demands he be an off-the-shelf bad guy.
There's a lot of good things in the movie.  They're just short-
circuited.  Tony Shalhoub, for instance, is fine as a Palestinian-
American FBI agent, but the movie tries to force points when his son is
thrown in the internment centers.  And I mentioned Bening, and
Washington is always watchable, even in a movie like this, and there's
plenty of glossy-looking photography and production design.  But by the
fatally rushed ending, I couldn't concede that all this did much more
than make a deeply flawed movie into a merely bearable two hours.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
What if one of our cities became the target for terror? What can we do? What can America really do about the increasing threat of terrorism? What basic human rights are we willing to sacrifice to prevent another Oklahoma City disaster? So far America has been the leading nation, opposing the fundamentalist terrorists around the world. It is the land of opportunities. It is the land of freedom. But what if it became the new target? This dark fantasy has unfortunately a very strong grounding in reality. 
When a special branch of the United States military, under the command of General William Devereaux (Bruce Willis), takes prisoner suspected terrorist mastermind Sheik Ahmed Bin Talal, Islamic fundamentalists across the world take notice. The only warning the FBI receives is a single, cryptic message: "Release him." Then all hell breaks loose in New York. A bus is destroyed, killing 25 civilians. A Broadway theater is bombed. Hostages are taken at a school. As the wave of terrorist activity crests, the President must consider if the only way to save the city and break the grip of fear is to declare martial law. Devereaux argues against that eventuality, but is nevertheless ready to lead 10,000 men into action on American soil. Another person not in favor of martial law is Anthony Hubbard (Denzel Washington), the FBI agent in charge of investigating the terrorist activities. His staff is comprised of smart, energetic, intelligent men and women very much unlike the usual group o!
f moronic Feds we're used to seeing in movies. Hubbard develops an uneasy alliance with CIA agent Elise Kraft (Annette Bening), whose department knows more about the situation than they're willing to reveal. But the attacks escalate. The FBI are helpless, chasing an invisible enemy. The land is under siege. They have lost control..A terror is coming from within.. 
What's great about this film is that it is made as if holding up a mirror to life. It reflects reality. And that's why it makes such an impact. Edward Zwick has created a clever, well written and terrifying thriller that may very well be one of the best films of the season. The director manages to tell several stories simultaneously. And so his film plays on several levels, never loosing focus on its main objective. He is exploring the abuse of power, the distrustful relationships that exist between various segments of the U.S. government (the army, the FBI, and the CIA). He takes a look at the complexities inherent when so many secrets and lies are involved. The Palestinian community in 1998 New York is treated exactly as Japanese Americans were during World War II. There are concentration camps and unlawful interments, all in the name of the "greater good." In the latter part of the film the land of opportunities looses its heart and soul -- freedom. Was that what the terror!
ists really wanted?
This film has evoked protests and objections from the Arab-American population in the U.S. and N.Y. especially. But to me these protests seem unnecessary. Zwick is careful to not step over the line and make the Palestinians typical Hollywood bad guys. The script is therefore wonderfully balanced. Agent Hubbard's best friend and loyal colleague Frank Haddad (Tony Shalhoub) is Lebanese-American. And it is quite often you hear lines such as "My first boyfriend was Palestinian. They seduce you with their suffering" or "They love this country as much as we do." But no matter how you twist this matter, you won't get away from the fact that when it comes to world wide terrorism it is Arab-speaking population who are in the great majority. More to the point, The Siege demonstrates the injustice of blanket condemnation of any ethnic group by depicting the unfair treatment of all Arab-Americans by the U.S. military. And thus this film does not serve as a source for discrimination in any!
 way.
Denzel Washington is dashing as always. In this role he is much more determined and stronger than usual. Anette Bening is enjoyable and believable as a shadowy CIA operative who prefers espionage, a network of snitches and seduction to gather information.. Bruce Willis is terrifying as the sadist, hungry for power, that never looses his connection with the audience, since his point of view is not too hard to understand.
The film is elegantly shaped. The scenes are easily floating into each other and the film never seems overlong. Zwick knows exactly how to provoke tension, horror and emotions and does it with a rarely observed professionalism. He tightens the intensity as the events progress. And when a plot twist comes, it actually is surprising. It is not a film drained in patriotism, like the work of Roland Emerich. Nor is it a film that portrays explosions purely for entertainment values. It is a daring picture that has courage enough to undertake such a risky story and difficult journey. It has courage enough to get involved in politics. It questions our foreign policies, mentality and defense. I must admit that it ends rather disappointing, as the director turns the patriotism way up and innovation down. But despite of that, it is certainly an intelligent and  thrilling film that provokes emotions and thoughts; a virtue that few summer films can boast of. 
"This is the U.S. army. It's a broadsword, not a scalpel. Believe me, you do not want us in an American city" 
- Gen.William Devereaux, "The Siege" 

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE SIEGE
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Denzel Washington, Annette Bening, Bruce Willis, Tony Shalhoub,
Sami Bouajila.
Screenplay:  Lawrence Wright and Menno Meyjes & Edward Zwick.
Producers:  Lynda Obst and Edward Zwick.
Director:  Edward Zwick.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  114 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The makers of THE SIEGE probably are throwing up their hands,
baffled by the protests voiced by Arab-American groups.  The basic set-up,
understandably, could hit a nerve:  Arab terrorists, incensed over U.S.
involvement in the disappearance of an Islamic religious/political leader,
begin a massive bombing campaign in New York City.  Initially, a joint
task force led by F.B.I. special agent Anthony Hubbard (Denzel Washington)
is on the case, but tensions and animosities rise as they are unable to
end the bombings.  Eventually, the President imposes martial law in New
York, charging U.S. Army General William Devereaux (Bruce Willis) with
driving the perpetrators from hiding in Brooklyn's Arab-American community
into the open -- even if it means imprisoning every young male of Arabic
descent to find them.
     You can feel co-writer/director Edward Zwick straining for every
possible opportunity to make it clear that THE SIEGE is _not_ about
Arab-bashing.  Hubbard's partner Frank Haddad (Tony Shalhoub) is a
Lebanese-born naturalized citizen; representatives from Arab-American
anti-defamation groups stand up in meetings to voice their patriotism and
to denounce terrorism; ominous music accompanies every shot of
Arab-Americans trapped behind barbed wire fences; even the motivations of
the terrorists are traced more to duplicitous U.S. foreign policy
decisions than to fanatacism.  As THE SIEGE builds to a series of speeches
condemning the idea that extremism in the defense of security is no vice,
you know that Zwick wants audiences to feel him championing the notion
that Islam does not equal violent zealotry -- that Arab-Americans are
people too.
     There's one very important thing missing from THE SIEGE, however:  a
genuine connection to the people who are suffering.  The film doesn't
spend a second of personal time with a character actually interned in a
detention camp, nor with individuals tortured by the military for
information, nor with anyone victimized by anti-Arab hate crimes.  They
appear in forlorn masses, in news footage, or hidden behind doors.  Yes,
Shalhoub does get dialogue expressing outrage when his teenage son is
taken prisoner, but the sentiment feels second-hand and token.  During its
final hour, THE SIEGE becomes a thoroughly generic thriller of chases and
speeches -- more interested in being provocative than being empathetic,
and more interested in the _idea_ of trampled rights than those whose
rights are being trampled.
     In fact, it's a shame THE SIEGE had to go there at all, because its
first hour works so well as a crackling police procedure drama.
Washington shares some exceptional scenes with Annette Bening as a
secretive C.I.A. operative whose agenda may be very personal; their
clashing tactics -- the rule of law vs. the rule of expediency -- make for
first rate and surprisingly platitude-free sparring.  Zwick directs the
early action sequences with energy and economy, anchored by the
always-satisfying images of determined people going about a difficult job
with hard-nosed efficiency.
     That exceptional first hour deteriorates into bloated nonsense as
soon as Willis's General Devereaux starts marching his troops across the
Brooklyn Bridge.  Willis himself is a huge part of the problem, taking a
potentially complex character and quickly turning him into a sneering
caricature of military sadism.  Even the fundamental honor and decency
Washington brings to every role starts to seem like sanctimony, because
the script isn't serious about getting into the gray areas of individual
rights vs. societal needs.  The concept deserves more than heroes and
villains pointing guns at each other.  Arab-Americans may be troubled by
the idea that some Arab characters are portrayed as terrorists in THE
SIEGE.  They should be more troubled by the idea that, in a film with such
an incendiary premise, Arab characters in general are more symbolic than
substantial.
