Title
Review for Twice Upon a Yesterday (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: The woman Victor loves is marrying another guy and his
job is going down the tubes.  Then two magical junkmen give Victor a
chance to relive the last eight months again and he tries to avoid the
same mistakes.  The characters are tiresome and familiar.  Rating: 4 (0
to 10), 0 (-4 to +4)
   - First feature film by Maria Ripoll.
   - Plot concept similar to GROUNDHOG DAY or upcoming TV series SEVEN
     DAYS.  Victor (Douglas Henshall) has really screwed up the last
     eight months of his life.  But he has been given another chance
     not to lose Sylvia (Lena Headey) the woman he loves.  He finds
     things harder than he expected and requiring more than just good
     intentions.
   - Two mysterious Spanish junk men have the ability to send him back
     in time and allow Vic to relive the past eight months and not to
     hurt Sylvia.
   - Elizabeth McGovern in a small role as a bartender whose wisdom
     inspires Vic.
   - All these young romantic films seem to have some nudity to keep
     the audience titillated.  It is unnecessary for this story, but
     expected.
   - Vic is not very smart in how he uses his memories of the first
     time around.  He says things that would make no sense to anyone
     but himself and the audience, convincing people that he is not all
     there.
   - This film makes London look really, really ugly.  The capper is
     walls with signs saying "Please do not piss here."
   - Title chosen to be intriguing, but has to be forced into the film.
   - Interesting in what can be changed and what cannot.
   - Vic is not very likeable.  He slashes tires and in general is just
     not very appealing.  It makes the audience not care if he gets the
     woman he wants or not.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  As the song "Yesterday" goes, "Why'd she have to go/ I
don't know/ She wouldn't say./ I said something wrong/ Now I
long for yesterday..."  Who doesn't?  If only we knew then
what we know now, our mistakes would be corrected and
life's mishaps would fall neatly into place.  Or would they? 
Many philosophers and psychologists believe that given the
basic character that each of us is stuck with, we'd make the
same blunders all over again--kind of like the person who
knows the smoking and overeating are bad for him but
continues to indulge in both.  Still, the opportunity to go back
to the past to smooth out our bungles and fumbles is so
tempting that a good many of us, given the choice, would opt
for doing just that over winning the lottery.  All of which
makes the premise a fascinating one for the storytellers,
including the Spanish team of Maria Ripoli, who directed
"Twice Upon a Yesterday" and Rafa Russo who wrote the
screenplay.  Though magic realism comes into play, the film--
once called "The Man with Rain in His Shoes" and then
named "If Only" before receiving the current title--does not
have the sci-fi look.  This film is for the most part not far from
a conventional romantic comedy with dramatic overtones,
whose characters are at once so thinly drawn and yet so
irritating that at times you may be tempted to look away from
the screen.  
   Take a look at the male lead,  Douglas Henshall in the role
of a Scottish 30-something who is so immature and
exasperating that you'd have to look back to a character like
Mari Hoff (Brenda Blethyn) in Mark Herman's movie "Little
Voice," to uncover his equal.  He acts in London's fringe
theaters, is considered mediocre, and lives in a flat that is as
untidy as he is unkempt.  Sylvia Weld (Lena Headey) and he
seem made for each other, given Sylvia's gamin-like
demeanor and flighty behavior.  Sylvia's best girl friend,
Alison (Charlotte Coleman) is even worse: she spends much
of her time advising Sylvia to dump the lad, putting him down
as a mediocrity in every way who is entirely unsuitable for the
likes of Sylvia, while for his part, Victor's best friend Dave
(Mark Strong) deigns to counsel Victor on the ways of women
while he himself hasn't a clue about how to connect with any
one of their ilk.
    When Sylvia discovers that Victor has been unfaithful to
her (and Victor adds to injury to confessing that he loves
another), Sylvia leaves him.  Victor soon regrets what he has
done and gets his chance to correct his misbehavior when
two Spanish trash collectors sprung from the pages of Don
Quixote kick him back a year or so, giving the hapless suitor
the opportunity of a lifetime to make amends.  In one of the
two interesting twists to the tale, Victor finds that being on his
best behavior cannot prevent similar disasters from taking
place, while an even more arresting turn of events occurs in
the final minute of the story--one which encourages us to
debate over our post-cinema coffee how the situation will
ultimately turn out.
   On the whole, however, the movie has an awkward, first-
draft feel because most of the characters are so silly or bland
that caring about them is out of the question.  Not that a film
must have likeable personalities.  "Goodbye, Lover," for
example, features an unholy mess of evil people but the
performers are so attractive, so strong and convincing, that
we show concern for them despite their sinister
temperaments.  The one redeeming feature of "Twice Upon a
Yesterday" is the lovely Spanish actress Penelope Cruz--who
wowed lovers of art movies recently in the far more
imaginative production "Open Your Eyes."  As a bartender
with more class than the rest of the cast combined, Ms.
Cruz's Louise--the woman who gets the now-mature Victor's
undivided attention--is the movie's compelling high point.  On
the whole, however, the film lacks the whimsy that fables
must possess to realize their potential.

Author
Steve Rhodes
He works at a Notting Hill bookstore.  She's a beautiful woman.  And
they're characters in a new romantic comedy.
No, this isn't the movie NOTTING HILL.  Not even close.
The hopeless and uninvolving script by Rafa Russo does have shades of
NOTTING HILL and SLIDING DOORS, but director María Ripoll's TWICE UPON A
YESTERDAY has a few things lacking -- romance and humor being just two
of the missing ingredients.
Also missing in action are any characters that you care about.  The male
lead, Victor Bukowski (Douglas Henshall), has the appearance of someone
who has spent the last week sleeping in a trash bin.  He's frequently
drunk, but, when he's sober, he acts as if he were plastered.
As the story opens, Victor has been cheating on his live-in girlfriend.
Having foolishly admitted it, he has lost her, and she's about to marry
someone else.  Through a little cinematic magic, he gets to go back in
time to right his wrongs.
No, he doesn't go back and undo the affair.  He goes back to when he
makes the mistake of telling the truth.  This time he lies through his
teeth about his indiscretion, denying it ever happened.
His girlfriend, Sylvia Weld, is played by Lena Headey in perhaps the
best performance in a show doesn't have any good ones.
The two leads evidence no chemistry together.  And, with the male
looking so undesirable, it's hard to see how they could.  Their love
affair doesn't have a genuine moment.  The director tries to compensate
with dramatic music and artful lighting, but it doesn't help.  These
artistic tricks actually make it worse since they draw attention to the
fundamental lameness of the story.
One suspects the film is supposed to be a romantic comedy, but, if so,
they forgot to include anything funny.  Perhaps they should have tried a
laugh track along with the dramatic violin music.  At least that would
have introduced some laughter into this laughless comedy.
Ultimately the movie asks whether altering the past will enable us to
obtain the future we want.  A good question perhaps, but this lifeless
cast gives us no reason to care about the answer.
TWICE UPON A YESTERDAY runs mercifully just 1:32.  It is rated R for a
little sex, profanity and nudity and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
