Title
Review for Lair of the White Worm, The (1988)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Peter Reiher
     Whatever else one may say about Ken Russell and his films, it must be
admitted that no one else makes anything like them.  That, in and of itself, is
praise of some sort.  Originality is always hard to come by.  Russell delights
in the outrageous, the bizarre, even in the tacky.  Yet he is a major film 
talent, with great visual gifts.  Which means that whenever Russell makes a new
film, you never can tell what you're going to get.  Maybe it will be THE MUSIC
LOVERS, WOMEN IN LOVE, MAHLER, or CRIMES OF PASSION.  On the other hand, it
might be SALOME'S LAST DANCE or LISZTOMANIA.  Part of the fun of seeing a new
Ken Russell movie is finding out which Ken Russell made it.
     THE LAIR OF THE WHITE WORM is vintage, though minor, Ken Russell.  It's
deliciously ludicrous and just barely under control.  Working from a turn of
the century horror novel by Bram Stoker, Russell updates and subverts the
horror/adventure genre in his own peculiar way.  The results are rarely
terrifying, but usually thoroughly entertaining.  The year has yet to produce
a stranger film.
     The story begins with a Scottish archeologist unearthing a huge snakelike
skull from a small excavation of a Norman convent.  Soon, the pretty sisters
who run the hotel on which the excavation took place are entangled in sinister
doings concerning local legends of a great white worm, pagan religion, and a
mysterious Lady.  Can the valiant archeologist and the local lord, a descendant
of a legendary worm-slayer, save the poor girls from Certain Doom?  
     Russell, who also wrote the screenplay, has taken a most unusual approach
to the story.  Originally set, of course, around the turn of the century,
Russell moves it into modern times.  But he keeps the flavor of Victorian
adventure novels.  With the tiniest of clues, the heros spin incredible, yet
utterly correct, theories that require complete rethinkings of their world
views.  And the most unlikely ideas work - this is a film where one can turn up
a mongoose in Midland England on a moment's notice, or where one's pater is
certain to have some snake-charming music in his old collection of North
African gramophone records.   On the other hand, Russell has injected a 
liberal dose of sex, much of it kinky, that Stoker surely did not include in
the novel.  He lets no opportunity pass to point out the phallic significance
of snakes.  Russell deftly turns cartwheels along a knife's edge between the
delightfully silly and the naively charming, balancing a metaphoric ball of 
perversion on his nose.
     The film is also visually interesting.  Russell is bold with his
camerawork, as always, and, as always, can be counted on to provide a
distinctive visual style to his films.  In this case, he and cameraman Dick
Bush provide two - one for the "real world", and one for a set of visions
inspired by snake venom.  In the real world, he moves the camera smoothly and
unobtrusively, lights the scenes with a fair number of sinister shadows, and
frequently recourses to wide angle lens to distort the picture, sometimes
slightly, sometimes wildly.  In the visions, Russell overlights and flattens
the shots, uses garish colors, snaps jarringly from one shot to the next, and,
generally, makes everything look cheap and sleazy.  One has definitely left
one world and entered another when he switches styles.
     Perhaps the most enjoyable aspect of the film is Russell's attention to 
details.  He is absolutely serious about being silly, so, when the evil 
villainess picks up a hitchhiker for nefarious purposes, it is, of course, a
Boy Scout.  Where does she spend her sleeping hours?  In an Indian snake
basket, of course.  And her favorite game is Snakes and Ladders.  
     Russell extends this attention to detail into the characters.  The local
lord has a wonderfully odd butler who obviously has no respect for his master 
and is prone to fall into vaguely lewd reminiscences of his adventures with the
previous lord.  His expression on being told to lock the chambermaids in their 
rooms is almost worth the price of admission on its own.
     In general, Russell's actors give him precisely what he wants -
straight-faced performances despite the general silliness.  The heros keep
their upper lips stiff despite appalling dangers, the heroines scream on cue,
and the supporting players die in stereotype.  The one exception, well
calculated, is Amanda Donohoe who plays the sinister villainess, conveying not
only the menace of the character, but an amusing self-awareness about just how
dotty her religion is.  Catherine Oxenberg and Sammi Davis play the girls,
while Peter Capaldi and Hugh Grant (last seen as the aristocrat in "Maurice")
play the archeologist and the lord, respectively.  
     One could not really say that THE LAIR OF THE WHITE WORM is a good film,
but it certainly isn't a dull one.  Russell has never done anything quite like
it before, yet it bears his distinctive mark and could not possibly have been
made by anyone else.  One leaves the theater wondering that he actually made
this film, and that somebody gave him millions of dollars to do it, and that,
against all odds, THE LAIR OF THE WHITE WORM was actually quite entertaining.

Author
Jim G
     Ken Russell has taken the theme of the survival of a pre-Christian cult of
snake worship, from Bram Stoker's last novel, intertwined it with the mediaeval
legend of the Lambton Worm (from Durham, north-east England), to give us a
quirky fantasy thriller, with one of the most beguiling and sensual of
villainesses to stalk the screen in some considerable time.
     The film is set in the Derbyshire countryside, and starts with the
discovery of a large reptilian skull by student archaeologist Angus Flint, who
is excavating on the site of a Roman settlement near the local guest house.
The guest house is now run by Eve and Mary Trent, since their parents
disappeared the previous year while out walking.  This coincides with the
return to his estate of Lord D'Ampton; and also of the mysterious and exotic
Lady Sylvia Marsh, from her regular winter sojourn in parts unknown.
     Lady Sylvia is in fact the most recent reincarnation of the High Priestess
of the snake god Dionyn, and is herself part snake, being able to sprout fangs
and spit venom as the mood takes her; her return in the spring, to her country
home at Temple House, is in order to offer worship and sacrifice to the deity.
The central characters, it seems, are fated to repeatedly conflict, as James
D'Ampton is a descendant of a knight, who is reputed to have slain one
manifestation of the D'Ampton Worm in ages past; whereas Eve Trent is an
unknowing re-embodiment of the spirit of a nun, whose order attempted to build
a convent on the site of Dionyn's temple during the time of the Roman
occupation.
     The film is hardly a serious attempt at the horror genre, and the more
entertaining because of that; the script is littered with double meanings,
especially Lady Sylvia's dialogue, as she revels in turns of phrase which
appear innocuous to her listener, but on which she is putting a quite different
interpretation.  She could be seen as an archetypal psychopath: intelligent,
gracious and charming, beautiful, sensual and amoral; without the slightest
compunction in killing those who cease to amuse her.
     There are also various visual nudges in the ribs, such as the ornaments on
the mantelpiece in Lady Sylvia's living room, and the most peculiar items
included in the buffet at Lord D'Ampton's party.  Generally the humour in the
script works well, and is comfortable in context, as in the delightful repartee
at the doorway when James D'Ampton first calls upon Lady Sylvia, and the
eccentric performance by Stratford Johns as the butler; although perhaps Mr
Russell oversteps a bit when, while watching her snakes and ladders board
burning in the fireplace, Lady Sylvia whispers "Rosebud."  The lightness in the
script does, however, tend to reduce the tension in the plot, and it is
undoubtedly a certain lack of suspense which would be my only real reservation
about the film.  Also, the character of Lady Sylvia is so strong, and none of
the others are developed enough to match her, that the story sometimes falls a
bit flat when Ms Donohoe is off-screen; one seriously doubts the ability of the
protagonists to defeat the snake woman, and it is only by the most exceptional
luck that most of them don't end up being fed to the Worm, anyway.
     Of course, there are some serious problems with the suspension of
disbelief: the logistics of keeping an immense snake supplied with human
sacrifices, even one which hibernates for half of the year, would surely have
brought Lady Sylvia's activities to someone's attention much sooner; I
seriously doubt that Derby county hospital could produce an antivenin to an
unknown snake venom in the twelve hours or so required in the film; James
D'Ampton deduces Lady Sylvia's involvement in the abduction of Eve, and the
continued survival of the Worm, on the flimsiest of evidence; and there is no
way he could have known that she would find snake charming music so hypnotic,
as up until then he had no reason to believe she was anything other than a
normal, if rather unpredictable, woman (but, as the whole of the night-time
section starting with the plan to charm Lady Sylvia from her house, so that it
can be searched for the missing Eve, is probably the best in the film, apart
from the final battle, who am I to complain?).  Of course, there is no reason
not to accept all the daftness -- the cinema *is* for entertainment, after all.
     As one might expect in a film where the monster is a huge snake and the
heroine is called Eve, sexual symbolism is an integral part of the plot,
although never really to excess, except perhaps in the violent flashback
sequences: ravished nuns, wrestling air hostesses, white clad virgins and
dildoes of the most disconcerting dimensions, all make an appearance - and Lady
Sylvia gives the *wickedest* love bites!  The special effects, by Image
Animation, are good, and never intrusive, except perhaps during the short,
chaotic flashbacks, when Mr Russell foregoes his usual commendable restraint
:-); the Worm itself, although only seen full-size during the climax of the
final battle, is satisfyingly horrendous.
     So, overall, on a scale of 10, a fair 7 for the film as a whole, and a
definite 9+ for Ms Donohoe's performance as the exquisitely decadent Lady
Sylvia Marsh.  Forget about reality for 90 minutes or so -- go see it.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Some of the most stylish and interesting horror are those directed by
Terence Fisher.  Fisher's films include HORROR OF DRACULA, KISS OF THE
VAMPIRE, ISLAND OF TERROR, and THE DEVIL'S BRIDE (a.k.a. THE DEVIL RIDES
OUT).  Some have said that Fisher is to horror films what Hitchcock is to
suspense.  Any year is a banner year for horror fans when two Terence Fisher
films come out.  1988 is such a year--well, sort of.  Lamentably, Fisher
died several years ago, but if the term Hitchcockian can be applied to films
done in his style, you should be able to do the same thing with Fisher.  For
Fisher, making horror films was an art.  Making films about razor gloves or
hockey-masked killers and mass-producing those is at best a craft and barely
that.  But 1988 can boast two films in the best traditions of Fisher, both
made by filmmakers with much better reputations.  THE DECEIVERS was directed
by James Ivory and LAIR OF THE WHITE WORM was directed by Ken Russell.
     Russell like to spice his films with sequences of near-hallucinatory
images.  Sometimes that works, as it did in ALTERED STATES or THE DEVILS.
Sometimes it is a complete non sequitur, as in CRIMES OF PASSION.  He let
weirdness totally take hold of his last film, GOTHIC, but with LAIR OF THE
WHITE WORM he is back telling a story reasonably linearly.  And while it is
not his most ambitious project, making a 1960s-style horror film--and doing
it well--is better than trying to do a biography of Tchaikovsky and trashing
it as badly as Russell did with THE MUSIC LOVERS.  In this case, Russell's
source was the Bram Stoker novel of the same title.  Stoker also wrote JEWEL
OF THE SEVEN STARS, which was adapted into THE MUMMY'S SHROUD and THE
AWAKENING.  And, oh yes, he wrote a book called DRACULA which, if I
remember, has been the basis of a few films.
     Since before the Garden of Eden the god of the Bible has been at war
with the primal snake god Dionin.  Through the ages various snake cults have
flourished and, where necessary, opposed Christianity (as well as Conan!).
A disciple of Dionin--thousands of years old, thanks to clean living and the
power of the snake god--has set up shop on the English countryside where
legend has it a great "worm" was slain by a Lord D'Ampton after it had
feasted on people and cows.  Since then there had been disappearances in the
region, but not enough to cause too much fuss until the discovery of the
skull of some inexplicable animal is found by a Scottish visitor.  Then
things start to happen.
     Surprisingly for a film by Russell, LAIR OF THE WHITE WORM is, if
anything, a bit lightweight.  But it is a well-crafted horror film.  He
finds surprising places to hint at snake shapes in the film, from a water
hose to the insignia on a policeman's collar.  Amanda Donohoe makes a
superbly sensuous villainess and is always marvelous to watch, but never
more so than when she is seducing an unlucky but eager Boy Scout for the
greater glory of Dionin.  LAIR OF THE WHITE WORM will probably be my
favorite Ken Russell film.  I sat through it twice and had a great time both
viewings.  Rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
In this adaptation of the Bram Stoker novel, a group of proper
English types with room-temperature IQs are mystified by a local
outbreak of vampirism, in between dream sequences that indulge
the director's fetishes.
Alexei Sayle once listed the basic mysteries of the
universe, concluding with "And why do people keep giving Ken
Russell money to make films?"  After this, you'll be wondering
why too.  His previous "Gothic" covered similar territory with at
least some skill.  In comparison, "Lair" takes a deep breath and
dive-bombs straight into Bad Movie Hell.
Gathering together everyone on the books with a regional
accent, we are introduced to the picturesque English countryside
and a village, seemingly with a population of about six.  Our
four leads gambol and frolic in a manner not unlike Enid Blyton's
"Famous Five".  Julian Sands having passed on this film, we
instead have Hugh Grant as dashing RAF pilot Lord James D'Ampton
(really), looking as if he was sedated.  (I envy him.)  The
neglected Peter Capaldi as a geek archaeologist gets to muse over
a giant snake skull he has dug up, his acres of curly hair
threatening to dominate every scene he is in.  Catherine Oxenburg
and Sammi Davis, their romantic interests, flit about until such
a point as they can be captured by the bad guys.  Just over on
the next set, the slinky Lady Sylvia Marsh (Amanda Donohoe, she
of the Acting Career That Would Not Die) chews scenery, stopping
only to slaughter the occasional anorak-wearing nerd.
But this is a Ken Russell film, it's been 20 minutes and there
haven't been any naked nuns yet!  Wheel them on!  Before you can
say "a clear need for Freudian analysis" there's a dream sequence
in which naked nuns are being raped by brutal centurions as a
gloomy Christ looks on, restrained by a large latex worm.
Tiring of jaunting about in sports cars, sipping apertifs
and competitive under-acting, Grant and Capaldi decide that
something is amiss.  (Although they wrongly conclude that it is
Lady Sylvia and not the director.)  Grant misses the obvious plan
(invite the Lady Sylvia into his car down on the main road, get
arrested and soon everyone will know what's going on) and
basically wanders about in Lady Sylvia's gothic mansion for the
rest of the picture.  Capaldi is attacked by a snake-policeman
and defends himself by charming the snake with music.  (Or maybe
it's an intense dislike of bagpipes.  Capaldi in a kilt with
bagpipes is a frightening thing.)  Soon Donohoe sheds her
clothes, paints herself blue and is threatening the girls with a
massive strap-on (and a role in the sequel).  But Capaldi has
protected himself with snake anti-serum ("Where's the acting
anti-serum?")  and Donohoe is engulfed by a giant bendy snake.
There are some more naked nuns in there somewhere, but it's
all become a blur to me.
Appalling.  [*/misfire] and "Cannibal Apocalypse" on the Sid
and Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."
