Title
Review for Unhook the Stars (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Right here in this life, you get reincarnated," says Mildred.
"You change."  Mildred is a middle-aged widow and mom whose children
are grown.  Although she is not yet a grandmother, she looks like one,
albeit an extremely attractive one.
     Mildred is played with earnest realism by Gena Rowlands.  Rowlands
rejects the typical sentimental characterization for roles of this type
and instead imbues Mildred with a documentary style
straightforwardness.  Mildred plays the sort of tireless and loving
mother that everybody wants.
     Mildred is the center of director Nick Cassavetes's film UNHOOK
THE STARS.  Nick is the son of director John Cassavetes and actress
Gina Rowlands.  As much as I admired UNHOOK THE STARS, I kept thinking
the film was John Cassavetes-lite.  This is not meant as an insult.
John's actors played characters with their emotions on the edge whereas
Nick's characters have theirs more in check.  Both, however, have
characters that are so real you will swear they are not acting.
     As the show opens, the last of Mildred's two kids is about to
leave home.  Mildred has been throwing the morning paper route for Ann
Mary Margaret (Moira Kelly from CHANGING HABITS) because Annie has
trouble getting up.  When Annie tells her mom that she is an adult now,
Mildred doesn't buy it.  "You're not an adult," she says.  "An adult is
someone who works and takes care of themselves."  Soon after this,
Annie packs her bag and is almost never seen in the film again.
     Across the street from Mildred is a young family she has never
met.  Marisa Tomei (MY COUSIN VINNY, UNTAMED HEART and ONLY YOU) plays
the high-strung and irresponsible young mother named Monica.  Tomei's
performance is out of character for her, but excellent.  The audience
gets angry with Monica while being charmed by her at the same time.
     Monica's son J.J. (Jake Lloyd from JINGLE ALL THE WAY) is about to
turn seven.  He is a serious kid who almost never speaks.  Less
believable is his behavior, which is perfect.  Given his hard drinking
mother and his equally irresponsible father, Frankie (David Thornton),
I have trouble believing they could turn out such an angel.
     One day Monica shows up at Mildred's doorstep to introduce
herself.  She then announces that she has to go to work, and since she
has no one to take care of J.J., could Mildred keep him all day.
Rather than viewing this as an imposition, Mildred looks upon this as a
great opportunity.  When Monica asks her to do this on a regular basis,
Mildred agrees to do it for free.  Mildred likes having someone to take
care of again.
     Perhaps the most touching scenes of the show are the ones of
Mildred teaching J.J. by reading to him from the encyclopedia. She
starts with the letter A and goes on from there.  She recasts every
entry in terms that J.J. can comprehend.  One of the few failings of
the script by Helen Caldwell and Nick Cassavetes is that they do not
have a proper grasp of what is possible for a seven-year-old boy.  I
have one, and I know.  Mildred's lessons are too often couched in
language for a ten-year-old.  Similarly, there is no way that anyone
would let a seven-year-old leave by himself in the morning to go throw
a paper route as Mildred and Monica let J.J. do.  A ten-year-old could
do this perhaps, but not a seven.  Still these are the only two such
problems with the story.
     At Thanksgiving, Mildred's son Ethan (David Sherrill) comes home
with his new wife.  Mildred's explanation of the holiday to J.J. is
dead-on.  She says, "That's what Thanksgiving is all about -- meeting
friends and eating a lot."  Ethan's wife looks like a cross between a
Radcliffe graduate and a fashion model.  The stares between her and her
polar opposite, Monica, are hilarious.  Monica is always foul mouthed,
which Mildred ignores.  As they are enjoying Thanksgiving, Monica
cusses out her would-be date on the telephone.  Ethan's wife is
scandalized.
     One of the best subplots starts when Monica gets a baby sitter for
J.J. so that she and Mildred can go to a bar together.  There they meet
Big Tommy (Gerard Depardieu) and a couple of other friends of Monica's.
For the first time Mildred is able to indulge herself.  She is used to
devoting all of her energies to caring for others.  At the bar, she is
able to spend time in adult conversations for her own benefit.
Although she dresses nicely and takes good care of herself physically,
she has long since given up on a love life.  She shocks herself by
becoming attracted to Big Tommy.  From the time they leave the bar, the
scene is a beautiful blend of subtle and touching humor.  As throughout
the film, it all rings true.
     A picture with few surprises manages to have some towards the end.
Even so, it is more a character study and a (second) coming of age film
than one with a strong narrative drive.  Mildred has awakened and likes
what she sees.  Her second life may have even more promise than her
first.
     UNHOOK THE STARS runs 1:43.  It is rated R for strong language.
The film would be fine for any teenager.  I recommend it to you and
give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Vince Waldron
A very pleasant surprise from writer director Nick Casavettes, son of the
founding father of american independent cinema, a genuinely heartfelt
character study that features an immensely satisfying starring performance
from the director's mom, Gena Rowlands (who proves once again that she is
without question one of the American cinema's most gifted and intelligent
of any age or gender.)   There aren't a great deal of shattering
breakthroughs in the movie's straightforward screenplay, but the film
offers its relaxed and extremely capable ensemble enough privileged moments
that I was more than willing to forgive the story's occasional pat turns.
If nothing else, this film should be required viewing for its depiction of
an intelligent, sexy older woman who sacrifices not a wit of her dignity,
intelligence and believability along the way.  Highly recommended.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 11/1/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:44
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Gena Rowlands, Marisa Tomei, Gerard Depardieu, Moira Kelly, 
      Jake Lloyd, David Thornton, David Sherrill 
Director: Nick Cassavetes
Producer: Rene Cleitman
Screenplay: Nick Cassavetes and Helen Caldwell
Cinematography: Phedon Papamichael
Music: Steven Hufsteter
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     Nick Cassavetes, the son of acclaimed international director John 
Cassavetes, makes his directorial debut with UNHOOK THE STARS, a 
pleasantly unsentimental character study of one woman who has difficulty 
letting go.  Although Cassavetes may want independence from his father's 
name and memory, this film won't earn it, for, although the style bears 
only a passing resemblance to the late film maker's, Nick not only uses 
several members of John's crew (notably Phedon Papamichael), but has 
cast his mother, Gena Rowlands, in the lead role.  In addition, the 
script has a heavy autobiographical tinge -- Cassavetes is using cinema 
to work out his ambiguous feelings towards his famous father.
     For Mildred (Rowlands), a single mother (she was widowed many years 
ago), her last chick is about to fly the coup.  Her oldest, a son (David 
Sherrill), has already left home.  Now, her daughter, Annie (Moira 
Kelly), is on her way out.  Their parting is less-than-amicable.  Annie 
finds her mother to be a controlling and interfering influence, and 
wants to get away as soon as possible.  Mildred watches her go sadly, 
wondering what happened to all the aspirations she harbored for her only 
female offspring.  But Mildred isn't destined to be alone for long.  Her 
new neighbor across the street, Monica Warren (Marisa Tomei), has thrown 
her husband (David Thornton) out following a particularly nasty quarrel.  
Now, she's alone with her young son, J.J. (Jake Lloyd), and doesn't have 
the money to pay a sitter when she goes to work.  Mildred offers to 
help, gratis, and soon becomes J.J.'s surrogate mother.
     Looking back on UNHOOK THE STARS, the first thing that strikes me 
is the script's openness and honesty.  It doesn't try to trick and 
manipulate us with melodrama.  Every action has a natural consequence -- 
nothing ever feels forced or scripted.  When Monica's husband returns to 
town, wanting to see his son, there's no shouting match or violence.  
When Annie eventually comes home, there's no big, tearful reunion.  And, 
when Mildred begins to realize that her time with J.J. is coming to a 
close, we're spared an emotional scene.  UNHOOK THE STARS is 
consistently low-key, and, in the context of an intelligent script and 
strong acting, this represents a welcome change-of-pace from most 
American films.
     Gena Rowlands is excellent, but that shouldn't come as a surprise.  
She becomes Mildred, subtly and effectively bringing the woman's every 
emotion to the surface.  This is the kind of role that could easily be 
overacted, but Rowlands strikes the perfect balance between restraint 
and abandon.  From the first scene, where she's delivering newspapers, 
to the last, where she turns her back on the past and strides purposely 
towards the future, Rowlands makes us care about Mildred.  
     Marisa Tomei, who has always had screen presence, gives the best 
performance of a relatively short career.  Tomei makes Monica a 
swirling, contradictory font of pure emotion -- she's always nervous, 
agitated, elated, furious, or a combination of the above.  Monica may 
not be the best-developed character, but Tomei invests her with such 
passion and energy that it's impossible not to see her as a lot more 
than the person on the pages of Cassavetes' screenplay.
     It doesn't demand much of a stretch for Gerard Depardieu to play 
the likable French Canadian truck driver who becomes infatuated with 
Mildred.  Depardieu is a pleasant addition to the cast (and got involved 
for the chance to work with Rowlands), but isn't a revelation.  However, 
Moira Kelly is.  The young actress, the best thing about the recent 
ENTERTAINING ANGELS, gives a powerhouse performance in limited screen 
exposure.  Annie's pain and rage are palpable, going far beyond the 
norms of youthful rebellion, and Kelly realistically and effectively 
portrays them.
     UNHOOK THE STARS is an engaging motion picture, mixing various 
flavors of comedy and drama into a satisfying whole.  Admittedly, there 
are times when Cassavetes skims lightly over subject matter that is 
deserving of a fuller exploration, but the quality of the finished 
product allows us to overlook most of these incidents.  UNHOOK THE STARS 
is a movie of many special, small moments, that, combined together, make 
for a shining cinematic experience.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Scott Renshaw
     It has been too long since we have seen Gena Rowlands on screen, but
it takes only a few minutes of UNHOOK THE STARS to recall how good she can
be.  Rowlands plays Mildred Hawkes, a widow and career housewife whom we
meet delivering newspapers during the extended shot which plays beneath
the opening credits.  The route, we learn, belongs to her sullen and
rebellious daughter Annie (Moira Kelly), and Mildred mutters to herself as
she delivers the papers that this will be the last time she covers for
Annie.  We know instantly, of course, that this isn't true.  Mildred's
life is organized around doing things for others, and even when Annie
moves out of the house in an act of defiance Mildred continues the paper
route because it is something to give structure to her day.  She is a
woman living in an empty nest who almost doesn't know how to be anything
but a wife or a mother.
     Mothers tend to get very shabby treatment in the movies, portrayed as
perpetual nags or otherwise treated as comic relief, but Rowlands'
performance as Mildred is beautifully balanced and convincing.  If UNHOOK
THE STARS had focused entirely on Mildred, it might have been a great
film.  Instead, director and co-writer Nick Cassavetes (Rowlands' son with
the late director John Cassavetes) splits his story between two
characters:  Mildred, and her foul-mouthed, troubled neighbor Monica
Warren (Marisa Tomei).  Early in the film, Monica kicks out her abusive
husband (David Thornton), and asks Mildred -- whom she had never met
before -- to watch her 6-year-old son J. J. (Jake Lloyd) while she works
split shifts as a waitress.  Mildred is only too happy to have another
child to teach, and watching the relationship between the two is an
absolute delight as Mildred dusts off her somewhat old-fashioned parenting
methods and begins to feel useful again.
     Unfortunately, UNHOOK THE STARS gets side-tracked whenever Tomei's
Monica is the center of attention.  In a film which is otherwise low-key
and observant, Tomei starts to crank up the adorable loud-mouth routine to
MY COUSIN VINNY levels.  A scene in which Monica is a guest for
Thanksgiving dinner -- much to the consternation of Mildred's
straight-laced son Ethan (David Sherrill) -- plays like something from a
much broader fish-out-of-water comedy, and drags on for an awfully long
time.  Tomei's performance isn't a bad one; it's just a good one in a
different kind of movie.  Her character exists mostly to provide the
laughs, and whether or not Monica and her estranged husband reconcile is
only interesting because it affects Mildred.  Cassavetes makes the mistake
of treating that issue as one in which we have an equal emotional
investment.
     There is a similar awkwardness to a sub-plot which finds Mildred in a
romantic flirtation with one of Monica's drinking buddies, a
French-Canadian truck driver named Big Tommy (Gerard Depardieu).  Big
Tommy's passes are rather absurd, and not simply because Mildred is a much
older woman.  Those scenes mark the only occasions where Mildred is
treated as slightly pathetic, a lonely old lady getting drunk and finding
the attentions of a younger man equally intoxicating.  That romance
ultimately has little to do with Mildred's development through UNHOOK THE
STARS, but Cassavetes doesn't quite seem to realize what a great character
he has in Mildred, and what a unique arc her story takes without the
distractions of a wacky neighbor or a romantic interest.
     That is more of a testimony to how good UNHOOK THE STARS is when
Rowlands is center stage than it is to a lack of quality the rest of the
time.  The script takes Mildred on a subtle but intriguing side-track when
Ethan and his wife invite her to move with them to San Francisco, an
invitation which Mildred declines.  She believes that her choice is an
example of her willingness at last to let go of her children, but it is
only because she has J. J. to take care of that she feels prepared to do
so.  When that relationship appears to be pulled out from under her as
well, Mildred is forced to acknowledge that she has merely substituted a
new person whose happiness is more important to her than her own.
Rowlands is sensational as she tries to cope with a life strictly for
herself, and UNHOOK THE STARS is a beautiful character study when we are
allowed to watch.  You only wish you could have watched without the
supporting characters jumping up and obscuring your view quite so often.
