Title
Review for Sleepless in Seattle (1993)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Emily Corse
     Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks are so appealing in SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE
that only a confirmed curmudgeon could dislike this funny, friendly
romance.  The film's central theme, the idea that somewhere there's a
perfect magical love, will provoke more than a little in-theater
Kleenex action this summer.
     Hanks plays Sam Baldwin, a recently-widowed Seattle architect with
an eight-year-old son and a bad case of melancholia.  Ryan plays Annie
Reed, a recently-engaged Baltimore journalist with a case of cold
feet.  They're perfect for each other, but would never even meet if it
weren't for the power of Fate.  (Fate was a power player in 1990's
abysmal JOE VERSUS THE VOLCANO, which also starred Ryan and Hanks.
Fortunately they redeem themselves here.)
     Sam's young son Jonah (played with a satisfying degree of
restraint by Ross Malinger) becomes the catalyst when he phones a
Christmas Eve radio talk show to wish for a new wife for his
still-grieving father.  Annie, like most of the women listeners, is
touched by the poignancy of Jonah's request.  After Sam is bullied onto
the air by the smarmy talk show "doctor," Annie is moved to tears by
his beautiful, bittersweet description of his lost love.  She responds
with a letter to Sam, the anonymous radio caller identified as
"Sleepless in Seattle."
     Jonah chooses Annie's letter over thousands of others, but Sam
(who's seen FATAL ATTRACTION) is understandably reluctant to involve
himself with an unknown woman 3000 miles away.  As Jonah connives to
bring about a meeting, the film cuts back and forth between the
characters and their two cities, with the portent of their pre-destined
love percolating in the background.
     Director and co-writer Nora Ephron uses a failure-proof formula of
thirty-something humor and yuppie privilege to concoct this year's
answer to WHEN HARRY MET SALLY....  As the Oscar-nominated screenwriter
for that 1989 film (again starring Ryan), Ephron deserves much of the
credit for repeating its success here.
     Some aspects of the film may seem a little too familiar, such as
the last-minute holiday sprint down New York streets, the repeating
motif of a classic romantic movie (AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER in this case),
and a soundtrack of old standards.  But more importantly, the humor
still sparkles, even when the themes are as old as the hills.
     Men mock the emotionalism of women; women bemoan the scarcity of
men; precocious children use naughty words.  Some of the best laughs in
the movie are almost throw-aways, like Annie's careless
over-the-shoulder concern when she accidentally bashes her fiance in
the head, "I'm sorry hon, are you bleeding?" with no pause for a
response.  Even the moldier jokes work (as when Hanks exclaims with
outrage, "That's a chicks' movie!"), thanks to the skillful comic
timing of the actors.
     The soundtrack also contributes comic effect, such as Gene Autry's
encouraging "Back in the Saddle Again" when Sam finally decides to
 call a woman for a date.  Unfortunately, in some quieter scenes
the music intrudes with a lack of subtlety corny enough to irritate.
The singer/narrator concept should have died back with CAT BALLOU.
     Rob Reiner, director of WHEN HARRY MET SALLY..., has a
disappointingly small role as Sam's buddy Jay.  "Tiramisu," he
trumpets, offering Sam a cryptic pointer on dating in the '90s.  Annie
too gets plenty of wacky advice on the singles scene from her best
friend and confidante Becky, cheerfully played by Rosie O'Donnell.  The
wise-cracking O'Donnell was last seen on-screen with Hanks in last
year's baseball comedy A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN--and she'll satisfy her
fans again here.
     The locales used for filming are beautiful, dream-like and watery,
from the docks in Seattle to Baltimore's Inner Harbor, but ironically
this still feels like a New York movie.  The Rainbow Room and the
Empire State Building provide the settings for the movie's climactic
scenes, and the Space Needle just can't compete.  And yet, the
mellowness of the main characters indicates a cultural move from the
neuroses and angst of the classic Woody Allen style to a new middle
American sensibility.  This isn't a movie about who we *are*, but about
who we'd like to be.
     Sam and Annie are beautiful, funny, sensitive, and successful.
They've struggled a bit, but their destiny is absolutely
happily-ever-after.  Though it takes the entire length of the movie for
them to find each other, the wait is worthwhile-- SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE
is a fantasy we want to believe.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Tom Hanks, Meg Ryan, Rosie O'Donnell, Ross Malinger, Bill
Pullman. Rated PG.
I have nothing against unabashedly romantic films. When done right, with
at least slightly evident restraint, they can be engaging, sweeping,
appealing. But it's a hell of a shame when someone botches it as badly
as Nora Ephron botched Sleepless in Seattle, a hollow, boring romance
that should appeal only to the most gullible of viewers; the ones
willing to buy into Ephron's whiny views of life and romance.
Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan, two of Hollywood's most likeable stars play Sam
Baldwin and Annie Reed, repectively. Baldwin's wife recently died and he
moved to Seattle with his son, Jonah, seeking to get away from the
familiar surroundings which remind him of his late spouse. Jonah senses
tension and calls a talk radio show to tell the world about their
problems. Sam seems ready to strangle his son for calling the show, but
when he gets on the phone he begins pouring his heart out.
Ephron has him do this so that Annie Reed (Meg Ryan) can hear it. Annie
is a happy woman. She is engaged to Walter, an allergy-prone working man
and seems to be perfectly content. But after hearing Sam the widower on
the radio show, she becomes convinced that he is her destiny and is
willing to risk her engagement for it.
Five years after this movie hit theaters, Hanks, Ryan and Ephron would
team up again in the far better, although still sub-par romantic comedy
You've Got Mail, which is about people who hate each other in real life
falling in love on the internet. At least that movie had a sense of
spontaneity. Here it seems that the first one hundred minutes exist
solely to set up for the last five. The fact that Sam and Annie will
finally meet is so excruciatingly obvious that everything else is
perfunctory.
Sleepless in Seattle is full of wonderful performers; from its two leads
to supporting stars like Bill Pullman and Rosie O'Donnell. But none of
them can save the film from being a bore. Its characters are dull and
empty, its script isn't funny or particularly charming. The script has a
fundamental problem: Annie gives up, for little reason, her life with
Walter to pursue "Sleepless in Seattle," whom she has never even seen.
It's the kind of life decision that real people don't make, and its a
major, unforgivable plausibility sacrifice.
In essence, this movie's purpose is to head towards a goal that
shouldn't even exist. It's a ten minute short film with ninety-five
minutes of filler. If you were to show me Sleepless In Seattle and I
didn't have to review it, you could just call me "Asleep in
Philadelphia."
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Long Che Chan
We have seen this scenario before- several times, actually, but we never
tire of it.  The "destiny" element in a romantic movie, that
they-were-meant-for-each-other feeling, the giddiness.  Sleepless in
Seattle will be called overrated because it feels familiar, but from the
familiarity, director-writer Nora Ephron pulls in a nearly extinct
gadget called satire.  Sleepless in Seattle, at heart, is not meant as a
satirical look at the 50s romances, but as something sentimentalists can
get "high" on, something cynics will soften up to.  It's sheer fun that
doesn't require much intelligence, but a good amount of subdued zeal.
The two main characters are played by Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan.  They're
performances are reserved, which fits the movie well- it, too, is a
quiet, light experience.  Sam, the Hanks character, is a man who has
just become a widower.  He is left to be a single-parent for his young
boy and is fed up with people trying to soothe him with "work will get
you through this" comments.  He moves to Seattle.  Annie Reed, played by
Ryan, lives cross-country in Baltimore, where she is engaged to a drab,
low-key guy named Walter (Bill Pullman) who is allergic to nearly
everything.  She doesn't indulge in dreamy, romantic fantasies- she is
extremely down-to-earth, a woman afraid of flying.
Back in Seattle, Sam's son Jonah discreetly calls a radio psychologist
to report that his father is "Sleepless in Seattle," an insomniac who
cannot grasp the reality of his wife's death.  Sam is literally forced
out to pour his heart and soul onto the telephone, onto radio, where
millions of listeners tune into this heartfelt sobstory of love lost.
Annie Reed hears this in Baltimore and falls in love with Sam at first
listen.  She is in tears by the end of his "our-love-was-magic" speech
and is convinced Sam is her destiny, her fated true love.
This from a woman who, in the beginning, said "Destiny is something
we've invented because we can't stand the fact that everything that
happens is accidental."  Now, she is willing to drop the Walter dweeb
for this sweet, charismatic voice to whom she has no idea it belongs.
She asks her brother (David Hyde-Pierce) if this is just pre-wedding
jitters and he replies "Yes".  She is extremely confused.  She knows
she's not the only one pursuing this dream guy "Sleepless in Seattle"
but she feels something in her gut- telling her "if you don't find this
guy, your destiny will not have been fulfilled".
Meanwhile, Jonah gets a letter from Annie and he, too, is convinced this
is the gal for his dad.  Sam, who already has a ditzy girlfriend,
dismisses the letter which says they should meet atop the Empire State
Building.  "Hah," he scoffs.  Jonah is concocting plan after plan
because he instinctively knows this is his destined stepmother.  Annie
is full of itching curiosity- who is this "Sleepless in Seattle" guy, he
sounds like a dream, he is my destiny!
The film continually alludes to the Cary Grant sobfest An Affair to
Remember, from which it steals from frequently.  That's the satire part,
but it's satire done in a care-free way.  The cynics have said the movie
can't stand on its own, that its too loaded with false romance.  It is
false romance, borrowed from old 50s movies.  We, the audience, don't
actually believe this is real because we know life just isn't that
coincidental.  We would love life to be this way and some of us do
believe in destiny (myself nearly included).  Sleepless is rather
manipulative like An Affair to Remember, but it's the kind of
manipulation we don't mind- we were manipulated in Terms of Endearment
and did we mind (I loved it.)
Although the movie has its elements of satire, it is basically a
(highly) pleasurable romantic-comedy that doesn't let explosive,
extremely funny humor get in the way of its dreamy, surrealistic
love-destiny story.  How do these cynics live?  How can they resist this
piece of tempting amour?  It's the movies that try too hard that usually
fail.  Sleepless doesn't push us, it seduces us with its romantic
fantasy and we are seduced. Sleepless in Seattle is a very delicious
movie and those who dismiss it just don't get the point.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Eight-year old Jonah Baldwin (Ross Malinger) misses his mother,
who died eighteen months ago from cancer.  More than that, however, he
recognizes that his father Sam (Tom Hanks) is desperately lonely.  So,
on Christmas Eve, Jonah calls up a radio talk-show psychologist and
asks for help.  Forced onto the phone by his son and identified as
"Sleepless in Seattle," Sam reluctantly (at first) opens up and talks
about his love for his dead wife and the things that made her special.
Across the country in Baltimore, Annie Reed (Meg Ryan) is listening to
the syndicated program, and Sam's testimonial of love brings tears to
her eyes.  Even though she is engaged to Walter (Bill Pullman), Annie
begins to wonder what it would be like to meet Sam, even going so far
as to be one of thousands to write a letter to him.  But when
circumstances conspire to make an assignation possible, the question is
whether either Sam or Annie will have the courage to follow the signs
that fate has shown to them.
     There are those who will claim that SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is too
corny, with sugar-coated cuteness filling in for the lack of a strong
plot.  And, while they have a point, there's something that the cynics
are missing--it's meant to be that way.  By its own admission, this
film is intended to be a throwback to the screen romances of the past
(AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER in particular, which is cited numerous times,
and borrowed from explicitly and implicitly).  Anyone going to see
SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE expecting a tale of stark modern life has walked
into the wrong theater.  This is a timeless, dreamy fantasy whose mood
falls somewhere between magic and reality.
     Coincidence is the backbone of Nora Ephron's story, wending its
way through the plot with uncanny repetitiveness.  Skillfully, however,
the script turns to its advantage what could have been a major
hindrance to the audience's suspension of disbelief.  The concept of
destiny is an important element to all that transpires.  At the
beginning of the film, Annie is a realist who dismisses the idea of a
supernatural sign as nothing more than a random occurrence.  By the end
of SLEEPLESS, she has become a firm believer in fate.  Considering the
unusual nature of the bond she develops with Sam, how could she not?
     While this is a thoroughly enjoyable movie, especially amidst the
burgeoning tide of action/adventure summer fare, it is not without
flaws.  The character of Walter, although nicely played by Bill
Pullman, is superfluous.  His inclusion is meant to say something about
Annie's life and personality but, as the movie progresses, he becomes
more of a hindrance and annoyance than an asset.  His purpose is never
clearly delineated and the too-neat resolution of this subplot is
lacking in believability.
     Then there's Annie's family.  The dinner scene with them near the
beginning of the movie is pointless, with the attempts at humor coming
across as weak and unfunny.  Little of value is revealed about any
character.  Apparently what we're supposed to learn is how quirky
Annie's relatives are and how this has impacted on her personality, but
the way the scene is played, the result is only partially achieved.
It's not that this part of the movie is unpleasant, but it doesn't seem
to belong, and the cutting-room floor might have been a more
appropriate place for it to reside.
     The ending is a little abrupt, but not in a bad sense.  It's
usually a positive trait of a film to keep the audience hungry at the
conclusion.  We want to see a little more--perhaps just a crumb to
nibble on--even though it's clear that the story has reached its
natural conclusion.  More often than not, as is the case in SLEEPLESS,
this is an indication that the characters have been well-defined and
deftly portrayed.
     Tom Hanks, who is frequently chosen for parts that demand energy
and verve, does an excellent job in a subdued role.  It's easy enough
to make the widower into a cliche, but Mr. Hanks' heartfelt
performance, combined with an intelligent script, have avoided that.
Instead of a person lifted from stock, we are given a man we can accept
and whose grief we can sympathize with.
     Meg Ryan has a less challenging role and, compared to what she did
in PRELUDE TO A KISS (where she had to play the old man in a young
woman's body), there's nothing noteworthy about what she does.  She's a
likable actress who is fine for the part, but she has far fewer
"moments" than Mr. Hanks.
     The supporting actors are effective.  Rosie O'Donnell and newcomer
Ross Malinger manage to steal their share of scenes.  Bill Pullman,
despite being saddled with a poorly-developed character, manages to
make an impression (sort of like in NEWSIES).  Rob Reiner and Rita
Wilson (Tom Hanks' real-life wife) have small parts.
     SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE has been billed as a "romantic comedy," but
the accent is more on romance than humor.  Comic moments are kept to a
minimum, and there are only a couple of openly funny scenes (one
involves a comparison of "male" and "female" movies--AN AFFAIR TO
REMEMBER versus THE DIRTY DOZEN).  Subtle humor abounds, but it's the
kind that normal people encounter in everyday life, more often worthy
of a chuckle than outright laughter.
     As an antidote to the summer doldrums and an alternative to
dinosaurs, rock-climbing, and last action heroes, SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE
is perfect.  While lacking the unfettered charm and exuberance of
Kenneth Branagh's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, this film is enjoyable in its
own right, not to mention more easily accessible.  Lovers will probably
enjoy this a fraction better than singles, but there's more than enough
in SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE to cause the edges of just about everyone's
lips to curl upwards.
     Oh, one more gripe.  Brooks Robinson, while unquestionably a great
baseball player, is not (as this film claims) the lone choice for best
third baseman of all time.  Of equal, if not greater, stature is a man
by the name of Mike Schmidt.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Jon A Webb
     Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks are destined for each other, though they
haven't met.  Meg becomes aware of Tom when he discusses his former
marriage on a call-in radio show and becomes known as "Sleepless in
Seattle".
     This movie is much like MADE IN HEAVEN in the view it presents of
love: that it is perfect, unchangeable, and that for every man there is
exactly one woman, and vice versa.  An oddly constant view (with no
basis in reality, that I can think of) from Hollywood, by the way: I
can think of dozens of films that present the same idea, from DAMAGE
to A STRANGER AMONG US.
     SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is filled with Nora Ephron's own pleasant
sense of humor, e.g., the running joke on AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER being
deeply loved by women but not understood by men.  It's a cute movie,
somewhat thin on plot--after all, everything that happens is designed
to bring Ryan and Hanks together at the end of the film, so nothing
else matters.
     I would say that the final meeting is flubbed from a directorial
point of view.  It should be a soaring moment, comparable to the great
uplifting moments from old romantic movies, but instead it is only a
little sweet.
     Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan play their stereotyped characters, Ryan a
little more obviously than Hanks.  She's fun to watch, but I wonder if
she can do anything other than act loopy (PRELUDE TO A KISS wasn't
encouraging).
     What I think this movie lacks most is some sort of hard edge.  It
should have some believable tension; Ryan's fiancee is never a credible
threat.

Author
Keith Meng-Wei Loh
     SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is every bit the equal of WHEN HARRY MET
SALLY, the movie to which most reviewers will be making their
comparisons what with Nora Ephron (writer and director), the gorgeous
and funny Meg Ryan, the beaming-smile romance, kismet, dialogue to die
for, acting in every corner as precious as diamonds in a large jewelry
store and even a bit part with Rob Reiner thrown in.
     This is a movie which will make you smile for an hour after it is
finished.  I've been very lucky going to the movies recently, running
into a quite a few very magical, very good looking films like MAP OF
THE HUMAN HEART and LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE.  SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is
a capper to what has been a very good spring-summer.
     Two stellar performances from Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks are jewels
amid the many funny characters inhabiting SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE.  Meg
Ryan is a comedic actress of the first rank, perhaps of the only rank.
She's designed for everyone to fall in love with.  Tom Hanks,
thankfully, has lost many of his kidstuff mannerisms and puts forward a
mature and thoughtful performance as a widower who thinks he can never
find love again.  There is one scene, however, in which Hanks' comedic
skills really blows the audience over.
     The real star is the writing.  Nora Ephron is a genius.  The
dialogue is fast and witty and every bit as intelligent as in WHEN
HARRY MET SALLY.  The story is mature without losing its essential
magic, in that two people from opposite sides of America can find each
other through a radio show.  When I brought up MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART
and LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE I meant to compare their themes of love
and magic and happenstance. SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is full of the same
romantic fantasy but in a way that makes the me feel that the same
thing could happen to me.
     SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is beautifully shot, as well.  Three cities
are photographed like post cards: Baltimore, New York and Seattle each
have an atmosphere that comes through the screen.  And have I ever seen
a lingering look, a look of grief as powerful as this?  Simply, not
that I can remember.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Not long ago A STRANGER AMONG US introduced audiences to the word
"bashert."  It is the concept that a man and a woman are fated to meet and
fall in love, a pairing made in heaven.  People in SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE
discuss whether there is anything to this concept and are inclusive, but it
is clear that screenwriter Nora Ephron wants us to believe it is true.
SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE has the strangest case of bashert since SOMEWHERE IN
TIME.  Ephron, who previously wrote WHEN HARRY MET SALLY..., has written and
this time directs this story about when Sam met Annie.
     Sam is Sam Baldwin (played by Tom Hanks).  Sam lost his wife Maggie and
decides to leave Chicago and its memories and to move to Seattle.  There,
eighteen months later, he is still a wreck and an insomniac to boot.  He
lives in a houseboat with his son Jonah (talk about tempting fate!).  Jonah
(played by Ross Malinger) calls a radio psychologist to ask what his dad
should do.  When Sam is called to the phone, he opens up to the psychologist
and shows such sensitivity that hundreds of women listerers across the
country are moved, including the absolutely right woman for Sam.  She is
Annie Reed (played by Meg Ryan).  Unfortunately, she lives a continent away
in Baltimore and is already engaged to be married.  But Fate is not to be
cheated, and we follow two story lines--the lives of Sam and Annie--knowing
full well that they will eventually come together.
     Ephron's plotting is not really her strong point.  The film is
extremely sentimental from the opening credits on.  Under the credits we
hear Jimmy Durante singing "As Time Goes By" and are shown a map of the
United States on a section of a globe.  As each actor's name is credited, a
star is added in the sky over the map.  Then in the film as a running gag
everybody has seen the sad film AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER.  All the women love
it; none of the men care for it.  Eventually that film will be pivotal in
bringing Sam and Annie together.
     While the plot is sentimental and a little sticky, the dialogue is a
lot of fun and often very witty and insightful.  Annie's confidante is her
friend Becky (played by Rosie O'Donnell) who, like Annie, is unmarried and
is clearly getting frustrated.  Her cynical comments are some of the best
lines in the film.  On the other hand, Sam's conversations with his friend
Jay (played by Rob Reiner) are totally unlikely and inane.  As before,
Ephron's female characters are better written than her male characters.
Still, it is unusual these days to see an unabashedly--not to say overly--
romantic film.  SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is diverting and even nostalgic with
its resurrection of old songs that act as commentary on the story.  Nothing
great, but a solid +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
