Title
Review for George of the Jungle (1997)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Scott Renshaw
GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE
(Disney)
Starring:  Brendan Fraser, Leslie Mann, Thomas Haden Church, Holland
Taylor, Greg Cruttwell, Abraham Benrubi, voice of John Cleese.
Screenplay:  Dana Olsen and Audrey Wells, based on the characters created
by Jay Ward.
Producers:  David Hoberman, Jordan Kerner and Jon Avnet.
Director:  Sam Weisman.
MPAA Rating:  PG (mild profanity, scatalogical humor)
Running Time:  92 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE suffers from a fundamental, insurmountable split
personality:  it wants both to be a big, dumb comedy for 8-year-olds and
to make fun of the fact that it is a big, dumb comedy for 8-year-olds.
The former is fairly easy, particularly for Disney, whose recent
contributions like JUNGLE2JUNGLE and D(whatever integer the MIGHTY DUCKS
series is up to lately) make you wonder why they don't just spin off a
live-action banner called Big Dumb Comedies for 8-Year-Olds Pictures.  The
latter, however, requires subtlety...finesse..a keen sense of how far is
just far enough.
     Now that you have lifted yourself off the floor from convulsions of
laughter, I'll confirm your suspicions that GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE does not
represent the Platonic form of subtlety, finesse, or a keen sense of how
far is just far enough.  The adventures of inept jungle king George
(Brendan Fraser), including his romance with dizzy heiress Ursula Stanhope
(Leslie Mann) and his rescue of his friend Ape the talking ape (voice of
John Cleese) from poachers Max (Greg Cruttwell) and Thor (Abraham
Benrubi), are the stuff of which most youth-oriented films in the 90s are
made.  There are some moderately diverting special effects, including a
tree-trunk-fetching elephant named Shep (computer-generated courtesy Dream
Quest Images).  There are pratfalls and comic brawls a-plenty.  And there
are at least 475 separate gags involving either a) flatulence, b)
excrement, c) urine or d) injuries or the threat of injury to the male
gonads.
     All of which works just fine on its own level, except that
screenwriters Dana Olsen and Audrey Wells then feel obliged to get
meta-conscious on us.  Most films of this stripe would be perfectly
comfortable simply serving up a scene where a nasty character like
Ursula's erstwhile fiance Lyle Van de Groot (Thomas Haden Church) falls
face first into a steaming elephant pile.  This one has a native guide
observe:  "Villain falls into pile of poop...a classic element of physical
comedy!"  It's tough to take a film seriously as a wry commentary on its
own excesses, especially when those excesses are the main reason the
majority of the audience is watching.
     GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE's attempts at something resembling
sophistication and wit, half-hearted though they may be, are clearly an
attempt to capture the spirit of the animated namesake created by Jay Ward
(of "Rocky and Bullwinkle" fame).  They also demonstrate a radical
misunderstanding of what was amusing about Ward's efforts.  Like "Rocky
and Bullwinkle," "George of the Jungle" was smart satire rich with
exaggerated word-play.  It also featured a lunk-headed hero played
completely straight, a far jungle cry from the sensitive noble savage
served up by Brendan Fraser.  Fraser is appealing in a goofy-naive way,
but he's a classic Disney-fication:  they've taken a mockery of heroes and
turned him into a hero.  There's nothing to connect this GEORGE OF THE
JUNGLE to Jay Ward's "George of the Jungle" except the theme song, which
is probably the one thing most people will remember about the animated
series.  Those who remember more may be hoping for more than this
predictable kiddie matinee posing as savvy family entertainment.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Outlandishly stupid GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE is a MONTY PYTHON level
comedy for the grade school set.  It even has MONTY PYTHON regular John
Cleese supplying the voice of George's intellectual sidekick, the ape
named "Ape."
     Brendan Fraser, who has been in a long string of silly movies
(including ENCINO MAN) and a few serious ones (the best being SCHOOL
TIES) hams it up as George.  Everyone in the show knows that they have
signed up to do a farce so they milk the slapstick as hard they can.
Depending on your point of view, this film is either truly awful or so
bad it is good.  In either case, be warned that a little of this
repetitive movie can go a long way.
     The show starts with Ursula Stanhope (played by Leslie Mann from
THE CABLE GUY), a rich heiress from "Frisco", and her snooty fiance,
Lyle Vandergroot (Thomas Haden Church), on a safari in darkest Africa.
They are there to see apes, and while in camp, they hear of the
existence of a white ape.
     Ursula, a ditzy blonde with the brainpower of a church mouse,
seems well matched to her intended.  Lyle, with his ascot and his
desire for a latte in the jungle, has an intelligence equal to his
fiancee's.  He is also a major coward and a liar.  Both Mann and Church
play their characters as pure camp.
     The best actor in the show is never seen.  Keith Scott, with a
voice like Robin Leach from "Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous," is the
film's all-knowing narrator.  When Lyle, on a lark, causes one of his
guides to fall several thousand feet into the river canyon, the
narrator reassures the kiddies in the audience.  "Don't worry," he
tells them.  "Nobody dies in this story.  They just get really big
boo-boos."  And when George gets shot point blank in the head, the
narrator reasons with us, "George can't die because he's the star."
     After the narrator, the next best parts of the film are the few
special effects.  Most of us never seen a full grown elephant that
jumps around and has all the mannerisms of a dog.  George has just such
a hybrid, and the elephant is the largest and most unusual version of
man's best friend you are ever likely to see.  Imagine an elephant
playing fetch.
     Of course, George's raison d'etre is his proclivity to crash into
everything, especially trees.  ("Watch out for that tree!" is the
show's mantra.)  Fraser has the muscular body and the ridiculous smile
that makes him well chosen for the part.  George's costume consists
solely of what he refers to as a "mud flap," and his home is a Swiss
Family Robinson-style tree house, complete with an elevator.
     After way too many flatulence jokes, GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE finally
runs out of gas and ends.  But don't leave yet.  There's a funny
epilogue set in Las Vegas.
     And then it does end, well sort of.  The film's theme song is
guaranteed to remain firmly planted in your brain for months.  You'll
be singing it at the office, driving your coworkers crazy.  ("George,
George, George of the jungle, watch out for that treeeeee!" Aargh, I'm
doing it again.)
     GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE runs 1:32, which is longer than it sounds.
The movie is rated PG, but consider it a G and fine for kids of any
age.  My son Jeffrey, age 8, thought it was "great!"  His favorite part
was when George's doggish elephant loaded his trunk up like a cannon
and shot a bad guy in the rear with a toucan.  I give the picture a
mild thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Homer Yen
George of the Jungle  Tarzan for Toddlers
George of the Jungle might have tickled my funny bone when I was a wee   
lad.  His place is forever etched deep in my memory, lying somewhere   
where Curious George and Amelia Bedelia also roam.  After all, who can   
forget that unforgettable upbeat jungle song which ended with the words:   
Watch out for that tree!  I couldn't stop laughing, but my parents could   
never quite appreciate the slapstick silliness.
For better or worse, that quality hasn't changed.  An animated opening   
recounts how George, as a baby, wound up in the Buvuku jungle, in the   
heart of Africa.  He is befriended and raised by an assortment of   
animals, including Ape, who is a scholarly, talking gorilla;   
Tookie-Tookie, a toucan; and Shep, an elephant.  George (Brendan Fraser)   
grows up to be the guardian and self-proclaimed king of the jungle.  Yet   
despite his physical prowess, when it comes to vine-swinging, he is   
navigationally challenged.  You'll hear more than a few disconcerting   
"thuds" in this movie.
We are also introduced to Ursula (Leslie Mann), a sweet but meek   
socialite who is rethinking her engagement to the snooty Lyle Van de   
Groot (Thomas Haden Church) while exploring the lush Buvuku.  During her   
expedition, she is threatened by a lion.  George saves her and takes her   
back to his treehouse.  The result is a slowly developing love story   
between the city girl and the jungle boy.  But mostly, this is a movie   
that incorporates dozens of slapstick moments.  For example, we see   
George receiving sex education from a gorilla.  We watch Lyle try in vain   
to outwit George.  We see two bumbling poachers try to kidnap (apenap?)   
Ape so that they can cash in on this talking phenomenon.  And we see   
George, who has been taken back to America by Ursula, try to adapt to his   
modern surroundings.   One especially funny scene involves George   
watching a TV commercial that equates falling with love with having lots   
and lots of coffee.  Mistaking this as a weapon of woo, George   
immediately and voraciously munches on all the coffee that he can find in   
the house.  The caffeine buzz makes him hyper, and he runs out into the   
streets of his concrete jungle, where more silliness ensues.
Yet, while the movie does have it's funny moments, it became obvious to   
me that I had outgrown the silliness and the shenanigans of George and   
his jungle pals.  Yes, I have become my parents.  It should be noted,   
however, that Fraser is physically agile, boyishly appealing and brings   
good comic timing to the role.  And, to Disney's credit, all of the   
children in the theatre were laughing and enjoying the jokes and the   
humor of it all.  However, while the portions were just right for the   
young ones, adults will find this fare not very filling.  

Author
Michael Dequina
George of the Jungle (PG) no stars (out of ****)
        Hollywood's track record in bringing old television cartoons to real
life in the big screen hasn't exactly been good, to the say the least: in
1980, Popeye came to theatres in Robert Altman's musical oddity; 1994 saw
the heavily hyped but thunderously boring The Flintstones.  The track record
doesn't get any better with Sam Weisman's thoroughly unwatchable treatment
of Jay Ward's 1960s animated series.
        Brendan Fraser stars as the title character, the wide-eyed king of
the jungle who has a problem with crashing into trees; Leslie Mann is the
love interest, heiress Ursula Stanhope; John Cleese provides the voice of
George's simian sidekick, an ape named Ape; and Thomas Haden Church is the
villainous Lyle Van de Groot, Ursula's fiance.  So what is the film about?
Don't ask scripters Dana Olsen and Audrey Wells.  Their script is a mess,
heavy on slapstick pratfalls ("when in doubt, have George slam into
something" seems to be their philosophy) and groaner one-liners, light on
anything resembling a plot--and without any dramatic structure, the film
seems to drag on and on and on (and then some) without any rhyme or reason.
Olsen and Wells try to infuse some irony into the proceedings through the
use of an unseen, pompously self-aware narrator (Keith Scott).  The attempt
at self-mocking is admirable, but the writers just don't seem to realize
just how bad it all is, from the overly broad performances (Fraser's George
is more of an annoying dimwit than a charming innocent) to the cheap-looking
jungle sets.  The one thing one would think the film would at the very least
get right is the nostalgia kick from its bouncy theme song.  Alas, even that
is botched--instead of using the original version from the TV show during
the main titles, Weisman serves up an alterna-rock-inflected version by the
Presidents of the United States of America.
        At a tick over 90 minutes, the painfully forced, unfunny George
feels three times its actual length, if not more.  At the media screening,
the guy sitting behind me could be heard loudly snoring during the third
act.  We should all be so lucky.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/

Author
Ben Hoffman
Remember George when he was a mere cartoon back in the 1960s?   He
is now alive and well in this boisterous, most enjoyable, laughable
version interpreted by Brendan Fraser. George is just short of being
dimwitted but then, how would you be if every time you swung from a
jungle vine you went crashing into a huge tree?   Despite that,
George keeps on grinning, happy with the jungle friends, the wise
ape whose name is "Ape" (voice of John Cleese),  the drum-playing
chimps, the lion, the toucan and George's own pet dog who just
happens to look exactly like an elephant but, it must be admitted,
does behave like a dog.
So this inept Tarzan-more-or-less-clone loves his home.   We know
this because there is a narrator's voice (Keith Scott)  with a great
sense of humor, who fills us in on anything we ourselves may not be
aware of.  There is Ursala Stanhope (Leslie Mann) who is on safari
in Africa.   When George, who has never seen a woman, first meets
her he wonders what kind of "funny-looking fella" is this?   I told
you he has been hit on the head just a bit too often,
George takes the willing Ursala to his 2-storied home while Lyle Van
de Groot  (Thomas Haden Church), her ostensible sweetheart and
safari-companion worries that the giant ape they are seeking may
have carried her off.      George gives up the jungle to return with
Ursala to the "civilization" of San Francisco (as exemplified by
Ursala's mother Beatrice Stanhope (Holland Taylor) who informs
George that if he does not give up Ursala, Mother will see that
George will no longer have a need for  wearing a loin cloth.    (One
of several bits of adult humor.)   As it happens, George has to
return to Africa (with Ursala) because poachers are after his
friends.   Before George leaves San Francisco, he has some hair-
raising adventures atop the Golden Gate bridge (Joey Preston is the
stuntman).
Expecting another Disney film suitable solely for younger children,
I was most pleasantly surprised to find myself laughing from
beginning to end at this live and lively version of George, suitable
for adults as well as kids.   To top it off is the beautiful take
off of The Lion King which I will not describe.    Go see for
yourself; it is one funny, slapstick movie.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Brendan Fraser, Leslie Mann, Thomas Haden Church, Greg Cruttwell, 
      Abraham Benrubi, voice of John Cleese, voice of Keith Scott
Director: Sam Weisman 
Producers: Jon Avnet, David Hoberman, Jordan Kerner 
Screenplay: Dana Olsen, Audrey Wells 
Cinematography: Thomas Ackerman
Music: Marc Shaiman
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     I suppose there are a lot of Generation Xers who harbor a certain 
fondness for the old TV cartoon GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE, which ran on 
Saturday mornings in the late '60s and early '70s (apparently, there 
were only 17 episodes produced, but they were rerun so often that it 
seemed like a lot more).  As a result, it was only to be expected that 
in this era of re-hashing TV products for the big screen, someone would 
stumble upon GEORGE.  The outcome is a live-action re-interpretation of 
the cartoon that, despite changing numerous details, remains faithful to 
the spirit of its inspiration.  However, perhaps the most surprising 
thing about this movie is that it's far more entertaining than one might 
reasonably expect given the premise.
     Disney is stuck in a remake rut, and some of their recent efforts 
(101 DALMATIANS and THAT DARN CAT in particular) have been less-than-
inspired.  And, while GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE isn't likely to top many 
critics' end-of-the-year Top 10 lists, it's a breath of fresh air coming 
from a studio that has become known for its stagnant, family values-
oriented treacle.  GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE possesses both an edge and a 
sense of self-mocking that's unusual for any feature, live or animated, 
that emerges from under the Mouse's protective umbrella.
     Arguably, the best thing about the original GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE 
was the theme song, and it has been retained in its full glory (albeit 
slightly altered -- some of the lyrics aren't the same).  And, of 
course, George still swings from vine to vine, regularly smacking into 
tree trunks.  However, while that's the movie's most recognizable and 
most frequently-repeated comic routine, GEORGE manages to be more than 
just a one-joke picture.
     GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE's plot borrows heavily from the likes of KING 
KONG, CROCODILE DUNDEE, and, of course, TARZAN.  George (Brendan 
Fraser), who is known variously as the "Great White Ape" and the "King 
of the Jungle," spends his days hanging out in the land of Bukuvu, which 
lies deep in the heart of Africa.  George is a man, but he was raised by 
animals, and he can speak their language as well as his own.  His 
companions include a playful elephant called Shep, a Tookie Tookie bird, 
and a talking ape named (appropriately) Ape (voice of John Cleese).  
George's life changes forever when a group of humans enter his world.  
They include the pretty-but-flighty Ursula (Leslie Mann), her stuck-up 
fiance, Lyle (Thomas Haden Church), and a pair of inept big game hunters 
(Greg Cruttwell and Abraham Benrubi).  George saves Ursula from a lion 
attack, then shows her around his domain.  She returns the favor by 
taking him to San Francisco and introducing him to another kind of 
jungle.  In the process, the two fall in love, but complications arise 
when Ape is ape-napped.
     Does this sound stupid and silly?  Yes, but that's the whole point, 
and director Sam Weisman (BYE BYE, LOVE), his cast, and crew all 
recognize it and revel in it.  By adopting the tone of the cartoon 
series, GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE manages to appeal to children, while some 
of the unexpectedly clever humor will keep adults from becoming too 
restless.  The film pokes fun at everything from "serious" jungle epics 
to Disney's own THE LION KING.  For those who prefer "least common 
denominator" humor, there's plenty of flatulence, and some of the double 
entendres are salacious enough to push the limits of the PG-rating.
     The best running gag doesn't involve George crashing into a tree; 
instead, it satirizes one of my least-favorite motion picture devices: 
the voiceover narrative.  The disembodied vocal talent in GEORGE OF THE 
JUNGLE belongs to Keith Scott, who sounds astonishingly like Don Pardo.  
Omniscient and without form, he emotes alliterative, flowery prose with 
tongue in cheek.  Some of his observations are slyly amusing; others are 
downright hilarious.  And there's a moment when he gets into a heated 
argument with one of the big game hunters.  That's right:  a voiceover 
narrator trading insults with a character.  
     Using the same vacuous expression he displayed to good effect in 
ENCINO MAN and AIRHEADS, Brendan Fraser is suitably bland as George.  
Leslie Mann (THE CABLE GUY), whose blond hair and helium voice cause her 
to resemble Joey Lauren Adams from CHASING AMY, plays an appealing 
Ursula.  Thomas Haden Church is effectively snobbish as Lyle.  The real 
scene-stealer, however, is the animatronic Ape, who is enjoyable in 
large part due to the vocal talents of veteran British comedian John 
Cleese.
     The comedy in GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE is not sophisticated, but it is 
frequently audacious and irreverent.  Technically, GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE 
isn't as polished as Disney's most recent animated feature, HERCULES, 
but, on a certain level, it offers a better entertainment value.  The 
film delights in its own daffiness, and the relatively short running 
length avoids overkill.  The result is one of Disney's most lively non-
animated features in years.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Surely if you're expecting an intelligent film, this is not the one you're
bound to stop on as a cute, brightly lit light bulb appears above your head.
But if you're in the mood for brainless fun for the whole family, GEORGE OF
THE JUNGLE isn't half bad . . . barely.
If the Zucker Brothers/Jim Abrahams team, who produced such off the wall
comedies as AIRPLANE! and THE NAKED GUN, were to collaborate with Disney,
something much like GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE might be the outcome.
Unlike the majority of extremely lame "family" comedies (JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE, MAN
OF THE HOUSE, the 1997 remake of THAT DARN CAT), GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE might
actually make parents feel good about being along for the ride. The sad fact
behind family comedies is that they generally have no real appeal to an older
audience. Brainless slapstick, vulgar jokes, and "funny" faces are the main
ingredients. But GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE actually has wit. People of all ages
will be laughing at some point during the film.
It's nothing overly new of course. And how many times, just HOW MANY TIMES can
 we see people get hit in the groin and still laugh? This movie uses this
overly cliched method of "humor" more than once. Sure, George slams into
things several times in the movie, but that's his trademark. But for crying
out loud, we are also subjected to the "hit groin" ploy three or four times,
an elephant peeing twice, and an ape farting twice. If you do happen to find
them funny the first time, is it really funny to see again a few minutes
later?
So while GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE does have it's problems, it's a lot better than
most family oriented comedies. It is vulgar, at times surprisingly so, but
that's almost expected in movies where kids are going to make up a large part
of the audience. And how many parents out there would find it charming for
their own young ones to fart, burp, urinate, and/or hit someone in the
genitals in order to get a laugh? Not many, but we still seem to allow them
to WATCH it in order to get a laugh. I suppose it will remain that way for a
long time. But I digress, and do hope to stress that I got a lot more out of
GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE than I was expecting! It's fun, and it's dumb. Not a bad
choice for the family's night out.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
A movie review by Michael J. Legeros
Copyright 1997 by Michael J. Legeros
     Watch out for that theme!  George, George, George of the Jungle
will play in your head for a *week* after watching this agreeable
adaptation of Jay Ward's classic 'toon.  Brendan Fraiser (ENCINO MAN,
AIRHEADS) is a dead-on delight as the butt-flapped tree knocker.  I
can't recall a comic performance this...  rich since Eddie Murphy's
nutty professor.  He's backed by a surprisingly spry supporting cast:
Anne Heche lookalike Leslie Mann as that funny-looking fella Ursula
(envisioned here as an heiress on safari), Thomas Haden Church as her
finicky fiancee, Keith Scott as the wisecracking narrator ("Meanwhile,
at a very big and expensive waterfall set"), and John Cleese as the
voice of George's tree house companion, a hyper-intelligent ape named
Ape.  Oh, and Richard Roundtree also appears as an African trail guide,
though I believe even *he* has more screen time than the woefully under-
utilized Cleese.  (Ape *does* get his due in the film's final scene,
however, which may be the wackiest bit in the entire movie.) Director
Sam Weisman (BYE BYE, LOVE, D2: THE MIGHTY DUCKS) has the tone down pat,
but his pacing leaves a lot to be desired.  That GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE
isn't frantic through and through is probably a good thing for the
smaller kids in the audience.  And their slower-witted parents.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Brendan Fraser, Leslie Mann, Thomas Haden Church, Greg Cruttwell,
Abraham Benrubi, voice of John Cleese, voice of Keith Scott Director:
Sam Weisman Screenplay: Dana Olsen, Audrey Wells
"George, George, George of the Jungle WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREE!"
I didn't think a theme song could be this contagious until I found
myself humming it for breakfast, lunch and tea.
"George, George, George of the Jungle WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREEE!"
Yep. I've caught Jungle fever, God help me. Not long after George
started swinging, I felt the incredible urge to throw of all shy
reservation and self restraint, strip out of coat and tie, throw on a
loin cloth and swing from vine to vine. There's nothing quite like the
feel of flying through air, only to be stopped by the incredible jolt of
a large tree trunk. The feel of wood smashing against skin and bone,
shattering the vertebrate, the splinters embedding in the soft tissue of
tongue and cheek, the missing teeth .... I'm getting carried away!
"George, George, George of the Jungle WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREEEE!"
As a decent, respectable citizen of this earth, I found myself laughing
at excrement jokes, painful male gonad jokes and self inflicted, bodily
harm jokes? Maybe it was because Jim Carrey was absent, and Brendan
Fraser present that made the slapstick so much more palatable. This
likeable portrayal of "George" by Brendan, carries with it the innocence
of a child, the pectorals of a Man, and other well proportioned parts
desired by Woman. Yes ladies, stop gawking - tongue in, close that jaw.
We've all got what he's got, more or less.
 "George, George, George of the Jungle WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREEEEE!"
I didn't know that animals were so computer malleable until I watched an
Ape philosophize, an elephant imitate a dog, gorillas become Ninjas, and a
monkey imitate George. The story is very simple. George finds Ursula,
George likes Ursula, George mates with Ursula - I don't mean initially,
because we need to build up the sexual tension between Man and Woman,
Tarzan and Jane, George and Ursula; and I don't mean literally - shame
on you, put away those thoughts, this is a children's movie! Who's
Ursula? Oh, she's a wealthy blonde who is the most fortunate and
compatible of her sex to be chosen for George, with a matching I.Q. of
one.
"George, George, George of the Jungle WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREEEEEE!"
So Disney has created a fun spoof with more vacuum than grey matter; but
who cares, after a hard days work, it's pretty invigorating to end up
laughing like a one year old. This movie doesn't pretend to be a great
myth of Olympic proportions, like the meat loaf "Hercules"; and so ends
up to being more enjoyable and likeable, with little expectations to
live up to.
"George, George, George of the Jungle WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREEEEEE!"
"Goodbye England's rose .... Like a candle in the wind..."
"George, George, George of the Jungle WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREEEEEE!"
"Let's hear it for the Men in Black.....Men in Black."
"George, George, George of the Jungle WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREEEEEE!"
"Now how does that song from My Bestfriend's Wedding go again?"
"George, George, George of the Jungle WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREEEEEE!"
"It's the Circle of life....."
Nope, I still like this tune the best: "George, George, George of the
Jungle WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREEEEEE!"

Author
Zmcpilot@one.net
This shold be brief: "George of the Jungle", Disneys most recent entry
into the live action Genre, is a very entertaining and hilarious day
at the movies. First blush reaction to the whole premise might be one
of "great..another TV series made into a movie...this'll probably be
as bad as The Flinstones..."
Not true. "George" is a funny, refreshing,  and fast paced update of
the '67 animated series. 
The story is a familiar one...boy lost in jungle, raised by apes,
speaks with Tarzanesque "George not like liver" english, saves girl
from lion, falls in love with girl, etc. It follows a Croc Dundee
territory swap, as George goes to NYC to recover from a gunshot wound.
Girls' rich parents reject him because he's "stripes" to her "spots",
on and on. 
But what is so entertaining is that all along the way, the film zigs
where you expect it to zag. An expected routine punchline is replaced
by a well written, witty exchange. A bad guy stops to argue with the
narrator. The kenyan tour guide stops to tell the camera about the
hilarity of a "man falling in elephant poop".  
In short, it is well written. They sidestepped what could have become
typical cliches. They thought about it, in the writing process,
re-working lines until they were funny, not just typical. 
The humor is sometimes adult, the inside references zinging over the
kid's heads like so many spitballs. But the kids have their share of
laughs as well.  It is appropriate for all ages, just one questionable
word, "ass". 
Go see it. You will laugh enough times to make your $7.50 well worth
it. The movie does NOT take itself seriously, and for that reason,
allows you the viewer to laught right along with it. You're in on the
joke. 
Visit the McCarty Movie Review Page at http://w3.one.net/~mcpilot/movies.htm
Remove the "Z" for Spam free E-mail

Author
Walter Frith
     Have you ever started watching a movie inside a theatre and about 15
minutes into the feature presentation you can't wait to leave?  That is
exactly the feeling created as 'George of the Jungle' unfolds.  Based on the
cartoon of the same name, 'George of the Jungle' is an absolutely abysmal
offering from Walt Disney Pictures and it looks as if Disney now believes
that movie audiences will buy into anything and I do mean ANYTHING.  The
first few minutes of the film features an exploration team deep in the
jungles of Africa whose leader (the cast mostly features nameless, tasteless
and untalented wannabe actors) is a rich snob and immediately sickens the
audience with his unlikable and obnoxious personality.  His bride to be has a
voice that could crack glass and torture the most vicious attack dogs all in
the same breath and she immediately becomes embroiled in a jungle
confrontation with a lion.  
     Enter George (Brendan Fraser).  He's a jungle hero raised by nature when
he was separated from his family in a plane crash when he was an infant.
 Naturally he saves her from peril and proceeds to use a few pro-wrestling
moves (clothesline, elbow drop and suplex) all in cartoon fashion which
exploits cruelty to animals in extremely poor taste.  We laugh about that
sort of thing in cartoons as politically incorrect as it may seem in today's
day and age but for some reason it doesn't work here in live action.
 George's companion is a gorillas named "Ape" voiced by John Cleese and
George is soon rewarded by the girl he saved as she takes him back to America
(San Francisco to be exact) and introduces her to her very wealthy family and
friends.  She is engaged to a man suited to her position and George returns
to his jungle for the film's climax.
     Brendan Fraser is such a talented young actor whose work in such films
as 'School Ties' and 'With Honors' was a treat and I don't understand the
reason he chose this jaw dropping project of extremely crude and unfunny
material.  I saw 'George of the Jungle' on opening day with a theatre filled
mostly with small children and their parents and the laughs were very few and
far between so there goes the theory of appealing to the kiddies and upon
looking around the theatre some parents were shaking their heads and putting
their hands in front of their face in embarrassment.  I saw it with my 69
year old father who kept falling asleep. 
     'George of the Jungle' is a live action film based on a cartoon that
features visuals and sound effects derived directly from cartoon antics and
it features people falling in excrement, animals expiring gas from the bottom
end in people's faces, wooden dialogue, quick scenes of lost logic, and
faceless performances with no creative turns from anybody behind the camera.
 If this film were edible, you would get food poisoning.  Definitely a
candidate for worst film of 1997 (that honor still belongs to John
Leguizamo's 'The Pest' until I digest this one further) and one of the worst
films of the 90's.

Author
Brian Matherly
Call me a sucker for cheesy movies that admit their intentions from the
very beginning. Ever since the trailers for this movie were released, no
one could deny this movie was going to be the mecca of cheese. Let's just
say the movie delivers.
Almost a faithful translation of the original cartoon, replete with a new
rendition of the "George" theme by the Presidents of the United States of
America" and our good old faithful narrator, "George of the Jungle" offers
up the "so bad it's good" tradition of film-making.
The cast gives the usual cardboard performances common to most slapstick
children's films, especially Fraser who pulls a Keanu as George by not
really altering his voice to match his wild upbringing, but on the whole
the movie entertains. Fart jokes are not my style, though, and the last
fifteen minutes seem to be crammed with this type of humor. Only one
scene, involving yet another of my pet peeves: the face in the fecal
matter, actually comes off as being one of the better scenes in the film,
if not only for the scene that directly appears afterward.
Dana Olsen and Audrey Wells know their comedy fairly well, but their best
writing actually comes out of the relationship between Ursula and her best
friend (Kelly Miller). One almost longs to see a movie exclusively about
the two of them because the scenes with them seem to ring the truest.
The rest of the cast is rounded out by Thomas Haden Church (Wings, Ned and
Stacey) as the jerk boyfriend of Ursula who has a run in with the local
African law, John Cleese (A Fish Called Wanda, Monty Python and the Holy
Grail) as the voice of the ultra-intelligent Ape who must disguise his
true nature whenever Ursula is around, and Greg Cruttwell (2 Days in the
Valley) and Abraham Benrubi (Kubiack from Parker Lewis Can't Lose) as a
pair of bumbling hunters out to
find the mysterious "White Ape".
Be sure to stick around several minutes into the credits to catch a
rendition of "My Way" you won't soon forget.
Reviewed by: Brian Matherly (jbmath@worldnet.att.net)
