Title
Review for Angel Baby (1995/I)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ANGEL BABY (director/writer: Michael Rymer; cinematography: Ellery Ryan;
editor: Dany Cooper; cast: John Lynch (Harry Goodman), Jacqueline
McKenzie (Kate), Colin Friels (Morris Goodman), Deborra-Lee Furness
(Louise Goodman), Daniel Daperis (Sam Goodman), Robyn Nevin (Dr.
Norberg); Runtime: 104; Cinepix Film Properties; 1995-Australia)
A heartfelt Australian romance story about a mentally ill couple, which
won seven Australian Academy Awards, including best picture, actor,
actress and director. This film offers a piercing look at love between
Harry (Lynch) and Kate (McKenzie), who meet while attending therapy
sessions at a rehab day-clinic for the mentally disturbed.
The engaging young adult couple quickly get to know one another and
enter into a sexually active relationship. Harry is a bachelor who is
recovering from hearing voices. He has his own room in his brother
Morris' (Colin) house, where he lives with his wife Louise (Furness) and
young son Sam (Daperis). Kate was raped by her father at a young age and
removed from the family, and is also suffering from schizophrenia. She
now lives alone in a hostel, where her only outside interest is
religiously watching the TV show "Wheel of Fortune." Kate's life is
guided by omens, which she receives from her guardian angel named
Astral. Astral communicates with her as the letters are turned over
during the "Wheel of Fortune" and the phrases are revealed. Later on,
Kate will first learn of her pregnancy, as the letters spelled out are
"Great Expectations.''
The couple struggles against the odds of them living together on their
own and making it, as they get their own apartment, getting support from
his concerned brother and from the staff members at the clinic. The
lovers seem to be made for each other, each depending on the other for
support. There are many magnificent scenes of them showing their love
for each other in a sensitive and witty way, also showing how fragile
and insecure they are.
Things change when Harry lies about his mental illness in order to get a
computer job, and she announces as soon as he lands the job that she is
pregnant. The rehab staff is concerned about how they will manage to
take care of a baby and about how she is handling her pregnancy, as she
refuses to see an obstetrician; Morris also doesn't think they can
manage alone, and wishes they reconsider having the baby.
Without telling anyone, the couple stops taking their medication,
believing that by not taking the medicine the baby, whom Kate believes
is Astral himself, won't be infected with their illness. There is a
brilliant scene in the department store at the mall, where they are
buying gifts for their expected child and are told the item is on sale,
but since the original price fits the "Wheel of Fortune'' phrase, they
insist on paying full price. But the confused store clerk refuses the
higher price, saying they must buy the item at the sale price. This
throws the couple into a panic, as the store-manager is called. The
director shows how the outsiders only seem to harm them, even when they
are trying to be fair with them and offer them sound advise. Kate
becomes completely unwound in the store, as a speeding rollerblader
knocks her over while waiting for Harry to resolve things with the
manager and she starts to bleed, which causes her to become hysterical.
But we can rest assured that this is not going to be a cliché movie
about the mentally ill and how they manage, as the acting remains
controlled and is too earthy for the story to become compromised by a
sugary resolution.
At home, Kate locks herself in the bathroom, after ransacking the
apartment. When Morris, who is worried about how they are getting on,
comes over to visit them, he ends up calling the police after seeing
that something is wrong. She will be locked up in the mental hospital,
where she is heavily sedated against her will. To make matters worst,
even though Harry is working out satisfactorily in his job, he is fired,
as his boss explains to him that he is worried about what his customers
would think if they found out about his condition. Everything is
spiraling downward for the couple and they can't seem to get a break,
even though the people in their lives are not ogres and mean well in a
rational way, but they are not connecting with the couple.
This is a sensitive film. The director-writer, Rymer, makes sure that
our sympathies lie entirely with the struggling couple without making
the outsiders into monsters. Its beauty lies in how honestly the story
is told and in showing how difficult it is to find love and then lose it
through something you have no control over. It's an absorbing film, that
is well-acted and directed, but it is not a film that you might care to
remember. It lacked real affection for the couple, as they seemed forced
down our throats instead of being allowed to grow gradually on us.
Having pity for them, is not the same as really caring for them.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Inventive animated tale produced by George Lucas and directed by John
Korty and Charles Swenson.  The minds of sleeping Rushers (humans) are
being influenced by the dream-dispensing land of Frivoli and the
nightmare-inducing Murkworks.  The key to their power struggle is the
mainspring from the Cosmic clock, which controls all time.  Fast,
witty story isn't for all children, especially those who won't have
patience for its unique look and flippant, incidental storyline. 
Visually, film is a combination of rainbow-hued watercolors, pen and
ink, live action, and still photographs.  Its endearingly scrappy look
is matched by its throwaway dialogue - I can imagine this being the
kind of cartoon Robert Altman might produce. 
Hip characters provide many laughs, especially overenthusiastic
superhero Rod Rescueman (James Crenna), and a nonchalant fairy
godmother (Judith Kahan Kampmann).  There's also the nominal lead
character Ralph, a thing that looks like an extra from YELLOW
SUBMARINE (voice actor Lorenzo Music).  Film's main basis for
characterization is to play against stereotype - an idea we're overly
familiar with now, but don't mind in this case because the whole
production has such an easygoing feel about it.  The animators slip in
many visual gags, mostly to do with film and television - one of the
characters is an aspiring actress, another an aspiring writer, another
an aspiring heroic lead.  Consequently, story treats the manufacture
of dreams and nightmares as being akin to the movie-making industry. 
Most interesting visual effects occur when we see a nightmare
activated in the world of the Rushers. 
From berardin@bc.cybernex.net Mon Feb 24 15:54:20 EST 1997
Article: 5332 of rec.arts.movies.reviews
Path: nntphub.cb.lucent.com!not-for-mail
From: berardin@bc.cybernex.net (James Berardinelli)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Subject: REVIEW: ANGEL BABY (1995)
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Date: 24 Feb 1997 20:39:11 GMT
Organization: -
Lines: 93
Sender: eleeper@lucent.com (Evelyn C. Leeper)
Approved: eleeper@lucent.com
Message-ID: 
Reply-To: berardin@bc.cybernex.net (James Berardinelli)
NNTP-Posting-Host: mtvoyager.mt.lucent.com
Summary: r.a.m.r. #07011
Keywords: author=Berardinelli
Originator: ecl@mtvoyager
Xref: nntphub.cb.lucent.com rec.arts.movies.reviews:5332
X-Status: 
Status: O
Cast: John Lynch, Jacqueline McKenzie, Colin Friels, 
      Deborra-Lee Furness, Daniel Daperis
Director: Michael Rymer
Producers: Timothy White and Jonathan Shteinman
Screenplay: Michael Rymer
Cinematography: Ellery Ryan
Music: John Clifford White
U.S. Distributor: Cinepix Film Properties
     ANGEL BABY, a tale of love, loss, and mental illness from Michael 
Rymer, swept through the 1995 Australian Film Awards, winning seven, 
including best picture, best director, best actor (John Lynch), and best 
actress (Jacqueline McKenzie).  However, unlike SHINE, which was 
similarly lauded at the 1996 AFIs, no overseas distributor rushed to 
pick up ANGEL BABY.  The reason?  Despite certain thematic similarities, 
SHINE is an upper; ANGEL BABY is a downer.  
     Depressing or not (I suppose it depends on your point-of-view), 
there's no denying ANGEL BABY's emotional power.  This is the sort of 
film that lays it all on the line, and requires the kind of intense 
commitment from its lead actors that few motion pictures demand.  John 
Lynch (SOME MOTHER'S SON) and Jacqueline McKenzie (ROMPER STOMPER) 
deliver intense, passionate portrayals that obliterate the barrier of 
the screen.  In large part, ANGEL BABY succeeds because of their work.
     Lynch plays Harry, a schizophrenic who, thanks to medication, is 
able to move through society in a relatively normal fashion.  Harry, who 
lives with his brother (Colin Friels), sister-in-law (Deborra-Lee 
Furness), and nephew (Daniel Daperis), is an outpatient at a psychiatric 
clinic called "the Club House".  One day, while there, he catches sight 
of Kate (Jacqueline McKenzie), a new client.  She ignores him, but, shy 
and smitten, Harry decides to follow her as she makes her way from the 
clinic to the halfway house where she lives.  Realizing that she's being 
shadowed, Kate confronts Harry, and, after a few tender getting-to-know-
each-other scenes, they are frantically in love.  The sheer intensity of 
their emotion has disastrous consequences, for, although Harry and Kate 
believe their love is strong enough to overcome anything -- even 
insanity -- the reality is far less romantic or forgiving.
     Watching this film, I was reminded strongly of a couple of recent 
motion pictures:  JUDE (which is based on Thomas Hardy's JUDE THE 
OBSCURE) and BREAKING THE WAVES.  Both of those films, like ANGEL BABY, 
deal with the effects of a powerful, all-consuming love.  JUDE ends in 
tragedy, disproving the cliche that love conquers all.  BREAKING THE 
WAVES centers on a potentially-schizophrenic young woman who clings 
desperately to both her husband and her sanity.  In one way or another, 
both of these threads are echoed in ANGEL BABY, which explores not only 
the transcendent power of love, but its limitations, as well.
     Writer/director Michael Rymer's imperfect narrative contains a few 
contrived missteps, but the characters and their relationships are so 
effectively conceived and expertly realized that it's difficult to fault 
the film much for this.  ANGEL BABY is well-focused on an emotional 
level, and I found myself unexpectedly touched by this unconventional 
love story.  There's far more than mental illness and its attendant pain 
to Harry and Kate's relationship.  The tenderness, eroticism, and 
ecstasy of their interaction leaves the most forceful impression.  We 
can't help becoming involved as they walk an uncertain mental tightrope, 
clutching at each other all the way.
     For those watching the film in the United States, it's worth 
acknowledging an unusal bit of cross-cultural trivia.  Kate is a WHEEL 
OF FORTUNE addict (she believes the words in the puzzles are actually 
private messages from a mystical spirit), and it's a rather curious 
experience to note just how similar, yet different, the Australian 
version of the game show is from its North American counterpart.  
     Having seen ANGEL BABY, it's easy for me to understand why major 
distributors like Fine Line and Miramax stayed away.  Much like BREAKING 
THE WAVES, it's a raw, intense, carnal film that will appeal most 
strongly to adventurous movie-goers.  Actually, it's ironic that the 
very qualities which scared off everyone except Cinepix Film Properties 
are those that give ANGEL BABY its unique identity and make it such a 
compelling viewing experience.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     ANGEL BABY is an Australian film from 1995 that swept their
equivalent of the Oscars and is just now being released in the United
States.  It tells a rarely told story about the plight of two mentally
ill people who meet and fall in love.  To preserve their new family
they will make a decision that will put both of their lives in
jeopardy.
     Harry and Kate meet at a group therapy session at a psychiatric
clinic referred to as "The Clubhouse."  With their medications they are
coping with life well enough so that they are outpatients rather than
residents.  Unlike the others in their circle they are both attractive
and so love naturally enters the picture.
     Harry is played with sincere and touching emotions by John Lynch.
He is an excellent actor who has enriched many films including: CAL,
THE SECRET GARDEN, IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH,
and MOLL FLANDERS.  This coming week I will get to see his work again
at the press screening of SOME MOTHER'S SON.
     Kate is played with beauty and grace by the lovely Jacqueline
McKenzie (TRAPS).  Although they both have severe emotional problems,
hers is worse so McKenzie's part proves the more challenging.  She is
convincing as a troubled woman who has natural and intense yearnings
for romance, and yes, for sex.  Their sexual relationship is shown
naturally and explicitly, but it is never sensationalized or exploited.
Confined to an important middle segment in the show, the sexual
escapade is the central thread that convinces the audience of the
strength of the lovers' commitment.
     First time director Michael Rymer, who also wrote the script,
weaves a story full of inner truths and high energy.  When Kate meets
Harry for the first time, she rejects him out of hand with, "I don't
hang around with psychos."
     Kate has help in life.  She believes that she is watched over by
her guardian angel, Astral.  Knowing that Astral is always there to
guide her is what makes Kate's life bearable.  The way Astral
communicates is the most surprising aspect of ANGEL BABY.  Kate listens
to all "Wheel of Fortune" episodes and takes copious notes since Astral
sends her messages through the game board.  This is not done for
comedic effect, but as a natural thing a mentally disturbed person
might believe.
     Kate has a hard getting through life.  When she is invited to eat
dinner at the home of Harry's brother Morris (Colin Friels) and his
wife Louise (Deborra-Lee Furness), they serve her chicken.  Kate keeps
losing the chicken leg as she uses a soup spoon to get the meat off the
bone.
     Once Harry and Kate realize how much they love each other, they
get an apartment together.  Choosing the apartment proves a challenge.
They insist on a good number, and the selection of available apartments
is limited.  Watching him get a job again as a programmer and her try
to set up house is joyfully touching.
     One big day she announces she is pregnant.  How does she know asks
Harry.  Easy, the "Wheel of Fortune" answers for the day were: "Great
Expectations" and "Big as a blimp."  She should get tested, but she
does not trust the doctor recommended by her psychiatrist.  He asks
her, "Would you prefer to see another doctor?"  She retorts, "Yes, Dr.
Seuss."
     Harry thinks the answer to their troubles and to their fear of
birth defects because of their heavy medication lies in, "no more junk
food, no more coffee, and no medications."  For someone with their
mental disorders, this is a recipe for death.
     Up until this point the show had been touching and serious but
upbeat.  From the quotes and the situations you may think it is funny,
but actually it is not.  After they stop their medications, all hell
breaks loose, but the director carefully keeps his actors in line.
Most would have been content to let them overact so they could have
complete artistic freedom.
     By the end of the film, I was reduced to tears.  This is a tragedy
that is never manipulative and always genuine, and the heartfelt acting
makes it a powerful movie.
     ANGEL BABY runs 1:45.  It is not rated but would get an R for the
sex, nudity, and profanity. The film would be fine for serious and
older teenagers.  I recommend the movie to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
