Title
Review for Last Dance (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sharon Stone, Rob Morrow, Randy Quaid, Peter Gallagher, 
      Jack Thompson, Jayne Brook, Charles S. Dutton
Director: Bruce Beresford
Producer: Steven Haft
Screenplay: Ron Koslow based on a story by Steven Haft and Ron Koslow
Cinematography: Peter James
Music: Mark Isham
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     Arriving at theaters in the wake of the far superior DEAD MAN 
WALKING, LAST DANCE starts out with a serious handicap.  This less 
compelling tale of living on death row has neither the depth nor feeling 
of Tim Robbins' film, and, while Sharon Stone acquits herself admirably 
as the prisoner, Rob Morrow leaves something to be desired as the man on 
the outside who develops feelings for her.  Hollywood rarely does this 
sort of hard-hitting story as well as independent productions, and this 
is a case-in-point.
     While LAST DANCE isn't strictly a gender-switched re-telling of 
DEAD MAN WALKING, there are a number of obvious similarities.  In this 
film, the death row inmate is Cindy Liggett (Sharon Stone), a woman 
tried and convicted for the brutal beating deaths of two high school 
kids.  There's no doubt that she's guilty, and Cindy never pleads 
innocence, although she does claim to have been high on crack at the 
time of the deed.  As a result of various appeals, she has been awaiting 
death for twelve years, and the execution order has been handed down 
three times.  On this occasion, barring a last minute miracle, it 
appears that the lethal injection will be administered.
     Enter Rick Hayes (Rob Morrow), a new hire at the Clemency Board.  
After reviewing Cindy's case, he thinks she might have been given a raw 
deal -- her lawyer didn't bring up the drugs in her defense.  So, after 
breaking through Cindy's hard-as-nails exterior, he begins to gather 
evidence to obtain another stay of execution.  The deeper he digs, the 
more he becomes emotionally involved, risking his career for the life of 
this friendless woman he has learned to care for.
     Director Bruce Beresford, whose erratic resume includes titles 
ranging from the sublime DRIVING MISS DAISY to the pointless A GOOD MAN 
IN AFRICA, injects a little too much manipulation and melodrama into 
LAST DANCE.  There's all sorts of legal maneuvering going on here.  
Often, instead of being captivated by the characters and their 
interaction, we're distracted by wondering whether Cindy is actually 
going to die in the last reel.  I kept recalling the movie at the end of 
Robert Altman's THE PLAYER (where Bruce Willis rushes in to save Julia 
Roberts from the gas chamber), and worrying that something similar might 
happen here.
     In actuality, LAST DANCE is more Rick's story than Cindy's.  Her 
character doesn't have much of an arc; his does.  When we first meet 
him, he's a brash lawyer looking for a handout from his brother (Peter 
Gallagher), the Governor's chief of staff.  After taking Cindy's case 
for the Clemency Board, he becomes a crusader, not so much against the 
death penalty but for her life (although the film's message is clearly 
anti-death penalty).  Unfortunately, Rob Morrow doesn't display enough 
depth as an actor to make Rick a real person -- there are too many 
scenes where he comes across as flat.
     Sharon Stone is not a revelation, but, dressed in drab clothes with 
dirty brown hair, she gives the most impressive performance of a rather 
lackluster career.  Throughout most of the film, there is a believable, 
haunted look in Stone's eyes, and the questionably-structured conclusion 
has power largely because of the way she reacts to events.
     Ultimately, one of the biggest problems with LAST DANCE is that it 
doesn't take risks or break new ground.  It's a little too safe, and, at 
times, that results in mediocre drama.  DEAD MAN WALKING showed the 
power this kind of film can have when handled well; this picture 
illustrates the effects of softening it for mainstream appeal.  There 
are moments when LAST DANCE generates a legitimate emotional impact, but 
the road to the closing credits is littered with too many unnecessary 
distractions (like the last-minute efforts to save Cindy).  So, while 
this movie is perfectly watchable, and even worth a marginal 
recommendation, in comparison to DEAD MAN WALKING, it feels diluted.

Author
David N. Butterworth
During the last half century, only one woman has been tried and executed
for her crimes.  Unfortunately for the producers of LAST DANCE, this
capital punishment movie fails to generate enough interest even to raise
the question "Is this *that* woman's story?"
Following on from last year's Academy Award nomination for her supporting
role in CASINO, Hollywood fave Sharon Stone continues her bid for
recognition as a Serious Actor.  After a diabolically-dreary turn in
DIABOLIQUE, Stone returns to serious cinema in a film that is seriously and
uncompromisingly average.  As death row inmate Cindy Liggett, Stone--sans
makeup and with a Meryl Streep-inspired Southern drawl--plays a convicted
killer who has been in the state penitentiary awaiting the death penalty
for 12 years.  With three stays of execution by a sympathetic judge yet
little hope for ultimate mercy, Stone's character is one that is beaten and
broken and ready to die.
Enter Rick Hayes (NORTHERN EXPOSURE's Rob Morrow), an inexperienced
attorney who is assigned to review Liggett's case for the Clemency Board.
Expected to follow standard operating procedure to an inevitable outcome,
Hayes instead finds himself drawn into a personal relationship with Liggett
as he investigates her crime.  Although there is no question that she is
guilty--as a teenaged crackhead, Liggett cold-bloodedly beat to death two
high schoolers--Hayes discovers a changed woman in Liggett and seeks to
have her sentence commuted.  Only a compassionate nod from the Governor can
save her from death by lethal injection as Hayes fights to uncover
discrepancies in her original defense trial.
But this is not a brutal, hard-hitting expose of life behind bars, which
might have made for better drama.  The worst the women prisoners appear to
endure is a steady diet of television soap operas and game shows!  LAST
DANCE's focus is on the relationship between Liggett and Hayes, and this is
where it falls down.  These two characters are similar in so much as no one
has expected anything of them in life, but otherwise there is simply no
chemistry between the two, for which we can blame both the weak script and
Morrow's featherweight performance as Hayes.  The film lacks emotional
punch right up until the climactic scenes, when Stone finally gives it her
all in glorious Technicolor.
Word-of-mouth and obvious comparisons to the superior DEAD MAN WALKING
should kill LAST DANCE off at the box office.  Sharon Stone fans are about
the only potential audience and they will be treated to a decent Sharon
Stone performance coupled with an atypical, anti-glamorous Sharon Stone
look.  She certainly does the best she can with the paper-thin
material--LAST DANCE is unlikely to hurt her career.
Veteran Australian director Bruce Beresford (BREAKER MORANT) is no stranger
to plots centering around civic injustice, but he plays this outing way too
safe, failing to inject any life or depth into the proceedings.  If there
was an opportunity for originality or creativity here then Beresford missed
the boat.  LAST DANCE fails to satisfy as astute character study,
provocative political treatise, or even camp women-in-chains potboiler.
As dances go, this is a slow one-step with no chance of appeal.
