Title
Review for Geronimo: An American Legend (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Keith Meng-Wei Loh
GERONIMO directed by Walter Hill / story by John Milius / starring
Jason Patric, Marc Damon, Gene Hackman, Robert Duvall and Wes Studi
as Geronimo / music by Ry Cooder
     The Apache Indians of the southwest had fought off Spanish
conquistadors and the Mexican army before the U.S. cavalry attempted to
bring them into the system of remote and barren reserves that had been
the fate of all the plains Indians.
     An Apache war chief, Geronimo, and a small band of warriors broke
out of a concentration camp.  He fought a guerrilla campaign against
hundreds of United States cavalry and held out for months by raiding
from the mountains which had been the Apache range until the white men
came.  While the cavalry followed rumours and false trails from canyon
to mesa, newspapers in the east quickly made the defiant Apache a folk
legend, demonizing him and at the same time making him a symbol of the
vanishing frontier.
     It was only with the help of other Apache scouts that the cavalry
at last cornered Geronimo and negotiated his surrender.  Geronimo, who
had left the army concentration camps twice before, returned to the
fences and lived until he was old by learning to sign his name in
English and selling his autographs at 'wild west' shows.  Suffering
from tuberculosis and pneumonia, Geronimo died pathetically on a winter
night, alone, after falling from his horse.  He had had a vision that
he would die astride a horse.
     There is so much about Geronimo that is appealing as a story.
Geronimo the Man was a brilliant personal leader, charismatic and
proud, and immensely spiritual--a hero in the real sense.  The plight
of the Apache, like the story of Wounded Knee, was for those who stayed
in the reserves, one of suffering and inhumanity.  As Geronimo's
exploits became daily fare in the newspapers, the American government's
Indian policy became the subject of political machinations that
extended even to the President.  The hunt for Geronimo, himself, of
course, is the classic David vs. Goliath story become life.
     GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND is a disappointment on two levels.
One, that with such inspiring source material a movie can be so
superficial.  Two, that the crew of director Walter Hill and writer
John Milius could come up with a movie so boring.
     Both John Milius and Walter Hill have built up an impressive list
of action films, leading one to expect that GERONIMO might be at least
exciting, if receiving the standard Hollywood embellishment.  Milius,
whose accomplishments include scripting APOCALYPSE NOW and directing
CONAN THE BARBARIAN, has strung together a surprisingly slow plot
littered with speechifying and shallow characterization.  Hill, best
known for the "48 Hour" films but also noted for a decent film of the
Jesse James gang, THE LONG RIDERS, never quite connects the audience
with what is gritty, human story.
     Like many movies before it, GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND adopts
the cliched device that one cannot tell a story about Indians (or a
different culture for that matter) without seeing it through the lens
of a white man.  The character of the young cavalry officer Lt. Davis,
played by fresh-faced Marc Damon, is provided to give us idiots a
history lesson and moral commentary.  What insight he gives us through
an ungainly voice-over narrative is debatable, however, because he is
inexplicably absent for many key events that might elude those in the
audience who know little about Geronimo.  His narrative seems necessary
only to tie together scenes that are strung along in a very loose
fashion.
     The greatest failing in GERONIMO is that we are never really given
a good idea of what motivates Geronimo, nor do we spend much time with
the character.  GERONIMO the movie is more about the people who try to
catch him than the man himself.  Wes Studi, in a much larger role than
his Magua in THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, is still not much more than
supporting cast.  His lines, whether delivered by aid of subtitles or
in the noble kind of English all movie Indians seem to speak, consist
mostly of wise sayings like:  "You white-eyes lie" or "your heart is
strong".
     We never travel deep into the Apache culture save for MTV type
filming of ghost dances, and a vague feeling that the Apache are very
religious and are meant to be free.  The brutality of the reserves
first forced upon the Apache are not shown, neither do we really
experience their lives at all.  There are several other Indian
characters who are anonymously portrayed.
     This is not to say that the dialogue of the white men is much
better.  Jason Patric (who looks more like Dennis Miller's lost twin
with each movie) is the only cavalry scout who has an affinity for the
Apache.  He is a man of clear sympathies, who is strangely unemotional
and is stoically played.  Gene Hackman provides a competent performance
as the general first sent to keep the Apache under control.  If you've
seen Robert Duvall in LONESOME DOVE you need not see him here, though
his performance as a bigoted scout (the Tom Horn character?) is the
most natural.
     GERONIMO is filmed in the same golden shine seen in DANCES WITH
WOLVES, with pretty vistas abounding but without a feeling for life
either in the saddle or on station.  Milius has written a film akin in
style to FAREWELL TO THE KING in which everyone and everything is
imbued with meaning, but where nothing seems real.
     The music by Ry Cooder shows touches of the sensitivity that
Cooder displays with his own music, but a bombastic orchestral score is
most evident, intending perhaps to impress the audience with the
majesty of movie.  It comes off as self-important.
     Even those seeking action will be disappointed.  There are
actually few scenes of battle between the Apache and the cavalry.  And
the one gunfight that is portrayed in any depth involves a superfluous
subplot in Mexico that does not involve the Apache at all.
     The best thing that can be said is that Geronimo is such a good
story that it is bound to be made again, hopefully with more depth.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Whenever U.S. government starts meddling into other
countries' affairs, under the pretext of supporting human
rights or preventing political, religious or ethnic
persecution, the other side is ready to use mantra that says
"Look who's talking! What have you done to the Indians?"
However, even the Americans themselves are ready to use that
dark chapter of their own national history when it suits
their purposes. Hollywood is just another example, with its
revisionist westerns, made in early 1990s. Those movies
tried to exploit the emerging wave of Political Correctness,
coinciding with the 500th anniversary of Columbus' discovery
of America. One of such examples is GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN
LEGEND, 1993 western directed by Walter Hill, film that
deals with one of the last conflicts between American
natives and white settlers.
The hero of the film is Geronimo (played by Wes Studi),
leader of Apaches, fierce warrior tribe that used to give
hard time to white settlers during the second half of 19th
century. When the movie begins, in 1885, Geronimo and his
Apaches made peace with U.S. government and try to live
peacefully in Arizona reservation. However, broken promises,
injustice and violence against his people would make
Geronimo restless. With not more 30 or so of his followers,
he escapes reservation and begins guerrilla campaign. General
Crook (Gene Hackman), commander of U.S. Army forces,
respects Geronimo and knows that even his 5,000 force isn't
enough to catch Geronimo in the great spaces of the American
Southwest. Instead, he turns to people who are more
experienced with Apaches - Lt. Charles Gatewood (Jason
Patric) and Indian hunter Al Sieber (Robert Duvall).
Together with young Lt. Britton Davis (Matt Damon) they
would begin mission aimed at capturing Geronimo.
GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND, like many movies made under
the shadow of Political Correctness, try to tell the tale
about oppressed minorities, but instead the real subject is
the bad conscience of the oppressors. So, the story about
Geronimo is told from the perspective of his enemies. Almost
all of them happen to be his greatest admirers and use every
opportunity to express how sorry they feel for having to
fight him and his people. Although such elements of John
Millius' screenplay do indeed have some basis in history,
they harm the story of Geronimo. To be honest, Walter Hill
does try to make Geronimo the real hero of the film, but the
movie segments that deal with the plight of Apaches and the
uprising are given too little time. Instead, they turn out
to be nothing more than the back story for rather
uninteresting adventure story of Gatewood and his band. To
make even worse, Hill has some real problems with pacing and
style, and in the end we have impression that we are
watching two films badly edited into one - story about
Geronimo and story about his pursuers. The movie should have
been better if it turned to Geronimo's life before and after
his last uprising, in many ways more interesting than the
story about Gatewood.
The difference between those segments could be observed
through the different quality of acting. Wes Studi, Cherokee
actor who was so impressive as Magua in THE LAST OF THE
MOHICANS, was perfect choice for Geronimo, not only because
he resembles Geronimo, but because he induces a lot of
passion in his role. Contrary to him, we have disinterested
actors who sleepwalk through the roles of his white enemies.
While this could be expected from someone like Jason Patric,
it is shame when we have veterans like Gene Hackman or
Robert Duvall. Even Hill's directing is bellow expectations
- battle scenes are too short and, like in many of his late
films, force viewers to ask what had happened to the great
action director of 1970s. Even his old associate, music
composer Ry Cooder, disappoints, with the score that shifts
between Indian motives and classic. On the other hand,
photography by Lloyd Ahern II, with the use of red lenses,
gives somewhat dreamy atmosphere, ideal for this movie that
was supposed to be melancholic epic. All in all, compared
with some of the Hollywood's examples of Political
Correctness, this film isn't so bad, but we are left with
the unpleasant impression that it could have been better.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I have mixed feelings about GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND. My major
problem with it was that Walter Hill (he also directed 48 HRS) thought
he was Richard Attenborough and was doing Gandhi. We had a lot of shots
of Geronimo staring Christ-like into the lens for long periods without
moving. Wes Studi who plays Geronimo, and who was great in LAST OF THE
MOHICANS, convinces you of Geronimo's near godliness. No matter how
many innocent (white) people he kills, you want him to slaughter more.
The picture makes you feel how he has been wronged and since he is a
warrior, murdering people is the natural thing that all warriors must
do.
     I read an article where Wes Studi said he felt the movie tried too
hard to be politically correct. If you want to see a really good movie
about Native Americans, I recommend DANCES WITH WOLVES. LAST OF THE
MOHICANS is also good albeit not in the same league as DANCES WITH
WOLVES.
     So what was right about the show?  Excellent performances by all
of the actors. Especially fascinating was Wes Studi and Jason Patric.
Good minor character roles were played by Gene Hackman and Robert
Duvall. The cinematography by Lloyd Ahern was award winning quality
with great open space shots and very effective close up shadow shots.
     GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND runs 1:55 and is rated PG-13. Given
the violence, I am surprised it did not get an R. It would be fine for
teenagers. Overall, I think the good does outweigh the bad, and I give
the show a thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I think that the most positive thing I can say about GERONIMO is that
it trusts the viewer.  It shows historical events and it trusts the audience
to make the right decision about who was right and who was wrong.  That
sounds like a small thing, but it was more than you got from films like
DANCES WITH WOLVES, THUNDERHEART, or, on another continent, GANDHI.  So
often when a film shows the old establishment as wrong, it shows everybody
who sided with or worked for that establishment as being totally
reprehensible.  I doubt that anybody can see GERONIMO and not come away with
the belief that a great injustice was done to the Chiricahua Apache.  But
many of the whites in this film are compassionate toward the Indians.  And
not all of the Indians agree with each other about their relations with the
whites.  Most of the people in this film are a bit bewildered about what is
happening and are ambivalent about United States Government policies toward
Indians.  As an example, Robert Duvall as an army scout professes his hatred
of the Indian in the early parts of the film, but it becomes clear later in
the film that underneath the surface he respects Indians and is also
indignant over injustices done to them.  While other aspects of this film
are not so well handled, the complexity of characters is a change from the
pre-digested Political Correctness we often see in films of this sort.
However, the film does twist facts to make it a more salable quantity.
     The story, as narrated by Lt. Britton Davis (Matt Damon) is not a full
biography of Geronimo, but only covers about five years and Geronimo's last
uprising, 1881-1886.  At the beginning of the film Geronimo (Wes Studi) is
already a living legend, but he now wants peace and is willing to turn
himself over to the cavalry and settle into life at the reservation.  But
when an Indian holy man is killed in the incident at Cibicue Creek that led
to a battle killing several whites, Geronimo (who is present at the
incident) decides to break his agreement and head for Mexico.  The film
covers two expeditions to apprehend Geronimo and his final surrender.
     A major component of this film is the beautiful near-desert vistas that
serve as a backdrop of many of the scenes.  Here also you should take what
you are seeing with a grain of salt.  The actual terrain over which Geronimo
ranged, particularly around Tombstone, Fort Thomas, and Fort Bowie does not
look at all as majestic with few of the buttes and other rock formations
that we see with most of this film.  You find those a little further north
in Monument Valley and in Utah, the latter being where the exteriors were
filmed.  Real "Geronimo territory" is flat or hilly with sand and scrub.
     The film is based on a story by John Milius, who also co-authored the
script, and that leaves some latitude for fictionalizing.  While the film is
supposedly narrated by Davis, it is clearly not based on or even consistent
with the real Britton Davis' book about these incidents, THE TRUTH ABOUT
GERONIMO.  Do not take much of this film as actual history.  Geronimo was no
place near the Cibicue Creek battle.  In real life the incident happened
mostly to White Mountain Apaches, though there were a few Chiricahuas
present at the time.  The two different tribes of the Apache nation did not
even like each other more often than not.  Chiricahuas did not get on well
with Jicarilla Apaches, Mescalero Apaches, or White Mountain Apaches.
Geronimo's breakout was only very indirectly related to the battle of
Cibicue Creek.  Following Cibicue there was a large buildup in white
military force in the area and this buildup of power is probably what
frightened Geronimo off the reservation about a month later.  Britton Davis
greatly respects Geronimo in the film, while the real Davis called Geronimo
"a thoroughly vicious, intractable, and treacherous man."  He also called
the Apaches "wild, intractable, and resentful of restraint."  In that book
the real Davis had a different point of view both on the campaign against
Geronimo and on the warrior himself.  Also Davis did not go into Mexico
under the command of Miles, as it is shown in the film, and did not
participate in the final surrender of Geronimo.  If truth be known, other
tribes and even other Apaches considered Geronimo a loose cannon and an
uncontrollable terrorist.  His campaign against the whites probably put him
on the side of some justice, but not for what anyone would really consider
the right reasons.  As for Britton Davis resigning the army in indignation
over its policies against the Indians, that too is total invention.  Davis
resigned because he got a better job offer and did not like army life.  So
much of this film really is a very inaccurate account of what took place in
history, even if it does cover many real events and characters.  This is a
very distorted view to make history seem to support the Millius' wishful
interpretation.
     GERONIMO suffers a great deal by comparison to the recent GETTYSBURG.
GERONIMO's history is not nearly as accurate and at the same time
GETTYSBURG's characters were a good deal more interesting.  The lead is
Jason Patric as Lt. Charles Gatewood.  Patric is a good deal too handsome
and is not nearly as formal-looking or gaunt as the real Gatewood.  And he
lacks the real Gatewood's thick moustache.  The film wants you to sympathize
with his point of view, and has chosen to make him heart-throb handsome
rather than to go the extra step to make him look like the real Gatewood's
photographs.  But Patric is pretty good at horsemanship.  Gene Hackman also
fails to capture the look of his character.  General Crook wore a bushy
forked beard that gave the impression of one full beard going off to the
right and one to the left.  Director Walter Hill probably decided that the
real beard would upstage the actor.  Under Hill's flat direction, only Studi
seems to project any screen presence at all.  The historic Geronimo had a
perpetual scowl on his face and Studi is one of the few Indian actors who
really looks the part.  Ry Cooder's score, using Indian themes, may conjure
up an emotional response in people who know more about Indian music than I
do, but for me it conveyed very little of the feeling that was called for.
     GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND is generally accurate to history while
still twisting events to support a predetermined set of conclusions.  It is
more fair to both sides than it might have been, but it still is a
lackluster piece of storytelling.  I give it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jason Patric, Gene Hackman, Robert Duvall, Wes Studi,
           Matt Damon.
Screenplay:  John Milius and Larry Gross.
Director:  Walter Hill.
     To paraphrase the old song, and to make a distressing confession,
I don't know much about history.  When approaching a film based on
historical subject matter, I rarely find myself basing my critique on
accuracy, for better or worse.  Nevertheless, I had a feeling I was
going to have a problem with GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND as sool as I
noted that Wes Studi, who portrays the title character, had been given
fourth billing.  As authentic as it looks, GERONIMO just doesn't click
because it doesn't make its principal character the focus of the
story.  Like DANCES WITH WOLVES, it's not so much a story about Native
Americans as it is about guilty white men.
     GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND is narrated by 2nd Lt. Britton Davis
(Matt Damon), a fresh-out-of-West Point officer assigned to the 6th
Cavalry responsible for re-settling Apaches in the American Southwest
on reservations.  The only resisters are the Chirokawa Apache, led by
Geronimo (Wes Studi).  Geronimo surrenders himself to sympathetic 1st
Lt. Charles Gatewood (Jason Patric) and Gen. George Crook (Gene
Hackman) as the film opens, but an incident on the Turkey Creek
Reservation enrages Geronimo.  He breaks off with a small band of
warriors and begins a violent series of raids on both sides of the
U.S.-Mexican border.  Gatewood, Davis and veteran Indian tracker Al
Sieber (Robert Duvall) attempt to track down the Apaches and make a
deal the U.S. has no intention of keeping.
     Perhaps the most glaring problem with the script for GERONIMO is
that it doesn't seem to have a direction or a clear enough sense of its
point of view.  Although the narration is coming from Davis, GERONIMO
is not a first-person narrative.  Much takes place without him present,
so it's difficult to see events as they develop as somehow having an
impact on Davis.  When Davis gives an impassioned statement near the
end of the film about his shame at the government's treatment of the
Apache, I found myself wondering why he was the one to get that scene.
As questionable as the decision to let the story come from a white man
might be, GERONIMO at least should have had the conviction to show us
more through his eyes once that decision was made, so that Davis' loss
of innocence makes sense.
     Screenwriters John Milius and Larry Gross also do a less than
impressive job of making Geronimo himself come alive.  Wes Studi is
grim-faced and taciturn, but his anger is never real enough.  Perhaps
out of some fear of making him too unsympathetic, they show Geronimo
actually killing unarmed settlers only once, and that scene is given a
"they asked for it quality."  Geronimo is treated more as a symbol than
a man, and I came away from the film with very little insight into his
character.
     All this is not to say that GERONIMO doesn't do many things
right.  Cinematographer Lloyd Ahern does some of the year's finest
work, capturing the Southwestern deserts in rich reds and oranges.
Director Walter Hill (THE LONG RIDERS) and Milius (CONAN THE BARBARIAN,
APOCALYPSE NOW) are veterans of bloody cinema, and their battle scenes
are well choreographed.  Gene Hackman and Robert Duvall both turn in
typically marvelous performances, finding much more nuance than the
script provides, and their one scene together is truly great work.  Ry
Cooder's score is also noteworthy.  In fact, everything about GERONIMO
screams "epic," but somewhere along the line a fair amount of substance
leaked out of the stylish wrapper.
     GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND clocks in at about 1:55, short by the
standards of the holidays' other big releases, yet it seemed much
longer.  A barroom showdown with a group of bounty hunters didn't seem
to serve any real purpose, and the editing generally seemed
disjointed.  GERONIMO wants to be revisionist, but it doesn't provide
enough real information, or compelling enough characters to make me
care.  Somewhere amidst the cliches is the story of a warrior who
fought and killed for what was being taken from him, but it didn't make
it to the screen in this version.  In a case of an extremely misleading
title, GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND doesn't do enough to make a real
historical figure real.

Author
James Berardinelli
     GERONIMO is a "revisionist" retrospective of the United States'
so-called "Geronimo Campaign," and the costs of those events to the
lives of individuals and nations.  The tale of how five thousand U.S.
troops failed to capture a tiny band of renegade Chiricahua Apaches
forms the framework for most of this movie as it attempts to redress
some of the wrongs of the history books.
     After I'd seen this movie, someone asked me who the good guys
were.  I had a hard time answering, and that points out one of
GERONIMO's fundamental flaws.  For the most part, its characterizations
are so weak and ambivalent that the audience finds it difficult to
develop much feeling for any of the people we encounter on screen,
regardless of whether they're white or Native American.
     This is a beautifully-photographed motion picture, although
cinematographer Lloyd Ahern has a tendency to overuse red and amber
filters.  Nevertheless, the Utah landscape which formed the backdrop
for such John Ford classics as CHEYENNE AUTUMN and RIO GRANDE is shown
in its best light.  If nothing else, GERONIMO at least has the look of
an epic.
     Wes Studi, the Cherokee actor who gave such an impassioned
portrayal of Magua in last year's THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, is more
subdued as Geronimo.  While Studi does his best to bring out the
warring nobility and bloodlust within the legendary Apache leader, he
is ultimately curtailed by a screenplay that seems interested in two
things only:  showing battles and giving history lessons.
     Jason Patric plays Lt. Charles Gatewood, the officer given charge
of arranging Geronimo's surrender.  Gatewood is supposed to be torn by
duty to his country and sympathy with a people his government is about
to betray, but Patric does such a poor job of bringing to the fore
anything but surface emotions that we lose all interest in his
character and, as a result, the film loses much of its appeal.
     Gene Hackman and Robert Duvall don't give their best performances
here, but they're entirely believable, and they elevate the film a
level during their scenes.  Hackman is General George Crook, a
sympathetic officer who gets replaced because Geronimo gets away from
him.  In a more interesting role, Duvall is Al Sieber, an Apache hunter
who admits to a grudging respect for his arch rival Geronimo.
     Although Patric's flat performance doesn't help matters, it's the
confused and boring script that ultimately proves to be GERONIMO's
undoing.  The battle scenes are wonderful, but much of the exposition
between them is tedious in the extreme.  Also, the movie doesn't seem
to know which side to sympathize with.  Instead of that indecision
leading to a gritty result, it creates ambivalence and apathy.
     In a time when Westerns are regaining their popularity, there are
bound to be a few miscues.  GERONIMO is not a bad movie, but neither
does it live up to its promise.  The legend itself may be fascinating,
but this treatment doesn't have the life necessary to be of more than
passing interest.  Those expecting another DANCES WITH WOLVES had
better look elsewhere.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
