Title
Review for Postino, Il (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Joan Ellis
     THE POSTMAN is a beautiful, heartbreaking movie about a very
different kind of friendship in an outpost of the old world.  Mario
(Massimo Troisi), the reluctant fisherman in a fishermen's culture,
catches cold every time he sets foot in a boat. He takes a modest job
delivering mail by bicycle to Pablo Neruda (Phillipe Noiret), the
renowned poet living in exile from Chile. Poetry becomes their
connection.
     The friendship of the unlikely pair speaks the sad truth that we
can rarely tell our friends about the inner forces that drive us
through life. Much later, in despair, Mario returns to the poet's house
to revisit the place that had once been alive with the sounds and
sights of emotional discovery.  In the silence that now envelops it,
the loss of joy is simply overwhelming.  It is a wrenching scene.
     Mario has a face of piercing intelligence with sharply angled
cheekbones and the saddest eyes you will ever see. He has fallen in
love with Beatrice, and he turns to the poet, Neruda, for help in
overcoming the halting awkwardness he brings to the courtship. The
friendship between the exalted poet and the postman is sublime, the
sadness of it is unbearable.
     The simple dedication, "To our friend Massimo," is a deeply simple
tribute to Massimo Troisi, the actor who died at 41, one day after
filming ended and just before the surgery he had postponed in order to
finish the film.  Hobbled by illness during the production, he was
driven to deliver this message about heartbreak and friendship. We can
all be grateful that he felt so strongly.
For all Ellis reviews, see http://movie.infocom.net (which has a search engine)
or send any email to: movie@telecomp.com
Feel free to reuse as long as source acknowledged.
Please send information regarding reuse to 'nebbadoon@telecomp.com'

Author
Christopher Null
     The story surrounding the making of THE POSTMAN is almost as
interesting as the film itself.  English/Austrian Michael Radford was
hand-picked by the star of the picture, Italian Massimo Troisi, to direct
the dramatization of a Chilean novel about the story of Pablo Neruda
(Phillippe Noiret), a Chilean poet exiled to an Italian island, where he
befriends a local fisherman-cum-letter carrier.
     Radford accepted the assignment, and Troisi assumed the title role of
Mario, a simple Everyman whom Neruda slowly cultivates from tongue-tied
wallflower to smooth Romeo.  With Neruda's advice and introduction to
poetry, Mario is able to overcome his awkwardness and enchant the woman of
his dreams, the darkly beautiful Beatrice (Maria Grazia Cucinotta), and
subsequently he convinces her to marry him.  His transformation complete,
Mario finds inside himself the romanticism and courage that we all wish
for.
     Radford, director of the spectacular 1984, creates a memorable and
refreshing film about unadulterated love without resorting to gimmicks
like modern Hollywood romances do.  In THE POSTMAN, Troisi brings to
starkly realistic life the character of Mario as the personification of
emotion--feeling strongly for both a woman and his mentor.
     Only a few problems stand out as noticeable.  The subtitle
translation could use some work, and the characters tend to mumble on
occasion, making the extraction of emotion from a language I don't
understand all the more difficult.  Otherwise, I have no complaints. 
Everything in this unlikely movie seems to work well.  Even THE POSTMAN's
slow pacing fits the film perfectly.
     The eye-popper to the story surrounding the film is that Troisi, a
man with a long history of heart problems, died some 12 hours after the
film wrapped.  One could speculate that his devotion to the project kept
him alive just long enough to finish shooting.  And if that doesn't say
something about what you can expect to see from Troisi on the screen, I
don't know what does.

Author
Christophe Boone
Directed by Michael Radford
Produced by Mario Cecchi Gori, Vittorio Cecchi Gori,
and Gaetano Daniele
Written by Anna Pavignano, Michael Radford, Furio Scarpelli,
Giacomo Scarpetti, and Massimo Troisi.
Based on the book by Antonio Skarmeta
Music by Luis Enriquez Bacalov
Cinematography by Franco DiGiacomo
Now showing in major cities, and re-released for a second time in select 
theatres on Friday, February 16, 1996 for a limited run.
        12 hours after filming the final scene of IL POSTINO, Massimo 
Troisi passed away due to a fatal disease that he was well aware was 
eating away at him.  It has been said that he bought the rights to this 
book because he knew he was going to die, and he wanted to act in a 
serious role after becoming well known as a comedic actor in Italy.  The 
biggest tragedy of this film is that Troisi never saw what he had 
accomplished.
        Nominated for Best Actor (Massimo Troisi), Best Adapted 
Screenplay, Best Music, Best Director, and Best Picture for this year's 
Academy Awards, IL POSTINO has won the battle that few films ever must 
attempt--to be a foreign film nominated for the Best Picture Oscar along 
side other American film (or English speaking film) nominees.  Due to a 
technicality that IL POSTINO was released in Italy in 1994, and therefore 
not eligible to be nominated by Italy for the Best Foreign Film Oscar, 
Miramax spent $1.5 million and sent tons of videos to members of the 
Academy to get this film seen and nominated.  This is why.
        Mario Ruoppolo (Massimo Troisi) is a fisherman's son who becomes 
a postman due to his father nagging him about not having a job.  He has 
one customer, Nobel Prize for Literature nominee and exiled Communist 
Chilean poet Pablo Neruda (Philippe Noiret).  Neruda is living in Italy on 
Ruoppolo's island while in exile, so Ruoppolo rides his bicycle to his 
house every day to deliver the mail.  Soon thereafter, Ruoppolo befriends 
Neruda, and with his simple way of thinking, learns to appreciate 
Neruda's poetry and share his thoughts with the poet.  He employs 
Neruda's help to win over a woman he has fallen for, Beatrice Russo.  
Through Neruda's help and poetry, Ruoppolo attempts to win her heart.  
Enough with the spoilers.
        This film is crafted with a tender spirit.  Throughout, if you 
know Troisi's story, you realize how gaunt he looks.  His stubble does 
not mask his dying.  This is his final performance, and both he and the 
audience know it.  His character comes alive as if it wasn't a character 
at all, but rather simply Troisi expressing his feelings for a woman in 
his own shy, confused way.  Opposite Noiret, known to this critic best 
for his portrayal of Alfredo in CINEMA PARADISO (this critic's favorite 
film of all time) an accomplished actor, Troisi shines, and steals the 
screen from him.  It is hard not to think about his impending death as 
the film comes to an ironic close, and Neruda's poetry rolls up the screen.
        Many reviews have been written about this film, so I will not 
write a lengthy one.  I will leave it at that.  If you have not yet seen 
IL POSTINO, search your newspaper for the nearest art house cinema, and 
go see it in its second re-release in less than a year.  Take some 
friends, and tell the rest.  You'll quickly realize why the Academy went 
out of its way for this film.

Author
Pedro Sena
Without being pushy, and without saying much of anything, this film stands
out as a magnificent achievement in directing and acting. Few films will
ever  stand out in your imagination as much as this one does, with such a
wonderful story, though sad, but so very strong that it just hits you like
the wind. This, unlike most films, is really, in the Godard'ian sense, a
"poetic"  film, rather than a film about a story that happens to have some
poetry in it.
It is the story of a poet that has been exiled in his original country,
Chile, and he has been given asylum in Italy. But Italy's political
situation is not clear, and Pablo Neruda, was often accused of being a
communist, rather than a poet that lived his words. So he is given a place,
out in the middle of nowhere, where there is no media, and very little
brouhaha for him to attract any attention. Authorities often hope that the
writer kinda fades away, but leaves behind some of the writing.
And in this old, run down place, that still has no running water, no jobs
for anyone except fishing, takes to its famous person, through a young man
that has been hired by the local post office just so that he can bike up the
mountain to deliver the mail to the poet. And there, in time, they become
friends, or at least, as far as the postman is concerned a valuable friend.
As the story develops, the postman finally gets a chance to meet someone  he
is in love with, Beatrice. And the story really starts. The postman, becomes
a bit of a poet himself, although his words are not exactly as good
metaphors as the poet's own work. It works anyway, despite the  mother's
agitated concerns that the words are obscene. She takes the  words to the
local priest, who declares it a poem, but does not say
much else. He is convinced that communists eat babies and hate religion.
Even when he sees the poet in his own church... the scene is slipped by
rather quickly... nice touch.
The postman and the girl finally marry. And the poet gets his exile revoked
in Chile and he is off to his homeland.
>From here on, the story takes on really different proportions. While the
poet is here the words and the metaphors help enliven the place. As soon as
he is gone, the local politicians take over with lies. One promises to build
up the water system, and starts the program until the day he gets elected,
at which point the construction stops. He doesn't need the vote anymore. He
is in. It's a good thing, because the poet would have definitely said
something if he had seen this.
And in the end, we find that the postman, who has not received any letters
from the poet, creates a "live" poem for Pablo Neruda. It involves many of
the wonderful sounds that the place has, that one can hear at any time, from
the wind, to the waves, to the fishing nets.
One day, Pablo returns with his wife. The postman died. The wife was left
with a boy named Pablito after the poet, and a tape of the "live"  poem that
the postman. The postman had remarked many times that he is not famous and
that there was no reason for the poet to remember him. But he has made a
larger impression on everyone else. It seems that the postman fainted and
dies at the demonstration that would have been his crowing success. What has
become a "communist" party, mainly a direct opposition to the corrupt
officials, like the one that promised something and then
stopped it when he got elected, is having a celebration, and they intend to
have the poet's work read by the postman, who has become a bit of a well
known man. Unfortunately, the politicians do not like "anti-government"
activities, and they unleash the police on the crowd and the postman is one
of the victims.
Few films have the beauty, the desire, the care, to create such a strong
story and bring it to the forefront. And the two people that make it work
are Massimo Troisi as the postman, and Philippe Noiret as the poet. Even the
lines are read so beautifully that when we hear at the end of the video tape
an ad for a few actors doing the poetry, only one ( Wesley Snipes ) comes
off as good as the film's rendition of the lines of Neruda's work.
It is a treat to see something like this, and that Massimo Troisi was even
nominated for an Oscar for this role, is an incredible compliment to the
director's vision, and his work with the two lead actors. One wishes that
there were more.... and hopes for more, and the ending just leaves you in
tears.
But few films show you what the power and beauty of words can be. It doesn't
matter that anyone can tell you about anything in this film. The true story
is the words, and how they live. The film just floats on the words. It may
be considered a "bit talky" but it is never boring, and never out of
context, or away from the real point it needs to make. But one can easily
see, that this film has nothing to do with communist at all... it's about
poetry, and those who embrace the poetic muse for the love of the words and
the purity
of feeling.
This film is second to none in this department. Excellent work all around.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Massimo Troisi, Philippe Noiret, Maria Grazia Cucinotta, 
      Linda Moretti 
Director: Michael Radford 
Producers: Mario and Vittoio Cecchi Gori, Gaetano Daniele 
Screenplay: Anna Pavignano, Michael Radford, Furio Scarpelli, and 
            Massimo Troisi based on the novel BURNING PATIENCE by 
            Antonio Skarmeta  
Cinematography: Franco di Giacomo 
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films 
In Italian with subtitles 
     THE POSTMAN, an Italian film from British director Michael Radford 
(WHITE MISCHIEF, THE ELIXIR), is a charming piece of cinema that takes 
several comfortable formulas and expands upon them in ingenious and 
emotionally-satisfying ways.  There's a little of everything here:  
poetry, politics, humor, love, and heartbreak.  Best of all, these 
elements flow together seamlessly in a production characterized by solid 
acting, balanced pacing, and eye-catching cinematography. 
     Mario (played by the late Italian writer/director/actor Massimo 
Troisi) is a postman in a fishing village on a small island off the 
coast of Italy.  Arriving there in 1953 is famed Chilean poet Pablo 
Neruda (Philippe Noiret), exiled from his native country for espousing 
communist doctrine.  Mario is curious about this new resident who, 
despite his advancing age, has a seemingly magical power over women.  
Eventually, after delivering Neruda's mail for a while, he gets up the 
courage to engage the poet in a conversation about writing.  This begins 
an unusual collaboration, with Mario providing a sounding board for 
Neruda's ideas and Neruda teaching Mario about poetry and its 
relationship to life.  
     Although all of THE POSTMAN is wonderfully engaging, the last act 
lends added resonance to everything that has come before.  The final 
thirty minutes change this film from a good little movie to a *great* 
little movie.  Radford has a subtle touch that draws out the best from 
characters and situations.  One could argue that all films seek to 
manipulate; in the case of THE POSTMAN, it is done with the utmost 
skill.  This picture is affecting because, instead of relying on 
Hollywood's sledgehammer tactics of toying with an audience, it plumbs a 
wellspring of deeply-felt, honest emotion. 
     In the final performance of a great career, Massimo Troisi (who 
died at the age of 41, shortly after completing this picture) gives us a 
memorable character.  Hesitant, shy, and uncultured, Mario has the heart 
of a poet, but little talent with words.  In this post-FORREST GUMP era, 
it would be easy to compare him to the Tom Hanks character, but Mario is 
really a more complex individual.  He occasionally makes some 
startlingly insightful observations, such as "the whole world is a 
metaphor for something," often without realizing how thought-provoking 
his comments are.  THE POSTMAN is about Mario, and Troisi imbues him 
with a captivating humanity.   
     Philipe Noiret's Pablo Neruda is the perfect foil for Mario -- a 
kindred spirit with all the experience and talent that the postman 
lacks.  Noiret plays Neruda as part father-figure, part dreamer, and 
part realist.  When Mario asks him how to become a poet, the older man 
responds by advising his "pupil" to take a walk along the island's 
shoreline and see what images come to mind.  After Mario has fallen for 
the stunning Beatrice (Maria Grazia Cucinotta), Neruda tells him about 
the many women of that name to have inspired poets. 
     For two hours, it's possible to fall under THE POSTMAN's spell and 
be completely enchanted.  There is more vitality and genuine passion 
here than in any ten big-budget extravaganzas.  This movie about words 
and images will delight not just because it entertains, but because it 
takes the motion picture experience one step further, and fulfills.  
Look for THE POSTMAN this summer.  It will be one of the year's more 
rewarding theatrical experiences. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Philippe Noiret, the French actor who has been in dozens of films
is perhaps best known in the U.S. as the projectionist in the wonderful
1990 film, CINEMA PARADISO.  Here, as Pablo Neruda, he charms us once
again, this time as a famous poet who has been exiled from his native
Chile because of political reasons.  He now makes his home on a small
island in the Mediterranean. living in a secluded mountainous area
where he will not be in frequent contact with the villagers and where
he can write his poetry undisturbed.
     IL POSTINO is the story of friendship and heartbreak.
     Mario (Massimo Troisi) is the son of a fisherman but fishing is
not to his taste.  He thinks about emigrating but just then he is asked
if he would like to be the personal postman to the poet.  The area is
out of the way of the regular postman but Mario is happy not to have to
either emigrate nor fish.
     In the beginning, Mario climbs the road to Neruda's home and shyly
delivers the mail.  Neruda, though polite, at first shows little
interest in his personal mailman.  As time passes he becomes a bit more
friendly, intrigued by Mario's interest in Neruda's poetry and poetic
manner of speaking.  (While the film frequently refers to "metaphors"
it is really "similes" that are being discussed.  I suspect the
translator of having confused the two ... but no matter.)
     Mario's sole purpose in learning how to write poetry is to enchant
his beautiful Beatrice (Maria Grazia Cucinotta) with whom he is in
love.  Much of the poetry he reads to her (as his own) is really that
of Neruda.
     Heartbreak comes when Neruda receives mail that he can return to
his homeland.  They will keep in touch it says here.
In the early 1990s, Italy's famous actor Massimo Troisi, read a novel
by Skarmeta which became his inspiration for the film IL POSTINO and in
which he acted the part of Mario despite his having had a history of a
bad heart.  Twelve hours after the film's photography completion, he
died in his sleep at the age of forty-0ne.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Just as Gene Siskel recently admitted that he walked out of BLACK
SHEEP, let me confess that I went to see THE POSTMAN (IL POSTINO) as
soon as it was released last year, but walked out bored stiff after
twenty minutes, and so I never wrote a review of it.  Since it got two
major Oscar nominations, Best Picture and Best Actor (Massimo Troisi),
I decided to go back and see it all no matter how unpromising it seemed
in the beginning.  In short, I am glad I did, but I do not think the
film is Oscar caliber.  I found THE POSTMAN to be an extremely slow,
but heart warming little picture.
     On a small and poor Italian island in 1953, a famous Chilean poet,
Pablo Neruda (Philippe Noiret), comes to live in exile.  Since he is an
avowed Communist, he is shunned by his government, but since he is
known as "the Poet of Love", he is adored by all the women of the
world.  That he is plain looking, in his 50s and balding is of no
concern to them; they are hot for him because of his poetry.
     Massimo Troisi plays a simpleton, a la Forest Gump, called Mario
Ruoppolo.  Mario applies to be the postman to part of the island.  It
turns out that in that area everyone is illiterate except for the newly
arrived poet and hence the poet is the only one that ever gets mail.
Being a mailman to a single person is more work that it might seem
since woman all over the planet write to the Poet of Love.
     Pablo becomes a mentor to Mario who decides he wants to be a poet
too.  Mario wants to know all of his secrets since he is in awe of him.
Pablo tries to convince Mario that poets are quite human and tells him,
"We poets are all fat."  In a touching series of scenes, Pablo attempts
to teach metaphors to Mario, but Mario is sure that the concept is too
difficult.  When he accidentally creates his first metaphor, Mario
claims it does not count since it was not intentional.
     Once reason Mario wants to be a poet is to attract women.  Being
painfully shy, he needs all the help he can get.  When he goes into a
bar, he sees a stunning beautiful woman, Beatrice Russo (Maria Grazia
Cucinotta), in a low cut dress playing a table game with soccer players
on sticks.  He plays it with her without speaking, but loses since he
spends most of the time staring at her.
     An old Dictaphone type of instrument plays a key part in the show.
Pablo warns Mario about it saying, "Even the most sublime ideas sound
ridiculous if heard too often."
     With Pablo's help, soon Mario is spouting poetry left and right.
He woes Beatrice with lines including, "your laugh is a sudden silvery
spoon," and "your smile spreads like a butterfly."  With his new
confidence, Mario becomes involved in the Communist party, but he
wonders what would happen if they ever actually won.  "So what if we
break our chains?  What do we do then?"
     I did not buy the ending of the show.  Although the conclusion did
not detract from the overall effect of the picture, I found it too
manipulative.
     I have no idea why this film was nominated for best picture of the
year for 1995.  There were so many that were better, PERSUASION and TOY
STORY just to name two much better ones.  And as for Massimo Troisi
getting the best actor nomination, I am even more surprised.  His
acting consisted of mumbling his lines while keeping the exact same
sick dog expression on his face throughout the entire film.  An
effective, but monochromatic performance and certainly not worth award
consideration.
     The sets by Lorenzo Baraldi and the cinematography by Franco
DiGiacomo create a wonderful atmosphere of a dirt poor but highly
picturesque out of the way island.  The town is lush shades of rose and
salmon and most of the houses have highly texture stucco walls with
pealing paint.  The simple costumes by Gianna Gissi add to the feeling
of prevailing but beautiful poverty.  The natural grandeur of the sheer
rocky cliffs overlooking the blue ocean seem a natural setting for
poetry.  Finally, my favorite part of the film is the music by Luis
Enriquez Bacalov.  It is dreamy music full of overtones of a simpler
time and place.
     THE POSTMAN runs a slow 1:56.  The editor (Roberto Perpignani) and
the director (Michael Radford) create a film with long scenes that are
only sparsely filled with dialog.  I suggest bulking up on coffee as I
did, or the film's soporific pacing may put you to sleep.  This is a
sweet little life affirming movie, but it moves at a glacial speed.
When there are words, they are in Italian subtitled in English.  The
film is rated PG for no reason whatsoever.  There is no sex, nudity,
violence, bad words, or anything to offend anyone of any age.  A two
year old could see this film.  I give the movie a thumbs up and award
it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
