Title
Review for Me, Myself & Irene (2000)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
Chad Polenz
Carrey plays Charlie - an overly friendly, gutless Rhode Island bike cop who 
one day snaps and develops a
split personality whereby he becomes Hank - a ruthless, twisted enforcer. At 
first the extreme lengths
"Hank" goes to in order to get his way are funny, but it's a joke that can't 
carry an entire film. Especially
one where the plot is non-existent and the screenplay so poorly developed the 
cliches are about the only
thing going for it. 
The jokes here are intended to appeal to the modern audience's craving of the 
extreme, but it comes off as
tired and unoriginal. The film's vulgarity quotient is just absurd and 
offensive. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Author
Frankie Paiva
rated R
116 minutes
20th Century Fox
starring Jim Carrey, Renee Zellweger, Chris Cooper, and Robert Forster
written by Mike Cerrone, Bobby Farrelly, and Peter Farrelly
directed by Bobby Farrelly and Peter Farrelly
Perfect casting has never been a problem for Jim Carrey. Who else could have 
made The Mask believable and fun? What type of person would Truman Burbank 
have been without him? He has approached all of his latest roles with energy, 
and there is no exception here. Whatever material the Farrelly brothers hand 
him, whether itâ^Ŕ^Ůs golden laugh-out-loud comedy or gross-out trash, he 
delivers it with vigor. Perhaps he is a little too full of energy for his 
own, and this movie's good. This is the role Carrey seemed born to play and 
he fits it perfectly. He is so good itâ^Ŕ^Ůs scary. The script, however, is 
frightening for other reasons. 
Charlie Baileygates (Jim Carrey) is a peaceable Rhode Island state trooper 
that's constantly taken advantage of by everyone around him. His wife sleeps 
with an African American midget on their wedding day, and later produces 
three large, black genius sons. He doesnâ^Ŕ^Ůt seem to care the whole town is 
laughing at him behind his back. After a day of unusually tough verbal abuse, 
Charlie cracks revealing Hank. Hank is the complete opposite of Charlie. Hank 
likes to fight, is less than a gentleman to women, and wreaks havoc wherever 
he goes. Doctors determine that Charlie has schizophrenia, and give him 
medication to control the problem. Irene (Renee Zellweger), a golf course 
manager, is a young woman that gets sent to jail unawares of her boyfriendâ^Ŕ^Ůs 
illegal conduct he has involved her in. Charlie must escort her to a New York 
jail. Before leaving, Charlie forgets to grab his medication. As both of his 
personalities begin to fall for Irene, Charlie must win the battle between 
Hank and himself before he loses Irene for good.
The Farrelly brothers are famous for their work on Dumb and Dumber and 
Thereâ^Ŕ^Ůs Something About Mary. In interviews they have tried to evaporate 
their title of the gross-out kings of comedy by saying things like, â^Ŕ^ÜWhat is 
gross? We do everything only to be funny.â^Ŕ^Ý Not to be too graphic, but I do 
not find a thirty second shot of a chicken shoved up a manâ^Ŕ^Ůs behind at all 
humorous. This type of shocking humor is copious. As the film continues, it 
becomes so abundant that it just isn't funny anymore. An early scene 
involving a cow that just will not die will have animal activists screaming, 
and will have everyone else screaming with laughter. Charlieâ^Ŕ^Ůs three black 
sons (flawlessly performed by Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, and Jerod 
Mixon) are the only things regularly funny in this movie. The rest crosses 
the line of good taste too often. The Farrelly brothers have the wrong 
approach to making people laugh. When they did the hair-raising hair gel 
scene in Mary, it was outrageous because it came out of nowhere. With this 
movie, we expect the gross humor. Therefore, it isnâ^Ŕ^Ůt nearly as hilarious or 
shocking when performed. 
The romance fails too. Perhaps the offscreen chemistry between Carrey and 
Zellweger is good, but their onscreen work is horrible. Irene doesnâ^Ŕ^Ůt match 
the Charlie/Hank character, and the screenplay robs Zellweger of any comic 
opportunities. She tries to be her usual exuberant and shining female 
character, but the script works against her. Supporting performances from 
Robert Forster and American Beautyâ^Ŕ^Ůs Chris Cooper do nothing to help the 
film. Me, Myself & Irene is about a half hour too long for all of the above 
reasons. The romance moves along at an unhurried pace, while the comedy wants 
to move faster.
Even if the Farrellyâ^Ŕ^Ůs borrow much from their two previous films, they do one 
thing here that is genuinely interesting and original. Stay for the credits, 
and youâ^Ŕ^Ůll see the name of every single extra that worked on the film, as 
well as a picture of the place they appeared in the movie. This is certainly 
an intriguing concept, one that is far more interesting than this shocking, 
yet bland movie.

Author
Chad Polenz
>From the Farrelly brothers, the guys behind "Dumb & Dumber," "Kingpin" and 
"There's Something About Mary" comes this year's challenge to tasteful comedy 
starring none other than Jim Carrey - the man who may actually be a living, 
breathing cartoon. It's a shame this movie's not a cartoon though because all 
the gags that are supposed to work here come off as childish, amateurish, 
dumb and unfunny. 
Carrey plays Charlie - an overly friendly, gutless Rhode Island bike cop who 
one day snaps and develops a split personality whereby he becomes Hank - a 
ruthless, twisted enforcer. At first the extreme lengths "Hank" goes to in 
order to get his way are funny, but it's a joke that can't carry an entire 
film. Especially one where the plot is non-existent and the screenplay so 
poorly developed the cliches are about the only thing going for it. 
The jokes here are intended to appeal to the modern audience's craving of the 
extreme, but it comes off as tired and unoriginal. The film's vulgarity quotie
nt is just absurd and offensive. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-F32-40F75B8-39D14C72-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976  
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        It's such an obvious concept you have to wonder why someone didn't
think of it sooner.  Unfortunately, Bobby and Peter Farrelly, the sicko
sibs who brought us "There's Something About Mary," did think of it, and
that means their latest film is filled with as much gross-out humor as it
is Jim Carrey going "from gentle to mental" (the film's smart tagline).
        In fact, "Me, Myself & Irene" is actually filled with *more*
gross-out humor than it is Carrey doing his split personality thing, and
that's its biggest failing.  After the success of "'Mary," the Farrellys
have clearly been trying to top their hysterical hair-gel sight gag, and
"Me, Myself & Irene" serves up a scene or situation every ten minutes which
threatens to dislodge it.  But it never quite manages it.  That's because
"There's Something About Mary" was a rather sophisticated little comedy
that went for shock value any chance it could.  "Me, Myself & Irene" is a
pretty tasteless--and much less funny--film highlighted by Jim Carrey
pratfalling all over himself.
        In this tale of a mild-mannered highway patrolman named Charlie
(Carrey) whose pent-up emotions are finally unleashed in the form of an
obnoxious alter-ego named Hank, the rubber-limbed comedian is adroitly
cast.  Charlie is so meek and well-meaning that he's taken advantage of by
just about everybody in his small Rhode Island town.  Until he meets Irene,
that his, and the lascivious Hank emerges.
        Two personalities in love with the same women?  Clever idea.  Let's
stick a chicken up someone's butt and see if it flies.  Ah, the subtle
humor of Bobby and Peter Farrelly.
        Renée Zellweger ("Jerry Maguire") plays Irene.  Her performance is
an odd one, since it feels displaced, as if phoned-in from another movie.
She's never involved in any of the truly shocking stuff, only occasionally
pausing to crinkle up her nose when Carrey (as the bully Hank) says
something outrageous.
        The Farrellys have a unique talent for making us squirm, but for
two hours straight it's a bit much.  I can watch a dog defecating on
someone's lawn without paying $8.00 for the privilege thank you very much.
"Me, Myself & Irene" is filled with a lot of good ideas that just sit
around awaiting punchlines, or one-joke setups that are stretched out in
perpetuity.
        Take Charlie's three African American sons, for example--that's
right, it seems that his pretty young (Caucasian!) wife was less than
faithful.  It's a funny concept, but the writers (the brothers and Mike
Cerrone) do little with it and instead go for cheap laughs by having the
trio constantly spewing street language.  I like the idea of three
behemoths kissing their racially-different Daddy on the cheek as he leaves
for work but all the stuff about quantum physics (their biological father
is a Mensa chapter leader) is ridiculous, as is most of the film.
        Once again the Farrellys poke fun at everyone, so no one group
should feel singled out, but it takes away from what might have been some
truly inspired cinema.  Jim Carrey struggling with a multiple personality
disorder is indeed an obvious (if clever) pitch for a whacked-out comedy.
Unfortunately, the bulk of "Me, Myself & Irene" is raunchy and crude and
all rather obvious too.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Jerry Saravia
Jim Carrey can be as funny as anyone on screen with the right screenplay and 
the right director. He also proved to be humane and soulful in films such as 
"The Truman Show" and "Man on the Moon." The Farrely Brothers proved their 
comic worth in Carrey's "Dumb and Dumber" and the obscenely hilarious 
"There's Something About Mary." Both Carrey and the Farrelys reunite in one 
obscenely unfunny and desperate film called "Me, Myself and Irene," which has 
a great comic premise that is hardly milked for all its worth. 
Carrey plays a Rhode Island police officer named Charlie who is seen as a 
joke in his community. His wife has left him with three black kids, fathered 
by a snipy, black limousine driver who happens to be a Mensa member! They run 
off together while Charlie is left to raise the kids. Years pass and the 
community sees him less as an authority figure and more as a hapless fool. 
But Charlie is repressing his rage at people and it finally comes out in the 
form of Hank, complete with an attitude and a Clint Eastwood accent. Now the 
little girl who plays hopscotch on the street despite Charlie's warnings is 
practically drowned by Hank! Not funny. The woman who buys a vaginal product 
at the supermarket and walks ahead of Charlie on line with tons of groceries 
is now embarrased by Hank who gives a full description of the product on the 
speaker system. Not funny. 
Still, give the Farrelys credit for trying since I thought that eventually 
the film would find its comic rhythm and exploit the schizophrenic angle of 
Charlie. Not so. We are left with a plot involving Rene Zellweger as a woman 
on the run from some crooked cops and a crooked ex-boyfriend involving golf 
clubs and some other assorted business, none of which merits as much as a 
chuckle. Then there is some more business involving an albino waiter who may 
be a family murderer and tags along with Charlie and the girl, but again, no 
major laughs to be found. So what we are left with are countless sexually 
scatalogical jokes involving dildos, an actually funny scene involving a cow, 
a scene involving a chicken placed in an unlikely orifice, and so on. When a 
nearly dead cow gets the only major laugh in a Jim Carrey movie, you know you 
are in trouble. 
I never liked "Ace Ventura" but I've admired Carrey in it, as I have in most 
of his films including the often riotous "Dumb and Dumber." For the first 
tim, however, I actually found Carrey excruciatingly boring in this film, 
exuding little of his genuine comic talent or gift for mimicry. In fact, I am 
also a firm believer that Carrey can act and he has a mental breakdown scene 
that is relatively touching to watch. Outside of that, if the Farrelys paid 
more attention to Charlie's character than Hank's and if they made Zellweger 
exploit her comic zest (shown to far greater effect in "Nurse Betty"), then 
this might have been a real winner. Instead, it is the Farrelys merely 
coasting on sexual jokes and innuendoes galore with Carrey merely playing 
with a dildo or himself. Embarrasing is the word. 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Bobby Farrelly, Peter Farrelly.
Cast: Jim Carrey, Renee Zellweger, Chris Cooper, Robert Forster, Anthony 
Anderson,  Mongo Brownlee, Jerod Mixon, Michael Bowman, Traylor Howard, 
Richard Jenkins, Rob Moran.
2000 - 115 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, brief nudity, and sexual innuendo).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, July 22, 2000.
Writer-directors Bobby and Peter Farrelly have made a career out of 
increasingly upping the ante in their big-screen comedy ventures, going for 
broke with bawdy, salacious humor in order to do one thing, and one thing 
only: make the audience laugh. Where the Farrelly brothers have also 
excelled, however, is in their continuous creation of quirky stories and 
likable characters that they place the outrageousness around, so as to ground 
the films in at least a modicum of reality. Beginning with their first and, 
coincidentally, best and funniest picture to date, 1994's "Dumb and Dumber," 
and followed by 1996's "Kingpin" (their weakest film, but still ambitiously 
enjoyable) and 1998's funny and raucous, if overrated, smash hit, "There's 
Something About Mary," their latest endeavor is the utterly satisfying, 
charming, and predictably rib-tickling "Me, Myself & Irene." 
Headlining the fine cast in his first return to a purely comic performance 
since 1997's "Liar, Liar," Jim Carrey stars as Charlie, a sweet-natured, yet 
meek and seemingly inconsequential, Rhode Island State Trooper whose marriage 
to an intelligent blonde (Traylor Howard) ended fifteen years ago when she 
struck up an unlikely romance with an African American midget limo driver and 
fellow MENSA member. Charlie is left to take care of his three sons whom he 
was left with, and who turn out to "have year-round sunburns," but he loves 
them unconditionally and trudges on with his life. 
Switch forward to the present, one day, triggered by yet another case of 
citizens not taking his profession and authority seriously because of his 
understated personality, Charlie snaps and temporarily becomes Hank, his 
crude, despicable alter ego who is able to do the sorts of things Charlie 
would never do. Diagnosed with Multiple Personality Disorder, Charlie is 
assigned to escort the beautiful Irene Waters (Renee Zellweger) back to her 
home state of New York following a wrongful arrest for fraud, granted that he 
take the medication for his now-fragile condition. Soon, Charlie and Irene 
are on the lam after they learn they are being stalked by two cops (Chris 
Cooper, Richard Jenkins) who have been hired by Irene's crooked boyfriend to 
do away with her. To make matters worse, Charlie loses his medication and, 
without any control over it, frequently becomes the up-to-no-good Hank, who 
cares about very little but getting into Irene's pants.
If the plot of "Me, Myself & Irene" sounds slightly unfocused and more than a 
little implausible, that is okay because what Bobby and Peter Farrelly enjoy 
doing is creating a basic premise in which to design a line of crass jokes 
and unrestrained humor that is snappy and funny enough to withhold a two-hour 
movie. While not as purely comic as, say, "Dumb and Dumber" or "Kingpin," 
"Me, Myself & Irene" pays close attention to its eccentric three-way 
relationship between Charlie, Hank, and Irene, and amidst the raucous laughs 
unearths a genuinely sweet romance.
After two years of focusing on more dramatic work that has rightfully proven 
his wide acting chops (1998's "The Truman Show," 1999's "Man on the Moon"), 
Jim Carrey is in top comedic form as the lovable Charlie, as well as the 
unruly Hank. Acclaimed for his extreme range of facial expressions, Carrey 
garners many laughs simply from his transformations from himself to his alter 
ego. Best of all, Carrey is the type of performer who cherishes the audience, 
and wants nothing more than to entertain everyone; therefore, when even the 
slightest comic opportunity arises, Carrey runs with it.
A standout in 1996's "Jerry Maguire," followed by an unfortunate appearance 
in 1999's flat, unconvincing "The Bachelor," Renee Zellweger is her usual 
winning self as the title character of Irene. Carrey may be the bigger 
personality of the two, but their quick interplay is the source of what makes 
"Me, Myself & Irene" work so well, and Zellweger does excellent work as she 
reacts to Charlie's sweetness and Hank's lewd ways, as well as forms the 
center for the romance that ultimately forms between Charlie and herself.
Lest anyone forget "Me, Myself & Irene" is, indeed, a Farrelly comedy, the 
jokes come fairly fast and furious, and involve (but are not exclusive to) a 
stubborn cow that is the victim of a potential road kill incident, but 
refuses to die; an inappropriate sex scene involving a chicken; an 
interesting way for a grown man to get ahold of milk; the three robust, black 
stepsons of the very-much-Caucasian Charlie who just so happen to be 
18-year-old prodigies; and the morning travails of Charlie, who attempts to 
urinate in a toilet despite his erection. 
A road movie at heart, the film takes up the majority of its running time 
following Charlie/Hank and Irene traveling and hiding out from the cops, and 
it is this section that is the most thoroughly satisfying. Only the overly 
violent climax that is reminiscent of Carrey's self-fighting scene in "Liar, 
Liar" loses its humorous footing, but promptly recoups in time for the 
charismatic finale.
With a soundtrack complete with rerecordings of several Steely Dan classics 
(including my personal favorite, "Do It Again," which plays over the end 
credits), and a purposefully cheesy occasional narration in the vein of a 
Disney nature documentary from the 1950s, "Me, Myself & Irene" is one of the 
more enjoyable and lively motion pictures to come along this summer, and 
demonstrates how a successful comedy should be carried out.

Author
Shay Casey
Year: 2000. Starring Jim Carrey, Renee Zellweger, Robert Forster, Chris 
Cooper, Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, Jerod Mixon, Michael Bowman, 
Traylor Howard, Tony Cox. Written by Peter Farrelly, Mike Cerrone, and 
Bobby Farrelly. Directed by Bobby Farrelly and Peter Farrelly. Rated R.
It seemed like the perfect concept. What better for the Farrelly 
Brothers, famous for writing and directing comedies with offensive 
subject matter, than to make a movie about a guy with a split 
personality? It's exactly the sort of thing the Brothers relish: poking 
fun at something serious (in this case mental illness), throwing all 
care to the wind to get a laugh. Jim Carrey's signed on too? Even 
better. The National Alliance for the Mentally Ill even helped out by 
levying complaints against the Brothers' new film before its opening, 
claiming it was misrepresenting the condition of split personality, 
labeling it incorrectly as "schizophrenia," and so forth. Such a protest 
seemed like just the sort of thing that would, of course, only add more 
fuel to the Farrelly Brothers' fire, proving that some people just 
couldn't take a joke, and that the Farrellys would be helping the more 
enlightened viewers to yet another dose of their brilliantly subversive 
comedy.
Yes, it all seemed perfect, but one thing went wrong: Their movie isn't 
funny.
It's not for lack of trying. The Farrellys utilize in "Me, Myself & 
Irene" their most high-concept premise ever: Carrey plays Charlie 
Baileygaites, a man who after being dumped by his wife for a midget limo 
driver, decides to bury all his aggressive feelings deep down inside and 
never release them. This, of course, means all his neighbors exploit his 
entirely too-forgiving nature, making his job as a Rhode Island state 
trooper increasingly difficult. Soon enough, Charlie's repressed 
aggression manifests itself into a second, independent personality named 
Hank, a deep-voiced, boorish ogre unafraid of taking the assertive 
actions his predecessor had been unable to muster. This guy isn't above 
crashing a car through the wall of the barber shop in which he's been 
insulted, or holding a little girl's head underwater because she refused 
to stop jump-roping in the street.
Then things start getting lost in the most complicated plot the 
Farrellys have ever attempted, and the film runs off its tracks. Some 
have suggested that this isn't a problem, because the Farrelly Brothers' 
brand of humor doesn't require plot to work. They're wrong, of course: 
Plot was greatly instrumental in building up the kind of rollicking 
comic energy that infused the Farrellys' last effort, 1996's "There's 
Something About Mary." (1999's "Outside Providence" was technically an 
earlier project.) The brothers' earlier film wasn't funny merely because 
it contained outrageous gags (despite what some newsmagazine articles 
would have you believe), but rather because its most outrageous gags 
were entirely unexpected. In "Mary," the Farrellys managed several times 
to pull off a neat sleight-of-hand trick: They'd have you thinking the 
story was going one way, then reveal its real direction in delightfully 
surprising fashion.
"Me, Myself & Irene," by contrast, seems to have been made by folks who 
looked at "Mary" and saw only the surface grossness, missing all of the 
subtle machinations that really made it work. Having been produced by 
the same guys who made "Mary," "Irene" seems like an even bigger 
disappointment. The brothers pile on the offensive humor, taking shots 
at race, midgets, albinos, mental illness, and all manner of bathroom 
jokes. But they haven't come up with a way to make any of it fresh; most 
of "Me, Myself & Irene" comes off as rote, by-the-numbers, adolescent 
comedy. The plot, with Carrey forced to drive alleged fugitive Irene P. 
Waters (Renee Zellweger), who's in more trouble than anyone knows, back 
to New York, has an ending that's entirely predictable from the get-go. 
(Think Charlie and Irene will fall in love? Yeah, me too.) The Farrellys 
then introduce scores of different characters, and none of them ever 
manage to do anything you haven't already expected them to do, no matter 
how outrageous their actions might be. Compared to the curveballs the 
Farrellys are used to throwing, this stuff is almost entirely 
soft-tossed, presenting an obvious problem: When gross-out humor loses 
its shock value, it's no longer funny, merely gross.
The jokes that do work are milked over and over until their 
effectiveness runs dry. Take, for example, the subplot involving 
Charlie's three Black sons (Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, Jerod 
Mixon). The incongruity of it all is funny for a while, with three burly 
Black men discussing higher math in ghetto language and white-bread 
Carrey mouthing said language with an entirely too-pleasant smile on his 
face. But by the end of the film, they're still doing the same schitck; 
it hasn't been elevated to another, funnier level, and it hasn't been 
dropped either. That's too bad, because it ceases to be amusing about 
halfway through. "Me, Myself & Irene" reeks of wasted opportunities. 
There ought to be more focus on how other people react to Charlie's new 
personality, and on how Charlie deals with the consequences of Hank's 
actions. This doesn't really happen; nearly every supporting character 
learns about Charlie's condition early on, so they don't have any 
opportunity to be surprised by it. The film throws what looks like a 
patented Farrelly curve in a scene towards the midway point (involving 
an albino companion Charlie and Irene pick up called, appropriately, 
"Whitey"), but the script doesn't go anywhere with it, instead leaving 
the thread twisting in the wind before awkwardly tying it up during the 
climax.
Jim Carrey is a gifted comedian, both physically and vocally, but he's 
left with nothing much to do here except contort himself in a manner 
similar to Steve Martin in "All of Me." It's a great showcase of 
flexibility and split-second role-shifting, but none of it is terribly 
funny. Carrey doesn't pull any stunts we don't expect him to pull, and 
the Farrellys' script doesn't give him anything else to pull: The 
situations in which he must perform the role-shifting aren't set up in 
any meaningful way. Perhaps Carrey can take solace in the fact that his 
supporting actors fare no better. Zellweger's Irene is not a strong 
female lead; Mary in "Mary" may have been part adolescent fantasy, but 
she was also intelligent and strong-willed. Irene is nothing in 
particular, as the film never makes clear whether she's ditzy, clever, 
or neither. As such, she gives us nothing to latch onto as the only 
"sane" person in the film. Chris Cooper is stuck playing exactly one 
note as a corrupt FBI agent, and his character is entirely too 
straight-laced for a movie like this. He, like the others, does 
absolutely nothing unexpected.
After viewing the shapeless mess that "Me, Myself & Irene" eventually 
dissolved into, I was stuck wondering whether or not the Farrellys had 
outsmarted themselves. Maybe their kind of comedy can only work for so 
long until audiences get wise to it and stop being shocked. But I don't 
believe it -- good filmmakers find ways of surprising their audiences 
even after people have grown attuned to their style. If the Farrellys 
are indeed good, smart filmmakers (and I still think they are), they'll 
rebound just fine. Even after that happens, though, I'll still consider 
"Me, Myself & Irene" to be a high-caliber misfire.
For more reviews, go to http://www.geocities.com/sycasey/movies.html

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Bobby Farrelly and Peter Farrelly. Screenplay by Mike
Cerrone, Farrelly and Farrelly. Starring Jim Carrey, Renee Zellweger,
Chris Cooper. Running time: 116 minutes. Rated AA for coarse language by
the MFCB. Reviewed on June 28th, 2000.
In a way, I have a lot in common with Charlie Baileygates. I consider 
myself, all things considered, a nice guy. I'm polite. I do favors 
without expectation of reward. I could count on one hand the number of 
times in the past five years that I've gotten really, blood-boiling, 
vein-in-the-neck-throbbing angry. Sometimes, I'm probably a bit of a 
pushover. I've often wondered what would happen if, one day, I just... 
snapped. The new comedy "Me, Myself & Irene" is devilishly entertaining 
wish fulfillment.
Charlie, played by Jim Carrey, is a Rhode Island state trooper. The film 
opens with a flashback to eighteen years ago, when Charlie married his 
sweetheart Layla (Traylor Howard). On their wedding day, Charlie became 
involved in an inadvertent fracas with Shonte (Tony Cox), a black midget 
limo driver who, like Layla, was a card-carrying Mensa member. Soon, 
Layla and Shonte were having an affair, and nine months later she gave 
birth to triplets: three African-American baby boys. Outwardly oblivious, 
Charlie raised the kids as his own (despite the fact that one is actually 
named Shonte Jr!).
Fast forward to the present. Charlie is rearing the boys by himself, 
Layla having run off with Shonte years earlier. His "sons" (Anthony 
Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, and Jerod Mixon) have grown into brilliant but 
foul-mouthed prodigies -- witness their hilarious, profanity-laden 
quantum mechanics study session. But gullible Charlie has become the 
state joke, and one day all his pent-up rage externalises itself... as a 
split personality, Hank, a gruff-talking, aggressive, no-nonsense jerk.
There's more to the plot than this, of course, as Charlie/Hank becomes 
involved with Irene (Renee Zellweger), who is being hunted by corrupt New 
Jersey cops because of her involvement with a crooked golf course owner. 
Or something. Frankly, the specifics of this whole storyline are made 
murkily clear at best, and really don't matter anyway. The point is just 
to keep Charlie/Hank and Irene together for an extended period of time, 
and embroil them in a series of wacky encounters.
"Me, Myself & Irene" is a funny movie, but it is in many ways a victim of 
its own publicity campaign. So much of the set-up has been revealed in 
trailers and in print that a lot of the humor which could have arisen 
from the unexpected and improbable scenario has been defused by our 
familiarity with the material. Imagine, for instance, directors Bobby and 
Peter Farrelly's last picture, "There's Something About Mary", if you 
knew Chris Elliott was Woogie. Few comedies can sustain the laughs no 
matter how well-acquainted we are with them ("The Philadelphia Story" 
does it for me; so does "Mystery Science Theater 3000"). "Me, Myself & 
Irene" is no exception.
There's also something of a miscalculation in the script by the Farrellys 
and Mike Cerrone. Hank starts off as an amusing character -- consider his 
revenge against a woman who skips ahead of Charlie in the supermarket 
line-up, for example -- but then the writers seem to assume that Hank as a
concept is good enough. However, Hank himself isn't funny; he's 
grotesque, really. To work, Hank needs to be doing funny things, but for 
much of the middle third of the film, he doesn't, and this contributes to 
long stretches of comparative tedium. There are also some really bizarre 
moments, like the late introduction of another companion for Charlie and 
Irene, the weird albino Whitey (Michael Bowman), whose inclusion seems 
almost an afterthought. Or the inexplicable cameo appearance by tennis 
star Anna Kournikova, which seems to exist just so we can realise, "Hey, 
that's Anna Kournikova!"
Fortunately, things pick up heading into the home stretch, especially 
once Charlie and Hank start to coexist simultaneously. It is these scenes 
in particular that really give Carrey a chance to shine, and he makes 
exhaustive use of his rubber-faced, marionette-limbed repertoire. Carrey 
also does a good job playing Charlie and Hank as truly different yet 
fundamentally interconnected, and it's a shame his material wasn't more
consistent. His interaction with the boys, for instance, is priceless, as 
he slips effortlessly into urban slang: "That be whack!"
Zellweger is also enjoyable, and gives Irene enough strength to hold up 
against the human onslaught that is Carrey. But Irene is a poor successor 
to Cameron Diaz's character in "Mary", because whereas Diaz was both the 
instigator and victim of comic moments, Zellweger is usually just left to 
react to Carrey's antics.
There has been some controversy surrounding "Me, Myself & Irene", and the 
erroneous association of the term "schizophrenic" with Charlie's split 
personalities. Although the term "schizo" is used on occasion in the 
film, it is never employed by someone who should know better -- instead 
they spit out "advanced delusionary schizophrenia with narcissistic rage" 
like it rolled right off the tongue. The purported "controversy" is a 
non-starter.
Indeed, I was surprised to find that the subject of multiple 
personalities is not just used as ammunition for jokes, but instead earns 
some serious consideration as well. There is a theme running throughout 
"Me, Myself & Irene" that many people assume fabricated identities, be it 
for profit, or escape, or just to cover up a mistake. This is true not 
just of Charlie, but also Irene, Whitey, the corrupt cops, even Shonte 
the limo driver. "Me, Myself & Irene" being the kind of movie that it is, 
the idea is not pursued to any great lengths, but I appreciated its 
inclusion nonetheless.
I had great hopes for this reteaming of Jim Carrey and the Farrelly 
brothers (they first worked together on "Dumb And Dumber"), and in the 
final analysis I'll admit to feeling a little disappointed. "Me, Myself & 
Irene" is not the best comedy for either, trying but failing to be as 
funny and outlandish as superior entries in their respective
filmographies. But it is very entertaining all the same -- and if it 
doesn't appeal to the Charlie in you, maybe there's a little bit of Hank 
lurking inside that will enjoy it instead.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/MeMyselfAndIrene.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
What's the recipe for a great comedy film? Well, I guess there really isn't
one simple answer to that question, but slapping Jim Carrey, one of the top
comedic actors of our day, alongside the Farrelly brothers, one of the top
comedic writer/directors of our day, is a pretty good start, right? Well,
you'd think so. But after seeing the so-so trailer for this movie, I can't
say that I was very impressed. And now that I've seen the entire film, I
think I know why. It's just not that funny.
PLOT:
An emotionally challenged Rhode Island state trooper is suddenly altered
into two split personalities when all of his unresolved feelings break out
into an aggressive personality of their own. This disorder comes into major
play as he escorts a young lady out of state, and suddenly finds both of his
personalities fighting over her.
CRITIQUE:
Jim Carrey's three black sons in this movie are hilarious, but the rest of
the film is bland at best, with a couple of laugh-out loud scenes, many flat
and obvious jokes, a lame story which goes nowhere, and Carrey seemingly
trying too hard to make us laugh. I can't really put my finger on the exact
thing which didn't work in this movie, but after the first 20 minutes or so,
I just sort of sat there and smirked sporadically. Most of the time, I was
annoyed by the lengthy musical interludes between scenes, the Zellweger
factor, which we'll get into later and the "forced" comedy, especially all
the gross jokes and the physical comedy by Carrey, which just didn't seem to
work for me this time around. Mind you, I did hear a lot of others in the
audience laughing, and God knows this is the kind of movie which someone
either "gets" or not, but with its lengthy run-time and a surprisingly
distracting character in Carrey as his second personality Hank, the film
just left me feeling sort of blah. Of course, many people thought KINGPIN
sucked, and I totally loved that film, so perhaps this movie might jiggle
your funny bones, but for me, the buck stopped here. I'd rather watch DUMB
AND DUMBER over this any day.
Now I don't know whether or not my disinterest in this film has to do with
me having reached my saturation level on gross-out jokes (although I highly
doubt it...I'm a pretty messed up guy), the fact that the movie actually
tried to focus more on the story than any previous Farrelly film, or the
fact that the leading lady, Renee Zellweger, was just plain ol' boring. But
whatever the reason, I can't honestly recommend that you see this movie in
the theatres, unless you did actually find the trailer somewhat amusing,
since most of the jokes run around that sort of gamut anyway. The corny
name-calling didn't really work for me, the rehashed "crazy" dude that they
pick up didn't really work for me, and Carrey's irritating Dirty Harry voice
didn't really work for me. The one thing that did really work for me was the
first third of the film (before Zellweger got in there), with its comforting
feel, funny jokes, and three black sons. Unfortunately, the rest of the film
lost that same feel inside an idiotic plot which I honestly didn't really
care about, and Carrey's physical gags, which just left me with a strong
sense of deja-vu. Mind you, I didn't hate the film by any means, in fact, I
was thinking about recommending it even slightly for the black son scenes
alone, but in the end, the film just sort of disappeared from my mind after
a couple of minutes, and it certainly can't be put in the same category as
any of the big hits from any of its prime participants.
In the end, there was something about this movie that just didn't work.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Several previous actors from Farrelly films are back in this one, including
Roy Munson's dad from KINGPIN, actor Danny Green, who plays the "bad guy" in
this film. Rob Moran (husband of TV's "Entertainment Tonight" reporter Erin
Moran), who played the rich, eccentric bowler in KINGPIN, and plays a local
trooper in this one. And Lin Shaye, who played the wonderfully ugly landlady
in KINGPIN and the old tanned woman in THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY.
Some sports stars also make cameo appearances in this film, including none
other than the sexy tennis star, Anna Kournikova, who has a line as the
motel manager. Retired hockey star Cam Neely also reprises his role as
Seabass in his one (although I didn't notice if he had any lines), and even
current hockey star Brendan Shanahan shows up as a trooper.

Author
Susan Granger
This scatological comedy will score at the box-office since there's
definitely an audience for the gross gags and toilet jokes but it's no "There's Something About Mary." Jim Carrey plays Charlie, a mild-mannered Rhode Island state trooper suffering from a split-personality disorder. Flashback 18 years to when his wife left him for the brainy, vertically-challenged limo driver (Tony Cox)  who fathered their African-American triplets whom Carrey has raised as a proud, loving father. The boys become rowdy, jive-talking geniuses (Jerod Mixon, Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee) but, having repressed his anger and resentment too long, Charlie's suddenly got company - a foul-mouthed, aggressive alter ego named Hank. And they've both fallen for Renee Zellweger, a feisty, quirky gal who's on-the-lam from shady EPA investigators (Chris Cooper, Richard Jenkins) in a pointless plot. In the Jekyll-Hyde transformation, "Rip Van Wussy" Carrey cavorts and contorts, much to the amazement of his sympathetic supervisor (Robert Forster) and a psychotic albino (Mi!
chael Bowman) who joins the road adventure.  Directed and written by Bobby and Peter Farrelly, plus Michael Cerrone, unfortunately this romantic farce lacks the sweetness and outrageous fun of the Farrelly's earlier films. But they're still pushing the envelope of bad taste, including a redefinition of "hanky-panky" involving a rubber appliance, chicken-abuse, cow-shooting, reprising Woody Harrelson's milk-mustache from "Kingpin," and a unique marriage proposal. And the end credits are novel, citing each and every performer. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Me, Myself and Irene" is a crass, raunchy 4. Like Charlie, this movie is origami - it folds under pressure.

Author
Shay Casey
Year: 2000. Starring Jim Carrey, Renee Zellweger, Robert Forster, Chris
Cooper, Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, Jerod Mixon, Michael Bowman,
Traylor Howard, Tony Cox. Written by Peter Farrelly, Mike Cerrone, and
Bobby Farrelly. Directed by Bobby Farrelly and Peter Farrelly. Rated R.
It seemed like the perfect concept. What better for the Farrelly
Brothers, famous for writing and directing comedies with offensive
subject matter, than to make a movie about a guy with a split
personality? It's exactly the sort of thing the Brothers relish:
poking fun at something serious (in this case mental illness), throwing
all care to the wind to get a laugh. Jim Carrey's signed on too?
Even better. The National Alliance for the Mentally Ill even helped out
by levying complaints against the Brothers' new film before its
opening, claiming it was misrepresenting the condition of split
personality, labeling it incorrectly as "schizophrenia," and so forth.
Such a protest seemed like just the sort of thing that would, of course,
only add more fuel to the Farrelly Brothers' fire, proving that
some people just couldn't take a joke, and that the Farrellys would
be helping the more enlightened viewers to yet another dose of their
brilliantly subversive comedy.
Yes, it all seemed perfect, but one thing went wrong: Their movie
isn't funny.
It's not for lack of trying. The Farrellys utilize in "Me, Myself &
Irene" their most high-concept premise ever: Carrey plays Charlie
Baileygaites, a man who after being dumped by his wife for a midget limo
driver, decides to bury all his aggressive feelings deep down inside and
never release them. This, of course, means all his neighbors exploit his
entirely too-forgiving nature, making his job as a Rhode Island state
trooper increasingly difficult. Soon enough, Charlie's repressed
aggression manifests itself into a second, independent personality named
Hank, a deep-voiced, boorish ogre unafraid of taking the assertive
actions his predecessor had been unable to muster. This guy isn't
above crashing a car through the wall of the barber shop in which
he's been insulted, or holding a little girl's head
underwater because she refused to stop jump-roping in the street.
Then things start getting lost in the most complicated plot the Farrellys
have ever attempted, and the film runs off its tracks. Some have
suggested that this isn't a problem, because the Farrelly
Brothers' brand of humor doesn't require plot to work.
They're wrong, of course: Plot was greatly instrumental in building
up the kind of rollicking comic energy that infused the Farrellys'
last effort, 1996's "There's Something About Mary."
(1999's "Outside Providence" was technically an earlier project.)
The brothers' earlier film wasn't funny merely because it
contained outrageous gags (despite what some newsmagazine articles would
have you believe), but rather because its most outrageous gags were
entirely unexpected. In "Mary," the Farrellys managed several times to
pull off a neat sleight-of-hand trick: They'd have you thinking the
story was going one way, then reveal its real direction in delightfully
surprising fashion.
"Me, Myself & Irene," by contrast, seems to have been made by folks who
looked at "Mary" and saw only the surface grossness, missing all of the
subtle machinations that really made it work. Having been produced by the
same guys who made "Mary," "Irene" seems like an even bigger
disappointment. The brothers pile on the offensive humor, taking shots at
race, midgets, albinos, mental illness, and all manner of bathroom jokes.
But they haven't come up with a way to make any of it fresh most
of "Me, Myself & Irene" comes off as rote, by-the-numbers, adolescent
comedy. The plot, with Carrey forced to drive alleged fugitive Irene P.
Waters (Renee Zellweger), who's in more trouble than anyone knows,
back to New York, has an ending that's entirely predictable from
the get-go. (Think Charlie and Irene will fall in love? Yeah, me too.)
The Farrellys then introduce scores of different characters, and none of
them ever manage to do anything you haven't already expected them
to do, no matter how outrageous their actions might be. Compared to the
curveballs the Farrellys are used to throwing, this stuff is almost
entirely soft-tossed, presenting an obvious problem: When gross-out humor
loses its shock value, it's no longer funny, merely gross.
The jokes that do work are milked over and over until their effectiveness
runs dry. Take, for example, the subplot involving Charlie's three
Black sons (Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, Jerod Mixon). The
incongruity of it all is funny for a while, with three burly Black men
discussing higher math in ghetto language and white-bread Carrey mouthing
said language with an entirely too-pleasant smile on his face. But by the
end of the film, they're still doing the same schitck it
hasn't been elevated to another, funnier level, and it hasn't
been dropped either. That's too bad, because it ceases to be
amusing about halfway through. "Me, Myself & Irene" reeks of wasted
opportunities. There ought to be more focus on how other people react to
Charlie's new personality, and on how Charlie deals with the
consequences of Hank's actions. This doesn't really happen
nearly every supporting character learns about Charlie's condition
early on, so they don't have any opportunity to be surprised by it.
The film throws what looks like a patented Farrelly curve in a scene
towards the midway point (involving an albino companion Charlie and Irene
pick up called, appropriately, "Whitey"), but the script doesn't go
anywhere with it, instead leaving the thread twisting in the wind before
awkwardly tying it up during the climax.
Jim Carrey is a gifted comedian, both physically and vocally, but
he's left with nothing much to do here except contort himself in a
manner similar to Steve Martin in "All of Me." It's a great
showcase of flexibility and split-second role-shifting, but none of it is
terribly funny. Carrey doesn't pull any stunts we don't
expect him to pull, and the Farrellys' script doesn't give
him anything else to pull: The situations in which he must perform the
role-shifting aren't set up in any meaningful way. Perhaps Carrey
can take solace in the fact that his supporting actors fare no better.
Zellweger's Irene is not a strong female lead Mary in "Mary" may
have been part adolescent fantasy, but she was also intelligent and
strong-willed. Irene is nothing in particular, as the film never makes
clear whether she's ditzy, clever, or neither. As such, she gives
us nothing to latch onto as the only "sane" person in the film. Chris
Cooper is stuck playing exactly one note as a corrupt FBI agent, and his
character is entirely too straight-laced for a movie like this. He, like
the others, does absolutely nothing unexpected.
After viewing the shapeless mess that "Me, Myself & Irene" eventually
dissolved into, I was stuck wondering whether or not the Farrellys had
outsmarted themselves. Maybe their kind of comedy can only work for so
long until audiences get wise to it and stop being shocked. But I
don't believe it -- good filmmakers find ways of surprising their
audiences even after people have grown attuned to their style. If the
Farrellys are indeed good, smart filmmakers (and I still think they are),
they'll rebound just fine. Even after that happens, though,
I'll still consider "Me, Myself & Irene" to be a high-caliber
misfire.
For more reviews, go to http://www.geocities.com/sycasey/movies.html

Author
Laura Clifford
The Farrelly Brothers try to push the outer edge of outrageousness they 
established with "There's Something About Mary" in their newest flick "Me,
Myself & Irene."  While it has its moments, they should be thankful they
had the wisdom to reteam with their "Dumb and Dumber" star, Jim Carrey,
because without his talent, this could have been a dismal effort.
Carrey is Charlie, a nice, fastidious Rhode Island state trooper who we're
introduced to in a flashback chronicling his sticky sweet romance and
subsequent wedding.  While his wife (Traylor Howard, TV's "Two Guys and
a Girl") professes to be his soul mate, she falls for their Black midget
limo driver on her wedding day when they both discover they're
Mensa chapter heads after he tries to pin Charlie with a nonexistent 
racial slur.  Charlie never seems to notice when his three sons are all
born Black and loves them unreservedly.  Charlie also gets no respect from
the townsfolk he serves or his newspaper-stealing neighbor.  When Charlie's
wife finally decides to run away with her long-time lover (the kids are
entering college by this time), Charlie snaps and Hank emerges to deal with 
Charlies long supressed rage.
No sooner is Charlie put on medication to control Hank's manic outbursts
(like reciprocating his neighbor's dog's 'lawn presents' personally 
on his neighbor's lawn), then he's tasked with returning Irene (Rene
Zellwegger, "Jerry Maguire"), who's being framed by her ex-boyfriend,
to upstate New York to face trumped up charges.  Of course, the medication
is left behind, Charlie and Hank are both attracted to Irene, and everyone
in their path seems to want to kill them.
This last aspect is perhaps, one of the biggest problems with the screenplay of
"Me, Myself & Irene" (the Farrellys and Mike Cerone), as Irene's problems
with her ex are never clarified, nor is it made clear why so many corrupt
cops and mob guys seem to be involved or why Irene's knowledge deserves
her death warrant.  This run, stop for comedic Charlie/Hank/Irene interlude,
run, stop, run plot mechanic creaks along flatly.  The only saving grace is
that Charlie's three large, extremely smart sons (they argue over physics
homework) figure out he's in trouble and begin a rescue mission which is
returned to occasionally.
Carrey gives a great, manic yet controlled physical performance.  He's ramrod
earnestness as Charlie and leering maniac as Hank.  His transformation from
one to the other, especially initially, is a marvel to behold (and seemed to
foreshadow his transformation into the Grinch, coming later this year).  He
gets all the good lines, romancing Irene with 'your eyes are all squinty and
your mouth's puckered up like you've been sucking on a lemon, but it works.'
If that doesn't describe Zellwegger - perfect!  However, he's also given some
pretty unsavory stuff to work with (particularly with regards to an oversized
sex toy) that verges on just plain distasteful, rather than distastefully
funny (i.e., Mary's hair gel).
Other than Carrey, only the three young actors who play his sons really get
a chance to shine, as they get dad to switch the TV from Gomer Pyle to Richard
Pryor and continue to grow up in a healthily profane manner.  Zellwegger is 
mostly stuck in reactive mode.  Chris Cooper ("American Beauty") is utterly 
wasted as a corrupt cop and plays the role humorously.  Faring slightly better 
is Robert Forster ("Jackie Brown"), who at least emotes with an air of 
cluelessness suitable to the material.
"Me, Myself & Irene" is a disappointment from the Farrelly perspective, but
Carrey fans at least should appreciate his take on the split personality -
the performance is a lot more alive than the Andy Kaufman impersonation he
gave in his previous film.
Peter and Bobby Farrelly have made their own imprint on mainstream comedy these
past few years with their debut hit, "Dumb and Dumber," the underrated
"Kingpin," and the overrated "There's Something About Mary." Now, six years
after "D&D," the pair reunites with Jim Carrey in a story about a nice guy cop,
Charlie, who loves his job, but keeps his frustrations inside. He develops an
alter ego, the sexually compulsive Hank, and the two vie for the affection of a
pretty fugitive in "Me, Myself & Irene."
Charlie is a member of the "best law enforcement organization in the country,"
the Rhode Island State Police, but he has a problem. He's just too easy going.
So much so, in fact, that everyone takes advantage of his amiable nature. His
wife left him for a black-midget-genius-limo-driver. Charlie is left to raise
their three boys - triplets who are definitely not the fruit of Charlie's loins
- and has never gotten over the desertion. He's also such a nice-guy sucker
that people treat him without respect to his authority. Scofflaws act as if he's
their personal valet. Even kids treat him like dirt - "My daddy says I don't
have to listen to you!" one petulant little girl tells him
The hapless cop snaps one day and out pops Hank. Charlie's alter ego exacts the
retributions the nice-guy cop can't, but Hank's violent actions earn Charlie a
stay under psychiatric care. He is eventually allowed back on duty, but he has
to take his medication every six hours.
Enter Irene (Renee Zellweger), a pretty young woman passing through town who
gets arrested for an out-of-state warrant and Charlie is selected to drive her
back to upstate New York. The warrant is a fake, though, as Irene is really
being sought by her former boss, Dickey, who thinks she has the dirt on his
shady dealings. He brings in a corrupt cop (Chris Cooper) and EPA investigator
(Richard Jenkins) to go after Irene with deadly intent and it's up to
Charlie/Hank to save her.
The only real attraction to "Me, Myself & Irene" is the sometimes-brilliant
physical comedy of Jim Carrey. There is little in the way of a story, but lots
in the way of the visual comedy that centers on Carrey. The comic actor made
his mark with the goofy hi-jinx of "Ace Ventura: Pet Detective," and has shown
himself to have an amazing physical versatility. His Charlie/Hank has the
flexibility of Inspector Gadget. In one scene, Hank picks up the unconscious
Charlie and throws him in the back seat of a car. It is a terrific moment of
visual, physical comedy and rivals Steve Martin's great performance in "All of
Me."
The rest of the cast is left out in the cold. About the best that can be said
for the roles beyond Charlie/Hank is that none of the actors damaged their
careers, at least. Renee Zellweger acts well with Carrey, but is always the
second banana to the comedian. Robert Forster fades into the background as
Charlie's commanding officer. Chris Cooper looks like he's in pain as the
corrupt, bad guy cop. This, in particular, is a waste of a terrific character
actor. The only saving graces in the supporting roles are the three guys who
play Charlie's "sons." The genius trio combines discussion of metaphysics with
earthy jive talk that gives a funky edge to Charlie's family life and the only
other laughs in the flick.
The story, by the Farrelly brothers and Mark Cerrone, is, in a word, lame.
Actually, there are two stories - one, about Charlie/Hank and Irene; the other,
about Irene's plight. The latter story has no sense as Irene is ported back to
New York into the jaws of imminent death, but we never get a sense of why.
Nothing is done to explain why the bad guys - these are the blandest bad guys
I've seen in a long time - want to kill Irene. I realize that the film is a
vehicle for Carrey, but a sensible story is a necessity of film, too. The
Charlie/Hank yarn works about the way you'd expect with all the pratfalls and
slapstick you'd want.
"Me, Myself & Irene" is what I expected out of the Farrelly brothers, and less.
Their use of the comic talent of Jim Carrey assures them a solid stay at the
box office - especially since it is a performance that is worth the price of
admission. The rest of the film falls flat and lays, lifeless, as the antics of
Carrey prevail. The laughs are there and they all belong to Jim Carrey (and his
sons). I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Hollywood's bad boys are back.  Those equal opportunity offenders, the
Farrelly brothers (writer-directors Bobby and Peter), who gave us 1998's
funniest comedy, THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY, turn their insults this
time to subjects ranging from black Mensa dwarfs to killer albinos.
The biggest surprise in ME, MYSELF & IRENE is that watching the movie is
about as much fun as attending a fireworks display on a rainy Fourth of
July.  Most of the jokes fizzle like soggy rockets, but a few do burst
in a marvelous display of outrageous humor.
The problem with the jokes isn't that they are too offensive but rather
that they simply aren't funny.  The Farrelly brothers certainly
acknowledge no bounds.  Their star, Jim Carrey, even defecates on his
neighbor's lawn in order to scare up a few laughs.  Our admittedly
sparse audience found little in the picture worth laughing at.  Indeed
the jokes that do work are more cute than outright funny.  Whereas in
THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY I thought I was going to bust a gut, this
time I don't recall ever laughing loudly.
Carrey, as Charlie Baileygates (and his alter ego, the nefarious Hank),
work for "the world's greatest police force -- the Rhode Island State
Police," explains the film's purposely hokey narrator (Rex Allen, Jr.).
Charlie is a mild mannered guy who lets people run all over him.  When
his wife gives birth to black triplets, Charlie is the only guy around
who doesn't realize that his wife must have been cheating on him.  (The
kids grow up to be about 1,000 collective pounds of foul-mouthed wiz
kids, doted upon by Charlie.  His wife leaves him early in the story so
he is left to raise the kids on his own.)
One day, Charlie snaps.  His pent-up rage turns him into a "schizo" with
an evil personality named Hank.  Hank, who has more confidence than
ability, thinks he is invincible, which gets him into no end of trouble.
This leads to some of the film's best humor.  Hank ends up with an
unusual milk mustache in one clever scene.  Another funny episode
concerns his inaccuracy in his morning urination.
As Charlie's sweet companion, Renée Zellweger plays Irene P. Waters, a
woman in trouble.  Her ex-boyfriend has the EPA after him, and she finds
herself drawn into the controversy.  Soon corrupt cops (led by Chris
Cooper in a wasted role) are chasing her, and Charlie and Hank are along
for the ride, trying to defend her.  Carrey goes back and forth between
characters, enabling him to amply demonstrate his ability to transform
and contort his body in remarkable ways.  Although I didn't find it
funny, his fight with himself is certainly a tour de force of his
physical skills.
"Listen Pocahontas," Hank warns Irene.  "If you don't put your head to
the ground, you'll never hear the buffaloes coming."  The Farrelly
Brothers should have put their ears to the test screening walls more.
If they had, they might have heard that the laughs weren't coming as
they should on ME, MYSELF & IRENE.
ME, MYSELF & IRENE runs 1:56.  It is rated R for sexual content, crude
humor, strong language and some violence and would be acceptable for
older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Bobby and Peter Farrelly
Written by: Bobby and Peter Farrelly, Mike Cerrone
Charlie Baileygates (Jim Carrey back in comic form) is a member of the 
greatest police force in the US, the Rhode Island state police. He's got 
three children (Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, Jerod Mixon) who he loves 
with all his heart, even though they clearly aren't his (as one character 
says, they seem to have a year round tan); a wife who loved him till she ran 
off with a midget limo driver; and another personality named Hank. Charlie's 
life now consists of backing down from everything resembling a 
confrontation, or allowing Hank to take over and confront everything. His 
captain (a sadly underused Robert Forster) is giving him one last assignment 
before he may have to let Charlie go. Charlie's last assignment is to drive 
young Irene (Renee Zellweger) upstate to another precinct so she can settle 
a ticket her boss, Dickie (Danny Green), got while driving her car. After a 
short trip, the two arrive at the precinct and meet Lt. Gerke (Chris Cooper) 
and EPA Agent Boshane (Richard Jenkins). The two have questions for Irene 
about Dickie, and things get more than a little complicated from here.
I've always been a fan of Jim Carrey, even back when he was known as the 
white guy on "In Living Color". The man's an absolute master of physical 
comedy and over-the-top facial expressions, and he displays even more of 
this ability in "Me, Myself, and Irene". In fact, during those all too brief 
moments when Carrey is allowed to do his thing with complete abandon, the 
movie is absolutely hilarious. The problems are with the rest of its running 
time, filled with the Farrellys' trademark gross out jokes, which I have 
never cared for. For example, one scene showed a dog doing its business on 
Charlie's lawn while his neighbor watched. Half the audience exploded into 
laughter, while the other half (this was the half I was in) stared at the 
screen in silence - obviously missing the joke. Perhaps watching something 
like this is just too high-brow for me, and I'll always lack the 
intelligence to understand. The scenes I did find funny were ones where 
Carrey beat himself up far worse than what was done to him in "Liar, Liar" 
and one where Charlie and Hank argue about jumping over a bridge. These were 
the kinds of scenes that have made Carrey famous, and I wish the Farrellys 
had thought to include more of them.
"Me, Myself, and Irene" does boast a great supporting cast, but everyone in 
it is sadly underused. Robert Forster, who was terrific in "Jackie Brown", 
is given a total of about five minutes screen time. Chris Cooper, who turned 
in a stellar performance in "American Beauty" as the ex-marine father, is 
given one of the most useless characters in the film (and there are quite a 
few of them). Then we have Anthony Anderson, who is making quite a name for 
himself with hilarious performances in both "Romeo Must Die" and "Big 
Momma's House". Anderson is given one of the funniest parts, along with 
newcomers Brownlee and Mixon as the three beyond intelligent but also 
incredibly vulgar children of Charlie. I've heard the three might get there 
own movie, and I personally look forward to it. Last we have Renee Zellweger 
("Empire Records") as the only relatively normal person in a film full of 
crazies. Zellweger does an excellent job moving back and forth from being 
infuriated with Hank to crazy over Charlie and treating it like it makes 
perfect sense.
So, now that I've gotten through saying what wonderful performances were 
given by some of the cast members and how hilarious Carrey was, you're 
probably wondering why I rated the movie like I did. Well, there are two 
reasons besides the abundant use of gross-out gags. First, the plot is 
useless, cliched, boring, predictable, and a lot more complicated than it 
needed to be (that probably sounded like five reasons, didn't it?); Second, 
I hate movies that run past the point where they're welcome and "Me, Myself, 
and Irene" wears out its welcome with nearly a half hour to go. The movie 
runs a ridiculous 116 minutes, and it should have been only 90. There are 
actually three or four scenes that could be taken as climaxes when I promise 
one would have sufficed. There is one other redeeming quality thankfully, 
which is the nice, quiet soundtrack. It's full of older songs, which play 
softly in the background rather than covering up what the characters are 
saying (as seems to be the current trend). If you enjoyed "There's Something 
About Mary", there's a good chance you'll get a kick out of "Me, Myself, and 
Irene" since it does contain some of the same sexual humor. I'd recommend 
the movie to fans of the Farrellys and give it a slightly generous three out 
of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at: http://www.dependentfilms.net,
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Twentieth Century Fox/Conundrum Entertainment
 Director: Bobby Farrelly, Peter Farrelly
 Writer:  Peter Farrelly & Mike Cerrone
 Cast: Jim Carrey, Renee Zellweger, Chris Cooper, Robert
Forster, Richard Jenkins
  When I was in college back in the Jurassic Age, I roomed
with a guy named Frank for three years, first in the dorms,
then in the fraternity house.  While guys all around us were
giving their fraternity pins away and getting engaged, Frank
and I somehow managed to go through the four years without
even going steady.  Almost every time we discussed this
situation, Frank came up with the same explanation.  "Gee,
Harvey," he'd say (he came from Buffalo and people from
there really talk that way), "I don't know.  I get enough dates. 
I get the car washed, shine my shoes, and the girls I like
keep winding up with the fellas who repair cars, who have
grease under their nails.  What is it with me?"  I illuminated
him.  "You're just too nice, Frank.  You're showing the
women that you're a wee bit too desperate.  Women go for
the more down-to-earth types; not guys who treat them
wrong, but people who just seem, well, just seem more
manly."  Try as he might, Frank never could get away with an
act. He had to be himself.  Last time I saw him he was
married with three kids.
   "Me, Myself and Irene" is comedy with a subtext that reads
something like Frank's plight.  Two guys are fighting for the
same gal.  One is Charlie, the nicest guy you can ever meet. 
Charlie, who is a proud member of the Rhode Island State
Police, would do anything for you.  In one situation in a
supermarket in his home state, a young woman asks to get
ahead of him in the line because she was in a real hurry. 
Charlie smiles and said, "Sure."  No sooner does he withdraw
from the line then the young mom calls out to her little ones
who appear out of nowhere with carts filled to the sky with
food.  In another situation, Charlie opens the door of his
modest suburban home to find his newspaper missing.  "My
wife is in the john," says his next door neighbor (using a
more vulgar term for the lavatory since, after all this is a
Farrelly Brothers film), "She'll be out soon and you can have
the paper."  Big smile from Charlie once again, but with a hint
of a frown.  Is this the kind of guy that can find a woman? 
Maybe.  In fact Charlie was married for a brief time until the
Mrs. (who, like Charlie, is white) took off with vertically
challenged, African-American limo driver leaving her soon-to-
be-ex husband with three babies who, in the words of one
neighbor, looked suspiciously like kids who had a year-round
suntan.
   "Me, Myself and Irene" shows what happens when you're
too nice for too long, setting up an intriguing gimmick.  The
trooper, pushed to the wall, finally splits into his gentle self
(Charlie) and his temperamental self, Hank, a kind of Jekyll-
Hyde transformation that sees the poor man changing
unpredictably from the benign to the malicious.  Both Charlie
and Hank are played by the inimitable Jim Carrey and the
woman wooed in turn by the two dispositions is the charming
and beautiful Renee Zellweger in the title role of Irene.
Since Irene is suspected of turning a dime on a corrupt
corporate bigwig, Dick (Daniel Greene), who has quite a few
members of the police force and judiciary in his pocket, Irene
is on the run.  The Farrellys put Irene in Charley's hands,
turning "Me, Myself and Irene" into a road-and-buddy movie. 
Now Irene is courted by the congenial young trooper with a
history of being dumped on, but just blink and she is more
roughly pursued by the coarse and vulgar Hank, who believes
that he has a better chance of winning fair maiden by his
brand of behavior.
   Political correctness is anathema to the Farrellys as the
writer-director team with the input of scripter Michael Cerrone
push the envelope once again to get laughs from the
audience.  In our era of ever-increasing ribald stand-up
comedy (in the tradition of Richard Pryor and Chris Rock),
the Farrellys believe that people are so accustomed to
offensiveness that Doris Day comedies will hardly bring more
than jeers from a movie constituency out for a good time. 
Stereotyping minorities of all sorts (majorities too) and
shaking up the patronizing politeness by which the
handicapped are often treated, Bobby and Peter Farrelly take
aim at the vertically challenged and albinos and, in one brief
moment, lesbians--while portraying African-Americans with all
the stereotypical baggage with which we associate rap stars. 
We're treated to outrageous portrayals of Charlie's three sons
(stepsons, actually), Shonte Jr. (Jerod Mixon), Jamaal
(Anthony Anderson) and Lee Harvey (Mongo Brownlee), who
are exceptionally smart and devoted to their white daddy--
which of course has nothing to do with their surplus use of
the mofo word.  
   Some Farrelly Brothers' excesses include a unconventional
use with which a chicken is put to use, and a similarly
unorthodox use to which a rubber gadget is manipulated. 
There are plenty of pratfalls, as Charlie/Hank somersaults
into a moving convertible like O.J. in a Hertz commercial, falls
over a bridge into the rapids, and crashes his car into the
shop of a local merchant who regularly treats Charlie like a
fall-guy.  
   If "Me, Myself and Irene" were the first movie to push the
envelope, i.e. if the Farrellys had not affronted their very-
willing-to-be-offended audience earlier in their career, this
would be the great summer comedy of the year.  This time
around, the demons of degradation pull back from the joyous
anarchy that garnered for them awards from the New York
Film Critics Circle and Golden Globe nominations in "There's
Something About Mary."  There's nothing in the current
picture that quite matches up to the delightfully sophomoric
comedy of that showcase for Cameron Diaz's talent as the
so-called hair-gel scene, but there are lots of smaller gags
that work their way into our funny bones--particularly one
scene that shows what Charlie does when he gets up in the
morning after spending the night with Irene, goes to the
bathroom, and has repeatedly bad aim while standing over
the toilet.
   The chemistry between the multi-talented Jim Carrey and
the now-feisty Renee Zellweger is palpable.  We can't help
wishing that the two will get together for good in the end (so
to speak): despite the fraternity-house laughs that punctuate
this film, the poignancy that informs the final scene is solid. 
Carrey does not rely any more on the facial contortions he
exercised in "Mask" but changes almost imperceptibly from
Charlie to Hank.  There's just a different look in his eyes and
his voice changes from fragile to menacing to let us know
which guy we're looking at during each moment.  Zellweger is
perfect as the straight person, generally reacting with just the
right change of expression each time Charlie turns into Hank,
showing her disgust with the tough-guy attitude and warming
up to the agreeable fellow she always knows is there.
   So you see, Frank my old college buddy, things do work
out, even for guys like you.  The hard workers with the
grease under their fingernails get together with the women
who love them, and, well, Frank, you now have three grown
kids and a wife that remains happily by your side to prove
that nice guys like you and Charlie don't always finish last.
Rated R.  Running time: 115 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
The ads for Jim Carrey's new film announce he's going `from gentle to
mental.' The slogan refers to Carrey's character in Me, Myself & Irene,
the new comedy from the dick/shit joke factory known as the Farrelly
brothers, but it could just as easily apply to the $20 million man's
decision to sign on to Irene.  He's reverted from (near) Oscar-worthy
performances to the type of hyperactive, lowbrow comedy that made him a
star.
In Irene, Carrey (Man on the Moon) plays Charlie, a well-adjusted Rhode
Island State Trooper complete with typical cop moustache. Described as a
really nice guy, Charlie also has a beautiful girlfriend named Layla
(Traylor Howard, Two Guys and a Girl), and the film opens with the happy
couple getting hitched. But things start to unravel for Charlie pretty
quickly, as he gets his ass kicked by Shonte (Tony Cox, Friday), the
newlyweds' genius black midget limo driver.
But that's just the tip of the iceberg, as far as Charlie's troubles are
concerned. Nobody takes him seriously, from the neighbor that steals his
newspaper, to his co-workers, to the citizens he's supposed to serve and
protect. Oh, and there's the little matter of the severely tanned
triplets that Layla has given birth to. Their names are Jamal, Lee
Harvey and Shonte, Jr. - you do the math. Layla eventually leaves
Charlie and the kids to live alone in their garage-sized house.
As a result of the entire world walking all over him, Charlie develops
another personality - a rude, no-nonsense bad-ass named Hank - that
emerges in a very funny scene set in a supermarket. As you can imagine,
Carrey plus a split personality equals a lot of nifty physical comedy
that nobody else in the world would be able to pull off. There's a scene
toward the end where Charlie is fighting Hank (or vice-versa), and
Carrey does such a good job, it almost looks fake.
Unfortunately, Irene doesn't quite measure up to any of the three
previous Farrelly brothers' films (There's Something About Mary, Kingpin
and Carrey's Dumb and Dumber). The main problem is with a convoluted
storyline involving a woman named Irene (Renée Zellweger, The Bachelor)
who Charlie/Hank must escort from Rhode Island to Massena, New York.
Irene is embroiled in some sort of big business/police cover-up deal
that's way too detailed for this kind of film.  And there are no
bust-your-gut-laughing scenes, like the Stiller vs. Dog set piece in
Mary.
As a result, the film is flat in too many spots, and wastes time setting
up its unnecessarily complicated plot when it could have had more gags
about feces and urine. Irene was originally supposed to be about Siamese
twins (played by Carrey and Woody Allen) that fall for the same girl,
but that idea was scrapped when Allen didn't sign on to the project. The
Farrellys dusted off an old script that they co-wrote with an old friend
(Mike Cerrone - he plays a police officer, too).
Like the previous three Farrelly films, Irene is chock-full of offensive
material that is bound to piss a lot of people off. But the Farrellys
are equal opportunity offenders and leave no stone unturned. They mock
blacks, albinos, lesbians and just about any other group you can attach
a name to. And there are sight gags a-plenty (like Charlie crammed onto
the couch with his three gigantic black sons), which leaves Zellweger as
the straight man in all of her scenes with her real-life beau Carrey (I
think she sets some kind of film record for the most number of
horror-struck double takes).
Irene is narrated by Rex Allen, Jr., who, like William Preston Robertson
in Raising Arizona and Sam Neill in The Big Lebowski, uses a slow
Southern drawl to tell the story via flashback. The film also features
cameo appearances by tennis pin-up princess Anna Kournikova and former
Boston Bruin puck-head Cam Neely. Sadly, Farrelly staple Lin Shaye
(she's the one who French-kissed the dog in Mary) appears briefly in
only one scene.
1:56 - R for strong sexual content, crude humor, adult language and
violence

Author
Bill Chambers
(Film, DVD, and books about movies reviews. Essays. Contests.
http://filmfreakcentral.net
Bring a friend.)
starring Jim Carrey, Renee Zellweger, Chris Cooper, Michael Bowman
screenplay by Peter Farrelly & Mike Cerrone & Bobby Farrelly
directed by The Farrelly Brothers
Memo to the Farrelly Brothers (There's Something About Mary, Kingpin):
comedies don't need plot, they need jokes. While watching Me, Myself &
Irene, I thought back to a bit from that show of shows, "The Simpsons",
in which papa Homer wails "Be funny!" as he attacks the television
during an especially lame program. The film's dense (in every sense of
the word) screenplay, an unseemly love letter to Rhode Island (the
Farrellys' birthplace), is beneath Jim Carrey, who is given precisely
two notes to play that he has dwelled upon enough already.
Charlie (Carrey), a Rhode Island state trooper, has let people walk all
over him for years; his bottled hostility has finally come uncorked and
manifested itself in the form of a second personality by the name of
Hank, a swaggering, Clint Eastwood-type with zero powers of repression.
The police force puts him on medication, then asks him to escort a cutie
pie criminal (Renee Zellweger, still wincing) from Rhode Island to
Messena, where her arrest warrant awaits.
We expect that their trip to Messena will comprise the bulk of the
story, and that along the way Charlie will lose or forget to take his
pills and hulk out. Despite the odds, he and Irene will fall in love.
But Me, Myself & Irene needlessly goes and gets itself a villain--worse,
one with an entirely incomprehensible motive. Chris Cooper, an actor not
famed for his comic gifts, is embarrassingly earnest as the heavy.
Even prior to Cooper's entrance, the theatre begins to smell like flop
sweat. Carrey's patented fearlessness provokes a couple of belly laughs
early on, but his performance, a sort of Jekyll & Hyde revue of his
Truman Show and Cable Guy personas, grows old fast. Contributing to this
over-familiarity is a climax that effectively duplicates Liar, Liar's
hilarious bathroom brawl between Carrey and himself. (And yet the
Farrellys snipped a moment in which Carrey had sex with a watermelon
because it too closely resembled American Pie's pastry rape.)
Everything about Me, Myself & Irene lacks edge, including the gross-out
gags (the second best of which the filmmakers have the nerve to
apologize for in a quick, closing credits take) and shockingly unfunny
narration (whose tediousness is highlighted by the brothers' tendency to
allow for hypothetically lengthy giggles with slow-paced editing).
Stay through to the bitter end for a mildly amusing post-script.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The American public was introduced to the subject of split
personality with the 1957 film THE THREE FACES OF EVE.  Two years
later Hitchcock used the concept for horror impact in PSYCHO.  Since
then the concept has frequently been used in comedy, but rarely
well.  Steve Martin may have come the closest to a good comedy about
multiple personality in ALL OF ME (though technically speaking that
was more about spirit possession).  With that possible exception the
concept has never been used effectively in comedy.  ME, MYSELF, &
IRENE is not an exception.
     Charlie Bailygates (played by Jim Carrey) is a gentle soul who
happens to be a Rhode Island State Trooper.  How he manages is
unclear because people just laugh at him and figuratively walk all
over him.  The whole town knows he is a soft touch and a nice guy.
And they rudely take advantage of his good nature.  Even after his
wife runs off with another man leaving him with three children he
still cannot express his sorrow and anger.  When it finally does
come out it is as a fully formed second personality, Hank.  But when
Charlie is asked to escort Irene (Renee Zellweger) to New York and
they runs afoul of some corrupt police, the extra personality comes
in handy.
     This film spreads itself thinly among three goals.  It wants to
be a chase film about police corruption, it wants to be a comedy
about split personality, and it wants to mix in as many crude jokes
as it can--the cruder the better.  The three tasks are really more
than it can handle well.  We find out various people who are
involved with the police corruption, but it is never explained what
it all about.  The schizophrenia plot is not very creative in its
ideas and certainly leaves room for a sequel with all new jokes
(Heaven help us).  The scatological humor could work well with
sufficient shock value, but even that is wearing thin.  It can spice
up a film that has enough else going for it, but by itself it does
not make the film worth seeing.  Less might very well be a little
more here.  Basically they need a plot that stands without the shock
jokes.  This one does not.
     Jim Carrey will never be in the Dustin Hoffman range of actors
in anything but paycheck, but here he has returned to the shock
humor that gave him his start.  He manages well as a physical
comedian but the gags are stale.  Renee Zellweger plays his
bewildered foil in the kind of role Terri Garr used to take so well.
She has already done better and more challenging work.  We have the
super-mellow Robert Forster who does not have a lot to do as Jim
Carrey's superior in the state troopers.  Almost directly opposite
is Chris Cooper, who is getting a lot of roles these days.  Where
Forster seem so imperturbable, Cooper always looks like he is
holding back a storm of emotion.  He is probably wishing he could
get more roles like OCTOBER SKY.  I know I am.
     This is standard summer fluff and probably not a film that will
win any new fans for the Farrelly brothers comedies.  I give it 4 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.  (If you see it,
stay through the credits.)

Author
Homer Yen
What's the first warning sign that you're about to
watch dimwitted entertainment?  The answer is when the
program has a narrator that sounds oddly like the guy
who narrated "The Dukes of Hazzard" or the guy who
sings the theme from "The Beverly Hillbillies." 
Here's another question.  What is the filmmaking
Farrelly ("There's Something about Mary") brothers
best known for?  The answer is an incessant desire to
bring gross-out yuckiness to the big screen.   Here's
the final question.  What can you expect from this
film, which combines a doltish sounding narrator with
Farrelly-type material?  The answer is a dimwitted,
gross-out movie that is about as fun and gross as
changing 10-day old kitty litter.
The film features the likeable but milquetoast Charlie
(Jim Carrey) who has been with the Rhode Island police
force for over 18 years.  Despite his badge, uniform
and tenure, he just can't seem to garner any amount of
respect.  That's pretty bad when you're an officer of
the law.  When he asks that a car be moved, the owner
throws him the keys and asks him to move it, to which
Charlie bashfully agrees.  When he tries to ask a
toddler to stop playing in the street, she screams and
scares him off.  The whole town laughs at him, but
Charlie just ignores it all.   He manages to keep the
indignity repressed deep inside.  Even his most
traumatic and heartbreaking experiences are locked
away.  Charlie just swallows hard and graciously
accepts his predicament.
Eventually, his angry side begins to surface.  When
irritated, Charlie slips out of his sissy demeanor and
transforms into Hank, who comprises all of the pent up
heartache, disappointment, and frustration that
Charlie has ever endured but put away.  Charlie avoids
confrontation; Hank invites it (when one is present,
the other is suppressed).  This is where Carrey gets
to have the most fun, but his actions as Hank the
Avenger are more like acts of an overgrown bully.  For
example, he dunks a young girl in a fountain for
talking back, threatens a boy for slurping too loud,
and even steals an ice cream cone from another young
tyke.  Against adults who have slighted him, his
vengeance manifests into acts of wonton crudeness.
His behavior is becoming a liability to the
department, so they assign him to escort a prisoner to
upstate New York.  She's Irene (an adorable Renee
Zellweger) who we later learn is being hunted by her
mob boyfriend.  Irene's only chance of survival might
be Charlie.  But our hero is not mentally capable of
leadership and is constantly fighting a battle against
Hank for control of his body.  Most of the film
centers on this bizarre triangle between Charlie,
Hank, and Irene.
Alas, this becomes a tiresome plot.  The primary
problem is that the film lacks the insight needed to
resolve the inner battle between Charlie and Hank, and
the gags weren't nearly as funny as those bizarre
situations from "There's Something about Mary."  At
least those gags took the audience by surprise.  Here,
the Farrelly brothers are trying to notch the
grossness up one level, but it really borders on
humorless disgust.  The best moments are when Carrey
is allowed to be his limber, silly self.  He's a good
actor who convincingly transitions between his two
altered states.  And Zellweger can do no wrong as the
girl who likes Charlie but is fearful of Hank. 
Ultimately, "Me, Myself and Irene" felt as
out-of-focus as Charlie's schizophrenia. 

Author
Jonathan Richards
Written by the Farrelly Brothers  and Mike Cerrone
     When your comic inventiveness runs to a guy crapping on his 
neighbor's lawn or commandeering a suck at the breast of a nursing 
mother, you'd better have a helluva comic actor to bail you out.  This 
must have been the game plan of the Farrelly Brothers, looking to ride 
the wave of their gross-out blockbuster There's Something About Mary.  
They hired Jim Carrey, filmdom's highest-priced comedian, and gave him a 
script that could have been written during recess at junior high.  The 
guy does his best, but it's like bailing with a sieve.
     Carrey leaps, he crawls, he slithers, he rubber-faces, he crashes 
through windows and tumbles down embankments, he even drops his pants 
for that revenge squat (not the only time he'll lower his trousers in a 
search for laughs), but it's no use; Carrey is funny, but he's not that 
funny.
     He plays Charlie, a mild-mannered Rhode Island highway patrolman.  
His troubles start when he's humiliated on his wedding day by the 
African-American Mensa-president dwarf who chauffeurs the limo.  When in 
the fullness of time his wife produces black triplets, Charlie willingly 
suspends disbelief.  He raises them on Richard Pryor videos, and grown 
up, they become huge louts (Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, and Jerod 
Mixon) who use "motherfucker" as everything from article to adverb, but 
are actually smart.  When Charlie's wife runs off with the dwarf, he 
sublimates his feelings.  And develops Advanced Delusionary 
Schizophrenia with Involuntary Narcissistic Rage.  In other words, a 
split personality.  His alter ego is Hank, a mean, crude bastard with a 
Dirty Harry swagger who dishes out revenge.  Charlie has medicine to 
keep him bottled up, but when he forgets it, his evil genius bursts 
loose.
     There's a plot.  Irene P. Waters (get it?), played as wallpaper by 
a resigned Renee Zellweger, is a greenskeeper who may know something 
about a nefarious scheme that involves a rich guy and a golf course and 
most of the New York State Police.  It's important enough to have almost 
everyone in the movie except Carrey trying to kill her, but not 
important enough to tell us what it is.  Charlie's supposed to escort 
Irene back to New York and turn her over to the authorities, but when 
the attempts on her life start, he and Hank spring to the rescue, and 
both fall in love with her.
     By the end of this mess I was trying to find places to laugh out of 
sympathy for Carrey, who really tries.  He does some nice 
two-characters-fighting-for-control-of-the-same-body schtick, but Steve 
Martin did it better in All of Me.  He works hard for his $20 million, 
but that sieve just won't hold water.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Reviewed by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
"Me, Myself and Irene" (2000) Grade: B-
Did you guffaw watching Edward Norton give his own
face a black eye in Fight Club, or better yet, Jim
Carrey "kick his own a-" in Liar, Liar? If so, Me,
Myself, And Irene may be just the cup of tea you've
been looking for. See Carrey punch himself. See Carrey
kick himself. See Carrey throw himself out of a moving
car. And that's only a small segment of the latest
Farrelly Farce. Enough gags for five movies, Irene,
like all of the Farrelly Brothers films, should be
great fun if you leave your respectability at the
front entrance. 
Jim Carrey takes a break from Oscar quest and returns
to the roots that made him larger than life. He plays
Charlie, a kind, passive wimp that's suffered from a
lot of stress over the past couple of decades. His
beautiful wife fell in love with another man, leaving
him all alone to take care of their three African
American children (see movie for an explanation).
Instead of getting angry or taking revenge, Charlie
just lets it be. As a member of the Rhode Island
police department, Charlie is picked on and bossed
around by everyone in the community, young and old.
Once again, Charlie lets it be. Until one day, Hank
enters the scene. 
Hank is the other half of Charlie's split personality;
he's the one trapped inside the body unable to come
out for a little payback. But when Hank finally busts
loose, revenge has never been funnier. Soon the two
personalities are fighting over the same girl, Irene
(Renee Zelwegger), an innocent golf course supervisor
all of the stereotypical baddies are after. 
Me, Myself, and Irene starts off with some huge laughs
and doesn't let up until half way through.
Unfortunately, the second half loses so much energy
that compared to the first half it will be hard to sit
through. Sure there are some clever quips here and
there but it is nothing like the rapid fire of jokes
thrown at you during the first forty five minutes. The
film just takes a wrong turn towards conventionality,
and from the Farrelly Brothers past work, this is
unexpected.
Carrey gives a wonderful performance; both physically
and verbally. As Charlie, he is hysterical because he
is so pathetic; a bumbling oaf of a protagonist who
couldn't be more of antihero. As Hank, the character
is to Rhode Island what Shaft is to New York. He's got
an exaggerated "cool guy" voice, a bible full of one
liners and he takes the law into his own hands. But
poor Hank is stuck in a puny body; with a figure like
this - how is he supposed to win any bar fights?
The rest of the cast does a nice job settling for
second place to Carrey's dominance. Like There's
Something About Mary, Kingpin and Dumb and Dumber, odd
supporting characters are inevitable. Charlie's
triplets are very funny as geniuses who are heavily
influenced by the vocabulary of foul mouth comics such
as Richard Pryor or Chris Rock. And there are others 
(humans and animals) who should remain nameless to
heighten your enjoyment. Zelwegger is satisfying
enough as the girl Charlie/Hank go gaga over. She is
never given a chance to deliver any funny lines but
she sets up Carrey for quite a few and I suppose that
is her purpose in the film. 
This is Carrey's show though and he knows how to
control a movie like the best of them: 
Who's the cop that will cop out when there's danger
all about? Hank! Can you dig it?

Author
Christopher Null
     After just missing Oscar gold with performances in The Truman Show
and Man in the Moon, Jim Carrey returns to the dramatic form for a third
bid at the little statue with a heart-rending performance as a victim of
split-personality disorder in the soulful drama Me, Myself & Irene.
     Yeah, and Adam Sandler is a gifted thespian.  With their
long-awaited follow-up to There's Something About Mary, the Farrelly
brothers return to their specialty -- gross-out shenanigans -- in this
equally funny entry into their oeuvre of perversion.
     The story involves the naďve and lovable Charlie (Carrey), a Rhode
Island state trooper who finds himself the whipping boy of the entire
state due to his welcome-mat demeanor.  Even children tell him to stick
it to himself.  And have I mentioned his new bride births triplets with
a black midget, running off with the father to leave Charlie to care for
the boys as his own?  No doubt about it, you're in Farrelly
brothers-land now...
     The story gets jump-started when Irene (Renée Zellweger) enters the
picture, and through a series of mishaps Irene and Charlie find
themselves on the run from a crooked golf course owner(!?) throughout
the northeast U.S.  And there's one other problem: Charlie has mentally
snapped, taking on a second personality of "Hank," Charlie's utter
opposite -- lover, fighter, and smooth-talker.
     Irene relies on two things to make itself the off-the-charts comedy
it truly is:  potty humor and the ability of Carrey to do pantomime
(mainly via beating himself up a la Fight Club).  And did I mention the
potty humor?  We're not talking fart-joke-as-afterthought.  We're
talking chicken-up-a-man's-butt as critical plot point.  We're talking
clear-the-theaters gross-out stuff... stuff that the Farrelly brothers
do so well it's better than poetry.
     Zellweger plays the straight (wo)man admirably well in the shadow
of Carrey's insane slapsticker.  If only the plot had been better -- or
rather, if only there had been a plot at all -- the movie might have
become a classic.  As it is, the film makes almost no sense at all,
having something to do with the aforementioned golf course and an
unnamed scandal therein, somehow peripherally involving Irene.  Mary was
clever.  Irene is just plain dumb.
     But no matter.  Irene is so easy on the eyes and on the funny bone
it practically begs for a sequel.  (Discerning viewers: Watch for cameos
by sports stars Anna Kournakova and Cam Neely, and a eye-popper from
late-night cable queen Shannon Whirry.)
Director: Bobby Farrelly, Peter Farrelly
Producer: Bobby Farrelly, Peter Farrelly, Bradley Thomas
Writer: Peter Farrelly, Mike Cerrone, Bobby Farrelly
Starring: Jim Carrey, Renée Zellweger, Chris Cooper, Robert Forster,
Richard Jenkins, Michael Bowman, Ezra Buzzington, Traylor Howard
http://www.memyselfandirene.com/
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html">
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Scott Renshaw
ME, MYSELF & IRENE
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Jim Carrey, Renee Zellweger, Chris Cooper, Robert Forster,
Richard Jenkins, Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, Jerod Mixon.
Screenplay:  Peter Farrelly & Mike Cerrone & Bobby Farrelly.
Producers:  Bradley Thomas & Bobby Farrelly & Peter Farrelly.
Directors:  Bobby Farrelly & Peter Farrelly.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, sexual situations, violence)
Running Time:  116 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The National Alliance for the Mentally Ill went public ten days
before the release of ME, MYSELF & IRENE with a protest of the film's
flippant tone towards multiple personality disorders. They were offended,
which is not an uncommon reaction to a Farrelly Brothers movie. In fact,
it was probably a shrewd move on NAMI's part to beat the rush condemning
ME, MYSELF & IRENE. Operating strictly from memory, here's a list of the
groups that could conceivably find something in the film to be offended
by: African-Americans, little people, African-American little people,
lesbians, law enforcement officers, animal rights activists, albinos,
nursing mothers, users of feminine itch remedies ... and, of course,
advocates for the mentally ill.
     Farrelly Brothers movies -- including KINGPIN and THERE'S SOMETHING
ABOUT MARY -- are tasteless, crude and, yes, occasionally offensive. 
They're also funny in the sort of I-can't-believe-I-actually-saw-that way
usually associated with vintage Mel Brooks, or the Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker
team. There's nothing remotely ennobling about ME, MYSELF & IRENE, the
story of Charlie Baileygates (Jim Carrey), a Rhode Island state trooper
with a little problem. After his wife leaves him for another man, Charlie
is left with three growing boys and a need to avoid confrontations. His
repressed id eventually takes the form of an alter-ego named Hank that
appears whenever Charlie is enraged and unmedicated. That little problem
becomes a big problem when Hank is assigned to escort Irene Waters (Renee
Zellweger) back to New York on an arrest warrant, and soon discovers that
Irene is being targeted by a corrupt cop (Chris Cooper) who thinks she
knows something about his activities. Unfortunately, Charlie has forgotten
his medication, meaning Charlie and Hank both have the opportunity to grow
infatuated with Irene while they're on the run.
     Fans of THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY -- and I count myself quite
squarely among them -- may find IRENE a bit disappointing by comparison. 
Carrey and Zellweger aren't nearly the perfect comic odd couple Ben
Stiller and Cameron Diaz were, nor is Carrey the sort of comic performer
whose ordinary guy demeanor works to balance the Farrellys' warped
sensibilities. The story is an unnecessarily convoluted parade of
double-crossing characters involved in a dirty business deal the specific
nature of which I still can't explain. There are a few missed
opportunities, like ignoring genial narrator Rex Allen, Jr. for much of
the film. And like the Farrellys' previous films, it's easily 15 minutes
longer than it needs to be, padded with musical cues that only distract
from the real reason for watching a Farrelly Brothers movie: seeing what
gut-busting affront to good taste they'll come up with next.
     Mere words can't possibly do justice to those affronts. IRENE's
finest moments may not reach the epic heights of MARY's zipper or hair gel
scenes, but they come close. There's a ridiculously funny running gag
involving Charlie's three "sons" from his wife's affair, a trio of immense
black youths with Mensa minds and Richard Pryor mouths. Hank's uninhibited
rampage of vengeance upon his first emergence gets more outrageous by the
moment. Then there's a morning visit to the lavatory that turns into a
battle between Charlie and his own excretory equipment. Sometimes it seems
that it's a long time between laughs in a Farrelly Brothers movie, but
maybe that's a good thing. Often, you still haven't recovered from the
last one five minutes ago by the time the next one rolls around.
     I'm not about to delve into whether or not NAMI was "right" in
criticizing IRENE for its approach to multiple personality disorder,
including repeatedly using "schizo" as a synonym. I do know that ME,
MYSELF & IRENE strikes me as a wildly comic spin on THE INCREDIBLE HULK
more than anything else, with Carrey's contorted transformations a special
effect all by themselves. That's only part of the amazingly adept physical
comedy Carrey pulls off, battling with his own body like Steve Martin in
ALL OF ME ... or, come to think of it, like Carrey himself in LIAR LIAR. 
This time, however, he doesn't have to fight against insipid moralizing. 
ME, MYSELF & IRENE may be uneven and peculiarly violent in its resolution,
but it's pure in its refusal to sentimentalize anything. Everything is
profane and nothing sacred in the Farrelly universe. Maybe that is worth
protesting. Or maybe, when you're laughing so hard that you forget to be
offended, it's worth applauding.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
ME, MYSELF & IRENE (2000)
Rated R; running time 118 minutes
Genre: Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0183505
Official site: http://www.memyselfandirene.com/
Written by: Bobby Farrelly, Peter Farrelly, Mike Cerrone
Directed by: Bobby Farrelly, Peter Farrelly
Cast: Jim Carrey, Renee Zellweger, Chris Cooper, Robert Forster,
Richard Jenkins, Mongo Brownlee, Anthony Anderson, Jerod Mixon,
Danny Green, Michael Bowman, Traylor Howard, Rob Moran, Lin Shaye
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsirene.html
The Diva, in her ME, MYSELF & IRENE review, was far too kind.  This
movie wasn't just bad; it was Ugly.  *Butt Ugly*.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Charlie (Jim Carrey), a mild-mannered Rhode Island motorcycle cop,
stands by while the world walks over him, especially his two-timing wife
Layla (Traylor Howard), who cheats on him with Chante Jackson (Tony
Cox), the Black chauffeur at his wedding.  Even when his "triplet" kids,
Jamaal (Anthony Anderson), Lee Harvey (Mongo Brownlee), and Chante Jr
(Jerod Mixon) come out looking remarkably more like Chante than him,
Charlie just grins and bears it--until Layla leaves him and Charlie
eventually snaps into two personalities: his mild, sexually-repressed
self, and "Hank", the angry, sexually-hungry, (and no longer) suppressed
side of him that Charlie "buried" inside when Layla ditched him.
Something-or-other about a dirt-dumb subplot involving Irene (Renee
Zellweger), the target of Charlie and Hank's affection, and bad cop Lt.
Gerke (Chris Cooper) and embezzlement at a golf course, ensues,
and...sorry, I can't be arsed to describe anything else about this inane
movie.  I'd really like to forget it ever happened, actually.
The Upshot:
Going into this flick, I of course knew it was a Farrelly Brothers
production--and what that exactly meant.  Shakespeare, it ain't; I can
dig that.  And though I avoided THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY like the
plague, I understood well in advance that the gross factor would be high
in "Irene".  "Gross", I could deal with.  "Jackass Stupid" and
"Unreasonably Meanspirited", however, pisses me off to no end.
"Irene" has no redeeming factors, or at least, those that might bring it
up from the sewer it occupies, are so damn subtle and underplayed that I
spent more time getting irritated by the grating music, the illogical
plotline [whoever came up with the Bad Turf Manager idea, needs their
butt whupped.  Now.], the foolishly empty characters, the bad acting,
Zellweger's nails-on-a-blackboard voice, and the crappy "special
effects" [that cow looked like a reject from the JAWS mechanical animals
pile] than in noticing any semblance of good within its l-o-n-g reels of
film [two bloody hours?  WHAT WERE THEY THINKING?  Oops.  Forgot.]  The
sound of silence--in the theater, and from the screen in between moments
of Slapstick Hijinx--was deafening.  And remember, this was supposedly a
comedy.  Oops.
The only tolerable thing about this whole movie--Jim Carrey's amazingly
agile body and the way he can contort it--was tempered by the knowledge
that he's Been There/Done That before; the child's play has played out,
bub.   All the Clint Eastwood voice-channelling in the world can't make
up for the fact that Carrey has quickly become a one-trick pony,
recycling the same characterization over and over, ad nauseum.  I kept
thinking to myself, "He gets paid $20 mil for this?  Where do I sign up
for Clown Lessons???".  Even the Rhode Island scenery was marred by the
thuddingly foolish decision by the directors to have Charlie covered by
bugs when he motored through the countryside on his Harley Electra Glide
Police Special.  Having just recently taken a cross-country trip on the
back *and* front of an Electra Glide, I'd complain about the fact that
That Just Wouldn't Happen, but since the balance of this film wouldn't,
either, what's the point?
Wasted potential grinds my gizzards.  Recycled waste served up as a
fresh dish, causes me to paint Yellow lights, Red.  I want that two
hours of my life, refunded to me, dammit.
The "Black Factor"  [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
In this day and age of so-called Political Correctness (about as stoopid
a term as "colorblindness"), one must be careful not to get ones hackles
raised when the group with which one closely affiliates--be it Blacks,
women, paraplegics, Catholics, World War II vets, soccer moms, what have
you--is targeted in a flick like "Irene".  The thin-skinned amongst us
might be read'ta take up arms, crosses, bazookas, what have you, to
protest Those Bad People Who Made Fun Of Us.
Me, I don't consider myself all that thin-skinned.  So when much fun was
made of Chante and the chip on his shoulder for being Black, a
chauffeur, and a dwarf, I barely batted an eye [but, take note, Farrelly
bros: Chante is a *girl's* name, ka peach?]  When that ho Layla tongued
(ewww) Chante right in front of Charlie, I almost lost my lunch, but my
temper was intact.  Even the "one-drop rule" joke made of Charlie's
"triplet" (uh huh) sons, elicited not much more than a roll of my big
brown eyes.
But when the brothers Farrelly implied that the only thing Charlie's
smart, Black sons got out of watching Richard Pryor, was the ability to
toss around cuss words like lettuce in a salad...well, them's fightin'
words, buster.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
The question is begged: is Jim Carrey a grossly overpaid but
Misunderstood Clown with a Lucille Ball-like gift for physical humor
(and little else)--or does he just have an unholy fixation with his ass?

Author
Bob Bloom

 Me, Myself & Irene (2000) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Jim Carrey, Renee
Zellweger, Robert Forster, Chris Cooper, Anthony Anderson, Mongo
Brownlee, Jerod Mixon and Michael Bowman. Written by Peter Farrelly &
Mike Cerrone & Bobby Farrelly. Directed by Bobby Farrelly & Peter
Farrelly. Rated R.
 The Farrelly brothers are insidious filmmakers. They force you to laugh
at situations and behavior that in real life you would feel guilty or
ashamed if you had a similar reaction.
 That is the depraved genius of these two irrelevant guys. They appeal
to everyone''s lowest basic instinct. So, you laugh at a man tied to a
tree butt naked with a chicken's head stuck where the sun don't shine.
 Or you laugh at three young black men with genius I.Q.s who talk and
curse as if they came from the meanest inner city ghetto in America. And
it's even funnier when their profanity is in German.
 These are just some of the examples of bad taste that abound in "Me,
Myself & Irene," Jim Carrey's latest outing, and his first with the
Farrellys since "Dumb and Dumber."
 Carrey plays Charlie Baileygates, a 17-year veteran of the Rhode Island
police force. He is a dedicated, nice guy, who lets everyone walk all
over him because he hates confrontation.
 Even when he loses his wife who presented him with three black sons by
the black, midget chauffeur who drove them to their honeymoon cottage,
he maintains his composure and becomes a loving, doting father.
 Carrey also plays Hank Baileygates, Charlie's ultra-aggressive
alter-ego. Hank loves confrontations, talking dirty, smoking and
fighting. He also is as honry as a rooster.
 It seems that Baileygates suffers from Split Personality Disorder.
Now, schizophrenia is not funny. And people who suffer from it, as well
as their friends and relatives, may take offense at "Me, Myself &
Irene."
 And I agree that such a disease is no laughing matter. But as portrayed
by Carrey and written by the Farrellys, with help from Mike Cerrone, no
one can really take Carrey or the way he presents this malady as a
serious look at the illness.
 "Me, Myself & Irene" is just an exercise for more of Carrey's
rubber-faced antics and slapstick physical humor. And the Farrellys
offer Carrey plenty of opportunities for pratfalls as Hank continually
clobbers Charlie.
 The movie's plot, which is only serviceable, has Charlie assigned to
convey an alleged hit-and-run driver from Rhode Island to upstate New
York.
 His prisoner, Irene Walters (Renee Zellweger), was framed and was
running away from her mobster ex-boyfriend.
 Actually, it's not important. What the movie boils down to is an
elongated chase with Charlie/Hank taking turns protecting and wooing
Irene, as well as Charlie/Hank fighting among himself for the young
woman's affections.
 Unfortunately, Zellweger, a very good actress as evidenced by her
performances in "Jerry Maguire" and "One True Thing," seems adrift
basically playing straight woman to Carrey's carrying-ons.
 She seems uncomfortable and unsure how to react to the madness going on
around her. Her performance is tentative and a bit weak.
 The film's true scene-stealers are the three young men who portray
Carrey's grown-up sons: Anthony Anderson as Jamaal, Mongo Brownlee as
Lee Harvey and Jerod Mixon as Shonte Jr. Their interaction as they
profanely debate quantum physics or taunt each other about the
universities that accepted them are priceless.
 Overall, the film's' pacing is a bit uneven and, at nearly two hours,
could have used some tighter editing.
 "Me, Myself & Irene" is strictly low-brow, slip-on-a-banana-peel
comedy. Its purpose is to make you laugh, even if you chide yourself
later for doing so.
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Reviews by Bloom, an associate member of the Online Film Critics
Society, can be found on the Internet Movie Database at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom
