Title
Review for Town & Country (2001)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Robin Clifford
Warren Beatty, Diane Keaton, Goldie Hawn and Gary Shandling star as a pair 
of married couples whose complacent lives are about to be shaken up in 
director Peter Chelsom's version of the classic romantic, screwball comedy 
in "Town & Country." 
The drawing room farce of the 30's dealt with sexual innuendo and relied on 
wit and a great deal of commotion and noise to place the viewer in the 
thick of the duplicitous romantic action. Back then, impossibly wealthy 
scions of society, with too much free time, would get themselves wrapped up 
in all sorts of sexual peccadilloes with spouses and lovers, only to have 
everything come out all right in the end - see "The Philadelphia Story" for 
a great farce. "Town & Country" has the impossibly wealthy protagonists 
with too much free time - the kind of people that have jobs but never seem 
to work - and sexual misconduct on several levels. But, there is almost no 
life to original script by Michael Laughlin and Buck Henry and this is 
"T&C's" downfall. 
There is, obviously, a great deal of Hollywood talent, in front of and 
behind the camera, involved in "Town & Country," but, without a likable or, 
at least, interesting story to carry through their efforts, it is all for 
naught. And, that's what we get here - naught. 
Porter Stoddard (Beatty) is a high-powered New York architect with a very 
good life indeed. His 25-year marriage to Ellie (Diane Keaton) appears, on 
the surface, to be perfect. But, there are cracks just below this pristine 
surface. His wife is suspicious of his whereabouts, his kids don't need him 
and his best friends, Griffin (Garry Shandling) and Mona (Goldie Hawn), are 
in the midst of a divorce. Porter tries to get control of his life before 
it is too late, but like a man fighting against quicksand, his struggle 
just sinks him deeper. 
At the 90-minute mark of "Town & Country" I asked myself, "What's the 
point?" I wasn't entertained, I laughed three times - over silly little 
pratfalls - and spent most of the film marking time 'til the end. Warren 
Beatty wanders around with his character in a bewildered fog, making 
problems for himself by thinking with a part of his anatomy other than his 
head. Keaton's Ellie is an empty headed flake who can't see the obvious as 
Porter screws around on her. And, as you get to know them, who would want 
friends like Griffin and Mona? 
The supporting cast is given nothing to do and, sometimes, does harm to the 
film, given the material they are forced to use.  Nastassja Kinski plays a 
cellist with whom Porter has a fling. The actress, who has, eerily, failed 
to age over the years, is miscast as the air-headed musician and the 
character doesn't belong, anyway. Jenna Elfman is a sweet, but smart, ditz 
who joins Porter and Griffin on one of their tacked on misadventures. Andie 
MacDowell is absolutely painful to watch as a wealthy heiress (is there any 
other kind in this movie?) who comes on to Porter.  The saving grace is a 
pair of quirky perf's by Charlton Heston and Marian Seldes as MacDowell's 
very strange parents. 
Glib rationalization of infidelity, like, "If he doesn't speak English, it 
doesn't count," are a staple for the screenplay. The morality of the film 
seems to be, if you can get away with it, go for it. The cast of characters 
are mostly people you wouldn't want to know, never mind befriend. The 
actors do their best, but are hamstrung by the weak material. Helmer 
Chelsom, who made the outstanding, offbeat comedy "Funny Bones," is mired 
in the mess of a script and never puts his imprint on "Town & Country." 
The production values are high, as one expects from a big budget Hollywood 
film. But, the opulent sets by Caroline Hanania, lavish wardrobes by Molly 
Maginnis and top-notch photography by William Fraker cannot save "Town & 
Country." The film has had a long list of production and distribution 
problems and it might have been better, for me anyway, if Hollywood just 
said no to this movie. I give it a D. 
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com 

Author
Steve Rhodes
"We've got a problem?" Porter Stoddard asks his wife Ellie.  "Which 
one?" she asks in reply.  Although she is asking him which color of 
swatch he prefers, this interchange could just have easily been said 
about Peter Chelsom's comedy TOWN & COUNTRY.  Before an orchestra 
starts, it carefully establishes a reference tone.  One of the biggest 
problems with TOWN & COUNTRY is that it never finds any consistent or 
successful tone.  The result is a dreadful comedy that's as flat as a 
can of soda left open all night.  
Wearing her signature nerdy and eclectic suits, Diane Keaton plays Diane 
Keaton, although the other characters insist on referring to her as 
Ellie Stoddard.  Warren Beatty plays Porter, Ellie's husband of 25 
years.  When we first meet Porter he is enjoying a personal cello 
concerto in his hotel bedroom.  A naked Nastassja Kinski has her cello 
in a bear hug.  The cello looks particularly happy.  Can't say that I 
blame it.  But, I digress.
It seems that this is the first time that Porter has ever cheated on his 
wife.  He swears to himself to never yield to such temptation again, but 
he, of course, does not keep this vow.  Before his wife can catch him, 
we switch to their equally wealthy Manhattan friends, Mona and Griffin 
(Goldie Hawn and Garry Shandling), whose marriage is going through its 
own crisis since Griffin has been caught dallying.
The country part of the story comes from the decrepit mansions and snow 
cabins that the couples visit after their marriages go awry.  While in 
Sun Valley, the two guys off on their own run into a local (Jenna 
Elfman) who takes them to a Halloween party.  Elfman dresses as Marilyn 
Monroe on her visit to President Kennedy, Beatty dons a polar bear suit 
and Shandling wears an Elvis outfit.  The visuals of a tipsy Marilyn 
Monroe frolicking in the snow with a horny polar bear is one of the few 
memorable or even mildly amusing parts of the production.  (The less 
said about Charlton Heston's embarrassing role as a mad, gun-toting 
father, the better.)
The film has reportedly been recut several times in order to find some 
version that works.  The editors clearly stopped too soon.  They should 
have kept cutting until all that was left was confetti.  They could have 
used the confetti to celebrate something worthwhile like some better 
movie's release.
TOWN & COUNTRY runs 1:36.  It is rated R for sexuality and language and 
would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
Porter Stoddard (Warren Beatty) is a successful architect married to
successful fabric designer Ellie (Diane Keaton) for twenty-five years.
They and best friends Mona (Goldie Hawn) and Griffin (Garry Shandling)
are about to face marital crises in a film most well known for its
torturous path to the screen, "Town and Country."
"Town and Country" has a pedigree befitting it's title with an all star
cast photographed by Oscar nominated cinematographer William Fraker and 
mouthing the words of screenwriter Buck Henry ("The Graduate")
under the direction of Peter Chelsom ("Funny Bones").  After years of
reports of budget overruns and reshoots and the racking up twelve different 
release dates, the media has been prepped for Beatty's next "Ishtar."  So,
is it that bad?  The answer is no.  But it's not very good either.
The major problem with "Town and Country" is that it's unstructured and
random.
Stoddard is immediately established as a philanderer, having just
bedded a flaky cellist (Nastassja Kinski).  Next scene finds him and Ellie
celebrating their anniversary in Paris with Mona and Griffin.  Then Mona
spies Griffin hustling a redhead into a motel and begins divorce proceedings
(Buck Henry cameos as both couples' divorce lawyer).
Ellie thinks she's overeacting, but sends Porter to support Mona on a trip
to check out her family's Mississippi manse.  The two childhood friends end
up in bed together, making us wonder why they'd never become a couple to
begin with.  Back home, their second coupling is interrupted by Ellie 
bursting in to tell Mona she thinks Porter's cheating on her.  Porter goes
off on a trip with Griffin to Sun Valley, Idaho to have more comic
misadventures with wacky women as Griffin attempts to tell him that he's
gay.  The four friends, along with every woman Porter's dallied with, all
end up back in New York City somewhat happily ever after.
Although the film begins promisingly, resembling a Woody Allen take on
New York City wasps, too many strands drift off into nowhere.
The Stoddard household is huge, containing two adult children (Josh Hartnett,
"The Virgin Suicides" and Tricia Vessey, "Kiss the Girls"), their colorful
bedmates and a maid who's just imported her shirtless boyfriend from the
rainforest back home.  After an amusing early scene that has Porter 
overhearing three bouts of lovemaking while in search of a nocturnal snack, 
the six supporting players are dropped except for an out-of-nowhere
appearance 
by the formerly forgotten son.  Porter's romantic misadventures with women
(other than Mona) are equally mishandled.  Once the marital discord begins,
the film seems as if it was editted with a machete, stopping and starting, 
never regaining its rhythm.
While Beatty gets off a few tart observations, his character is mostly
passive and bemused.  Maybe we're supposed to feel sympathy for an adulterer
who doesn't initiate his own sex romps?  Keaton's Ellie has a
trusting nature that's a result of her own self involvement resulting
in an unlikeable character.  Hawn smartly recycles her mature sex kitten
wives 
of "The Out of Towners" and "The First Wives' Club" while Shandling's
relegated 
to true second banana status.  Kinski is bland and unmotivated.  Andie 
MacDowell takes a weirdly unappealing role and does what she can with the 
screenplay's most bizarre subplot, which finds Charlton Heston as her rifle 
toting, billionaire daddy and Marian Seldes as her alcoholic,
wheelchair-bound, 
foul-mouthed mother.  Heston and Seldes are fun, as is Jenna Elfman 
as a Sun Valley bait and tackle salesgirl who brings Porter and Griffin to a 
Halloween party.
Oscar nominatored cinematographer William Fraker gives the film a nice look,
but director Chelsom shows none of the quirkily and blackly humorous depth 
he brought to films like "Hear My Song" and "Funny Bones."  The script is 
this film's weakest link - it's telling that most of the (few) laughs come 
from old-fashioned physical slapstick and the sight of Beatty in a bear suit.
While "Town and Country" isn't exactly painful to sit through, it mostly
just lays there.  
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
