Title
Review for Muppet Treasure Island (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Robert Louis Stevenson gets the musical Muppet treatment in this 
swashbuckling story of a boy, a rat, and a Great Gonzo who find adventure 
on the high-seas, under the judicious green thumb of a gracious Captain 
(Kermit the Frog), and the watchful eye of a particular pirate (Tim 
Curry, as Long John Silver).  There's a surprisingly solid story to go 
along with the expected in-jokes, asides, and anachronisms; credit one of 
the writers, James V. Hart, who also co-wrote HOOK.  But just as Renny 
Harlin and Geena Davis failed to patch the leaks in CUTTHROAT ISLAND, so 
have Brian Henson and Frank Oz sunk themselves with MUPPET TREASURE 
ISLAND.  They've made a fine kid's movie that's *way* too slow for anyone 
over the age of eight.  Even the songs are dull.  Except, that is, for 
"Cabin Fever," an amusing number in mid-film that most adult viewers will 
be able to relate to.  Arrgghh. 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Tim Voon
Those wonderful Muppets, they sing, they dance, they laugh and have a
lot more fun than a lot of humans -- gosh, I wish I was a Muppet, puppet.
The entire gang is back, they've converted Robert Louis Stevenson's
classic drama 'Treasure Island' into a musical comedy for children of
all ages.
They sing to the tune of Hans Zimmer, bleating out corny lyrics with
great enthusiasm; we actually get to see their feet when they dance;
they run about wildly beating each other up, with the occasional torture
scene for added variety. The kid Jim Hawkins sings with a high soprano
voice that makes me squirm; Long John Silver has a talking lobster, not
parrot, who is a proficient masochist; Kermit is the decent, lovable
captain and Miss Piggy is the Queen of the Island natives.
Have you ever seen a pig dressed in a tight, low cleavage, tiger skin
patterned cocktail dress? Well there's only one pig that can wear it
well, and believe me it clings marvellously to her, revealing all of her
feminine charms as she hangs upside down, dangling from a burning rope
tied to a tree over a cliff.
The thing I like about the Muppets is that they are never self conscious
about what they do. They are bold and daring without being crude or
obnoxious and are out to entertain with their easy going, frolicking
style.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Director Brian Henson's MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND is a hoot.  The
wonderful script by James V. Hart, Jerry Juhl, and Kirk R. Thatcher, is
an imaginative retelling of the classic tale by Robert Louis Stevenson
and is a laugh riot.  Moreover, the visual hijinks come fast and
furious and the sets (Val Strazovec) and the costumes are lavish and
great fun as well, especially in the production numbers.  The editing
(Michael Jablow) is crisp, and the movie pulsates with high energy.
The movie could easily be classified a musical since it has so many
songs (Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil) and so much music (Hans Zimmer).
I would recommend seeing the movie in the theater and buying the tape
when it is released.
     The show has humans and muppets intermixed and treats them as if
they were all of the same species.  The cinematography (John Fenner),
which oscillates between somber grays and outrageous bright colors,
starts with ominous darkness.  A blind, fiendish character comes to the
inn where Rizzo the Rat (Steve Whitmire) and The Great Gonzo (Dave
Goelz) are staying.  In the first of many non-PC lines, Rizzo says,
"It's some kind of a blind fiend", but Gonzo corrects him, "I believe
they prefer visually challenged fiend."
     Early in the show, Mr. Bones (Billy Connolly) dies, and Rizzo is
shocked, saying, "he died, and this is supposed to be a kids movie?"
In fact the movie never takes its self seriously.  It keeps poking fun
at itself with one self-deprecating line after another.  The picture is
filled with humor for various ages groups to ensure that the script
provides the requisite amount of laughter for its complete
demographics.  While looking for the treasure map in Mr. Bones's chest,
for example, they come across Henry Kissenger's book "Diplomacy."  They
do get the treasure map and the show is about them sailing with Captain
Smollett a.k.a. Kermit the Frog (Steve Whitmire) and Long John Silver
(Tim Curry) to find the treasure.
     The movie is full of great minor characters, although no one is as
good as the main characters already mentioned.  One of the best of the
minor characters is the straight laced first mate, Mr. Arrow a.k.a. Sam
the Eagle (Frank Oz).  When Captain Smollett incorrectly thinks Mr.
Arrow has died, he delivers the eulogy, "Mr. Arrow was a wonderful man
who used to get us up out of our beds for a good flossing."
     Other than Long John Silver, the other human lead is the cabin boy
Jim Hawkins (Kevin Bishop) who is the only weak actor in the film.  His
voice lacked substance and his lack of real singing ability stood out
among the other more accomplished actors and singers.  Actually,
Bishop's acting, and a tendency of the show to drag a little bit toward
the end are the only criticisms I have of the movie.
     There is some violence in the show, but it is not threatening and
is more reminiscent of Three Stooges mayhem.  When Gonzo gets put on
the rack, his arms stretch like they are made of rubber.  This pleases
him and causes him to remark, "I'm getting taller.  This is cool; I may
have a future in the NBA."  Later in the show Rizzo talks about fear
saying, "I've gone way beyond afraid.  Right now I'm somewhere between
bedwetting and a near death experience."
     The musical numbers are all well done, but hands down, the best
one is the cabin fever number.  In the midst of the long voyage, the
crew members jump up and start twitching like they have the
heebie-jeebies, and they begin singing, "I've got cabin fever."  Their
costumes then turn to bright primary colors filled to overflowing with
fruit.  In another musical number titled "When you're a professional
pirate, you're in the best company", we get great lines including, "I
could have been in politics because I've always been a big spender."
     MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND runs 1:39.  It is correctly rated G with no
sex, nudity, or bad language.  I have already covered the quite mild
level of violence which I think is handled perfectly.  I recommend this
movie to people of all ages - with and without kids.  My son Jeffrey
(almost 7) and his friend Haruka (7) went with us.  Jeffrey gave the
film two thumbs up and was never scared.  Haruka gave it a thumbs up,
but claimed she was scared a little bit which I never detected while
watching her.  Neither child wanted to crawl into our laps which is a
miracle for my ever lap hopping son Jeffrey.  I happily award the
film ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Brian Koller
It is no suprise that "Muppet Treasure Island" appeals to children.
The surprise is that it appeals to adults as well.  While kids
like the activity and silliness, adults like the gags and jokes.
Even the many songs, written by 1960's popsmiths Barry Mann and 
Cynthia Weil, are good.  Sometimes the silliness gets out of hand, 
and the plot gets left out to dry.  But there's always a good laugh
ahead to steady the course.
Billy Bones (Billy Connelly) is telling his tall tale of buried treasure 
for the nth time to his fellow tavern-dwellers.  They've heard
it all before, and no one believes him.  Also there is young busboy
Jim (Kevin Bishop), who dreams of a life at sea like his father.
A blind pirate gives Billy the black spot, which is a pirate's
death sentence.  In the commotion, the tavern burns down.  Billy soon 
dies, but not before delivering his long-hidden treasure map to Jim.
Out of work and seeking treasure, Jim convinces a rich but dimwit 
bear (Fozzy), who believes that a man lives in his finger, to fund 
his treasure hunt.  
Soon Jim is cabin boy on a ship sailing for the buried treasure.
Kermit the Frog is captain, with a green eagle as first mate.
Unfortunately, Fozzy has taken the advice of the cook, Long John
Silver (Tim Curry, who relishes the role) and stocked the crew
with pirates and scoundrels.
Fearing mutiny, Kermit tells the pirate crew to explore the
treasure island for provisions, planning to strand them on
the island.  His plan is foiled when the pirates kidnap Jim
and take him with them.  Some pirates remain on the ship and take
control of it as well.  The treasure is found, and poor Kermit
is tied up and hung upside down over a cliff with Miss Piggy,
who was hanging with pig savages on the island.  We learn that
Miss Piggy is a very bad singer.  This section of the movie
is a bit muddled, but kids won't care about the plot anyway.
But fortune smiles on the captain and his loyal followers,
and the mutiny ultimately fails.  The treasure is now safely
aboard ship and the pirates are in chains: but Long John manages
to free himself and row off with the treasure on a leaky lifeboat.
Be sure to fast forward past the closing credits to learn his
ultimate fate, and to hear a bad joke.
Muppets actors both large and small mix freely with the human actors.
Things that don't belong in pirate movies, such as a Henry Kissinger
book, a french cook, tourists in Hawaiian shirts, cheerleaders,
a jazz band, and quotes from "On the Waterfront" and "Apocalypse Now"
are there to remind us that nothing is to be taken seriously.
All your favorite muppets from the old syndicated TV show are
there, except the piano-playing dog, who isn't missed anyway.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tim Curry, Kevin Bishop, Kermit the Frog, The Great Gonzo, 
      Rizzo Rat, Fozzie Bear, Miss Piggy, Billy Connolly, 
      Jennifer Saunders
Muppet Performers: Steve Whitmire, Dave Goelz, Jerry Nelson, 
      Kevin Clash, Frank Oz
Director: Brian Henson
Producers: Brian Henson and Martin G. Baker
Screenplay: Kirk R. Thatcher, Jerry Juhl, and James V. Hart 
      based on the novel by Robert Louis Stevenson
Cinematography: John Fenner
Music: Hans Zimmer
Songs by Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     No matter how you feel about cute, fuzzy puppets, it's difficult to 
actively dislike the Muppets.  From their 1976 television show until 
today, Jim Henson's creations have always appealed on more than one 
level, offering adorable playmates and positive messages to children and 
surprisingly sophisticated humor to adults.  MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND, the 
fifth big screen feature to star Kermit the Frog and friends, and the 
second directed by Brian Henson, delivers exactly what fans -- young and 
old -- expect.
     As was true of their 1992 outing, THE MUPPET CHRISTMAS CAROL, the 
Muppets are visiting familiar motion picture territory -- there have 
been over a half-dozen movie adaptations of Robert Louis Stevenson's 
TREASURE ISLAND.  Of course, none before now have featured singing 
crocodiles, warbling lobsters, talking frogs, and high-kicking pigs.  As 
usual, a few human actors get in on the fun, including Tim Curry and 
Kevin Bishop.
     MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND doesn't exactly re-invent the classic story, 
but it takes a few liberties with it.  Young Jim Hawkins (Bishop) is on 
board the ship of Captain Smollett (Kermit the Frog), bound for the 
Caribbean and buried pirates' treasure.  The crew, a mutinous group of 
thugs and cutthroats, are led by the one-legged bandit Long John Silver 
(Tim Curry).  Once land is sighted, Silver makes his power-play, nabbing 
Jim and his treasure map and seizing control of the ship.  The only 
obstacle still remaining between the rogue and unlimited wealth is an 
army of wild boars and their leader, Benjamina Gunn (Miss Piggy).
     There have been many great on-screen/off-screen couples -- Bogart 
and Becall, Tracy and Hepburn, Branagh and Thompson -- but none are 
quite as intriguing as Kermit and Piggy.  A match made in Jim Henson's 
workshop, these two have gone through some tough times in the last 
twenty years, but they have endured.  And, although they don't have many 
scenes together in MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND (Piggy doesn't show up until 
the film is two-thirds over), it's clear that the chemistry is still 
there.
     One of the chief pleasures of MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND is watching 
Tim Curry essay Long John Silver.  Curry, who no one would ever call 
subtle, creates one of the most memorable human characters in any Muppet 
film.  Kevin Bishop makes an appealing Jim Hawkins, the young 
protagonist in search of a family.  Jennifer Saunders and Billy Connolly 
have suitably overt-the-top cameos.
     As has always been true in Muppet movies, set design is superb.  
MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND is an impressive-looking motion picture, rich in 
color and contrast, and featuring some impeccable matte paintings.  
There are the usual musical numbers -- seven jaunty tunes that will be 
forgotten the moment you leave the theater.  They may not be memorable, 
but at least they're not irritating.
     MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND comes out under the Disney umbrella, and, 
like every movie that is favored with Mickey's Midas touch, this one has 
the potential to be a huge favorite.  The Muppets certainly have "family 
appeal", and the film is designed to keep parents interested and 
children enthralled.  It's not as eye-popping as TOY STORY or as magical 
as an animated feature, but MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND represents ninety-
plus minutes of solid entertainment, and you won't have to dig to find 
it.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin
