Title
Review for People Will Talk (1951)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
PEOPLE WILL TALK (1951)  Written and directed by Joseph L. 
Mankiewicz, from the play "Dr. Praetorius" by Curt Goetz. 
Produced by Darryl F. Zanuck. Photography, Milton Krasner. 
Editing, Barbara McLean. Art direction, Lyle Wheeler, George 
W. Davis. Set design, Thomas Little, Walter M. Scott. Music, 
Wagner and Brahms. Music direction, Alfred Newman. Cast: Cary 
Grant (Dr. Noah Praetorius), Jeanne Crain (Annabel Higgins), 
Finlay Currie (Shunderson) Hume Cronyn (Prof. Elwell), Walter 
Slezak (Prof. Barker), Sidney Blackmer (Arthur Higgins), Basil 
Ruysdael (Dean Lyman Brockwell), Katherine Locke (Miss James), 
Will Wright (John Higgins), Margaret Hamilton (Miss Pickett), 
et al. 110 minutes.
M.D. Cary Grant teaches at a University, also runs a clinic. 
He meets Jeanne Crain who is so desperate (because she is 
pregnant and unmarried) that she attempts suicide. Grant 
tricks her into thinking she is not pregnant--attributing this 
to a lab mix-up of tests--and marries her. 
Parallel to this subject (rather than used as a subplot) is an 
investigation launched by mean-spirited, jealous colleague 
Hume Cronyn into the mysterious past of Grant and his strange 
companion Finlay Currie. 
The film's pregnancy theme may be very dated these days, but 
it was quite progressive in its time. The  University's 
investigation is a reflection of McCarthy-type witch-hunts. 
The title refers to gossip, intolerance and slander, but in 
addition  everyone talks and talks and talks. Some of this 
talk is literate, some is Hollywood- heatrical. 
The movie has a great deal of charm and color, makes good use 
of music, is pleasant to watch. It is also full of 
improbabilities and loose ends,  along with a strong dose of 
corn. Implausibilities include Crain's instant love of Grant; 
Crain's suicide attempt, as neither her having a gun nor using 
it right outside Grant's office make sense; the odd story of 
Grant's past...
The entire tete-a-tete part where Grant proposes to Crain is 
ho-hum, if not ho-ho-ho-hum-hum-hum; the sequence of playing 
with toy trains is exaggerated in its effort  to be humorous. 
In general, whimsy in this movie is on the heavy side. There 
are other flaws.
The characters don't really satisfy, even though most are 
played by consumate character actors. Many of the thespians 
are overdrawn and overdone. Attractive Jeanne Crain is, as 
usual (with exceptions, notably in "Pinky") too cold an 
actress; Sidney Blackmer, as Crain's father, is too smug in 
his admission he has been a failure in life; Cronyn is much 
too evil. Even Grant is too idealized, too smart, self 
-possessed, angelic and multi-talented.
On the other hand, bass-playing physicist Walter Slezak is 
charming and convincing as Grant's  friend, and Finlay Currie 
is memorable. Currie, an accomplished Scots musician who only 
entered movies in his early 40s, had made a strong impression 
as the convict in the 1946 "Great Expectations." His role here 
is unusual by any standards. Shunderson is an older, big, 
silent man, possessed of what looks like Scottish dourness 
(but isn't), and with unclear functions. Clearly, though, he's 
a man with a secret. He gives the impression of having some 
sort of mental weakness. Attached to Grant with total 
devotion, he is like a loving dog. The Shunderson-Praetorius 
rapport is interesting and touching enough to justify the 
whole film.
I must admit that the movie's weaknesses may become apparent 
only after repeated viewings. Seen once (perhaps even a second 
time), PEOPLE papers over the holes, thanks to brio, warmth 
and originality. And, even for those whose logic does not 
allow them to  suspend disbelief, this movie still ranks as 
good, enjoyable and recommended.  After all, it is a 
J.L.Mankiewicz product. (Edwin Jahiel)  
