Title
Review for Déjŕ Vu (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Rainbow Film Co./ Revere Entertainment
 Director: Henry Jaglom
 Writer: Henry Jaglom, Victoria Foyt
 Cast:  Stephane Dillane, Victoria Foyt, Vanessa Redgrave,
Glynis Barber, Michael Brandon, Vernon Dobtcheff, Graydon
Gould, Noel Harrison
    Only connect!...Only connect the prose and the passion
and both will be exalted, and human love will be seen at its
height."  Did Henry Jaglom say this, or are we experiencing
deja vu while we watch his latest offbeat--though accessible--
film about the nature of romance and love?  Utilizing his wife
Victoria Foyt in the principal role, Jaglom has fashioned a film
with mystical undertones as a meditation on some heavy
themes: destiny vs. free will, compromise vs. burning bridges,
the pull of history vs. the allures of the present.  If he doesn't
quite succeed in realizing his ambition it is only because he is
tackling exalted subjects, but "Deja Vu" features some solid if
sometimes pretentious dialogue, intense performances, and
some lush scenery from the majesty of Jerusalem to the
beauty of Paris; from the richness of the white cliffs of Dover
to the coziness of a London cottage.
   The story opens as a store owner from Los Angeles, Dana
(Victoria Foyt), is shopping for garments in Jerusalem for sale
in her business.  An elderly, enigmatic French woman (Akiva
Marks) sits beside her in a scenic cafe and, opening up the
way strangers often do to reveal secrets unknown even by
their most intimate friends, she describes a liaison she had
decades earlier with an American lover who gave her a ruby
pin, left for home with a promise to send for her, and simply
disappeared.  
   There ensues a progression of incidents that take Dana to
Paris, to Dover's white cliffs, to London and ultimately home
to Los Angeles, but before meeting her fiance, Alex (Michael
Brandon) in London, she has a fateful meeting in Dover with
Sean (Stephen Dillane) whom she observes painting a pretty
scene and finds herself not only attracted to the urbane fellow
but having the strangest feeling that they'd met before.  By a
remarkable coincidence, business draws both Dana and Sean
to a London home where they are hosted by a comical pair
with their own stories to tell, and are entertained by the host's
sister, Skelly (Vanessa Redgrave).  Skelly is a woman of the
world who believes in taking life by the horns and refusing to
compromise even if one must give up security in favor of a
brash romance.
   While Jaglom's latest effort is more structured than his
autobiographical films such as "Can She Bake A Cherry Pie"
(which furthered Karen Black's acting career) and "New
Year's Day" which featured the director himself in a starring
role, he continues to compete with the French penchant for
talk.  As with his most recent offering, "Last Summer in the
Hamptons," which focused on a group of theater people
talking up a storm to reveal all their neuroses, Jaglom seats
his characters in the central scene around a living room
where they tell campfire-like stories about their lives, one of
which hits home so thunderously that Dana and her secret
paramour Alex seem ready to crawl under a table.
   The fable relies all too much on unbelievable coincidences
to demonstrate that we poor mortals are often blown hither
and thither by fate, our decisions made for us by some all-
knowing entity which can disrupt our most solid plans and
sweep us away to romantic bliss.  There is little doubt that the
pathetic philistine Alex is no competition for the dashing Sean
(Stephen Dillane) whose English manners, aesthetic sense,
and savoir faire wholly outmatch the boorish materialism of
Dana's fiance.  Dillane takes high honors for his finely-honed
acting while Vanessa Redgrave is surprisingly underutilized
and cast in a stereotypical role of a woman who is simply a
type.  Vanessa Redgrave's own mother has a banal cameo
as an aging parent who is not wanted by either of her
children, while Victoria Foyt is well cast as a sophisticated
career woman overwhelmed by destiny.
   Few movies have put a single song to such use, giving the
audience a feeling of instant deja vu, as the refrains of "White
Cliffs of Dover" is repeated interminably to illuminate the
movie's title:  "It seems we've stood and talked like this
before/ We looked at each other in the same way then/ But I
can't remember Where Or When." Not Rated.  Running time:
115 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
James Sanford
Director Henry Jaglom is proof-positive you can sustain a filmmaking career
without ever having a hit. How many among us have sat through such Jaglom
masterworks as "Venice/Venice," "Eating" or the ever-popular "Babyfever"?
Anyone? Anyone?
 That's because Jaglom is the king of the "talking head" movies, most of
which proceed as follows: A group of sophisticates (or pseudo-sophisticates)
gather in a house, pour some drinks and exchange story after story about
their tragic (or semi-tragic) lives. The actors are encouraged to improvise.
The camera drifts slowly from one solemn face to another as the audience
either drifts off to sleep or drifts toward the lobby.
 There's a dose of that in "Deja Vu," Jaglom's latest effort, but this time
out he was lucky enough to get Vanessa Redgrave to participate in the
discussion. Unsurprisingly, everything she says is well worth listening to,
even though her role as an aging jet-setter is peripheral to the main
storyline about how American fashion buyer Dana Howard (Victoria Foyt, who
co-wrote the screenplay with Jaglom) slowly realizes married British painter
Sean Elias (Stephen Dillane of "Welcome To Sarajevo") is her romantic
destiny.
 From their first meeting on the legendary white cliffs of Dover, both Dana
and Sean have the unshakable feeling they've met before -- thus, the film's
title. But the course of true love never runs smoothly, and it turns out
Dana is engaged and Sean already married. Of course, when Sean's wife starts
pushing the "let's have a baby" button and Dana's fiance runs her planned
"Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers evening" by getting stoned, it becomes
rather obvious what's coming next.
 Though stretches of "Deja Vu" get bogged down in pointless talk, much of it
obviously made up as the camera rolled, the movie is otherwise about as
close to the mainstream as Jaglom as ever likely to get. There's a neat
framing device involving Dana's encounter with a mystery woman, a charming
Dillane performance, music by Lena Horne and Vera Lynn, and, of course, the
sensational Redgrave, who puts some needed zing into the movie's second
half.
 On the other hand, Foyt's characterization runs hot and cold, to the point
where it's tough to tell if Dana is merely wrestling with a divided heart or
struggling with undiagnosed manic depression. Take her if you must, Sean,
but don't forget to fill that lithium prescription before taking off for
paradise.
James Sanford

Author
Bob Bloom
 Deja Vu (1998) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Victoria Foyt, Stephen
Dillane  and Vanessa Redgrave. Directed by Henry Jaglom.
 Deja Vu is like a drawn-out, talk-a-thon with an O'Henry-like twist at the
end that makes all that went before it seem worthwhile.
 The movie, directed by cult figure Henry Jaglom and written by Jaglom and
his wife, Victoria Foyt (who also stars), is a story about love and
destiny.
 Like many Jaglom films, it has the feel of the actors making up the story
as they go along. And, as in most Jaglom movies, there is mostly talk and
very little action.
 Deja Vu is a movie that requires the upmost patience. You watch for
minutes on end, trying to figure where the movie is going, when you get
sidetracked by another discussion by another group of characters. But as
you listen, you see how that talk ultimately weaves its way into the
tapestry of the film as a whole.
 Deja Vu is the story of Dana (Foyt), an American businesswoman on a
shopping trip in Jerusalem. There she meets a mysterious French woman who
shares with Dana a story of lost love revolving around an antique ruby pin.
The woman departs, leaving the pin with Dana.
 Dana, who is supposed to go to London to meet her fiancé and some friends,
changes her schedule and flies to Paris to try to track down the older
woman and return the pin.
 From there, her search leads her to Dover, where she meets and is drawn to
Sean (Stephen Dillane), a stranger who she feels she has already met.
 From Dover, Dana travels to the London townhouse of her friends where she
meets her fiancé and, coincidentally, Sean and his wife, who are visiting.
 Of course, everything works out for the best for everyone, and the mystery
of the pin is finally unearthed at the finale.
 Deja Vu is a bit pretentious and at times boring, sort of like real life.
But it's a movie that makes you concentrate. It's the words, not the
actions, that drive this fantasy-romance.
 The performances are adequate. The only exceptional turn comes from
Vanessa Redgrave, who plays a free-spirit also visiting the townhouse who
advises Dana to follow her heart and take chances.
 Deja Vu is a rather unconventional, adult movie. It is a leisurely feature
that gradually draws you into its convoluted maze, but once inside you
really don't want to escape until you discover the inevitable outcome.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Most directors are happy to imitate others.  Not Henry Jaglom.
Jaglom makes very personal movies, stamped with his own style.  Even
his mediocre films such as LAST SUMMER IN THE HAMPTONS and BABYFEVER
have flashes of brilliance.  In his best movies like the incredible
ALWAYS - not to be confused with the Steven Spielberg fantasy of the
same name - he can sustain that superlative level for the entire
picture.  DEJA VU, although uneven, remains a dreamy romance that at
its best has the magic of a fairy tale.  The bright script by Jaglom
and his wife Victoria Foyt, who is one of the movie's two leads, never
ceases to delight us with its little mysteries as well as its major
romantic overtones.  Like a home movie that needs more editing - Jaglom
is the editor as well as the director - the picture fascinates us even
while its needless drifting frustrates us.
     DEJA VU is Jaglom's homage to romance, particularly those once in
a lifetime romantic moments that, if not seized, will forever seal the
fate of the needlessly timid.
     The story opens in Jerusalem where the lovely and serene Dana
(Victoria Foyt from ALWAYS) is enjoying a cup of coffee in the solitude
of an outdoor cafe that overlooks a pastoral park.  An attractive,
older French woman, played by Aviva Marks, asks if she can join her.
Dana mentions that she has been engaged for six years and that her
fiance is happy that she has finally agreed to set the date for the
wedding.  The older woman asks the fatal question of whether Dana
really loves him.  After Dana gives a less than convincing affirmation
of her affection, the stranger relates a story of an American soldier
whom she loved but didn't marry.  After the woman walks away, Dana is
not sure whether she was real or some kind of a mental apparition.
     After setting off unsuccessfully to find her in a beautiful,
rain-soaked Paris, she crosses the channel and ends up by the lovely
Cliffs of Dover, where she meets a painter named Sean (Stephen Dillane
from WELCOME TO SARAJEVO).  Somehow convinced they've met before, they
fall head over heels in love with each other but end up doing only some
intense closed-mouth kissing - a variety rarely seen in modern movies.
     The original, dreamy music by Gaili Schoen uses violin, flute, and
piano to set the mood.  In typical Jaglom fashion this is interspersed
with romantic music from the 1930s that sounds like it comes from a
treasured old record.  Just the music alone will put you in the mood
for love.
     The characters decide that they are nostalgic for a time that
perhaps never was or was never meant to be.  Constantly aware of the
danger of a missed opportunity, Sean reflects that, "It feels like one
of those moments that, if you turn the wrong way, you may regret it
forever."  The horribly conflicted Dana becomes even more so after
leaving Sean for her fiance and then ending up staying in the same
house with mutual friends for the weekend.  The further complication is
that he is married, a fact he never got around to telling her before.
     Since they already have, respectively, an attractive spouse and a
finace, Sean and Dana are simultaneously repelled and attracted to each
other.  In a great scene around the coffee table, the guests end up
telling stories which come back to the theme of the lover that got
away.  Vanessa Redgrave, who seems to be in a different movie every few
weeks, is one of the guests who shares a story.  Watch Sean and Dana's
body language as they gently squirm in their seats across from each
other during the discussions, which rub their nerves raw.  Jaglom
manages to make their uneasiness palpable and genuine with subtle
maneuvers of the camera and careful shifts in the editing.
     "I'm married, I have vows, I have to stick with it," Sean tells
us, but even if you think you can guess the twists and turns, you may
be surprised.  Their difficulties will play out in a manner perhaps
more akin to reality that the pabulum that Hollywood prefers to offer
us.
     "Are you happy?" Sean's wife asks him when she begins to sense
that their 10 years together may be experiencing unexpected
difficulties.  "I'm as happy as I ever expected to be," he responds in
a frank but less than satisfying confirmation of contentment.
     "I never thought I could feel love, the real love you read about
and dream about," Dana tells Sean.  Partly a schmaltzy love story and
partly a wonderful romance, DEJA VU has more than enough good parts to
make up for its unnecessary subplots and periodic lack of focus.
     DEJA VU runs 1:55.  It is rated PG-13 for a little profanity,
brief sexuality and a scene of drug use and would be fine for
teenagers.
