Title
Review for When the Bough Breaks (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Spawned by the smashing success of SILENCE OF THE LAMBS,
genre of the serial killer film proved to be one of the most
enduring trends in the last decade. Multitude of such
projects, ranging from "high concept" Hollywood projects
down to low budget exploitation, offers wide range in
quality. WHEN THE BOUGH BREAKS is relatively little known
1993 film, that tries, less than other examples, to hide
being inspired by Jonathan Demme's work.
Movie begins with horrible discovery which indicates that
the Texan town became target area for vicious serial killer
who dismembers little children. Swaggert (played by Martin
Sheen), chief of local police, reluctantly agrees to seek
help from Dr. Audrey MacLeah (Ally Walker), State-paid
forensic psychologist who should make profile of possible
perpetrator. However, when MacLeah tries to engage in
investigation, she is faced with animosity of male
policemen, and Swaggert's lack of faith in her talents.
Working alone, she finds clues that connect the crimes with
institutionalised autistic child.
This film, written and directed by Michael Cohn, at first
glance, gives impression of being really cheap knock-off of
SILENCE OF THE LAMBS. That impression is, actually, more to
Michael Cohn's credit - he looked at Demme's work very hard,
and unlike many others, found out what had worked in SILENCE
OF THE LAMBS and what had not. So, this film, although
shorter, although less spectacular, is full of dark
atmosphere and elements which, although revolting, happen to
be fascinating and leave strong impression. The main
character, obviously inspired by Clarice Starling, is
original, though. Ally Walker gives really strong
performance as psychological investigator troubled with her
own personal, and never revealed, demons. Almost everyone is
under the shadow of that performance, including creepy Ron
Perlman and Martin Sheen (whose character simply disappears
in the middle of film). The result is low budget, but
effective, although anything but original film. Fans of Ally
Walker would probably enjoy this film very much, since it
could be seen as sort of prelude to her cult TV series THE
PROFILER.
