Title
Review for Enjeru dasuto (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A quasi-SILENCE OF THE LAMBS thriller from one of Japan's most
remarkable new directors, although his evident talent doesn't make this
movie really work.
I so badly wanted ANGEL DUST to be more than the sum of its parts. This is a
maddeningly slow, oddly unsatisfying movie that contains many individually
spellbinding things -- good performances, a hypnotic score and many
mesmerizing images -- but doesn't have a story that can redeem it.
The plot: Every day at six P.M. sharp, in the heart of Tokyo, a young woman
dies on the subway, the victim of a pattern killer whose motives are
obscure. One of the detectives assigned to the case is a young woman whose
former lover, a psychologist who helped deprogram former cult members, may
be somehow entangled in the killings. There are a number of twists and
revelations, none of which I'll reveal here, but I can safely say that the
plot is not exactly designed to keep the audience guessing.
The movie makes much of specific things that never really add up or go
anywhere: deprogramming, cult psychology, the dynamics between patient and
therapist, former lovers, and so on. None of these elements are really
*used* -- they're just added to the heap, and we're expected to take them
and run with them. I'm always annoyed by this strategy, which seems to imply
that any director with enough of a brain to just *mention* these things in a
movie is worth applauding.
ANGEL DUST is agonizingly leisurely in its pacing. At first this helped set
up a mood, which I always appreciate when done right, but the movie slowly
turns into nothing *but* mood. If shortened by about half an hour, it would
have been even more effective (and that's still being generous); as it
stands, it's ponderous and unrewarding. There are whole stretches of the
movie where there is so little happening that I wondered if the movie had
become permanently derailed. Then comes a quick burst of powerful visuals.
Then another slow spot. The pattern repeats. This technique quickly wears
out its welcome.
The single eeriest thing about the movie is the way it presaged the Aum
Shinri Kyo subway murders, but not in a way that grants any real insight
into the subject. What a letdown, because ANGEL DUST was directed by Sogo
Ishii, one of Japan's foremost avant-garde directors. His talent is
unmistakeable in this film -- it's probably amazing in a theater -- but he
was at the mercy of an inferior script this time around. It's hard to speak
really well of a movie when the strongest reaction it provokes is, "What the
hell was *that* all about?"
