Title
Review for Peter's Friends (1992)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Jeff Meyer
Not wanting to get into a full-blown review of the new British film
starring Hugh Laurie, Kenneth Branagh, Emma Thompson and Peter Fry (I
hope I have these names right), I have only a few notes:
 *  About halfway through the film, I thought, "I hate those films that
    center around a group of friends with all sorts of problems, who
    resolve their problems neatly and tidely by the end of the film."
    At the end of the film, I thought, "Gee, I wish all their problems
    had been resolved neatly and tidely at the end of the film."  My
    god, I *am* an American film-goer.  (However, there are some
    problems with this ending.)
 *  As one of those "where are we now" films, it is as witty as to meet
    (and pass by a bit) the minimum requirements for such a film.  The
    characters, with the exception of the American wife of Branagh's
    character, are pretty fully fleshed out -- it is variable. (It's
    odd to see Laurie in a film where he doesn't say "Whoops!" in a
    very loud voice.  Not to mention having Fry around him and not
    doing Jeeves.)  Branagh is competent, but not wonderful.
 *  One exception to the above statement:  Emma Thompson is *brilliant*.
    While other actors wait for their dialogue to fill in their
    character, Thompson manages to completely and totally describe the
    woman she's playing through body language.  Now there's your Best
    Actress nominee, kids -- forget Michelle Pfieffer.
 *  I find it interesting that scenes of social embarrassment make me
    want to crawl underneath my theater seat; but Ahnold turning a camp
    of [fill in your generic force of nasties here] doesn't even slow
    my hand for popcorn.  PETER'S FRIENDS is not very real to me in
    some aspects, and very real to me in others.
Uhhh ... you want to know whether to see it or not?  I got in free.
Well, let's just say that if you haven't seen HOWARD'S END yet this
year, go see that instead.  However, if it's this or THE DISTINGUISHED
GENTLEMAN (Our Motto: You Don't Need To Be A Psychic To Know Where This
Film Goes!), either go see PETER'S FRIENDS, or go to a rendition of
Handel's "Messiah."

Author
Michael Stoneheel
     After Kenneth Branagh first film several critics compared him to 
Lawrence Olivier.  After his second film he was compared to Orson 
Welles.  What next?
     Personally, I liked his first two films.  I thought he was an
excellent actor but I didn't find any greatness in his directing.
Knowing his intention to imitate other films, I expected a British
version of THE BIG CHILL.
     Actually PETER'S FRIENDS is a mixture of "Thirty Something" and 
"Are You Being Served?".  It is a sentimental dramatic comedy (what a 
disturbing term) written by Rita Rudner and Branagh concerning a reunion
of friends after ten years.
     The film begins with several cinematographic experiments.  Branagh
used home-video photographing style to show the main characters' last
meeting at 1982 (he was probably influenced by Woody Allen).  This
method can irritate the audience, create an authentic atmosphere, and
give an impression of another objective character (namely the
camera)--none has been achieved!
     Afterwards, a sequence of events from the 80's is presented with
some documentary effect.  The arrival of all the friends to Peter's home
could be considered as the only brilliant scene of the film.  It is
fast, funny, sarcastic and accurate.  From this point the film
circulates between a tedious melodrama and comedy.  Several jokes in
the film made me laugh (and it is very difficult during the last years)
but some of the gags were used too much (for example, the laughter of
Tony Slattery).  The sentimental scenes are boring and it would have
been better off without some of them.
     The only thing left is to expect a good performance from such fine
actors, well, forget it!  Hugh Laurie and Imelda Staunton are annoying,
Rita Rudner gives the best performance but when we understand it she is
gone, Stephen Fry and Emma Thompson are reasonably good and Branagh is
excellent in the start but soon he becomes too self-conscious with his
acting.  The main problem is that the actors do not relate to each
other.  What could have been a perfect ensemble turned to be a complete
chaos.
     This film is another proof that Branagh hasn't understood the
cinema media yet.  The script is suitable for television and not for
cinema, the casting is not balanced and the cinematography has no
effect.  The only comfort is that due to Branagh's talent the film is
mediocre but not bad!

Author
Christina Marie O'Sullivan
Directed by Kenneth Branagh
Written by Kenneth Branagh and Rita Rudner
Cast: Kenneth Branagh, Stephen Fry, Hugh Laurie, Rita Rudner,
      Tony Slattery, Imelda Staunton, Emma Thompson.
     PETER'S FRIENDS, by cast list alone, should make for a good film,
if not an excellent one.  Alas, it didn't.
     Ten years after appearing at a New Year's Party performing "Orpheus
in the Underground" Cabaret, the troupe reunite at the huge mansion of
one member, Peter, at his request.  There is Maggie (Emma Thompson),
the frumpish, bookish one who is terribly attached to her cat; Andrew
(Kenneth Branagh), the self-hating sarcastic alcoholic scriptwriter;
Sarah, the energetic promiscuous one; the married couple (Imelda
Staunton and Hugh Laurie) who are still mourning the loss of one of
their children and worried sick about the survivor; and Peter himself,
who seems rootless in career and in intimate relationships, and has
inherited a huge, beautiful English mansion.  For New Year's Eve 1991,
Peter invites them all to meet.  Andrew brings his American actress-wife
(Rita Rudner) who embodies all the stereotypes of an American television
actress; Sarah brings Tony, her current lover, who is married to someone
else.  Once they meet and catch up, a series of surprises and
revelations follows, with Peter making the biggest "surprise" of all.
     Of course the course of events does not run smoothly.  What looks
promising during the opening credits all the way to the train station
where Maggie meets up with Sarah and Brian (Tony Slattery) slides into
a dog of a script.  Peter's surprise is pretty evident by the time he
and Andrew collect firewood; and it appears that during the writing,
Branagh and Rudner were so hung up on their own characters (I guess
obnoxious characters beset by personal problems are supposedly more
complicated than genial characters beset by personal problems) that the
married couple are given precious little to do, and Laurie looks really
out of place and uncomfortable with his screen role.  By the time 
Rudner's character gains an atom of respectability, her character is
shunted off to L.A.; and apparently Rudner and Branagh had decided that
Sarah's lover was just getting too much attention, so they wrote him off
to return back to his wife.
     The film has a few wonderful moments: Maggie leaving her cat, and
telling Andrew of her last relationship with a guy who wrote self-help
books; Sarah and Brian making wild, spontaneous love in the train;
Maggie making a pass at Peter; and Rudner's meeting with the cook:
"Haven't you seen 'Upstairs, Downstairs'?"
     However, a few wonderful moments doesn't always make for a good
film.  I was really disappointed, and felt that the actors were wasted
in their roles.

Author
Andrew Hall
     After someone dies, a group of old college friends reunites after
many years to deal with the problems of their adult lives.
     No, but Kenneth Branagh's new film PETER'S FRIENDS is sort of a
British BIG CHILL.  Branagh (DEAD AGAIN, HENRY V) also stars, along with
Emma Thompson, Rita Rudner, and Stephen Fry.
     After the death of Peter's (Fry) father, the friends reunite at his
father's mansion in rural England to spend New Years together.
Promiscuous Sarah arrives with her latest love, Brian, who happens to
have a wife and child.  Neurotic Maggie (Thompson), an author and reader
of self-help books, has a secret crush on one of the friends.  Andrew
(Branagh), a writer who has left England for Hollywood, finds that his
American television star wife Carol (Rudner) is driving him nuts.  Roger
and Maggie, a husband-and-wife jingle-writing team, find their marriage
endangered after the loss of their son.
     Coming to Peter's house seems to allow everyone a chance to come to
terms with life, in one way or another.  Everyone, it seems, has a major
crisis or a resolution of one except Peter, who appears mysteriously
immune to such problems.  But Peter drops his own sobering bombshell on
his friends at the end of the film.
     The characters in PETER'S FRIENDS are wonderful; we get to know
them quickly.  Many of the scattered laughs in the film come from
laughing at the characters.  I liked the women best of all.   Rudner, a
wonderful stand-up comedienne who also co-wrote the script, is
delightful here as the vain appearance freak.  Thopmson is also
endearing as the hopeless neurotic who, with Rudner's help, suddenly
blooms.
     My biggest complaint with PETER'S FRIENDS was the ending, which
comes too soon after Peter's revelation.  I felt as though I were
waiting for something else to happen.
     This is a good film, especially if you like films with real
characters.  Perhaps the British element will put a few people off.  But
I hope PETER'S FRIENDS gets distributed more widely than it has been in
Phoenix (only one theater).  It is certainly better than many of the
comedies coming out of Hollywood these days.
     Though PETER'S FRIENDS is not laugh-a-minute - there are periods of
intense drama between the laughs - I recommend seeing it.

Author
Pedro Sena
( Sidenote.. interesting that I would catch this the same evening that I saw
Glengarry Glen Ross .... pure theatre. )
If Glengarry Glen Ross was American acting styles at its very best, then
Peter's Friends is the English version of the same thing.  The finest
ensemble style acting that you will find, is in both of these productions.
American filmdom is afraid of these PLAY things.  The English, of course,
have thrived on it for a long time.
And Peter's Friends, despite its down ending ( not quite ), is a play that
does not need a movie.  But Kenneth Branagh manages to make it enjoyable,
and not an evening of heavy theatre, until the last possible moment, which
is nice, and makes for a fun evening.  One has no clue as to what is going
on, or what will happen.  So much the better.
Peter's Friends, centers around a group of buddies that used to spend their
college days doing little reviews for parties, with some burlesque thrown
in.  Several years later, all the members have gone their own way.  Peter
has decided that he will have a party to honor all of his friends, the last
chance that he might have to do so, for he is also losing the properties he
lives in.
And they arrive.  The actor and his wife actress, frustrated because he is
the star and she has to stick around with him until she gets her own break.
The spinster, who still picks up a bum here and there, and is trying to find
something of a spark in a relationship, to excuse her sexual escapades.  The
successful businessman in the advertising business, who is good, but has a
wife that is just about gone haywire about her child.  And Maggie, who seems
intended on coming over to the party to hook Peter into marriage.
And their interplay gets everyone in trouble with everyone, and insulting
everyone else in the process, but never losing the sense of friendship which
brought them together in the first place.  Like many years ago, they still
tease each other about their sexual anything's, and their choice of mates,
compared to their choice of friends ( never in question, now is it.? ).
And the disappointments set in everywhere.  Peter is not responding to
Maggie's advances, and she is hurt by it.  Sarah is still trying to bed down
the actor ( specially now ), and to get rid of the cold fish American wife,
who spells out clearly she is in it just to get her own chance at acting.
And Paul, whose marriage may have meant
something at one time, but has been a terrible disaster since the death of
one of the twin sons.  His wife has turned into a neurotic mess since.
All's well that ends well, is the norm here, and we won't disappoint anyone
with a spoiler's alert.  Needless to say that this film is excellent, and
the acting is above and beyond the call of any one's duty, and that it is a
very enjoyable evening, the likes of which many of us would love to have
once in a while ( well, we can forget the news.! ), just to appreciate old
friends, who really were better friends than we give them credit for, much
later.
The best one in this ensemble is Stephen Fry as Peter.  The smooth one is
Emma Thompson.  The most boring one is Kenneth Branagh. But the film is
excellent, and very enjoyable, and allows a theatrical play to live, without
having to resort to filmdom's very famous close ups.  Theatre still lives,
even if through the lens on a
camera.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Kenneth Branagh
Writers: Rita Rudner and Martin Bregman
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Emma Thompson, Stephen Fry, Alphonsia
Emmanuel, Hugh Laurie, Imelda Staunton, Rita Rudner, Tony Slattery,
Phyllida Law, Alex Lowe, Richard Briers
The reunion film is not an original idea in any way, shape, or form. 
It's been done throughout film history over and over again, and has
become one of the many sub-genres, like the prep school sub-genre, the
angst-filled teen sub-genre, and the slasher sub-genre.  What makes
"Peter's Friends" so remarkable is not how it doesn't follow the rules
of this sub-genre, but how it follows it so well, and creates characters
that I wouldn't mind hanging with.
What are the rules of the reunion sub-genre?  Well....
1.You need a group of friends, most of them married or at least dating,
and sometimes even married or dating eachother.
3. They are not to have spoken together much since they split apart.
4. The reunion has to come in intervals divisible by 10.
5.They all have to be slightly to highly neurotic.
6. The reunion has to bring them together, seperate them with little
crises, then bring them back 
together because, after all, they're friends.
7. There has to be some sex or at least some making out either between
the friends or with other people that are there or were invited.
8. Eightly, they're all unhappy or marginally so.
9. There's some sort of sexual tension amongst some of them that's built
up over the years.
10. The friends are all wildly successful in the world of entertainment
and the arts, sometimes internationally so.
11. The film is filled with nostalgic radio hits from the time when they
were friends, sometimes causing them to get together in dance/song.
Since it follows these rules so closely, it will probably be (and has
been) coined off as just a "British 'Big Chill.'"  And in some ways it
is.  Both follow the rules, as I said, and both feature lots of
bitching, big confessionals, and broken relationships.  But while "The
Big Chill" was, at least to me, a tad too whiny and unsatisfying,
"Peter's Friends" hits its mark, making this film funny, dramatic, and
poignant.
The friends of Peter's were all in the same theatre group back in '82,
performig wildly outrageous British acts for people far too stuck up to
enjoy them (the opening scene has them all dancing in tux tops and
tutus).  After Peter's (Stephen Fry)  wealthy father (Richard Briers,
hardly on screen enough to register, but oh well) dies, leaving a giant
mansion to him, he has to decide whether or not to keep it.  Not sure
what to do with it immeadiately, he decides to throw a giant reunion
party, inviting back all his old chums.
Of course, all or most of his chums follow the tenth rule.  Andrew
(Kenneth Branagh, also directing here) is an actor who's unhappily
married to a TV star, Carol (co-writer Rita Rudner).  Maggie (Emma
Thompson) is a successfuly publisher of self-help books, but looks like
she needs them more than her customers, as she is lonely and unhappy. 
Roger and Mary (Hugh Laurie and Imelda Staunton, who were also married
in "Sense and Sensibility") are married, and are the most successful
creators of jingles in the UK, but have suffered a tragedy as one of
their newly born twins has recently died.  And Sarah (Alphonsia
Emmanuel) is as promiscuous as ever, having a new boyfriend as of two
weeks named Brian (Tony Slattery) who's married and wants a divorce
because of her, giving her doubts.
The film features lots of inner-friend jokes, and even some old theatre
anecdotes (which I at least find a lot of fun in, as I've done lots of
theatre myself).  And there are big confessions, brawls between the
friends, and by the end, almost everyone is unhappy, even though some
have resolved their problems long before the end (which I kinda dug). 
The final twist would seem forced an anti-climactic, but for some
reason, I felt the same way the rest of the friends did.  Maybe it's
because the people in this film are so likable that I just wanted to
join their clique.
That's really what makes "Peter's Friends" so lovable: the way you just
want to hang with a group of friends who can be so dysfuntional
sometimes, but when someone's in crisis, can come together wonderfully
for one another.  It's when you have a giant crisis like this and people
want to selflessly help you out instead of subtely pushing you away that
makes you realize you have true friends, and these people are true
friends.
Not to mention Kenneth Branagh is able to make the film seem nostalgic
for the 80s (a decade I grew up in, unfortunately) without taking us
outside of the 90s.  There are some 80s classics and anti-classics like
Tears for Fears "Everybody Wants to Rule the World," but unfortunately
no stupid/fun 80s songs (I think if I ever did an 80s reunion film, I'd
put some crap Go Gos song on, or at least some good old "Come on
Eileen"), but this is the British 80s we're talking about.  Oh well. 
But anyway, the direction is pretty good, although nothing amazing. 
Branagh's forte is really making Shakespeare fresh and magical, but at
least he's very good with making a less ambiguous film like this.
The writing is good from Rita Rudner and Martin Bregman, with lots of
good one-liners, and even some really bad but good puns (to mock the
fact that Andrew lives in L.A., Peter, while cutting some logs, asks him
is he has wood in L.A., and Andrew says, "No, but we have Hollywood" -
punishment like that).  The actors, as in most speaking movies, are
better than their material, though, with some stand-out performances to
the six friends, as well as the outsiders like Slattery, Rudner, and
Phyllida Law as the old housekeeper of the Peter's mansion.  A little
note should be made about Hugh Laurie's performance, as he looks like he
took some massive doses of prozac before doing this - I mean, I've never
seen him actually act this dramatically.
"Peter's Friends" is a really enjoyable film which makes people like me
pine for some sort of future reunion, although I don't know what kind
I'll have (like most people, I don't look forward to my high school
reunion).  Because of the way these friends are still able to maintain
the same amount of care they have for one another and after such a long
period of seperation, I just look forward to the day when I can have
friends like that.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
