Title
Review for Belly of an Architect, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BELLY OF AN ARCHITECT, THE (director/writer: Peter Greenaway;
cinematographer: Sacha Vierny; editor: John Wison; cast: Brian Dennehy
(Stourley Kracklite), Chloe Webb (Louisa Kracklite), Lambert Wilson
(Caspasian Speckler), Sergio Fantoni (Io Speckler), Vanni Corbellini
(Frederico), Stefania Casini (Flavia Speckler), Stefano Gragnani (The
Nose Man), 1987-UK)
A potbellied, 54-year-old noted architect from Chicago, Stourley
Kracklite (Brian Dennehy), and his much younger wife, Louisa (Chloe
Webb), come to Rome by train, where he makes his grand entrance by
having sex with her as they arrive in Italy. He will be the director of
an art exhibition that is being planned on the obscure 18th-century
French architect Etienne-Louis Boullee.
The couple are feted with toasts and a sugar cake replica of one of
Boullee's buildings by their hosts, the father of a family financing the
exhibition -- and a brother and sister -- Flavia (Stefania Casini) and
Caspasian (Lambert Wilson). Boullee has been the most influential
architect in the life of Kracklite, and he has spent the last ten years
preparing for this exhibition to honor him, while the Italians see this
exhibit as a chance for them to gain world recognition and for that they
need a prestigious American architect like Kracklite to sell the project
to the art patrons.
During the course of his stay in Rome, Kracklite will be undergoing a
series of psychological and physical mishaps. His stay will be for nine
months, the time it takes for Louisa to give birth and for Kracklite to
end his life, as he eventually finds out that he is dying from stomach
cancer. At first, he will develop stomach problems and blame this on his
wife, whom he thinks is trying to poison him. He will also become
extremely jealous of the attention the serpentine, youthfully handsome,
thin waist lined architect, Caspasian, is paying to his wife. He will
eventually, after the couple is there for three months, push his wife
into having an affair with Caspasian as he becomes impossible to live
with, developing an obsession about his belly and his mortality.
Caspasian will notice that she is pregnant before her husband does, a
pregnancy which came about on the train coming into Rome. Her husband
doesn't notice she is pregnant until she tells him, as he does not look
at her stomach, being that he is so preoccupied with his.
Sacha Vierny, as cinematographer, supplies the film with striking
visuals, every scene is beautiful to behold. The technicolors of favor
for the film are the different shades of brown resembling the marvelous
architecture in Rome and the pure shades of white, which tend to
introduce the characters in their best light, before it becomes apparent
that they are all obnoxious to a certain degree and not as pure as they
first might have seemed.
Peter Greenaway (The Cook, the Thief, His Wife & Her Lover/The Pillow
Book/Prospero's Books) made use in this film of many diverse
metaphorical themes: while giving us a lesson about architecture and
deriding how money from patrons is what drives the arts. He also tells
about Isaac Newton's influence to the world, about Augustus and his wife
Livia who poisoned him, Kracklite's stomach problems, and the artist as
an egotist. The hero of the story is in the middle of a mid-life crises,
where it seems everything is rapidly going down the tubes for him. His
feelings are wounded, his sufferings are gargantuan, and he is about to
lose his wife and control of the exhibit to his architect rival
Caspasian, and eventually he will tragically lose his life. He resembles
Boullee, in that they are both known for producing few works and not
finishing what they start, and that they were both hypochondriacs.
This film like all Greenaway productions, is a splendid visual film to
behold. Brian Dennehy comes up with a big performance, towering over
others even in his downfall. The most emotional scene, has him looking
through a keyhole and watching his wife screw Caspasian. The film might
not add up to much in weight, but the sum of its parts were like an
apple hitting Newton on his noggin. It had one mesmorizing visual scene
after another, and gave one enough fodder to think about all the
spiritual and corporeal themes it just spread before your eyes without
going further into them. Greenaway, as always, is an acquired taste.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Peter Greenaway
Starring: Brian Dennehy, Chloe Webb, Lambert Wilson, Sergio Fantoni, Vanni
Corbellini, Alfredo Varelli, Geoffrey Copleston, Francesco Carnelutti,
Stefano Gragnani
"The Belly of an Architect" is an interesting example of a film that
applies metaphors to everything it presents.  It's not so much concerned
with telling a story or introducing characters as it is introducing one
kind of a character, and trying to bring him down to what he really is. 
Films like these are challenges for the audience because they have to pay
attention to every little thing that happens, remember lines that may come
into context later on as they take on different meanings, and then later on
try to figure out the themes its trying to present.  In other words, it's a
fun film for those who enjoy a film that's a puzzle.
The architect (and belly) being referred to in the title is Stourley
Kracklite (the ever-likable Brian Dennehy), a man who arrives in Rome from
Chicago with his much-younger wife, Louisa (Chloe Webb, the Nancy from "Sid
and..."), to head an exhibition of the work of an older favorite architect
of Kracklite's, Etienne-Louis Boulee.  Arriving in the city, he is greeted
with lots of warmth from the people working with him, and seems to be doing
exactly what he wants to do with all the freedom he can have.
However, he soon begins to suffer some pains in his lower chest, and his
life begins to tumble down in front of him.  He learns that Boulee himself
suffered pains much like his, and pretty soon is convinced that his wife is
trying to poison him, since that is what happened to the Roman Emporer
Augustus, whom he sculptured once.  As he becomes more and more obsessed
with what he thinks is a stomach tumor (a doctor confirms it's just a case
of bad gas...and egotism), his wife feels more and more distanced, and
finds herself succumbing to the flirting of one of Kracklite's collegues,
Caspasian (Lambert Wilson).
The film was directed by Peter Greenaway, one of the most controversial and
overall intriguing directors working today (he's directed such films as the
NC-17 "The Cook, the Thief, His Wife, and Her Lover," "Prospero's Books,"
and "The Pillow Book").  Greenaway's a director much more interested in
themes and creating certain sensual moods than really really telling a
story, and here he blows us away with some truly gorgeous shots of Rome and
its many sculptures (photographed beautifully by his usual D.P, Sacha
Vierny), and overwhelms us with some truly cinematic moments, most notably
a scene where Kracklite discovers a colleague of his has been secretly
taking photographs of him when he didn't think he was being photographed,
and a scene where he watches his wife sleep witih Caspasian.
Of course, there's the themes that Greenaway is aiming at, like the way
that artists are often too influenced and consumed by what came before,
shown in the way that many of the things that happen to Kracklite were
things that happened to Boulee.  But he also shows the other side of this,
exploring how sometimes artists TRY and be like other artists, shown in
some of the ways that Kracklite actually takes steps to make sure that what
happens to him is what happened to others before him.  The way that these
two play with one another is obviously the thing that Greenaway is playing
with here, and after awhile, we're not sure if it's one or the other or
both that is coming into play in this film.
And we get to see another one of Greenaway's odd fascinations, things that
he brings into perspective and concentrates on that no one else really
finds interesting but him...until, of course, they see his movies.  In
"Prosero's Books," it was those damn books; in "The Pillow Book," it was
the fetish of writing calligraphy on bare flesh; in "The Belly of an
Architect," it's, well, the belly.  We see Kracklite come up with a really
big fascination with his belly, which he thinks is being eaten away from
the inside by a nasty tumor, a fascination that makes him go as far as
xeroxing pictures of the bellies of various statues in Rome, and then, um,
hold them up to his own belly.  Seeing his room adorned with pictures of
stomachs is one of the weirdest, oddest images I've seen in my short
lifespan.
Of course, there are a bunch of problems which pull this down from what it
really wants to be.  One of the things Greenaway is best at is bringing
about his themes without actually mentioning them, leaving everything up to
the imagination.  This film blatantly tells us everything we need to know,
having the characters actually dicuss the themes.  This makes everything
seem much more bland than it actually is, and since there's nothing really
fascinating to watch after the themes have been stated, the film seems to
really, really drag.
It also doesn't help that this film is way too fable-like - everything
anyone does is so that Greenaway can bring out his themes.  This makes
everything seem so less poetic, especially that ending, which instead of
being disturbing or somber merely comes off as being contrived.  I have no
problem with fables, but when they come off like this, it undermines
everything a whole lot than it really should have.
But there's really more to reccomend than to dislike here, even if the film
comes off as way too pretentious for its own good.  The one thing that
really makes it worth viewing is the performance of Brian Dennehy as
Kracklite, who brings so much life to his role as well as so much humanity
that you can't help but feel bad for him as he takes a nasty descent into
madness.  The film is actually a lot like a one-man show: everyone is
merely there as a supporting role for him, and almost every scene features
Dennehy either talking with people, or by himself, sometimes even writing
bizarre letters to the long-dead Boulee, confessing his deepest thoughts. 
Dennehy's such a good actor and makes everything seems so real that he
gives the only real human feel to the film, and makes it seem a lot better
than it really is.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jeff Meyer
See at the Seattle Film Festival:
THE BELLY OF AN ARCHITECT (Great Britain, 1987)
Director/Screenwriter: Peter Greenaway
Cast: Brian Dennehy, Chloe Webb, Lambert Wilson, Vanni Corbellini
     I made a special point of going to see THE BELLY OF AN ARCHITECT since I
had heard that, due to legal hassles, it may never see the light of day.  I
wish I could tell you that its absence from distribution would be a shame;
unfortunately, I was totally at sea during the entire picture.  The plot itself
is interesting: a noted Chicago architect, Stourley Kracklite (Dennehy) and his
much younger wife (Webb) travel to Rome so that Kracklite can fulfill a dream:
design a tribute to the 18th century architect Etienne Louis Boullee.
Kracklite is obsessed with Boullee, and his health begins to fail under the
strain of getting the tribute prepared in time for the opening.  Several of his
sponsors are trying to turn it into a more commercial affair than Kracklite
would like, and one (Wilson) begins to seduce Kracklite's wife.  This drives
Kracklite further into his obsession; he begins to write letters to Boullee,
describing his problems; his gastric problems, which mimic Boullee's, become
serious, and he wonders if his wife is poisoning him (like Alexander's wife did
-- a famous statue of Alexander was done by Boullee).  He also has an annoying
habit of punching people in the nose (though almost every Italian in this film
is portrayed as being an asshole -- it is not a promotional picture for
visiting Rome in that sense).
     I won't get into the conclusion, but you basically have the plot right
there, and there are few surprises.  No one is really very sympathetic in the
film; Kracklite's wife and Kracklite basically work at destroying the other,
and while you feel sorry for Kracklite as he breaks down, it's not the type of
artistic obsession you can empathize with.  Wilson and his *very* strange
sister and weasel-like flunky would be a pleasure to throw off a bridge.  The
photography is fairly staid, and things move at a snail's pace.  About the only
good thing I can say about it is that the shots of the Roman architecture are
spectacular; but I am sure there are several PBS documentaries on Italian
Architecture which could provide just as much scenic pleasure while sparing us
the angst.
