Title
Review for Trial and Error (1997)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Walter Frith
'TRIAL AND ERROR' OBJECTS TO BEING ORIGINAL
It's a struggle for a lot of television stars to make a transition to
the big screen.  Two of the most successful have to be Robin Williams
and Tom Hanks.  Other stars such as Tom Selleck, Shelley Long, David
Caruso and Roseanne have had luke warm, little or no success at it.
Michael Richards is certainly the funniest second banana on television
today with his wacky portrayal as Kramer on the top rated television
comedy 'Seinfeld'.  He attempts to strut his stuff in the latest comedy
from Jonathan Lynn ('Clue', 'My Cousin Vinny', 'Greedy') entitled
'Trial and Error'.
Jeff Daniels ('Dumb and Dumber', 'Gettysburg', 'Terms of Endearment')
also stars as a high profile, conservative attorney who is sent by his
firm's boss from Beverly Hills to Nevada to represent a member of the
family (Rip Torn in a genuinely entertaining role) on trial for fraud.
Daniels gets drunk at his bachelor party the night before and by nature
of a hangover the next morning his out of work actor friend (Richards)
substitutes for him in court and pretends to be the attorney of record
for the trial.  The problem now is that he has to keep on being the
attorney of record and things get sticky here to say the least.
I don't understand why Hollywood feels it's necessary to keep telling
the same story over and over again.  While 'Trial and Error' isn't a
complete disappointment because it does have some hilarious moments,
it's a movie of switching identities and getting through the system
very nervously which is something we've seen time and time again.
There is also a needless romantic sub plot where Daniels has an affair
with a beautiful waitress (Charlize Theron) and at the same time is
engaged to be married back home in California.
Jeff Daniels plays the straight man quite well in this one and Richards
does the best he can and you can tell at certain points where his
comedy is improvisational and while 'Trial and Error' hasn't cleared
the way for him to have a big career in the movies, Richards probably
has a better shot than most from today's television at breaking out.
Visit Mr. Frith's 'Movie Reviews' section of 'The Review' at
http://www.arrowweb.com/review
Comments on this review may also be sent to wfrith@icom.ca

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(New Line)
Directed by     Jonathan Lynn
Written by      Gregory Bernstein, Sara Bernstein, and Cliff Gardner    
Cast            Michael Richards, Jeff Daniels, Charlize Theron, Austin
                Pendleton, Jessica Steen, Rip Torn
MPAA Rating     "PG-13"
Running Time    106 minutes
Reviewed at     Six Forks Station Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (31MAY97)
     TRIAL AND ERROR is a clumsy reworking of MY COUSIN VINNY, with
director Jonathan Lynn staging another small-town trial with another
exasperated judge presiding over yet another courtroomful of colorful
personalities.  In this case, its Michael Richards out-of-work actor
impersonating his best-friend lawyer (Jeff Daniel), after a bachelor
party for the latter leaves him incapacitated.  Despite the Kramer-ish
antics of Mr. Richards, some fresh flustering by VINNY veteran Austin
Pendleton (as the judge), and one howler of a testimony from Rip Torn
(as the defendant), the courtroom shenanigans end up only intermittenly
funny.  Far more interesting is the romance that develops between
Daniels' character and a waitress (played by a glowing Charleze Theron)
and a late line of thought that asks each character to examine how the
issue of truth affects them.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Anyone who has embraced the rumors that Michael 
Richards will star in a Kramer spinoff after "Seinfeld" ends its run 
should watch TRIAL AND ERROR. Then you'll know Richards just 
plain can't carry a comedy vehicle. He's great in moderation, as a 
supporting cast member, but as the attention-grabber, the pratfalls 
just don't work. The fact that TRIAL AND ERROR has a generally 
weak, predictable script doesn't help things any for the "Seinfeld" 
fans who are used to top-notch comedic writing.
        Richards plays an actor who throws a bachelor party for his 
best friend, Jeff Daniels, who used to be a serious actor. This was 
Debra Winger's husband in TERMS OF ENDEARMENT, but ever 
since that Ex-Lax scene in DUMB AND DUMBER, no one's taken 
him the least bit seriously. Here, he does little to earn back any of 
our respect. As in DUMB AND DUMBER, Daniels is again the 
straight man, the Dean Martin to Richards' Jerry Lewis.
        Daniels plays a straight-laced lawyer who gets way too 
drunk at the bachelor party and ends up with a monstrous hangover 
the next morning. He has court, but all he has to do is request a 
continuance. No big deal, Richards thinks, and when Daniels passes 
out in the bathroom, Richards decides to impersonate Daniels in the 
courtroom. Of course, the judge doesn't grant the continuance, so 
Richards has to continue being the lawyer for the duration of the 
trial.
        That's the premise, and it does lead to a few strained 
laughs, but basically it's a retread of MY COUSIN VINNY, right 
down to the bitchy D.A. and the sarcastic judge. The sad part is, 
TRIAL AND ERROR director Johnathon Lynn also directed MY 
COUSIN VINNY, so the only person he's ripping off is himself. The 
thing is, Richards is no Joe Pesci and there's no equivalent of Marisa 
Tomei. The closest we get is sexy Charlize Theron, a nature girl 
Daniels falls in love with. It's a plus that Theron never wears a bra, 
but she does nothing for the comedy of the film. Then again, what 
comedy? This movie is both a trial and an error.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
David N. Butterworth
It's hard to disassociate Michael Richards from Kramer, the role (for those
of you who've been in a plastic bubble this past decade) he plays on TV's
"Seinfeld."  Richards has defined Kramer's personality--every slap happy,
pratfalling, wildly gesticulating character trait--so completely that his
recent forays into big screen roles have smacked of Kramer, albeit on
varying doses of medication.
Wise-acre critics have already dubbed Richards' latest movie "My Cousin
Kramer," as the film is directed by Jonathan Lynn, whose previous courtroom
comedy "My Cousin Vinny" made Marisa Tomei a star.  However, "Trial and
Error" has a lot more going for it than just Richards' typically ebullient
performance.
Richards plays Ricky Rietti, an unemployed actor who throws his best
friend, attorney Charles Tuttle (Jeff Daniels), a humdinger of a bachelor
party the night before Charlie's career-making court case.  With Charlie
incapable of showing up for work the next day, Ricky steps in, using his
improvisational skills to try to establish a defense.  In a cut-and-dried
case of fraud (Rip Torn's Benny Gibbs is accused of selling pennies as
"copper engravings of Abraham Lincoln" for $17.99), all Ricky needs to do
is get a continuance.  Instead, he makes matters worse.
Austin Pendleton, as Judge Graff, presides over Ricky's ad-libbed antics
and neatly depicts the deterioration of a confident authority figure to a
blubbering imbicile over the course of the trial.
Daniels is wonderful at playing straight man to the likable Richards, and
gets a good number of laughs himself.  Positioning himself as Ricky's
assistant, Charlie attempts to guide Ricky through the legal proceedings,
with whispered directions, cue cards, even a nursery monitor (after he's
finally removed from the courtroom babbling demands for a recess).
In a sweetly-handled subplot, Charlie courts a hotel waitress, Billie (the
fetching Charlize Theron).  Their blossoming relationship is played out
against a spectacular Nevada backdrop of snow-capped mountains and bright
blue skies.
"Trial and Error" is a nicely balanced blend of zany comedy and touching
romance.
With "Seinfeld"'s Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Jason Alexander currently making
the movie circuit with roles in "Father's Day" and "Love! Valour!
Compassion!" respectively, Richards' central performance in "Trial and
Error" further underlines that show's prime time popularity.  (What next?
Jerry starring in a Hollywood version of "Sunday in the Park with George"?)
If you're a dyed-in-the-wool Kramer fan, then "Trial and Error" is likely
to appeal to your sense of slapstick.  If you're not, it's a lot of fun
anyway.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TRIAL AND ERROR ** .  Directed by Jonathan Lynn. Written by Sara Bernstein
and Gregory Bernstein, from a story by Sara Bernstein. Photography,
Gabriel Beristain.Editing, Tony Lombardo. Production design, Victoria Paul.
Music, Phil Marshall. Produced by Gary Ross and Lynn. Cast: Michael
Richards (Richard Rietti), Jeff Daniels (Charles Tuttle), Charlize Theron
(Billie Tyler), Alexandra Wentworth (Tiffany), Jessica Steen (Elizabeth
Gardner), Austin Pendleton (Judge Paul Z. Graff), Rip Torn (Benny Gibbs)
and Dale Dye (Dr. Stone).A New Line release. 98 minutes.PG-13.
"Trial and Error" can be a trial for the viewer and its execution is an
error.
The concept is OK , I suppose, and it has its moments, but not enough of
them. The Britisher who made it was a collaborator of Eric Idle of Monty
Python fame; the co-author of the superbly witty TV satire series "Yes
Minister" and "Yes, Prime Minister"; a performer; and starting in 1990, a
film director as well. His first movie, "Nuns On The Run," was a
forgettable cross-dressing comedy with some nice gags, but these were
seldom followed through. It waited a long time before it picked up speed.
The same thing happened to his next film,"My Cousin Vinny" and in the Eddie
Murphy vehicle "The Distinguished Gentleman." The tempo got reversed in
last year's "Sgt. Bilko." Its first part was excellent and lively, its
second part dragged.
"Trial and Error" does not have the rhythmic unevenness of the earlier Lynn
pictures, yet it shares their inability to make a tight, coherent whole.
(The first part of "Bilko" is an exception because it is a transposed TV
series that does not lose from being episodic).  Director Lynn seems more
at home with short spurts and sketches rather than with long distance
running.
Like "My Cousin Vinny," "Trial end Error" is a lawyer-in-the-courtroom
comedy, a bill of goods sold on the strength of "Seinfeld"'s Michael
Richards who gets billed above co-star Jeff Daniels.
As one of the 789 people in the US. who watch "Seinfeld" only now and then,
I do not  feel qualified to pass judgment on Richards's TV persona. Yet for
the sake of peace and harmony I am willing to accept the general opinion
that Richards has much talent. I am even willing to concede that he does
nicely in "Trial and Error" and that without him the movie would have been
even more boring.
Charles (Daniels) is a Yale-educated lawyer who has clerked for a Supreme
Court Justice. In his very first job he made partner in a prestigious (and,
'tis hinted, unscrupulous) law firm. The sudden rise comes because he is
about to marry blonde Tiffany, the boss's daughter. She is merely outlined
as a spoiled, air-headed socialite brat.
Charles's best man-to be is childhood buddy Richard (Richards), a mostly
unemployed actor who, from a short, funny audition we witness, is no Brando
or Olivier. He is preparing a bachelor party that gets postponed as Charles
is dispatched by his father-in-law-to-be to a no-town in Nevada with orders
to defend a relative (Benny Gibbs, played by Rip Torn) accused of fraud.
Gibbs has been selling to collectors, for well over $20 a piece,  "copper
engravings of Abraham Lincoln " that turn out to be pennies. This scam is
so dumb and preposterous that right away it removes any connection of the
movie to reality.
In Nevada, Charles finds that Richard plus a few pals have preceded him in
order to hold the bachelor party. In the local hotel's bar, and in a
sequence that is entirely forced and artificial, Charles gets in a tussle
that puts him in a bloodied up and very hazy state. Just as artificially,
by the following day, having swallowed more pain pills than prescribed,
Charles  is in no shape to appear in court.  For reasons both too phony to
explain, the two friends exchange names, with Richard posing as lawyer
Charles, and Charles as Richard's assistant.
Things happen, unevenly divided between courtroom and exterior scenes.
Developments get telegraphed non-stop from the film's opening, mostly
having to do with several blond women. The instant we meet wife-to-be
Tiffany we know that the marriage will not take place. In Nevada, when we
meet  cute, blond waitress Billie, we know that she and Charles will end in
each arms. When we watch Richard watching the distant vision of a woman on
a motorcycle, we know that another twosome will eventually materialize.
Even though the biker is hardly visible, we can guess which blond she'll
turn out to be. The ancient cliche of antagonists who end up lovey-dovey is
alive and well. What we cannot guess is the end where Charles and Tiffany
go to bed together, but the next morning
waitress Billie replaces Tiffany for good. Whether another improbability or
else a cynical bit of morals, the episode can make you uncomfortable.
Essentially the movie welds two familiar sub-genres: the impostor and the
not-to-be wedding. Operating in spurts and fits of unequal interest,
straining beyond belief its farcical elements, the courtroom shenanigans
can reach soporific levels. Curiously though, as  romantic aspects
increase,  the balance of the courtroom scenes improves. This is partly
caused by a mock-pathetic testimony by the enormously talented Rip Torn,
partly by Austin Pendleton (the Judge) whose series of reactions are
original, clever samples of increasing irritation.
A small saving grace is in the visuals of Nevada's landscape. The same
countryside also holds the odd sight (and site) of something like a
graveyard of toilets, the shooting of which is, for some reason, a means to
get rid of hang-ups. Perhaps there is a deep Freudian meaning to this. Or
could it be a belated homage to Lynn's compatriot Dr. Crapper who invented
the modern flush toilet?

Author
Berge Garabedian
Michael Richards leaves his spot as Kramer on the infamous Seinfeld TV
sitcom for a stint as a lanky, goofy best friend to Jeff Daniels'
lawyer character in this ill-fated, and unfunny, "comedy".
PLOT:
Richard the actor (Richards) has to take the place of Charles the
lawyer (Daniels) in a real court case, after Charles is left
unintelligible from a night of heavy drinking at his bachelor party.
The film follows the antics of the two men as they try to get away with
their tomfoolery.
CRITIQUE:
This movie did not make me laugh once. Perhaps it was because I was
tired when I watched it. Perhaps. Perhaps it was because I had seen
Richards perform most of the same schtick a thousand times on Seinfeld.
Perhaps. Perhaps it was because the movie just wasn't funny.
Absolutely.
The lack of humour wasn't the only issue that I had with this film
either. The movie attempts to weave a couple of love stories through
its vision, but unfortunately, they are also lacking in conviction,
believability and credibility. They are contrived and appear to be
placed into the story for convenience sake. The actors were all
adequate enough in their roles, but the problem didn't lie in the
acting. I wish I could find one good reason for you to see this waste
of time, but I can't. Unless of course, you need something playing on
your TV set while you waste some time around the house.
Overall, this movie stinks. On the good side, Charlize Theron is darn
cute, and the movie is no longer then 90 minutes. On the bad side, this
movie is not funny, interesting or enjoyable in any which way possible.
A person wouldn't even enjoy his nachos while watching this emptiness.
Please skip it.
Little Known Facts: 
Jonathan Lynn earned a degree in law from Cambridge before becoming an
actor/director.
Charlize Theron grew up on a farm outside Benoni, South Africa, as the
only child. At the age of 18 her mother made her go to Los Angeles to
try a career in the movie industry. She came to LA without knowing
anyone in the city but after two weeks when she was standing in line on
Hollywood Boulevard an agent gave her his card. After eight months in
LA she got her first part. Since then she has taken acting lessons and
her career has skyrocketed, specifically in DEVIL'S ADVOCATE (8/10).
Charlize was narrowly beat out by Elizabeth Berkley for the lead role
in the "movie", SHOWGIRLS. She was quoted as saying "it was like I had
some guardian angel."

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Michael Richards, Jeff Daniels, Charlize Theron, Austin Pendleton, 
      Jessica Steen, Rip Torn, Alexandra Wentworth 
Director: Jonathan Lynn 
Producers: Jonathan Lynn and Gary Ross 
Screenplay: Gregory Bernstein, Sara Bernstein, and Cliff Gardner 
Cinematography: Gabriel Beristain 
Music: Phil Marshall 
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema 
     Even if you don't like Jeff Daniels, you've got to give him credit 
for being a good sport.  During his career, he has played second fiddle 
to the likes of huge spiders (ARACHNAPHOBIA), screaming matches between 
Shirley McLaine and Debra Winger (TERMS OF ENDEARMENT), Jim Carrey's 
rubber features (DUMB AND DUMBER), Keanu Reeves and a speeding bus 
(SPEED), and now Michael Richards' antics.  If there was a Hollywood 
award for the quintessential team player, Daniels would be in 
contention.   
     TRIAL AND ERROR casts the actor as hot shot lawyer Charlie Tuttle, 
who has been on the fast track ever since graduating from Yale Law 
School.  He has just been made a partner in a lucrative L.A. law firm, 
he has a 37th story office with a view, and he's engaged to the boss' 
beautiful-but-heartless daughter.  So, when his future father-in-law 
tells him to fly to the tiny town of Paradise Bluff, Nevada to request a 
continuance for a friend of the family, how can he refuse?  
Unfortunately, the unexpected trip conflicts with his bachelor's party.  
That's no problem for the ever-resourceful best man, actor Richard 
Rietti (Michael Richards), who has been Charlie's best friend since he 
was nine years old.  If Charlie can't come to the party, why not bring 
the party to Charlie? 
     So, Richard drives out to Paradise Bluff and shows his friend a 
great time -- too great a time, as it turns out, because Charlie ends up 
getting punched out by a couple of burly guys at a bar, then overdoses 
on pain killers.  As a result, he's in no shape to appear in court the 
next day as the representative of Benny Gibbs (Rip Torn), who's being 
charged with fraud (at $17.99 a pop, Benny's "copper engravings of the 
Great Emancipator" turned out to be nothing more than pennies).  But the 
ever-helpful Richard has a brainstorm -- he'll impersonate Charlie, 
request the continuance, then both of them can get out of town.  There's 
just one snag -- while the judge (Austin Pendleton) doesn't have a 
problem with Richard's motion, the prosecutor, Elizabeth Gardner 
(Jessica Steen), does, and the case ends up going to trial with an actor 
posing as the defendant's lawyer. 
     If TRIAL AND ERROR resembles MY COUSIN VINNY in a broad sense (big 
city lawyer caught in a small town trial), it's no accident.  Director 
Jonathan Lynn, who presided over VINNY, allows this film to develop in a 
similar, lighthearted manner.  The script, credited to Gregory 
Bernstein, Sara Bernstein, and Cliff Gardner, isn't a comic masterpiece, 
but Lynn gets the most out of it.  There are several dull patches and 
more than a few jokes don't work, but these are counterbalanced by some 
hilarious sequences and a surprisingly winning romance. 
     TRIAL AND ERROR is designed as a showcase for the talents of 
Richards, who is best known for his role as the off-the-wall Kramer on 
TV's SEINFELD.  And, while Richards tones down his buffoonery here, 
there's still plenty of physical comedy involved.  However, as enjoyable 
as some of the actor's outrageous stunts are, he is upstaged by the 
deftly-handled relationship between Charlie and a local barmaid named 
Billie (played by Charlize Theron, the spandex-clad blond from TWO DAYS 
IN THE VALLEY).  Both Daniels and Theron are likable, and they really 
click together.  Daniels' portrayal of Charlie is just another variation 
of his usual screen personae; Theron plays Billie with an adorable 
combination of sexiness and sweetness.  The result is that this subplot 
becomes more interesting than the main story, and it's easy to grow 
impatient during some of the longer, drawn-out court sequences (not to 
mention an ill-conceived romantic interlude involving Richard and the 
prosecutor). 
     TRIAL AND ERROR is reasonably effective for what it intends to be -
- a genial comedy offering a change of pace from the mayhem of THE FIFTH 
ELEMENT, THE LOST WORLD, and CON AIR.  The structure is a little 
awkward, but its not hard to overlook this and other problems if you're 
in the market for several hearty laughs, a few smiles, and an 
unambitious-but-agreeable time at the movies. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Michael Richards, Jeff Daniels, Charlize Theron, Austin Pendleton,
Jessica Steen, Rip Torn, Alexandra Wentworth Director: Jonathan Lynn
Screenplay: Gregory Bernstein, Sara Bernstein, and Cliff Gardner
Needless to say crazy Kramer (Michael Richards), without smart mouth
Jerry, big mouth Elaine and dumb arse George is very much like a fish
out of water. Michael Richards first feature film as the male lead is a
major disappointment. Probably because his character, an out of sorts
actor impersonating a lawyer is not well defined or likeable. Richards
cannot make up his mind about whether he still wants to be Kramer or a
more regular guy, and the result is something of a half-poached egg.
Part of the problem may rest in the fact that Richard's face has become
synonymous with Seinfeld's Kramer, and it is difficult to picture him
otherwise. A big plus when his talented zaniness lights up the small
screen, but a big minus when he attempts a role outside what we are
accustomed to. Jeff Daniel's comic talent was evident opposite Jim Carey
in "Dumb and Dumber", but he alone cannot make up for the three missing
stooges. It's as if the ghosts of George, Jerry and Elaine are haunting
the set, wishing to make an appearance, but sadly do not.
So this overdrawn tale of an actor impersonating a lawyer with a moral
ending, would have fared better as a shorter, much-ado-about-nothing
episode of Seinfeld. In which case we would have all four clowns of
situational comedy together on screen, and that would generate more
laughs than if one were sitting alone.

Author
Phil Brady
When I first heard the setup for Trial and Error, I registered a
small wince. It sounded like "My Cousin Kramer," and I'm sure that easy
dismissal will pop up in many reviews. "My Cousin Vinny" had Joe Pesci,
Marisa Tomei, and Fred Gwynne, all perfectly cast for their roles. The
story was cute, and it looked like its premise had been copied as a
vehicle for Michael Richards. Lightning was unlikely to strike twice,
and I have a rooting interest in Richards. I had learned his name before
Seinfeld, when he was the only good thing in the movie "UHF" (1989 -
Weird Al Yankovic was the "star"..'nuff said). Well it works just fine.
Richards, Jeff Daniels and Austin Pendleton are just as well cast, and
actresses Charlize Theron and Jessica Steen are very right for their
roles, too.
Daniels plays a fast-track lawyer. He's a new partner, about to
marry the boss' daughter when that boss sends him on a short errand in
Nevada. A brief continuance request is rejected, and now he must defend
a guilty-as-sin swindler Rip Torn. Rip doesn't steal any scenes, but
they do allow him with a neat piece testifying on the stand in his own
defense. Where does Richards fit in? Well, it seems he engineered a
bachelor's party the night before, and Jeff is unable to even stand up.
Richards, playing an unsucessful actor, takes it upon himself to
impersonate his buddy for a "one-line walk-on." When the continuance is
denied, he's stuck with the case, unless he wants to admit to violating
all kinds of laws.
Early in the movie, we get a lot of Richards' physical comedy, very
good bits, but they won't carry a movie. Midway through, these schticks
drop away, and we see capable acting carry him through the rest of the
film. Daniels serves as more than just a foil for Richards, coming to
terms with his marriage to a woman he doesn't love. The reality that
jolts him out of it is Theron's radiant barmaid. She could jolt quite a
few men with her sweet manner, knit tops and cutoff jeans..oh, where was
I? Daniels and Theron have quite a few good scenes away from the
courtroom (did I mention she was blonde?).
The primary job of reacting to Richards belongs to Pendleton, as the
bemused judge, and Steen as the incredulous prosecuting attorney. They
do so well that we easily brush aside any concerns about how far real
courtroom types would put up with Richards' disorderly ineptitude. The
screenplay spreads the humor out well, physical comedy here, wordplay
there, with situations and reaction shots providing a balanced attack.
All my fears were unwarranted. Its not fair to compare this film
with "Vinny," since both are excellent comedies. Richards does the big
screen thing well, and Daniels' career as an ack-TORE is further
derailed by another brilliant comedy outing. Don't miss this one.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(New Line)
Starring:  Michael Richards, Jeff Daniels, Charlize Theron, Jessica Steen,
Rip Torn, Austin Pendleton.
Screenplay:  Sara Bernstein and Gregory Bernstein.
Producers:  Gary Ross and Jonathan Lynn.
Director:  Jonathan Lynn.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  98 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     On its face, director Jonathan Lynn's decision to make TRIAL AND
ERROR looks like a very, very bad one.  Sure, he had an unexpected success
with a previous film about an inexperienced attorney fumbling around in a
backwater courtroom (MY COUSIN VINNY), but that was exactly the reason not
to try it again.  The subject matter is flimsy enough without trying to
make it work _twice_; such hubris usually guarantees the wrath of the
cinematic Fates.  Yet TRIAL AND ERROR somehow turns out to be another
lightweight-but-agreeable comedy in the tradition of MY COUSIN VINNY, with
just enough smiles and giggles to prove satisfying.  
     "Seinfeld's" Michael Richards stars as Richard Rietti, a
rarely-employed actor in Los Angeles who is about to act as best man for
his long-time friend, attorney Charlie Tuttle (Jeff Daniels).  Charlie is
marrying the boss's daughter (Aleksandra Wentworth), and joining the
family means getting choice assignments like helping out a distant
relative of the boss's wife who has been charged with fraud in a small
Nevada town.  Dealing with the case looks to eliminate plans for a
bachelor party, but Richard shows up in Nevada to send Charlie off in
style.  That send-off sends Charlie off to bed with a hangover and two
black eyes after a bar fight, inspiring Richard to "help out" by posing as
Charlie in court.  Desperate to avoid disaster -- as well as several
felony counts -- Charlie tries to help Richard maintain the illusion that
he is actually Charlie Tuttle, while mounting the notorious "Twinkie
defense" for their client (Rip Torn).
     It's hard to get terribly worked up over either the positive or
negative qualities of TRIAL AND ERROR.  The character arcs -- flaky actor
Richard learns to take some responsibility for his actions, while uptight
lawyer Charlie learns to go after what he wants rather than what he is
supposed to want -- are simply designed and efficiently resolved, but
rather poorly developed.  The comic situations offer consistent chuckles,
as well as a fair number of missed opportunities.  The casting presents
appealing and talented performers like Richards, Daniels, Torn and
Charlize Theron (sparkling with energy as a waitress who steals Charlie's 
heart) then gives them little to do.  Time and again TRIAL AND ERROR will
deliver a really satisfying moment, only to follow it up with an
underwhelming one.
     It's actually to Lynn's credit, however, that TRIAL AND ERROR never
seems like it's straining for every possible laugh.  That's what you might
have expected if the film had been set up as a star vehicle for Richards;
the idea of LIAR LIAR with Richards in the lead is primally disturbing.  
As it turns out, Richards and Jeff Daniels share the spotlight quite
comfortably.  Richards's role isn't far removed from "Seinfeld's" Kramer,
providing the expected physical comedy and goofy reaction takes.  In a
hilarious scene early in the film, Richard does his "mafia bit" during an
acting audition, which consists of doing a solo impression of a man being
beaten insensible.  As he contorts his body to simulate getting a kick to
the ribs, you wonder whether Richards can defy gravity to suit his comic
purposes.  Yet Daniels is never treated strictly as a second banana; in
fact, his romantic sub-plot may be the real heart of the film.  The two
gifted supporting actors do something fairly rare in screen buddy
comedies:  they actually support each other, rather than trying to step on
each other.
     Despite the effective pairing of Richards and Daniels, TRIAL AND
ERROR doesn't generate as many laughs as it should, particularly in the
courtroom.  Richards' legend-in-his-own mind actor is a howl when he tries
to translate the confrontational hyperbolics of fictional courtrooms to
the real world, but that doesn't happen often enough.  He also doesn't
have as effective a foil as Joe Pesci had in MY COUSIN VINNY; neither
Austin Pendleton (as the judge) nor Jessica Steen (as the incredulous
prosecutor) can match the late Fred Gwynne's imposing presence.  Only at
isolated moments, like during Torn's sob-story testimony, does the script
really seem to be providing A-level material.  TRIAL AND ERROR isn't a
truly memorable comedy, but it's a well-paced and frequently amusing one.
Let's just hope Jonathan Lynn doesn't decide to prove a third time can
still be a charmer.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Sitting through the pathetically bad TRIAL AND ERROR, one's mind
naturally fantasizes about the movie that could have been.  In a film
where little is salvageable, two of the actors, Jeff Daniels and
Charlize Theron, develop characters that have potential, albeit almost
all of it unrealized.  Their romantic fling is the only glimmer of hope
in an otherwise dismal movie.  But their affair is so brief and
inconsequential to the heart of this slapstick comedy that it does not
come close to saving the picture.
     Charlize Theron, who gave an excellent but small performance as
Helga in 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY, plays a waitress named Billie.  Billie
was an astronomer on her way to grad school at Berkeley when a tire
blew out on her trailer in Nevada.  She liked the desert terrain so
much that she decided to live there in her stranded trailer and get a
job in a nearby town.  When she invites Charlie Tuttle (Daniels) to
ditch his rich lifestyle and live with her in bliss in the middle of
nowhere, it is easy to dream about the show that could have been
because the chemistry between them is promising.  But, this little
piece of the movie is a mere sideshow.
     You may remember Daniels from GETTYSBURG, which should have gotten
him an Oscar nomination for best supporting actor, or from many other
films.  Hopefully, his fans will soon forget his part in this disaster.
     In TRIAL AND ERROR, new law partner, and soon to be newlywed,
Charlie goes to a courtroom in a tiny Nevada town to represent lifelong
con artist Benny Gibbs (Rip Torn).  Benny sells copper engravings of
Lincoln through the mail.  For $17.95, Benny mails his customers a
shiny new penny.
     Charlie gets drunk the night before the trial.  Through a
misadventure, his actor buddy Richard Rietti (Michael Richards) ends up
impersonating him in court.  Since they are never able to straighten
this out, Michael Richards becomes lawyer Charlie and Jeff Daniels his
assistant Richard.  It is not as funny as it sounds.
     Jessica Steen plays prosecutor Elizabeth Gardner, at whom Richard
makes a crude pass at the bar the night before the trial.  Typical of
the unbelievable humor of the show, his come-on line to her at the bar
has him talking about intercourse in the second sentence after saying
hello.
     Although director Jonathan Lynn has two good comedies to his name,
MY COUSIN VINNY and SGT. BILKO, most of his films, such as CLUE and THE
DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMEN, have not been very successful.  To be honest,
the blame for TRIAL AND ERROR should be shared with first-time writers
Gregory and Sara Bernstein.  They rely on unoriginal sight gags for
much of the (non-existent) laughter.  Characters fall through ceilings,
people get food stuck on their mouths, lovers walk in accidentally on
other lovers, actors fall over each other, guys sitting on the lawn get
soaked by the sprinklers, and the canonical list of cheap movie humor
goes on ad infinitum.
     As I left the theater I reflected on the film, ULEE'S GOLD, that I
had seen at a press screening earlier in the week.  It has marvelous
acting and a beautiful story, but with its low budget it will open at a
few art house around the country and be seen by almost no one.  TRIAL
AND ERROR, on the other hand, will play at thousands of screens.  It is
sad that so many people will accept TRIAL AND ERROR's poor quality when
films that deserve to be seen are ignored.
     TRIAL AND ERROR runs 1:38.  It is rated PG-13 for language.  The
film would be acceptable for kids say 10 and up.  I recommend you avoid
this unfunny comedy.  I give it * for the valiant attempts by Daniels
and Theron to rescue a sunken movie.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
