Title
Review for Pocahontas (1995)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Fred Edwords
>From the July 1995 issue of the Interracial Club of Buffalo Newsletter
     It's as though Disney has been beating around the bush for a long
time on this whole mixed-couple thing.  First it was a love story
between a cocker spaniel and a mongrel in LADY AND THE TRAMP.  A sexy
songstress and a bunny got it together in WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT?
Then a fish/woman and a handsome prince fell in love in THE LITTLE
MERMAID.  Finally, it was a young gal and a bewitched prince in
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  But never in all this was there a decidedly
non-white lead character.  That didn't happen until ALADDIN, which,
though not an interracial film, was definitely a welcome change of
habit.
     Not until last month, then, can we say that Disney finally took
the plunge.  Yet when they did, it wasn't entirely worth the wait.
True to traditional Hollywood form, their scriptwriters saw to it that
the interracial love affair was a fleeting thing indeed.  And the
artists made sure that Pocahontas was comfortably anglicized.  (She may
have had her mother's eyes, but definitely *not* her father's nose.  As
NEWSWEEK put it, "... tall and shapely in a buckskin minidress, with
miles of floating hair:  she's Native American Barbie.")
     Remember American TV's first interracial kiss?  It was on STAR
TREK in 1968 and the faces were turned away from the camera so the lips
would not be seen.  Ditto for Disney's first interracial kiss in
POCAHONTAS.  Fortunately, however, there is a second kiss at the end of
the film that is much more honest.  Perhaps those doing the storyboard
figured the audience would be softened up by then.
     Meanwhile, the tired script offers, as TIME magazine put it,
"... a boy-meets-girl, boy-gets-girl, boy-loses-girl story whose plot is
familiar in every weepie affair, from ROMEO AND JULIET to THE
BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY."  However, the boy-loses-girl ending is the
weakest part of the tale, and totally unnecessary.  After Pocahontas
saves Captain John Smith's life by placing her body between him and her
father's war club, Smith saves her father by standing between him and
Governor Ratcliffe's bullet.  Smith is wounded.  So in the next scene
we learn that Smith must be taken back to England.
     "Going back is his only chance," she is told.  "He'll die if he
stays here."
     In other words, the only way to save this seriously wounded man is
to break his heart by hustling him away in a primitive sailing ship
where he will suffer months at sea in the raging Atlantic Ocean until
he can get to England where some quack with no knowledge of sanitation
or anesthesia will cut him up, bleed him, and then put leeches on his
wounds.  Trust me: he's far better off staying with Pocahontas in the
wilds of old Virginny!
     Pocahontas looks up at her father, who tells her, "You must choose
your own path, my daughter."
     So Pocahontas thinks for a moment, then says. "I am needed here."
     And that's that.  The relationship is over and, in the manner of
ONE POTATO, TWO POTATO, the film ends with Pocahontas running after
Smith's ship as it sails away, seeking that one last glimpse of the one
she loves.
     How convenient.  Not only does their interracial love have no
future, but it is the non-white lover who breaks it off, thus saving
the white lover from any suspicion of racism.  Both of their motives
are made pure -- the union simply wasn't meant to be.
     Now, to some, this criticism will seem unfair.  After all, the
real historic Pocahontas didn't marry Captain John Smith, either.
After being abducted by the English in 1612, Pocahontas married a
different white guy, John Rolfe, had a son by him, went with him to
England, and died there of smallpox in 1617.  But if historic accuracy
is an issue, then Disney's POCAHONTAS has other problems.  The real
Pocahontas was only 12 when she rescued John Smith (or performed a
*pretended* rescue as part of a tribal adoption ritual for the good
captain).  The supposed romance never happened, it being an invention
of the 1790s, and the legend has grown ever since.
     So let's not talk history, or even faithfulness to the original
forms of great fairy tales: Disney has never had much regard for
either.  Let's talk cultural bias.  After all, if the studio was
willing to change the poignantly tragic ending of Hans Christian
Anderson's THE LITTLE MERMAID in favor of a happy Hollywood finish,
then why did it break its own tradition this time to give us a tragic
POCAHONTAS?  In the usual manner of film scripting, they could have
merged the character of John Smith with that of John Rolfe and had
Pocahontas marry him.  Then the reward for her courage would have been
complete.  But racism can be a hidden and subtle thing.  I'm sure most
everyone involved with the film felt they had done something truly
advanced and enlightened.
     Well, they certainly tried.  Pocahontas is depicted as
intelligent, independent, fearless, assertive, athletic, and, in the
words of her father, a young woman who "speaks with a wisdom beyond her
years."  She's definitely the best Disney female role model since Belle
in BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  Furthermore, the film goes out of its way
to be politically correct when it comes to its depiction of Native
Americans.  And it promotes environmentalism in the bargain.  TIME
said, "As teacher of the land's bounty with John Smith as her student,
Pocahontas becomes the first eco-feminist."
     So, despite the fact that Disney Studios couldn't quite shake off
all the vestiges of entrenched, unconscious racism, they at least gave
us a generally positive interracial romance, a strong non-white
heroine, a clear preachment against racial bigotry, and an upbeat
ecological outlook put beautifully to music.  The rest of Hollywood
hasn't given us better, and generally provides much worse.  So, despite
my caveats, I'd recommend taking the kids and making a family affair of
it.  We did.
     And if you happen to find yourself chuckling a bit at the
excessive use of heroic images of Pocahontas perched commandingly atop
precarious precipices, or drifting wistfully through the weaving mist,
her long black hair blowing engagingly about her shoulders and face in
the colorful autumn wind, just remember that this too can be part of
the fun.  And POCAHONTAS is definitely a fun movie.
--
So long as profit is not your motive, you may distribute this
article freely.  Permission for publication in print or for profit
must be sought though contact with the author.
Fred Edwords
Phone:  1 (800) 743-6646       

Author
David G. Martin
     Nobody was looking forwards to the premiere of POCAHONTAS more
than I.  As I ran out to my ride before the movie, my stomach was tied
in knots...  I was a nervous wreck.  Warned I would be disappointed,
scared by bad reviews and expectations lifted by good ones, I fearfully
awaited the verdict ... is Pocahontas a soaring success, or an overblown
failure?
     Walking out of the theatre, lost in contemplation, I would have
quietly voiced a "so-so" review, with a grade of "B-."  To say I was
disappointed isn't exactly it ... it was not what I was expecting.
     However, more than three days of heavy pondering have really
changed my opinion.  Be warned ... you cannot simply leave the theatre,
already having decided if the movie was "good" or "bad."  I have been
thinking about nothing but the movie for the past three days, and now I
think I truly understand it, and truly appreciate this film.
     POCAHONTAS is an experience completely unlike anything ever made
before.  Beneath the oddly-scripted, strangely-paced story lies a
beautiful, deeply spiritual film, a masterpiece in a category all its
own.
     You cannot assign a grade to this film: you cannot compare it to
any other movie.  I believe Pocahontas herself would have said that
'grading or comparing the movie is like chaining an eagle: you can do
it, and it makes the eagle easier to look at, but robs the creature of
its spirit and dignity.  Eagles were meant to soar, free as the "wild
mountain stream" ... and so is POCAHONTAS.
     The movie is not about love.  It is not about hate or even
misunderstanding.  It is about the Pocahontas in all of us, the
restless spirit who longs to bridge the chasm between what is right,
and what should be right (but it not), the Powhatan in us who clings to
what is familiar, and the John Smith who would like to gain the new
without losing the old.  It is a film about the savage in everyone, as
well as the nobility.  It is about truth, the truth that we are all the
same in the eyes of the world.
     Pocahontas herself is the most memorable character in Disney
history.  Her double-edged gift is her indomitable curiosity and need
for change ... even though is leads her to many spiritual and physical
joys from the environment around her, it sets her apart from her
fellows.  She appeals to me because she is alone in her world, the only
world she knows... as are many of us today.  Yet, her blood is the same
blood as flows in her people, steady and smooth.  Thus, she both
respects tradition and thrives on change.  Not wild enough to be
special and understood by her people, nor traditional enough to be one
of them, Pocahontas is truly isolated psychologically, save for the
kindred Grandmother Willow, who cannot even begin to qualm her need for
adventure.  Nakoma, Pocahontas' best friend, has begun to pull away
from her ... for as they grow older, Nakoma is preparing herself for an
adult life, and hence slowly isolating herself from her friend.  Nakoma
is also as traditional as her people, and so can never really understand
Pocahontas.
     So then it is fated that John Smith and Pocahontas become
soul-mates, for he is her kindred spirit.  Smith too is alone in his
world, in the same way Pocahontas is.  His entire world has become
based around his reputation and his life abroad.  One gets the
impression that he has never been appreciated as a person, and so has
never really been emotionally secure in any way.  The men revere him,
but cannot see him as a friend, leaving him a man with himself.  He
treats everyone in a loose, aloof manner, so that he never faces
rejection or heartache.
     And spirit knows when meeting one of its own kind ... Pocahontas
and John Smith have more than the forbidden romance.  It is the only
relationship that either could ever be totally fulfilled by.
     Which is why the end is not tragic nor disturbingly sad.  John
Smith tells Pocahontas that they will always be together, and this
holds to the end.  They each carry a part of the other's soul, and so
no expanse of ocean will ever part them.
     And they have both gained something by the time they part,
something to fine and subtle to put a point on.  However, we know that
Pocahontas has found her calling ... to promote peace between the two
peoples that she is so close to, and John Smith now knows that it is
safe to love, and safe to treat other people with compassion and
respect.  He has learned to look at the world with praising, rather
than appraising, eyes.
     After saying that, I must get into the less spiritual aspects of
the film.  The animation, with the exception of some very badly drawn
scenes of the Englishmen towards the beginning and middle of the film,
is stirringly lush and spectacularly grand in scale.  The backgrounds
are sweepingly majestic, to the point of overwhelming.  The character
design leaves very little to be desired, with the possible exception of
Kekata, and the characters are truly realistic and move well.
     The voice actors are all exceptional.  Irene Bedard provided a
delightfully perky voice for Pocahontas, and Judy Kuhn as her singing
voice neared "too perfect to be real."  Russell Means did a stirring
and very real job as Powhatan.  However, Jim Cummings as the singing
voice of both Powhatan and Kekata sounded unfortunately off-key and
undignified.  Mel Gibson provided a wonderfully bravado voice for John
Smith, and Christian Bale was excellent as the charmingly apathetic
Thomas.  David Ogden Stiers, doing double duty as both Wiggins (who was
quite endearingly simpy) and Ratcliffe (who was blessedly obnoxious)
was lovely.  Billy Connolly and Joe Baker as Ben and Lon were both
amusing.  Linda Hunt is perfectly crackly as Grandmother Willow, and
Kocoum's voice (?) gives a good, solid performance, as did Kekata's
voice (?).  Unfortunately, Michelle St.John, while blessed with a great
voice, in times gave a mediocre and over-acted job, but the rest of the
time she did another solid performance.
     At any rate, this is a powerfully moving film, intensely moody and
unusually sensuous.  It truly deserves the name of POCAHONTAS, for it
is less of the legendary romance between John Smith and Pocahontas, and
more of one young woman's fight to save all that she loves while still
changing with her changing world.  The real Pocahontas (Matoaka?) would
have been proud of her legend.
     One request ... please do not walk into that theatre, expecting
ALADDIN or THE LION KING.  POCAHONTAS is neither.  If you expect a
whimsical fable, go elsewheres.  POCAHONTAS is a grave, adult account
of a dark time in American history.  This film is not a masterpiece ...
it was not intended to be one.  It is a unique and moving film, and not
quite like anything you will ever see again.
     And it easily deserves a place among the spiritually rousing films
of all time.
Animation: Meeko (Nik Ranieri), who was absolutely delightful.
Voice Acting: Irene Bedard (Pocahontas), who conveyed love, anger, fear,
curiosity, and a number of other emotions that I can't even name.
Character Design: Pocahontas (Glen Keane), who also gets kudos for best
                  hair stylist. :-)
Song: "Just Around the River Bend."  While not as meaningful as "Colors of
      the Wind," it is a wonderfully spritely song sung by the astounding
      Judy Kuhn.
Animation: Nakoma (Duncan Majoribanks) who was a constant appearance
           disappointment.
Voice Acting: Kekata (?), who was rather dry and predictable.
Character Design: Nakoma again, who looks like she could just as easily
                  star in THE LEGEND OF FA MULAN.
Song: "Listen With Your Heart," for being too depressingly short.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     POCAHONTAS is an animated movie of incredible beauty.  It is a
Disney made fairy tale set in 1607 in Virginia and is loosely based on
some famous historical figures.
     This movie version of the true story of Pocahontas makes an 11-12
year old girl into an older teen with a body that any fashion model
would kill for.  She is extremely well endowed by her creator.  In
Disney's version she falls in love with John Smith and saves his life.
In reality, she never did the former, but did do the later.  The real
Pocahontas did marry an Englishman, but not John Smith, and did go to
England to die of Small Pox at the ripe old age of 21.  You will have
to see the movie to learn Disney's ending.
     Although many reviewers have claimed that since Disney was only
making a cartoon, they could take whatever liberties they wanted with
historical fact, and it was unfair to criticize them for inaccuracies.
I find this logic specious.  Lets say Disney had made the movie with a
homely looking 11 year old Pocahontas, Native Americans who were lazy
and murders and Englishmen who were risk taking and hard working
entrepreneurs.  You think those same critics would then claim, well, it
is only a cartoon?  But I digress.
     Of Disney's recent movies this was the most picturesque - even
surpassing THE LION KING which set a benchmark for cartoon beauty.  The
colors were translucent and luminescent with pastel greens and blues
dominating.  So many scenes were striking it is hard to pick the best,
but I think the image of the chain of leaves was my personal favorite.
It seemed a metaphor of the linking of the characters.  There were no
poor visuals in the show and many were quite innovative like the ones
showing the fog or the ones of the reflected fire.  The vast vistas as
in THE LION KING were even more impressively done in POCAHONTAS.
     The music by Alan Menkin and the lyrics by Stephen Schwartz was
breathtaking albeit not quite on the same level as the scenic imagery.
I hope the lead song wins the Academy Award.  It was lovely - upbeat
and dreamy at the same time.
     The characters were a mixed bag and the script (Carl Binder,
Susannah Grant, and Philip LaZebnik) was the worse part of the movie.
Pocahontas was played by a fairly new actress to movies, Irene Bedard.
Her boyfriend John Smith was done by every woman's heartthrob, Mel
Gibson.  His sidekick Thomas was performed by Christian Bale from
EMPIRE OF THE SUN.  Russell Means was Chief Powhatan and David Ogden
Stiers was the evil Governor Ratcliffe.  Finally, Linda Hunt, whose
only good movie was THE YEAR OF LIVING DANGEROUSLY where she was
phenomenal, played a tree called Grandmother Willow.
     For my taste, I thought the raccoon Meeko and his sidekick the
hummingbird Flit stole the show.  Meeko was forever playing tricks on
Percy, the Governor's pampered bulldog.  These three characters were
just about the only ones given no dialog which is fine given the poor
quality of the words the humans and the tree were forced to utter.
     The best line was Smith's "Don't worry I've been in worse scrapes
than this, but I don't remember any right now" which sounds like it was
lifted verbatim from one of the plethora of LETHAL WEAPON movies.  The
worse was the way Pocahontas talked.  It was so cool that you half
expected her to ask her girlfriend if she wanted to go hang out at the
mall.  The male Native Americans were given more authentic sounding
dialog.  Other than the sight gags of Meeko, Flit, and Percy,
POCAHONTAS was devoid of any real humor.  Coming from a studio that
produced THE LION KING and ALADDIN, I was surprised.  It could have
used more humor.
     The actors were not much.  Gibson's delivery was monotonic and
lacking of any real emotion.  Only Bedard breathed any life into her
role.  Pocahontas's melodious singing was by Broadway singer Judy Kuhn
who was terrific.
     Disney has always been fond of having characters die in its
movies.  POCAHONTAS was no exception.  The way the movie handled it
with complete silence afterwards is something I still can not decide if
I liked or not.  It certainly was different.
     Although this was a cartoon, it is a shame that Disney felt
compelled to twist, distort, and hide so many key facts and paint their
characters in such black and white.  Besides the problem mentioned in
the beginning of this review, there were many more.  We learn that the
Native Americans treated the land and other people well whereas white
people raped and plundered the land and treated other people poorly.
     Granted that the Native Americans were probably better stewards of
the land, the good and evil was not quite so tidy as shown in the
movie.  According to a recent in-depth article in the Wall Street
Journal, Pocahontas's tribe, the Powhatans, killed people in other
tribes in order to subjugate them and then they extorted eighty percent
in taxes from the tribes they controlled through this villainy.  They
may have been extra sweet to the earth, but to their fellow human
beings and neighbors they were not.
     Since the MIGHTY MORPHINE POWER RANGERS are getting savaged by the
critics because of the toy tie ends, let me point out that POCAHONTAS
figures are in all of the toy shops and book stores and in many of the
fast food places.  Moreover, we had to sit through seven, count 'em
seven, previews of upcoming Disney attractions, before we got to see
the movie we paid for.  That is over ten minutes of advertisements we
were forced to watch.  Actually, I love seeing previews, but that is
another story.
     POCAHONTAS runs 1:20, and although it does feel a bit short, I
liked the pacing.  It is rated G, and it is a soft G at that.  There is
no sex other than a single kiss and no bad language.  Even the bathroom
humor of THE LION KING is absent.  It has some violence, but it is very
low key and should be safe for any aged kid.  Jeffrey, my six year old,
gives the movie a thumbs up.  His favorite character was Pocahontas.
He even liked it better than THE LION KING he said because it did not
have the blood that THE LION KING did.  I recommend the show to
everyone regardless of age.  Take the whole family and go see it.
Given its numerous problem areas (script, actors, and accuracy), I can
bring myself only to give it *** although the good parts are
spectacular.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
William Loguidi
     Starting with THE LITTLE MERMAID and most recently THE LION KING,
the Walt Disney company once again proved that they could not only
consistently make modern day animated classics, but were particularly
in touch with what the general viewing public--particularly kids--
wanted to see.  Therefore, it's with some surprise that as a big fan of
the above mentioned movies I was so disappointed with POCAHONTAS.
     Despite some innovation and risk taking, the story is surprisingly
straightforward and dramatized in broad strokes, as are its
characters.  A group of Englishmen lead by the evil Governor Ratcliffe
come to the New World in search of gold with no regard for the
"savages" that live there.  The natives look upon the English with just
as much fear and distrust.  Only the love between the beautifully
structured Pocahontas and the dashing Captain John Smith can prevent a
terrible clash.  The ending, as it turns out, is not entirely a happy
one and is one of the film's finer moments.
     The characters are mixtures of stereotypes and lack any real
depth.  Governor Ratcliffe, for instance, is a snobbish, single-minded
bore whose mere appearance is supposed to bring about hisses.  Captain
John Smith is a blond hunk who, while "slightly" misguided, is good at
heart.  Pocahontas herself is the typical Disney heroine who is
practically being forced to marry a man who everyone but her likes and
finds the man of her dreams just in time.  She even comes complete with
insignificant best friend.
     Again, against tradition, talking animals aren't used, but a
lusty, wizened, talking tree is.  This is an odd compromise, but it's
one of the few elements that really work.  The animals are a delight,
and what brief time their interactions take place brings the only humor
and fun to a rather bland presentation.  Maybe it would have been a
better film if we saw the story unfold through their eyes.  The talking
tree, who seems to have a thing for John Smith, is the only other
character that can hold our interest and is perhaps the best developed
of the bunch.
     The music, a welcome delight in the later Disney films, is mostly
a let down here, with the exception of the catchy and motivational,
"Colors of the Wind."  Mel Gibson, as the voice of John Smith, has a
solid singing voice and should have been used more.  The opposite holds
true for the Governor Ratcliffe led songs; the singing is even more
grating than his simplistic character.
     I was rather bored through what turned out to be a shorter than
expected running time.  Even the children in the audience seemed
restless.  While there's no stopping a kid from seeing something that
they want--or Disney wants them to--most I believe will be
disappointed.
     Perhaps the biggest problem is that Disney has strayed from their
familiar fable and fairy tale themes to history.  It's all right to
change or embellish fantasy to suit a movie's entertainment value, but
doing so to historical facts doesn't work nearly as well as creating
nagging questions in the viewer's minds and plot holes that are never
filled.  Even the artwork, another Disney strong point, varies greatly
in quality, making any story problems even more obvious.
     As mentioned above, there were many questions that stayed with me
while viewing the film.  For instance, if John Smith was truly such a
world traveler and had so much experience with "savages," why did he so
quickly change his previous "kill as many Indians as I can" attitude.
If he was such a nice guy after all, he should have changed his ways
long before this.  Or how about Pocahontas' amazing English speaking
ability when this had supposedly been the first time she had seen white
men?  I can understand making the Native Americans speak English for
the benefit of the audience, but simply saying that they had met a
missionary years earlier would have cleared up a lot; history was
modified in the film anyway.  As it is, I wonder if it doesn't give
kids the wrong impression.
     In short, the film is too simplistic for adults and contains too
much romance and not enough action or humor for the younger set.  While
Disney tried valiantly in many ways to break with some of their firmest
traditions, they end up failing on too many levels.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     In order to avoid the crowds of young children, I have long had a
policy of seeing Disney's new animated features at the latest possible
opening-night showing.  Since these showings are well past bedtime for
most children, the audience is primarily made up of adults.  Attending
these showings has helped to underscore a recent, general change in the
audience for these films.  When I saw BEAUTY AND THE BEAST at the late
showing, there were fewer than ten people in the theater.  For
POCAHONTAS, the show was nearly sold-out.
     While Disney's animated features have always been well-suited for
children, each of their recent efforts (primarily going back to THE
LITTLE MERMAID) have increasingly been directed at a much wider
audience.  Each new film has had a greater maturity and an increased
willingness to introduce serious themes that will be best appreciated
by the adults in the audience.  POCAHONTAS is by far Disney's most
serious and dramatic animated feature to date.  It is also one of their
best.
     Prior to the release of POCAHONTAS (and even after it, to an
extent) there has been a great deal of controversy surrounding the fact
that this is Disney's first animated portrayal of an event from
American history.  Historians questioned whether or not Disney would
treat the subject with respect.  They didn't need to worry.  The film
features some of the most vividly believable human characters ever
portrayed through animation and a powerfully dramatic and well-balanced
storyline.  The movie does not make the Indians into unrealistic saints
or the British into unredeemable villains.  Instead, it portrays them
all as human beings and explores their very real prejudices and fear of
the unknown.
     Admittedly, the film certainly isn't a very accurate portrayal of
history, but it is a bit hard to tell what *is* true with the story of
Pocahontas. About the only thing that historians agree on about the
Pocahontas story is that nobody knows what really happened.  On one
hand, many historians argue that Pocahontas probably was much younger
when she met John Smith than she is portrayed in the film.  On the
other hand, many other historians cite evidence that suggest that the
two may never have met *at all*.  In the long run, the story has become
more legend than reality (and Disney has always used the word "legend"
when discussing this film).  Disney was probably correct to simply do
whatever worked best dramatically.  Most importantly, the film remains
very true to the *spirit* of the story.
     While the characters are very human, they clearly are living in
the same fantasy universe where all Disney animated features take
place.  It is a world where magic really exists and where animals have
real personalities (wisely, though, the animal characters do not talk
in this film).  This doesn't seem to be an inappropriate setting for
telling the legend of POCAHONTAS. The fantasy elements of the film are
clearly derived from the spirituality and deep love for the natural
world that are very much a part of American Indian culture.
     Even though they are animated, it is obvious from the very first
scenes of this film that the human characters are not just cartoons.
We first meet the British sailors as they are saying farewell to their
loved ones before embarking on the journey to America.  In these few
brief shots, we are able to immediately see them as real people with
lives that go beyond the story being told in the film.
     Disney's system of assigning teams of animators to specific
characters really paid off here.  By having small groups of animators
concentrate all of their effort on just one character, they are able to
create very distinctive personalities.  In particular, the characters
in this film feature very natural and *consistent* facial expressions
and body language.  The audience can read a great deal of emotion
simply by watching the faces, much as you can with talented live-action
actors.  The American Indian characters are animated with a somewhat
angular style that may take a little getting used to for viewers more
familiar with the traditionally more rounded look of Disney's human
characters.  This style helps to make the characters very distinctive
and to provide an appropriate ethnicity.
     The voice actors are also all very well matched to the characters'
personalities.  The animators take advantage of the expressiveness of
the actors' voices and appropriately match it with body language.
American Indian actors provide the speaking voices for all of the
American Indian characters, lending a certain authenticity.  Irene
Bedard as Pocahontas and Russell Means as Powhatan are particularly
good.  As John Smith, Mel Gibson's voice is recognizable but not
distracting.  The animators obviously studied Gibson as he is
occasionally recognizable in Smith's facial expressions.  Among the
other British characters, David Ogden Stiers is particularly notable in
that he plays *two* characters providing both with very distinctive
voices.
     While all of the human characters in the film are well-realized,
Pocahontas and John Smith provide the core of the story.  Both are
among the finest characters that Disney has ever created.  The first
thing that is noticed about Pocahontas is how strikingly beautiful she
is, but soon her imagination, intelligence and inner strength capture
the majority of our attention.  The character shares the sense of
wonder and vivid imagination of other Disney heroines, but there is an
overall complexity to the character that they have rarely achieved
before.
     Smith is also quite complex.  He is the character that grows and
changes the most over the course of the film, but it isn't a radical or
unnatural change.  His reputation as an expert "savage hunter" is
presented from the beginning, but it doesn't take long to learn that
there is much more to him than this.  He has the spirit of an explorer
with an active passion for discovery.  Smith and Pocahontas really do
seem to connect in the film.  It seems a bit odd to talk about
chemistry between two drawn characters, but the word does apply.
     Beyond the two leads, the film manages to remain focused on a
small, easily managed group of characters.  Of the Englishman, we
primarily become acquainted with two supporting characters.  Governor
Ratcliffe is the leader of the expedition and the film's main human
villain.  Thomas is a young sailor who is torn between loyalty to Smith
and his duty to Ratcliffe.  Of the Indians, there are three main
supporting characters.  Powhatan is the chief of the tribe and
Pocahontas' father.  Kocoum is a powerful warrior who is Powhatan's
choice for Pocahontas to marry and who represents a possible "safe"
path for Pocahontas' life to take. Finally, Nakoma is Pocahontas' best
friend and confidant.
     None of these supporting characters are allowed to overwhelm the
central story of Pocahontas and John Smith, but instead they are truly
allowed to *support* that story.  The central theme of this film is the
dangers of ignorance and prejudice and each of these characters help to
provide characters that demonstrate those emotions.  Late in the film,
the prejudices and concerns of these characters spark a powerful
incident that leads to the film's climax.  The final twenty minutes or
so of the film are among the most serious and intense events ever
portrayed in a Disney film.
     Some may complain that Ratcliffe is a relatively weak villain for
a Disney film, where the villains are often the most interesting
characters.  In truth, Ratcliffe is *not* the main villain in this
film.  The real villains  are the much more abstract concepts mentioned
above.  Ratcliffe simply serves as a personification of ignorance.  In
addition, Ratcliffe's overwhelming greed (a desire to find gold
consistently remains his main motivation) prevents him from ever
opening his eyes to the reality of the situation.  Still, even the more
sympathetic characters, including, at first, both Pocahontas and John
Smith, are required to overcome their ignorance.
     One of the most unusual devices used in this film is to give
Pocahontas a spirit mentor who takes the form of a talking tree, voiced
by Linda Hunt with a great deal of wit.  Grandmother Willow serves as a
conscience and guide for Pocahontas and eventually for John Smith as
well.  She is also used as an ingenious way to dispense with the
language gap between the two main characters.  This is a device that
really can only work in animation, where suspension of disbelief comes
somewhat more easily.  Unfortunately, the film does drop the ball a bit
when the *other* Indian and British characters try to interact.  It is
not entirely clear who can understand whom.
     The general story and themes of this film are quite serious and
the tone of the film reflects that.  That doesn't mean that the movie
does not contain some very welcome comic relief.  The vast majority of
the comedy is provided by the animal characters.  Pocahontas is given a
raccoon named Meeko and a hummingbird named Flit as her constant
companions.  The animals do not speak, but they are given very
distinctive personalities.  A third animal, Ratcliffe's spoiled pet dog
Percy, eventually becomes mixed up with Meeko and Flit as well.  While
these animals frequently bring visual humor to the film, they also are
an active part of the story. Writers Carl Binder, Susannah Grant and
Phillip LaZebnik manage to use the relationship between Meeko and Percy
to draw a parallel to the conflict between the British and the
Indians.
     Like the vast majority of Disney's animated features, POCAHONTAS
is a musical.  The songs by composer Alan Menken and lyricist Stephen
Schwartz are exceptionally well integrated into the film.  Often, the
segue to the songs is so smooth that they actually seem to be a part of
the dialog.  Among Disney's animated musicals, only BEAUTY AND THE
BEAST came close to integrating the music so completely into the
story.  This level of integration may prevent the songs from seeming as
"memorable" since they lose a lot of their meaning taken out of the
context of the film.  It is really most important for the music to
serve the film, though, and this music does that *very* well.
     Several months before the film was released, Disney used the
entire performance of the song "Colors of the Wind" in a trailer.  As a
result, many people had already seen this sequence before the film came
out.  On its own, it was impressive (and probably helped to sell the
film), but it is a bit of a shame that most viewers will not get to
experience it for the first time in its proper context.  In the film,
this song is the point where John Smith's point-of-view truly begins to
change and it is quite powerful despite its familiarity.
     Menken and Schwartz provide a surprisingly hard-hitting song
called "Savages" that leads up to the film's emotional climax.  This is
a very gritty and angry song that is not likely to ever be featured on
Disney's child-oriented "sing along" collections.  Menken and Schwartz
deserve a great deal of credit for being willing to push the envelope
with this song.  Unfortunately, Disney did decide to tone the lyrics
down a bit just prior to the film's release (the original lyrics are
still included on the original pressing of the soundtrack CD).  It is a
shame that Disney was unwilling to let Schwartz's lyrics maintain their
full impact.
     As good as POCAHONTAS is, it still suffers from a problem common
to Disney's recent features.  While they have been willing to deal with
more serious and adult themes in their films, they still refuse to drop
their limits on the running time.  POCAHONTAS is actually only 80
minutes long and it definitely would have benefited from a little
additional time.  The recent Disney films have all rushed the middle
act a bit and that is once again the problem here.  The romance between
Pocahontas and John Smith is not given quite as much attention as it
deserves.
     It has been widely reported that a romantic duet between the two
characters was deleted late in the production (the music from the song
is still incorporated into Menken's background score and a pop version
plays over the end-credits).  It is fairly obvious where the song
*should* have gone and it may have been a mistake to remove it.  The
scene in question is one of the film's more dramatic moments, but it
did leave me feeling that it needed something a bit more.
        POCAHONTAS is yet another triumph from Disney's animation
department and is sure to be on my list of the best films of 1995. It
tells a powerful story that truly touched me emotionally.

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring the voices of Irene Bedard, Mel Gibson, Russell Means,  
          David Ogden Stiers, Linda Hunt, Christian Bale  
Directors: Mike Gabriel and Eric Goldberg  
Producer: James Pentecost  
Screenplay: Carl Binder, Susannah Grant, and Philip LaZebnik  
Music: Alan Menken  
Song Lyrics: Stephen Schwartz  
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures  
     Anyone who expects historical accuracy from a Disney animated  
feature should be ashamed of themselves.  Those approaching POCAHONTAS  
in anticipation of seeing a true-to-history account of the early days of  
Jamestown are in for a rude awakening.  In reality, Pocahontas was a 12- 
year old girl who never had a romance with John Smith (she later married  
John Rolfe, the man who brought tobacco to England).  Writers Binder,  
Grant, and LaZebnik have changed those details (and more) in an effort  
to create a story that appeals to both children and adults.  Taking  
advantage of the studio's breathtakingly intricate animation, directors  
Mike Gabriel and Eric Goldberg have breathed vitality into this, the  
fifth "new wave" Disney animated feature.  
     Despite some obvious similarities -- Menken's music, a heroine who  
doesn't want her father to choose her husband, and a small legion of  
animals -- POCAHONTAS is actually something of a departure from the  
recent batch of releases (A LITTLE MERMAID, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST,  
ALADDIN, and THE LION KING).  This film isn't quite as cute; deals with  
some reasonably serious, "adult" issues; and contains an element of  
poignancy.  The cartoonish animal sidekicks, which include a raccoon, a  
hummingbird, and a pug, are amusing as ever, but this time around, they  
don't have voices (although Linda Hunt gives speech to the talkative  
Grandmother Willow).  
     Considering the less upbeat nature of the story, POCAHONTAS isn't  
as fun or energetic as its Disney predecessors.  The plot moves somewhat  
slowly, disdaining the frantic pace of THE LION KING.  The  
Menken/Schwartz musical production numbers are lively (and probably  
better than anything since BEAUTY AND THE BEAST), but their on-screen  
time represents less than a third of the movie's "action."    
     POCAHONTAS presents a fictionalized chronicle of the arrival of  
English settlers in Virginia.  Led by a greedy, bombastic governor  
(voiced by BEAUTY AND THE BEAST alum David Ogden Stiers) and Captain  
John Smith (voice of Mel Gibson), the explorers come in search of gold.   
They promptly begin cutting down trees, digging holes, and preparing to  
kill the Indians.  Meanwhile, a young native woman, Pocahontas (speaking  
voice of Irene Bedard, who was also the physical model for the  
character; singing voice of Judy Kuhn), observes the newcomers with a  
mixture of curiosity and trepidation.  Her father (voice of Native  
American activist/actor Russell Means), however, is certain that the  
white mens' landing means war.  The only hope to avert a pitched battle  
comes as a result of the developing romance between Smith and  
Pocahontas.  
     Several recognizable themes suffuse POCAHONTAS: the stupidity of  
wanton destruction, the need for tolerance between those of different  
races and cultures, and the forks in life's road offered by fate.  While  
none is presented with any special subtlety (after all, children are  
supposed to get the message), there is surprisingly little preaching.   
It would have been easy to turn this into a "Native American good/White  
Man bad" film, but positive and negative traits are shown on both sides.   
The governor will not go down in history as one of the great Disney  
villains.  He's more of a loud-mouthed boor than anything else -- not an  
evil-to-the-bone nasty like Jaffar or Ursula.  
     POCAHONTAS is going to make a ton of money, both on its nationwide  
opening weekend and in subsequent weeks.  Children everywhere will flock  
to see it, accompanied by adults who rightfully recognize Disney  
animated films as solid entertainment for the over-ten crowd.  The only  
question about this movie is whether, without the "happily-ever-after"  
ending, it will attract the repeat business of ALADDIN and THE LION  
KING.  Regardless of what the final box office tally says, however,  
Disney has come up with another winner.  
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)  

Author
Eric Grossman
     While it may not be as classic as BEAUTY AND THE BEAST and while
it may not earn as much as THE LION KING, Disney's 33rd full-length
animated feature, POCAHONTAS, is an intelligent film that is
entertaining for all ages.
     Set in 1607, the story centers around two historical figures,
Pocahontas and Captain John Smith.  Much like Romeo and Juliet,
Pocahontas and Smith are from completely different cultures that will
not accept each other, yet they find what is common to all people,
love.  Through them, the Indians and the English colonists overcome
their hatred for each other and learn to live in peace.
     While it plays a little hard and fast with the facts, Pocahontas
is a captivating romantic adventure story with a level of
sophistication that will keep the adults as fascinated as the kids.  As
you would expect from Disney, the animation is first rate.  The colors
have a soft, subdued look that is reminiscent of some of Disney's older
classics and the detail in the character's faces brings animated
"acting" to a new level.  Mel Gibson supplies the voice of John Smith
and even sings a couple of songs (that marvel alone is worth the price
of admission).  Irene Bedard provides the voice of Pocahontas while
Judy Kuhn does the singing.
     The score by Alan Menken and songs by Menken and Stephen Schwartz
are not quite as memorable as some of the hits from other recent Disney
extravaganzas but they are still first rate.
     Wrapped inside an entertaining shell, POCHAHONTAS deals with the
importance of following your heart and respecting others.  Good lessons
for adults as well as children.  Bob Dole would approve.

Author
Adrian Preston
Occasionally, not often, but every now and again, the animators at Walt Disney
are allowed to produce an absolutely breathtaking piece of animation. Of
course, it's usually so well hidden among the arrays of generic forgetable
characters and anthropomorphised creatures that it is difficult to pick out.
They did it in the Lion King, the first few seconds of a sunrise over the
African savanna was astonishingly beautiful, as the sun burst over the plains,
the traditional African song made it a visual and acoustic treat. They did it
in Fantasia, which don't forget was probably the first experimental piece to 
explore animation as a form of art. And they did it in Pocahontas. It's well
hidden, but during one of the songs, as Pocahontas is singing to John Smith, 
she sings about the wind, and her face dissolves into streaks of almost
impressionistic pastel shades, giving the feeling of life and movement and
real beauty in the world around her. It really is a quite lovely and effective
piece of animation.
Unfortunately it only lasts about three seconds, and is the only highlight
in one of the most forgetable films to come out of the Disney studios since..
well, since for ever really. The plot is really quite simple: The English
sail to the Americas to exploit the land, among them is John Smith, the 
captain of the vessel, who falls in love with the beautiful Pocahontas, a 
native indian. Their love for one another stops the English and indians
warring. That's it. Add a couple of stock Disney comic relief characters
( A raccoon, a small bird and a spoilt small dog. ), add a typical villain 
( The evil governor, who sees the Americas as a way of getting rich and 
improving his position in court. ) and even so, there is still nothing
there with which to make a film. Disney seem to have realised this and in
their panicked state ( 'Oh my God, it's only going to last twenty minutes, 
what are we going to do?' ) must have decided to pack it out with song after
song after song.
Now the Disney music has, quite rightly, won a few awards in the past. But
in Pocahontas the dreary score is just dreadful. Maybe it's just me, but
I could hardly tell them apart, just padding, they advanced the plot not
one iota and half of them were completely unescessary.
I'm a great fan of Disney villains. Prince John in Robin Hood was a 
masterpiece, as was Shere Khan (Jungle book), but recently with villains like 
Ursula (The little mermaid) Gaston (Beauty and the Beast) and Jafar (Aladdin) 
they seem to have become, well, tamer, milder, not as evil. The classic Disney
villain recently had a resurgence in Scar ( The Lion King ), but even so, was 
still only a reworking of Prince John. The evil Governor from Pocahontas is 
another in the line of manufactured stock bad guys, instantly forgetable. 
Remember the wicked witch in Sleeping Beauty kicking the skull across the 
floor? There was a time when Disney were able to imbue a real sense of evil 
into their baddies, or a superb sense of comic evil.
Finally we come to the MORAL. Disney recently reminds me of the animaniacs'
'wheel of morality'. It's tempting to believe they have one at the Disney
studios and every now and then spin it, to see what moral their next film
will espouse. The plot is secondary. THOU SHALT FACE UP TO THY 
RESPONSIBILITIES yelled the Lion King, THOU SHALL NOT JUDGE ON EXTERNAL
APPEARANCE screamed Beauty and the Beast, THOU SHALT BE TRUE TO THYSELF
wailed Aladdin. Disney have always, always been good triumphs over evil
kind of guys, but with recent films we have had morals rammed down our
throats till they are coming out of our ears. And Pocahontas is more
guilty than most THOU SHALT LOVE THY FELLOW HUMAN BEING it berates us,
THOU SHALT NOT JUDGE ON SKIN COLOUR it beats us around the head with. All
very worthy sentiments, but guys, come on, give us some entertainment!
Anyway, that's Pocahontas. Notice I haven't said anything about the 
horrifically butchered politically correct version of history Pocahontas
espouses, and the well-manered civil version of the native indians they
give us, and a host of other appaling devices they've used to get the morals
across. But still, it only a cartoon.
My son, who usually adores Walt Disney films lasted about ten minutes into 
this one, and then got bored and wandered off. I sat through the entire
length and can safely give it a:
* (one star) out of five rating. And that's only because there is no symbol
on the keyboard with which I can denote half-a-star.:)

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I guess I should point off first of all that I didn't actually pay 
to see this movie. I had nothing to do and it was on the dorm's cable 
network so I decided to give it a whirl, with the full knowledge that 
this would be the most mediocre Disney cartoon since about 1946. In 
the tradition of all the history-bending Disney tales, POCAHONTAS 
takes pains to present the most politically-correct portrayal of Native 
Americans (can't even call 'em Indians anymore!) despite having a 
heroine that looks like Cindy Crawford and ignoring nearly all 
historical facts. For starters, the real Pocahontas was around twelve 
when she met John Smith but I don't see any "Pedophelia" song and 
dance number.
        As the story opens, Pocahontas is out singing to the animals 
and talking to the old woman tree spirit when the drunken, corrupt 
Englishmen arrive in the new world, led by the round Governor 
Ratcliffe (as for the way his character looks and talks, remember the 
Sheriff of Nottingham from ROBIN HOOD?) and John Smith. Here 
we get more factual White-Out applied to history. Smith didn't come 
over until the third Jamestown excursion, after all the original 
colonists were dying of dysentery (again, a song-and-dance number 
they left out), and he sure didn't look like Mel Gibson. Imagine the 
pairing of John Goodman and Christina Ricci and there's your real-life 
romance.
        We instantly are forced to side with the Ind... er, Native 
Americans upon seeing the rudeness of the settlers, who immediately 
dig up all the earth in search of gold. The natives don't take well to 
this intrusion, attacking once or twice. Ratcliffe asks what possible 
motive the "savages" would have for attacking God's people, to his 
effeminate servant's response, "Let's see, we stole their land, cut down 
their trees and dug up their earth."
        Alright, dammit! All us white guys know it was wrong to 
steal the land away from the Indians and force them into an existence 
of selling Navajo blankets on the side of the road, but I refuse to feel 
guilty about it. And if the Disney people want to make us all feel guilt 
about it, I don't think the proper medium is a cheery movie where the 
trees talk and everyone breaks into song at the drop of a tribal 
headdress. Maybe another black-and-white three hour epic detailing 
every minute of the inhumanity and suffering, but not a G-rated movie 
where a raccoon and a dog playfully fight over food in every other 
scene.
        So Pocahontas investigates the new visitors and meets Smith, 
who turns out to be a Not-Bad White Guy (the only one in the movie). 
After the customary song about how narrow-minded and self-centered 
the whiteys are for not realizing the trees do actually talk, the two end 
up falling in love. It's a match made in the pit of hell. The Indians are 
mad at her for befriending the enemy, not to mention the fact that 
she's already engaged to one of her own people ("But he's so... 
serious," Pocahontas claims in her 17th century valley girl voice. 
Welcome to Jamestown, 90210.), and Smith's friends are also upset 
he's wasting his superior Anglo self on the savage girl, even if she 
does look like this month's centerfold.
        I really don't know what to say about this one. PC-HONTAS 
annoyed me most of the time with its constant sensitivity issues and 
screwing around with history. Nowhere is that more evident than the 
happy ending, where the colonists realize the Indians are human after 
all and befriend them. Um, when did that one happen? Was it 
somewhere along that whole Trail of Tears thing when the Americans 
massacred 30,000 of them? Besides that, it's probably the least 
entertaining Disney animated feature in a long time. The songs are 
substandard and there are way too many of them. If you can overlook 
that and can control the vomit reflex every time we get a speech about 
ethnic intolerance and the stealing of land, maybe you'll be entertained 
by it. I wasn't.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
