Title
Review for Like It Is (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
        London's club scene and gay sub-culture provide the background
for this gritty, contemporary, gay-themed love story from Britain's
Channel Four and director Paul Oremland.  Like It Is has been compared
to 1996's wonderful gay coming of age tale Beautiful Thing, but this
low budget production is unlikely to reach a broad audience as it has
been consigned to a limited release on the art house circuit.
The film opens in the gaudy, neon-lit resort town of
Blackpool.  Nervously waiting outside a gay night-club is the
strikingly handsome Craig (newcomer Steve Bell).  A fighter who earns
spare cash on the lucrative, but illegal, bare knuckle fight circuit,
Craig is also uncertain of his sexuality.  Loathe to enter the club,
he hangs around in the alley outside.  There he meets Matt (Ian Rose,
a star of numerous tv soaps), who is leaving the club.  A London-based
club entrepreneur, Matt is in town to help promote the latest single
from his protégé Paula (Dani Behr), a pop singer whose career is
on the way up.  Their sexual encounter is brief and unsatisfactory,
and leaves Craig feeling even more confused.
Recognising the lack of opportunities in this bleak town,
Craig heads off to London, and unexpectedly arrives on Matt's
doorstep.  However the self-centred Paula, who is also Matt's
roommate, grows jealous of Craig's presence, and does her best to
destroy the relationship before it becomes too serious.  Also throwing
a spanner or two into the works is Matt's boss Kelvin (former Who
frontman Roger Daltrey), a manipulative and nasty piece of work who
would be right at home in a lurid tv soap opera.  A big shot music
promoter with a penchant for young male bimbos, Kelvin is also adept
at making or breaking artists who cross him.
Craig eventually grows uncomfortable and disenchanted with
this hedonistic world of drugs, sexual jealousy, bitchiness and
hypocrisy, and decides to return home to Blackpool.  There at least
everything is a little more straight forward, and Craig knows where he
stands.  Matt has to confront his own feelings and eventually choose
between his dream of managing his own club with Kelvin or a chance of
happiness with Craig.
The performances of the largely unknown cast are quite good
and surprisingly natural.  Bell, a real-life boxing champion himself,
brings a touching vulnerability, naiveté, and air of uncertainty to
his role that perfectly suits the character.  Daltrey hasn't had a
role this juicy for years.  He seizes the opportunity with gleeful
abandon, and his smarmy, uninhibited performance dominates the film.
Behr is wonderfully bitchy as the selfish and jealous Paula, while
Rose is also good as the cocky and seemingly shallow Matt.
Writer Robert Gray seems to know this territory well, and he
examines London's gay scene with an honesty and insight that is rare.
First time feature director Oremland beautifully captures the ambience
of the night club scene as well as the bitchy politics of the music
industry.  His insights provide this enjoyable and intelligently
crafted film with a bit of muscle.  Like It Is has a gritty edge that
is tempered with some wonderful touches of disarmingly candid humour.
