Title
Review for Lengua de las mariposas, La (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
David N. Butterworth
        There are two remarkable images in the Spanish film "Butterfly"
("La Lengua de las Mariposas").  The first is of a young Chinese woman
running through a field--a simple, transitory moment filled with fervent
beauty.  The second is a slow-motion shot of a young boy chasing after a
truck while hurling rocks and epithets at the downtrodden people inside.
        Both images are related in that they deal with loss--José Luis
Cuerda's film is filled with easy metaphors, as subtle and delicate as a
butterfly's wing.
        The Chinese woman is running to wave goodbye to a young saxophone
player, Andrés, who briefly visited her island home and moved her with his
innocence and caring.  In the film's more potent closing scene, Andrés'
younger brother Moncho runs with tears in his eyes as his cries of
"atheist" and "murderer" turn to more genuine remembrances of his teacher,
Don Gregorio, one of many republican sympathizers now being carted away.
        "Butterfly" describes this time of emotional upheaval through the
eyes of an eight-year-old boy (Manuel Lozano, whose resemblance to Mark
Wahlberg is uncanny and whose outstanding performance as Moncho belies his
years).  Moncho, an asthmatic, lives with his parents and his older brother
(Alexis de los Santos) and, as the film opens, is being taken to school for
the first time.  Having learned that the schoolmaster Don Gregorio strikes
his boys, Moncho is not surprisingly fearful, but Don Gregorio turns out to
be anything but an insensitive brute, taking the little Swallow (Moncho's
nickname) under his wing and teaching him about nature, bugs, and the
tongues of butterflies.
        Don Gregorio is played by Fernando Fernán Gómez, a veteran Spanish
actor whose on-screen performances span more than 170 films.  He's
wonderful, like a cozy old grandfather whose lap you wish you could curl up
onto.
        Cuerda cleverly relegates the political turmoil to the background
so that the overriding feel of "Butterfly" is a heartwarming coming-of-age
tale set during a difficult time rather than a movie directly focused on
the Spanish Civil War.  This allows the director to shape the story with
humor and fondness as we witness the two brothers just being boys amid a
lot of beautiful settings.  But the effect of the country's changing
allegiances is very much there in the faces and actions of the Galician
townsfolk--the rich landowner who attempts to bribe Don Gregorio with a
pair of capons so that his son can receive some personal tutoring, and the
priest who airs his disapproval to Moncho's father now that Moncho's
schooling has taken away his desire to become an altar boy.
        And the impact comes to a head in that final, powerful scene, when
Moncho is forced to publicly renounce his teacher--a man who has loved him
and cared for him and opened his eyes to the beauty all around him--in
order to protect his family's true loyalties.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Laura Clifford
1936 Spain is on the brink of a civil war that will pit fascists against
communists and Loyalists against Republicans. Little Moncho (Manuel Lozano) is
just coming of age at this critical juncture in his country's history when he
enters school for the first time. Frightened by the stories told to him by his
older brother, Andre, of the mean old teacher, Don Gregorio (Fernando Fernan
Gomez), poor little Moncho wets himself at his first confrontation with the man
and runs away from school. But, Don Gregorio's patience, kindness and
understanding take hold as he opens up the wonderful world of nature to the boy
in "Butterfly."
Director Jose Luis Cuerda takes on a big effort as he tries to mix a sensitive
tale of a little boy and a kindly old man with one of political intrigue in
pre-Franco Spain. At first, Moncho's story takes the lead as he and Don
Gregorio form a relationship, with the old professor teaching the boy the 
wonders of nature and life. His teachings are exemplified with the don's 
description and eventual close-up look at a butterfly's tongue - the probiscus 
the delicate creature uses to collect the nectar of life.
Where the latter is a sometimes melancholy, often thoughtful, look at the
cross-generational relationship, the politics depicted take on a harsher, more
sinister tone. Right from the start of the film there is an undercurrent of the
conflict between those who seek the freedom of a Spanish republic and those who
want to retain the safe haven of the monarchy. The conflict builds steadily
through the film to its final culmination - civil war. In the end, Don Gregorio
and other liberal thinkers are rejected and the power of fascism takes hold of
the country. The innocent betrayal by Moncho of the old man is both sad and
abruptly handled, wrapping the story up in an unsatisfying manner.
Director Cuerda is virtually unknown in the US and "Butterfly" doesn't have the
appeal or coherence to change this status. The bond between Moncho and Don
Gregorio is sweet and holds an attraction for the viewer, but the politics of
the film are too simply drawn with its "liberal is good, conservative is bad"
message.
If you have a desire to see a foreign language film, I recommend, instead, the
wonderful Iranian film, "The Color of Paradise." I give "Butterfly" a C.
In the five years between the fall of the Spanish monarchy and
the Spanish Civil War, a small, shy boy, Moncho (Manuel Lozano) makes
a rocky transition to the local school which is eased when his elderly
teacher Don Gregorio (Fernando Fernan Gomez, "The Grandfather") comes to
his home to 'apologize.'  Moncho becomes fast friends with the nature
loving teacher as well as other children at school who expose him to the adult
world of love.  Unfortunately, Moncho will be more than exposed to the
adult world of politics, which divides even his Republican father and
devoutly religious mother in "Butterfly."
"Butterfly" is perhaps most successful in capturing the feel of life in
a rural Spanish town in the 1930's, where merchants are visitted not only
for their wares, but for advice (a young farmer purchases a bottle for the
mother of country girl Carmina while complaining about her ever present
mutt Tarzan) gossip (a group of schoolchildren listen to his tale) and
more (Carmina visits Moncho's father for funeral expenses when her mother
dies).  The town's band, which practices in an old chocolate factory,
recruits Moncho's older brother Andres (Alexis de los Santos) but unbeknownst
to him, he's wanted as bait for the young ladies rather than his musical
ability.  The town's wealthiest man has two fresh capons delivered to
Don Gregorio during class so that Don Gregorio will work his son harder 
in math (the capons are returned).  Don Gregorio leads his class outdoors
to inspire them with thoughts of the marvel of a butterfly's tongue
(Butterfly's Tongue was the film's original, and better, title) and is
found by Moncho picking apples from a neighbor's tree.
"Butterfly" is also a coming of age story, in which Moncho gets his
first kiss (after some guidance from Don Gregorio) and Andres finds his
heart broken after a band visit to another village.  Innocence is damaged
when Carmina's drunken lover takes harsh measures against Tarzan (foreshadowing
another act of human cruelty) while the children watch hidden in bushes.
Spanish acting institution Fernando Fernan Gomez is the teacher everyone
wishes they'd had as Don Gregorio.  He's a complex man - older, yet
promoting liberal politics.  His unorthodox methods for keeping control
of his class are a study in human psychology.  Manual Lozano is well
utilizied as Moncho, with his face reflecting the perplexing world around
him (some of his nonactorly facial expressions are a hoot!).  Alexis de
los Santos lends an air of naive romance to older brother Andres.  Uxio
Blanco is the strong mother Rosa, whose protective maternal influence is
stronger than her husband Ramon's (Gonzalo Uriarte) idealism.
The film is shot lovingly, nostalgically all aglow, yet editted oddly,
with scenes feeling cut off, too abruptly ended.  The film's climatic
ending, where politics harshly divide the Galician town's inhabitants
is also jarring, which would be fine if the filmmakers had laid the
groundwork for accepting Moncho's final action - they don't and the
effect is alienating.
"Butterfly" has been praised for its resistance to sentimentality, yet
even given its downer of an ending, this played like a favorite of older
Foreign Language Film Academy voters , a group criticized for their
sentimentality, to me.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
BUTTERFLY (LA LENGUA DE LAS MARIPOSAS)
  The Spanish Civil War 1936-39 was perhaps Europe's most
ideological struggle of the 20th century pitting the
Republicans of the left (liberals and Communists and their
acolytes) against the Fascists on the right (landowners and
upper clergy and their sympathizers).  Hitler was to support
the Fascists by testing the power of the Luftwaffe in bombing
expeditions over Spain while the Soviet Union backed the
Republican side.  "Butterfly," which is based on three stories
in Manuel Rivas's novel "Que Me Quieres, Amor," indeed is
"a beautiful marriage of film and literature" as the major writer
Gabriel Garcia Marquez has said.  Formerly "Butterfly's
Tongue," or "La lengua de las mariposas," but now known
simply by the title "Butterfly," Jose Luis Cuerda's film based
on Rafael Azcona's wonderful adaptation of the novel into a
screenplay takes place just on the cusp of the Spanish Civil
War in the northern regions of Galicia.  While "Butterfly"
shows the impact of the changes that would be brought about
by the death of the Republic, our attention is focussed not so
much on the transfiguration of Spain that would result but on
the idyllic society evoked by the novelist as seen through the
awe-struck eyes of a bright 7-year-old boy.  If you enjoyed
the performance of Haley Joel Osment in M. Night
Shamayalan's "The Sixth Sense," you'll adore the
performance of little Moncho (Manuel Lozano) as he takes in
and reflects on the world of his village (actually filmed in
regions of Santiago) at his tender age.
   Moncho is a delicate young man, eager to learn, but
introduced to school a year or so after the proper time
because he is afflicted with asthma.  Though clinging to the
apron strings of his mother, Rosa (Uxia Blanco) and confiding
to his older brother Andres (Alexis de los Santos) that he
fears being hit by his new teacher, he quickly develops a
rapport with the kind and gentle Don Gregorio (Fernando
Fernan Gomez)--who is to introduce the class to the beauties
of nature in the surrounding countryside as well as to the
grace of the printed word within the ramshackle schoolhouse. 
Don Gregorio's considerate demeanor and world-view are
reflected in the character of Moncho's dad, Ramon (Gonzalo
Uriarte), a tailor and Republican party member who shares
the teacher's mild disdain for organized religion, but is
scorned by the likes of one coarse and drunken braggart--a
metaphor for Fascism--who is fond of rough sex with a
woman whose background becomes a startling revelation in
the story.
   To further the film's authenticity, the political factionalism of
the town--which reflects distinctions present throughout
Spain--are soft-pedaled until the shattering payoff at the
conclusion.  After all, what does a 7-year-old know about
such things...and remember that everything that we see we
are viewing through the eyes of little Moncho.  The point of
the production, instead, is to show us the arcadian conditions
existing in this village just a few years after the toppling of the
Spanish monarchy in 1931 when that Iberian country was
living under Republican rule, and one could profess atheism if
he chose, or not, and no one would persecute a person for
his beliefs.  Moncho bears witness to his first sexual act
(which his pal Roque, played by Tamar Novas, explains is
like "when bitches get stuck together only human beings have
to be in love").  Moncho also demonstrates his respect for his
big brother, Andres, who gets to play in a touring band, the
love he feels for his parents, and most of all, the awe with
which he views his kindly schoolmaster.  As the teacher,
Fernando Fernan Gomez turns in the kind of performance
we'd expect from the man who played the title figure in 1998
in "El Abuelo."  Gomez, who was nominated for the Goya
(Spanish Oscar) for his role in "The Grandfather," is
considered one of Spain's great actors and becomes in
Cuerda's production a remarkable symbol for the kinder and
more gentle government that Spain enjoyed before that
benevolence was choked off by Franco's Fascists.
Not Rated.  Running time: 97 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
I'm generally pretty bored with films that are described as `coming of
age' pictures.  Words like `moving,' `touching,' and `emotional' are
usually thrown in for good measure, and each seems like a red flag for
both sappy content and predictable, linear stories.
Thankfully, José Luis Cuerda's The Butterfly is still an exceptionally
enjoyable film, despite being all of the things listed above.  The film
is about the relationship between a young boy and his teacher, and it's
set in mid-‘30s Spain during the country's transition from a monarchy to
a republic.
Moncho (Manuel Lozano, in his film debut) is a young boy who has been
taught at home by his tailor father Ramón (Gonzalo M. Uriarte) because
he's asthmatic.  On the eve of his first day of public school, Moncho's
older brother Andrés (Alexis de los Santos, also in his debut) horrifies
the young boy with tales of the beatings he's taken from his teachers
over the years.  So it's no surprise when Moncho pisses his pants the
following morning, just because his old, craggy teacher, Don Gregorio
(Fernando Fernán Gómez, The Grandfather), asked him what his name was.
Of course, Don Gregorio turns out to be a really nice guy.  He and
Moncho form a special bond (but not like the usual kind between priests
and young boys, or even Boy Scout leaders and young boys), and both
share an interest in nature.  At first I was worried, because the last
old Don that hung around outside this much keeled over in a tomato
garden with an orange in his mouth.  But nothing like that happens
here.  Don Gregorio is an old softie and appears to be the first hippie
teacher - a precursor to the tie-dyed David van Dreesen from Beavis &
Butt-Head.
The rest of The Butterfly is rife with the undercurrent of Spain's
political upheaval, and there are subplots involving Andrés' invitation
to play the saxophone with a touring band and the town whore.  The film
is actually based on three short stories written by Manuel Rivas in "Que
Me Quieres, Amor' and was adapted by Rafael Azcona.
In addition to being beautifully photographed by Javier G. Salmones
(Twice Upon A Yesterday), The Butterfly features terrific performances
by the young first-timer Uriarte and the rubber-faced Gómez, the latter
of whom could pass himself off as the Spanish Walter Matthau.  Directed
by José Luis Cuerda, The Butterfly was nominated for thirteen Goya
Awards (the Spanish equivalent of the Oscar).  It only took home one
trophy (for Best Screenplay) but would have swept everything if it
weren't for a little film called All About My Mother.
Previously titled The Butterfly's Tongue (taken from the Spanish title
La Lengua de las Mariposas), The Butterfly might seem like something you
may want to expose your kids to, what with the cool combination of
uplifting story and political education.  But parents, beware: The film
has a pretty graphic sex scene, features perky schoolgirls swimming
without tops and, for good measure, even throws in a scene where a dog
is cooked on a spit.  I screened the film as part of the Cleveland
International Film Festival and saw some poor mother ushering her kid
out of the theatre during all of the parts that could permanently scar
the impressionable brain of her child.  She must have been pretty tired
when the credits finally rolled.
1:35 - R for nudity and strong sexual content

Author
Steve Rhodes
José Luis Cuerda's BUTTERFLY (LA LENGUA DE LAS MARIPOSAS) is a coming of 
age story set against the background of a brewing Spanish Civil War.  A 
tale so modest that 15 minutes would more than suffice in telling it 
all, the movie has nothing wrong with it but little that is compelling 
either.
Moncho (Manuel Lozano), the story's protagonist, is off for his first 
day of school.  An asthmatic, he is so scared that he literally pees in 
his pants in front of the class on his important first meeting with his 
new classmates.  But this is that rare and unbelievably tolerant class 
that never holds his embarrassment against him, thanks to the guidance 
of their nearly sainted teacher, an atheist named Don Gregorio (Fernando 
Fernán Gómez).  Both of these male leads deliver noteworthy performances 
in this minimalist drama.
"Be careful with him," Moncho's mother admonishes Gregorio before the 
eventful first day.  "He's a sparrow out of the nest for the first 
time."  This episode gives Moncho the occasional nickname of sparrow.
The one-room schoolhouse in the small Spanish town where the story is 
set houses boys of all ages.  The girls' schooling, or lack thereof, is 
never addressed.  We do know that there are girls in the town because of 
a scene in which young school-age kids of both sexes swim together 
partially clothed -- the type of scene that would probably never past 
muster with the MPAA censors were the movie not foreign.
Shot in warm earth tones, the movie is visually appealing.  After 
various small incidents from nature walks to the canonical scene of 
young kids peeping on adults "humping," the movie finally takes off in 
the last 5 minutes.  With the predictable climax of denounce or be 
denounced, the villagers are forced to take sides in the war, with the 
consequence of a wrong choice being fatal. It is a powerful scene, but 
the movie needs many more such ones to be worth recommending.
BUTTERFLY runs 1:35.  The film is in Spanish with English subtitles.  
Officially it is rated R for "a strong sex scene," but it also contains 
nudity and a shockingly violent scene in which a dog is stabbed to 
death.  The movie would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 
