Title
Review for Down to Earth (2001)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Bob Bloom

 Down to Earth (2001) 1 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Chris Rock, Regina
King, Mark Addy, Eugene Levy, Chazz Palminteri, Frankie Faison, Greg
Germann and Jennifer Coolidge. Screenplay by Chris Rock, & Lance
Crouther & Ali Le Roi & Louis CK. Based on the film "Heaven Can Wait,"
screenplay by Elaine May and Warren Beatty from a play by Harry Segall.
Directed by Chris Weitz and Paul Weitz. PG-13.
 Third timeís a charm, the adage goes, but exceptions are possible.
 Take Down to Earth, for example. It is the third version of Here Comes
Mr. Jordan, originally produced in 1941 and remade by Warren Beatty in
1978 as Heaven Can Wait.
 The story is simple: A young man is accidentally taken before his time.
The young man and his guardian angels then spend the rest of the film
seeking the right body in which to return him to the land of the living.
 Along the way he, of course, falls in love, and at the fade-out
everything has worked out as divinely planned.
 Here Comes Mr. Jordan actually won two Academy Awards, one for original
story, the second for original screenplay.
 Heaven Can Wait, received 10 nominations, but won in only two minor
categories ó art direction and set decoration.
 And that brings us to Down to Earth. Before a reel of film unspools you
know problems will abound. Why? Because the story is credited to four
screenwriters: star Chris Rock, Lance Crouther, Ali Le Roi and Louis CK.
 It should not take four screenwriters to hash out a plot based on a
screenplay co-written by the legendary Elaine May and Warren Beatty.
 Down to Earth has a disjointed feel to it as if bits from each of the
writers were blended into a cinema stew without any thought of
cohesiveness. It jumps around from scene to scene without any rhyme or
reason. It feels as if were taped together instead of edited.
 A few laughs and a couple of chuckles rear their heads, but nothing
sustains them.
 The major problem is Rock. He is a fine comedian, but an inept actor.
His delivery of lines sounds like a constant standup routine. Every
sentence is shouted like its a punchline to some joke. Rock needs to
learn how to modulate his voice and phrase dialogue.
 Some of the humor works, especially Rockís diatribe about hospitals and
his put-down of a heckler at a comedy club. But most of the jokes are
not that funny.
 In this version of the story Rock plays Lance Barton, a failed standup
comedian, instead of an athlete as in the plotís previous incarnations.
 Heaven, as shown here, is a chintzy nightclub that would even make
Vegas blush. God, if we are to believe Down to Earth, has neither a
sense of taste nor style.
 Lance is sent back to earth and inhabits the body of a white,
53-year-old ruthless business tycoon, but even the comic possibilities
associated with this point are not utilized to their full potential.
 What we get are shots of a balding, chubby white guy trying to sing and
move to the beat of rap music. Hilarious, not!
 Down to Earth is deficient is plot and in substance. The weight of the
picture falls on Rockís shoulders and while he strenuously tries to hold
it up, he ultimately fails. Unfortunately, as a co-writer and an
executive producer, he must shoulder some of the blame.
 Rock has potential to be a fine comic actor. His work in Nurse Betty
and Dogma attest to that.
It just may be he still lacks the stamina to pull his own movie.
 Nice try, Chris, but we are certain you can do better.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafaytte.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
SSG Syndicate
When Lance Barton (Chris Rock), a bicycle messenger by day and struggling stand-up comedian by night, finds himself suddenly in heaven, he's convinced there's been a mistake. And he's right: in a celestial foul-up, an assistant (Eugene Ley) grabbed him before his time. So, since his body is no longer available, he strikes a bargain with the Heavenly Host (Chazz Palminteri) to return to Earth as Charles Wellington, a Manhattan billionaire who's just been murdered by his trophy wife (Jennifer Coolidge) and executive secretary (Greg Germann on TV's "Ally McBeal"). In his new guise, he's attracted to a social activist (Regina King) who finds his sleazy business practices reprehensible. It's a re-make of Warren Beatty's "Heaven Can Wait" (1979), which was taken from "Here Comes Mr. Jordan" (1941), based on Harry Segall's 1937 play - with the added twist of a hip, young black man trapped in a rich, 50ish, white man's body, a racial gimmick done before in Eddie Murphy's "Trad!
ing Places" (1983).  Which leads me to wonder exactly when does a remake become a rip-off?
   This updated concept, geared to the MTV crowd, rarely works, mostly due to the plodding pacing and inept comedic direction of brothers Chris and Paul Weitz ("American Pie"). Last year, Chris Rock quit his HBO comedy show to build a movie career and this is his first starring role. Unfortunately, it's not a good showcase for his talents, since supporting actors like Fred die Faison, Mark Addy and Wanda Sykes fare far better than he does with the material. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Down to Earth" is a floundering 4. And, when it appears in the video store, don't confuse it with a 1947 musical of the same name starring Rita Hayworth.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
This is from an actual conversation overheard at a promotional screening for
Down to Earth:
PATRON: Do you know what this movie is about?
USHER: Which movie are you here to see?
PATRON: Oh.    Isn't that an old movie?
USHER: Well, it's supposed to be a remake of Heaven Can Wait.
PATRON: No, I mean didn't Down to Earth come out last year?
PATRON: Sure it did.  Wasn't that the one with Freddie Prinze, Jr. and Julia
Stiles?
PATRON: Oh.    Wait, I got it.  It was the one with that girl that
looks like Helen Hunt and that boy from Election.
USHER: No, that was...shoot.  I can't think of the name.  It's right on the
tip of my tongue.
PATRON: Yeah, that was the one, I think.  She lived on a farm and fell in
love with a rich guy.
USHER: Here on Earth!  That's what it was.  Here on Earth.
PATRON: Oh.    That's just confusing.  Do you think they've run out
of titles?
USHER:   You think that's confusing?  Try selling tickets when
Bamboozled and Bedazzled are both playing.  Or The Legend of Drunken Master
and The Legend of Bagger Vance.  Or Saving Silverman and Save the Last
Dance.
PATRON: Oh, I just loved him in that movie with Jackie Chan.
USHER: Chris Rock was in Nurse Betty and Dogma and Lethal Weapon 4.
PATRON: And the voice of the hamster in The Nutty Professor 2?
PATRON: Oh.    Can you tell me which theatre The Wedding Planner is
in?
Believe it or not, some people know who Chris Rock is, and some people will
pay to see him on the big screen.  Sure, Down to Earth is his first starring
 role (not counting the New Jack City spoof, CB4), and it's recycled from a
script (Heaven Can Wait) that was a recycled script itself (Here Comes Mr.
Jordan), but Rock is a very funny guy with a very funny talk show on HBO.
Rock plays Lance Barton, a bike messenger and struggling stand-up comedian
from New York City.  Lance's routine is awful, and he is called Booey by
people familiar with his act.  His dream is to win a highly coveted slot at
the Apollo for the legendary theatre's last night before it closes up for
good.  It's amusing to watch Rock, a brilliant comedian, playing a character
who bombs on stage (it's better than Seinfeld taking a dive to throw off
Kenny Bania), but it's even funnier to watch the wiry actor ride a bike, and
funnier yet to see his narrow head in a giant bike helmet.
The unintentional sight gag only lasts for a second, because Lance is hit by
a truck and dies.  Because of a clerical error in Heaven, Lance is given the
chance to temporarily inhabit another person's body until a more suitable
host can be located by his angels (Eugene Levy and Chazz Palminteri).  He
picks the corpse of Charles Wellington, the 15th richest man in America who,
like his Heaven Can Wait counterpart, was poisoned by his wife (Jennifer
Coolidge, Best in Show) and her lover (Greg Germann, Sweet November).
As an old, fat, white guy, Lance's racially charged act doesn't exactly play
well with the brothers.  His problems are compounded when he falls in love
with a woman (Regina King) who hates his guts for cutting funding to the
Brooklyn hospital that employs her.  Don't worry - it all works out in the
end.  It's cute, predictable and sporadically funny.
Earth is rated PG-13, which means that Rock's trademark adult humor is
completely absent.  Rock without the F-word is like the Lakers without
Shaq - sure, they're still going to win some of the time, but it's just not
the same.  There are only a few scenes where you see Rock's character in
Wellington's body - thankfully, he doesn't don a fat suit like The Nutty
Professor.
Speaking of The Nutty Professor, two of that film's screenwriters - Chris
and Paul Weitz - directed Earth.  They're probably better known by the
unwashed masses for their teen sex romp, American Pie, but savvy moviegoers
will recognize them from Chuck and Buck.  The Weitz brothers use two actors
from Pie here (Levy and Coolidge, who played Stifler's mom), as well as a
number of performers from Rock's HBO show, including the immensely
hysterical Wanda Sykes, who steals every scene she's in.
1:26 - PG-13 for language, sexual humor and some drug references

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
DOWN TO EARTH (2001)
Rated PG-13; running time 95 minutes
Genre: Comedy
Seen at: Jack Lokes' Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.downtoearthmovie.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0231775
Written by: Louis C.K., Lance Crouther, Ali LeRoi, Chris Rock
Directed by: Paul Weitz, Chris Weitz
Cast: Chris Rock, Regina King, Mark Addy, Frankie Faison, Eugene Levy,
Chazz Palminteri, Greg Germann, Jennifer Coolidge, Wanda Sykes
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsdowntoearth.html
You ever feel like you really, really wanted to sneeze - I mean really,
*really*, wanted to sneeze - and no matter how hard you tried, you just
couldn't do much more than let out an insincere snort or two?
Substitute "laugh" for "sneeze" in the above sentence, and you'll know
how I felt while watching DOWN TO EARTH.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
The pitch probably went a lil' sum'n like this:
   "There's this guy, see, who's a frustrated jock, and he's on the
    verge of becoming unfrustrated, when this gang of angels - let's
    call them Mr. King (Chazz Palminteri) and his bumbling assistant,
    Keyes (Eugene Levy) - takes him from this earthly veil a few years
    before he was due. The frustrated jock grumbles about this, so the
    angels put him in a dead quarterback's body, and he goes on to win
    the pro championship and lives happily ever after!"
   "What's that?  Warren who?  Ok, never mind.  How about we make him a
    mediocre comic...hey, I know, make him a mediocre _Black_ comic!
    And let's name him Lance Barton (Chris Rock), and put him into a rich
    White guy's body, and have Lance the inner guy try to squeeze up on
    Shaniqua...nah, that's too obvious; let's make her Suntee (Regina
    King) the Social Activist...but Suntee - who can only see the White
    outer guy - hates Wellington The Rich White Guy because he keeps
    ignoring her Activator...er, Activism; and for kicks, let's have
    Well be a lardbutt whose slutty wife (Jennifer Coolidge) sneaks
    around with Well's skanky lawyer Sklar (Greg Germann) to plan Well's
    murder...and hey, for more giggles, let's have Lance - in Well's
    body, but with his Ghetto Mindset fully in place - not only win over
    the hearts and minds of his sassy maid Wanda (Wanda Sykes) and
    uptight Brit butler Cisco (Mark Addy), but also bop up and down The
    Mean Streets Of New York blasting Jungle Music and attracting
    attention from the natives, who'll have no part of Wellington The
    Rich White Guy emulating their musical stylings and cultural
    traditions! Yeah, that'll be FUNN NEEE!"
The Upshot:
Man, this flick was bad, almost to the point of pain.  This movie was
just Wrong in so many ways.  I shouldn't be surprised, not with two
credited directors and a gazillion writers (including, not surprisingly,
Rock himself).
I laughed a few times, but always in isolated, "that was a cute gag",
circumstances.  I spent most of the time wondering about how We can be
so hypocritical at times (see the "Black Factor" for more on this), why
on earth anyone would bring their young child to witness Rock's
typically-foul mouth (ditto), and whether or not someone at the WB would
get the bright idea to make this movie into a weekly series.  I was
about to say "I really hope not", but since I don't watch the WB anyway,
no worries.
I snickered at Wanda "watch me twist my neck" Sykes' antics, but I saw a
lot of the gags (including the Black-man-and-a-taxi) coming from miles
away.  Most of all, I feel sorriest for Regina King (Suntee?  As my bud
Jim Hill would say, render unto me a break) and Frankie Faison
(Whitney), who seem to get enough steady work as The Sidekick, The Comic
Relief, or The Street Hustler, but whose true talents aren't showcased
nearly as much as they should be; that streak continues, here.  As for
the Rock man himself, I have no such remorse for him; he'll get a big
enough paycheck for this one.  And I'll go back to my "avoid remakes if
at all possible" stance.  Until the next flick comes down the pike, that
is.  The things I do for 3BC...
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
Take away my Ghetto Pass if you must, but surely, I can't be the only
one who thinks it's the ultimate in hypocrisy for Us to get all offended
and sh...tuff when White comics crack on Black folks using the same
language that *Black* comics use, can I?  Yeah yeah yeah, "only family
can dog family"...I've heard it all before.  What. Ever.
And I've changed my mind; I'm not gonna call out the Black family that
brought their very young son to see this, though I cringed when the kid
starting howling at some of Rock's more...colorful language.  It's not
really that family's fault; not when the idiots running the MPAA gave
this one a *PG-13* rating.  But I shouldn't be surprised: this is the
same MPAA that, in all their sublime cluelessness, gave BILLY ELLIOT an
R rating.  Pardon my french, but the MPAA can kiss my Bl[MPAA WARNING:
LANGUAGE NOT FIT FOR CHILDREN UNDER 13. UNLESS THEY'RE FRENCH.]
Bammer's Bottom Line:
DOWN TO EARTH was a prime example of why I Hate Remakes.  If *this* is
what your movies are gonna look like, Chris, stick with stand-up.
You're a whole lot funnier on stage than in lame flicks like this one.
DOWN TO EARTH (rating: yellowlight):
Hear ye, hear ye: Bammer declares the rest of 2001 "Remake-free Year".
You may go back to what you were doing now.  Have a nice day.

Author
Ross Anthony
Don't get me wrong, I like Chris Rock the comedian. But Chris Rock the 
comedic actor needs quite a bit of work. Ironically, his character is 
nicknamed "boo-y" in this rewrite of Warren Beatty's "Heaven Can Wait." 
A jumpy angel presumes Rock, a struggling comedian, dead as a truck 
approaches Rock's bicycle. Pulled from his body too soon, Rock pleads 
with heaven's managing angel, "I am not dead, now get me a new body, 
I've got an audition at the Apollo!" The angel concedes that Rock's 
death was indeed "untimely" and sets him up (temporarily) with the body 
of an older rich white guy who had just been killed by his wife's lover. 
It's a fun story, decently updated with a strong enough script. 
Unfortunately, nearly everyone in the film outperforms the lead; most 
notably two character actors - the butler and the maid. Chris is as 
stiff as a rock; his awkward delivery never lets us enter this wonderful 
world of make believe. Coupled with occasional rickety editing, the 
production feels of a less than average independent film. 
That said, of course, a few humdingers slip through:
"She's so skinny, you two might just start a fire havin' sex."
"Your mom has so much hair under her arms - she looks like she's got 
Buckwheat in a headlock." 
Wonderful also, the first scene where Rock (as the rich Charles 
Wellington) meets the butler. And, Rock (as Wellingtion) stirs up the 
waters as well as the intensity level of the film in a strong hospital 
board meeting scene. Nicely done. One last touch, Rock's first attempts 
at the Apollo result in boos so Herculean they create a gale, his 
coat-pocket handkerchief fluttering in its the wind. 
A stronger lead could have pulled this picture together. Additionally, 
the heart-stopping political incorrectness of Rock speaking hood-talk 
from the mouth of a rich white guy gave the film some of its brawnier 
moments. The production would have benefited by displaying the white 
Wellington (outside) more often (juicing the contrast), instead of 
showing us Rock (inside & out) nearly all the time. 
Down To Earth. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Chris Rock, Regina King, Mark Addy, Eugene Levy, Frankie 
Faison, Greg Germann, Jennifer Coolidge, Chazz Palminteri. 
*  Directed by Chris Weitz & Paul Weitz. 
*  Screenplay by Chris Rock, Lance Crouther, Ali Le Roi, Louis CK. 
*  Based on the film "Heaven Can Wait" by Elaine May and Warren Beatty 
which was based on a play by Harry Segall. Yet another version ... the 
1941 film, "Here Come's Mr. Jordon" 
*  Produced by Sean Daneil, Michael Rotenberg, James Jacks at Paramount, 
Village Roadshow,NPV, Alphaville 3 Arts. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Steve Rhodes
In DOWN TO EARTH, Chris Rock plays a struggling standup comic, Lance 
Barton, whose jokes -- "I know this gal so ugly she had to wear makeup 
on the radio" -- have been dying.  As he tries to get ready for his 
life's dream, a slot at the amateur night in the last show at the famous 
Apollo theater, he ends up even deader than his material.  Not one to 
let a technicality like a heavenly address get in his way, he negotiates 
with the heavenly powers (Chazz Palminteri and Eugene Levy) to insert 
him into another earthly body so he can play his big gig.  For the 
record, the hereafter looks like a big blue nightclub.
If this plot sounds familiar, it should.  DOWN TO EARTH is a remake of 
the 1978 film HEAVEN CAN WAIT, starring Warren Beatty.  That film, 
confusingly, was itself a remake, not of the 1943 film HEAVEN CAN WAIT, 
but of the 1941 picture HERE COMES MR. JORDAN.  Now that we've gotten 
that straightened out, we can proceed.
Young, black, slender and poor Lance ends up in the body of Charles 
Wellington, a pudgy, white billionaire who is supposed to be 53 but 
looks a decade older.  Once in his new skins, Lance finds that he sees 
himself, but everyone else still sees Charles's body.  The audience sees 
Lance, except for a few scenes when Charles is rapping or joking with 
black humor, as blacks stare at him in disbelief and dismay.  At those 
times, the audience sees this old white guy disconcertingly trying to 
act black.
Lance transforms Charles from vicious capitalist into kind 
philanthropist.  It isn't quite as magnanimous as it sounds, since Lance 
starts his giving as a way to impress Suntee (Regina King), a community 
activist who opposes Charles's plans for Brooklyn Community Hospital.  
Charles, the 15th richest man in the world, wants his hospital to boost 
profits by turning away people without insurance.  In a dazzling 
performance for the cameras at the hospital's board meeting, Lance, as 
Charles, declares, "Shot in the head, you get a bed."  No one notices 
that Charles's lingo suddenly sounds downscale.  "Drive home safely, tip 
your waitresses," he tells his board when he leaves. "I gotst to go."
It's a good natured story, and Rock radiates a sweet likeableness 
throughout.  But, the bottom line is that the movie is basically one 
long Chris Rock comedy routine.  If you like his shtick, you'll probably 
like the movie.  For my taste, some of his jokes are cute, but most 
don't quite click.  Not a bad movie.  Think of it as a near miss.
DOWN TO EARTH runs 1:27.  It is rated PG-13 for language, sexual humor 
and some drug references and would be fine for kids around 9 and up.
My son Jeffrey, almost 12, gave the movie ** 1/2, saying that some of 
the jokes were funny but many weren't.  He mentioned several structural 
problems he had with the script, especially the way the last act and the 
ending were handled.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Homer Yen
Here's a little bit of film history.  In 1941, a
well-received film called "Here Comes Mr. Jordan" was
released, which told the story of a boxer who
accidentally dies before his time and is reincarnated
in the body of a murdered millionaire.  Decades later
in the late 70s, "Heaven Can Wait" was released, which
told the story of an NFL quarterback who accidentally
dies before his time and is reincarnated in the body
of a murdered millionaire.  Now, we have "Down to
Earth," which tells the story of a comic that
accidentally dies before his time and yada, yada,
yada.
This tepid little reincarnation of two arguably much
better films focuses on struggling comic, Lance Barton
(Chris Rock).  His ultimate goal is to perform at the
Apollo theatre without getting booed off the stage. 
But he is prematurely sent to Heaven.  Too bad for
Lance.  Now, he'll never get to make that appearance
and he won't be able to meet that cute girl that he
saw crossing the street.
Even Heaven makes a mistake now and then.  Yet, while
he can be returned among the living, he can't have his
old body back.  That's just the way it goes, and with
the help of two Angel chaperones (Eugene Levy and
Chazz Palminteri), they help Lance look for a new one
to inhabit.  
Lance finally settles on the body of billionaire
Charles Wellington after discovering that he is the
object of attention of that aforementioned cute girl. 
He not only gets a rare second chance to make good on
his unfulfilled dreams of stardom but also gets the
opportunity to affect some positive changes on the
lives that he touches.
There's no burst of creativity here.  You'll also be
disappointed with its screenplay, which is
unforgivingly underdeveloped.  One of its two major
sins is that there are too many elements that are left
dangling.  Foremost is the fact that
Lance-as-Wellington, along with his money and power,
can really do some good.  But, everything that he says
and does seems to be just an excuse to test out his
comedic material.  At a board meeting regarding the
privatization of a community clinic, for instance, he
enters a Johnny Cochrane state-of-mind.  "If he's shot
in the head; give him a bed.  If he's bloody; he's our
buddy," he riffs to the dismay of the greedy
stakeholders.  This is funny material that establishes
Rock's comedic presence.  But, it doesn't take the
movie anywhere.  Why can't he make those
white-collared pruneheads see the error of their ways?
A more shameful sin, though, is its lack of funny
moments.  Rock has three or four decent sequences that
make us smile.  It's cute watching Lance-as-Wellington
(who is seen as a white, portly, balding, 50-year old
man) sway to rapper DMX and 'act black' in Harlem. 
But the film spends too much time making Rock, whose
acting seems amateurish, into a romantic leading man. 
Part of the problem also lies in the fact that this
film is rated only PG-13 while the amiable comic with
eyes-bigger-than-a-cue-ball and
teeth-as-bright-as-a-flashlight does his best stuff in
an R-rated environment.  Here, he looks desperate to
utter the "F" word.  What we get here is a manic comic
that is unfairly restrained, a story that has too many
loose ends, and a film that only Chris Rock fans would
really enjoy.


Author
Michael Dequina
        There's no denying that Chris Rock is a funny man.  On the
stand-up stage, he blazes, eliciting many a large laugh with his fierce
mix of rage and joy.  But one thing few would ever say about Rock is that
he's a great actor.  This is not to say that he's an especially bad one,
for he has been effective in small roles in _Dogma_ and _Nurse_Betty_. 
It's just that one doesn't exactly equate "lead movie star" with him, and
his flat starring vehicle _Down_to_Earth_ doesn't do anything to change
that perception.
        Part of the problem is that he is never quite able to completely
shake off his stand-up persona.  Granted, on screen he displays the same
charismatic presence he has on stage, but the barking line delivery and
cadences of his stand-up delivery also carry over, which makes it
difficult to separate Rock from the character he's supposed to be
playing.  _Down_to_Earth_, a remake of 1978's _Heaven_Can_Wait_ (which
itself was a remake of 1941's _Here_Comes_Mr._Jordan_), makes an obvious
attempt to ease the transition by casting Rock as Lance Barton, a
stand-up comic.  This, however, just makes matters worse; whenever Lance
takes the stage and does his act, we see Rock (who happened to co-write
the script and recycle some of his own material), not the character of
Lance.
        The plot, as it is, has struggling stand-up Lance suffering an
untimely death in a traffic accident; apparently, this was a mistake, so
an angel named King (Chazz Palminteri) quickly gives Lance another
body--which, unfortunately, is that of just-deceased  billionaire Charles
Wellington.  Lance negotiates this to be a temporary arrangement, but he
has second thoughts when he meets activist Sontee (Regina King), whom
Lance manages to successfully woo while in the body of the much-older
white man.
        Rock and King manage to generate some charm together, but their
romance is often lost amid easy fish-out-of-body jokes (there is not only
one, but two, scenes of Lance bumping to rap music, forgetting he's in
the form of a portly old white man) and boring subplots, in particular
one revolving around Wellington's scheming wife (Jennifer Saunders) and
her lover (Greg Germann), who also happens to be Wellington's right-hand
man.
        _Down_to_Earth_ was directed by Chris and Paul Weitz, but this
film doesn't display any of the antic spirit of their last film,
_American_Pie_--not even during the stand-up sequences that should be
comic high points.  But just at fault, if not more, is Rock, who
fashioned a less-than-ideal project for himself.  When someone wants to
see a Chris Rock comedy, one wants to see him R-rated unleashed--not so
much in terms of profanity than his intelligently biting adult humor.  In
_Down_to_Earth_, not only has his edge been smoothed over, so has his
smarts.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Brandon Herring

Down To Earth  * *1/2 out of * * * *
Starring: Chris Rock, Regina King, Eugene Levy, Chazz Palminteri, Frankie 
Faison, Mark Addy, Jennifer Coolige, Greg Germann.
Directed by: Paul and Chris Weitz
Running Time: 87 Minutes
Rated PG-13: sexual humor, language.
Good natured comedies are sometimes a rarity. Most comedies out in the past 
year have either been raunchy (Road Trip), Stupid (Dude, Where's My Car), or 
just plain bad (Urban Legends: Final Cut...wait that wasn't a comedy). Its 
nice to know that some filmmakers out there still make these good natured 
comedies, and Chris Rock's new vehicle "Down to Earth" is one of them. It's 
funny, but also at the same time has a sweet side to it, and in the end 
delivers a good message.
Lance Barton is a struggling comedian, he wants to be at the Apollo and 
perform his comedy and not be booed off the stage (his nickname to his 
friends is Booie). On his way home from a bad show, he is hit by a truck when 
he sees a beautiful girl while riding his bike. He arrives in Heaven just in 
time, of course not realizing what happened, he thinks he is dreaming. 
Convinced by Keyes (Eugene Levy) and King (Chazz Palminteri) that he is 
indeed not dreaming, he finds out that Keyes took him 42 years early. For the 
mistake they tell him he can go back to Earth in another person's body, and 
live their life. The body he chooses is a older man by the name of Charles 
Wellington.
Wellington the 15th richest man in the world, is having a problem however, 
his wife is cheating on him, and his wife and her love (his personal 
secretary) just tried to kill him. To add to the muck, Charles has died and 
Lance has taken over his body. Now as Charles Wellington, Lance must fit in, 
in the world and try to convince the love of his life Sontee (a person very 
angry at him) that he is in fact someone else.
Many of the jokes in Down to Earth work, however some do not, and fall flat 
on their face at times as well. The acting is one of a mediocre scale, Chris 
Rock who I think is a better comedian than actor does a good job in the main 
role as Lance Barton, Regina King is sexy and realistic as the love interest, 
Eugene Levy and Chazz Palminteri make a great comedic duo as the angels. The 
standouts however are the maids and servant of Charles Wellington. Mark Addy 
of "The Full Monty" fame, does a great job playing his personal servant 
comedically named Cisco. Wanda Skyes plays Wanda, the loud mouthed but inside 
sweet maid is very funny.
Chris and Paul Weitz directed a little teen movie in 1999 that went on to 
make $102m domestically. That little film was "American Pie", and now two 
years later they are back, directing a comedy is hard to do, because you 
don't need any fancy camera shots, or special effects. "Down To Earth" really 
doesn't have any of these, but the direction however is good, the actors all 
do the right things, and the major flaws come from the story and the overall 
tone of the film. It doesn't seem as funny as one would want it to be, and 
story is at times pretentious.
Besides these flaws, "Down to Earth" is a clever little comedy, that is a 
remake of the Warren Beatty classic "Heaven Can Wait". In the end, its worth 
the watch, and worth sitting through its (too) short running time of only 87 
minutes, cramming in everything it can. 
Reviewed by Brandon Herring 2/25/00.

Author
Laura Clifford
A remake of the 1978 Warren Beatty vehicle "Heaven Can Wait" (which in turn
was a remake of "Here Comes Mr. Jordan"), "Down to Earth" tells the tale
of Lance Barton (Chris Rock, "Lethal Weapon IV"), a young Black standup 
comic trying to win over the audience at Harlem's Apollo Theater.  When
he's taken to heaven prematurely by bumbling angel Keyes (Eugene Levy, 
"Best in Show"), his only recourse is to return in another body.  He chooses 
that of Charles Wellington, the tenth richest man in the United States.  Of 
course, Wellington is not only rich, but white and 53 years old, which makes 
Lance's bid for closing night at the Apollo, as well as his desire to woo 
Suntee (Regina Taylor, "Jerry Maguire"), a tad tricky.
The original Elaine May/Warren Beatty script has been reworked by
Chris Rock, Lance Crouther, Ali LeRoi, and Louis C.K. to turn Beatty's 
vehicle as a football player into Rock's vehicle as a comic and add some
racial humor.  As directed by Chris Weitz and Paul Weitz (codirectors of 
"American Pie" and costars of "Chuck & Buck"), the whole affair comes off 
as amateur hour.
Initial scenes play like filmed line reading rehearsals.  Production
values are shoddy.  Most serious of all is the use of Rock when his
Wellington counterpart would have been more appropriate.  This problem
is clearly attributable to the fact that the old white guy is never lip or
action synched when he IS on screen.
Rock does get the chance to do some fun schtick, such as his turnaround
on Wellington's plans for a poor neighborhood hospital ('Bullet in the head?
You got a bed!'), but he's uneven when interacting with the rest of the cast.
Regina Taylor fares well amidst the mediocrity as the young activist who
confusedly ends up falling for the man she believed to be her nemesis.
Also good is Frankie Faison ("Hannibal") as Whitney, Lance's compassionate 
manager - the only human who's made privy to Lance's body body switch.
Chaz Palminteri and Levy are pretty much wasted as heaven's ambassadors.
Another "Best in Show" alumnus, Jennifer Coolidge, is poorly used as 
Wellington's cheating wife (AND shown several days apart wearing the SAME
outfit?!) and Greg Germann (TV's "Ally McBeal," "Sweet November") continues
display his sitcom roots as her lover and husband's lawyer.  Mark Addy
("The Full Monty") is sorely underutilized as Cisco, Wellington's fake
English butler.  Stealing the show in every scene she's in is Wanda Sykes
("The Chris Rock Show") as Wellington's disgruntled maid.
"Down to Earth" is for Chris Rock fans only.  All others should go rent
"Heaven Can Wait" or truly be brought down to earth.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
