Title
Review for Deconstructing Harry (1997)
Number of Reviews
24

Author
E. Michael Kelsey
Ok, Woody, we get it. As sad as that is to say, laughing at obvious
incarnations of Mr. Allen himself is just getting less and less appealing.
Perhaps a more blatant self-analysis than most, DECONSTRUCTING HARRY heads
nowhere fast, a common attribute to many Allen films, but never has the ride
been so dull.
A year after the wonderful EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU, which showed a fresh, and
yet more classic side to Woody Allen's film-making, DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is
here. It's the story of Harry Block (Allen), a writer whose novels are no more
than thinly disguised renditions of his personal life. Those who knew him most
intimately are making unauthorized pseudo-appearances in Harry's books, and
they are all greatly offended by what has unofficially-but-obviously been
revealed. Those most upset include Harry's ex-wife/ex-therapist Joan (Kirstie
Alley), and Joan's sister, Lucy (Judy Davis), whom we quickly learn was having
an affair with Harry at the time. The situation isn't helped any by the fact
that Woody's entire life has been libidinously centered and completely
unfaithful.
But now Harry has been invited to receive an honorary award from the school
that once expelled him, and trying to find someone to accompany him is proving
very difficult. When it comes down to it, this is really just an excuse to get
Harry to visit old friends, which is really just an excuse to replay old
memories, which is really just an excuse to allow Allen's self-catharsis to
take place. Luckily, Allen does have some interesting approaches to this
catharsis, and if it hadn't been for his less than standard direction, nothing
would have saved this film. Even with the same script, it could easily have
been downright awful. What makes this film as enjoyable as it is, which may
not be a lot, is the interesting blend between "real life" and the novelized
interpretations. We flip back and forth between the characters from Harry's
books and the people they parallel. One minute we're watching the fictional
Leslie (Julia Louis-Dreyfus), and the next, we're back to Lucy, all the while
the exact same story is being told. This, along with just a few very funny
moments, makes this film almost worthwhile, and for very adamant Woody Allen
fans, it may even be a blast.
If you're not an extreme fan of Allen, however, DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is likely
going to be a giant waste of time. If you're familiar with his work, you may
be surprised at the turn this film takes, including dialogue more reminiscent
of Andrew Dice Clay's uncensored standup comedy than classic Allen. The script
is heavily laced with profanity and vulgarity, even more obscene than Allen's
usual sex-obsessed works. This would be more uncomfortable to sit thru with
your mom than EVERYTHING YOU'VE ALWAYS WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT SEX, because at
least that film was handling those subjects with tactful humor, not just
throwing it out there so nonchalant. Such explicit dialogue is nothing new to
the world of movies, but it's never been so explored by Allen. Just be aware.
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is just another soapbox for Allen to proclaim his own
insecurities and philosophies about life. It's nothing new by any means, and
quite frankly, it's boring. Allen really seems convinced that we're anxious to
hear his side of everyone's story, but this overly self-indulgent film has
nothing to offer anyone, aside from Allen himself. The large cast of highly
recognizable actors are merely skimmed over, adding no real benefit to the
experience. Allen has never been one to create deep, rich, individual
characters; we're usually stuck with the same, fast-talking array of New
Yorkers. The only thing that changes is the *quantity* of these characters in
each film. In other words, a dozen or so great actors only give your eyes a
little more something to do.
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is worthy of two-and-a-half stars merely on the basis
that is was done very well. Of course, well-presented boredom is not much
better than mediocre boredom is it?

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Woody Allen
Cast: Woody Allen, Billy Crystal, Demi Moore, Robin Williams, Judy
Davis, Elisabeth Shue, kirstie Alley, Bob
Balaban, Richard Benjamin, Eric Bogosian, Hazelle Goodman, Mariel
Hemingway, Amy Irving, Julie Kavner,
Caroline Aaron, Eric Lloyd, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Tobey Maguire, Stanley
Tucci
Rated R: Language, sex, nudity
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    I don't know a single person that doesn't think that Woody Allen is
annoying. I, myself, am one of those
people. I think he is intensely annoying. I watch him jitter and shake
around the screen, spewing
half-sentences like a broken verbal machine gun, with those black little
eyes magnified behind those
ridiculously thick glasses, and I wonder why I repeatedly go to see the
films that he writes, directs, and
stars in. It doesn't take me long to figure it out--he's really funny.
That's usually what it comes down to.
Maybe the character he plays isn't always really funny, but his
supporting characters are so funny, and the
situations are absolutely hilarious.
    Deconstructing Harry is his latest film, and I imagine that to
obtain complete enjoyment, one should know
Woody Allen pretty well. I, for one, do not--I have not seen a lot of
his films (I think this marks the fourth
or fifth), and what I know of him outside of his work is just what I
read in the tabloids and Entertainment
Weekly. But I know that this film is one big stab at himself, and I can
assume that it is successful. But like
most of his films, this one is successful because of the numerous
interesting characters, and the witty,
sharp, Woody Allen humor. What this film seems to have that his others
do not is a jagged edge, a kind of
licentious and hateful quality, an element present simply to make more
fun of himself.
    It's about Harry Block (Allen), a godless, sex-crazed author who, at
the time of the film, is in complete
disarray. He's just written a book that gives up the secrets of some of
his closest friends and ex-girlfriends,
and none of them are particularly happy with the situation. He's never
allowed to see his kid, his parents
have all but disowned him, his sister and her husband look down upon him
because he isn't a true Jewish
man, and so forth. On top of all this, he can't get motivated to write
anything significant, so his life is on
hold.
    The film is kind of a journey for Harry to understand himself, or
maybe make himself better, should he
reach the point of caring about himself. It leads to a situation in
which he's driving in a Volvo with a
hooker and a corpse, on his way to get honored by the school which
expelled him. Like all of Allen's
films, he has a huge cast. It's nearly distractingly large, with almost
every part filled up by a big-name star.
Most of the women turn in the best performances, with genuinely funny
moments delivered by Judy Davis,
Kirstie Alley, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, and Demi Moore. If you're familiar
with Allen's films, then you'll know
what to expect--it's the same kind of humor, pacing, and mood to which
we're all accustomed in his
movies.
    This one, however, seems to suffer from a peculiar storytelling
technique. Because of the nature of the
story, Harry frequently relives pieces of short stories that he has
written; most of them star a guy thinly
disguised as himself, and tells a true story. He remembers one of the
first stories he wrote, about his first
encounter with a prostitute. Another story he remembers is one in which
he goes to hell to save the woman
he loves. Throughout the film, the action also switches to a different
cast doing the exact same thing,
which is meant to represent the book which he has just written (the one
that everyone is upset at him for).
If my explanation of this is confusing, then I'm doing my job--it is
also rather confusing in the film. I didn't
put the pieces together until the last quarter of the movie. It's really
not that obvious, nor is Allen's reason
for doing it (though I imagine if you're familiar with all of his work
then there is something here to give you
a hint). The flashbacks sure are funny, though.
    Towards the end, he actually meets the character that he created,
his alter-ego, and this individual gives
Harry all kinds of advice. I like the idea (look into your writing for
advice), and the central idea behind his
character--he can function in the artistic world but not in the
realistic world--is a fascinating one.
Ultimately, the film aside from the comedy works because Allen really
thought about his concepts and
materialized them effectively (although the flashbacks to his stories
could have been less confusing).
Whether you love him or hate him, you're likely to enjoy Deconstructing
Harry. And if you know Allen
really well, you'll probably get a lot more out of the film. As for me,
it proved to make a worthwhile
evening of entertainment, even if though is about a godless, sex-crazed
author in complete disarray.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Woody Allen, Judy Davis, Elizabeth Shue, Kirstie Alley, 
      Bob Balaban, Hazelle Goodman, Eric Lloyd, Billy Crystal, 
      Richard Benjamin, Demi Moore, Julie Louis-Dreyfus, Stanley Tucci, 
      Robin Williams
Director: Woody Allen
Producers: Jean Doumanian
Screenplay: Woody Allen
Cinematography: Carlo Di Palma
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
Deconstructing:  To write about or analyze in a way that questions 
traditional assumptions about certainty, identity, and truth, asserts 
that words can only refer to other words, and attempts to demonstrate 
how statements about any text subvert their own meanings. (The American 
Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Third Edition)
     How much of Woody Allen is there in Harry Block?  This is 
undoubtedly one of the questions likely to be foremost in any viewer's 
mind after watching Allen's 1997 feature, DECONSTRUCTING HARRY.  It's 
also the question most often asked of the director in interviews about 
the film.  Allen has been understandably evasive, stating repeatedly 
that, while there may be some similarities between Harry and himself, 
the movie is a work of fiction and Harry is nothing more than a 
character.
     Of course, it could be argued that artists, regardless of whether 
they're authors, painters, or movie directors, aren't always aware of 
the full ramifications of what they create.  It seems clear that Allen 
is doing a little more with DECONSTRUCTING HARRY than simply telling a 
funny story.  But is he using Harry Block as a means to work through 
some personal demons, in a form of on-screen therapy?  Or is this a 
none-too-subtle jab at all the critics who want to inextricably entwine 
Allen's real life with his reel life?  The truth is, it's probably a 
little of both.  If DECONSTRUCTING HARRY has an overriding theme, it's 
that the man and the artist can be separated, and, even if the man is a 
despicable person, his art can redeem him.
     Of course, this makes DECONSTRUCTING HARRY sound like a deeply 
philosophical movie, which it isn't, and the seemingly-pretentious title 
only adds to the confusion.  But the film is appropriately named.  
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY doesn't tell a straightforward or linear story.  
Instead, it uses a fairly unremarkable plot as a springboard for comic 
vignettes that gradually answer questions about Harry's identity.  Like 
the layers of an onion, the folds of his life, both as told through 
"true" flashbacks and "fictionalized" accounts, are peeled away, 
offering a clear picture of the man -- and it's not a pretty one.
     So who is Harry Block?  He is, by some accounts, one of the most 
unpleasant men alive.  Since he's played by Woody Allen, he's also an 
insecure and self-absorbed individual, as well.  (Has there ever been an 
Allen character who wasn't a poorly-adjusted neurotic?)  Professionally, 
he's a world-famous, bestselling author who writes thinly-veiled 
autobiographical tales about his relationships with his three ex-wives.  
Personally, he's a wretch -- a pill-popping, alcoholic lout who has few 
friends and can't stay faithful to one woman.  By his own admission, he 
hasn't grown up, is a failure at life, has no soul, and is a self-hating 
Jew.  According to another character, the whole purpose of his life is 
"sarcasm and orgasm."  He's thoroughly dislikable, and one of the film's 
failings is that it occasionally tries (unsuccessfully) to sympathize 
with him.  Harry is best viewed from a distance.
     Ostensibly, the film is about Harry's trip to upstate New York, 
where a college that expelled him as an undergraduate now wants to honor 
him as a distinguished alumnist.  At the same time, he's looking to 
overcome a severe case of writer's block.  Along with Cookie (Hazelle 
Goodman), a hooker he hired for the day; Richard (Bob Balaban), a friend 
with a bad heart; and Hilly (Eric Lloyd), his son, Harry heads north.  
Along the way, we get to know him through both flashbacks of events from 
his life and anecdotes from his books, which are really just different 
flashbacks with other actors playing identical parts.  For example, Demi 
Moore plays Harry's second wife in the excerpts from his novels, while 
Kirstie Alley plays the same character in "real life".  Harry even has 
two fictional stand-ins for himself, played by Richard Benjamin and 
Stanley Tucci.
     All this might sound confusing, but it's really not.  Allen's 
script isn't linear, but it isn't difficult to piece together.  The 
intent is to amuse, not to confuse.  However, aside from piquing the 
viewer's curiosity about how much of Allen is in Harry, there's not a 
whole lot of depth to DECONSTRUCTING HARRY.  It's a movie of moments, 
some of which are side-splittingly funny.  Arguably, this is the most 
uproarious comedy that Allen has ever done.  The dialogue is almost 
always as brilliant and witty as it is profane.  There are as many 
genuinely funny one-liners here as in any other movie this year.  I 
won't go into detail describing my favorite scenes, but one offers a 
visit from Death, another includes an elevator ride into Hell (where the 
women are topless, the band plays "Sing Sing Sing (with a Swing)", and 
Billy Crystal runs the place), and a third features a blind grandmother. 
Then there's Robin Williams, who, in a cameo, has never been so 
delightfully out of focus.
     DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is an uneven piece of work, but the high level 
of comedy covers up many of the rough spots.  Allen fans won't confuse 
this latest outing with the likes of THE PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO, ANNIE 
HALL, or CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS, but it's good to know that the 
director can still poke fun at himself, despite his tarnished image.  We 
may never know how much of this film is pure fiction and how much is 
self-analysis, but one thing is for sure -- once the laughter has 
subsided and the end credits have rolled, audience members will begin 
deconstructing Woody.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 26 December 1997 for $8 with Wendy and Tony G. at the Paramus
Picture Show, of all places. 
Well, I should say right off that bat that despite two major objections, I
really enjoyed this movie. I should also add that there is so much going
on that I almost feel like I ought to see it a second time. 
*Deconstructing Harry* blurs the lines between the real lives of writer
Harry Block (Woody Allen) and the people in his life, and the characters
in his stories that are based on them. So, the pill-popping, sex-obsessed
Harry Block is also glimpsed in Bob, Ken (Richard Benjamin), Harvey
(Tobey Maguire), Paul (Stanley Tucci), and Mel (Robin Williams). 
Harry has a few ex-wives and ex-girlfriends who cannot deal with him and
his obsession with sex. His latest book details how he cheated on his wife
with her sister, and the latter shows up at his house ready to shoot him
for his thinly disguised portrayal of his betrayals. He has also been
invited to his alma mater, and--getting desperate--he winds up inviting
Cookie (Hazelle Goodman) to accompany him, just as she is. Mind you, she
is the prostitute dressed in a two-piece pink leather outfit who the night 
before Harry ordered to tie him up, beat him, and give him a blowjob.
Along the way, he brings an old friend, and his son. Throughout this
diegesis are flashes from his works of fiction, and flashbacks to Harry's
real life, and his imagination. 
All of this could be a frightening mish-mash, but Woody Allen has managed
to pull it all together rather well. This format also allows him to bring
out some hilarious and fantastic moments. Robin Williams is the actor who
is literally out of focus (a wonderful cinematic effect) and expects his
family to adjust to the distortion he has become. Joan, the psychiatrist,
has a hilarious scene in which she constantly leaves a patient so she can
yell at Harry in the next room for cheating on her. The visit to Ha Harry's
orthodox Jewish sister and brother-in-law. Two older women who share a
"dark secret" at a 1976 Bar Mitzvah reception with a Star Wars theme. 
There are many funny moments in *Deconstructing Harry* that make it worth
seeing. 
The performances are also very memorable, especially the womens'.
Actresses as disparate as Judy Davis and Kirstie Alley and Demi Moore
really stand out. The women suffer the brunt of Harry's behavior, and that
makes them a lot more interesting than the men.
The denouement of *Deconstructing Harry* does not measure up to the movie,
but that's okay, since the journey is more illuminating than the
destination. Also, the use of really hateful, foul language (the "C word"
is used more than once) is really beneath someone as smart as Woody Allen.
While it amplifies the misogyny of Harry, that misogyny is evident without
it. Some people would say it's brave of him to use this sort of language,
but I think it's an offensive easy way out. 
My other main objection is the heralding of the wonderful event--that
Woody has finally given a major role to a black actor. Hazelle Goodman is
absolutely hilarious, but she is playing the prostitute, Cookie! That the
"first major role for an black actor" in a Woody Allen movie is that of a
prostitute is insulting and a stereotype. A black actor could just as
easily have played one of Harry's friends in this movie, and been just as
important. Allen is often criticized that there are no black people in his
movies. The defense has been that the social class he depicts don't have
any interaction with blacks (which is hard to believe); so the only one
that gets this new status is a hooker?
Overall, *Deconstructing Harry* is the strongest movie Allen has put out
in years. The familiar themes of relationships, self-discovery,
self-hating Jews, atheism, are all here and are very entertaining. It's
hard not to disconnect Allen's movies from his real life, but either way,
it's an enjoyable, intelligent romp. 
Written and directed by Woody Allen cinematography by Carlo Di Palma, and
production design by Santo Loquasto. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Six shrinks later, three wives down the line, and I still can't
get my life together," Harry Block tells his psychiatrist in
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY.  Woody Allen, playing Harry as a parody of
himself, is back.  With his usual self-deprecating humor, he spends
copious time with his shrink, and, as always, he obsesses over sex.  At
his son's grade school, Harry advises his little boy, "The two most
important things are the work that you choose and sex."
     Woody surrounds himself with a cornucopia of friends (Kirstie
Alley, Richard Benjamin, Eric Bogosian, Billy Crystal, Judy Davis,
Mariel Hemingway, Amy Irving, Julie Kavner, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Demi
Moore, Elisabeth Shue, Stanley Tucci and Robin Williams among
others),creating too much of a distraction as these excellent actors
parade through the movie.  The jumbled result is a frequently humorous
show -- although there are not as many big laughs as in most Allen
films -- that disappoints as often as it surprises.  Still, a mediocre
Woody Allen comedy is better than the best films of some directors.
     As in THE PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO, Allen plays games with reality and
fiction and upsets the time-space continuum.  Harry Block is a writer
of semi-autobiographical tales.  In one of the more interesting twists,
most of the roles in the picture are played by two characters.  There
are the movie's main characters and the ones from Harry's book and
short stories, who in turn are modeled on the main characters.
     To complicate things further, Harry's stories constantly mock
Woody Allen's recent troubles.  Harry describes himself, for example,
as "a guy who can't function well in life but can in art."  Or as his
psychiatrist tells him, "You expect the world to adapt to the
distortion you've become."
     DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is filled with vignettes of comedic anger,
and, like most of Allen's works, it pokes fun at his fellow Jews.
After several dozen movies, most of Allen's characters seem to be
repeats from his previous movies.  The two fresh ones this time are
newcomer Hazelle Goodman's black hooker role and Robin Williams's fuzzy
part.
     Robin Williams plays a actor named Mel, who gets "soft" during the
filming of a movie.  He gets out of focus, and there is nothing they
can do to sharpen him up again.  ("Daddy's out of focus, Daddy's out of
focus," his son taunts him.)
     Woody looks older and more tired than ever in DECONSTRUCTING
HARRY, but he can still turn a phrase and create an unforgettable
image.  Although his recreation of hell with Billy Crystal as the devil
shows no spark of creativity, his rendering of a Bar Mitzvah with a
STAR WARS theme does.
     The lightweight story eventually runs out of gas and stops, but it
provides little to take away other than some fleeting humor.  Just a
year ago, Woody's EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU proved that Woody still
possesses his genius.  Let's hope for better things next time from
Woody than DECONSTRUCTING HARRY.
     DECONSTRUCTING HARRY runs 1:35.  The film is rated R for
profanity, sex, brief nudity and some dope smoking.  It would be fine
for older teenagers.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Woody Allen
Cast: Woody Allen, Billy Crystal, Demi Moore, Robin Williams, Judy
Davis, Elisabeth Shue, kirstie Alley, Bob
Balaban, Richard Benjamin, Eric Bogosian, Hazelle Goodman, Mariel
Hemingway, Amy Irving, Julie Kavner,
Caroline Aaron, Eric Lloyd, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Tobey Maguire, Stanley
Tucci
Rated R: Language, sex, nudity
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    I don't know a single person that doesn't think that Woody Allen is
annoying. I, myself, am one of those
people. I think he is intensely annoying. I watch him jitter and shake
around the screen, spewing
half-sentences like a broken verbal machine gun, with those black little
eyes magnified behind those
ridiculously thick glasses, and I wonder why I repeatedly go to see the
films that he writes, directs, and
stars in. It doesn't take me long to figure it out--he's really funny.
That's usually what it comes down to.
Maybe the character he plays isn't always really funny, but his
supporting characters are so funny, and the
situations are absolutely hilarious.
    Deconstructing Harry is his latest film, and I imagine that to
obtain complete enjoyment, one should know
Woody Allen pretty well. I, for one, do not--I have not seen a lot of
his films (I think this marks the fourth
or fifth), and what I know of him outside of his work is just what I
read in the tabloids and Entertainment
Weekly. But I know that this film is one big stab at himself, and I can
assume that it is successful. But like
most of his films, this one is successful because of the numerous
interesting characters, and the witty,
sharp, Woody Allen humor. What this film seems to have that his others
do not is a jagged edge, a kind of
licentious and hateful quality, an element present simply to make more
fun of himself.
    It's about Harry Block (Allen), a godless, sex-crazed author who, at
the time of the film, is in complete
disarray. He's just written a book that gives up the secrets of some of
his closest friends and ex-girlfriends,
and none of them are particularly happy with the situation. He's never
allowed to see his kid, his parents
have all but disowned him, his sister and her husband look down upon him
because he isn't a true Jewish
man, and so forth. On top of all this, he can't get motivated to write
anything significant, so his life is on
hold.
    The film is kind of a journey for Harry to understand himself, or
maybe make himself better, should he
reach the point of caring about himself. It leads to a situation in
which he's driving in a Volvo with a
hooker and a corpse, on his way to get honored by the school which
expelled him. Like all of Allen's
films, he has a huge cast. It's nearly distractingly large, with almost
every part filled up by a big-name star.
Most of the women turn in the best performances, with genuinely funny
moments delivered by Judy Davis,
Kirstie Alley, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, and Demi Moore. If you're familiar
with Allen's films, then you'll know
what to expect--it's the same kind of humor, pacing, and mood to which
we're all accustomed in his
movies.
    This one, however, seems to suffer from a peculiar storytelling
technique. Because of the nature of the
story, Harry frequently relives pieces of short stories that he has
written; most of them star a guy thinly
disguised as himself, and tells a true story. He remembers one of the
first stories he wrote, about his first
encounter with a prostitute. Another story he remembers is one in which
he goes to hell to save the woman
he loves. Throughout the film, the action also switches to a different
cast doing the exact same thing,
which is meant to represent the book which he has just written (the one
that everyone is upset at him for).
If my explanation of this is confusing, then I'm doing my job--it is
also rather confusing in the film. I didn't
put the pieces together until the last quarter of the movie. It's really
not that obvious, nor is Allen's reason
for doing it (though I imagine if you're familiar with all of his work
then there is something here to give you
a hint). The flashbacks sure are funny, though.
    Towards the end, he actually meets the character that he created,
his alter-ego, and this individual gives
Harry all kinds of advice. I like the idea (look into your writing for
advice), and the central idea behind his
character--he can function in the artistic world but not in the
realistic world--is a fascinating one.
Ultimately, the film aside from the comedy works because Allen really
thought about his concepts and
materialized them effectively (although the flashbacks to his stories
could have been less confusing).
Whether you love him or hate him, you're likely to enjoy Deconstructing
Harry. And if you know Allen
really well, you'll probably get a lot more out of the film. As for me,
it proved to make a worthwhile
evening of entertainment, even if though is about a godless, sex-crazed
author in complete disarray.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DECONSTRUCTING HARRY (director: Woody Allen; cast: Woody Allen (Harry
Block), Judy Davis (Lucy), Elisabeth Shue (Fay), Kirstie Alley (Joan),
Bob Balaban (Richard), Hazelle Goodman (Cookie), Eric Lloyd (Hilly),
Billy Crystal (Larry), Richard Benjamin (Ken), Demi Moore (Helen), Robin
Williams (Mel), Caroline Aaron (Doris), Mariel Hemingway (Beth
Kramer),Tobey Maguire(Harvey Stern), Julia Louis-Dreyfus (Leslie),Amy
Irving (Jane), 1997)
Woody Allen analyzes himself again on film, this time playing a
womanizer writer, married three times, unabashedly childish in
relationships, calling himself a louse and someone who must devour
women. He is self-serving, he presents here a bitter picture about
romance, but he mainly pokes fun at either himself or his
fictionalized-self, going through his wide range of jokebook material on
Jewish neurotics, that is sometimes devilishly funny, sometimes as flat
as matzoh, and sometimes done in just plain bad taste. This
ill-conceived film has its funny moments, if one can get through Woody's
hubris and his putz-like mannerisms, that have a way of zinging you, as
if you were around a schmuck who couldn't stop, even for a second from
being who he is. But when I have given up all hope for this muddled
mish-mash to amount to anything worthwhile, the "putz" gets off some
acidly perceptive comments that go straight to the laugh belly. So what
are you gonna say? This is a Woody Allen movie, it is how he operates
best, and this one ranks somewhere in the middle of his oeuvre.
There are many stars that have cameos, and it works out well, they just
do their routines and fit right into this rambling story, especially
since it is safe to say that this is not a plot driven movie, in fact,
the plot is incidental to the movie, if there wasn't a plot this would
still be a movie about the neurotic behavior of Mr. Allen. So I find it
unnecessary to try and explain the plot fully, except to say that Woody
writes books, using material from his marriages, with the movie going
back and forth between Woody and his real life situation and the
characters he has in his book being played by different actors, for
instance Richard Benjamin is the Woody Allen character Harry, but with
still a different name from that of the book. All the characters in his
books are thinly disguised representatives of his real life movie
situation.
Robin Williams is hysterical in his cameo, as a man who is out of focus.
Billy Crystal's cameo takes him to hell, where he looks very suave,
fitting right in with the guy who invented aluminum siding.
Bob Balaban (Richard) and Hazelle Goodman (Cookie) have more expansive
roles, the former plays Woody's friend who thinks he is ill, as Woody
accompanies him to the hospital, where he is given a clean bill of
health, so that he can now accompany Woody on his trek upstate to get an
award for his writing achievements, from the same college that kicked
him out when he was a student there. He also pays the black hooker, he
just had service him, to come along to keep him company. He will also
include his son in this trek, whom he kidnaps because his ex-wife won't
change the day of Woody's right to visit the child, and he desperately
wants his kid to see his father being honored by the college. But
wouldn't you know it, on the car ride upstate to the college, Bob drops
dead. And on the way to the college he stops off to see his sister, with
the remainder of his crew, and trade ethnic insults with his sister,
where Woody is called by her a self-hating Jew.
The film is worth seeing for Woody's acerbic one-liners; such as: All
religions are just clubs. Tradition is the illusion of permanence. You
are the opposite of a paranoid-- you actually believe that people like
you. And there are numerous other wise-cracks, that hit the right spot.
So what's the big deal if the story is not so hot, and Woody is a
selfish-lout, don't kvetch, enjoy yourself, you don't have to be a
nihilist to get a few yuks from this film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Ok, Woody, we get it. As sad as that is to say, laughing at obvious
incarnations of Mr. Allen himself is just getting less and less appealing.
Perhaps a more blatant self-analysis than most, DECONSTRUCTING HARRY heads
nowhere fast, a common attribute to many Allen films, but never has the ride
been so dull.
A year after the wonderful EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU, which showed a fresh, and
yet more classic side to Woody Allen's film-making, DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is
here. It's the story of Harry Block (Allen), a writer whose novels are no more
than thinly disguised renditions of his personal life. Those who knew him most
intimately are making unauthorized pseudo-appearances in Harry's books, and
they are all greatly offended by what has unofficially-but-obviously been
revealed. Those most upset include Harry's ex-wife/ex-therapist Joan (Kirstie
Alley), and Joan's sister, Lucy (Judy Davis), whom we quickly learn was having
an affair with Harry at the time. The situation isn't helped any by the fact
that Woody's entire life has been libidinously centered and completely
unfaithful.
But now Harry has been invited to receive an honorary award from the school
that once expelled him, and trying to find someone to accompany him is proving
very difficult. When it comes down to it, this is really just an excuse to get
Harry to visit old friends, which is really just an excuse to replay old
memories, which is really just an excuse to allow Allen's self-catharsis to
take place. Luckily, Allen does have some interesting approaches to this
catharsis, and if it hadn't been for his less than standard direction, nothing
would have saved this film. Even with the same script, it could easily have
been downright awful. What makes this film as enjoyable as it is, which may
not be a lot, is the interesting blend between "real life" and the novelized
interpretations. We flip back and forth between the characters from Harry's
books and the people they parallel. One minute we're watching the fictional
Leslie (Julia Louis-Dreyfus), and the next, we're back to Lucy, all the while
the exact same story is being told. This, along with just a few very funny
moments, makes this film almost worthwhile, and for very adamant Woody Allen
fans, it may even be a blast.
If you're not an extreme fan of Allen, however, DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is likely
going to be a giant waste of time. If you're familiar with his work, you may
be surprised at the turn this film takes, including dialogue more reminiscent
of Andrew Dice Clay's uncensored standup comedy than classic Allen. The script
is heavily laced with profanity and vulgarity, even more obscene than Allen's
usual sex-obsessed works. This would be more uncomfortable to sit thru with
your mom than EVERYTHING YOU'VE ALWAYS WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT SEX, because at
least that film was handling those subjects with tactful humor, not just
throwing it out there so nonchalant. Such explicit dialogue is nothing new to
the world of movies, but it's never been so explored by Allen. Just be aware.
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is just another soapbox for Allen to proclaim his own
insecurities and philosophies about life. It's nothing new by any means, and
quite frankly, it's boring. Allen really seems convinced that we're anxious to
hear his side of everyone's story, but this overly self-indulgent film has
nothing to offer anyone, aside from Allen himself. The large cast of highly
recognizable actors are merely skimmed over, adding no real benefit to the
experience. Allen has never been one to create deep, rich, individual
characters; we're usually stuck with the same, fast-talking array of New
Yorkers. The only thing that changes is the *quantity* of these characters in
each film. In other words, a dozen or so great actors only give your eyes a
little more something to do.
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is worthy of two-and-a-half stars merely on the basis
that is was done very well. Of course, well-presented boredom is not much
better than mediocre boredom is it?

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Woody Allen is one of the most successful artist-directors in
Hollywood, but he is becoming less and less reliable as a filmmaker.
In his early years of film-making he mastered the simple comedy.  From
there he went into a second phase and took risks experimenting with
different approaches and styles.  Some of these work better than
others.  ZELIG and CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS are the work of a creative
and intelligent artist.  DECONSTRUCTING HARRY goes to the other extreme
and is a bizarre experiment demanding more of the viewer than it gives
back.
     Harry Block (Allen) has in his life only two drives.  He wants to
have sex with as many women as possible and when he makes a mess of his
life and those of his lovers he wants to retreat into his writing.  The
story of this static and highly unsympathetic character is told with a
number of often clumsy stylistic experiments. Perhaps the most
irritating device is to express the disjointedness of Harry's life by
editing Harry's scenes putting in cuts in the middle as if to show
missing time with something edited out.  As a writer, Harry puts his
friends into his books in the thinnest of disguises.  The film
dramatizes incidents from these supposed books and cuts between his
real story line and fragments from Harry's books with different actors
playing the real and fictional people in Harry's life.  These fragments
are frustrating in their lack of completion, but even more frustrating
is the bringing of the characters out of the fragments into scenes with
the real characters.  It is up to the viewer to keep track not just who
is fictional and who is real but also to keep straight who is the
fictional doppelganger of which real person.  If that sounds
complicated, it is.  Then as another device in one of the stories, an
actor seems to have the peculiar property that he has gone out of focus
and can only be seen in blurry image.  Harry sees this as a metaphor
for his own condition and himself goes blurry for a short time.  As if
these touches did not create sufficient confusion, the story is told
out of chronological order.  If Allen were giving the audience a story
that was worth decoding, any and all of these stylistic touches could
be excusable.  But Allen puts the audience through all of this to give
us a portrait of Harry Block who is a selfish manipulator who is not
worth the effort to understand.
     DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is set at a time when Harry's old college,
the one that expelled him when he attended it, wants now to honor him
for a lifetime of writing achievement.  Harry is searching among his
friends to find one who will go with him.  Just why someone who is so
unwilling to commit to a relationship with anyone suddenly needs the
support of someone else is unclear.  Harry tries his current girl
friend Fay (Elizabeth Shue) only to find that she is about to marry
Harry's old friend Larry (Billy Crystal).  Block would like his son
Hilly (Eric Lloyd) to accompany him, but Hilly's mother, previously
first Harry's psychiatrist and more recently his wife, refuses to let
her son see his father.  Another friend Richard (Bob Balaban) would go
but has health problems.  Harry also considers bringing a prostitute
Cookie (Hazel Goodman).  It is interesting that Allen should introduce
another likable prostitute so soon after MIGHTY APHRODITE, but Cookie
is considerably different--black and a lot brighter than Mira Sorvino's
character in the previous film.
     While the comedy sequences are never complete, a few are elaborate
and some quite funny.  The centerpiece of the film is a journey into
Hell with Allen playing a sort of Orpheus rescuing Fay from the
clutches of the Devil, who looks a lot like Larry.  That story also is
left uncompleted, perhaps to show Harry's unwillingness to commit even
to telling a story.  The linchpin that was needed to tie together the
stylistic quirks of this film was a central character who changes and
who gives us something about which to care.  That character is patently
not the one Allen creates in Harry Block and not the characters around
Harry as seen through his acerbic eyes.  Allen can do much better than
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY.  I rate it a 3 on the 0 to 10 scale and a -1 on
the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Fine Line Features
 Director:  Woody Allen
 Writer: Woody Allen 
 Cast: Caroline Aaron, Woody Allen, Kirstie Alley, Bob
Balaban, Richard Benjamin, Eric Bogosian, Billy Crystal, Judy
Davis, Hazelle Goodman, Mariel Hemingway, Amy Irving,
Julie Kavner, Eric Lloyd, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Tobey Maguire,
Demi Moore, Elisabeth Shue, Stanley Tucci, Robin Williams,
Annette Arnold, Philip Bosco, Stephanie Roth, Gene Saks
   "I'm the worst person in the world," moans Woody Allen's
character, Harry Block, in Mr. Allen's latest exploration of the
psyche, "Deconstructing Harry."  When challenged by the
view that Hitler was worse, Block thinks it over briefly and
retorts, "Well, yes, after Hitler, Goebbels and Goering--I'm the
fourth worst person in the world."  That one-liner, one of the
many laughs in this briskly paced dark comedy about a guy
who never grew up, raises the tantalizing issue: Just how
much of the movie is art, and how much is Woody's own life? 
The point is exploited by the issue of "Time Out" magazine,
which hit the newsstands one week before the opening of the
film.  While Allen does mull over some real-life events in
"Harry"--his many divorces and plethora of psychiatrists--we
want to know: is this guy who has so frequently turned
nebbishness into entertainment really so down on himself?  It
appears so, that is, if you believe another gem from the lips of
Harry Block, "Writing and entertaining people is not enough."  
   Backed up by a stellar cast made up largely of Friends of
Woody, "Deconstructing Harry" examines the tribulations of a
fifty-something guy (Allen is himself 62) who is as obsessed
with sex as a teenager with a library of Playboys.  He simply
cannot pass an attractive woman without imagining what
physical intimacy would be like with her.  He is so consumed
by its fires that he has writers' block--a point made doubly
clear by her very name.  Still, he has churned out some
decent manuscripts in the past and so the college he
attended decades earlier has decided to honor him.  No
matter that the university expelled him at one point for giving
the dean an enema.  Harry Block has become its golden boy
and now, despite his many conquests, he seems unable to
find someone to join him socially on that day.  Ultimately he
digs up a motley crew made up of his son Hilly (Eric Lloyd
whom he has "kidnapped" because the boy's mom Joan
(Kirstie Alley) will not permit him to go; his friend Richard (Bob
Balaban); and a hooker, Cookie (Hazelle Goodman) with
whom he had spent the previous night.  Off goes Harry Block
in his car in a theme that brings to mind  "Wild Strawberries,"
Ingmar Bergman's 1957 drama about a Stockholm professor
who reviews his life's disappointments while traveling to a
university to receive honors.
   As in Luigi Pirandello's "Six Characters in Search of an
Author," Woody Allen's latest movie features a continuous
interplay of real-life people with fictional folks created by Harry
Block in his novels.  It's no wonder, then, that we see the
author as a younger person in the fanciful Ken (Richard
Benjamin), who grabs another man's wife during a Sunday
barbeque and has a quick round of sex with her in the
kitchen, just meters away from the woman's husband.  (In one
of the movie's more hilarious scenes the blind grandma
suddenly enters the room while the couple are in flagrante
and misinterprets Ken's rapturous outbursts as agreements
with some of her statements.) Harry proceeds to take us
around and around the block to introduce others in his life,
others who are so thinly disguised that he is confronted by a
furious and comically seething Lucy (Judy Davis), one of the
author's flames, who goes ballistic at the author for revealing
all.
   "I create my own universe," says Block, and "I make
everybody suffer and turn it into literature."  And we the
audience profit mightily from the writer's own dysfunctional life
as he lays on invention after delightful fabrication to entertain
his loyal followers in their theater seats.  Lacerating others
and himself alike, he torments his sister Doris (Caroline
Aaron), whom he visits after a four-year hiatus, spoofing her
decision to become a truly practicing Jew--saving some prize
comments for her Orthodox husband Burt (Eric Bogosian). 
Block, whose deity is science, exclaims, "Between Pope and
air conditioning, I'll take air conditioning."   To his old friend
Larry (Billy Crystal), who steals Block's girl friend Fay
(Elisabeth Shue), he offers the fires of hell--which the camera
displays to us in all its incendiary splendor.
   "Deconstructing Harry" features some particularly strong
roles for women, with Kirstie Alley coming across with
exquisite humor as a former wife, a psychoanalyst, who
frequently interrupts a session with a client to verbally abuse
the poor Block and throw him out of the house.
   We learn the meaning of the title only as the story comes to
a close, as one appreciative woman who shows up for the
college honors ceremony advises Block, "Your stories are
sad, but I like to deconstruct them because they're happy
underneath." Does this mean that Woody Allen himself, who
in real life has been on the couch for decades, has a glimmer
of awareness that underneath it all he really is a happy man? 
It must might be that he finally accepts the counsel of another
dignitary that "to be alive is to be happy."
   "Deconstructing Harry" emphasizes Susan E. Morse's sharp
editing.  Morse flashes backwards and forwards seamlessly,
making the story line absolutely clear, and not infrequently
interrupts jump-cuts a scene to underscore the title
character's uneven emotional life.  Allen is in his typical role
as the confused, unhappy nerd, though he seems to succeed
in the sexual area--a point which unfortunately undercuts any
criticism of his immaturity.  Robin Williams performs well as
one of Block's alter egos, a guy who is literally out of focus
(Carlo Di Palma's camera makes the man authentically
blurred), with Judy Davis and Kirstie Alley standing out as
exceptionally whimsical.  
   One day after screening the movie I happened to listen to
Gary Null's talk show on WBAI-FM.  Null laced into those of
us who insist on being martyrs, people who refuse to believe
that life is within their control.  "We see Woody Allen movies
about dysfunctional people as though there would be
something wrong with watching a happy family at work,"
complains the show's host.  Sorry, Mr. Null, but the
sophisticated among us who love anything touched by Woody
Allen are no longer amused by stories of the Brady family. 
Humor derives to a great extent from the suffering of others. 
We laugh at entertainers who slip in banana peels, not at
those who walk calmly down the street without a care in the
world.  "Deconstructing Harry," brimming with oddball, often
hilariously damaged people, should convince Mr. Allen that
writing and entertaining us with such humanity is absolutely
enough.  Rated R.  Running Time: 98 minutes.  (C) 1997
Harvey Karten

Author
James Sanford
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY
(Fine Line Features)
Directed by Woody Allen
 After such recent frothy forays as "Everyone Says I Love You" and "Mighty
Aphrodite," it comes as a shock to see Woody Allen deliver "Deconstructing
Harry," a vicious black comedy that calls to mind such earlier Allen as
"Crimes and Misdemeanors" and "Stardust Memories." Set against those two,
"Harry" has a more singular focus than "Crimes" and is a much more
successful examination of a writer's psyche than "Stardust." By turns
clever, devestating, bitter and delightful, this challenging piece of work
is easily one of Allen's most mature efforts to date.
 It also offers him an opportunity to play one of his least sympathetic
characters. Harry Block is a self-loathing post-middle-age novelist whose
fiction recalls the work of Philip Roth. But Harry has also written a savage
roman a clef about the faithless, superficial types in his life. "You take
everyone's suffering and turn it into gold!" accuses Lucy (Judy Davis), one
of Harry's several neurotic ex-lovers. Unable to cope with the demands of
loving relationships any longer, Harry now hires prostitutes, such as the
streetwise Cookie Williams (the delightful Hazelle Goodman), a weary vixen
in pink spandex cut-offs and a tie-dyed tank-top who Harry recruits as his
date for a ceremony his former college --he was thrown out before
graduation, so it's not technically his alma mater-- is holding to honor
him.
 Harry doesn't feel much like celebrating, however, since he's suffering
from crippling writer's block. During the course of the film, often at
unexpected moments, Harry's stories come to life and we can see for
ourselves how Harry combined personality traits from both a chilly ex-wife
(a knockout Kirstie Alley) and his rigidly religious sister (Caroline Aaron)
to create the character of Helen, who describes herself as "the shrewish
Jewish hybrid," and is marvelously played by an imaginatively cast Demi
Moore. Harry's isolationism also comes through in his tale of a movie actor
(Robin Williams) who realizes he's somehow become permanently out-of-focus,
and is destined to drift through life as a blur. "Deconstructing Harry"
features many such inspired bits.
 It also continues Allen's experimentation with offbeat camerawork and
editing. He's previously utilized a weaving hand-held camera in "Husbands
and Wives" and attempted Bergmanesque imagery in "Interiors" and
"September," and in "Harry," he tries out the kind of jump-cut editing
popularized by Godard and Truffaut in such films as "Breathless" and "Shoot
The Piano Player." Though the technique sometimes comes off as slightly
self-conscious, it effectively points up Harry's fragmented, chaotic world.
 More off-putting to some of Allen's fans may be the harshness of the
language used by many of the characters, although again, it's perfectly in
keeping with the rage most of these people are feeling. In previous films,
Allen concentrated on the lighter side of divorce: When Meryl Streep left
him and wrote a tell-all book about their failed marriage in "Manhattan,"
Allen played the idea for easy laughs. But Harry's thinly veiled portraits
of his friends and family do some real damage and almost inspire one of his
subjects to kill him. The humor cuts deeper and the laughter is sometimes
tinged with a gasp of disbelief. The brilliance of  "Deconstructing Harry"
lies in Allen's deft blending of its many tones: sardonic,  sarcastic and
sentimental.

Author
Kevin W. Welch
Woody Allen's films have been an acquired taste for a while now and it's
always tempting to think this has something to do with the man himself.
Deconstructing Harry makes the argument that both man and films have become
too hard to take. Everybody knows Allen's personal problems; given some of
the obsessions of this film, a viewer might well wonder, Why bother? If you
do bother, though, you get a surprisingly tough-minded analysis of the
off-the-shelf Woody Allen character.
Harry Block is a successful novelist in the literary sense of the word
(i.e., he doesn't write romance novels like Jack Nicholson's Melvin Udall
in As Good as It Gets). He's a cruddy person all the way through, whose
success comes from rewriting his life as "thinly disguised" fiction. What a
life. Harry has three ex-wives, an alienated half-sister, a long, long
string of hookers and an obsession with oral sex. Harry Block is the most
needy, manipulative, selfish bastard in the whole world. He's as nutty as
Melvin Udall, but Melvin's obsessive-compulsion is downright cuddly next to
Harry's less specific disorder. At least Melvin insults people in new and
original ways; Harry just whines and wheedles and nags and never
understands for a second what it must be like to be anyone but Harry Block.
You get sick of him very fast, and that's the point.
Harry is the end of the line for the classic Woody Allen neurotic Jewish
intellectual. They've all been self-obsessed creeps who date women half
their age, but luckily, they've all had moorings--a job or a supportive
family or something. Harry has nothing but his work (and the writing life
is not the same thing as a job) and unfortunately his work consists mostly
of sitting in a room by himself making up stuff. When you look at it this
way, the world really does revolve around Harry.
The movie has a lot of actors because many of the characters appear twice,
once as fiction, once as reality. This is a gimmick that works, in that it
shows how Harry's mind functions. Far from a distraction, the intercuts
between fiction and real life are good story telling and necessary for
setting up the ending. The technique is disorienting at times, but then
it's probably disorienting just being Harry Block.
There is a plot to all this, involving an award that Harry receives from
the upstate college which expelled him years earlier, and which he attends
with an acquaintance, a hooker and his young son, whom he kidnaps
(thinking, How can it be kidnapping when it's your own son). It all turns
out badly of course. Jack Nicholson found redemption at the end in a the
arms of a woman half his age. Harry Block winds up in a solipsistic
nightmare, which is about where he belongs.
Deconstructing Harry is raw and vicious; there's even a little gun play.
The sordid sexuality and the language really make this an atypical Woody
Allen film. There are words here that you seldom hear in a movie, even
these days, and it wouldn't be surprising if Deconstructing Harry flirted
with an NC-17.
It's a tough movie to take, because of it's uncompromising and relentless
approach to its subject. It lost the critics, perhaps unfairly. Look at it
this way--everyone knows the standard rap on the stock Woody Allen
character. Woody Allen is just jumping in with the newest and harshest rap
of all.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Woody Allen's last couple of movies lacked bite and true comic spirit, and I
had the feeling his work was going to continue along the lighter side, as in
"Everyone Says I Love You." Now with the shockingly disturbing and provocative
"Deconstructing Harry," he has created one of his most lacerating, uneven yet
truthful comedy-dramas ever. 
Woody Allen plays a successful author named Harry Block who's currently facing
writer's block on his latest novel. While he's creatively challenged, Harry
loves to sleep with any woman he meets, has affairs with girlfriends and wives,
and finds a kinky pleasure in sleeping with prostitutes. At one point, he asks
one particular prostitute (Hazelle Goodman) to tie him up, beat him, and "give
him a blow job." Harry also has a knack for pills and whiskey and little else -
all there is his art that feeds his soul, or what he has left of it. 
Harry's life is remarkably similar to his novel. The characters he creates are
exaggerated figments of people he was once close to (As a counterpoint to his
life, Woody dramatizes the real-life characters in his book by having different
actors). His Jewish sister and brother-in-law (played by Caroline Aaron and
Eric Bogosian) are depicted as hateful denizens in his book yet they are not
that different in reality. Harry also had an affair with his ex-wife's sister
(Judy Davis) who threatens to kill him after threatening to commit suicide.
They are hilariously depicted in his book as lovers (played by Richard Benjamin
and Julia Louis-Dreyfus) who have sex in front of his half-blind grandmother!
              "Deconstructing Harry" is an unusual experiment for Woody Allen
because he actually dissects himself and his life through his art and through
his relationships. One can argue that he has done that with every film he's
made, but what is most unusual is how rough Woody is on himself - for the first
time in his career, he curses, and talks about sex in graphic detail. He also
curses at his ex-wives (Kirstie Alley, Amy Irving) who are always yelling at
him for his numerous affairs and for how they are depicted in his novel! The
only sweet relationship he has is with a lovely fan (Elisabeth Shue) who's
about to marry Harry's best friend (Billy Crystal) who may be the Devil
himself! 
Woody also has a grand time including scenes from Harry's former novels. There
is one where different kinds of Jewish stereotypes are depicted in relation to
Harry's family, such as the perfectly cast Demi Moore as a psychotherapist who
"sees true beauty and meaning" in Judaism. Then there are the Jewish parties
where the guests are dressed as Darth Vader and the waiters as stormtroopers!
How about his uncle who may killed his first wife and eaten her! And then
there's Woody's greatest comic invention since "Zelig" called "The Actor," a
character (Robin Williams) who is always out of focus!
"Deconstructing Harry" juggles a lot of characters and situations and throws
them up in the air with great abandon. Woody Allen's visual style is more
complex since there are less long takes and lots of jump cuts to emphasize
Harry's own dissection of his life and the others around him. The film doesn't
always succeed nor is he as deconstructive of Harry as he should be, but his
theme of how an artist's work is more significant than his life is superbly
realized. "Deconstructing Harry" is not as consistently hilarious as his
earlier films, and maybe it isn't meant to be. It is, however, as daring,
courageous, darkly comic and outrageous a self-portrait as I've seen in a long
time. 
For more reviews, check otu JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with comments, suggestions or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or
jerry@movieluver.com 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Woody Allen, Judy Davis, Elizabeth Shue, Kirstie Alley, Bob
Balaban, Hazelle Goodman, Eric Lloyd, Billy Crystal, Richard Benjamin,
Demi Moore, Julie Louis-Dreyfus, Stanley Tucci, Robin Williams Director:
Woody Allen
Screenplay: Woody Allen
In this Umpteenth episode of the Life and Trials of Woody Allen, he
shouts his personal views about life, hell and Judaism for the world to
hear. There is no holding back, no matter how much you disagree with
him. When you watch this movie from start to finish, you have to listen
to him whine about this, that and the other. Some of it will be funny,
but most of it  is  tedious.
I enjoyed Allen's last two ventures into movie making - MIGHTY APHRODITE
and EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU. I felt that at last, Woody Allen was
becoming more commercial and palatable to the general public. In
DECONSTRUCTING, Woody tries to weave the tale of a man's life, his life,
through characters in his novels that are based on characters in
reality. This is an interesting approach, but can get annoying when one
is trying to match a novel character to the corresponding character in
real life, especially with constant flipping about. The general rule of
thumb is, the character in the novels are usually the better looking
ones ie Demi Moore\Kirsty Alley; Julia Louis Dreyfus\Judy Davis etc
Surprisingly, this is also one of Woody's most uninhibited movies with
plenty of casual sex, oral sex, writhing naked bodies (in hell), which
is too liberal for my taste. But hey this is a man who finds it
acceptable to bed an adopted daughter, so what can I say. His rant about
Judaism will no doubt shock and dismay some Jews, but this is a topic
that's too hot to handle, so I'll just say Shalom'. The script is well
written, the sentences wonderfully constructed and one can even find a
progressive chain of thought somewhere in this Academy nominated script,
but when Woody gets personal, he really let's himself go and the world
may not be ready for such an overly-progressive thinker.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Kevin Patterson
For his latest film "Deconstructing Harry," Woody Allen assumes the
personality of Harry Block, a writer and a truly repulsive human being.
Harry's success as a writer is due largely to his ability to take his
obsessions with sex and his numerous extramarital affairs and turn them into
stories. He is cynical and unpleasant to just about everyone, and he knows it.
He even tells women to keep their distance from him emotionally, because in
his mind he is the "worst person who ever lived." This is tough material, to
be sure, and at times it seems to get the better of Allen.
Allen develops the story in non-linear order, with numerous flashbacks to past
incidents in Harry's life as well as on-screen presentations of the
semi-autobiographical stories that he has written. At times, the characters
from these stories, slightly altered from their real-life models, appear and
talk to him. He also makes use of a camera technique whereby there are quick
cuts within the same scene, so that Harry is cut off in the middle of a
sentence, for example, but then we see him in the same place but in a slightly
different posture and talking about something else. While this effect helped
to capture Harry's various quirks and gestures at times, it's frankly kind of
annoying after a while.
And perhaps that's the best way to describe this movie as a whole - frankly
kind of annoying after a while. Allen devotes the film to the study of a
thoroughly unlikeable character. This does not make the film bad in and of
itself, but somehow it just doesn't carry enough impact to justify asking the
audience to swallow such a large amount of obnoxious behavior. A film can have
an unsympathetic protagonist and still deliver as a character study, but it
has to get inside the person's head somehow and allow the audience to relate
to the character. Or it can have an underlying theme that is monumental enough
that the characters aren't so important. Neither of these things happen in
"Deconstructing Harry"; Allen occasionally introduces an element of genuine
pathos to Harry's situation in that he seems defeated by his own insecurities
and obsessions, but the way he handles it is so repellent that I mostly just
wanted the guy to shut up and go away. And the theme - that a bad person can
create good art - isn't striking enough to carry the movie by itself.
Does it still work as a comedy? Well, sort of. Here we have the other problem
with this movie, namely that most of the other characters are reduced to the
level of sitcom dimwits. Allen might have gotten away with the
characterization of Harry Block if he had provided a more easily accessible
secondary character, but he doesn't do that either. One of his ex-wives, for
example, is his former shrink, and when their marriage breaks up she
interrupts her sessions with another patient to step into the next room where
he is waiting and shout obscenities at him. Later, there seems to be a real
contrast between Harry and the generosity of the newlyweds Larry (Billy
Crystal) and Faye (Elisabeth Shue), who come to bail him out of prison just
before their honeymoon. Then Faye inexplicably chooses this moment to mention
that she once slept with her gynecologist, and as a result she seems like just
another sex-obsessed twit.
Granted, these moments are still funny at a basic level, and there are a few
moments of truly inspired lunacy (such as when Robin Williams's character
suddenly becomes "out of focus" on the screen). There are, however, just as
many scenes where we just sit and watch Harry treat other people like dirt,
but not in a way that reveals anything new about him as a person. The first
fifteen minutes of this film, for example, are quite repulsive and almost
unbearably tedious; the people sitting behind me were considering walking out,
and while it does get somewhat better after that, I can't say I would have
blamed them.
I am not saying that characters always have to be pleasant, nor am I even
saying that Allen should not be allowed to make a movie that suggests that all
human beings are neurotic and preoccupied with sex, although I would seriously
doubt the validity of such a statement. I am saying, however, that the viewer
should be given some way to relate to (though not necessarily empathize with)
the characters on screen. Aside from the few moments of revealing insight into
the mind of Harry Block, "Deconstructing Harry" is not much more than a
psychological freak show: we are momentarily shocked at what we see,
momentarily amused at the comic moments, and momentarily intrigued that Allen
took on such abrasive material. After that, the movie is over, and it's out of
sight, out of mind.

Author
Andy Wright
Deserves Recognition for: Making me laugh hard enough to almost 
completely obliterate all memories of Shadows and Fog.
Capsule Review:
    I'm going to go out on a limb here and call this consistently 
hilarious, and surprisingly raw (Has Soon-Yi been bringing home Kevin 
Smith videos or something?) look at the thin line between fiction and 
plagiarism Woody Allen's most satisfying film since Annie Hall. Allen, 
even more neurotic and self-loathing than usual, plays a successful 
author catching hell from both the people around him and their thinly 
veiled fictional counterparts. (The all-too-brief vignettes that we get 
to see of his writing contains some of Allen's finest absurdist humor 
since Bananas, including a Star Wars themed bar mitzvah that made me 
briefly consider changing my religion.)
    As usual, Woody is backed by some stellar talent, including 
Julia-Louise Dreyfuss, Mariel Hemmingway in a sly reversal of her 
Manhattan role, a surprisingly capable Demi Moore, and the wondrous Judi 
Davis, who once again proves that no other actor can make a 10-or-12 
letter obscenity detonate off the screen quite the way she can. Harry 
may shock some long-time Allen viewers by its sheer mean-spiritedness, 
but it's a quality that seems to have sprung the director from the 
stale complacency that's marred much of his recent work. As long as he 
can stay away from the Bergman influence for a while, this bodes well 
for The Woodman's cinematic future.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Author
Omar Odeh
Good news: Woody Allen's back. Despite an embarassingly humble release
pattern, here in the capital, Allen's new film Deconstructing Harry is
one of the best of the year. It chronicles life history, more or less,
of a New York novelist of jewish origin. This description is unfairly
simple, however, since ultimately this loose story serves only as a
premise for Allen to launch a savage social critique, backed by deft
casting and narrative technique. The film has been characterised as
everything from 'irresponsibly sexist' to 'embarassingly
revealing'. This is perhaps hardly surprising in view of the
technocratic lynching Allen received in the media several years ago.
Ironically, many of these reviewers are in fact indulging the very
vices that Allen critiques through his protagonist. It is to his credt
that despite this he has managed to pull off a film as inspired as
this. (Ottawa dwellers be advised of the upcoming screening of
Manhattan at the Bytowne.)
    Allen takes no prisonners as he lampoons every facet of
conventional life and those naive, bored or lazy enough to still
practice it. The jewish faith, and by extension, institutionalized
religion, is treated with characetristic duality (Love and Death),
sexuality is twisted into an eerie grotesque (Manhattan) and Allem's
wit is razour sharp. Not the gimmicks and tricks that littered Mighty
Aphrodite or Everyone says I Love You. The film is exemplary of the
bizarre experiences Allen's best films put us through: to laugh while
recognizing how pathetic the goings-on are. And no-one is more
pathetic here than Allen's protagonist. A man so incapbable of
spending time in the real world, he has been left no alternative but
to create his own.
    The film benefits from truly inspired casting. The film is
structured such that for most of the people present in Harry's real
life there is another set of actors that play the fictional
recreations of these people as present in Harry's books. The pairings
could be the subject of a review in and of themselves.  Examples of
people/character pairings include: Kristie Alley/Demi Moore and Judy
Davis/Julia Louis Dreyfus. The considerations that emerge from these
pairings are two-fold, exploring both the unreliability of perception
and by extension the artistic process as well as alluding to the
fallacy and duplicity inherent in the star system. (Perhaps that last
one is my own zeal getting the better of me) Nonetheless Allen seems
to have payed careful attention to every casting decision. Even Robin
Williams apearrance as an actor in one of Harry's fictional stories,
although it lasts only several minutes, is elevated to a level above
that of a simple cameo. A lesser filmmaker would have treated the
appearance in a purly cursory manner, Allen instead seems to be
suggesting that the casting is to be scrutinized in detail.
    One of the most notable aspects of the film, is its narrative
construction. Deconstructing Harry is narrated with a flashback
structure that consists of three planes. The first is Harry's present
day life with all of its dilemmas and complications, the second is the
fictional world of Harry's books, and the last is Harry's true past
that is dealt with on occasion to contrast with the fictional world
that we are presented with. Which of these is which is only made clear
as the film progresses.  The associations that emerge as a result of
the interacting of these three planes are a primary source of meaning
generation in the film.  It is only as the fictitious and the
non-fictitious is delineated that the relevance of certain scenes
becomes clear. Harry turning 'soft' is an amusing gimmick on it's own,
however, situated as it is after the actor-story and late in the film
it is an eleagant device reaffirming the inescapable fate of the
protagonist: to forever be confounded by the very fiction he seeks
therapy with.
    On this basis, an attractive reading of the film-although it is
impossible to confirm or refute it- is as an allegory for the current
state of Americain independant filmmaking. As filmmaker after
filmmaker lines up with their low budget, flawed assumptions and
'genuine story', there are eerie parallels to be drawn with the flawed
ethic displayed by Allen's protagonist.

Author
Scott Renshaw
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY 
(Fine Line)
Starring:  Woody Allen, Hazelle Goodman, Bob Balaban, Kirstie Alley, Judy
Davis, Elisabeth Shue, Billy Crystal.
Screenplay:  Woody Allen.
Producer:  Jean Doumanian.
Director:  Woody Allen.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, nudity, adult themes)
Running Time:  95 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Woody Allen spends 95 minutes blurring the lines between life and art
in DECONSTRUCTING HARRY.  Allen plays Harry Block, a loathsome little worm
of a successful writer who turns his misery and philandering into the
subjects for his stories.  Understandably, this becomes a sore point for
the ex-wives and ex-lovers who populate his work as thinly-disguised
analogs; it's bad enough dealing with harry in real life without being
subjected to further indignities in fictional form.  Throughout the film,
we get a chance to see Harry's autobiographical tales brought to life,
with different actors playing the roles of various individuals in his life
-- Julia Louis-Dreyfuss as one-time lover Judy Davis, Demi Moore as second
wife Kirstie Alley, and so on.
     It's a fairly successful conceit, one which allows Allen to take off
on some extremely funny flights of fancy.  Robin Williams has a neat cameo
as an actor having trouble getting focused (literally), while an elevator
trip to hell becomes an opportunity to tear into occupations worthy of a
special place among the damned ("the media," "lawyers who appear on
television").  Allen has plenty of fun with the narrative device, but that
same device also points out one major casting problem in DECONSTRUCTING
HARRY:  with all the surrogate role-playing going on, Allen should have
found someone else to play Harry Block.
     In part, it's because the levels of self-referentiality become
wearying.  Allen is playing himself in a semi-autobiographical story about
a writer who writes semi-autobiographical stories in which he sometimes
plays himself, and so on to infinity like some double-mirror effect.  More
to the point, Allen isn't deft enough as an actor -- or ego-less enough as
a director -- to make Harry truly repugnant.  In order for us to take
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY seriously as Allen's acknowledgement that art does
not forgive all, Harry needs to be more than a pathetic little nebbish.
Another actor might have given Harry's misogynistic rantings and
rationalizations genuine bite; Allen's desperate need to be accepted and
understood bathes his every moment on screen in apologetic blandness.
     Of course, it's just as easy to read DECONSTRUCTING HARRY as Allen's
argument that art _does_ forgive all.  And in some ways, the film is its
own best argument, teasing the audience with goofy entertainment whenever
it's not making half-hearted attempts to dig into Harry's psyche.  Perhaps
it does matter to some viewers whether or not allen is a horrible human
being with a morally reprehensible personal life.  Me, I'll settle for
being treated to a bunch of laughs once a year.  Unfortunately, Allen has
been spending most of the last several years using his films as feature
length p.r. announcements for himself.  DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is as
effective in its comedy as it is distracting in its self-absorption,
blurring the line between life and art just enough to make you wish Allen
could blur it a bit more.

Author
Kevin Maguire
IN 'BULLETS OVER BROADWAY' and 'Mighty Aphrodite', supporting actresses
not only received nominations for Academy Awards(3) , but 2 won. The same
could have been said for 'Deconstructing Harry', but there were simply too
many to consider. 
On the surface (the first twenty minutes) of DECONSTRUCTING HARRY, Allen
(director, writer, actor) creates a disturbing element of comedy. He
despises so many things, and fears many more. A scene at the beginning is
so enigmatic, we wonder how he could, in any sense of the word, create a
comedic situation. In the beginning, two explicit sex scenes are noted, two
serious violent threats, one disturbing conversation with a psychologist,
and countless acts of swearing. The transition to comedy starts as
supporting actors start to detail Harry Block's situation (the main
character, played predictably by Allen) , when we here their troubling
trials with a man, who, self-proclaimingly states later in the movie, "I
put my art into my work." The onslaught of cynicism in this part of the
movie is at its highest, and also at the point where he criticizes himself,
and, acting childishly, expects everyone to forgive him. As a result, he
develops 'writing block.'
The middle of the movie focuses around a trip Harry Block is making with a
prostitute, a hypochondriac, and his son (who he kidnapped while exiting a
school bus). First on this trip is a stop at a carnival, where Allen has
surreal experiences with characters he himself creates, including one scene
of adultery in the process of being covered-up, with Judy Davis ( a scene,
by the way, that is worth being noted for its hilarious look at a person
who is flattered with herself.) The next stop is at a half-sister's estate,
where her right-wing Semetic husband seems bent on spreading criticism of
Allen's abstinence from Judaism, while, at the same time, intent on
spreading his own propaganda. Allen states to this man, "You're the
opposite of paranoid. Contrary to all the available evidence, you still
think people like you." The last stop places Allen at a university, where
they are hoping to present him with an award. However, the hypochondriac's
worst dream (or best hope) comes true as he dies. So Harry has shown up at
his old university with a prostitute and a dead body. 
In the conclusion, at some other location, Allen is arrested for
kidnapping his son, solicitation of prostitution, and possession of a
deadly weapon (from an early scene with Judy Davis.) But before this, Allen
is on an elevator which apparently leads to Hell. ( Example of who is in
Hell : "Third Floor : Media. Sorry, that level has filled up.") There he
runs into the devil (Billy Crystal) , who reviews all the horrible things
he's done in his life, and prophesized the above event. 
In jail, two friends bail him out, and he has a imaginary recognition
ceremony (obviously, when Allen was arrested, he hadn't received his award
yet.) At this ceremony, all of the characters in the movie are applauding
him, and, there and then, his writing block is solved, and he starts
writing a novel about, "A man who can only be artistic in work, not life." 
This film is as all Allen's released are : wonderful. The acting of
supporting characters is never very long, and as such, it would be very
hard to nominate any one person for an award. This certainly is not a movie
for everyone, and some may find it offensive. Actually, nearly all will
find it offensive, but some will not be able to draw comedy from this
offensiveness. I must lend my recommendation to this film, for it really
does capture the comedy that is so Woody Allen like. Ironically, most
people will like Woody Allen in this movie for hating himself.
Response is to be sent to Jmaguire@gwi.net , and is to have this as the
only contents of the subjects : "Kevin : Deconstructing Harry"
"It's the lie that gets you." - Richard M. Nixon

Author
Nicholas Amado
Woody Allen's latest film, Deconstructing Harry, is a fine addition to his
masterful body of work. It doesn't have the sweetness of Annie Hall, or the
goofiness of Sleeper. What it does have is originality that blends well with
the bitterness, the autobiographical aspects, and the brash humor. Allen has
taken a new approach technically with "Harry" while he returns to some of his
classical short story writing, many traces of which can be seen here.
Harry is a writer who has just completed a book, based strongly on his
experiences, that upsets all of the women in his life. The film is a montage
of his current predicament and scenes played out on screen with other actors
in his role. (Richard Benjamin, Stanley Tucci and Tobey Maguire all play Harry
in various embelished stories from the book.) Occasionally, to break even
further with conventional narrative, Harry will meet these characters who are
based on himself and have conversations with them. Though it doesn't really
matter, this film doesn't flow terribly well, but it is obvious that Allen
doesn't want it to. 
One of the technical aspects that Allen employs here is a unique editing
approach. Much of the film consists of scenes in which dialogue is cut
abruptly to flash forward only a few seconds in time. Cuts will also be made
to show brief passages in time. For example, a character may be sitting in one
position and rather than show them shift in their chair, a quick cut will be
made to their new position. It is extremely unique and works well with the
overall concept of the film, which is expressed in the title, deconstructing
this writer and all of his immoralities.
One of the best sequences in the film involves an "out of focus" Robin
Williams, which must be seen to be believed. It is one of the most original
and hilarious concepts I have seen in modern filmmaking. That brief sequence
alone is enough for me to recommend this picture to even those who are not
Allen fans.
The language in Deconstructing Harry is much more abrasive than in most of his
films. It helps to illustrate the nastiness of Allen's character who is as
neurotic and whiny as he always was, but now has a bit of a gruff and bitter
edge.  The film is fun for many reasons, not the least of which is the cast
which includes Elizabeth Shue, Billy Crystal, Julia Louis-Dreyfuss, Demi
Moore, Eric Bogosian, Amy Irving, Judy Davis, Julie Kavner, Kirstie Alley and
Robin Williams. There are many lines in the film that you will probably be
using for years to come. And Allen isn't afraid to let inventive filmmaking
take the place of solid narrative here. Plus, fans of his books will see many
references to old stories. Deconstructing Harry is strange to say the least,
but a must for Allen fans and most likely enjoyable for anyone who wants a
good laugh.
3 stars
Copyright (C) 1997 Nick Amado

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) NOTE: THIS REVIEW CONTAINS ONE OF THOSE WORDS YOU CAN'T
SAY ON RADIO. READ AT YOUR OWN RISK.
The opening scene of DECONSTRUCTING HARRY shocked me. Richard Benjamin,
looking pretty old, is fucking Julia Louis-Dreyfus, looking way too
young for him. The age difference and the lack of romance in their eyes
made me think she was doing it for money. After all, their M.O. was
definitely giving him more enjoyment than her. 
It also bothered me that the scene was played up for comedy. These two
people are soullessly fucking, hoping they won't be caught by their
spouses, and in walks blind-as-a-bat grandma. What a wacky situation. It
was funny, but not ha-ha funny. 
Turns out Benjamin and Louis-Dreyfus are playing characters, not in this
movie, but in Harry's (Woody Allen's) book. They really are supposed to
be "funny" in a deliberately sick, larger-than-life way. 
Allen's films are notorious autobiographical exaggerations. In
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY, he has subjected his life to another round of
fictional distillation. Harry's characters are interpretations of Harry,
who is an interpretation of Allen. The residue left after all that
filtering is what we see in the first scene. Although it is shocking, it
is deliberate and appropriate. 
If you can appreciate the distillation of three layers of reference and
laugh at the underlying truth, then you will like this movie. If, in
spite of the cleverness, you still think it's a little sick, you may
hate the movie. 
The glue that holds all these characters and meta-characters together is
that Harry is being honored at his alma mater and he wants to find a
friend who will accompany him. This allows him to interact with the
people from his past, most of whom have been portrayed in one of his
stories. Enactments of these stories (like the opening scene) are cut
into the overarching story of Harry's trip back to college. 
After one or two of his ex-wives decline to join him, Harry pays Cookie
(Hazelle Goodman), a prostitute, to accompany him to the ceremony.
Richard (Bob Balaban), another friend decides at the last minute to go
too, and rounding out the fourth passenger in his Volvo is his son (whom
he has to kidnap, since mom won't let him miss school). 
Robert dies on the trip from New York, which is taken in stride. When
they arrive at Harry's college, Richard's body is taken away and before
he can be honored, Harry is arrested for kidnaping and possession
(Cookie left her pot in the back seat). 
Harry is jailed, left to mull over the fact that his only friends are
dead or hired or kidnaped. 
Allen seems to be acknowledging that his life, like Harry's, is full of
bungled relationships and missed opportunities. However, this
acknowledgment is not an apology, nor is it regret, for in the end,
Harry is able to justify his life through the art and the characters
that he has created. 
Had he been better at relationships, he reasons, his books would have
been worth less than this review. Instead, he decides to accept that
he's an asshole, and enjoy his fame and success as a writer. 
The ultimate point of DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is that, for artists, life is
hell. If it weren't, they wouldn't have any motivation to create beauty.
Happy people just don't make great artists, and great artists are not
happy people. 
I find this message quite depressing, but I can't say I disagree. I
dipped my toes into the cold water of filmmaking, and decided instead to
sit by the pool. I look at the swimmers with envy, and yet I can't
really say I'd like to trade places. Like it or not, I have chosen warm
and stable security over fame and big success. I wish I could have it
both ways. In DECONSTRUCTING HARRY, Allen corroborates my fears that
it's not possible. 
Technically, this is a very good film. Allen's long-time editor Susan
Morse took some risks that really paid off. The movie is full of jump
cuts that not only effectively tighten up some scenes, but also add an
appropriate sense of confusion. Often when Harry is looking for the
right words, Morse uses a series of short cuts that give the movie the
same frustrated manner that Harry has. 
The inserted story segments have the fresh hooks and quick morals of
good short fiction (like the actor who literally loses his focus, or the
man who changes his identity to cheat on his wife, only to find that
Death has come for this alter-ego.) 
Allen's filmmaking tone is a little more raw than usual, if that's
possible. For example, his lead character talks more about "fucking" and
less about sex, relationships, and lovemaking. But his unique sense of
neurotic humor is still evident. 
Did I like this movie? No. I hated it. First it repulsed me and then it
depressed me. 
Was it any good? Yes. By distilling his own life to a smelly,
concentrated sludge, Allen really did hit on some human truths. In
addition, the lucid, careful control of three layers of reality shows
that, as a filmmaker, Allen is very good. 
As for a recommendation, I could go either way.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    Woody Allen's new comedy is funny, thank goodness, 'cause it ain't
moving, charming, or even particularly believable.  For starters, he's
miscast himself.  Allen lacks the... gravity to effectively portray
Harry Block, a pill-poppin', booze-swillin', whore-frequenting, thrice-
married bestselling author to whom the following is happening:  (a.)
he's suffering from writer's block, (b.) he's enduring the wraith of
friends and family members who take offense to his habit of basing his
work on his life, and (c.) he's now being visited by those semi-fiction-
al creations.  (Initially, Allen cuts between scenes from Block's life
and scenes from Block's stories.  Later, he begins blending both.)
Smaller roles are filled by a dozen other stars, the spotting of which
is as distracting as the fact that they rarely come alive in their
roles.  (Too often, the film feels like a stage play, with actors
hurling monologues-- or, Allen's case, one-liners-- at each other.)
    The anxious, almost frantic pace is also a challenge, as is trying
to keep track of which ex-wife, ex-girlfriend, or other love interest is
being referenced in a given scene.  (And really, Woody, isn't it about
time to start casting *older* actresses for these parts?) Admittedly,
the movie *is* side-splitting.  (My faves:  gags on Death, Hell, and
Darth Vader.)  And it's profane!  (How many blowjob jokes did you
count?) Too bad it's so empty.  Do you know what a black hole is?  One
question:  why is Billy Crystal the only actor who plays both his char-
acter and the fictional take on his character?  He gives a devilishly
good performance, though...

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Woody Allen
Starring: Woody Allen, Caroline Aaron, Kirstie Alley, Bob Balaban,
Richard Benjamin, Eric Bogosian, Billy Crystal, Judy Davis, Hazelle
Goodman, Julie Kavner, Mariel Hemingway, Amy Irving, Eric Lloyd, Julia
Louis-Dreyfus, Tobey Maguire, Demi Moore, Elisabeth Shue, Stanley Tucci,
Robin Williams, Philip Bosco, Paul Giamatti, Annette Arnold, Gene Saks
Woody Allen's latest film, "Deconstructing Harry," is his angriest, most
vulgar, and most highly sexual film to date.  It's also one of his
funniest, and his freshest film in a while.  Since his divorce from Mia
Farrow, he's been in a bit of a slump (starting with "Manhattan Murder
Mystery"), making films which are great on their own, but don't posess
the lasting power of films like "Annie Hall" and "Hannah and Her
Sisters."  By taking a big chance with this, telling a story of an awful
human being who may really be him or merely the public's perception of
him, he creates a film which is a cineamtic breath of fresh air from one
of the country's primary and one of its best filmmakers.
The Harry of the title is Harry Block (played by Woody), a whiny,
overly-neurotic, amoral, extremely seflish and narcississtic,
unfaithful, sniveling sonuvabitch bastard - who's also extremely
lovable.  Through this complex narrative, one of his most labyrinthine,
we get to know this guy through his real life, flashbacks, and through
the fictitious world of his novels, where different actors play the
literary people who are thinly disguised characters from his real life. 
Harry, a famed novelist, is also famed at telling exteremely
autobiographical stories, exposing secrets in his life for
therapy...much like Woody Allen himself has allegedly done (though he
always denies it).
When we first meet Harry, he's at a low point in his life.  His
extremely young girlfriend, Fay (Elisabeth Shue), has just left him and
has hitched up with one of his best buds, Larry (Billy Crystal), leaving
him more depressed than he usually is.  Not to mention the fact that his
latest novel, which exposes his affair with one of his ex-wives (Amy
Iriving - unrecognizable with her new blond do) sisters, Lucy (Judy
Davis), who is less than happy.  In the first minutes of the film, we
see one of the more comical episodes of the affair in literary form,
with his fictitious self (Richard Benjamin) porking the fictitious
sister (Julia Louis-Dreyfus) on vacation with their respective families,
and almost being caught by a blind grandmother.
Also, Harry has discovered that the next day, he is to awarded an award
from his old school (who kicked him out) for his writing, but has no one
to go with him.  He ends up taking along a sick friend (Bob Balaban), a
hooker he solicited the night before named Cookie (Hazelle Goodman,
marking the first black person in a lead role in a Woody film - 'cause
you know how hard it is to find black people in New York), and his son
(Eric Lloyd), whom he abducted from school much to the dismay of his
mother and one of his many ex-wives, Joan (Kirstie Alley).
Along the road, he has flashbacks to parts of his life, parts of his
stories, and even has hallucinations of characters from his novels
popping up to lecture him on his life.  The stories play like little
vignettes, with lots of cameos from celebrities, but reflect on Harry's
life at the time he thinks of them.  They also provide lots of comedy,
with several little stories standing out, like: a story about a young
writer (Tobey Maguire, from "The Ice Storm") who has an affair with a
hooker in his critically wounded friend's apartment, only to have Death
knock on the door to collect his friend's soul; an anti-semetic story
about an old Jewish woman who discovers her husband of 30 years had a
previous marriage where he killed four family members and devoured them;
a story about an actor (Robin Williams) who becomes blurry in real life
(you have to see it to fully understand it); and a story he's working on
about him journeying down to hell where Larry is the Devil so he can
retreive Fay from him (a sequence which features lots of topless women -
a new thing for Woody).
This kind of narcississtic storytelling is immeadiately reminiscent of
Woody's worst film (in my opinion), "Stardust Memories," a messy paen to
how much he can't stand his fame and his apparent necessity to do
comedy.  Woody neatly balances the relationship between reality and art,
showing that Harry tries to get therapy by exposing his real life to his
fans, but also alienates himself from everyone around him.  Pretty soon,
it seems like there's almost no way of differentiating his real life
from his fictitious one (one scene has he and Lucy continually mixing up
the names of the people in reality and the ones in his novels.
Is this true of Woody Allen in real life?  If one maps out his real and
reel lives, one can see a definite connection between the two.  For
instance, when his marriage was crumbling, he did the bitter "Husbands
and Wives."  The general public has come to think of the Woody Allen
character in all his movies as Woody Allen the person.  Hell, even I
think of him as some whiny, one-line-shooting, self-hating Jew, and I'm
like the resident Woody Allen FAQ.  But with this film, Woody seems to
be showing that he may put a lot of his personal life in his movies, but
to what extent I'm not sure.  Is Harry just the general perception of
him put on screen, or is this the real Woody Allen, bluntly portrayed
(if so, that makes Elisabeth Shue's character the film's Soon-Yi).
The depth of the film is also wonderfully accentuated with Allen's
brilliant diretion.  The entire film has an edgy feel to it, sometimes
disjointed as scenes are cut quickly, sometimes in mid-speech.  While
this is, yes, a tad annoying, it gives the film the right kind of
atmosphere, showing the disjointed nature of his being.  In fact, the
opening credits (with the cool jazz tune, "Twisted," playing in the
background) are juxtaposed with repeated shots of Lucy frantically
getting out of a taxi cab, followed by the raunchy sex scene between
Richard Benjamin and Julia Louis-Dreyfus, which sets up the film for its
almost non-stop raunchiness.
In fact, this film is probably Woody's most randy; even more sexual than
his '72 classic "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex (But
Were Afraid to Ask)."  There's some sex scenes,  and more sexual jokes
than you can shake a stick at.  Even Kevin Smith didn't tell this many
felatio jokes (my personal favorite, behind when Demi Moore said a
Hassidic prayer before going down on Stanley Tucci in one of Harry's
stories, was Julia Louis-Dreyfus saying to Richard Benjamin "I grind my
teeth.").  And Woody finally says "fuck" about fifty times, and even
uses "cunt" when angered at a couple points in the movie.  It seems that
Woody is opening his films up to a wider audience now, since Kevin Smith
has paved the way for sex jokes in modern-day cinema.
The film's comic moments (which turn this film into a non-stop
laugh-fest) are perfectly interwoven with the film's darker tones, which
it has a lot of.  This doesn't have the bitter feel of "Husbands and
Wives," but it is one of his blackest comedies, showing a man who is
corrupt almost to the core, but still can have salvation.  Woody's
portrayal of this man shows a person who is just awful, yet has some
redeeming qualities.  Why else would so many people interact with him if
he was as bad as Hitler?  And how good would this film be if it was only
showing how awful he is?
The script is brilliant, and should get at least an Oscar nomination,
but many people, I fear, will be turned off by some of his more
off-color jokes, like many of his sexual ones, and some ethnic and
sexist jokes (he calls a woman "a world-class meshuggener cunt), but
this is done to show the character of Harry better.  Woody handles the
film majestically, presenting it as it were through the eyes of Harry
reflecting, but with a deep edge to it.  Even Woody's courtship of Fay
is done to show how horrible it is, as she is a deep admirer of his
work, and he's not respecting her for her own self.
All the actors, who mostly have brief cameos in stories, are wonderful
(though Judy Davis does go a bit overboard), with stand-out performances
going to Elisabeth Shue, Billy Crystal (who's brilliant as the devil),
Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Richard Benjamin, Kirstie Alley, Demi Moore
(there's a shock), and, of course, Woody, who gives one of his best
performances in years.  Though I doubt anyone will get an Oscar
nomination (Woody's famous for his supporting actors getting Oscars),
they all do wonderfully, even if most are very brief.
"Deconstructing Harry" is one of the freshest, funniest, and all-around
fascinating films I've seen this year.  Many of his films are paced very
slowly, but Woody keeps the film moving at a quick pace, and when it's
over, I was sad that it was (by the way, this was my first Woody Allen
film seen in a theatre).  The point of the film seems to be that one
needs to get over themselves and get on with their lives, and this point
is never driven into the ground, but realized at the end, as they are in
most Woody films.  This may be Woody's angriest and narcississtic film
in years, which may turn off a lot of people, but it's still brilliant
work from an ingenius film craftsman.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Separating Woody Allen's private life from his creative body of
work is getting harder and harder, especially given how closely his Art
imitates life.  *His* life, that is.
        Call me unsophisticated, but I found his films a lot more appealing
before he started sleeping with his daughter.
        The burning question at the heart of Allen's latest film,
"Deconstructing Harry," is just how much of Harry is Harry, and how much is
Woody.  Distancing the character from its creator is a key theme in the
film and Allen seems to revel in Harry's unpleasantness.  Given the
talented director's despicable off-screen behavior, some could construe
"Deconstructing Harry" as Allen's personal admission of guilt.  Of course,
we're supposed to know better.
        In "Deconstructing Harry," Harry Block (Allen) is a successful
writer whose latest bestseller has pissed off just about everyone he knows,
including his three ex-wives.  Harry has used a lot of autobiographical
experiences as source material and, naturally enough, the people in his
life are not happy having their dirty laundry aired.
        Perhaps this is why no one wishes to accompany Harry to upstate New
York to be honored by his alma mater; the best companion he can come up
with is a prostitute called Cookie (shades of Mira Sorvino's hooker in
"Mighty Aphrodite").
        I guess even now there's some sort of prestige to being linked with
a Woody Allen film.  "Deconstructing Harry" stars, among others, Billy
Crystal, Robin Williams, Judy Davis, Bob Balaban, Mariel Hemingway, Amy
Irving, Julie Kavner, Tobey Maguire, and Eric Bogosian.  The reason Allen
is able to employ such a large cast for what is a relatively simple
storyline is the way he (de-)constructs his story: actors play both the
characters in the film as well as characters in Harry's novel, which are
often the same, only different.  Harry himself is played by Allen in
"reality" but by Richard Benjamin and Stanley Tucci in fiction.
        This isn't as confusing as it sounds although the way that Allen
elects to shoot the piece is, roaming around like some NYU Film School grad
who's just discovered the jump cut.
        You can't help but feel embarrassed for television's Kirstie Alley
and Julia Louis-Dreyfus who, in order to bolster their flagging resumés,
subject themselves to some brief but nevertheless humiliating sequences for
the privilege of working for the Woodster.  Young, nubile women fall for
rich, famous, wizened old men all the time but witnessing Elisabeth Shue
kissing Allen full on the mouth in excruciating close-up is about as hard
to watch as the wood-chipping scene in "Fargo."
        "Deconstructing Harry" has its funny moments but often the writing
is stagnant, hitting dumb-joke rock bottom during the 'Descent into Hell'
sequence.  Unless you enjoy the spectacle of a self-absorbed,
sexually-obsessed neurotic making light of his own crimes and misdemeanors,
you might want to stay away from "Harry."
