Title
Review for Abschied - Brechts letzter Sommer (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ABSCHIED (THE FAREWELL) (Germany, 2000) *** Directed by Jan Schutte. 
Script  and dialogue by Klaus Pohl. Photography, Edward  Klosinski. 
Editing, Renate Merck. Set design, Katharina Woppermann. Music, John 
Cale. Cast: Joseph Bierbichler (Brecht), Monica Bleibtrau (Helene 
Wiegel), Jeanette Hain (Kathe Reichel) Elfriede Irrall (Elizabeth 
Hauptmann), Margit Rogall (Ruth Berlau), Samuel Fintzi (Wolfgang 
Harich). 91 minutes. In German with subtitles. Seen at the Cannes 
2000 Festival.
One day in the life of  Bertolt Brecht (1898-August 14, 1956), the 
protean writer whose influence on theater, stage techniques, cinema, 
literature and more is incalculable. Note that he film does not cover 
24 hours but only the daytime ones
It is the last day of a summer vacation for Brecht, who is in ill 
health.  He has a holiday home north of Berlin, in a beautiful wooded 
area which includes a limpid lake. With the writer are his wife Helen 
Weigel;  their teen-age daughter Barbara; his heavy-drinking 
ex-collaborator Ruth;  Elfriede his assistant;  Kathe, a rising young 
actress; political dissident Wolfgang Harich (the only other man in 
the group) and his young wife Isot.
Brecht is a mega-womanizer. The two older female guests had been his 
mistresses. The younger ones are his current mistresses. Isot even 
has  the consent of her husband. One wonders what other ladyloves are 
waiting for Bertolt in Berlin. No, it is not a French bedroom farce 
but a serious work filled with discussions, reactions, antagonisms, 
alliances, politics, and other subjects and issues, all of which held 
my undivided attention..
In the late afternoon, the entire household are to drive back to 
Berlin, where Brecht will put finishing touches to his Caucasian 
Chalk Circle opening in his theatre. Ominously, a young man from 
Stasi, the dreaded Stalinist police, shows up to take Harich (the 
political dissident) back to Berlin, but Helen keeps this a secret 
from her husband...
1956 was a year full of political confrontations in the Soviet bloc. 
That's when Khrushchev gave his epoch-making speech criticizing the 
late dictator Stalin. In the summer, in Hungary,  there was a massive 
popular and nationalistic uprising against the Soviet occupation. 
There were student protests in Czechoslovakia and Poland., and, in 
East Germany, for the first time since the end of World War II, 
voices were raised against the Walter Ulbricht communist regime.
While this widespread turmoil is not persistently spelled out in the 
movie, it is there as  a permanent background reminder which affects 
the reactions of the charcaters and those of the viewers who are 
aware of the history and politics of the times.
The film's 91 minutes are a welcome return to the average length of 
most older movies. These are packed minutes, whether one does or does 
not realize this consciously.
"Abschied" was not filmed in Germany but in Poland, where its makers 
could find a remote, bucolic spot not subject to passing traffic 
sounds, other noises and interferences. Brecht's summer place (villa 
or datcha) was skilfully built by Polish workers, with removable 
partitions that helped with the camera movements. The cinematographer 
is also Polish. Edward Klosinski, one of the best anywhere, has 
worked with all major Polish directors as well as several Western 
European ones. In spite of the single location, photography and 
editing never induce claustrophobia in the characters or the 
spectators.
This work  covers many bases, plays like expanded, aired-out 
Kammerspiel. Its hero-antihero is shown without any concessions to 
the man, his admirers, or his legend.  Politically dyed-in-the-wool 
Brechtians may protest, yet whether revisionist or not, this is a 
strong, intriguing document.
I do not remember the film mentioning it, but Brecht died of a stroke 
three days after returning to Berlin.
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 
