Title
Review for Kokaku kidotai (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Foong Ngai Hoe
 When Ghost in the Shell (GitS) was released in 1995, it was probably
one of the most eagerly-awaited full-length anime (Japanese animation)
films since Katsuhiro Otomo's 1988 cyberpunk hit, Akira. Jointly
financed by Manga Video, Kodansha, and Bandai Visuals, GitS became the
first anime project to receive financial support outside Japan, and was
subsequently launched simultaneously on both sides of the Pacific - in
Japanese and English. Based on Shirow Masamune's manga (comics) series,
the film was directed by Mamoru Oshii, one of Japan's top anime
directors.
Major Motoko Kusanagi is an elite officer in the Section 9 security
force, and along with fellow-cyborg Bateau and the mostly human Togusa,
she is ordered to track down an illusive computer-criminal known only as
the Puppet Master, a hacker who can hack into the minds of cyborgs. But
the conspiracy unravels after Kusangi realises that the Puppet Master is
in fact a renegade program belonging to one of the ministries which
claims it's born "in a sea of information". As the ministries try to
out-maneuver each other in a political game to retrieve the Puppet
Master, the latter now turns its attention to Kusanagi. When the Major
begins to question her own existence as a cyborg, the Puppet Master
offers her a merger which will bring about a new life. This is where the
story derives its name from - the 'ghost' being the soul a cyborg feels
inside his or her shell (body).
Masamune's GitS is part political thriller, part social satire that
access society in the digital age. Those familiar with his comics are
quick to acknowledge the footnotes he attaches to his stories - some of
them taking up chapters even. GitS is a difficult manga to read, made
easier only by Masamune's brand of black humour.
GitS the movie isn't so much an Oshii's adaptation of Masamune's comics,
but rather the director's own vision of it. Like in his Patlabor movies,
Oshii brings to GitS a shade of noir that's become his trademark - tight
camera angles, heavy shadow outlines, depressing colours, and a story
that plods ponderously along.
Which is precisely the problem, depending on whether you like Oshii's
style of direction or not. Too much of GitS involves either Kusanagi
soul-searching, or long spells of dialogue off-screen while audiences
are left staring at the backdrop. To be fair, Oshii's unique directional
style does give many of the scenes a kind of poetry, but a
less-appreciative audience might end up squirming uncomfortably in their
seats. However, when the action does take place, it's often intense and
gripping in ways many Hollywood action films aren't. Blood splatters
across the screen, heads get blown off, but the violence is so well
integrated into the action they don't seem too gratuitous.
The immense detail in the animation is breathtaking (even by today's
standards) - from the dark and moody backdrops of Hong Kong in the 21st
century, to the gunfights that punctuate the film. Kenji Kawaii's
etheral score also lends to GitS the meditative feel the story needs.
In short, GitS is a technically brilliant and stylish animation, with a
thought-provoking story you'd not find in western animation.
Unfortunately, it's also a film too entrenched in its genre for its own
good - with a plot so murky you might need a second viewing to fully
understand it.
I'm not saying GitS is a poor production - on the contrary, it's a
marvellous aural and visual treat. Yet as art often does, GitS will win
many admirers but not converts. Neither is it likely to convince the
west that Japanese animation's a lot more than robots, babes, and sex.
And when you consider the amount of money poured into making this film a
blockbuster, that's self-indulgence.
All said, GitS is still worth the watch if you've always wondered how
Terminator 2 or Johnny Mnemonic might have turned out if animated.
Without any doubt this a great work of art - it's how entertaining it is
as a film that's open to debate.

Author
Jeff Williamson
I've been a backer of anime on the big screen as far back as AKIRA
(1989).  To me, there's an incredible difference between watching a
videotape or laserdisc on a small screen in your living room and
sitting in a darkened theater, staring up at a gigantic movie screen.
GHOST IN THE SHELL marks the first occasion on which I have seen anime
on the big screen *first*; that is to say, before seeing it in a home
video form.  Is it worth it?  Indeed.
Over a year ago, I had occasion to see a remarkable fan-subtitle of the
PATLABOR 2 movie.  It was my first conscious exposure to Mamoru Oshii's
work (I still haven't seen ANGEL'S EGG), though I've since realized I
have seen other Oshii films.  PATLABOR 2 may be the single best anime
movie I have ever seen; one which is fully deserving of a big-screen
treatment in America.  It is a profound political, philosophical, and
psychological statement.  For similar reasons, GHOST IN THE SHELL is
worth seeing.
Initial reviews had me blase about seeing the film; some folk were
apparently not too impressed.  "Too talky," I heard.  "The character
designs aren't anything like Shirow's."  "The story is nothing like the
manga."  All of these criticisms are true to one degree or another, but
whether they detract from or enhance the viewing experience is up to
the individual.
GITS is a very Oshii-esque film.  Replete with meaningful monologues
and multi-layered symbolism, it weaves subtle imagery to expound upon
Darwinian evolution, religion, the nature of life and sentience, and
man's role in relation to technology.  Oshii has taken Shirow's heavy
cyberpunk backdrop and melded it into a philosophical film which owes
more than a little nod to Ridley Scott's BLADE RUNNER.  Gone are most
of the one-liner interplays between the characters; instead, they make
intense intellectual speeches.  The dense city design is combined with
fascinating pieces such as the stitches from a tank's cannon ripping
up a mural which represents the evolutionary hierarchy...and stopping
just short of "HOMINIS" at the top of the chart.
Technically, the film is also excellent.  Kenji Kawai's haunting score
overlays the opening credits and an interior montage, recalling moments
in AKIRA.  The English voice actors deserve a great deal of credit for
what is one of the five best anime dubs I've seen.  The animation is
nothing short of superb.
The film has its flaws.  In an early scene, Kusanagi's speech to Togusa
on technology seems somewhat flat, or perhaps forced.  The points Oshii
has his characters make act as slower bridges between the action
sequences.  But each are entertaining to watch in their own right.
o  The English voice of the Puppetmaster is amazing.  It gave me chills.
o  Bateau gets the best humorous lines.
o  Kusanagi's voice is potentially the weakest, although I found myself
   wondering if the flat delivery didn't fit the cyborg character better.
This is another triumph of Japanese animated cinema.
-- 
Jeff Williamson *** Lightfall Integrated Media *** Chicago, IL
E-mail: docangst@mcs.com  *@_@*  http://www.mcs.net/~docangst/3w/ac/

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Crack the shell and discover a real gem. Navigates its wilderness
of high-tech philosophy without dropping the ball.
When we first see Agent Kusanagi, she's squatting naked on the ledge of the
topmost floor of a gigantic building, waiting for the right moment to
strike. In the room below her, illegal deals are being transacted. Just as
someone smells a rat, she dives like a suicidal bungee-jumper, takes out her
target with a burst of hollow-point submachine-gun fire, and then vanishes
in a haze of personal body-cloaking technology. Not exactly the opening for
a very thought-provoking movie, we might think. We are wrong.
GHOST IN THE SHELL -- a great title, by the way -- contains a barrage of
ideas that are both engaging, AND played out on-screen in fascinating ways.
It takes place in a heavily technologized future, where the human body
itself can be turned into one gigantic cybernetic host for a mind -- the
"ghost in the shell" of the title. The heroine of the film is the
aforementioned Kusanagi, a cool and calculating policeman with a totally
synthetic body, but with a very human mind. She knows from whence she came,
sort of, but where is she going?
Kusanagi and her cohorts run afoul of a clever and malicious hacker who
calls himself the Puppet Master. His specialty is hacking human bodies and
memories to perform crimes, and then leaving the hacked humans behind as
saps for the police. Fortunately, Kusanagi catches on fast, and when she
moves to trap the Puppet Master, she finds something even more startling --
not a hacker, but a new kind of life form, one that has been germinated in
the web of information and technology encircling the planet. GITS gives this
idea the workout it deserves, even though it's not a long movie -- less than
100 minutes -- but it's packed with movement and color, and never pauses for
breath. It also has the right ending for its difficult material; a lesser
movie would have a shootout and that would be the end of it, but GITS has a
knowing coda that puts everything into perspective.
GITS' biggest flaw, which is becoming an increasingly irritating caveat in
many imported movies, is the shockingly bad dubbing job. This is a movie to
watch subtitled if at all possible, since the dubbing is done with voices
that often don't match the characters at all. Kusanagi's dub voice is the
worst of the bunch -- static and uninvolving, despite the fact that she has
one of the best speeches in the movie.
The movie's greatest glory, however, is in its sleek and overpowering
images. There is a moment where Kusanagi goes scuba-diving, and touches the
reflection of her own face on the underside of the water. There is the final
brutal showdown in a "museum of evolution" between Kusanagi and a
death-dealing robot tank. There is the opening sequence, in which a human
shell is assembled and deployed. And there is a moment in the middle of the
movie where the camera stares and stares at rain-slickened streets with
crowds peppering them in slow-motion, for no other reason than to revel in
the glory of it all.

Author
Dean Gold
     GHOST IN THE SHELL (1995) is a manga based movie of a futuristic
worldin which the electronic net and cities are as one and
cybernetically enhanced people are the norm.  The story revolves around
Major Motoko Kusanagi, a woman cyborg agent of the Internal Bureau
whose mission is to track down the mysterious hacker known as "The
Puppet Master."  She and her colleagues learn that the Puppet Master is
in fact a creation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  Furthermore,
the MFA's Project 2501 (aka The Puppet Master) claims to be self aware
and its objective becomes to find a host body in order to have physical
existence.  The Internal Bureu agents question their own existence and
Motoko is forced to decide between forfilling her mission or aiding
Project 2501 in accomplishing its own goal.
     More important to an anime feature than its story is its
animation.  The innovative use of computer rendered graphics is
integrated well into the hand-drawn animated action of the story.
Blending traditional anime style people in an environment (that
sometimes resembles photorealism) as vast as the world it portrays.
Thus, the animation of GHOST IN THE SHELL serves the purpose in
immersing the audience into a completely different environment.  The
one aspect in which the animation fell short was the coloring; the
shades of GHOST IN THE SHELL are just too gloomy.  This does not serve
to enhance the story or the setting.  Some more brightness would have
made this feature a more pleasant experience.
     The wonderful exaggerated dramatization of portions of the action
(such as the opening in which we see the formation of our heroine's
artificial body) serve as the most delightful scenes.  Since animation
of GHOST IN THE SHELL is of very high caliber, the rating would have
been higher had it not taken its plot so seriously.  The fact is that
nothing is new about the technological, socialogical, or philosophical
ideas that GHOST IN THE SHELL calls upon to give itself drama.  The
feature manages to use them without making them appear as tired as they
might be in other science fiction stories, but it does not give the
profound impact it would pretend to deserve.
     Like a lot of anime, the story is grand in scope and so it is
written in a manner that gives it false complexity.  What results is
often nonsensical.  The problem is perhaps worsened in the English
version by some translation problems.  This disregard for conventional
methods of storytelling is nothing new to anime, but in GHOST IN THE
SHELL.  There are unnecessary scenes making the feature drag at times
and overall the feature is too long.  The ending of GHOST IN THE SHELL
is pretty silly.
     In conclusion, GHOST IN THE SHELL has plenty of ups and downs to
it.  Overall GHOST is an enjoyable experience and for anime fans, it is
a must see.
Additional Information
http://www.polygram.com/manga/ghost/ghost.html
http://www.msstate.edu/M/title-exact?+=Ghost+in+the+shell
This review and many more on Sci-Fi films and the
WWW Science Fiction Film Page
http://weber.u.washington.edu/~ataraxus/sfmenu.html

Author
Yamamoto
Why is it that whenever there's a woman with funky do which happens
to stick straight up, they have to sit right in front of you at the
movie theatres?  It doesn't matter where you sit, and the movie may
have just started.  Out of nowhere, poof, they'll waltz right in
and sit infront of you and block a good portion of the screen.  I
guess it's one of those life's unexplainable mysteries.
Speaking of difficult concept to grasp, GHOST IN THE SHELL came out
and I had to go check it out.  It's a Japanese anime taking place
in supposed future in the year 2029.  Yes, it's loosely related to
the comic book (which by the way 2 pages worth has been censored
for the conservative American public).  Anyhow, the secret service
in this era tries to capture this super hacker and well, things
don't ever the go the way you planned.
2 dozen nakkid cyber boobs.  9 doz bullets.  3 dead bodies.  42 on
the vomit meter.  No moon shots.  What we got here are:  long
distance peeping tom-fu, killer briefcases-fu, transparent body-fu,
garbage collectors from hell-fu, AP rounds in submachinegun-fu,
dodging crowd-fu, attack of the invisible zombie-fu, one way water
way-fu, runaway truck-fu, soul searching-fu, and of course your
standard issue big gun-fu.  Drive in academy award nominations to:
Bateau for saying stuff like "If I lose contact, I'm pulling the
plug", to Togusa for sayin' stuff like "set them up as a decoy" and
to Aramaki "did you hear me?"  And of course to lovely "Major"
Motoko Kusanagi "have you ever seen your own brain?"
Spoilers - Motoko Krsanagi is the top field agent of section 9, the
secret service.  And yes, most of her body is cybernetic and hear
cloaking device only works when she's nakkid. hmmm.  Anyhow, in the
future, the 'net gets so enormous that without people's knowledge,
one of the black ops programs acquired a "ghost" or a soul.  It
wants to be recognized as a sentient being and of course people
don't want to do that.  Then again, you can't really define real
human's soul so they can't prove anything.  The story revolves
around this premesis of the artifical soul and such.  Oh yeah, you
get your usual share of the guns and explosions too.  And the
animations are to die for.  Three and three quarter stars.  Shaggy
Bob says wicked!
Alien Alert!  Why do I get this feeling that whole country is
wrapped up in Jessica Dubroff's death?  And why is media making
such a hype, not only after the accident but even before?  Are we
supposed to feel the way media wants us to feel?  If you think
about it, don't you feel like you've been manipulated?  Ok, so I
may be bit paranoid but isn't there more important news to cover?
Just wonderin'.
> From: jfg115@psu.edu (John Gorzkowski)
> not that I have an opinion on the death penalty or anything, but
> just one argument that I heard was that after all the court costs
> of appeals and shit like that, executions cost more than life in
> prison--just something to think about....
That's why I believe in passing this new bill about the truth in
sentencing.  You can teach people who doesn't know better but you
can't change people who just don't care.  Heck, with arrest rate so
low and conviction rate being dismal, the least you can do is limit
the appeals to one and have it done with within a year.
