Title
Review for See Spot Run (2001)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Norm Schrager
David Arquette gets to reinforce his status as the goofy doofus once
again in this below-average family comedy about a boy, a dog, and a
dumb, sloppy, immature mailman (that would be Arquette).  Peering
through this half-assed attempt at a funny movie, it's easy to see that
the laughs are few and the comic action is a bore -- even the dog looks
kind of fed up.
Arquette, however, through the muck of this movie, is actually good as
the hapless idiot.  Sure, he's played the part before, but in a film
like this, Arquette gets to be genuinely likable, especially in the face
of the W.C. Fields edict (never work with dogs or children).  Maybe it's
his childish demeanor or puppy dog face that makes him fit right in, but
he's one of the only bright spots of this film.
Otherwise, a dumb script (which wants to be a John Hughes movie so
badly) cheats both Arquette and a fairly sweet story.  In short,
Arquette's Gordon has to look after his young neighbor (a cute,
laid-back kid named Angus T. Jones) after the little guy's beautiful,
overbearing mother is stuck trying to return home from a trip (horribly
bad shades of Planes, Trains, & Automobiles).  While Gordon and the boy
get acquainted, they meet up with Agent 11, a sharp FBI dog on the run
from unhappy mobsters -- including a slumming, unfunny Paul Sorvino.
Mob guys chase dog.  Dog hangs with kid and even bigger kid.  Mayhem
ensues.
With such a thin, familiar plotline, you'd think the writers would get
to it.  Yet, it takes more than a half-hour for the two stories to
collide.  If this movie was made with kids in mind, director John
Whitesell (helming his first feature) and company sure do try the
youngsters' collective patience.
The action sequences play like Home Alone meets Baby's Day Out, as
directed by a guy with no experience handling things like slapstick and
moving cars.  The scenes look stagy and awkward, and in the long run all
the gags just seem kind of tame.  Of course, the more static laughs run
to flatulence and poop, but I guess that's pretty harmless (if not,
uncreative) when it comes to entertaining kids.
And speaking of harmless, I never really got the feeling that this dog
could cause too much trouble.  In fact, the plot provides a backstory
showing the serious pooch as a pup, being instructed to work and not
have fun.  So, as an adult, he doesn't fetch or play catch.  He just
sits there.  Like this movie.
David Arquette should continue to head for more all-family comedies as a
career angle, but as for this one -- you'll be longing for Turner and
Hooch.
Director: John Whitesell
Producers: Robert Simonds, Tracey Trench, Andrew Deane
Writers: Daniel Baron, Christopher Faber
Starring: David Arquette, Angus T. Jones, Anthony Anderson, Michael
Clarke Duncan, Leslie Bibb, Kim Hawthorne, Constance Marie, Steven R.
Schirripa, Paul Sorvino, Joe Viterelli
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
In John Whitesell's SEE SPOT RUN, Agent 11 is placed in the agent 
relocation program after a Mafia boss, Sonny Talia (Paul Sorvino), puts 
out a contract on him.  Sonny sends his top two goons, Gino (Joe 
Viterelli) and Arliss (Steven Schirripa), to take out the agent, who bit 
off one of Sonny's testicles.  Did I mention yet that Agent 11 is a dog?  
And not just any mutt, but "the most decorated canine in FBI history."  
The hit men, not surprisingly, are upset about having to "whack a 
pooch."
If this sounds like a silly kids' comedy, it is.  Repeatedly falling in 
the same pile of dog poop got the most laughs at our screening.  In 
second place was a flaming Zebra fart.  Don't ask.
The movie stars David Arquette as Gordon, a mailman who has a love/hate 
relationship with dogs.  One day, the anal-retentive girl next-door, 
whom he's been trying unsuccessfully to date, is forced to entrust him 
with her 6-year-old son, James (Angus T. Jones), when her babysitter 
gets sick just before an out-of-town business trip.  Jones (SIMPATICO) 
is an adorable kid with a sad pumpkin-sized face.  Through a series of 
misadventures, Agent 11 comes to live with Gordon and James, and they 
name him Spot.  (The dog is spotless, and the dog's new name is chosen 
basically so that the movie can have a catchy title.)  Michael Clarke 
Duncan (the big convict in THE GREEN MILE) plays FBI Agent Murdoch, 
Agent 11's partner.
Perpetual slob Gordon transforms James from his excessively healthy diet 
of bran cereal, soy milk and prunes to a heavily sugar-laden one of 
non-stop junk food.  The result is like giving an alcoholic a gallon of 
vodka.  The kid goes crazy.  To reinforce this drinking analogy, Gordon 
wakes James the morning after he falls asleep with a big bottle of soda 
on the sofa.  Giving James a chocolate donut, Gordon tells him to have a 
bit of "the dog that bit you."
SEE SPOT RUN runs 1:34.  It is rated PG for crude humor, language and 
comic violence and would be acceptable for all ages.
My son Jeffrey, almost 12, gave the picture ***.  He said that he liked 
the dog and the plot.  He commented that he particularly liked the way 
that they built the characters.  
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
SSG Syndicate
     The comedic talent of David Arquette and the clever
casting of expressive six year-old Angus T. Jones make the wacky
slapstick antics of this canine comedy very, very funny. Arquette
plays an intrepid U.S. Postal carrier coping with a delivery route
that leads him straight through "dog alley," where one pugnacious
pooch after another tries to sabotage him. "There's not a dog on this
planet that can scare me," he boasts. But the pratfalls of his
personal life are another matter. He's immature and unreliable which
makes him less than appealing to his blonde, beautiful neighbor
(Leslie Bibb), a conscientious single mother whose baby-sitter cancels
on her just as she's leaving for an out-of-town business trip, forcing
her to leave her impressionable son (Angus T. Jones) in his
care. "You're a life-saver," she says. "Yeah, all five flavors," he
replies. Meanwhile, there's a canine crisis when a mob boss (Paul
Sorvino) puts out a contract on an FBI superdog, a 100-pound Bull
Mastiff, known as Agent Eleven: a.k.a. Spot, who seeks refuge in
suburbia and winds up in the truck of this mutt-hating mailman, much
to the dismay of his devoted FBI trainer (Michael Clarke
Duncan). Reminiscent of Buster Keaton, David Arquette has the heart of
a clown. He's a master of physical comedy. The five credited writers
and director John Whitesell make the most of his gleeful exuberance,
particularly as his relationship develops with the diminutive
child. "You'd be fun for a dad," the kid concludes. Yeah,
right. There's also some lame urologic and yucky dog-poop humor that
makes it PG, rather than G-rated. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "See Spot Run" is a fun-filled, silly 6. Sure, it's cops 'n'
robbers and a doggone dog, but, for kids, this is a crowd-pleaser and
a rollicking good time.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A goofy postman offers to baby-watch his sexy neighbor's kid (a neighbor for
whom he cares for deeply, BTW) but ends up in over his head when a stray dog
also enters the picture. Unbeknownst to them, the dog is actually a FBI
agent's drug-sniffing pooch who just escaped the witness relocation program
and is being chased by mobsters intent on whacking him out. Ooooooh, that
same ol' story again! :)
CRITIQUE:
This is not so much of a "bad" movie, as it is just a movie that we've seen
a thousand times before. The dog with the "super" powers, the bumbling bad
guys after him, the nice goofy dude who loves his next door neighbor, but is
afraid to tell her, the cute kid who you feel really sorry for, especially
when he cries, etc... It's also a kid's movie, which I generally don't
bother reviewing since my sensibilities and those of 10-year olds are not
exactly on the same plane, but every now and again, I like to take a stab at
one. I guess this one wasn't an awful one to check out, since it did
actually have a few funny moments, a nice performance by Michael Clarke
Duncan and a darn cutey-patootie kid, but sadly the film on the whole,
relies too much on fart, caca jokes and pratfalls for laughs. Then again,
isn't that what kids want? It's basically HOME ALONE with a dog! The
difference being that with the latter film, you actually gave a crap about
the kid in question, and the premise was somewhat believable and sometimes
even...touching.
This movie isn't necessarily as mean-spirited as some of the other gross-out
flicks that have come out over the past couple of years, but there certainly
wasn't much in the characters for anyone to truly identify with. Of course,
the basic idea of any of these kids movies is simply...will it make kids
laugh? I guess in that sense, some of the stuff in this film will definitely
work for the toddlers, as sight gags, over-the-top antics and many a goofy
character permeate the movie, but not really enough to recommend it on the
big screen, I'm afraid. If you wanna tie up the children for an easy ninety
minutes on a lazy Sunday afternoon, there are worse ways to do it. Of
course, don't expect the film to change their lives, or give them any
further insight into the human condition as we know it, but I think ya'll
hear what I'm saying here. Adults, stay away from this one, it's not for
you, and kids, well, see it if the parents want you to. Otherwise, no big
loss.
Oh and by the way, if you don't like David Arquette and "the character" that
he redundantly plays in all of his movies, stop seeing his goddamn movies! I
mean, am I the only one who's sick of people complaining about him playing
the same character over and over again? Dudes/dudettes, if you don't like
him, don't see his movies. Simple as that. Personally, I don't mind his
"goof character", but then again, I don't really think about David Arquette
all that much. Courteney Cox on the other hand...
Where's JoBlo coming from?
102 Dalmations (5/10) - Dinosaur (4/10) - The Grinch (4/10) - Home Alone
(8/10) - Lost and Found (4/10) - Mousehunt (6/10) - Ready to Rumble (7/10) -
Stuart Little (6/10) - Toy Story 2 (8/10)

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
1:33 - PG for crude humor, language and comic violence
