Title
Review for Carry on Doctor (1968)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Graeme Huggan
                Copyright 1996 Graeme Huggan
  
 The second of four Carry on films set in a hospital is considered one of 
the most memorable of the Carry on genre, as it establishes the on/off 
relationship between the characters of Kenneth Williams and Hattie 
Jacques and it surpasses it's highly successful predecessor (Carry on 
Nurse) with funnier sub-plots and jokes.
 The main story is about Dr.Kilmore (Jim Dale) who thinks that Sandra May 
(Barbara Windsor) is going to commit suicide on the roof as her amorous 
advances towards Dr.Tinkle (Kenneth Williams) have gone unwanted, but 
really she is just having a quick sunbathe! When Kilmore goes to 
investigate, he is accused of peering at her. The formidable Matron helps 
Dr.Tinkle to sack Kilmore, although Tinkle needs to persuade her not to 
mention the night when she and Kilmore found May in his room with him.
 Other story threads include Francis Bigger's fall off a stage while 
preaching and his subsequent stay in the hospital, with him dead set on 
believing that he is going to die. Bernard Bresslaw plays a patient who 
is constantly trying to get into the women's ward to meet a girl (Dilys 
Laye) he likes. 
 Hattie Jacques is great as Matron, Kenneth Williams plays Dr.Tinkle to 
perfection and there is a good comic performance by Frankie Howerd. Joan 
Sims has a small, 'out-of-character' and ineffective role as Bigger's 
bride-to-be, and Sid James is a patient in the hospital whose blood 
pressure increase may have something to do with him stirring the 
thermometer in his coffee. He is in bed for most of the film, as in real 
life, Sid had just recently suffered a heart attack. His role is 
therefore given less importance. 
 Two actors who also appear in small parts are Barbara Windsor, who is 
effective but leaves the film with 25 minutes to go, and Charles Hawtrey, 
for although he does not appear in many scenes, is quite funny as someone 
who is suffering from a sympathetic pregnancy!
 The film is good overall, although at certain points it does seem to 
lull and some of the jokes don't quite reach the mark. However, due to 
the strong character performances and a sense of high spirits all the way 
through the film, I would recommend everyone to watch this film.
 My Star Rating: 3 out of 5 stars.
 By Graeme Huggan  
