Title
Review for Your Friends & Neighbors (1998)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "YOUR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS" (Gramercy Pictures)
        Neil LaBute's caustic, dark comedy about sexual politics is a
follow-up to "In the Company of Men" and similar in its edgy,
tough-talking bitterness and emphasis on emotional isolation. Rather
than the singles scene, this time he attacks marital relations,
focusing - like a voyeur - on two upper middle-class couples. Ben
Stiller plays an analytical, pretentious college drama professor with
the disturbing habit of talking continually during sex. Catherine
Keener is his cynical, live-in girl-friend.  "Love," she says
succinctly, "is a disease." His buddy, Aaron Eckhart, suffers from
sexual dysfunction, leaving Amy Brenneman, as his gentle, dissatisfied
wife, with perpetual tears in her eyes. The guys work out at the gym
with Jason Patric, a calculating misogynist who enjoys humiliating the
women in his life and tape-recording raunchy sexual banter while he's
exercising. And Nastassja Kinski meets the other five characters in
her job as an assistant in an gallery; clearly, she's desperate for a
significant relationship wherever she can find it. Basically, this is
a nasty, sexually explicit social commentary about selfish,
egocentric, abrasive losers who love to verbalize about the awful
choices they make that wreck their lives. The steam-room scene in
which the men brag about the best sex they ever had is one of the most
appalling I've seen on the screen. Obviously, what Neil LaBute is
trying to communicate is that these hateful on-screen people are not
larger-than-life; instead, they're similar to the excruciatingly
vulnerable people we all meet every day, at home and at work. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Your Friends and Neighbors" is a
slow-moving, often disturbing, bleak 5. Hey, if these folks were real,
I'd be outta the neighborhood.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Neil LaBute
Cast:  Amy Brenneman, Aaron Eckhart, Catherine Keener, Natassja Kinski,
Jason Patric, Ben Stiller
Screenplay:  Neil LaBute
Producers:  Steve Golin, Jason Patric
Runtime:  99 min.
US Distribution:  
Rated R:  Graphic sexual dialogue, strong sexuality and language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Some films are cynical, and others make you crave for something as
benign as cynicism.  To call Neil LaBute a cynical filmmaker is a vast
understatement, for here is a man who has made two of the most
disturbing films I've seen in the last five years.  His debut feature,
In the Company of Men, is a harsh tale of two men exercising their
hatred of women on an innocent one.  His new film, Your Friends &
Neighbors, is far more brutal -- it illustrates the lives of six
miserable people and their miserable sex lives.  
The six characters are all related in some way.  Aaron Eckhart and Amy
Brenneman play a married couple who provide the facade of being happy to
their friends; the man, however, can only be sexually pleased with
masturbation, and his wife thinks that his lack of performance is
because of her.  They're friends with a boyfriend-girlfriend couple,
played by Ben Stiller and Catherine Keener.  Stiller's character is a
self-absorbed drama professor who likes to talk during sex, and Keener
is a bitchy woman who hates talking during sex.
The central conflicts arise when Stiller's character expresses interest
in the Brenneman character, and the two attempt an affair.  At the same
time, Keener meets a woman (Natassja Kinski) and has an affair with
her.  On the outset of all of this, not directly related to any
particular aspect of the film, is Jason Patric, who plays a womanizing
monster.  He's friends with Eckhart's character.  On a side note, I've
gone out of my way to avoid using any of the characters' names; this is
because LaBute refrains from using their names at any time during the
picture.
If you're looking for fun, you won't find it in Your Friends &
Neighbors.  This is an ugly, painful film.  I didn't like it, so much as
I "liked" it and admired it for its strength.  I've seen it twice, and
it certainly passes for entertainment -- there isn't a boring moment,
and I imagine most viewers will be adequately diverted regardless of how
they like the film.  There are individual scenes that are horrifying,
but you'll find that the overall impression is what hurts the most. 
LaBute thinks we're all hopelessly screwed up, and this film is a deeply
compelling argument for that assertion.  Its central theme, I believe,
coincides with his reasons for not using the characters' names.  It also
explains why the locations are never described, why everything takes
place in generic apartments, gyms, and restaurants.  LaBute wants his
film to look like Anyplace, USA, in which Everyone is sexually depraved.
I'm almost embarrassed to admit that I laughed through much of this
picture.  As hopeless as it is, as ugly and harrowing as LaBute makes
it, he wrings distant and uncomfortable laughs out of odd situations. 
One of the funniest scenes has Eckhart and Brenneman in a grocery store;
Eckhart says, "I think that, for a while, we just need to treat each
other like . . . meat.  You should see me as a giant . . . penis, and I
should see you as a big . . . vagina."  It's kind of a disturbing
thought, but it's one of the lighter moments in the film, one that
permits guiltless laughter.  The second half of the film is far less
forgiving.  In the film's most intense and most horrific scene, Patrick
talks about his "best" sexual encounter -- and he calmly describes a
homosexual rape that he committed in his teen years.  Perhaps I
shouldn't be discussing all of this in my review, for a lot of the film
works because it takes its audience by surprise.  I doubt that it
matters much -- this scene gripped me even the second time I saw it. 
The six performances are all superb, and LaBute's writing is sharp and
realistic.  Patrick is at his very best here -- I've never seen him act
like this, and the character he creates here is one of the most vivid
and hateful I've ever seen.  Eckhart is also fantastic; after seeing his
turn in Company, it's surprising to see him as a sympathetic character. 
Brenneman is the best of the female parts, and is also the most
sympathetic character -- she doesn't talk a lot, but the array of
emotions she flies through are all believable and upsetting.  Stiller
and Keener are good, but play mean-spirited people; Kinski is also good,
but her character ultimately becomes hopelessly pathetic.  
And that's where the film falters.  In the Company of Men has
characters you could latch on to -- people lived through that story. 
Nobody lives through Your Friends & Neighbors.  A certain level of
cynicism is okay, but I can't believe that we're all as bad off as
LaBute wants us to think.  Some of the story elements aren't completely
believable -- for instance, I find it difficult to believe that
Patrick's and Eckhart's characters would be friends in real life. 
What's to be said for a film that attacks its audience as strongly as
this, and then tells them that there's no way out?  I can only hope that
LaBute is warning us, saying, "Don't let this happen to you."  I'd hate
to think that LaBute wants us to know that we've already let it
happened, simply by being human.  

Author
Dennis Schwartz

YOUR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS (director: Neil LaBute; cast: Aaron Eckhart,
Amy Brenneman, Ben Stiller, Catherine Keener, Jason Patric, Nastassja
Kinski 1998)
LaBute's film is tough to watch, it seems to be more suitable for the
stage, and it is not written for wide audience appeal. It is a story of
the "me only" generation, who inhabit a stylishly fashionable world. The
characters are self-absorbed, greedy, and uncaring. They are consumed by
sex; sex as a power tool for their self-gratification and esteem. The
dialogue is trivial, these characters have little to say, even about
what is consuming them, even though they talk about sex every chance
they get, whether exercising, eating in a trendy restaurant, or in bed.
These 90s characters vaguely remind me of the protaganists in earlier
films, such  as BOB,CAROL, TED, AND ALICE and WHO'S AFRAID OF VIRGINIA
WOOLF, though these characters are not as amusing or witty. Their
coldness is disturbing, and the framed shots and dialogue of the film is
so successful in capturing this mood, that the film becomes wearisome
and is not a particularly appetizing one. It is safe to say, that this
is not recommended as a date movie!
Aaron is the financially successful corporate man who is sexually
unsatisfied by his attractive wife (Amy). He says masturbation is his
best form of sex. Amy is cast as the sexual object, who attracts all of
Aaron's friends, as she tries to work out her sexual problems. Ben is
the thespian/professor, living with his girlfriend, the dykish
Catherine, who only enjoys sex when there is no talking, she is only
interested in her self-gratification. Ben is the one who has lost track
of his integrity, and appears to be pompous and untrustworthy.
Kinski is the museum worker who becomes Catherine's lover. She is a
tough fit in this story line, since her character is undeveloped. In any
case, she meets all the characters in the story through her job in the
museum, and might even be considered the "nice one," but I think that is
a bit of a stretch, no one is really nice in this film.
There are all sorts of  sexual triangles going on among the couples, as
each one plays out his hang-ups. For one, sex is a means of practicing
his proficiency as a macho man, like it was a game; for another, sex is
a means of finding self-worth.
It is tough to critique this film fairly, mainly because it is not meant
to be an entertaining film, as much as its aim is to be an in-your-face
type of drama. But what it lacks, is the necessary depth it would need
to qualify it as a penetrating drama. Nevertheless, it must be commended
for its rawness and honesty to subject matter. Therefore, viewer beware,
what you see is not pleasant, and what it means to you depends on
whether or not you find that this bitter portrayal of relationships, is
one you agree with, or one that is so one-sided in its perverse view,
that you might feel intellectually compromised by it.
If you see this film on a date, then it might be a good idea to go for
few drinks afterward to talk about it and, hopefully, you don't have the
same bitterness to your partner that these characters do.
It might be of interest to note that LaBute is, of all things, a
Morman... uhmmmm!
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Murali Krishnan
Jerry is a drama professor and his wife, Terri, is a writer working in
advertising. Their relationship has become tenuous, as highlighted by the
fact that he feels the need to continuously talk and she desires silence,
particularly during sex. As a result, Jerry has decided to pursue Mary, who
is the wife of his friend Barry. Their relationship is also strained, since
her frigidity is squelching his amorousness. Meanwhile, Jerry and Barry have
another friend, Cary, who is not in a relationship. This is very
understandable since he is an emotionally sadistic jerk who is only
interested in control and domination. The final character in the story is
Cheri, an artist's assistant whom Terri meets in a gallery and develops a
sexual relationship as a response to Jerry's infidelity.
The film is an examination of the characters and the often brutal nature of
relationships. Sex is pervasive in the story, but it is not gratuitous,
because the physical intimacy experienced by partners reflects a deeper
emotional connection, and these are what the characters are missing. This is
not limited to just the couples. The three male characters have an enduring
friendship, but there are subtle homosexual overtones even here, as
witnessed by their locker room behavior.
The title of the film and the fact all the characters have similar, rhyming
names is a suggestion that these characters reflect the actual relationships
of actual people we may know. Indeed, even the close friends in this story
often do not see what transpires below the surface of the complex
relationships of their own friends and neighbors. The writing and acting are
well developed, as the characters are more than flat stereotypes. The main
weakness of the film is a lack of involvement in the story. As we are
watching the story of the characters, there is the feeling that we are
detachedly watching a laboratory experiment and waiting for its outcome.
There is no sense of involvement or empathy with the characters. Perhaps it
is because most of the characters are multi-dimensional and flawed, but this
is not a handicap for a well made film (like "Happiness").
Moderately recommended. This is a dreary story of the difficulty of
relationships. Although it has good material to work with and the characters
are well drawn, it lacks the engaging quality that most good character
dramas have.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Neil LaBute
Starring: Jason Patric, Ben Stiller, Catherine Keener, Amy Brenneman, Aaron
Eckhart, Nastassja Kinski
Neil LaBute must be the kind of director who not only wants to show
something about humanity in his films, but he also wants to follow that in
his daily life.  Some research I've done has led me to discover the guy's a
father of two, a practicing Mormon, and a just all-around good guy.  So why
does his second feature film, following last year's controversial "In the
Company of Men," only stumble upon even worse parts of humanity than that
film did?  What makes a man seem so nice and easy-going in daily life, yet
so intense and bleak in his work?
For those of you who found an intense glee in watching "In the Company of
Men," you're still going to have to brace yourselves for this one.  "Your
Friends and Neighbors" is a scathing, bleak, and ultimately claustrophobic
film that tosses you right in the middle of a sextet of Manhattan yuppies,
and forces you, almost like Malcom MacDowell in "A Clockwork Orange," to
watch as these supposedly normal everyday people tear eachother apart
psychologically.  And dammit if it's not a blast to watch from start to
finish.  From it's opening scene of a man practicing how he has sex minutes
before a hot date to the quick yet unsettling finale, it's as arresting as
anything you'll see this year.  And in 100 minutes, LaBute says so much
about humanity and how our insecurities and hang-ups force us to become
monsters to other people.
Unlike "In the Company of Men," which for those who don't know, dealt with
two businessmen trying to sexually humiliate a deaf woman as a form of
revenge, this film has no plot, yet it manages to widen the scope of the
original, not only to twice as many people, but it makes the monsters out
of both sexes in an equal fashion.  There's still three men who are all, in
varying degrees, total jerks, but there's also three women, and all of them
just need a good slapping.  There's the first couple, Jerry and Teri (a
goutee-d Ben Stiller and a butch-looking Catherine Kenner, the latter the
wife of indie-director Tom DiCillo), who's relationship is on the brinks
because, well, he just talks too much during sex; and then there's the
seemingly normal couple, the married Mary and Barry (Amy Brenneman and
Aaron Eckhart), who are actually at ends with their relationship because
he's a sorry-assed cuckold and her sexual self-esteem is at an end.
When we first meet these people, they're already on the cusp of break-ups,
and even before the halfway point, at least one of their members has had an
affair with varying degrees of success.  For Jerry, he becomes enamored
with Mary (nothing to do with his other film out there at all, I believe),
while Teri discovers love with an artist assistant named Cheri (Nastassja
Kinski) as a form of revenge for Jerry's inability to function at her
sexual, well, preference, and later as a retort against his own
infedelities.
Above everything stands Cary (Jason Patric - yes, that Jason Patric), an
almost-redux of the Chad character from "In the Company of Men," only this
time much, much colder.  His quiet intensity suggests a psychotic in him
just waiting to get out, and as the only one not already involved in a
relationship, he becomes the one who is the general violent Cassanova of
the film, though not only treating women badly, but also his buds, Jerry
and Barry (and just for the record, I noticed the names too, though not
until the end credits).
LaBute seals us off into the world of these six, not letting anyone else in
except for maybe a silent cameo, and the result is a film which wreaks of
claustrophobia set in closed-off locales like restaurants, living rooms,
and saunas (where Patric delivers a magnificent monologue that actually
ranks up there with that one scene in Bergman's "Persona" as one of the
most involving monologues ever put on film).  LaBute has become almost like
a modern-day Balsac, commenting on society with a witty acid tongue and
showing how everyone has one thing on their minds, only this time it's sex.
 Although it's not just sex, but it's also sexual humiliation and sexual
hang-ups, which then lead off into near-psychotic outbursts by the
characters on the nearest person.
But don't be fooled - this isn't totally uncomfortable viewing since,
thanks to LaBute, this is a downright hysterical film, albeit totally
disturbing and unsettling, but nevertheless hysterical.  He laces this film
with a witty screenplay, and allows it to come off less straight as "In the
Company of Men," and more darkly comic, which actually makes it all the
more intense.  He opens up his commentary to both sexes, and is actually
allowed to say more about everyman's ability to devastate everyone else
than he did in his first film.  But the real wonder is how he was able to
not only make everything about this movie totally true, but also make it
hysterically funny to watch.  I mean, this film has got to be at least the
second funniest film I've seen in a couple years.  Seriously.
And with a cast that I had 50% faith in (that is for Stiller, Keener, and
Eckhart, the latter who is unbelievably unrecognizable, thanks to a major
weight gain, a pathetic hair-cut, a tacky moustache - all which makes him
look like a "True Lies"-era Bill Paxton - and most importantly, a 180
degree turn from his character in "In the Company of Men"), I was very
pleasantly surprised when cast choices as weird as Brenneman (from "Fear"),
Kinski, and most of all, Patric, all turned in incredible performances,
making everything funny and best of all, realistic.  Patric, in particular,
comes back completely from his past career.  The man who I thought was the
most boring, dull actor I've ever seen when I saw "Sleepers" not three
years ago turns in a performance which, if seen by anyone, will blast his
career off.  What a strange turn of events.
"Your Friend and Neighbors" is absolutely incredible and riveting and
incredibly enjoyable.  Watching it is like watching a horrific accident
take place right in front of you - you don't want to look, but you don't
want to look away, so you don't and you're munundated with a sight which is
firghtening, realistic, and even entertaining in a sick way.  "Your Friends
and Neighbors" is just like that, which is somewhat like LaBute's first
film, only better.  He has made a little miracle here, not only by opening
up his horizons de criticism, but also by becoming better with direction
(thank god he dropped the tedious, stagy long shots).  Best of all, he's
less snobbish and preachy about it.  It's as if he's not pointing the
finger at anything, but rather saying that everyone's like this, including
himself, and that when we act like this, we deserve any unhappiness which
may befall us.  That's perhaps the most disturbing and accurate accusation
made at humanity in a real long time.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Your Friends and Neighbors (1998)
Jason Patric, Ben Stiller, Catherine Keener, Aaron Eckhart, Amy Brenneman,
 Nastassja Kinski. Written and directed by Neil LaBute. 100 minutes. 
R, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
During sex-ed back in school, the first thing our teacher said was "Sex 
is communication. If you remember nothing else about my class, please try 
to remember that." "Your Friends and Neighbors" is about six people who 
have a great deal of trouble communicating. Variously angry, self-
absorbed, over-analytical or simply needy, they couple in a variety of 
sexual combinations, but no one ever seems to end up satisfied. 
After a screening of this pitch-black comedy, one very upset journalist 
exclaimed "They're not my friends and neighbors! I don't know these 
people. I don't want to know these people!" I said nothing, but realized 
that I do know these people. I dated one of them. To be completely honest,
 there was an awful period of time when I was one of them. Extreme as 
they may be, the characters in "Your Friends and Neighbors" are drawn 
from contemporary culture. Look closely and you'll realize that they 
really are your friends and neighbors, and maybe you as well.
This is the second film from Fort Wayne writer and director Neil LaBute. 
His first, the brilliant "In the Company of Men," created a sensation 
last year and made most "Best of" lists at years-end. A dark study of 
power and cruelty, the film ended with a revelatory scene that forced 
audience members to rethink everything they had witnessed up to that 
moment. "Your Friends and Neighbors" contains no such scene. The last act 
of the film takes place in your head, as you try to sort out the actions 
and motivations of these six people.
Jason Patric is a hard-bodied predator who rehearses his sex talk and 
plays tapes of it on his Walkman during workouts. Asked if he considers 
himself a good person, he angrily snaps "Hey, I'm eating lunch!" then 
tells of using pilfered hospital stationery to exact revenge by sending 
an anonymous note to an ex-girlfriend stating that she had been exposed 
to the HIV virus. He acknowledges that he may face repercussions if 
Judgment Day ever comes, but "until then, we're on my time." 
Aaron Eckhart (Chad from "In the Company of Men") is a rumpled sad sack 
who confesses that his favorite lover is himself. He's not kidding. After 
a failed sex session with Amy Brenneman, his unassuming wife, he 
masturbates beneath the covers while she curls in the fetal position and 
pretends to be asleep. 
Ben Stiller is a pompous dramatics professor whose sex talk infuriates 
his lover, Catherine Keener. "Let's just do it," she growls in 
frustration, "I don't need the narration." Both try to augment their 
hollow love lives by seeking extracurricular partners. Ben invites Amy to 
have an affair with him, while Catherine cozies up to Nastassja Kinski, 
an artist's assistant at a local gallery. After they have sex and Kinski 
asks Keener which part of the lovemaking was her favorite, she replies, 
"I liked the silence best.''
"Your Friends and Neighbors" is often bleak and occasionally nightmarish, 
but also extremely funny. LaBute films his dark character study using a 
number of distancing devices. There are no exterior shots in the story's 
generic city, and the character's names are never spoken. As a result, we 
watch them with an almost clinical detachment, enabling us to laugh, 
rather than cry, at the foibles of the sextet. 
The acting is quite good as well. Jason Patric's intensity has worked 
against him in previous films, but it's completely appropriate for this 
character, and he gives a blistering performance. His finest moment comes 
when he describes his most memorable sexual experience. In a four minute 
scene with no cuts, the camera moves ever closer to Patric's face as he 
delivers an absolutely riveting monologue recounting a violent sexual 
encounter that he remembers with great fondness. It's twisted, horrific 
and a terrific piece of acting.
Aaron Eckhart is exceptional as the antithesis of his "In the Company of 
Men" character, particularly during a wonderfully nuanced confrontational 
scene with his wife. Catherine Keener imbues her damaged character with a 
humanity that softens the cold words she speaks. Her facial expressions 
when Jason Patric verbally assaults her in a bookstore are heartbreaking. 
As the foppish professor, Ben Stiller is appropriately smarmy, while 
Nastassja Kinski gives her character a wispy, beguiling feel. Amy 
Brenneman also impresses as the most enigmatic of the group.
LaBute uses extended takes, stylistic repetition and variations of the 
same scene to give the film symmetry. Sometimes it works and sometimes it 
seems overly mannered. I've watched "Your Friends and Neighbors" three 
times and, at different points, viewed LaBute as a ferociously honest 
visionary and a smug elitist. I'm sure he would be delighted at my 
reactions. His ability to both enthrall and anger is testimony to his 
skills as a filmmaker and provocateur. Neil LaBute is the real deal and 
"Your Friends and Neighbors" is a hell of a movie.

Author
Christopher Null
     What does anyone in Hollywood know?  You *can* make a movie with
absolutely no likeable characters.
     Neil LaBute does exactly that with this highly anticipated follow-up to
IN THE COMPANY OF MEN, a film so anti-humanity it's practically a sequel.
     Sadly, LaBute doesn't quite pull off YOUR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS, and
compared to COMPANY (a film that was this critic's #1 film of 1997), it
pales considerably.
     Why?  Well, turns out there's just not much of a story here.  Sure,
each of these characters are bizarre and twisted enough to amuse you through
the 99-minute running time of the picture, but in the end, you realize there
really wasn't much of a point to any of it.  And LaBute has engineered it
that way: he *doesn't* want you to get attached to these people.  In fact,
the characters don't even have *names!*  (However, they are "named" in the
credits of the film.)
     Just look at the roll call: Keener couldn't look worse if you dragged
her through mud.  Eckhart must have gained 50 pounds for his bohunk role
(and not in a good way).  Brenneman is a nearly frigid woman who still makes
room for adultery.  Stiller is a total basket case.  Kinski is apparently a
brainless moron.  And Patric, well, you'll just have to hear some of his
misogynistic prattle to believe what they've done to him.  Oddly, Patric's
sadistic OB/GYN is the most compelling player in the bunch, for sheer shock
value alone.  Still, it goes to show that just because you *can* make a
movie with six hateful characters... doesn't mean you *should.*
     NEIGHBORS also suffers from hideous cinematography (by Nancy Schreiber)
which is out of focus half the time and bad editing (by Joel Plotch) that
feels pieced together with scissors and snot.  Altogether, LaBute just seems
out of sorts doing an ensemble piece that tries to tell too many stories but
ends up telling them all badly.
     Not that I blame him for trying.  It certainly was an ambitious project
and it does have some pretty hilarious moments.
Director: Neil LaBute
Producer: Steve Golan, Jason Patric
Writer: Neil LaBute
Starring: Amy Brenneman, Aaron Eckhart, Catherine Keener, Nastassja Kinski,
Jason Patric, Ben Stiller
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        To call "Your Friends and Neighbors" a dark film is to call
The Beatles a moderately successful band.  This feature, the second
from writer/director Neil LaBute, continues his tradition of placing
despicable characters in unpleasant situations, a motif he introduced
with last year's "In the Company of Men."
        The story revolves around the lives of three couples
(identified in the film's end credits as Jerry, Cheri, Terri, Cary,
Barry and Mary, though their names are never spoken in the film).  All
six of our characters are unhappy with their love life, and several of
them decide to make a change... though none of them realize the others
are also miserable.  They don't know it at the time, but their actions
will actually leave them more unfulfilled than they were before.
        The casting is interesting.  Jason Patric, the villain from
"Speed 2," is the film's most loathesome character: a doctor who
practices "sex talk" when he's alone so he can sound sincere in bed.
He berates his lover for daring to have her period, fondly recalls
raping a high-school classmate, and absently plays "catch" with a
plastic fetus while talking on the phone, eventually drop-kicking it
down the hospital hallway.  (I was reminded of Ike from "South Park":
"Don't kick the baby!")
        Ben Stiller is a college professor whose relationship is on
the rocks because he likes to talk during sex, a quirk that his
girlfriend hates.  Her coldness doesn't bother him, though, since he's
got the hots for Amy Brenneman, a beautiful writer who's working on an
article about the art of lovemaking.  She's obviously attracted to Ben
as well, and all would be well if she didn't happen to be the wife of
his best friend.
        Aaron Eckhart, the most twisted person from "In the Company of
Men," is one of this film's most likeable characters.  He's the only
guy who doesn't really do anything wrong: he loves his wife and would
never dream of being unfaithful, although he is frustrated with her
conservative approach to sex.  He confesses to his friends that
although he adores her, she is unable to provide him with the kind of
pleasure he can achieve with his own hand.
        Stiller's girlfriend, played by Catherine Keener, meets
Nastassja Kinski, an assistant artist employed at a local gallery.
Their friendship quickly grows complicated, progressing from strangers
to buddies to lesbianism over the course of three scenes.  Kinski is
the closest thing to a voice of reason contained in the film: all five
of the other characters wander into the art gallery at some point and
engage in frightfully similar (and hilarious) conversations with her.
Along with Eckhart, Kinski is the only truly likeable character.
Sweet and loyal, she's determined to do everything she can to make her
new lesbian lover happy... to the point of smothering her with
kindness.
        That's our cast and storyline, and in case you missed it, I'll
reiterate: this is a BLEAK film.  It's a train-wreck: the sight is
horrible and appaling, but you can't turn away.  LaBute has crafted a
movie so shocking that it can't really qualify as entertainment;
however, the message is an important one.  If you've ever thought
about cheating on the one you love, I promise, this film will change
your mind.
        LaBute wants the audience to squirm, and he achieves his goal
by grabbing our noses and pulling us into his world.  We have no
distance from any of the characters; the film is shot almost entirely
with close-ups, a little touch that made me fidget uncomfortably in my
seat.  This, coupled with the fact that none of the characters' names
are given in the course of the story, provides an intimate yet
anonymous portrait of six lives on the fast track to disaster.
        I watched the "lesbian" portions of the film with some
amusement.  Since the release of "Chasing Amy," it seems that all
independent movies are required to include a character who suddenly
realizes that he or she is either gay or bisexual midway through the
show.  "Your Friends and Neighbors" does not disappoint in that
regard.  I'd criticize this trend a little more if my own indie
screenplay, "Four Sides of the Triangle," didn't have the exact same
problem.  Oops.
        I've awarded this film three and one-half stars, which is
surely the highest rating I've ever given to a movie that I did not
particularly enjoy.  But this is not a mistake: I don't think LaBute
intends for us to LIKE the film.  He wants to make us miserable,
and thereby warn us of the effects that cheating and dishonesty can
have on a relationship.  He accomplishes his goal: no one who sees
this movie will forget the lesson.  I truly believe that every person
in the world should watch "Your Friends and Neighbors" at least
once.  It would do much to solve society's marital problems.
        (Oh, one interesting thing I noticed.  In "There's Something
About Mary," Ben Stiller plays a really nice guy obsessed with a woman
named Mary.  In "Your Friends and Neighbors," Ben Stiller plays a
really creepy guy obsessed with a woman named Mary.  I've heard of
typecasting an actor, but this is ridiculous.)

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com

Author
Ryan Davis
Your Friends And Neighbors is a rather bizarre film about 6 people, who hop
in and out of bed with each other. Written and directed by Neil LaBute, who'
s first film, "In The Company Of Men" was simply marvelous, disappoints a
bit here with this one.
The story involves two couples(Ben Stiller & Catherine Keener and Aaron
Eckhart & Amy Brenneman), an artist assistant(Nastassja Kinski), and an
egotistical women abuser(Jason Patric). The character's names are not
apparent and are not mentioned in the entire movie.
Each of the characters has their own sexual style and they don't seem to
"merge" together well. So the group experiments behind their respective
partners back. There are some hysterical  scenes, one involves Jason Patric,
Aaron Eckhart, and Ben Stiller's characters. They are all in a sauna,
talking about their best "lay", when Jason Patric's character makes a
surprising confession. The whole scene is hilarious and exceptionally well
written and acted.
The enjoyed this movie, although it seemed a tad lengthy(even though it
only runs 99 min.). The film's cast is exceptional with Oscar caliber
performances by Catherine Keener, Aaron Eckhart, and Jason Patric.  I would
not recommend this film, to people who are offended by conversations that
are very sexually explicit. It did seem to offend people, more than half of
the people in the theater left during the film. Although Your Friends And
Neighbors doesn't have the power of LaBute's earlier film it still manages
to be somewhat entertaining and funny, while maintaining a melancholy
philosophy on human relationships.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, check out http://surf.to/joblo
Neil LaBute follows his critically acclaimed indie sensation from 1997,
IN THE COMPANY OF MEN, with a broader look at relationships and the
innappropriate behaviour of adults in contemporary society.
PLOT:
This film follows the lives of three couples: one married, one living
together, and two singles. We waltz through their everyday lives, and
listen in on their private dinners, sauna sessions and the multitude of
discussions about sex, life and the ups and downs of relationships.
CRITIQUE:
Annoying character study starts off with some thought-provoking ideas,
but eventually turns into a dialogue driven film that doesn't provide
the audience with any one character to give half a crap about. I liked
this movie at first because it seemed to bring up some interesting
queries likely to be discussed with my better half later on that night.
But soon enough, it downshifted into another boring tale about the
immoral actions of many of the "bad" people in today's society, and the
self-centered nature of life in these awful modern times. Unfortunately
for me, I could not stand to watch a film that spend the entire hour
and a half studying people who apparently don't feel much, have little
conscience, and whine incessantly. If it were only one or two of them
who didn't know what they wanted out of sex and/or their relationships,
then I might've been able to let it slide, but when all six characters
spend the entire runtime kvetching about their uselessness as human
beings. Well, let me tell you...it just got irritating.
Having said that, the acting was rock-solid on all sides, with special
kudos to Eckhart and Keener. But the real standout was Jason Patric
(who also produced this film) whose performance is one of the best of
his wobbly career. He played this prick to perfection, and really
pulled out all of the stops during one confrontation scene with Keener
in the bookstore (chilling). His cool performance is definitely one of
the reasons that I would barely recommend this film despite its
repetitive nature, lack of redeeming quality and unresolved ending.
Another reason to see this film is the hilarious opening credit score
that features a warped acoustic version of Metallica's "Sandman" song.
And, oh yes, none of the characters in this film call each other by
their names because director Labute apparently wants us to be able to
recognize these people within ourselves and others. Well, guess what?
Despite seeing little aspects of people I know in some of the folks in
this movie, the general lack of morals, compassion, feeling and
humanity (Kubrick anyone?) gave me very little reason to care or even
appreciate any of the lives of these people. It made the film
unbelievable, boring and most importantly, unentertaining.  
PS: Mrs. JoBlo cared even less about any of the characters in this
film, and gave it an even 5/10.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Director Neil LaBute is a mormon.
Aaron Eckhart was also the star of LaBute's first big-screen picture,
IN THE COMPANY OF MEN.
Amy Brenneman's mother is a superior court judge.
Catherine Keener has starred in all four of indie-director Tom
DiCillo's films.
Nastassja Kinski's real name is Nastassja Naksyznyski.
Nastassja Kinski spent some days in a German prison when a sin of youth
caught up with her. She had used public transportation several times
without paying, hadn't paid the fines, and hadn't worked in a hospital
as she was sentenced to do by a juvenile court. In 1978 she was finally
arrested. She spent 5 days in prison despite being a celebrity at that
time. After five days she was released early because of good conduct.
Jason Patric's real name is Jason Miller Jr., son of actor Jason Miller
(who played the priest in the original EXORCIST (7.5/10) movie). Jason
is also the grandson of legendary actor Jackie Gleason, and was married
to actress Robin Wright for two years from 1988 to 1990.

Author
Ryan Davis
        Your Friends And Neighbors is a rather bizarre film about 6 people, who
hop in and out of bed with each other. Written and directed by Neil LaBute,
who's first film, "In The Company Of Men" was simply marvelous, disappoints a
bit here with this one.
        The story involves two couples(Ben Stiller & Catherine Keener and Aaron
Eckhart & Amy Brenneman), an artist assistant(Nastassja Kinski), and an
egotistical women abuser(Jason Patric). The character's names are not apparent
and are not mentioned in the entire movie.
        Each of the characters has their own sexual style and they don't seem
to "merge" together well. So the group experiments behind their respective
partners back. There are some hysterical  scenes, one involves Jason Patric,
Aaron Eckhart, and Ben Stiller's characters. They are all in a sauna, talking
about their best "lay", when Jason Patric's character makes a surprising
confession. The whole scene is hilarious and exceptionally well written and
acted.
        The enjoyed this movie, although it seemed a tad lengthy(even though
it only runs 99 min.). The film's cast is exceptional with Oscar caliber
performances by Catherine Keener, Aaron Eckhart, and Jason Patric.  I would
not recommend this film, to people who are offended by conversations that are
very sexually explicit. It did seem to offend people, more than half of the
people in the theater left during the film. Although Your Friends And
Neighbors doesn't have the power of LaBute's earlier film it still manages to
be somewhat entertaining and funny, while maintaining a melancholy philosophy
on human relationships.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        To call "Your Friends and Neighbors" a dark film is to call
The Beatles a moderately successful band.  This feature, the second from
writer/director Neil LaBute, continues his tradition of placing
despicable characters in unpleasant situations, a motif he introduced
with last year's "In the Company of Men."
        The story revolves around the lives of three couples (identified
in the film's end credits as Jerry, Cheri, Terri, Cary, Barry and Mary,
though their names are never spoken in the film).  All six of our
characters are unhappy with their love life, and several of them decide
to make a change... though none of them realize the others are also
miserable.  They don't know it at the time, but their actions will
actually leave them more unfulfilled than they were before.
        The casting is interesting.  Jason Patric, the villain from
"Speed 2," is the film's most loathesome character: a doctor who practices
"sex talk" when he's alone so he can sound sincere in bed.  He berates his
lover for daring to have her period, fondly recalls raping a high-school
classmate, and absently plays "catch" with a plastic fetus while talking
on the phone, eventually drop-kicking it down the hospital hallway.  (I
was reminded of Ike from "South Park": "Don't kick the baby!")
        Ben Stiller is a college professor whose relationship is on the
rocks because he likes to talk during sex, a quirk that his girlfriend
hates.  Her coldness doesn't bother him, though, since he's got the hots
for Amy Brenneman, a beautiful writer who's working on an article about
the art of lovemaking.  She's obviously attracted to Ben as well, and all
would be well if she didn't happen to be the wife of his best friend.
        Aaron Eckhart, the most twisted person from "In the Company of
Men," is one of this film's most likeable characters.  He's the only
guy who doesn't really do anything wrong: he loves his wife and would
never dream of being unfaithful, although he is frustrated with her
conservative approach to sex.  He confesses to his friends that although
he adores her, she is unable to provide him with the kind of pleasure he
can achieve with his own hand.
        Stiller's girlfriend, played by Catherine Keener, meets Nastassja
Kinski, an assistant artist employed at a local gallery.  Their friendship
quickly grows complicated, progressing from strangers to buddies to
lesbianism over the course of three scenes.  Kinski is the closest thing
to a voice of reason contained in the film: all five of the other
characters wander into the art gallery at some point and engage in
frightfully similar (and hilarious) conversations with her.  Along with
Eckhart, Kinski is the only truly likeable character.  Sweet and loyal,
she's determined to do everything she can to make her new lesbian lover
happy... to the point of smothering her with kindness.
        That's our cast and storyline, and in case you missed it, I'll
reiterate: this is a BLEAK film.  It's a train-wreck: the sight is
horrible and appaling, but you can't turn away.  LaBute has crafted a
movie so shocking that it can't really qualify as entertainment; however,
the message is an important one.  If you've ever thought about cheating on
the one you love, I promise, this film will change your mind.
        LaBute wants the audience to squirm, and he achieves his goal by
grabbing our noses and pulling us into his world.  We have no distance
from any of the characters; the film is shot almost entirely with close-
ups, a little touch that made me fidget uncomfortably in my seat.  This,
coupled with the fact that none of the characters' names are given in the
course of the story, provides an intimate yet anonymous portrait of six
lives on the fast track to disaster.
        I watched the "lesbian" portions of the film with some amusement.
Since the release of "Chasing Amy," it seems that all independent movies
are required to include a character who suddenly realizes that he or she
is either gay or bisexual midway through the show.  "Your Friends and
Neighbors" does not disappoint in that regard.  I'd criticize this trend
a little more if my own indie screenplay, "Four Sides of the Triangle,"
didn't have the exact same problem.  Oops.
        I've awarded this film three and one-half stars out of a possible
five, which is surely the highest rating I've ever given to a movie that
I did not particularly enjoy.  But this is not a mistake: I don't think
LaBute intends for us to LIKE the film.  He wants to make us miserable,
and thereby warn us of the effects that cheating and dishonesty can have
on a relationship.  He accomplishes his goal: no one who sees this movie
will forget the lesson.  I truly believe that every person in the world
should watch "Your Friends and Neighbors" at least once.  It would do much
to solve society's marital problems.
        (Oh, one interesting thing I noticed.  In "There's Something About
Mary," Ben Stiller plays a really nice guy obsessed with a woman named
Mary.  In "Your Friends and Neighbors," Ben Stiller plays a really
creepy guy obsessed with a woman named Mary.  I've heard of typecasting
an actor, but this is ridiculous.)

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Your_Friends_&_Neighbors_ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
_Your_Friends_&_Neighbors_, writer-director Neil LaBute's follow-up to his
incendiary debut, _In_the_Company_of_Men_, does not have the sensational
"men are monsters" hook of the previous film, but it is every bit as
caustic--and the effect is nearly as fascinating.  This "modern immorality
tale," as the ads state, is a scathing, brutally funny, and ultimately
disturbing satire of sexual and social mores.
The six central characters' names rhyme: Mary, Barry, Terri, Cheri, Cary,
and Jerry.  But any point to this bit of cutesy preciousness is moot, for
the characters' names (or, for that matter, the city name) are never spoken
throughout the entire film, adding a discomforting intimacy--it's as if we,
the audience, are witnessing our "friends" and "neighbors."  Why the
quotes?  Because while these six interact within the same overlapping
households and social circles under the guise of friendship, what they do
is distinctly unneighborly.  Amy Brenneman and Aaron Eckhart's characters
are unhappily married; he isn't getting the job done in bed, and he'd much
rather pleasure himself, anyway.  Brenneman (since the character names
assigned in the end credits are never used, neither will I) seeks something
"different" in the arms of one of Eckhart's best "friends", Ben Stiller,
who himself is having trouble with his live-in girlfriend, the "unfeminine"
Catherine Keener.  So it is not terribly surprising when Keener, who hates
Stiller's habit of talking during the act, seeks--and finds--silent sex
with another woman, Nastassja Kinski.  Kinski is an "artist's assistant" at
a gallery that is visited at various points by nearly each individual
member of the group, which is rounded out by the brash, egotistical,
misogynistic Jason Patric.
It sounds like a mess, and it is; there's no rhythm or recognizable
structure to the entire film, jumping between characters and situations in
seemingly random fashion.  Ironically, though, LaBute's fractured style
heightens the reality of the events, which roughly assemble with the
imperfect coherence of strung-together memories.  Nonetheless, the jumble
is jarring, but the rough mosaic is made consistently engrossing by
LaBute's acidly comic dialogue, the intriguingly amoral (and well-rounded)
characters, and the crack acting ensemble.  
The clear standout in the cast is Patric.  While his character is an even
more extreme version of Eckhart's notorious Chad in _Men_, Patric's
earnestness prevents him from becoming a complete cartoon--which makes him
more all the more frightening.  Speaking of Eckhart, he is barely
recognizable here--and completely convincing--as slick, confident Chad's
complete opposite: fat, unkempt, and completely emasculated.  Brenneman may
betray her husband, but she makes the audience never lose sight of the
purehearted loneliness that drives her character to act in such a way; the
same, but to a lesser degree, goes for Keener, whose character is much
harder around the edges; and Stiller.  If one character remains a cipher,
it is Kinski's, who is mainly seen as an aloof object of desire (she is,
however, given some emotional gumption in her final scene).
As funny as _Your_Friends_&_Neighbors_ often is, I wouldn't exactly call
it an _entertaining_ film.  As surreally exaggerated as some of the
characters and situations appear to be, the emotional fallout is painfully
genuine.  Long after the film is over, you may find yourself in deep
discussion about _Your_Friends_&_Neighbors_ with your friends and
neighbors--at least, those whom you _believe_ to be your friends and
neighbors.  (opens August 19)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Matt Williams
Those familiar with Neil LaBute's directoral debut, In the Company of
Men, know that he knows how to tap the baser instincts of mankind. His
second film, Your Friends and Neighbors, continues in the same spirit,
showing the depths of mental and sexual cruelty of which both men and
women are capable.
The film focuses on three men and three women, who, while not alone in
their world, are the only ones with speaking roles in the film.  There's
one married couple, one "together" couple, and two singles.
The married couple are Barry and Mary (Aaron Eckhart and Amy Brenneman),
who, behind a happy facade, are having marital troubles.  Mary simply
wants something different... and that may mean Barry's best friend Jerry
(Ben Stiller), who's having relationship problems of his own, with his
girlfriend Terri (Catherine Keener).
Now, Terri is unsatisfied in her relationship with Jerry, and in fact
seems to get more enjoyment out of her new friendship with an artist's
assistant named Cheri (Nastassja Kinski).  Meanwhile, the single
womanizer Cary (Jason Patric) is on the prowl...and may just be true
evil personified.
None of the characters have names in the film (until the end credits,
where the rhyming nominations seem a further exercise in anonymity).
This serves to put a more personal spin on the whole movie...after all,
they are "Your" Friends and Neighbors.
But they're not people you'd really like to get that close to.
Seemingly normal on the outside, each and every one is a flawed specimen
of humanity.  Or are they the status quo?  (Shudder.)  In either case,
you're simultaneously repulsed yet riveted to the screen.
Jason Patric and Catherine Keener are the standouts in a talented cast,
and also the creepiest of the bunch.  Of the six, only Nastassja
Kinski's character is never fully explored...and she actually turns out
to be the nicest one here.  Perhaps LaBute has problems writing for
normal people.
Your Friends and Neighbors is never as sharp as his In the Company of
Men, but it comes close, and is a more ambitious undertaking.  LaBute's
sophomore slump here is only slight.
This is not a date movie.  It is fascinating to watch, but does little
to enhance a harmonious relationship.  In fact, it is the type of movie
that makes you want to shun any and all human contact whatsoever.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Chad Polenz
1998, R, 100 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes] 
Starring: Ben Stiller (Jerry), Amy Brenneman (Mary), Aaron Eckhart 
(Barry), Catherine Keener (Terri); produced by Steve Golin, Jason 
Patric; written and directed by Neil LaBute. 
Seen September 5, 1998 at 10 p.m. at the Sony Nickelodeon Theaters 
(Boston, MA), theater #2, with Matt Perreault for free using my 
Sony/Loews critic's pass. [theater rating: **1/2: okay seats, sound, and 
picture] 
Modern society is now inundated with more sex and sexuality than it ever 
has been before, from teenage sitcoms to NC-17-rated films about 
fetishes. The biggest debate of the subject is whether or not it affects 
reality or just reflects it. "Your Friends And Neighbors" takes a 
different approach as it's a film that revolves almost entirely around 
sex and how can be used for both pain and pleasure even within a small 
circle of friends. 
One of the most important aspects of the film that most be noted and 
analyzed before the film can really be dissected as a whole is 
writer/director Neil LaBute's basic setup and some of the unique methods 
he employs to tell the story. Firstly, and most importantly is the fact 
the script tells a rather complex, detailed story of lust, betrayal, 
arrogance, hypocrisy, greed, and just plain stupidity between six 
different characters (three men, three women), without hardly any 
supporting characters, (a few have a line or two), mostly extras. 
Everything they do will somehow affect another character and ultimately 
come full-circle back to themselves, whether it be positive or negative. 
But to just state this is arbitrary, and explaining and criticizing the 
process is difficult. LaBute's ability to tell his story through a few 
characters is a remarkable feat, but what's specifically impressive is 
the fact the characters' names are never revealed until the end credits 
roll. For the sake of this review, I will describe the characters and 
refer to them as their main characteristic. Another interesting 
accomplishment is the fact every scene takes place inside with limited 
focus. We're always able to tell where the characters are (someone's 
home, the gym, a restaurant, hotel room, etc.), but what the city they 
live in, what year it is, what the society is like, etc. is relatively 
unknown. The film is a complete character study with the tight, intense 
drama of the theater. 
No one plot dominates the story, which makes the first act a bit tedious 
for its lack of background. We're simply dropped in on the characters' 
lives and are expected to figure out the rest. The characters are a 
group of middle-class white people who are all successful at what they 
do, but they're only concern right now seems to be their sex lives. 
First there's Barry (Eckhart) and Mary (Brenneman), a married couple who 
are going through a dry spell not unlike many other couples in other 
situations who don't know what they're problem is. Barry is kind of a 
dorky businessman who loves his wife, and the sex they have, but doesn't 
have a lot of ambition - he just follows everyone else. Mary is a writer 
of some sort, but lacks aggression and emotion like her husband and is 
the meekness character, but ironically, doesn't hesitate to commit 
adultery just to feel something. LaBute's script does a good job in 
characterizing Mary and Barry as individuals, but is very light on 
chemistry and connection between the two. Obviously, this is the theme, 
which is enhanced by the actors' good performances, but at the same time 
seems just a bit hollow. 
Another couple is Jerry (Stiller) and Terri (Keener) who live together 
and seem to have been involved with each other for a long time, yet they 
constantly argue over anything and everything. Their sex life is also 
fraught with problems and for some reason they continue to do it 
throughout their infidelitous relationship. If only one aspect of the 
film could use improvement, it would be this area. It's natural for a 
married couple to become bored with each other, but why would two people 
who can barely stand each other continue to have sex and live together? 
What did they ever see in the other person to begin with? LaBute never 
really answers, but since the film is more concerned with the payoff 
than the process, it still makes for good drama, tension, and manip
ulation so intricate and deceitful it's fascinating. 
Two other characters act as catalysts, Cary (Jason Patric) and Cheri 
(Natassja Kinski). Cary is an arrogant, hostile sex-maniac who defines 
the word "bastard." Somehow he is able to bend women to his will, either 
through charm or just attitude, into getting his way. He's the kind of 
guy everyone should stay away from as we realize he's secretly 
perverted, but somehow Barry finds comfort in his company, although 
Jerry is always nervous around him. Patric gives an outstanding 
performance, so much so that we want to know more about him despite how 
intimidating and unlikable he is. Cheri is a character LaBute uses as a 
catalyst to see how the other characters react to her. She works in an 
art museum and at some point throughout the film, each character will 
engage her in almost the exact same conversation and her reaction is 
always different, from becoming involved in a relationship with one, to 
brushing it off as small talk with another, to being outright appalled 
by yet another. She's a sweet woman, perhaps the most normal of any of 
the characters, and although her symbolism is obvious, her role as the 
outsider is the most relatable. 
I will not reveal who cheats on who and how each character is 
specifically affected by the others' action, as that's the hook of the 
film. The first two acts begin to set up the characters and each's 
scenarios, but it's often difficult to tell what they will do about it 
and with whom. The result is sometimes surprising, other times 
predictable, but the actual course of actions is always fascinating. For 
a while everyone has their fun, but ultimately each character's guilt, 
attitude, or ignorance will disserve them. 
One of the most important things to note is how realistic the story is 
supposed to be. Since the characters only interact with each other there 
isn't much pop culture references, as almost everything has a deeper 
philosophy behind it. Are we to assume that these people are, as the 
title states, our friends and neighbors? I don't know of anyone going 
through the same situations as these people. Often times the film is not 
unlike a network melodrama, other times situations are like those not 
seen outside a porno movie. But what this film does have that the others 
don't is repercussions in the end. Although the film creates its own 
reality, it goes to show that even the immoral aren't immortal. 
In what way "Your Friends And Neighbors" is supposed to work is open to 
interpretation. It definitely has a lot to say about the price that 
comes with infidelity, but it could have been even better had it 
expanded on that theme more specifically. Still, it's an accomplishment 
in film-making because it has put a timeless theme into a modern 
perspective. 


Author
Jerry Saravia
Neil LaBute is a talented writer and director and I noticed it right away when
I saw his directorial debut, "In the Company of Men," a lacerating black comedy
about man's inhumanity towards women, and men. I've seen the film twice and I
was both shocked and gratified by the film's depiction of its characters,
especially the insensitive, insulting Chad, marvelously played by Aaron
Eckhart. "Your Friends and Neighbors" is LaBute's second effort, and it is less
angry and less intoxicating than it should have been. I am shocked to say this,
but LaBute has crafted a fairly, dare I say, tame and flat film of little
consequence. 
The film begins with people who have no interest in developing healthy
relationships with each other. We see the contemptuous, masculine, arrogant
Cary (Jason Patric) who prepares for a date by practicing his lines in bed
while writhing with faux pleasure. There's also Man (played by Ben Stiller) who
tries desperately to please his wife (Catherine Keener) but she doesn't like it
when he talks while copulating - "F---ing is not a time for sharing". When she
has an affair, she coldly states that the best part of sex is the silence. In
retribution, Man pursues another guys wife (a bland Amy Brenneman), who wants
desperately to find a man who can maintain an erection. Brenneman's husband
(played by a porcine, mustached Aaron Eckhart) can't seem to satisfy his wife
so he masturbates, even while she's in bed - he gets more pleasure from himself
than with anyone else. However, when they go shopping together, he insists that
the best method of resuscitating their sex life is to "treat each other like
meat". 
"Your Friends and Neighbors" is LaBute's attempt to show that relationships
have no saving grace, and that the partners gradually grow bored with each
other. Unfortunately, his characters lack sting and depth - they are glamorous
nobodies wafting through their existence with no desire or interest in each
other. This is quite a cynical point to make, but LaBute infuses this tale with
a static charge that renders everything as flat and monotonous. The movie is
devoid of color and humor, and the characters emerge as vapid ciphers. Compare
this to Woody Allen's "Manhattan" and "Deconstructing Harry" and you'll see
that Woody goes well beyond the primary cynicism - he explores what makes his
characters tick. 
As a writer, LaBute does have some witty, anarchic moments, though. There is
the running gag of an art-gallery assistant (Nastassja Kinski) who stares at
the same unseen art object with each of the main characters - they ask her the
same questions with the same exact responses. Then there's the undeniably
well-cast Jason Patric (doing some of his best work since "After Dark, My
Sweet") as the meanest, least likable character since Chad from "In the Company
of Men." Patric has two virtuoso scenes: one set in a locker room with his
friends where he confesses that a homosexual encounter in high school was the
best lay he ever had, and another scene where he mutilates Keener with such
piercing words that she is reduced to tears - an interesting scene because it
shows that Keener may not be such a frigid woman after all. 
Beyond some frank sexual talk and manners, Your Friends and Neighbors is dull
to sit through and the characters are ill-defined and impossible to care about.
LaBute is still a talent to watch for but he needs to imbue his characters with
some degree of humanity so that his dialogue can cut some fairly deep wounds in
all of us. "In the Company of Men" could have been a sick joke about teasing a
deaf woman and then dumping her for the sake of revenge, but LaBute was after
bigger game and revealed some strong character personalities. "Your Friends and
Neighbors" is about people who screw each other with no rhyme or reason. It's
just a sick joke. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, concerns or general comments at jerry@movieluver.com
or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
4 stars
It's true how the saying goes - "if you want reality, look out the
window."  The fascinating thing about watching a Neil LaBute film is
that they serve as the windows, peaking into lives of disillusioned
oddballs; people who represent different elements of society, all
trapped inside LaBute's narrative prisms that reflect different parts of
ourselves back at us.
LaBute's astounding debut film In the Company of Men quickly glided in
and out of selected Australian cinemas last year, suffering from more
than just a few negative reviews, and presumably relied on audience word
of mouth for the few people who were fortunate enough to see it.  The
film was meticulously plotted and sharply directed by LaBute, who laced
every one of its scenes with dark - some might say twisted - humor, not
before developing a screenplay that functioned both as a character study
and a manifestation of the director's biting views on corporate life in
America.   He turned a roller coaster of a screenplay into a power house
film; a movie that builds blazingly fast physiological momentum in the
minds of those who watch it, before the inevitably nasty conclusion that
puts a new resonance on everything that preceded it.  It's an experience
that's hard to shake.
Also hard to shake - but on a different level - is Your Friends and
Neighbors, which, like the film before it, promises to tell us as much
about its characters as it does ourselves.  In essence, the film is very
much like a stage play in that its settings and backdrops are not
crucial to its plot; for instance, LaBute often films in a supermarket
or a bookstore because, heck, these are places for us simply to listen
to his characters talk.  And they do talk.  The vast majority of the
film is dialogue based, and this ensures lengthy conversations between
the five principal characters.
It was hard to write a synopsis for this film, since no character's name
is ever mentioned in all of its running time - the characters talk to
each other as if they are strangers (my kingdom for a festival press
kit!).  Only after the film could I find out their names.  Drama teacher
Jerry (Ben Stiller) is told to "shut the fuck up" during sex by his
girlfriend Terri (Catherine Keener) - it appears he talks too much.
Jerry's best friend Barry (Aaron Eckhart, who played Chad to perfection
in In the Company of Men) is having sexual difficulties with his wife
Mary (Amy Brenneman).  He is not worried about the situation, however,
because Barry firmly believes that no woman can make love to him quite
like he can.  Jerry and Barry's pal Cary (Jason Patric) is a ruthlessly
honest and aggressive womanizer.  All the characters search for
happiness in the form of sexual bliss, and none of them can seem to find
satisfaction (LaBute includes a lesbian, a couple of affairs and a
retelling of a homosexual encounter for good measure).
Your Friends and Neighbors is really about a failure of communication in
society, in an age where sexual innocence has not only been lost, it's
been trampled on.  It's hard to pinpoint the foundations of the film's
themes - exactly where it is coming or what it is trying to achieve -
but that's all part of LaBute's confronting direction.  With tight
camera shots that seemed shoved right in front of the actors faces, he
brings us right into the picture, then tells us everything we think we
need to know, only for us to later realize that he really didn't tell us
much at all.
That's not to say that the dialogue in Your Friends and Neighbors is
shallow, instead, it's just very restrained, and flows awkwardly with a
strong sense of familiarity - a sense that we've talked about similar
things ourselves, even though the truth might be that we've never
mustered up enough courage to ask our friends about the best fuck
they've ever had (and, if this is a frequent topic in your
conversations, chances are you'll have never heard anything quite like
Jason Patric's post-gym shower story).  With so much talking but so
little reflection on their own lives, we must presume that sometime
off-screen the characters are doing the real talking, the soul-searching
within themselves.  We must presume this because otherwise the
characters become too robotic, too cold to be intimate with, but so damn
ruthless that we can't help but enjoy watching and being disgusted by
them - they're all Mr Hydes and no Dr Jekles.  We can presume, safely,
that much of LaBute's power comes from the things he doesn't tell us.
He is certainty a glass-is-half-empty kind of director, but it would be
naive to presume that he doesn't have reason for being so.  LaBute's a
director without subtlety, and a writer whose screenplays are tight,
somber and aggressive in tone.  Whilst Your Friends and Neighbors is not
the incredible film that In the Compmany of Men was, it's an
experimental piece that's works on similar levels (although toned down a
few notches in comparison).  LaBute does take some missteps on the way,
including allowing his narrative to become a little too void of action,
and the film - although scripted precisely and sharply - feels a little
messy upon completion.
Without going into too much detail - I am already pushing my word
limit - the film's cast all contribute excellent performances.  Ben
Stiller displays a confident yet reserved charisma as the scheming
Jerry, and Aaron Eckhart and Jason Patric are also fine.  The women fare
less well, mainly because the men took the meatiest parts.
"If you want reality, look out the window."  Screw that.  Open the door,
and climb inside the world of Neil LaBute.  You know you want to.  Just
don't come running back to me and don't, whatever you do, say I didn't
warn you.


Author
David N. Butterworth
        Savage, perceptive, and brutally funny, "Your Friends & Neighbors"
is a perfect antidote for anyone considering cheating on his or her partner.
        Continuing where he left of with last year's "In the Company of
Men," writer/director Neil LaBute has crafted another unsettling film in
which his characters say the kinds of things many of us would be hard
pressed to admit to even thinking.
        Jerry and Terri, although names seem inconsequential in "Your
Friends & Neighbors," are live-in lovers whose problems in the bedroom set
the film's wheels of deceit in motion.  Jerry (Ben Stiller) likes to talk
during sex, but it affects Terri's concentration.  Terri is played by
Catherine Keener, who finally gets the neurotic anger bit right.
        Jerry teaches theater to college students but occupations, too,
appear to count for little in this film (for what it's worth, Terri writes
advertising copy for the sides of tampon boxes--surely only a man could
have come up with that?).  The on-the-outs couple get together with some
old married friends of theirs, Barry and Mary, played by "Men"'s Aaron
Eckhart and "Heat"'s Amy Brenneman, who are experiencing some sexual
dissatisfaction of their own.  They've barely finished with dessert when
Jerry secretly asks Mary out on a date.  And it's not exactly for coffee.
        Barry likes to hang with his misogynistic friend Cary (Jason Patric
in a brilliant performance of such psychological cruelty it'll make your
skin crawl).  The two men compare notes by boasting about their sexual
exploits at, where else, the health club.  Jerry sometimes hangs out with
them too, but it's pretty obvious he doesn't care for Cary's misplaced
machismo.
        Nastassja Kinski (playing an artist's assistant called Cheri)
rounds out the sexually suspect sextet.  Along with falling for one of the
film's fivesome, she's a key player in a recurring gallery motif that
empirically strips social intercourse down to its most mundane roots.
        Although the entire cast is laudable, Patric is a standout.  In a
particularly uncomfortable episode, the camera slowly zooms in on him
delivering a scene-stealing monologue.  With a bead of sweat hanging from
his lower lid, Patric has the look and all of the malevolence of Alex in "A
Clockwork Orange."  At times LaBute's envelope-pushing dialogue seems
designed solely for shock value, but Patric's performance cannot be
faulted; it's hard to believe this is the same actor who floundered his way
through "Speed 2."
        Cary is a guy without an ounce of sympathy, sensitivity or, let's
face it, moral fiber.  If he was *your* best friend, you'd need some
serious counseling too.
        The film, which toys with the idea of what constitutes a good or
bad person, is at its best when its characters go picnicking on one another
with caustic, uncompromising viciousness.  It's not always pretty, but it
is insightful and LaBute milks the humor from these troubled situations
with consummate skill.
        Like the inscription "hold me" that Mary scrawls in a book she
lends to Jerry, "Your Friends & Neighbors" will make you want to hold onto
what you have--the wife who chews her fingernails, the husband who watches
too much television--recognizing that there are friends and neighbors out
there not worth having.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Gramercy Pictures/ Polygram Filmed Entertainment
 Director: Neil LaBute
 Writer: Neil LaBute
 Cast: Amy Brenneman, Aaron Eckhart, Catherine Keener,
Nastassja Kinski, Jason Patric, Ben Stiller
   Ever since the first Flintstone clubbed his buddy on the
head over a woman some 2 million years ago, the world has
been plagued by power politics.  In the 1990s, we're more
civilized.  We use words instead of clubs.  Our willingness to
do damage to our fellows on the job over our business status
was wonderfully interpreted by Neil LaBute in last year's "In
the Company of Men," a picture which aroused many in the
audience to want to throw clubs and stones at the screen.  "In
the Company of Men" featured a struggle between two co-
workers, drinking buddies in fact, over possession of a high-
status position in an office.  Now, office politics takes a back
seat to bedroom management in LaBute's "Your Friends &
Neighbors," a movie which implicitly asks, "Wouldn't you love
to spy on the folks next door with a hidden video camera?" 
LaBute appears to say that you're not so likely recognize the
bland, hale-fellow sports you greet every day like the folks in
"The Truman Show," but are more likely to discover that their
everyday demeanor is just a pleasant act--as it is to the
players in that Peter Weir film.
   As with "In the Company of Men," LaBute's latest effort
comes across not so much like a filmed play: that would be
deadly.  Rather, it's the sort of tale to which the stage could
do equal justice.  Whereas "Company" featured three players,
"Friends" juxtaposes six people, three of each gender, and
sets them off on a sexual roundelay exposing their intense
needs, their vulnerabilities, their willingness to betray even
best friends to satisfy their cravings.  Freud was right: libido is
everything.  Just observe the opening scene, featuring college
theater instructor Jerry (Ben Stiller) re-enacting a sexy
Elizabethan scene with a student to the appreciative eyes of
his adoring students.  "What do these characters want?" he
asks the class after thrusting up his partner's frilly skirt. 
"Sex."  Life follows art which follows life in Neil LaBute's
remarkable script which he directs sharply, satirically,
humorously.  "Friends and Neighbors" has a looser structure
than its predecessor, as the six-member cast frenetically
switch alliances.  But LaBute's edginess is present virtually at
every moment.
   The six friends and neighbors are: Cary (Jason Patric), who
works out with his pals Jerry (Ben Stiller) and Barry (Aaron
Eckhart); Cheri (Nastassja Kinski), who meets the others
while serving as an artist's assistant in a posh gallery; Mary
(Amy Brenneman), who is unhappily married to Barry; and
Terri (Catherine Keener), who is unhappily living with Jerry. 
Though the six frequently interact, they are quite different
from one another in temperament.  Terri is hard-shelled and
cynical; Cary is intensely hostile to the women he beds and is
fond of making tapes of his sexual banter; Mary is a gentle
soul constantly at the verge of weeping; Jerry is talkative and
analytical to a fault; Cheri is arty and desperate for a
significant relationship with someone of either gender; and
Barry has the appearance of a jock gone to seed--plump,
mustachioed and bewildered.  (Aaron Eckhart, who plays this
last character, turned in a dynamite performance as the
hostile and manipulative Chad in LaBute's previous work.  For
this role he gained quite a bit of weight, bleached his hair,
and comes across as a wholly different personality.)
   While no one on the street would begin to guess the
neuroses that plague each one, the movie hones in on the
unrequited needs that drive all to unstable frenzy.  Jerry, for
example, is looked up to by his students, a dynamic and
highly competent teacher.  But he has unbridled chutzpah. 
Soon after breaking bread with his live-in woman, his best
friend Barry and Barry's wife Mary, he corners Mary to ask
her whether he can call her.  Breaking the taboo against an
intimate relationship with your best friend's wife, he
rationalizes: "You're married to Ben...OK he got there first...It's
not a big deal."  Mary is shocked but accepts.  She does not
yet know that Jerry is despised by his mistress for--among
other things--talking incessantly during sex.  Seeking a
partner who does not talk while in bed, Jerry's wife winds up
with Cheri, Barry remains unable to perform appropriately with
Mary, and Cary, not satisfied with his one-night stands, comes
on in an extraordinarily hostile and shocking way to Terri.
   As the film comes to a close, Jerry is involved in a dress
rehearsal of a play by William Wycherley, presumably that
Seventeenth-Century playwright's "The Country Wife." 
Wycherley's London is inhabited exclusively by hookers, flirts,
cuckolds and seducers, with one character, Horner, feigning
impotence in order to have a go at women without their
husbands' suspecting the worst.  Neil LaBute indicates that
we have not progressed one iota from Wycherley's vision. 
With his latest film, slickly and slyly acted by a company of
men and women, he proves himself a writer-director with his
fingers on the contemporary--and timeless-urban pulse.

Author
James Sanford
Last week on a radio talk show, an author was discussing his new book about
how the workplace could be redesigned to feed the spiritual needs of
employees. When people tell you everything is "fine," he said, the word
should be thought of as an acronym for "feelings inside not expressed."
 That theory is proven again and again throughout "Your Friends and
Neighbors," a vicious, not-for-the-faint-of-heart comedy-drama in which
seemingly nice folks frequently gather in restaurants, bookstores and bars
to reassure each other that everything in their lives and relationships is
"fine." Once these same people get behind closed doors, however, they offer
plenty of evidence to the contrary.
 If you saw writer-director Neil Labute's "In the Company of Men" last year,
you know he's not exactly Mr. Feelgood and, if anything, this second effort
is even darker and more nihilistic than "Men" because so many of  the
"Friends" are easily recognizible types. They don't, however, identify each
other personally, so it's only by reading the press notes that we learn all
their first names rhyme, almost as if they were sextuplets born to parents
with a misguided sense of humor.
 Marrieds Mary (Amy Brenneman) and Barry (Aaron Eckhart, considerably
paunchier and meeker than he was as the lady-killer in "Men") just bought a
lovely old house but it's no love nest, thanks to their sexual
incompatability. On the other hand, copywriter Terri (Catherine Keener) and
drama teacher Jerry (Ben Stiller) do have sex, but Terri can't tolerate
Jerry's habit of shouting out things like "harmony! harmony!" in the heat of
passion. Outside of these two couples stand Cheri (Nastassja Kinski), a
free-spirited artist's assistant, and Cary (Jason Patric), a misogynstic
gynecologist whose tales of vengeance against women wow Barry and Jerry.
 Though these people barely touch each other, in some ways "Friends"
qualifies as one of the most violent movies of the year. Behind Cary's dull
eyes lies an arctic wasteland and just listening to his eerie sermonettes
about sex could give you frostbite. Scariest of all, this super-arrogant
stud justifies much of the evil he perpetrates by telling his audience,
"You'd have taken the same steps: Common decency dictated it."
 Terri is almost as nasty, a hawkish creature with a face by Modigliani and
an attitude copped from a spoiled child. Asked by one of her lovers what
part of their lovemaking she most enjoyed, Terri snarls, "the silence,"
making it clear that's the end of the discussion. "Nobody actually likes
you, you know?" Cary tells Terri during a particularly heated exchange in a
bookstore; the comment doesn't faze self-absorbed Terri in the slightest.
 As "Friends" rolls along, circumstances arise that cause everyone to
re-think their lives and to take hasty action. In most cases, of course,
they do exactly the wrong thing, and Labute, again employing the same
detached point-of-view he showed in his first film, charts his characters'
moral declines mercilessly. Everyone ends up crawling from the wreckage,
some more battered than others, but none unscathed.
 The atmosphere here is sterile and deliberately calculated to focus
attention solely on these six subjects, all of whom are well-detailed,
especially by Keener, Eckhart and the quietly charming Kinski. Those who
bristle at frank talk are likely to find listening to Labute's dialogue as
unpleasant as having sandpaper rubbed against their ears for two hours
andthe story's final twist should ensure no one leaves the theater whistling
a happy tune.
 But if you can get past the shock value, there's a veritable banquet of
food for thought being presented here, as well as a wealth of humor in the
conversations. Particularly memorable are the ones that revolve around the
ridiculous "watch bracelet" Barry buys his wife as a gift -- "they're quite
big in Europe," he assures her -- and the almost-whispered argument between
Barry and Mary in a supermarket. "We need to treat each other like meat,"
Barry tells her. "Didn't we read that?" As Mary walks away in dazed disgust,
Barry can't resist getting in the final word: "It was your book!" he bleats.
James Sanford

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Great, couldn't be better," is the universal refrain of the 
smiling characters that inhabit writer and director Neil LaBute's second 
film, YOUR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS.  That they are actually anything but 
is no surprise given the filmmaker.  His brilliant first picture, IN THE 
COMPANY OF MEN, which was on numerous best-of-the-year lists last year, 
established a benchmark for human cruelty.
     LaBute's latest battle of the sexes has the women as well as the 
men playing both predator and victim.  YOUR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS paints 
such a hopelessly bleak picture of relationships that we may want to 
become a nation of hermits.  When characters share moments of joy, you 
can be sure that LaBute will soon pull the rug out from under them and 
that their little sexual flings will turn into horrific mistakes.
     In his first film, LaBute had two men on the prowl to harass a 
single woman, a shy, deaf coworker of theirs.  This time LaBute 
introduces six unique characters: a married couple, a couple living 
together, and two single people.  They will all be devastated by the 
time this "immorality tale" concludes.  The bleak story engulfs the 
audience's emotions but provides just enough humor to make it bearable.  
The ensemble casting is superlative so the emotional drain it puts on 
the viewers is well worth its toll.
     As Cary, the story's only thoroughly evil character, Jason Patric 
has the easiest part.  A doctor whose lesser depravities include 
drop-kicking a plastic fetus when no one is watching.  Cary is closest 
in actions to IN THE COMPANY OF MEN's male characters.  His steam room 
confession of a childhood atrocity forms the nadir of the story's tales 
of inhumanity.
     Nastassja Kinski plays Cheri, an artist's assistant and the film's 
only completely sympathetic character.  LaBute has the other characters 
coming into the art gallery where Cheri works and engaging in the same 
series of lines with her but with differing results.
     As the nerdy drama teacher, Jerry, Ben Stiller is the story's most 
unsatisfying and ingratiating character.  Stiller, last seen hilariously 
in THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY, makes Jerry into a bit too much of a 
caricature.  A Woody Allen clone, Jerry drives his live-in girlfriend, 
Terri, crazy with incessant talking during sex.  She feels like he is 
the weather channel announcer since he is obsessed with issuing constant 
updates during their trysts.  When she finally finds a lover more to her 
liking, she tells her that it is the silence that she likes best about 
their lovemaking.
     Catherine Keener, with her translucent acting style, plays Terri, a 
writer - well, sort of.  When Cheri asks if she might have ever read 
anything of Terri's, Terri answers, "only if you read the side of your 
tampon box."  Terri is ashamed of her career, but Cheri finds it 
fascinating, turning over boxes in the grocery store to see if she can 
find any of Terri's work.  They hit it off in one of the few romances in 
the story that has much real promise.  Terri has a cynic's heart.  
"Love's a disease," Terri concludes.  "Yeah, but it's curable," Cheri 
tries to console her.
     At the fulcrum of the film is the married couple Mary and Barry, 
played by Amy Brenneman and IN THE COMPANY OF MEN's star, Aaron Eckhart.  
Their picture postcard perfect marriage is quickly shown to be a facade.  
They aren't happy with any part of their marriage, least of all their 
sex life.
     On either side of this fulcrum are the single sex buddy scenes - 
the women gather at lunch and the men in the locker room.  Full of false 
bravado, their conversations quickly cut to the bone as reality begins 
to set in.  
     The male bonding, and to a lesser extent the female, comes back to 
the question of naming one's best ever sexual encounter.  One guy 
confesses that he is the best that he has ever had.  Other answers prove 
more troublesome and baneful.
     Sometimes the characters' sexual adventures start off with hope and 
promise.  One adulterous affair has the characters giggling gleefully 
like teenagers.  They start their clandestine arrangement with the 
wonderful intimacy of a simple hug.  LaBute, like a vengeful god, will 
soon make them pay for their indiscretions.
     "Life is complicated," Cheri tells Jerry.  "It's a funny world.  
People can't communicate."  In LaBute's stories, life certainly is 
complex, and, when people speak, things only get worse.  His characters' 
vituperative language is more cutting than knives.  Rarely raising their 
voices, they manage to inflict mortal wounds with moments of relatively 
quiet terror.  Biting social commentary wrapped in the thin veneer of a 
black comedy, his films have much to say even if they can be 
overwhelming.  Unlike action films you forget in an hour, his movies 
will stay with you for years afterwards, provoking thought and 
reflection.
     YOUR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS runs 1:40.  It is rated R for profanity, 
sex, and very mature themes and would be appropriate for teenagers only 
if they are older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
YOUR FRIENDS & NEIGHBORS
(Gramercy)
Starring:  Amy Brenneman, Aaron Eckhart, Catherine Keener, Nastassja
Kinski, Jason Patric, Ben Stiller.
Screenplay:  Neil LaBute.
Producers:  Jason Patric and Steve Golin
Director:  Neil LaBute.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  100 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In an era when too many films bludgeon you with exposition,
desperately afraid of leaving anyone behind, Neil LaBute says as much with
what he refuses to tell you as he does with his words.  His blistering
1997 debut IN THE COMPANY OF MEN explored corporate and interpersonal
power games without ever naming the company, its product, or the city in
which it was located.  In so doing, he gave the story an uncomfortable
sense of generic familiarity.  Now comes YOUR FRIENDS & NEIGHBORS, a tale
of the complicated social and sexual dynamics between six urbanites:
college drama teacher Jerry (Ben Stiller); his live-in girlfriend Terri
(Catherine Keener); he best friend Barry (Aaron Eckhart); Barry's wife
Mary (Amy Brenneman); their womanizing pal Cary (Jason Patric); and
artist's assistant Cheri (Nastassja Kinski).
     Chuckle at the rhyming name conceit if you will, but that would only
be your most immediate reaction if you saw them in the closing credits.
You'd spend a bit more time puzzling over the realization that not a
single one of those names was ever spoken during the film.  For all the
memorable conversations LaBute gives to his characters, YOUR FRIENDS &
NEIGHBORS is really about failure in communication, a failure at achieving
any semblance of intimacy.  Cary prepares for his sexual encounters by
rehearsing his pillow talk into a tape recorder; Terri berates Jerry for
"breaking [her] concentration" by talking during sex; Barry and Mary find
themselves unable to talk about their sexual dysfunction problems, leading
to Mary seeking comfort from another man.  Despite the friendship or love
which ostensibly is between them, these six people treat each other like
strangers, as though they don't even know each other's names.
     It's a premise just as provocative as that of IN THE COMPANY OF MEN,
but it's not executed with quite the same skill.  IN THE COMPANY OF MEN
was an example of clockwork plotting, leading a viewer to a powerful
conclusion in which everything that preceded it suddenly took on greater
resonance.  YOUR FRIENDS & NEIGHBORS is more pure character study, less
concerned with where the characters are going than with where they are.
The few bits of unique composition LaBute includes, specifically a
recurring scene in an art gallery where only the characters change, are
more self-consciously clever than revelatory.  As intriguing and often
darkly comic as YOUR FRIENDS & NEIGHBORS may be, it doesn't entirely
satisfy as a narrative.  It's more like a slice of domestic life sliced
off with the razor of LaBute's caustic words -- Altman's SHORT CUTS as
written by David Mamet.
     That still makes YOUR FRIENDS & NEIGHBORS a cut above the
competition, particularly as a showcase for its cast.  Jason Patric sinks
his teeth into the showiest role, the baldly self-absorbed Cary,
delivering one monologue about participating in a sexual assault with a
frightening tenderness.  Aaron Eckhart, the callow Chad from IN THE
COMPANY OF MEN, is almost unrecognizable as the paunchy cuckold who
believes that he has been his own most satisfying sexual partner.  The
women fare less well, with Amy Brenneman a puzzlement as the unhappy Mary,
but every one of the six principal performers has at least one gripping
moment.  YOUR FRIENDS & NEIGHBORS isn't the icy triumph IN THE COMPANY OF
MEN was, but it continues Neil LaBute's unflinching, unnerving examination
of language as assault, of every human interaction as a power struggle.
He says all the things we're generally unwilling to admit we say...and,
sometimes, the things we don't say.

Author
Jamie Peck
YOUR FRIENDS & NEIGHBORS
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
This "modern immorality tale," as the ads go, finds drama coach Jerry 
(Ben Stiller) growing sexually distant from his girlfriend Terri 
(Catherine Keener). Jerry decides to initiate an affair with Mary (Amy 
Brenneman), the wife of his best friend Barry (Company alum Aaron 
Eckhart), and when Terri finds out, she has a fling of her own with 
Cheri (Nastassja Kinski), a sexy art gallery employee who also catches 
the eye of Cary (Jason Patric), a buddy of Jerry and Barry's. The long 
100 minutes it takes for these people to out-nasty each other feels like 
group therapy with a bunch of self-centered whiners or, worse, an 
episode of "Jerry Springer" sans schlock value. 
All of the bed-hopping, put-downs and duplicitous characters, and "Your 
Friends & Neighbors" isn't even amusing in a "Melrose Place" sort of 
way. The blame may be in the repetitious screenplay, but it's certainly 
not in the acting - this ensemble is so excruciatingly believable that 
you'd just like to give everyone a good smack. Particularly whup-worthy 
is Patric's Cary, a repugnant lothario who owns both the funniest (when 
his occupation is revealed) and the creepiest (when he tells about his 
"best lay") scenes of this so-called black comedy. Stiller and Eckhart 
are close behind as creeps with different horniness outlets, but neither 
matches Patric's vile ferocity. 
The women's roles aren't much nicer, save for Kinski, who stays on the 
underdeveloped side of things. Keener and Brenneman are fine as 
respectively curt and "sensitive" gals, but what's missing here is a 
reason to care about all of this depraved behavior. In "In the Company 
of Men," that sympathy generated from a deaf secretary who was the 
victim in a shocking scheme hatched by to cruel co-workers. The 
antagonists' behavior in that film sucked you into an uncommonly 
discomforting story, while here it sends these five irritating folks 
through terribly misguided motions over and over and over again. Save a 
seat for me, Fred. I'm coming with you.
