Title
Review for Of Love and Shadows (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ben Hoffman
     To fully appreciate OF LOVE AND SHADOWS, it helps to be familiar
with Isabel Allende, on whose books the movie is based.   Back in
1973, her uncle, Salvador Allende, a Socialist who had been elected
President of Chile, was assassinated. in a coup with the assistance of
the U.S. This was followed by a military dictatorship under Augusto
Pinochet.  He was condemned by the United Nations Human Rights
Commission for his imprisonment and torture of dissidents.
     Isabel Allende, who now lives in California, has said of the
assassination, "I think I have divided my life into Before that day
and After that day."    She has been, among other things, a
journalist, a columnist, and a teacher but she is best known for her
fascinating books, The House of Spirits, The Stories of Eva Luna, and
Of Love and Shadows.    In each of the books she brings in the world
of Chile after the coup.   Her books make easy and fascinating reading
and knowing that although they are novels, they are based on real
stories make them even more interesting.
     The movie is a thriller about the underground that tries to help
the prisoners.  Francisco (Antonio Banderas)  and his brother, Jose
(Diego Wallruff) pretend to be priests as, dressed in clerical garb,
they evade the guards to visit with the victims of the government.
The brothers, and their friends, live metaphorically in the shadows of
the real life going on in Chile.   They are aided by the beautiful
Irene (Jennifer Connelly) who comes from a rich family    Living in
her mother's mansion, she could easily have ignored the world outside
the estate.  Instead, it has been turned into a home for the aged
where she looks upon the elderly as if they were her relatives.
     Gustavo (Camilo Gallardo) is the handsome army captain to whom
she is engaged. She thought she was in love with him . . . until she
meets up with Francisco, and her world changes.     As in all of
Isabel Allende' s stories, there is a touch of the mystical.  This is
true of much of the literature of South America.  In this film, Irene
goes with Francisco to visit a young woman who may have psychic
powers.   The woman is lying on a bed when she is suddenly seized with
a frantic shaking and making fires erupt outside the house.   She even
manages to make the armed guard that has arrived look foolish.
     But why tell you more?   See the film for yourself and witness
the humor and the horror that make up the wonderful film.    And
remember, it is based on the truth.
