Title
Review for Freddy Got Fingered (2001)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Okay, let's cut to the chase:  If you're a fan of The Tom Green Show, you'll
probably really like Freddy Got Fingered.  If you hate the show, or can't
stand Tom Green, you've got no business going to see it.  And for the folks
that don't know who Tom Green is, consider yourself warned - Freddy is a
solid 12 on the gross-out scale (out of 10).  As if the title wasn't enough
of a warning...
Green, who also directed and co-wrote Freddy, plays Gord Brody, a cartoonist
(the third we've seen this year, after Monkeybone and Tomcats) who, as the
film opens, is about to relocate from his parents' basement in Portland to
Hollywood, where he's already secured a job at a cheese sandwich factory
until he hits it big and sells his animation ideas.  His parents (Rip Torn
and Julie Hagerty) proudly wave goodbye to their oldest son as he drives off
in the new car they've just bought for him.  Less than three minutes later,
he's grabbing horse cock.
It turns out that Gord is a phenomenally bad, unfocused cartoonist who is
given some shaky advice by a cartoon bigwig (played by Anthony Michael
Hall) - quit his day job and "get inside the animal."  The latter direction
is supposed to help Gord flesh out his crude animated characters, but
instead affords him the opportunity to play with roadkill.  And that's
before he falls in love with a handicapped, amateur rocket scientist with an
oral fixation who gets off on being caned.
The bulk of Freddy focuses on the relationship between Gord and his
overbearing father.  Gord thinks he's getting treated unfairly, while his
dad wonders why he can't be like younger brother Freddy (Eddie Kaye Thomas,
Black and White), a gainfully employed bank teller.  If you're familiar with
Green's television show, some of the film's content, one might theorize, is
probably based on his relationship with his real father, a man who spent his
entire career in the military.
This ain't Citizen Kane here.  There's a ton of gross-out material, and
almost none of it is even slightly integral to the plot.  The film is
two-thirds over before you realize what the title means.  Freddy's music
often overpowers its dialogue, which some may actually consider a good
thing.  But none of that matters when you're busting your gut watching a
delirious Torn run though Pakistan wearing nothing but a bathrobe.
Green has no real professional acting experience, no familiarity with
writing feature-film scripts and absolutely zero know-how when it comes to
directing.  But you know what?  There are a lot of films that are worse than
Freddy - films made by experienced talent. You have to admire his ability to
cajole money from a major film studio to make this thing, too.  And he does
all of his own stunts.  He's the complete package, or a real tool, depending
on if you like him or not.  Personally, I don't think Green is too far off
from Jim Carrey's work on In Living Colour.  Green is just as funny and just
as unpolished as Carrey was back then - a real diamond in the rough who is
probably going to be around a lot longer than 15 minutes (hey, if J. Lo can
do it, why can't he?).
The only other actor to emerge from Green's gigantic shadow is Torn, who, if
you can believe it, plays a more vulgar version of his Larry Sanders
character.  He is perfectly cast here.  Freddy also features cameos from
Green's new wife Drew Barrymore, Shaquille O'Neal and Canadian TV talk-show
host Mike Bullard, who once threw up on live television when Green taunted
him with a dead animal.  And if you look close, you can see footage of Green
's lymph-node surgery, too.
1:30 - R for crude sexual and bizarre humor, and for strong language

Author
Steve Rhodes
FREDDY GOT FINGERED, written and directed by its star, Tom Green, has 
the worst trailers that I've ever seen, and it has been called the worst 
movie ever made by some critics.  "How bad could it be?" I asked myself.  
Whereas I'm not quite ready to call it the worst movie ever, it is 
certain to be at the absolute top of my worst of the year list for this 
year.  A movie whose cruelty knows no bounds, it makes the mistake of 
confusing shock with humor.  When you break a guy's leg so horrendously 
that the bone sticks out, it isn't funny.  And having Green lick the 
blood off the bone only makes it more repulsive rather than making it 
somehow perversely funny.
I'm one of the few critics who thinks that Tom Green's last major 
outing, ROAD TRIP, was one of last year's best and most underappreciated 
comedies.  Perhaps Green has suffered some kind of blow to the head 
since then that has changed his ability to ascertain what is humorous 
and what isn't.  Acting like he is Andy Kaufman's evil twin, Green 
insults his audience from the very beginning of FREDDIE GOT FINGERED. 
Stopping his car when he sees a horny horse, he runs over to masturbate 
it.
In the story, Green plays Gord Brody, an infantile 28-year-old 
skateboarder who lives in his parents' basement since he is perpetually 
unemployed.  Well, he does get a job at the Hollywood Cheese Sandwich 
Factory, but it doesn't last.  Rip Torn and Julie Hagerty, drawing their 
agents' short straws, are stuck playing Gord's parents.  Torn copes by 
overacting while Hagerty tries her best to blend into the woodwork, 
hoping that no one will notice her presence.
With the manic behavior of someone about to overdose on cocaine, Gord 
seems about to explode in every scene.  While at a hospital, Gord 
delivers a baby from a woman whom he has irritated into an early labor.  
After yanking her baby out, he swings the baby rapidly around his head 
by holding on to the umbilical cord.  He then proceeds to bite through 
the cord, spewing blood everywhere.  The scene manages to be even more 
disgusting that this description.
There are a few briefly bearable -- bearable, not funny -- moments in 
the film, but it is impossible to catch your breath them since you are 
perpetually on your guard for the story's next atrocity.  As bad as the 
trailers are, they are masterpieces of comedy next to the abomination of 
the movie itself.  Whatever you do, don't flirt with the idea that any 
movie this bad might be fun to see.  This is a film that you don't want 
to inflict on yourself, no matter how adventuresome a moviegoer you 
think you are.  Trust me.  A root canal without anesthetics would be 
less painful that FREDDIE GOT FINGERED.
FREDDY GOT FINGERED runs 1:33 but feels like three eternities.  It is 
rated R for crude sexual and bizarre humor, and for strong language.  
Consider it as NC-17.  This is not a movie for adults and certainly not 
for kids.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
Gord Brody (Tom Green) is an aspiring animator approaching thirty who still
lives in parents Jim (Rip Torn) and Julie's (Julie Hagerty, "Airplane")
basement.  As dad declares all out war, Gord secures a job in a cheese
sandwich factory in far off LA and sets off to make his dreams come true.
Gord doesn't make much of a go on his first attempt and lands back home with
fawning mom and outraged dad in "Freddy Got Fingered."
Tom Green cowrites (with "Tom Green Show" scribe Derek Harvie), directs and
stars in what is essentially Tom Green's primal scream.  So, if Tom Green 
screams in an empty theater, does he make a sound?
It's clear that "Freddy Got Fingered" is at least partially autobiographical
and Green sure has one hell of a complex about his dad (mom gets off easier
when sonny boy advises her to go out and have sex with basketball players and
Greeks).  While this may be of interest to his hard core fans, there's little
about Green's mania on display here to recommend this movie to anyone else.
The film starts promisingly enough, with a well executed skateboarding
scene through a shopping mall set to the Sex Pistols' 'Problem' (Green's put
together a first rate soundtrack) and yes, I laughed a few times. Green's 
flummoxing of a security guard with psychotic ramblings and his attempt to 
draw, make music and eat at the same time (the 'daddy would you like some 
sausages' scene repeatedly shown in the film's trailer) are inspired comedy.
But what's funny about a paraplegic girlfriend who gets turned on by having 
her legs caned or a skateboarding injury that results in an exposed kneecap?  
A baby delivery bit shows some groan-inducing promise until enough blood
is splattered to coagulate the laughs.  Younger (by three years) brother
Freddy's internment at The Institute for Sexually Abused Children does
nothing but confirm one's worst fears regarding the film's title and
Green's infamous 'handling' of a real horse, while not nearly as shocking as 
it would seem, doesn't make sense.  By the time he repeats the gag with
an elephant at film's end, the overall effect is numbness.
While "Freddy Got Fingered" has the admirable end result of depicting the
harm in demeaning a child's self esteem, it's essentially a whole lot of
Tom Green running around being noisy.  Rip Torn, what were you thinking?
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
