Title
Review for Shuang long hui (1992)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        To review a Jackie Chan film is to announce that one
has too much time on one's hands.  A more futile gesture is
hard to imagine: I doubt anyone has ever decided whether or
not to see a Chan movie based on anything so trivial as a
review or critique, and with good reason: such items are not
needed, for Chan's track record speaks for itself.  Over the
course of the past three decades, he's churned out dozens of
martial arts extravaganzas which have delighted audiences all
over the world, making him one of Asia's biggest (and richest)
stars.  Chan fans, a group I count myself part of, go to see his
films not because of their breathtaking intellect, but because we
enjoy seeing the master kick a little ass, and make us laugh
while he does so.  Who cares what the critics think?
        Chan is a rare breed: a hybrid who possesses not only
stunning physical grace but also a sly streak of self-depreciating
humor-- he's not one of those buff Ah-nold clones, and that's
part of his appeal: he looks like "everyman," and uses his wits
(and a dash of good ol' dumb luck) to pull himself out of the dire
situations he continuously finds himself confronted with.  In that
regard, his performances parallel the great silent comedians of
cinema's earliest days: both Chaplin and Buster Keaton are
acknowledged by Chan as major influences.
        The plot of "Twin Dragons," made in 1992 but just
released in America, consists of the usual silliness: some bad
guys are running around Hong Kong, and only some tightly-edited
kung-fu and astonishing stunt work by Chan can make the streets
safe again.  The twist this time is that Jackie plays two roles,
a pair of identical twin brothers separated at birth.  One grows
up to be a master martial artist named Boomer, a tough guy
raised in the hard streets of Hong Kong.  His twin, John Ma, is
a revered classical pianist and conductor, educated in the finest
schools and possessing no martial arts ability.  Having no
prior knowledge of each other's existence, both men are soon
mistaken for their twin, leading to some predictable but amusing
fish-out-of-water comedy (Boomer being forced to conduct a
symphony orchestra (one of Chan's all-time great comedic
scenes), the wimpy Ma being forced to duke it out with the
bad guys, etc.)
        The final showdown, in which Boomer and Ma bust
some heads in a deserted car factory, is the film's shining
moment, containing some of Chan's most impressive (and
dangerous!) stunts.  Watching the action, we realize that
the action is closer to the Three Stooges than Bruce Lee.
(One room in the automotive factory is an environmental
testing lab, surrounded on all sides by glowing red walls.
The room beside it contains numerous showers, designed to
simulate rainfall.  Some of the biggest laughs occur as Jackie
and the villains fight in the hot room until one of them can't
take the heat any more.... then they dash into the showers,
cool off for a few moments, then return to the hot room to
fight some more!)  But Chan never sacrifices intensity for
humor.  "Twin Dragons" contains some of his best and most
exciting stunts to date: I still cringe when I think of the
numerous times he was almost converted into a Jackie
pancake.
        It's silly to even consider commenting on the story itself;
the dialogue and obligatory love tangents (one of which features
Maggie Cheung, Chan's co-star in "Supercop") are here only to
give the action sequences something to alternate with.  Suffice
it to say that this isn't "Casablanca," nor is it intended to be.
It succeeds at what it attempts to do: take the audience on a
wild ride through some hilarious and tense moments, with barely
a moment to catch one's breath.  It's a winner on two levels:
this is not only the tightest Chan movie I've yet seen... it's also
the funniest.
        The only major disappointment with "Twin Dragons" is
the fact that there are no bloopers or outtakes attached to the
final reel.  (For those of you not in the know, Chan makes it
a policy to include a number of humorous outtakes intermixed
with the end credits of each of his movies, showing flubbed
lines and stunts.)  It's a long-standing tradition, and I'm
perplexed as to why these were not included with this
American release of the film.  With such impressive stunts, I'm
sure the outtakes would've been fascinating.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Steve Rhodes
So what would cause 2 grown women and about 2 dozen grown men to faint?
Why, the sight of Jackie Chan and Jackie Chan together as they play
identical twins, who were accidentally separated at birth.
One Jackie Chan plays John Ma, a world famous pianist and composer, who
lives in New York City.  The other Jackie Chan plays Boomer, a Hong Kong
auto mechanic and martial arts expert extraordinaire.  Lest you faint,
let me tell you up-front that the same Jackie Chan plays them both.  The
aforementioned characters who collapsed in the movie were overwhelmed at
the mere sight of a man with an unknown twin.
Jackie Chan films are endurable and enjoyable only because of the boyish
charm and energetic bravado of Chan himself.  The scripts for his movies
are usually so thin that, without Jackie Chan, it would be almost
ridiculous to contemplate going to see them.  TWIN DRAGONS, originally
released in 1992, has just been re-released theatrically without
allowing the film to be screened in advance to film critics.  This is
probably smart marketing since, among the Jackie Chan films, this one is
probably one of the silliest and lamest.
If you have not seen his movies before, you might be inclined to shake
your head and walk out during the first 10 minutes of this one, as it's
quite ludicrous.  Leaving would be a mistake, although going in the
first place is still questionable.  Once you're there, stick around
because Jackie, especially in the film's grand finale, gets to perform
one amazing martial arts feat after another.
The whole movie is little more than a ruse for Jackie to show us his
martial arts skills in a comedic setting.  In this broad parody, Boomer
fights not 1, not 2, not 3 but 20 men at a time and eventually wins just
before he seems certain to be beaten completely to a pulp.  (Jackie, as
is well known and documented, does all of his stunts.)  Although his
later films are much better, this one does have its moments.
The plot, such as it is, concerns the misadventures of Mr. Ma in Hong
Kong as he is mistaken for Boomer, and vice versa.  Even their women
friends get them confused, causing for modestly staged sexual mix-ups.
Moreover, the two of them, being twins, experience life jointly.  When
one sneezes, so does the other.  During one of the mix-ups, Boomer has
to conduct a symphony orchestra while Ma gets in a whole mess of
trouble.  Every time Ma rolls over or gets hit, Boomer's body or hand
reacts uncontrollably, causing the symphony to try to follow their
"guest" conductor's increasingly spastic movements.
The movie is way over-the-top slapstick, but for Jackie's die-hard fans,
no movie of his can be too hokey.  For most of us, we'd be better off
renting one of his later, more polished movies and passing on this
re-release.
TWIN DRAGONS runs 1:30.  It is rated PG-13 for comedic violence, sexual
situations and profanity and would be fine for kids 10 or 11 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, found the film confusing, and, although he liked
the martial arts, he gave the movie only * 1/2.  His friend Steven, age
10, thought there was a little too much fighting, but liked the comedy
enough to give the movie ** 1/2.  His twin, John, thought the movie was
really good and worth *** 1/2.  Their friend Alan, almost 10, thought
the movie was awesome and was a **** motion picture.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Ross Anthony
We stereotype Kung Fu plots as contrived excuses to display a lot of cool
martial arts fighting scenes. Oddly, I felt that "Twin Dragons" showed off a
lot of cool fight scenes as an excuse to display a good plot. Yeah, I was
really into the story. I didn't expect that from Jackie. The fight scenes,
though way cool, even seemed to distract me at times.
The black and white opening sequence embodies the humor and action we've
come to expect from the adorable Jackie Chan. It quickly depicts the "twins
separated at birth" story.
One Jackie grows up on the streets as kind of a nice guy thug; the other
Jackie having the privilege of a loving rich family becomes a turtlenecked
artist/composer/conductor type. Midway, the twins' lives intercept as they
find themselves trying to live the life of the other -- and kissing the
wrong women too. It's as cleverly coordinated as his stunts and charmingly
compelling to boot!
The only major flaw is a lull created by a rather typical "pre-climax" fight
scene. The real "climax" fight scene that followed it would have been plenty
for me. Still, a great time over all.
Starring Jackie Chan and Jackie Chan.
Directed by Tsui Hark and Ringo Lam.
Produced by Teddy Robin at Dimension/Distant Horizon/Media Asia.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Marty Mapes
Twin Dragons is the latest Jackie Chan movie to be re-dubbed and
re-released in the United States (this one is actually 7 years old). As
MOVIES go, it's a good bit of entertainment. Chan wields his usual
charm, grace, and skill, playing identical twins. 
As JACKIE CHAN MOVIES go, it's mediocre. It has some good fight and
stunt sequences, but it lacks a really good one. The story is
interesting enough, and Jackie does alright at separating his two
characters (he's no Jeremy Irons). But identical-twin movies are nothing
new, and in at least one scene the special effects fail miserably. 
Chan 1 grows up with an alcoholic mother who dies young. He becomes a
mechanic and hangs around with his short pal Teddy (Teddy Robin Kwan),
who's always getting in trouble. It's amazing how easily a fight can
break out in these kinds of movies. 
Chan 2 grows up with a silver spoon in his mouth. He becomes a classical
pianist/composer/conductor. While Chan 1 lets his fists fly, Chan 2
waves his arms in front of an orchestra. 
The two come together in Hong Kong. Chan 1 has gotten in trouble with a
crime boss and is trying to flee to China. Chan 2 is in town to play a
concert. The big mix-up starts when their girlfriends fall deeper in
love with the wrong brother, and ends with the two switching identities
just as 1 was supposed to take on the crime boss and 2 was supposed to
conduct his symphony. 
There's not much to say about the plot. It's all driven by the crossed
identities, which you can only do so much with. Also, "the plot" isn't
what Jackie Chan movies are about. Chan movies are about stunts and
fighting and grace and balance. In one sense, Twin Dragons doesn't
disappoint. It has a great boat-chase scene, two or three fun fight
scenes, and not one but TWO big showdowns at the end. 
But when you put it all together, this one lacks the edge, the spark
that's in so many other of his movies. Watching TWIN DRAGONS, I felt
like I had seen it all before as Jackie went through the same routine,
one more time. There's usually an exotic setting or an amazing stunt or
an expensive special effect to make the movie stand apart. TWIN DRAGONS
lacked that something extra. 
The final insult came at the very end of the film as the credits rolled
and ... no outtakes. 
If you really want to see this one, save it for video.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Twin_Dragons_ (PG-13) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
After Jackie Chan finally scored a U.S. blockbuster with last fall's
American-produced _Rush_Hour_, it comes as no surprise to see another of
Chan's relics from his large vault of Hong Kong productions unearthed for a
stateside release.  What is somewhat surprising, however, is the film
Dimension Films has chosen to release to capitalize on his
stronger-than-ever popularity.  While 1992's _Twin_Dragons_ delivers the
blend of high-flying martial arts and broad slapstick that has become
Chan's trademark, the film, while diverting, remains one of his more minor
efforts.
My guess is that Dimension chose _Twin_Dragons_ because of its precious
gimmick: as the title suggests, Chan plays twins.  Separated at birth, the
identical brothers have had different upbringings and thus live very
different lives.  Boomer was kidnapped by a crook in the hospital and was
found by an alcoholic but loving woman; he grows up into a street-smart
auto mechanic with exceptional fighting skills.  On the other hand, John Ma
remained with their parents, travelling with them to the States, where he
studied music.  Now a world-renowned conductor and classical pianist, he
has returned to Hong Kong for the first time for a concert.
Of course, it is only a matter of time before each brother learns of the
other's existence, and hijinks ensue.  Predictably, these hijinks revolve
around mistaken identity.  Boomer and John's respective female
friends--Barbara (Chan's favorite co-star, the amazing Maggie Cheung,
largely wasted) and Tammy (Nina Li Chi)--can't tell them apart, and neither
can Boomer's goofy (and very annoying) sidekick Tyson (Teddy Robin), nor a
group of baddies with a score to settle with Boomer.
As with all domestic releases of Chan's Hong Kong films, alterations have
been made to _Twin_Dragons_.  In addition to a new soundtrack, featuring
English language dubbing (Chan and, it seems, Cheung redid their own
dialogue) and a more polished score, certain edits have been made.
However, most of the pruning is actually for the better.  One idiotic,
overly cartoonish (yes, even for a Chan film) sight gag involving a doctor
is thankfully gone; and a heavyhanded fantasy scene with John and Barbara
has understandably been excised.  However, it must be said that with that
cut and a brief moment between those two in a car, whatever substance there
was to Barbara's already-thin character has been erased.  In the original
version, Barbara is a lifelong music afficionado with singing aspirations;
in the new cut, she's basically just a woman who happened to be seen at a
karaoke bar.
What did survive the editing process, of course, were the many fight
scenes.  From a wild karaoke bar scene (where Boomer uses everything from
light fixtures to speakers to dispatch bad guys) to the terrific auto shop
climax, the action scenes in _Twin_Dragons_ all display a creative abandon
absent in the entirety of _Rush_Hour_.  Those seeing _Twin_Dragons_ for an
action fix won't be disappointed; however, those looking for a bit more
inspired comedy like myself knows that Chan can do--and has done--better.
Dimension Films also holds American distribution rights to Chan's 
_Drunken_Master_II_, and I'm a bit surprised that the studio didn't release
that one now instead of _Twin_Dragons_.  Funny and full of fantastic
fighting (which would definitely play well in the wake of _The_Matrix_'s
HK-inspired derring-do), it is my favorite Chan film, and would likely
maintain Chan's new stateside heat, if not increase it.  With the release
of the middling _Twin_Dragons_, it appears that Chan's U.S. fortunes will
once again take a downslide--much like they did after the successful 1996
release of his _Rumble_in_the_Bronx_.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com


Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
         You get two Jackie Chans for the price of one in this lame, recycled action comedy that was made as a fund-raising project for the Directors' Guild of Hong Kong, back in 1992, and, oddly enough, has been available on video in an earlier English-dubbed version. It's been edited and re-released to capitalize on Chan's success last year with "Rush Hour."  In this story - 
which is remarkably like Jean-Claude Van Damme's "Double Impact" -  Chan plays twins separated at birth by a kidnapper. Raised in the United States by his natural parents, John Ma (Jackie #1)  is a piano prodigy who becomes a renowned orchestra conductor, while Boomer (Jackie #2), who grows up in the streets of Hong Kong, becomes an auto mechanic whose idea of a good time is cruising for chicks. 27 years later, just as John Ma comes to Hong Kong for a concert, Boomer gets involved in some criminal activity and, predictably, they're mistaken for one another. Chaos and mischief reign, and there's one wane cute scene in which both Chans are in a bathtub with a woman who believes
 she's looking at a mirror reflection, not another man. Directed by Sui Hark and Ring Lam (veterans of Hong Kong cinema), there's more emphasis on slapstick farce than action - a fact which will undoubtedly disappoint hard-core martial arts fanatics who look forward to seeing the acrobatic Jackie Chan do his own, often inventive stunt work. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Twin Dragons" is an inane, boring 3, filled with senseless madness and silly mayhem.

Author
Matt Williams
In his latest rerelease, Jackie Chan uses a gimmick that Jean Claude
VanDamme aficionados know well.  It's a gimmick that goes something like
this: if one Jackie Chan is good, two must be better!  Unfortunately,
Twin Dragons proves that not to be the case.
Jackie plays a pair of twins, separated at birth.  One, John Ma, under
the guidance of his true parents, becomes a concert pianist,known the
world over.  The other, Boomer, is a mechanic and part time con artist,
with an instinctive knack for martial arts(wouldn't you know).
Raised on opposite corners of the globe, the twins are blissfully
unaware of each other's existence.  That is until fate places them both
in Hong Kong at the same time.  John Ma is there for a concert,but
spends most of his time avoiding the advances of a marriage-minded
woman, Tammy (Nina Li Chi).
Boomer, on the other hand, is in trouble.  An attempt to help his
diminutive friend Tyson (Teddy Robyn) win the love of a singer, Barbara
(Maggie Cheung), earns him the wrath of a local gangster.  But when the
gangsters mistake John Ma for Boomer, hilarity ensues...well, sort of.
Twin Dragons relies even more on comedy than the typical Jackie Chan
film. The mistaken identity gags wear out their welcome almost
immediately, yet the film just keeps them coming.  As is the case with
most of Jackie's rereleased films, Twin Dragons suffers from a horrible
dub, and the resulting sound mix certainly doesn't help the humor any.
Jackie Chan's films have never been praised for their complex plots.
The spectacular fight sequences are what draw the fans.  There's one
good one in Twin Dragons, a climactic battle in an automotive testing
factory. Yet, by the time it finally rolls around, it's a case of too
little, too late. And to top things off, the film doesn't even include
any of Jackie's trademark outtakes over the end credits.  This is a
rerelease sure to disappoint his fans.
Originally released in 1992, Twin Dragons' special effects already seem
cheap and dated.  Twin effects have been around for a very long time,
yet when Jackie and Jackie appear together onscreen it seems like a bad
episode of The Patty Duke Show.  The picture gets grainy, out of focus
in spots, and the dividing line between the actor and himself is so
visible, it's distracting.
If you're looking for a good Jackie Chan film, go rent a subtitled
version of Drunken Master II.   Twin Dragons was a waste of Jackie's
time...twice over.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Christopher E. Meadows
Starring Jackie Chan, Maggie Cheung, Teddy Robin Kwan, Nina Chi Li,
    Philip Chan, etc.
Many people laud Jackie Chan's kung-fu fighting and stunt-performing
abilities without realizing the true secret of his cinematic success.
Martial artists and stuntmen are a dime a dozen, but what really sets
Jackie Chan above the rest is his wonderful knack for physical comedy.
He has few equals in that field, at least among those working
today--Bruce Campbell and Jim Carrey are the only other names that
come immediately to mind.  And it is comedy, rather than fighting,
that makes "Twin Dragons" worth watching.
The premise of "Twin Dragons" is that Jackie Chan plays both halves of
a pair of twins who were accidentally separated at birth, grew up into
entirely different people, and eventually run into and get confused
for each other in Hong Kong.  Sound familiar?  The same basic idea was
done by Van Damme in "Double Impact," which was also set in Hong Kong
and made the year before...but whereas in "Double Impact" the point
was to have two Van Dammes to show twice as much beefcake and kick
twice as much butt at once, "Twin Dragons" plays up the comedy aspect
of mistaken identities--in fact, one of the Jackie Chans can't fight
at all.
After the opening, in which the twins are split, they grow up
separately--the one who was lost becomes Boomer, a tough auto
mechanic, road racer, and street hustler, while John Ma, the one who
went with his parents to America, grows up to be a virtuoso piano
player and orchestra conductor.  
As the film begins, Boomer's friend Tyson (played by Teddy Robin Kwan,
also the film's producer) falls for a karaoke singer named Barbara
(Maggie Cheung).  In pursuit of her, Boomer and Tyson bust up a party
for a Triad (mob) figure, Brother Wing (Alfred Cheung).  In lieu of
breaking Boomer's leg, Wing challenges Boomer to a road race, with
stakes of three hundred thousand Hong Kong dollars (about $33,000 US).
When the twosome attempts to flee Hong Kong, they get into a boat
chase with Wing's men which ends up critically injuring Wing.
Meanwhile, John Ma has come to Hong Kong for the first time since his
family left, to conduct a concert, and is set up with a rather
attractive female nurse, Tammy (Nina Li Chi), by Tammy's father, an
old family friend.  As fate would have it, the Ma twins _almost_ meet
several times, confusing all those with whom they come into contact
(including Tyson, a waiter, Tammy, Barbara, Tammy's ex-boyfriend
Rocky, and each other), accidentally get switched with each other,
meet, switch back and forth two more times, and get stuck in each
other's roles when it comes time to conduct the concert and the
mobsters have a job they need Boomer to do.  In the end, they join
forces to save Tyson from the mob brothers in a climactic kung-fu
comedy battle.
Chan fans expecting the sort of back-to-back fighting action seen in
"Double Impact" may be disappointed.  This movie has only one fighting
Chan in it, that being Boomer--when the thugs come after John Ma, he
has to run away or get beaten up.  However, the fight scenes where
Boomer does his thing are everything we've come to expect from Jackie
at his prime--constant motion, use of handy props as improvised
weapons, and fast and furious action.
Chan fans shouldn't fret too much, though, because there _are_ two
_comedic_ Chans in "Twin Dragons."  As might be expected, each Jackie
Chans is constantly being mistaken for the "other" Jackie, and neither
one quite realizes what's going on at first.  The funniest scene of
the movie comes in John Ma's hotel suite, when Tammy unknowingly
corners the two Jackie Chans in the bathroom and they have to convince
her that there's only one of them...while taking a bath together.
There is physical comedy, too: being twins, the brothers share sort of
a psychic link.  When John Ma is playing the piano, Boomer's hand
twitches as though he were playing the piano, too.  When Boomer is
racing a speedboat, attempting to escape from Brother Wing's thugs,
John Ma is jerked this way and that (disrupting their dinner in a fine
restaurant) as Boomer tries to keep his balance.
The version of "Twin Dragons" that I saw was dubbed and
pan-and-scanned, bought from Best Buy for under $5.  While I
personally prefer subtitled and letterboxed films, this one was
nonetheless well worth the money.  The voice acting was quite good,
and Cam Clarke, one of my favorite voice actors, did a fine job of
differentiating the two different Jackie Chans.
All in all, this very entertaining film gets a rating of 8 out of 10
from this reviewer.
An interesting side note: "Twin Dragons" was made as a charity project
by the Hong Kong Director's Guild, and features cameo appearances by
many reknowned Hong Kong directors.  Most notably, John Woo is the
priest on the left at the wedding, Tsui Hark and Ringo Lam (the
directors of "Twin Dragons") are two of the card-playing mechanics in
the Mitsubishi testing facility, and Philip Chan (who played the
police superintendent in Woo's "Hard-Boiled," and who, interestingly
enough, also had a role in Van Damme's "Double Impact") is the hotel
manager.  Other Hong Kong directors, who will probably not be
recognized by non-Hong Kong-cinemaphiles on this side of the Pacific,
fill many of the film's other minor roles.
(This review is copyright 1998 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for Usenet distribution and associated archival, including the
Internet Movie Database, but other distribution rights reserved to the
author.)
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Co-moderator, rec.toys.transformers.moderated
Robotech_Master    | Homepage: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/>
robotech@eyrie.org | PGP: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/rm.key.txt>   
robotech@jurai.net | ICQ UIN: 5477383 

Author
Steve Kong
A review of a Jackie Chan film is something that no one really reads.  Chan
films are films in which you go, you sit, you enjoy the action, and you
leave.  There's no real story, acting, or character building.  Chan films
are all about the wow-effect of the action.  And Twin Dragons has a lot of
that wow-effect.
The story for Twin Dragons is pretty thin.  A pair of twins separated at
birth are finally reunited by accident.  One twin, named Boomer (Jackie
Chan), is a tough guy and the other, named John Ma (Jackie Chan), is a
brilliant musician/composer.  When John comes to Hong Kong to conduct one
of his pieces, he bumps into Boomer by accident.  What ensues is a whole
lot of ridiculous plot, but that's not a big deal since Chan films are
about the action and not the paper thin plots.
The action in Twin Dragons is non-stop.  From the very start to the very
last seconds Twin Dragons is packed with action.  All of it amazing and all
of it hilarious.  Chan's action is what makes him stand out from other
action movie stars - there is a sense of humour that accompanies his
action.  This humour along with Chan's natural onscreen charisma makes him
the most likeable action star in the world.  The only complaint I have with
the action here is that there are some sequences where the use of handguns
is too prevalent.  In Chan films the fans go to see Chan's incredible
dexterity and quick fists-of-fury in the fight sequences, not a John Woo
double-fisted pistol gunfight -- this is a small complaint though.  While
on the subject of John Woo who as a child aspired to become a priest, look
for Woo's cameo late in Twin Dragons as the priest performing a marriage.
As always, my reviews of Chan films are quite short, either you have
already gone to see them on your own accord or you just don't have the
motivation to go.  So, my reviews are always the motivator for those of you
in the second category to go see the latest Chan film.  Don't Miss Jackie
Chan's Twin Dragons.  It's more action and comedy than his last film Rush
Hour.  One thing to mention is that sadly missing from the end of Twin
Dragons is the familiar bloopers real.
 a guy with a helluva attitude who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Twin Dragons (1992/1999)
Reviewed by Eugene Novikov
http://www.ultimate-movie.com/twindragons.html
Member: Online Film Critics Society
Starring Jackie Chan, Maggie Cheung, Teddy Robin Kwan. Rated PG-13.
I've always been a sucker for Jackie Chan, the limitlessly energetic martial
arts star who has in the past couple years established a fan following as
well as a solid film presence in the US. His recent films have been of widely
varied quality; Mr. Nice Guy didn't cut it but Rush Hour, with Chris Tucker,
was a delight. And with the success of the latter film, it comes as no
surprise that Hollywood is bringing back one of Jackie Chan's older films,
made in his native country.
Released in Japan in 1992 under the title Shuang long hui, Twin Dragons is,
like most of his other films, just as much of a comedic endeavor as it is a
martial arts one. It has Chan in a dual role; he plays Boomer, a
mechanic/martial artist as well as Mr. Mah, a maestro and musician. Boomer
and his pal Tyson are running away from some thugs that want $300,000 that
they won from them in a bet; money that neither of them happen to have.
Meanwhile, Mr. Mah prepares for a big concert.
Well it just so happens that the twins, separated at birth, are somehow linked
so that when Mah plays the piano, Boomer's hand starts to move as if he was
playing the piano, and when Boomer is on a boat, Mah acts like he is on a wild
boat ride, etc. This mysterious connection, of course, becomes useful when the
two meet up and go to rescue Tyson from the thugs that kidnapped him.
Those that found the Japanese Godzilla movies with bad dubbing charming will
certainly enjoy poking fun at this abysmally voiced adventure, where you can
almost see the dubbers struggling to do the voiceover correctly. Still,
although the dubbing is incoherent and the plotting nonsensical (the
telepathic link part makes no sense and the thugs are awful villains), Twin
Dragons is lots of fun, not only because of Chan's relentlessly amazing
stunts but also because of his comedic skills. There are some hilarious
scenes in what is essentially a mistaken identity caper, most of them
involving trying to hide one of the twins from an unsuspecting supporting
character who just happens to be walking in at that moment.
Twin Dragons was successfully preempted by Jean-Claude Van Damme and his
Double Impact, which, incidentally, was the only Claude movie I really liked.
That doesn't render Twin Dragons worthless because there's certainly some fun
to be had with good ol' Jackie Chan and some humorously self-effacing
co-stars. The climax and ending are a mess, but some individual parts are
quite funny, and I couldn't help but enjoy the movie as a whole.
It is worthwhile to note, however, that despite the enjoyably hokey
screenplay, this is a rather poorly made, low-budget film. The effect of two
Chans on the same screen is abysmal, and some special effects (such as rigs
and wires) are botched as well. Whether this takes away from enjoyment of the
picture is up to the individual, but it never helps.
Despite the fact that Chan is 45 years of age, it isn't unreasonable to
assume that with his popularity, he'll stick around for a while, both in the
US and in Japan. I never get tired of watching him perform, he is adorable,
charming, and very, very cool.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Victory A. Marasigan
Victory's World: Movie Reviews
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
Jackie Chan kicks his way into Van Damme territory with Twin Dragons,
an embarrassingly bland action comedy of mistaken identities.  Chan
plays separated-at-births Boomer and John Ma, whose drastically
different paths...
Aw, forget the plot description, it's not even worth the space.  But
let's face it.  No one goes to Jackie Chan movies for the plot anyway.
The Scenes Where Nothing Happens in Chan's films have always been
little more than glue thriftily spread to hold the action sequences
together.  In the case of Twin Dragons, however, the tiresome
plot-driving scenes fritter away so much of the movie that you almost
want to shout (at the risk of demeaning the artistic value of cinema),
"Get to the good part already!"
Most of the film is devoted to showing the brothers' efforts to hide
the other's existence from their own acquaintances.  Why it is
necessary to do this is not satisfactorily explained, but neither are
a lot of aspects of the plot.  The twins' love interests, demure
club-singer Barbara (Chan-film regular Maggie Cheung) and lusty
bride-hopeful Tammy (Nina Li Chi), get disoriented in all the
brouhaha, yet strangely seem not to mind that they are not sure which
brother they are in love with. The scenes describing the boys'
bumbling antics get stretched so thin we stop caring who Chan is
supposed to be in any given shot (In several shots, in fact, even the
make-up and hair people seem to forget which brother is which.).
Even Chan's so-corny-it's-funny humor is off-kilter in this outing.
Some of the gags are so carefully innocuous they're annoying.  A case
in point: whenever anyone sees the brothers together, they fall to the
ground in a dead faint.  Are we laughing yet?
As usual, the final showdown is the film's jewel, a tour de force
display of Chan' s agility and grace.  Never mind that it's not clear
how the brothers end up fighting suited bad guys inside an automobile
crash-testing facility.  It's all good fun, but too little too late.
Perhaps Chan's next movie should just be a collection of the last
fight sequences of all of his movies.  They could call it Jackie
Chan's The Final Fight Scenes, and everybody would go home happy.
Reviewed April 14, 1999 at Loews Theaters White Marsh, White Marsh, MD.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
1999 is already turning into the Year of the Bard.  Shakespeare in Love won
the Oscar, A Midsummer Nights Dream is coming to theaters soon, a Taming of
the Shrew update is already there.  So I suppose it shouldn't come as a
complete surprise to anyone that Jackie Chan has remade The Two Gentlemen
of Verona.
Well, perhaps that's a bit of a stretch, but the story of twins separated
at birth that fuels Twin Dragons is at least as old as Shakespeare's tale.
Jackie Chan steps out of his usual Hong Kong cop screen persona to play
mismatched twins -- one a successful American pianist and orchestra
conductor, the other a Hong Kong mechanic with ambitions to drive race
cars.  They cross paths in Hong Kong and, predictably, are swiftly mistaken
for each other. The mechanic gets crossways with one of the Hong Kong
street gangs, who are generous enough to provide any number of henchmen so
that our heroes can beat the stuffing out ot them.
Up to now, the Jackie Chan movies (that have been released in the US) have
always worked because they've been balanced in two important ways.  First,
there's been a balance between Chan's formidable rock-'em sock-'em skills
and his equally formidable skills as a physical comic.  The fun thing about
Jackie Chan movies is not that he beats up on the bad guys, but how he
beats up the bad guys -- with impeccable comic timing, just as though he
were in a Roadrunner cartoon.  Secondly, there's always been a balance
between the technical deficiencies of Jackie Chan movies -- the poor
dubbing, the silly scripts, the overall averageness of the supporting cast
-- and the excellence of the stuntwork and the imaginativeness of the One
Big Stunt that redeems the movie's flaws.
It's a tough balancing act for Chan, but he's always pulled it off up until
now.  The few movies that have gotten theatrical release in the States have
all been a hoot to watch.  Remember the scene where Jackie uses that
samurai sword to stop that out-of-control hovercraft in Rumble in the
Bronx?  Or the giant Kevlar hamster ball in Operation Condor?  Or the scene
where he wrecks that Pepsi truck in Mr. Nice Guy?  (Probably the greatest
product-placement scene ever, next to the one in Wayne's World.)  But in
Twin Dragons...
There.  I said it.  I didn't want to say it, believe me.  I love Jackie
Chan movies.  I've been a consistent defender of his work against those who
would dismiss his film career.  Why, I even kept my mouth shut after seeing
Rush Hour because I didn't want to rain on Jackie's parade.  But even in
the most generous light possible, Twin Dragons isn't good.
Shakespeare's work aside, there just isn't a lot that can be done with the
concept of mismatched twins.  The best Twin Dragons can do is use the
wrinkle that one twin is affected by the muscle movements of the other.  We
see the mechanic twin's hand twitching when the pianist twin plays, and we
see the pianist twin thrash around violently while the mechanic twin is
fighting.  I grinned a little at that, I'll admit, but the gag just gets
worked to death.  So is the gag where people faint when one twin, then the
other walks by.  Not to mention that the twins both have girlfriends, and
they keep crossing paths as well.
With all the really lame comedy present in the movie, you would hope that
the fight scenes and the stunt scenes would counterbalance things enough to
make Twin Dragons entertaining.  Unfortunately, it doesn't happen.  The
fight scenes aren't all that bad, really, and the final fight scene in an
auto factory is probably worth a ticket if you have a dollar movie theater
handy.  But the One Big Stunt that characterizes Chan movies is absent.
For whatever reason -- low budget, or that Chan's body isn't quite so
resilient anymore -- there isn't the one grand, gooey, destructive stunt
scene that's the signature of Jackie's work.
Twin Dragons is a disappointment, but it's not a bad movie.  Instead, it's
a reminder of just how good the other Jackie Chan movies are.  They've all
had to keep their balance in an unforgiving critical climate.  Twin Dragons
loses its balance, true, but it's a narrow high wire at best with heavy
winds.
