Title
Review for Ball of Fire (1941)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BALL OF FIRE (1941) A remarkable, funny screwball variant of łSnow White
and the Seven Dwarfs.˛  Linguist Gary Cooper and seven fuddy-duddy scholars
on a foundation grant, are cloistered in a mansion where they are preparing
an encyclopedia. Cooper ventures into the forbidding outside world to do
research on slang. He meets cabaret singer Sugarpuss OšShea (Barbara
Stanwyck) a gansgteršs moll. The mob stashes her in the professorsš house
and, to our great merriment, the outrageous follows the preposterous.
Little-known comedy was directed by the great Howard Hawks who worked in
all genres and who, like the flyers who flew by the seat of their pants in
so many of his aviation movies, had all the right instincts. Script by
Billy Wilder and Charles Brackett. It is uncanny that Wilder, who had come
from Germany a few years before, could write such American and such slangy
dialogues. Cooper, who was just as versatile as Hawks and could play
anything from a romantic lovers to strong, silent men of action, shows
again what a marvelous comedian he was. He sometimes even looks like Johnny
Carsonšs Floyd Turbo character. Hawks remade the movie in 1948 as łA Song
Is Born,˛ a musical version with Danny Kaye. (Edwin Jahiel)
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Heather Picker
     Directed by Howard Hawks.  Written by Charles Brackett and Billy Wilder. 
Starring Barbara Stanwyck and Gary Cooper.  1941, 111 min., Not Rated.  
     "Ball of Fire" is a screwball comedy in which Gary Cooper plays an English
professor, Bertrand Potts, who has spent the last eight years in seclusion with
seven colleagues, compiling an encyclopedia. When he discovers that the slang
terms he was going to use in the encyclopedia are outdated, he enlists the help
of a group of "normal" folk with healthy slang vocabularies to assist him in
compiling terms.
     Among the members of the group is Sugarpuss O'Shea, a burlesque dancer and
gangster's moll who has to hide from the authorities because her boyfriend is
in trouble with the law. The script was written by Charles Brackett and Billy
Wilder, and Wilder's influence is more evident, though it still isn't nearly as
powerful as it would be when the Wilder/Stanwyck collaborations reached their
creative peak three years later in 1944 when he directed and co-wrote "Double
Indemnity," in which she gave a definitive performance as a femme fatale.  
     Sugarpuss and Professor Potts become involved, which threatens their lives
and the encyclopedia project.  Never mind the fact that at first she only
pretends to love him to bide time before hastily planned nuptials to her mob
boyfriend, who himself has only proposed because he faces criminal charges and
Sugarpuss doesn't have to testify against him if they're married.  Her
indecisiveness when it comes time for the wedding should seem contrived, as by
this time the plot is wearing thin, but Stanwyck and Cooper nicely manage to
keep the film afloat.  "Ball of Fire" was one of the last screwball comedies
made before World War II, and though not hysterical, as other Howard
Hawks-directed screwball vehicles are, it will hold interest because of great
performances. (Note the Snow White story and visual references.)  Hawks remade
it seven years later as "A Song is Born."
Review Courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com
