Title
Review for Emerald Forest, The (1985)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
Many predict that the biggest political issues of next
century would be in the domain of ecology. Some of those
trends can be observed even today, with the environmentalist
movements gaining strength all over the globe, and even
coming to power in countries like Germany. However, in
1980s, care for the environment and long term interests of
humanity didn't look that attractive or important during the
reign of neo-conservative ideology, new Cold War and extreme
materialism. In the beginning of 1990s things changed -
environmentalism became fashionable in the era of emerging
"political correctness" so Hollywood tried to cash in. The
results were mixed, somewhere between disasters
(WATERWORLD), solid but overhyped epics (DANCES WITH WOLVES)
and interesting failures (THE MEDICINE MAN). Unfortunately,
that trend came too late for a movie that could have put all
of them to shame - THE EMERALD FOREST, ecological adventure
by John Boorman, made in 1985.
The plot of the movie is allegedly inspired by a true story.
Bill Markham (Powers Boothe) is an American engineer working
on the great dam project in the middle of Amazon jungle. One
day he brings his family to the building site, but that
little trip ends with his little son Tommy wandering in the
forest. There he gets abducted by Indian tribe known as
"Invisible People". For the next ten years, Bill spends
every spare moment to search for his son in the Amazon.
Unfortunately, the "Invisible People" are one of those
tribes that haven't got any contact with the outside world.
But that doesn't bother Tommy (Charly Boorman), who was
adopted by tribal chief Wanadi (Rui Polonah) and became
member of the tribe himself. When Bill finally meets him,
Tommy had already forgotten his parents and "civilised" way
of life. He seems happy with his life so he decides not to
listen to father's pleas for the return to civilisation.
Father and son part again, but not for the last time.
Village of the "Invisible People" gets attacked by the rival
tribe of "Fierce People" who take away all the women,
including Tommy's wife Kachiri (Dira Paes) and sell them to
the sleazy brothel owners at the outskirts of jungle. Unable
to fight guns with bows and spears, Tommy must seek his
father's help, which brings him to dangerous journey to the
heart of civilisation.
Unlike most ecological movies, that either try to shove the
environmentalist agenda to the viewers' throats or, even
worse, use ecology as cheap excuse for lame action/thriller
plots, THE EMERALD FOREST was very subtle. That shouldn't
surprise anyone, because the movie author, John Boorman,
liked nature, its beauty and dangers, long before the
environmental trends became fashionable. So, the tone of the
movie isn't preachy - the script by Rosco Pallemberg was set
in a virgin Amazon jungle threatened by an encroaching
civilisation, but Boorman was less interested in conflict
between nature and progress than in splendid opportunity to
make very personal film - classical adventure that is almost
impossible to imagine in Hollywood these days. Boorman
obviously liked what he was doing, because he chose his
teenage son Charley to play Tommy; that choice was good,
because that boy was perfect as lead character who
symbolises the innocence of the Amazon and the natural state
of man. His green eyes and innocent beauty corresponds with
the the innocent beauty of the rain forests. The nominal
lead, Powers Boothe, is shadowed by him, same as Meg Foster
as his mother, cast more because of her green eyes than
acting ability. Perhaps because of Boothe, the conflict
between the father and son wasn't as powerful and
interesting as it should have been.
The opportunity to have some father/son drama with cultural
clash themes, wasn't used in the first part, but some of the
script problems are more visible in the second. Boorman was
forced to admit that the Amazon jungle isn't that
all-friendly and blissful place, although Tommy and
"Invisible People" might see it that way. So, someone had to
represent the bad side of the Amazon, and that role was
filled by the tribe of "Fierce People" - whose villainy
might remind people of the native characters seen in the
classic Tarzan films (they are even painted black only to
illustrate their allignment). The "two tribe" concept wasn't
that simplistic, though; it is implied that the civilisation
stripped away the forest that used to be the hunting ground
for the "Fierce People", thus forcing them to go to war with
other people. However, the evil of the "Fierce People" is
underlined with the way they accept civilisation - unlike
noble and purist "Invisible People" who see white men as
"Termite People" (who eat away their world) and whose vision
of "Termite People" world is frightening (as witnessed by
Tommy in his short trip to Bill's city), they are ready to
accept the civilisation - first guns, than liquor -
corrupting and degrading themselves in the process.
Boorman brings film to the climax with the showdown in the
brothel, thus providing the audience with the standard
action scenes. But, instead of ending film immediately after
that, with the bitter-sweet note (Bill warns that the
civilisation would win in the end), Boorman provides the
audience with implausible fairy tale finale - Indian prayers
bring the flood that would take away the dam as the symbol
of the civilisation. But that scene is made even more
implausible with the addition of Bill who tries to blow up
his life's work in the process. The ending - Tommy, Kachiri
and his friends living happily ever after in a natural
paradise - is bad contrast with the end credits, that warn
the audience about sad reality of the Amazon - destruction
of the rain forests and silent genocide of the Indians.
However, despite all those flaws, THE EMERALD FOREST is not
beautiful and entertaining, but also a thought-provoking
film - one of those who were right on the spot with many
burning issues of today's world.

Author
Louis Proyect
John Boorman's 1985 film "The Emerald Forest" begins with the point of
view of a white family out on a picnic. Bill Markham (Powers Boothe)
is the supervisor of a dam construction site on the edge of the Amazon
rainforest, which looms menacingly. He warns his children to stay out
of the forest, since there are dangerous things inside it. By the end
of the film, the point of view becomes entirely reversed. It is the
forest that is the safe haven and it is the outside "civilized" world
that is savage.
His son Tommy (played by Charley Boorman, the director's son) strays
into the forest where he meets several members of the "Invisible
People," including the chief. They take him with him back into the
deep forest, while his distraught parents organize the construction
workers into a search party.
When we next see Tommy, he is an adolescent. Clad only in a
loin-cloth, he has become "Tomme." Side by side with his new father,
the chief (Rui Polonah), he is learning the fine points of hunting and
fishing with a bow and arrow. As it turns out, the chief had taken
pity on the boy and spirited him away from the "Termite People." He
decided that he would be better off in "the World," as the "Invisible
People" describe the rainforest. The "Termite People" are like insects
since they have been tearing down the big trees.
Tommy's father has never lost hope that he can discover his son and
organizes an expedition into the heart of the rainforest. He runs into
a war-party of the "Fierce People," who pursue him. He eventually lies
exhausted near a river, after having been wounded by one of their
spears. There he meets his son, who manages to rescue him from his
attackers. The two make their way back to the "Invisible People's"
camp.
After his father recovers from his wounds, he tells Tomme that he
wants to take him back with him to the city, but the youth explains
that he has been in "the World" too long. He belongs there now. Then
the father turns to the chief and asks him to order the boy to return
with him. The chief shrugs his shoulders and says that if the boy
wanted to return, he would have agreed to do so. Furthermore, he would
not be chief any longer if he told members of his tribe to do
something that "they did not want to do." This admission gets to the
very heart of the difference between "primitive" society and our own.
In our society, it is normal for the state, employer, teachers and
religious officials to order us around every day of our lives. The
high price of civilization is repression.
Next we find ourselves at an outpost at the edge of the forest that
houses a brothel to serve construction workers. They are working on
various development projects which have sprung up near the dam of the
opening scene, now up and running. The "Fierce People" are bargaining
with the white men who run the brothel. If they bring him Indian women
whom he can prostitute, he will give them machine-guns in exchange
that they can use against their enemies, including the "Invisible
People." We eventually learn that the Bill Markham's crew has build a
dam on the territory of the "Fierce People" and that their degraded
behavior is one of the unforeseen consequences of "development."
The "Fierce People" launch a raid on Tomme's village and take all the
young women back to the brothel, where they become go-go dancers and
prostitutes at the point of a gun. Among the women is Tomme's wife
Kachiri (Dira Paes). Tomme organizes a group to rescue the women but
fail because bow and arrows are no match for machine-guns.
He decides that there is only one person who can help him and that is
his biological father. He leaves "the World" and crosses a river that
brings him into a large city near the rainforest, where Bill Markham
lives. We see the city through the eyes of the Indian and it is a
horrible place. When he gets off his canoe, a gang of drunken,
pistol-shooting slum dwellers chase after him for sport. The irony is
that his pursuers are originally from the rainforest themselves and,
like the "Fierce People," have no place to go after losing their land
except the city.
One of the slum-dwellers rescues him from the mob and allows him into
his shack. He tells him, "I know you. You are one of the Invisible
People. Do you know my people? We were the Turtle People." While the
man is speaking, we hear the sounds of bottles crashing, boomboxes
blasting and violent arguments through the walls of the shack. Tomme's
face expresses fright and disgust at the notion that people have to
live this way. Boorman's film has succeeded, since we share this
feeling with him. We want to be back in the forest away from such a
horrible place.
Boorman took enormous risks with this film. He obviously left the task
of presenting a straightforward social and political account to
documentary makers. He is much more interested in trying to translate
his material into something approaching legend. There are numerous
scenes in the film when he tries to evoke a non-scientific
understanding of the world. Tomme searches for magic stones that have
the power to make the members of his tribe invisible. We also see
things through his eyes, when he goes through an initiation ceremony.
He turns into his totem, an eagle, and flies through the air.
At the conclusion of the film, we learn that at one time 4 million
indigenous people lived in the rainforests of Latin American. Now
there are less than 150,000. The final scenes of the film make a
powerful, dramatic case for how urgent it is to defend the human
rights of the remaining tribes. While it is too late to turn back the
clock, it is not too late to fight for the survival of this important
part of our human race right now.
