Title
Review for Ever After (1998)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Steve Rhodes
     EVER AFTER is a delightful retelling and reinventing of the 
Cinderella legend by writers Susannah Grant, Rick Parks, and director 
Andy Tennant.  Set in a lush, fairytale, sixteenth century France, the 
movie floats on gossamer wings.
     Drew Barrymore, last seen so bewitchingly as the waitress in THE 
WEDDING SINGER, plays Danielle, a.k.a. Cinderella.  Danielle is a 
beautiful tomboy who fights with the best of them but who manages to 
stay absolutely charming in every scene.  Barrymore is perfectly cast 
for the role, and, given this script, it becomes hard to think of anyone 
who could have played it better.  When she smiles, the camera lens 
almost melts.
     As Danielle's stepmother, Rodmilla, Anjelica Huston delivers a 
reserved but dead-on performance, helped by the bitingly witty script.  
"Nothing is final until you're dead, and even then I'm sure God 
negotiates," she concludes.  Anyone who plans on negotiating with God, 
certainly thinks highly of herself.  And when she catches Danielle 
wasting her time reading books, she has an unusual put-down.  "Some 
people read because they can't think," she chides her.
     Danielle's stepsisters are played by Megan Dodds as the bitchy 
blonde, Marguerite, and Melanie Lynskey as the more lovable Jacqueline.  
The former wants to go to the dances to marry the prince, but the latter 
goes only for the food - if her mother is to be believed.  In the film's 
most satisfying scene, Danielle finally slugs Marguerite when she can 
stomach her no more.
     Poor Prince Henry (Dougray Scott) is in an arranged marriage to a 
Spanish princess he doesn't love.  Fleeing the castle one day in hopes 
of avoiding the marriage, he meets Danielle, a feisty servant.  When he 
meets her later, she is dressed in finer garments so he doesn't 
recognize her.  He comes to believe, incorrectly, that she is of noble 
blood and starts seeing her without the knowledge of her stepmother or 
two stepsisters. 
     The king, played by Timothy West, feels sorry for his son so he 
gives him 5 days to choose a bride.  "Choose wisely, Henry," the queen 
(Judy Parfitt) sternly admonishes.  "Divorce is something they only do 
in England."
     Of course, the prince will want Danielle for his bride, and, of 
course, there will be numerous complications.  "A bird may love a fish, 
senor."  Danielle tells Leonardo da Vinci, who conveniently happens by.  
"But where would they live."  A prince and a commoner are not a likely 
combination in the 1600s.
     Never fear, they will get together and the stepmother and her awful 
daughter will get theirs in the end.  But you knew the story.  The 
delight of EVER AFTER is that it makes it all seem new and fresh.  
Barrymore's performance alone is worth the price of admission.
     EVER AFTER runs 2:01.  It is rated PG-13 for a single mild 
profanity, and the picture would be fine for all ages.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, loved the picture, giving it ****.  He 
thought Barrymore was really cute. (When she first kisses the prince, he 
leaned over to me and whispered, "I wish I was the man in that picture."  
Ditto for his Dad.)  His favorite part was the ball and Danielle's 
costume with the fairy-like wings.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Simon Calloway
Cast: Drew Barrymore; Anjelica Huston; Dougray Scott
DVD Widescreen 2.35:1/Trailer/Dolby 5.1/Language Selection
 When I was a kid and my parents brought me to the movies, I saw a film by
Disney called Cinderella.  I never fully understood why kids liked this
particular cartoon.  I found it annoying and boring, even for a cartoon, with
the magic pumpkin and talking mice simply uninteresting. But, I was never a
Disney-type kid.
 Now, when I heard Drew Barrymore would be starring in a live action story of
Cinderella, not produced by Disney, I thought, It could be interesting.  And
Anjelica Huston as the wicked stepmother? I'm there.
 Little did I know, I have found my new favorite movie.  Ever After is an
enchanting, lovely adaptation of the silly Disney cartoon.  It is told through
different versus, such as Cinderella's name being Danielle, and the magic
pumpkin and mice have taken a hike (thank God!).  This is one of the reasons
Ever After works.
 Since you know the story, I will not waste the time to tell it.  I will tell,
however, that the story takes different turns, resulting in very (crowd)
pleasing excitment.  Barrymore is just perfect for the role of Danielle, while
Huston is, of course, chillingly excellent as the evil stepmom.  This is her
film, so to speak.  She steals all her scenes, although Barrymore has a certain
sparkle that makes you want to just watch her and nothing else. 
 Do yourself a favor and see this film.  It will restore your faith in movies.

Author
Bob Bloom
 Ever After (1998) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Drew Barrymore, Dougray Scott
and Anjelica Huston.
 It seems the Brothers Grimm - as well as all the other writers of fairy
tales - had it all wrong.
 No fairy godmother, no magical pumpkins turning into carriages. Nope, it
was pure spunk, resilience, honesty and Leonardo Da Vinci who won
Cinderella her prince.
 Only her name wasn't Cinderella, it was Danielle. At least that's the way
the story goes in Ever After.
 Danielle was the daughter of a French nobleman. When her beloved father
remarries, he brings Danielle the mother she never had, as well as two
stepsisters.
 However, shortly after his remarriage Danielle's father dies, and her
stepmother, Rodmilla, while not necessarily wicked, turns out to be less
than kind to her new stepdaughter.
 Director Andy Tennant, who co-wrote the screenplay with Susannah Grant and
Rick Parks, has turned the Cinderella legend on its ear.
 Call this a PC fairy tale, with a pinch of Gloria Steinem.
 Danielle may be a damsel in distress, but she is no weakling. She's more
16th-century Xena, Warrior Princess than a Snow White. She can ride, handle
a sword, is well-educated (her favorite book is Thomas More's Utopia) and
is not afraid to speak her mind. She believes in the rights of the
individual and that all men - and women - are equal.
 As portrayed by Drew Barrymore, Danielle is an outspoken, strong-willed
young woman who, while working in and around the manor house like a
servant, is savvy enough to know when to yield and when to get in the face
of her stepmom.
 Barrymore is most appealing, and while she is no beauty, she radiates an
honesty and frankness that is most appealing. It is easy to understand how
she could attract the eye of any man, especially a prince.
 Dougray Scott is handsome as Prince Henry, the nobleman smitten by
Danielle's outrageous ideas, her passion for life and her frankness.
 As Rodmilla, Anjelica Huston gives a deliciously evil comic performance.
It borders on campiness but falls short of crossing that fine line.
 Her portrayal is very similar to Sigourney Weaver's performance as the
evil stepmom in the revisionist Snow White: A Tale of Terror that aired on
the Showtime cable channel earlier this year.
 Patrick Godfrey is an eccentric Leonardo, reminding one of Desmond
Llewelyn's "Q" from the James Bond movies.
 The lush French countryside, plus a soothing score by George Fenton adds
to the pleasure of this modern retelling of an old bedtime story.
 Ever After offers wit and charm. It's colorful, enjoyable and tame enough
for the entire family.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Matt Williams
The fairy tale of Cinderella has been retold many times over the years.
However, it isn't often that such a retelling results in a film as
revisionist in Ever After.  Eliminating the fantastical elements
(pumpkins and fairy godmothers), while enhancing the romantic angle,
Ever After strives to recast the fairy tale as a misunderstood episode
in history. The result works surprisingly well.
According to this version, "Cinderella" was just a demeaning nickname
applied to the young Danielle (Drew Barrymore) by her cruel stepsisters.
Danielle's father died shortly after marrying the evil Baronness
Rodmilla (Anjelica Huston).  Rodmilla takes pity on Danielle and raises
her as a pathetic servant girl.
Danielle's stepsisters, Marguerite (Megan Dodds) and Jacqueline (Melanie
Lynsky), are, of course, pampered little snobs.  Rodmilla is grooming
them for a potential match with the eligible Prince Henry (Dougray
Scott).  However, after a chance encounter with Danielle, Henry is
smitten.
Danielle finds herself in the awkward position of playing a charade.
She pretends to be of noble birth and worthy of a prince's affections.
All the while, she struggles to conceal her blossoming relationship from
Rodmilla.
This updated telling of the Cinderella tale actually works much better
than it seems.  Despite its anachronistic class attitudes, Ever After
manages to create a lushly realistic backdrop for its timeless tale.
There is, however, one critical flaw in the story which Ever After never
addresses.  Why does the social climbing Baroness Rodmilla deign to
marry Danielle's low-born father.  It's a crucial question which
underlies the film's themes of class inequality.  However, the film
shies away from ever providing a substantive answer.
Drew Barrymore delivers a fair performance as the lead.  She's
definitely more headstrong than most previous Cinderellas.  But she's
also unconvincing at times, particularly during weepy scenes.
At least, she has a reliable supporting cast to lean on.  Dougray Scott
provides an admirable romantic interest, and Anjelica Huston is
perfectly cast as the wicked stepmother.
Romantics will no doubt enjoy Ever After, easily overlooking its flaws.
Others who attend will find, while not a perfect film, one which is
better than they hoped.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
J.K. Salisbury
Whether you realize it or not, you set certain expectations when you enter a
movie theater. These could be developed from seeing a preview, hearing rumors
or gossip, seeing a poster, or maybe just from hearing the name. I am quite
guilty of this as well, and it sometimes unfairly influences my opinion on a
movie. This usually means that a movie doesn't live up to what I thought I was
going to see. But every so often, something wonderful happens. I have certain
expectations set forth, and when I see the movie, I am completely and
pleasantly surprised. The latter is the case with Ever After, a pleasantly fun
and wonderful retelling of the tale of Cinderella (Grimm, not Disney, so no
pumpkins, sorry).
The story, along with Romeo and Juliet, is probably the most well known love
story of our time. Hence, there is no need for me to outline the plot,
because it follows the tale pretty much to the letter. Nor will I really
spend much time analyzing points and aspects of this movie, because plain and
simply, the surprising charm of this movie, is that it is fun. This is the
most fun I've had in a theater in quite a long time. This differed from how
much I laughed at There's Something About Mary, for the simple of fact that I
didn't feel bad about laughing here. This movie will make you smile, make you
laugh, make you cheer, make you do everything that a fairy tale should. The
story has been told, and retold, but this is the most energetic retelling yet
(Disney's was more romantic, but this one has more humor and fun). The
characters are real, believable. Angelica Huston makes you want to boo her
every appearance on screen (then again she, like Michael Douglas, can do that
in her sleep, but she does it oh so well), Drew makes you want to cheer, or
sigh, as you do for a heroine. The prince (played with confident charming
effectiveness by newcomer Dougray Scott) makes you cheer, and makes the women
envious, and even swoon at times. All of the characters work in the context
of the tale. The king and queen are powerful, yet real, and even the
character who becomes the cupid of the two fate-crossed lovers (won't ruin
the surprise) turns in a wonderfully watchable, comic performance.
You have noticed me mentioning comedy a lot, because therein was where the
surprise lay for me. I didn't expect to laugh as much as I did. It isn't just
slapstick, physical humor either (although that exists) but some rather deep,
intelligent smart humor that I didn't expect. The humor came from all angles,
not even in excess, but rather to keep the movie from getting to serious about
itself. Most of all, this movie never forgot it was a fairy tale. Whenever the
storyline seemed to be getting mushy, intense, or emotional, here came the
humor, or the one-liner, to bring the smile back.
This movie will have the reverse effect of Saving Private Ryan, from this
aspect. When you leave Private Ryan, you feel, as one friend of mine put it,
like you're leaving a funeral. It was depressing, about a depressing and
serious topic. But when Ever After is over, your face will hurt from smiling,
and laughing so much. It makes you (to be cliché) "feel-good". Sure, there
are flaws, Drew's accent slips, historically, they may make some mistakes,
but you know what?. Who cares, it is fun, you can take kids, you can go as
adults and not be ashamed, and you can leave with a smile, and energy in your
heart. My recommendation, give this movie a chance, as soon as possible, you
won't regret it.
See more of my Reel Ramblings at
http://www.angelfire.com/ks/nearside/comingatt.html
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Marty Mapes
**** (out of 4) For years, Hollywood has paid lip service to the idea of a
strong female character. Yet from Disney's cartoons to THE SAINT to KISS THE
GIRLS, these "strong" women have needed a man to save them in the end. 
Drew Barrymore plays Cinderella, who, without giving up her femininity, is a
genuinely strong character. It is the most refreshing turn of the summer. 
In this retelling of the fairy tale, the magic and mysticism have been
stripped away, leaving human nature to drive the story. It makes for a much
more interesting movie. 
Danielle has been raised by her father Auguste (Jeroen Krabbe), her mother
having died in childbirth. Dad marries Rodmilla (Anjelica Huston), when
Danielle is about 9. Danielle immediately loves Rodmilla and her two
daughters, though the opposite isn't necessarily true. 
Soon after the wedding, Auguste leaves on business. Everyone is tense
because they sense that without him, their family will fall apart. They
understand that he is the buffer and the glue that allows them all to
coexist peacefully. Before he can make it to the front gate, he falls off
his horse and dies, his last words professing his love, not for his wife,
but for his daughter. This gives Danielle hope throughout her life, but it
makes her stepmother even more jealous and cruel. 
Danielle, nicknamed Cinderella because she likes to read on the hearth,
grows up less a daughter and more a servant to her step-family.
Nevertheless, she is happy, enjoying life more than her bitter mother and
sister Marguerite. (Her other sister Jacqueline (Melanie Lynskey) is not so
bad.) 
One day a hooded figure on a stolen horse nearly tramples Danielle. She
pelts him with apples and demands the return of the horse, until she sees
that he is the prince. She makes her obeisance and allows him to ride on. He
pays her for her silence in this embarrassing matter. 
Danielle knows exactly what to do with the money. A hired hand has been sold
into slavery, parting him from his wife. She heads to town to buy him back,
disguised as nobility. There she meets the prince again and, when drawn into
conversation, scolds him for his elitist point of view toward slavery. 
The prince is taken by this challenging young woman, who is more than just a
pretty face, who can argue politics and morality with him as an intellectual
equal. Like in the fairy tale, the prince is smitten, but he doesn't know
his love's identity. He must learn who she is and where she lives before his
father the king forces him to marry another. 
Even though the story is melodramatic, there are no two-dimensional
characters. That's not to say they aren't exaggerated, but they have their
own motives and thoughts; they are not merely acting on behalf of the plot.
For example, Rodmilla is, on the whole, cruel and jealous. But the movie
took the time to show us why, and it even permitted her a scene of kindness.
She and Danielle are alone together, the stepdaughter braiding the
stepmother's hair. The camera captures them, locked in each other's gaze as
they talk about love. For a brief, fleeting moment, the two connect as
mother and daughter, before Rodmilla puts her hard exterior back on. (This
scene also demonstrates the capability of both Barrymore and Huston as actors). 
Another example is that Prince Henry falls in love with Danielle, not merely
because the plot demands it, but because she offers him something the other
courtiers do not. At first she is challenging and elusive. Later, she proves
to be an intelligent, clever, capable partner. They meet again several
times, each time discussing important and substantive issues. Their love
springs from their friendship and mutual respect, not the other way around. 
Along with the depth of the characters, the caliber of the dialogue makes
screenwriters Susannah Grant, Tenant, and Rick Parks a trio to watch. As
mentioned before, the arguments between characters are substantive and
insightful. When Danielle is at the table with her step-family the insults
are incisive and on-target. When she argues with the prince, the two bait
each other with rhetorical traps. Everyone in the movie is a notch smarter
than in your average film. 
The movie turns corny near the end, and a wrinkle in the plot contrives to
lengthen the film by about ten minutes, but on the whole, there is nothing
wrong with the film. 
It is incredibly refreshing to see a movie with a genuinely strong female
character. It is equally refreshing to see a love story that has time to
develop. EVER AFTER gives me hope that Hollywood is capable of producing
high-quality entertainment that doesn't treat its audience like idiots. This
is a movie not to be missed.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Those behind "Ever After" have taken an enormous gamble.  In
perhaps the boldest piece of counter-programming this summer, 20th Century
Fox is pitting its disarming Cinderella story against earth-threatening
meteorites, swashbuckling Mexicans, soldiers of both the small and saved
variety, not to mention that mean green lizard who's still stomping around
out there.
        But judging from the reaction of a largely youthful Monday night
crowd--and a pretty voluminous one at that--"Ever After" seems to be well
on its way to becoming a surprise hit.
        What screenwriters Susannah Grant, Rick Parks, and Andy Tennant
(who also serves as the film's director) have done here is to come up with
a slightly different take on the classic Cinderella fairy tale.  Only--and
this is what's most intriguing about the film--it's not really all that
different.  You can't call it a "modern" adaptation of the story, since
most of the film takes place in 16th-century France.  And simply referring
to it as a "live action" version doesn't quite cut it either.
        Perhaps the film's closing voiceover explains things best: "It's
not that they lived happily ever after, it's that they lived."
        The story is the standard riches-to-rags tale of a young girl
forced to live and work for her unsympathetic stepfamily and falling for a
handsome prince in the process.  There are some nice enhancements to the
yarn, like the stepsisters not being particularly ugly (one even turns out
to be an ally), and the prince not wanting "those certain obligations that
come with privilege."
        But the true pleasure in watching "Ever After" is believing that
this fairy story (attributed to the Brothers Grimm) actually happened to
real people.
        The film is a big step up for Tennant (whose previous turn at bat
was the Matthew Perry/Salma Hayek romantic comedy "Fools Rush In") and he
rises to the occasion.  While more functional than inspired in the
production design department, "Ever After" nevertheless features some
impressive French chateaux, "Babe"-inspired rustic settings and, to back
all that prettiness up, a George Fenton score that makes more than a casual
nod to Mark Knopfler's lyrical musings for The Princess Bride.
        Drew Barrymore is the cinders-encrusted Danielle and she continues
her stilted acting style that served her well in "The Wedding Singer"
(that's two enchanting films for two this year from Barrymore).  Her
popularity among teenage girls is clearly evident, yet Barrymore manages to
win the entire audience over with her genuine smile and plucky joie de
vivre.
        Dougray Scott, looking partly handsome and partly like Oliver
Platt, plays the charming prince Henry, and Anjelica Huston, who appears to
have learned a thing or two from the raised eyebrow school of acting
courtesy former beau Jack Nicholson, pulls out all the stops as Danielle's
wicked stepmother, the Baroness Rodmilla.
        "Ever After" might also be one of the few films to feature Leonardo
da Vinci solely for comic relief.
        Finally, a side note for parents.  The film is rated PG-13, but the
rating is ludicrous.  Save for Danielle's father suffering a heart attack
early on in the film, which is no worse than anything in most of Disney's
G-rated features, and da Vinci once referring to manure by a more colorful
term, there's nothing in "Ever After" that couldn't be seen--and thoroughly
enjoyed--by young children.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Andy Tennant
Cast:  Drew Barrymore, Anjelica Huston, Dougray Scott, Patrick Godfrey,
Megan Dodds, Melanie Lynskey
Screenplay:  Susannah Grant, Andy Tennant, Rick Parks
Producers:  Mireille Soria, Tracey Trench
Runtime:  120 min.
US Distribution:  20th Century Fox
Rated PG-13:  mild violence and profanity 
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
While watching Ever After, I realized that the only rendition of the
classic tale of Cinderella I had seen is Disney's animated version.  I
became aware of this about halfway into the film, when I noted that it
was going to be hard for the director, Andy Tennant, and his writers to
include fairy godmothers, talking mice, and carriages that turn into
pumpkins after midnight.  Like most children's' stories, I have no
affinity for this particular fairy tale, but Ever After is a
delightfully entertaining re-interpretation of the story.
Drew Barrymore takes center stage in this version, cast as the young
Danielle.  After the untimely death of her father (she's only eight when
he dies), Danielle falls under orders of her stepmother, Rodmilla (a
very wicked Anjelica Huston), and stepsisters (Megan Dodds and Melanie
Lynskey).  Danielle is, of course, a very strong girl because she was
raised from an early age by her father.  Rodmilla sees this as an
advantage, and puts Danielle to hard labor for ten years.  When Danielle
reaches the ripe age of eighteen, she's a confident and hard-working
young woman, in addition to being fantastically attractive.
So, when she meets the Prince Henry (Dougray Scott), heir to the French
throne, he's instantly enthralled with her intelligence (she likes to
read) and passion (she's a socialist).  But, feeling that her status is
not good enough for him, she spins a lie in which she pretends to be a
rich Baroness whenever he's around.  What she doesn't realize is that
Henry is looking for his bride, and that her stepsister, Marguerite
(Dodds), is successfully attempting to win the right to be his wife.
It takes a lot of talent to wring interest out of a story told so many
times, and Tennant proves that he's up to the task.  Visually, the film
is impressive, with nice cinematography, and fantastic sets and
costumes.  I never got the feeling that I was watching something
artificial, or that any of it took place on a sound stage.  Some of the
scenes are truly fantastic, such as the infamous ball.  It's refreshing
to see a Hollywood period piece that actually pays attention to details
(although all the actors have British accents, despite the fact that
they're living in France).  
Tennant is also a gifted storyteller, and he makes this clear in the
passion with which this story is told.  True, some of the scenes are
nearly overdone, but Tennant is a master at payoffs -- there are
numerous segments that thrilled me, and had the audience around me
cheering with excitement.  There won't be an indifferent mind in the
house when Danielle finally has her way with Marguerite, or when Tennant
shows us the best way to take revenge of a wicked stepmother.  And the
film never regresses into banality or stupidity -- Ever After is a fairy
tale, but it's an imaginative and well-executed fairy tale.
Barrymore is luminous in the lead role.  It's nice to see a child actor
that actually made it through the teenage years; Barrymore, in addition,
was one of the few child actors who had talent.  Here, she perfects a
British accent (but shouldn't it have been a French accent?), while
injecting Danielle with multiple layers of intelligence and strength. 
She is the heart of this film, and manages to elevate the already-high
quality of the overall package.  The supporting roles are colorful,
particularly from Huston.  She was clearly born to play this role; her
eyes seethe wickedness even when she isn't speaking.  Scott is also very
good (and very funny) as the spoiled prince.  Dodds, as the bitchy
stepsister, is perfect, while Lynskey (who was fantastic in Heavenly
Creatures) is likable as the good stepsister.
The previews for Ever After didn't look promising; I expected a
thoughtless and dry interpretation of the story.  Instead, I got this
film, which is energetic and charming -- this is Hollywood storytelling
at it's finest.  In addition to crafting a great picture all-around,
Tennant has discovered the best possible way to avoid the magic spells
and talking animals that most people will expect from the story.  He
deserves double bonus points for that.

Author
James Brundage
Is it just me, or did Cinderella used to be a lot NICER?
Directed by Andy Tennant (Fools Rush In)
Written by Susannah Grant (Pocahontas)
Starring Drew Barrymore (The Wedding Singer), Anjelica Huston (The Grifters)
I guess its women's lib… and now that I've gone and said that, all the women
liberals I know will hunt me down and kill me, so this may be my final
review. I guess its women's lib that's made this new version of Cinderella,
and I guess its women's lib that decided to put America's sweetheart who's
only good-roles-was-getting-hacked-in-"Scream" and rubbing noses with
aliens. And I'd also guess its women's lib that tried to make all under the
Hollywood blanket of pop-culture while retaining a complete stranglehold on
all of the balance that SHOULD be in the film. And it makes sense that it'd
be women's lib: after all, women are they're audience.
Yes, it's the latest trite little chick flick to hit the screen, set 500
years in the past yet still having a female main character who gets to
overshadow everybody, say all the good lines, give all the coy smiles,
deliver the punchlines, and endear herself to the audience of women who are
nestling their heads in the nearest barely awake man. Thus is my MOVIE
WARNING: DO NOT BE ALARMED IF YOU HEAR SNORES DURING THE COURSE OF THIS
FILM.
Although it clocks in at about 2 hours, it feels like 6. The story itself
takes a fairy tale that was bearable and makes it unbearable, drawing it out
further and further like a little hair before PLUCK it snaps, taking your
mind along with it. The fairy tale we all know: Cinderella. The twist we all
know: a Cinderella that can hit a moving target with an apple at ten years,
expertly fence, read classics, give a mean left hook and still have time to
check for dirt underneath her nails.
Girl's you have your little hero-girl of the month to look up to. Guys be
warned, this is a chick flick, bring your walkman, tune to the latest
Pirates game, sit back, close your eyes, and go to sleep. But guys: don't
forget your batteries.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One thing the world did not need was yet another telling of the
Cinderella story, particularly one that gives Cinderella the values and
qualities of a 1990s woman.  Given that that is true, and that the
story has been much revised, this is at least a watchable version that
benefits from a sumptuous production.  Normally it is bad policy for a
filmmaker to adapt a famous story and then to revise it.  However, in
this case there is a framing sequence in which an old woman, a Grand
Dame, is telling the Grimm Brothers what really happened and proving it
by showing them the actual glass slipper that apparently had been in
her family for a long time.  Saying that she is going to tell "what
really happened" covers a multitude of revisions to the classic story
and even a few anachronisms.  While a film like ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF
THIEVES claims to be the story of Robin Hood and then tells its own
story, EVER AFTER starts right out by saying the Grimm Brothers had it
wrong.  There is even a nod to the historical fact that in the original
Grimm story the shoe is a fur slipper.  The story was mistranslated to
English and "fur" became "glass," words that I am told sound similar in
French.
     Once we are past the framing sequence the scene shifts to 16th
Century France where a widower father, Auguste (played by Jeroen
Krabbe) very deeply loves his precocious eight-year-old daughter
Danielle (Anna Maguire).  So that his daughter will have a family he
marries the enigmatic Rodmilla (Angelica Huston).  Very soon after the
marriage Auguste dies.  Flash forward ten years and the household under
Rodmilla's rule has a very definite pecking order.  Danielle (now Drew
Barrymore) is basically just a servant.  In a rather nice variation on
tradition only one of the stepsisters, Marguerite, is beautiful, vain,
and cruel.  The other sister, Jacqueline, is rather plain, but decent
and sympathetic to her stepsister.  Her heart is good though she rarely
has the courage to say anything.  Jacqueline is just one position above
Danielle in the house pecking order.  Everything in the house is ruled
over by Rodmilla, who sees things her own way.  As she goes back on a
promise she says, "Nothing is final until you are dead.  And then I am
sure God negotiates."
     To rescue a house servant, Danielle must pose as a woman of the
court and in that guise she captures the attention of Prince Henry
(Dougray Scott).  He is amazed that this woman is willing to argue with
her prince.  And he is more amazed that when she argues she invariably
wins.  For once it seems that what a prince finds stimulating is a
woman's intellect, not her looks.  This variation on the traditional
fairy tale has among its revisions that there is no fairy godmother
protecting Cinderella.  Instead, visiting court is none other than
Leonardo da Vinci (Patrick Godfrey) and he comes off nearly as magical.
I guess that Leonardo was about as close as you could get to wizardry
in the 1500s without it actually being wizardry.
     Drew Barrymore is reasonable as Danielle, though neither the
director nor the camera really coaxes much deep pain or emotion from
her.  She has a sort of hurt-child look that might be acceptable for
this role, but does not quite work in the scenes in which she is
supposed to be a formidable fighter or look stunning.  Speaking of
stunning, the stepmother is also supposed to be attractive according to
the script and while Angelica Houston is a good character actor, it is
never clear why Auguste is so taken with her.  Her acting does have the
fairy tale villain feel, however, an artifact of films like THE
WITCHES.  And she does qualify as one of the better features of this
film.  Dougray Scott is something of a surprise.  Initially he comes
off as just a handsome hunk without a lot of acting talent.  But he
does have a very expressive face, when he bothers to use it.  That
could make him a very enjoyable comic actor in the style of Hugh
Laurie.  Also along for the ride is Timothy West, one of those solid
British actors who will always turn in a quality performance.  Having
Jeanne Moreau in the framing sequence does a lot for the film.  She
certainly is one of the great ladies of French cinema.
     EVER AFTER is something of a surprise.  Nothing great here, but it
is a pleasant film to watch and is nicely visualized.  I give it a 6 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael Redman
It's not a bad thing to update old stories. It's done all the time in the
oral tradition. The difficulty with this film is not that the tale has
changed, it's that it's dry.
The new Cinderella, Danielle (Drew Barrymore) is not sitting around waiting
for her prince to come. She's a woman of the late twentieth century albeit
situated in sixteenth century France. When her father dies, she stays on in
his house even though she is mistreated by her wicked stepmother Rodmilla
(Anjelica Huston). She works by day, but reads Sir Thomas More by firelight at night.
Although the story is updated, you know the plot. Danielle meets Prince Henry
(Dougray Scott), goes to a ball disguised, is later found out and they live
happily ever after.
The movie is often like watching a filmed play. Theater in real life is
engrossing. Theater on the screen is usually lifeless. There doesn't seem to
be much going on. The camera can be a star of films. Here it's a co-conspirator.
Danielle's convictions are compromised. A socialist and a feminist, she
pretends to be royalty to get her man. A kind woman, her last act in the movie
is one of revenge.
The most enjoyable characters are the most cartoonish. The fairy godmother
stand-in, Leonardo Da Vinci (Patrick Godfrey) is fun to watch as the eccentric
old man who advises Danielle. Huston is enjoyable in her over-the-top wickedness.
In all fairness, my companion loved the film. Maybe it's one of those "chick
flicks" that men don't like. It is certainly a date film. Nearly the entire
audience was couples. Oh well, maybe it's good for something.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and should have
known that his run of enjoyable summer films was bound to end sometime. Email
your retro-fitted legends to Redman@bvoice.com)
[This appeared in the 8/6/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A retelling of the classic Cinderella fable, has a sweet, innocent 8-year
girl who loves her father dearly, turn into a servant for her stepmother,
after her father passes away unexpectedly. After 10 years of waiting on her
demanding stepmom and her stepsisters, the girl is wooed by the bachelor
prince, who believes her to be a courtier, and falls for her ability to say
what is on her mind, and her lack of manipulative tactics.
CRITIQUE:
Interesting, well-told, beautifully photographed version of the classic
tale, features many new, fun twists, and solid performances by the entire
cast, especially Drew Barrymore in the lead role of Danielle. This movie is
sure to strike a chord with girls around the world, who might be able to
identify with the lead character's conviction, truth and love. They might
also appreciate the whole "white knight in shining armor" scenario, with the
higher-brow prince falling for the lower-brow servant. Anjelica Huston plays
another wicked character flawlessly, as this film actually allows her
character to show some humanity, as well as one of the stepsisters, who is
essentially, very understanding to Cinderella's plight. Having said that,
the movie didn't blow my mind, was quite predictable considering its source
material, and did have a weak link in the prince character, who didn't quite
bowl me over. All in all, this film will be appreciated much more by girls,
but entertaining enough for all, with great cinematography, a solid lead,
and an interesting and timely story line.


Author
Matt Petras
     As fairy tales go, Cinderella has to be one of the most famous. Almost
everyone knows it, well at least in North America. So it is natural that
someone will try to make a movie out of it. It has been done before with
varying results. This version of the story is both similar to the original
and different at the same time. The basic story remains unchanged but,  one
thing that seems to vanish with this version, and that is all the
fantastical elements of the story. There is no fairy god mother or anything
even remotely of that nature. After the fantastical elements are stripped
away  what is left is a realistic believable rendition of the Cinderella
story and an interesting love story at the least. .
 Unlike in the fairy tale, the prince plays a much larger part than just
that of  the masked ball at the end. The ‘Prince', who happens to be the
crown prince to the throne of France,  meets 'Cinderella', known as
Danielle,  on a few occasions, most coincidentally and he becomes smitten
with her. Although this seems to be a far cry from the traditional story it
allows for the main plot to proceed with enough room for some imaginative
story telling.. The story takes place in a renaissance setting;  in France,
with Leonardo Da Vinci providing some comic relief on more than one
occasion. This addition of Leonardo Da Vinci, was quite successful in that
it added some color to the movie, since some of the roles are a bit
stereotypical. For example the role that was scripted for the prince leaves
a few things to be desired. For instance the character seems to be a bit too
unstable and fickle, a crown prince should not be anything remotely like
that. Especially since he is portrayed to be in his mid twenties at the
least and almost ready to take the throne.  The characters of
Danielle(Cinderella) played by Drew Barrymore, and that of the evil step
mother, played by Anjelica Huston, are well developed and well played by the
two women.  Although the part of Danielle is a bit stretched it is not too
unlikely and not totally unbelievable. The nuances of the character are
brought out well by Drew Barrymore and from watching the movie it seems like
she had fun making the movie. As a contrast the part of the evil step mother
is clearly seen from the very beginning and is almost clique. But,  Anjelica
Huston seems to add a certain flair to the role that makes it suit the movie
nearly perfectly.
     The actual story is fairly predictable since it is after all the basic
story of Cinderella, but there are more than enough twists in how the story
is told to make it interesting and enjoyable. The acting is of high caliber
and seems deserved of praise. All in all this movie takes you back into
history, into a seemingly magical fairy land. But, don't get me wrong there
is nothing but reality, it is just refreshing to watch a movie that is not
based in a familiar setting with everyday familiar things happening. So
although the story is basically familiar the world it is set in is not, and
that adds a dimension to the film which in this humble reviewers opinion
makes it worth seeing

Author
Tim Voon
Director:  Andy Tennant
Cast:  Drew Barrymore, Anjelica Huston, Dougray Scott, Patrick Godfrey,
Megan Dodds, Melanie Lynskey Screenplay:  Susannah Grant, Andy Tennant,
Rick Parks
In an odd, but ever charming retelling of a dramatised version of the
Cinderella story, gone is the fairy Godmother, mice and pumpkin, but
remaining is an intelligent, witty Cinder girl (Drew Barrymore), who
reads her father's copy of UTOPIA in her spare time. Present still is
the wicked stepmother (Angelica Huston) and two sisters – one evil and
the other not. One may expect that this story may not go down well with
audiences because it strays too far from the original fairy tale, but it
carries with it, such odd charm that one cannot help but smile and like
it. For example, the friendly banter between the strong-willed,
thoughtful Danielle (Cinderella) and her depressed, disillusioned prince
brings out much humour. For once we are shown why they get along and are
attracted to one another, although not initially. This fairs better than
the romanticised versions of the same tale, which presume that they fall
in love, just because they're both good looking. Although at times the
dialogue wavers between 17th and 20th century English, this is easily
overlooked and is not so much an annoyance but instead unintentionally
funny. This story of a French prince who finds his match in a commoner
may be far fetched, but at least it leaves us with hope that behind
every fairy tale, lies a true story, ever after.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The renowned D'oyly Carte opera company went out of
business some years back because though they were the
world's foremost interpreters of the works of Gilbert and
Sullivan, they persisted in performing the masters like
museum pieces.  Updating classics is often a wise idea.  A
good emendation can make a dying masterpiece appear fresh
and contemporary.  Gilbert and Sullivan's "The Mikado" was
once successfully performed in a Toyota salesroom rather
than a medieval Japanese town, and the title character in
recent productions of Shakespeare's "Julius Caesar" often
totes a piece and bears a striking resemblance to Mussolini. 
Cinderella is an ideal tale to bring up to date since it lacks an
authentic rendering anyway.  With five hundred versions of
the story in circulation, the famed beauty is up for grabs by
any author who can put a fashionable spin on it.
   "Ever After" is a Cinderella for the nineties, keeping the
charred woman in the Sixteenth Century but making her
anything but the helpless lass in the fantasies of the Grimm
brothers, whose variant is the most popular in the west.  If
Alexander Graham Bell had lived in the 1500s, this Cinderella
would nonetheless not be waiting by the phone for a call from
her prince or even from a baron.  Active where the Grimms'
heroine was passive and stubborn as a terrier when the
situation calls for obduracy, the female of director Andy
Tennant's project discovers that you can get your prince by
insisting on equality just as others get their noble beaux by
downcast eyes.
   As the wicked stepmother Rodmilla (Anjelica Huston) says,
"Do not speak unless you can improve the silence."  Whether
or not Danielle (Drew Barrymore) does indeed enhance the
hush depends on your point of view.  If you're Rodmilla,
nothing she says or does can make you happy, and if you're
her beautiful but catty stepsister Marguerite (Megan Dodds),
you're competition at best, an embarrassing commoner at
worst.  Stepsister #2, Jacqueline (Melanie Lynskey) would like
to side with Marguerite but this time around she is mostly a
cipher, though secretly on the side of Cindy.
    Forget the pumpkin.  "Ever After" sounds like a fairy tale
but it's more of a contemporary royal romance than a pixie-
like plot.  After the sudden death of her beloved father
Auguste (Jeroen Krabbe), Danielle loses all her status as his
cherished little girl and is forced to work as a domestic in her
stepmother's home.  On several occasions, she runs into
Prince Henry (Dougray Scott), the heir to the throne of
France, and though she beans him with an apple the first time
around, she soon develops a speaking relationship.  During
their sessions in the countryside, she describes to him her
political philosophy which she has culled from her dad's
favorite book, "Utopia" by Sir Thomas More.  Recall that
More, the early 16th century writer once said "They wonder
much to hear that gold, which in itself is so useless a thing,
should be everywhere so much esteemed that even men for
whom it was made are thought of less value than it."   In
other words the writer was a true democrat, and Danielle is to
influence French politics by convincing the prince that thieves
are not bad people, because "a thief cnanot help himself if
you suffer a man to be ill-educated."  On another occasion
she advises, "Rustics are the legs of a country and deserve
respect."
    Aside from these scenes which exploit political science to
further feeling of amour, there's a feeble bit of swordplay
between Henry and a gypsy band, a few scenes of silly
peasant women virtually fainting at the sight of royalty, one of
Leonardo da Vinci (Patrick Godfrey) walking on water, and
one of Marguerite whining "I wanted one four-minute egg, not
four one-minute eggs."  Henry is finally sold on marriage to
Danielle when the young woman charges, "You own all the
land, yet can find no pleasure in working it," to which the
prince, intoxicated by her feminism, recounts how "You swim
alone, climb rocks, and free servants."
   No doubt that Andy Tennant has brought the famous fable
up to date, but does he really improve the silence?  For the
most part his update has good comedic touches, strong
feminist purport, and entertaining vistas.  The picture is
seriously marred by Dougray Scott, who may remind you of
Antonio Banderas but displays none of the charm of that
flamboyant Spanish actor.  He delivers his lines in a
monotone and has the charisma of a French souffle.  Anjelica
Huston does a surprisingly good comic turn as the malevolent
mom who wants only the best for her own daughters but
meets her comeuppance from the queen, and Drew
Barrymore plays to type as a 20th century independent
woman who discovers that feistiness, not pliability, ultimately
triumphs.

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
I love movies that can take me away.  Not like any other medium, cinema
has the power to take us jaded, p.c., smart-alecky and 90's chic
individuals to a distant land where there are princes, dragons, fairies,
magic, and honor.  I am not hindered by time, occupation, nor status; my
$7.50 will be my ticket for a brief interlude with somebody's
imagination made vivid.  Woodrow Wilson was correct when he saw that
films were writing history with lightening.
So, somewhere up the studio ladder came the idea to remake Cinderella.
Cinderella, as we all know, is a classic tale of a peasant girl with a
horrible stepmother who falls for Prince Charming, and wishes to go to
the costume ball, where she could get his attention.  She is forbidden
to go, but she does, and through magic, obtains a stunningly beautiful
gown and glass slippers.  She gets away before the prince could find
her, leaving behind a slipper; but it is through this that the prince
searches her out, and they fall in love.  It is a story bound to rouse
passions, as it did for generations before us; that is why it is a
classic.
For the studio to agree, there has got to be a hook.  What could make
the film fresh and powerful for today's audience, that _The Slipper and
the Rose_ didn't already do twenty years ago?
Why not remove the magic, and replace it with jaded, p.c., smart-alecky
and 90's chic sensibilities?
It must have looked good on paper; but _Ever After_ takes it's
Cinderella story too seriously, and its audience not seriously enough.
Cinderella, a.k.a. Danielle, is brought to life by Drew Barrymore, and
gives her character a gracious presence. But does she have to become a
champion human-rights expert and philosopher as well?  (She's shown
throughout reading a _paperback edition_ of Sir Thomas More's _Utopia_.
Funny, I don't remember paperbacks being invented yet).
Don't get me wrong: I don't have a problem with seeing films of strong
women role models in the Middle Ages; I do have a problem when the
filmmakers pander to the audience with historical women who are far too
modern for their own times.  I am still waiting for that big budget
biopic of St. Theresa of Avila.  I don't think Hollywood would
green-light the screenplay.
Nonetheless Ms. Barrymore is soft on the eyes, and a wonder to watch.
Is this the same person who grew up from kiddie roles to slutty
adolescent roles, to now, dignified adult roles?  Her transformation is
vivid.  Too bad it was with this film, where four of her co-stars
overshadow her.
Anjelica Houston is vicious as Rodmilla, her stepmother, and we know
she's wickedly good from scene one; but this is the kind of role that
she can do in her sleep.  Dougray Scott, as Prince Henry, is, well,
charming.  Patrick Godfrey, a well-renowned English thesp, brings great
pep in his role as Leonardo da Vinci (!).  But trumping the entire cast,
and walking away with the picture is Megan Dodds, as Marguerite,
stepsister number one.  She steals the film every time she's on it, and
so much so that I was convinced that I had seen her before, perhaps as
Molly Ringwald's older obnoxious sister in _Sixteen Candles_.  I was
wrong.
The cast alone is game, and the screenplay has its witty moments.  But
face it, a fairy tale without magic is like a cookie without sugar.  The
direction, cinematography, set design, costumes, all fall a little flat,
except for the scenes at the ball.  Did I really pay to see a soap
opera?
It's not impossible for there to be a modern, hip telling of a fairy
tale; _The Princess Bride_ is still current for having been made over
ten years ago.  That film had more wit, style, and magic than this film
will ever aspire to be.  As an aside, my girlfriend loved it; so I'll
show a little mercy.

Author
Richard Matich
   A retro reveiw by: Richard Matich.
Once upon a time there was a movie studio that wanted a
fortune of gold. To achieve this they hired one of the
fairest in the land. Drew[Barrymore] was her name, and
she couldn't have been more lovely than in this story.
They also hired an Oscar winning actress[Anjelica
Huston] to "over" act the wicked step mother role. The
the prince would be played by a talented new
arrival[Dougray Scott]. But alas! The story is an old
one that, for all their gimmicks and updates, appears
to be as bland as the MGM costume dramas of the '30s.
They may find a pot of gold, yet it will be ill gotten.
The story seems pointless. You have seen it all before
in books and on television. Its an expensive "made for
tv" movie or mini series. It looks like, but lacks the
charm of, The Adventures Of Robin Hood[1938]. The movie
is made for that "family values" crowd that never seems
to like anything of much "lasting" value. The
filmmakers get so desperate to keep this sham of a plot
going that they even put Leonardo da Vinci in as a
character. He does not seem to fit in a Cinderella
movie. The studio probably wanted another Leonardo.
Anything to rob the mass movie audience of more cash.
The da Vinci character made me angrier than anything I
have seen on screen in many years. It is like in
Sleepless In Seattle when the two people meet at the
top of the Empire State building. Why that building?
Why not have them a-top of any non famous building?
Doesn't the Empire State Building observation area
close before the famous climactic scene was supposed to
have taken place? The hack who directed this bland
cinematic merriment is not interested in such matters.
He was awfully busy conspiring with composer George
Fenton. They create a score so loud and intrusive so as
to take your mind off the film's many long pauses while
waiting for any real action or dialogue to begin. Is
there any good news about this fractured fairy tale?
The part of King Francis is played with comedic
perfection by Timothy West. The scenes with him are the
funniest of the film. There is some humor to the movie,
but unfortunately, not enough. Soon after this
particular ball begins this chariot turns into a great
big celluloid pumpkin that never seems to get moving.
