Title
Review for Kingdom Come (2001/I)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Doug McHenry's KINGDOM COME, the death of a man so unloved by his 
wife (Whoopi Goldberg) that she wants only three words of derision on 
his tombstone ("Mean and Surly") brings together his dysfunctional 
family for the funeral.  In the story's best line, the funeral home 
brags in its advertisements that it's "Your pit stop to the afterlife."  
The script by David Dean Bottrell and Jessie Jones, based on their play 
"Dearly Departed," might well have worked when it was a play, but, as a 
movie, it feels so much like a typical television sitcom that it's a 
wonder that it doesn't have a laugh track.
When we first meet Clarisse (Jada Pinkett Smith) and her unfaithful 
husband, Junior (Anthony Anderson), they are arguing their way down the 
highway.  As she slaps at him, he tries to kill both of them, as well as 
their 3 young kids, by running the car off the road.  Of course, since 
this is a slapstick comedy, the movie doesn't expect us to take any of 
this seriously.
Other members of the family on their way to the funeral include Lucille 
(Vivica A. Fox) and her husband, Ray Budd (LL Cool J), and Marguerite 
(Loretta Devine) and her son, Royce (Darius McCrary).  Royce has big 
ambitions, which pleases his highly religious mother.  He plans on 
having several kids.  She explodes, however, when he explains that he 
wants them only so he can live off welfare.  To show how rotten he is, 
the story has him flaunting his smoking in front of a "No Smoking" sign 
in the room in the funeral home in which the father's body lies in 
repose.     
Cedric the Entertainer plays Reverend Hooker, a cheery preacher with a 
humorously exaggerated lisp.  His predilection for spicy Mexican food 
turns the funeral into a fart fest.
Although harmless enough, the movie is rarely funny.  My personal laugh 
count was zip.  Still, if you're a fan of TV sitcoms, which I'm not, you 
might like KINGDOM COME.  Some very vocal members of my audience 
certainly did.
KINGDOM COME runs 1:35.  It is rated PG for thematic elements, language 
and sensuality and would be acceptable for kids around 8 and up.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Norm Schrager
When LL Cool J stars in a movie with a title like Kingdom Come, you
expect to see car chases, stuff getting blown up, that sort of thing. 
Instead, we get a fairly average, seen-it-before, family comedy that has
its moments as well as its problems -- just like the clan in the movie.
When the Slocumb family patriarch -- evidently an ornery sonofabitch --
keels over in front of wife Whoopi Goldberg, it sets off a Slocumb
pilgrimage back to the tiny town of Lula for a weekend of last
respects.  But, like most extended families, there is friction,
conflict, and the occasional secret.
Director Doug McHenry, working from a screenplay by David Dean Bottrell
and Jessie Jones (based on their play Dearly Departed), introduces the
Slocumbs by route of broad humor, some of it too uncomfortable for
laughs.  Son Junior (Anthony Anderson) goes ballistic during the drive
to Lula, his wife (Jada Pinkett Smith) and kids hollering in the car,
and pulls out a gun.  Nephew Royce (Darius McCrary) talks and acts like
a hood while toting his Bible-loving mother along, telling her he can't
wait to settle down and have kids so he can collect welfare.  These
settings are funny?
But once the family settles in, it's clear that the filmmakers were more
interested in the pain and hardship behind those humorous facades.  LL
Cool J's Ray is a recovering alcoholic, trying to keep it together for
others while hatred for his father boils up; Junior's infidelity and
bankruptcy come to the fore; and we learn that Royce's only brother is
in prison.
What keeps Kingdom Come from melding these storylines into a superior
film is a lack of execution -- the scenes played for comedy are not that
funny, and the dramatic sequences seem to lack a greater depth that they
deserve.
The acting quality runs the gamut.  LL Cool J is capable and
understated, Anderson is likeable, even when he's short-changed by the
dialogue, and Goldberg is appropriately subdued in the smaller role of
mother hen.  Pinkett Smith is this film's version of nails on a
chalkboard, playing every line, emotion, and movement at full throttle. 
She is needlessly annoying and the movie always feels better when she's
not on screen.
The final act is a heartfelt look at love and thankfulness, but it
ultimately smacks of sitcom resolution, right down to a poor pastor (the
excellent Cedric the Entertainer) with gas problems cracking up a
stern-faced congregation.  The movie's happiness does have a certain
satisfying feel, but it's never as honest or as entertaining as the
dramatic moments.  In the long run, however, Kingdom Come is saved by
its earnestness.  Barely.
Director: Doug McHenry
Producers: John Morrissey, Edward Bates
Writers: David Dean Bottrell, Jessie Jones
Starring: LL Cool J, Jada Pinkett Smith, Vivica A. Fox, Loretta Devine,
Anthony Anderson, Toni Braxton, Cedric the Entertainer, Darius McCrary,
Whoopi Goldberg
http://www.foxsearchlight.com/kingdomcomethemovie/index.htm
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
