Title
Review for Always Outnumbered (1998) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Made-for-television movies do not get the respect they sometimes
deserve.  HBO made one of the best films last year, "Don King: Only
in America", and "Always Outnumbered" is one of the best films of
this year.  But these films are relegated to instant obscurity,
because the only screens that they are shown on reside in living
rooms and bedrooms.
"Always Outnumbered" stars Laurence Fishburne as ex-convict
Socrates Fortlow, paroled after serving a long sentence for double
murder.  He has moved to a Los Angeles ghetto, and ekes out an
existence collecting bottles and cans from dumpsters.  He tries to
get a better job, but his stubborness and intimidating presence
interfere.
With little going for him except pride and determination,
Fortlow has more success helping others than himself.
He semi-adopts a young street kid (Daniel Williams), steering
him away from a gang.  He helps save the marriage of a troubled
neighbor couple, and gets medical help for a an aging, ailing
friend (Bill Cobbs).
While Fortlow becomes a hero, his achievements are not just
due to his integrity.  He is a big, intimidating man, and he
regularly takes advantage of his size to get his points across.
A lesson here is that if you must live in poverty, it really
helps to be built like a linebacker.
Walter Mosley, who also wrote the book, wrote the screenplay.
He probably deserves even more credit than director Michael Apted.
The script is outstanding, with the only flaws showing up
at the film's end, when the loose ends are all tied up perhaps
too neatly.  Early scenes also threaten to stereotype minor white
characters as jerks, but this tendency is overcome later
in the film.
It is possible that "Always Outnumbered" would not be successful
as a theatrical release, despite its quality.  Fishburne, Cobbs
and Natalie Cole are a generation older than young filmgoers who
might prefer to see Will Smith.  The depiction of urban poverty and
youth gangs is not glamorized.  There is no room for comedy
in this stark drama.  Once again, we can be grateful for HBO
for ignoring demographics and simply producing an excellent film.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
