Title
Review for Midsummer Night's Dream, A (1999)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There was a time when seeing a particular Shakespeare play might
be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.  People would rarely have a
chance to see two different companies performing the same play.  Then
it was sufficient to be simply providing Shakespeare.  That is not so
any more.  Turner Classic Movies frequently plays the 1935 film
version.  It is not so long since PBS broadcast a BBC version.  In
fact, the Internet Movie Database lists nine TV versions and it does
not list the comic version featuring the Flying Karamazov Brothers.  If
a filmmaker wants to do a new version of a Shakespeare play, it should
be at least in some way very original.  It should have something that
the previous versions do not offer.  Certainly two films that I thought
did that were Kenneth Branagh's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING and Ian
McKellan's RICHARD III.  The former managed to use diction that made
following the dialog easy and a pleasure to follow.  That and its
pleasant Tuscan setting made the film a real joy.  And McKellan's
reframing of RICHARD III as an alternate history with a Fascist
takeover of Britain in the 1930s stands as the single most exciting and
inventive performance of Shakespeare I have ever seen.  The new WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE'S A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM was presenting a very familiar
story, so with a fixed plot it should have been greatly creative in
some other way.  It should have been as innovative as those films.  It
was not.
     Michael Hoffman adapted the Shakespeare play and directed.
Hoffman did a beautiful job creating a sumptuous look and feel for the
1995 film RESTORATION, but his ideas were far less rich or original for
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.  As the film starts we
are immediately plunged into cliche with Felix Mendelssohn's "Midsummer
Night's Dream."  It is a rather obvious choice and hardly one that is
inspiring.  The first original touch is to move the setting from
ancient Athens to late 19th Century Monte Athene in Tuscany.  But there
is something of a problem there almost immediately.  The play has many
references to its setting, and there is an immediate dissonance to see
Italy and hear it called Athens.  It is also jarring to have characters
whose names are Theseus, Demetrius, Lysander, Helena, and Hermia.  The
move of location is probably an attempt to repeat the effect that
Branagh achieved with his Tuscan setting, but it really does not work
the same sort of magic.
     For those who do not know the story, I will say just briefly that
Duke Theseus (David Strathairn) is preparing to wed Hippolyta (Sophie
Marceau) when he is asked to settle a dispute between a father and
daughter.  Egeus (Bernard Hill, recently seen as the captain going down
with the ship in TITANIC) has arranged a marriage for his daughter
Hermia (Anna Friel) to Demetrius (Christian Bale). But the rebellious
daughter instead loves Lysander (Dominic West).  Another woman, Helena
(Calista Flockhart), loves Demetrius.  Getting involved into the action
is also a traveling theater company preparing to put on a bad play
about Pyramus (Bottom (Kevin Kline)).  And as if that were not enough
in another part of the forest is Oberon, King of Fairies (Rupert
Everett) is having his problems with his queen Titania (Michelle
Pfeiffer).
     The stars of the film are really Stanley Tucci and Kevin Kline.
Kline has a somewhat expanded role from the Shakespeare involving
Bottom's wife who never appeared in the original play.  These sequences
have to be done without dialog since it is easier to do it that way
than to get Shakespeare back to write lines for their interaction.
Stanley Tucci is almost always a pleasure to watch on the screen.  Here
he does his rubber-faced thing a little too much and amazingly he
overstays his welcome.  But Calista Flockhart (TV's Ally McBeal)
manages to out-rubber-face even Tucci and to almost achieve the level
of a Macaulay Culkin (not appearing in this film, thankfully).
Sadly, the film is never as enchanting as it is supposed to be or even
as it needs to be.  Many of the intended magical elements turn leaden.
Having Puck ride a bicycle again and again is just not all that
whimsical.  Having him ride a silly-looking plastic turtle intended to
be real is even less so.  Hoffman even has a mud-wrestling scene with
Helena and Hermia.  Really.  The sequence of the play of "Pyramus and
Thisbe" may be where some of the humor works the best in a sort of
imitation Monty Python way.  Still, this sequence comes off as
gratuitous filler, but then it always did in the original play also, so
that is not Hoffman's fault.  Once one accepts the Italian setting, the
use of Italian opera melodies is pleasant and does add to the mood,
though when the same melodies are repeated one starts to wonder if
there were not more to choose from.
     In spite of the cast, this is a competent but unexceptional
version of one of Shakespeare's more popular plays.  I rate it 5 on the
0 to 10 scale and a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Fox Searchlight Pictures/ Regency Enterprises
 Director:  Michael Hoffman
 Writer:  Michael Hoffman
 Cast: Christian Bale, Rupert Everett, Calista Flockhart, Kevin
Kline, Sophie Marceau, Michelle Pfeiffer, David Strathairn,
Stanley Tucci
  As the song goes, "When I'm not near/ The girl I love/ I love
the girl I'm near."  Love is so wonderfully irrational.  Who but
an accountant would have it any other way?  Shakespeare
took advantage of love's illogical, nay demented, nature, in
fashioning a fable that--take away the sylvan background and
the eye-popping changes wrought by extra-natural
elements--could take place right in the heart of Times Square
on New Year's Eve.  Shakespeare, known for his unusually
perceptive insights into human nature as well as his
impossibly lyrical utterances, knew that reason and love do
not often keep good company. And so he had no problem
arranging for a beautiful fairy queen to fall hopelessly in love
with an ass.  Next time you see a strange-looking couple on
the street and wonder, "What could she possibly see in him?"
remember that the most ravishing femme fatale just might
find a guy with donkey ears and an eccentric nature more
exciting than an army of bean counters hunched over their
desks at Broderick & Company CPA PC.
   In keeping with the festive mood of Midsummer Night which
is celebrated in England on June 23, Shakespeare offers not
one story of a pair of star-crossed lovers as he did with
"Romeo and Juliet" but looks into comic possibilities of a
similar situation involving five sets of ill-sorted lovers.  The
very multiplicity gives the play comic overtones.  "A
Midsummer Night's Dream" opens during the four seemingly
endless days before Theseus, Duke of Athens, would wed
Hippolyta (whom he won in battle).  She is not so eager. 
Demetrius and Lysander love Hermia.  Helena, who loves
Demetrius, is lusted after by no one.  Oberon and Titania, the
fairy king and queen, have separated.  In a play-within-the-
play, Pyramus and Thisbe are divided by the mutual dislike of
their parents.  Despite the seemingly insurmountable
difficulties that love brings to us all, Shakespeare is
determined to show that everything gets sorted out.  Love
works.  Love can put an ass's head on anyone.  Has this,
dear reader, ever happened to you?  As for logic, well,
"Midsummer" sets before us people who are equals in class
and wealth, its men and women about equal in height.  What
makes one man fall in love with one woman, ignoring all
others?  
   The action unfolds at night, when reason gives way to
dreams, and by daybreak we will see how "the lunatic, the
lover and the poet/ Are of imagination all compact."
   Shakespeare is coy about giving specific instructions and
set designs to the people who are to direct his works, leaving
(in this case) Michael Hoffman to tinker as he will with the
natural background, the order and length of the scenes, even
the century.  He chooses to update "Midsummer" from 16th
Century Athens to the Tuscany region of Italy in the late 19th
Century, when bicycles were first coming into their own as a
new invention.  For his score, he freely employs operatic
sections from Bellini's "Norman," from Verdi's "La Traviata,"
and the traditional background music of Mendelssohn--as well
as a brand-new orchestration from Simon Boswell.  The lush
film--the most expensive work to date by Fox Searchlight
Pictures--opens as Duke Theseus (David Strathairn) prepares
for his wedding to the reluctant Hippolyta (Sophie Marceau). 
During the days prior to the nuptials, the Duke holds court
listening to a complaint from the starchy old Egeus (Bernard
Hill).  Egeus, for reason wholly arbitrary, insists that his
daughter Hermia (Anna Friel) marry Demetrius (Christian
Bale) rather than the dashing Lysander (Dominic West) whom
she loves. The lovers plan to elope into the woods using their
newly-invented bicycles.  Meanwhile the lovelorn Helena
(Calistra Flockhart) follows the man of her dreams,
Demetrius, like a spaniel, masochistically insisting that the
more he scorns her, the more she will love him.
   At the same time a group of amateur actors head for the
woods looking for a space to rehearse the play "The Most
Lamentable Comedy, the Cruel Death of Pyramus and
Thisbe," under the direction of the Peter Quince (played by
an almost unrecognizable Roger Rees).  As all converge,
they are watched by the woodland fairies, particularly the
mischievous Robin Goodfellow, or Puck (Stanley Tucci), the
fairy king, Oberon (Rupert Everett), and his estranged queen
Titania (Michelle Pfeiffer).  Puck sprinkles drops from a flower
into the eyes of some of the sleeping mortals and the
slumbering fairy queen, causing each to fall in love with the
first person he or she sees upon awakening.  The mixup that
results is the source of most of the comedy.
   For reasons known principally to the adapter-director,
Michael Hoffman, the company of thesps is a mixed one. 
British, American and French performers get together leaving
the audience to judge which nationality can do the
Shakespeare best.  Surprisingly the Americans outdo the
British in most junctures, the one major exception being the
American David Strathairn, so adept in quirky roles such as
those directed by John Sayles ("The Return of the Secaucus
Seven").  Here he is overly stiff appearing uncomfortable as
though intimidated open himself for judgment "as a
Shakespearean actor."  Nor does Michele Pfeiffer, for all her
beauty, look alive in the role of the fairy queen or exhibit the
slightest chemistry with Rupert Everett.  Kevin Kline runs
away with the show (surprise!) as Bottom the Weaver, who is
transformed into an ass (see above note about how most of
us lovers are likewise converted).  Capturing the screen as
an obvious ham, he debates his role as Pyramus with the
theater company's manager so vivaciously that we wonder
whether Mr. Hoffman was spared similar domination.  He
clowns furiously when afforded his donkey's ears and yet at
key points allows us to look into the pathos that has
enveloped the man who has been so changed by love. 
Stanley Tucci, known by lovers of art movies for his hilarious
job as a nervous chef in the wonderful "The Big Night" easily 
becomes the movie's center, its impresario, as he sprinkles
love's potion indiscriminately and then sits back with a smirk
on his face to judge humankind: "Lord, what fools these
mortals be!"  
   Oliver Stapleton's camera conveys the mysterious sylvan
atmosphere of the woods, though he could have done more
with the Tuscan town that forms the urban backdrop of the
story.  When you consider that the only special effects
employed by Hoffman are the donkey's ears set upon Kevin
Kline, you may agree that this interpretation of "A Midsummer
Night's Dream," surprisingly only the second major studio
presentation of the great comedy (the first being the Warner
Bros. 1935 version with James Cagney, Dick Powell, Olivia
de Havilland and Joe E. Brown), is a vivid one indeed.  
   What you come away with is a graphic illustration of the
lunacy of lovers and yet another production that has us
thinking about the nature of illusion and reality.  Were the
proceedings of the humans and fairies in the forest an actual
occurrence or simply the lovers' dream?  Was Bottom really
converted into an ass, or did he simply dream about his own
subconscious view of himself as, at base, a donkey?  We sit
in our seats in the darkened theater, knowing full well that
everything on the screen really happened. Or did it?  As
Prospero will say later on in "The Tempest," "We are such
stuff/ As dreams are made on, and our little life/ Is rounded
with a sleep."  Despite the inadequacy of a handful of actors
in this "Midsummer," the movie comes awfully close to being
a dream production.  

Author
Dennis Schwartz
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM (director: Michael Hoffman; cast: Kevin Kline
(Nick Bottom), Michelle Pfeiffer (Titania), Rupert Everett (Oberon),
Stanley Tucci (Puck), Calista Flockhart (Helena), Anna Friel (Hermia),
Christian Bale (Demetrius), Dominic West
(Lysander), David Strathairn (Theuseus), SophieMarceau (Hippolyta),
Roger Rees (Peter Quince), Max Wright (Robin Starveling), Gregory Jbara
(Snug), Bill Irwin (Tom Snout), Sam Rockwell (Francis Flute), Bernard
Hill (Egeus), 1999)
Shakespeare's lightweight farce is transported from 16th century Greece
to 19th century Tuscany (there are now bicycles with headlights to shine
in the night and wonderful operatic interludes). The plot revolves
around the upcoming wedding of Duke Theseus (David Strathairn) and
Hippolyta (Sophie Marceau). Problems arise when a forced marriage
between Hermia (Friel) and Demetrius (Bale) is proposed by Hermia's
father, even though Hermia is in love with Lysander (West), and Helena
(Calista) is madly in love with Demetrius. Another subplot has to do
with the group of would-be thespians who are asked to perform at the
duke's wedding, led by the weaver Nick Bottom (Kline). His over-the-top
performance is amusingly brilliant, as when he turns into an ass and
woos a beautiful queen, and when he emotes from that junior high school
type of play, "Pyramus and Thisby," that he is asked to perform at the
wedding. He ends up stealing the film with his energetic comical
rendition of a buffoon.This character has always been considered one of
Shakespeare's best comedy roles.
The fun and heart of the story takes place with one overnight trip into
the woods, where the unrelenting lovers travel to in their planned
elopement. The fun part begins when these mortals run unbeknownst to
them into the ever-playful Puck (Tucci), the servant of Oberon, who
sprinkles into their eyes a love potion that lures them into loving the
first person they see. Love in this fairyland setting has more to do
with chance than anything else since it is blind. The mix-ups that
follow Puck's interference, create new difficulties and allow for the
lovers to be manipulated and mismatched by Puck's magic. He even fools
the beautiful Fairy Queen Titania (Pfeiffer) into falling in love with
the transformed Bottom, now appearing as an ass, even though her true
love is the handsome Fairy King Oberon (Rupert).
Shakespeare's magic wasn't working; and, I think that was because an
hour or so of the play's dialogue was lopped off, making this three hour
play into a two hour movie. The consequences are that the characters
couldn't be fully developed; in fact, the film had a flatness to it that
belied how good its lush cinematography made it look. Instead of
character development, we got rolls in the mud to convey the deep
feelings of how the young lovers felt about the confusion Puck's love
potions had on them. Too dumb down Shakespeare even further, there were
times when the director used obvious facial gestures by the characters
to let us in on how to react to what they were doing. This is sort of
like the canned responses for those tv shows, where a sign is held up to
let the audience know when to applaud.
What was eloquent about the film, that made it a passable viewing
experience, was due to the superb cast, a mixture of true Shakespearian
British actors; such as, Anna Friel, Christian Bale, and Dominic West,
and the feisty non-Shakespearian actors, Calista Flockhart, Stanley
Tucci, Rupert Everett and Michelle Pfeiffer.Then there was the stirring
use of Verdi's greatest operatic hits throughout the film, which fitted
conveniently in with the director's 19th century Italian theme.
This is a clever film; it is much better than the scores of amateur
stage productions that continually flood the country. But the director
made a lot of odd choices in this film that take away somewhat from the
magical feeling of the play and make it seem artificial, or more of a
commercial venture than it should be. There was no artistic reason to be
in 19th century Italy, except for its rich landscapes and colorful
costumes and beautiful villas shown. Also, the flatness and clumsiness
of the fairyland scenes when juxtaposed against the lively actor's
troupe, made this film seem uneven, even begging us to utter with
conviction the bard's choice words: "What fools these mortals be."
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
=A9 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jonathan Richards
     Have you ever had one of those dreams where things don't quite
work the way they should, where stuff happens out of context and in
the wrong places and the people don't all fit, but you still wake up
feeling pretty good?  That's the way it is with Michael ("Soapdish")
Hoffman's take on "A Midsummer Night's Dream".
This is one of those conceptually reimagined Shakespearean
productions, and while such adventures can work (Ian McKellan's
"Richard III"), they run the risk of throwing the proceedings out of
balance, and that's what happens here.  Hoffman has set his version of
the Bard's Athenian comedy in Tuscany, which causes a few problems,
and he's updated it to the late 19th century (presumably to be able to
throw in bicycles), which causes a few more.  References to Athens
seem a little strange in the setting, and a hundred years ago they
were letting girls play girls' parts, which strains the logic of the
"Pyramus and Thisbe" play-within-a-play casting.
The first clue that something may be amiss comes at the main
title, which is overlaid with a wink-and-nudge note to the effect that
corsets and high-button collars were still in fashion, but "the good
news is that the bustle was on its way out, which made possible the
use of that new-fangled invention, the bicycle."  This doesn't set a
Shakespearean tone, but it seems to embolden Hoffman to make a few
other improvements on Shakespeare as he rolls along.  The worst of
these is a digression where, to give more prominence and pathos to
Bottom, he has rude workmen spill red wine on the weaver's white suit,
and then sends him home crestfallen to his apartment and his harridan
wife (whom we've seen earlier looking for him and demanding in Italian
"Where's that worthless husband of mine?")  It becomes a virtual
subplot, and it's of no great help to Shakespeare.
But the source material is magnificent, and the settings are
beautiful, and the cast for the most part is up to the challenge.
Dominic West as Lysander falls the shortest, but Calista Flockhart is
a revelation as Hermia, and Stanley Tucci makes Puck a rascally
animated cartoon that nicely fits the sprightly character.  Rupert
Everett is good as a quietly scheming Oberon, and Michelle Pfeiffer's
beauty and talent do lovely things with Titania, though she
occasionally seems to lose confidence and resort to acting flourishes.
The outstanding performance belongs to Kevin Kline, whose Bottom
the Weaver radiates a rustic goodness and balances buffoonery with
simple wisdom.  Kline's language is effortless, his timing flawless,
and his depth bottomless.  He and Sam Rockwell (as the boy Thisbe)
make a hilarious romp of the climactic play-within-a-play, which
features that current comedy staple, the hurled dog, and might be
retitled "There's Something About Thisbe".
The bottom line: despite its many flaws, it's still "A Midsummer
Night's Dream", and it's still well worth seeing.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated PG-13
starring Kevin Kline, Michelle Pfeiffer, Rupert Everett, Stanley Tucci,
Calista Flockhart, Anna Friel, Christian Bale, Dominic West, David 
Strathairn, Sophie Marceau
based on the play by William Shakespeare
written and directed by Michael Hoffman
There really is no need for me to mention it, but Shakespeare is
hotter than ever. SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE won Best Picture, and more than
a few teen movies are using the Bard as inspiration. We knew it
wouldn't be long before we had another period piece Shakespeare
adaptation. The film is Michael Hoffman's rich, opulent adaptation of
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.
This version of A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM moves the setting to Italy
towards the end of the 19th century. It is the story of one night when
all sorts of unexpected twists occur involving a few couples falling
in and out of love.
Demetrius(Christian Bale), is set to be wed to Hermia(Anna Friel), who
actually is in love with Lysander(Dominic West). Since Hermia doesn't
want to be forced into unwanted wedlock, she runs away into the forest
with Lysander. But that is not before they tell Helena(Calista
Flockhart), who is starved for Demetrius' affection, of their plans.
Helena then tells Demetrius of their flight, and he rushes into the
forest, followed by Helena. It is there that all four of them
encounter Puck(Stanley Tucci), a fairy who administers a love potion
that will make a person fall in love with the next person he
sees. Puck also works his magic on the fairy queen(Michelle Pfeiffer),
who falls in love with an actor(Kevin Kline) who is turned into a
donkey, while the fairy king(Rupert Everett) makes some observations
of his own.
Michael Hoffman(ONE FINE DAY, RESTORATION) works wonders with a superb
ensemble cast; the standouts being Pfeiffer, Kline, and Calista
Flockhart, who takes a step away from "Ally McBeal". The film is shot
wondrously on location by Oliver Stapleton(THE GRIFTERS, ONE FINE
DAY), who makes the play seem anything but stagy.
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM is a fine film, but if there is a problem to
be mentioned, it is the film's length. At 115 minutes, the movie is
too long to just be taken as a light comedy, and there isn't much in
the way of drama to hold a viewer's attention. Although I am
unfamiliar with the play, there doesn't seem to be much original work
added to this production, despite the change in location. But all in
all, A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM is a funny, lush tribute to the Bard's
greatness...and newfound popularity.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST 


Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4)
I'll start the film review with points against,
because by criticizing at the start
(and since the criticisms are but small)
we put behind us things unpleasant, which,
though necessary if one wants to share
the truth, do not comprise the all
of one's experience watching Hoffman's film.
This version of A Midsummer Night's Dream
at 19th century's turn's suppos'dly set
(though "turn" in this case surely means the last,
for phonographs in 1800 would
be out of place). But let's not fret o'er when
it's set; suffice to say that it was long ago.
The setting isn't modern like the one
Baz Luhrmann used when he made Romeo
+ Juliet some two or three years past.
Nor is the setting bold and striking like
McKellen and Loncraine's Richard III
which looks and feels like Nazi Germany
(it's chilling to the bone and worth a rent.)
The point is that this film does not have one
odd thing about it, leading one to ask:
"Why now? Why film? Why not a trav'ling play?"
Effects most special? Not particul'y
(although the fairies made of light are neat).
Amazing sound and music? Not to me.
(although I think the music rang a bell)
I guess that Hoffman simply wished to tell
a lightweight tale for summer moviegoers.
"Lightweight" describes the film most fittingly, 
unless perhaps you know of what I speak
when I say "fluff." But "fluff" is not the worst
of jibes; in fact a very pleasant time
is eas'ly had at movies which are fluff.
In short: it's nothing special and it's fluff, 
and that was it. That's all the bad I had 
to say about this film. (Espesh'ly since
I thought I wouldn't mention the first scene
with Michelle Pfeiffer -- her deliv'ry was
not great and sounded wooden. But, quite soon
the feeling passed and so I thought I'd leave
those unkind words unwritten in my piece).
At this point in reviews I often find
it's time to summarize the movie's plot, 
but this time I will not. For since the film's
retelling is quite faithful, I'll not bore
you with the details -- you can always look
them up in any tome of Shakespeare's work.
(In fact there's even now a "dummies" book!)
The changes Hoffman made, (he wrote the script
as well), it seems to me were mostly made 
to make the dialogue seem more like speech
and less like speeches. Shakespeare's words and deeds
were left intact as far as I can tell.
Okay, a little -- little! -- summary
to save you looking up the movie's plots.
(I say instead of "plot," the plural. Yes, 
this film has two threads, prob'ly more, but I'll
just keep my myself to two, for breviphiles.)
The first one is a love triangle, but
it is a square, because it has four sides:
Fair Helena fawns o'er Demetrius,
who loves her not; for he loves Hermia.
In fact, he'll marry her, though not because
she loves him back. ‘Tis father's whim to whom
she'll wed; and he doth pick Demetrius.
But Hermia loves good Lysander, and
he requites her love, which means that of the four
sides to our square, just Helena's unloved.
The other thread tells of the fairy king
and how his plot to tease his wife ensnares
a simple weaver/actor by the name
of Bottom. (He's the one, and this the play,
where human head turns into ass's head.)
That's all the summary you'll get from me.
There's more, but ‘tis of no immense import.
The film deserves some praise, now that we've moved
beyond the summary and criticism,
And most of it belongs to Hoffman's cast:
a fine job all around and in all roles.
Though Kevin Kline (as Bottom) gets the first
screen credit at the end, the credits at
the film's beginning show the players' names
in alphabetic order. In that way
ensemble acting's emphasized o'er "stars"
or egos. Quite refreshing, I do say.
Puck (Stanley Tucci), gray and bald, still has
a spritely step along with some of Dream's 
most funny lines. Calista Flockhart shines
as our fair Helena, and though comes close,
she never whines (a fear that's grounded in
her TV past). And Kevin Kline can act
the fool in such a charming way that you
can love him, foolish mortal though he be.
You'll surely recognize the faces of
the other actors, even if you don't 
know what their names may be. Of more import,
though, is that all performances are good.
Nor Rupert Everett (as the Fairy King --
don't laugh), nor Pfeiffer as his wife are bad,
though both of them are flatter than the rest.
So all in all A Midsummer Night's Dream
is pretty good, considering it's fluff.
And if you have a couple hours to spare --
say Star Wars is sold out and you have made
no other plans -- see Kline and Tucci play 
their parts. It may not change your life but for
an afternoon you will be entertained.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Kevin Kline, Michelle Pfeiffer, Rupert Everett, Stanley Tucci,
Calista Flockhart, Anna Friel, Christian Bale, Dominic West, David
Strathairn, Sophie Marceau.
Screenplay: Michael Hoffman, based on the play by William Shakespeare.
Producers: Leslie Urdang and Michael Hoffman.
Director: Michael Hoffman.
For those who have little idea of what this movie is about, it's about
Shakespeare. Don't be like the poor gentleman behind me who paid good
money for a seat, probably drawn in by names like Pfeiffer and
Flockhart, only to be disappointed that they are speaking in a different
language. That's right. It takes a good fifteen to twenty minutes for
the human brain to comprehend that this is actually English - the
smarter, more poetic sort. But once the brain has rearranged several
pathways of functioning, Shakespeare becomes understandable and that's
when you begin to realise, what a truly great artist he was.
 Problems – the setting, the costumes and the actors all seem slightly
out of place neither looking Greek, or as if the names Helena, Hermia,
Demetrius and Lysander truly belong to them.
 Humour. Lots of naked butts and sex references. The grade six kids who
were sent in by their parents, no doubt for the educational experience,
ended up giggling whenever bare flesh flashed their way. Shakespeare was
no doubt ahead of his time. The Fairy Queen Titania (Michelle Pfeiffer)
gets laid by an Ass (not arse), and when her husband Oberon finally
breaks the spell (in forgiveness), they get laid next to the Ass. This
says a lot about taking animals to bed. There is also implied group sex
when the love quadrangle of Helena (Calista Flockhart), Hermia (Anna
Friel), Lysander (Dominic West) and Demetrius (Christian Bale), all have
a mud fight\bath before waking up stripped naked (by the fairies) and in
each others arms. No one has a knack for sex and comedy like
Shakespeare.
Of note is Michelle Pfeiffer, who is devastatingly beautiful as the
fairy Queen. She has not exuded this much sensuality into a role since,
‘Lady Hawk'. Kevin Klein makes a great Ass, and Rupert Everett flaunts
his male form about no doubt to entice both sexes as Oberon the fairy
King (pun intended). Calista Flockhart takes her Ally McBeal into
Helena. This is Shakespeare and this is a love-story born from the heart
of a warm midsummer's night. When you awake the next morning, you will
wonder to yourself, was it all a wonderful dream or did you really have
sex with an Ass.

Author
Dustin Putman
William Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream   * * (out of * * * * )
Directed by Michael Hoffman.
Cast: Kevin Kline, Stanley Tucci, Calista Flockhart, Christian Bale, 
Rupert Everett, Michelle Pfeiffer, Anna Friel, Dominic West, David 
Strathairn, Sophie Marceau, Sam Rockwell.
1999 - 121 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for brief nudity).
Reviewed May 15, 1999.
"Hamlet," "Othello," "Romeo & Juliet," "Much Ado About Nothing." In the 
past several years a big screen adaptation of one of William 
Shakespeare's plays has been released at least every couple months, and 
with the huge success of Oscar-winner "Shakespeare in Love," many more 
adaptations are in the works, and the first out the gate is one of his 
lighter, fluffier comedies, the self-proclaimed "William Shakespeare's A 
Midsummer Night's Dream," which, unfortunately, is not nearly as magical 
as the lovely title implies.
The setting of this latest adaptation, directed by Michael Hoffman, has 
been transported from 17th-century England to 19th-century Tuscany, but 
strangely enough, the Elizabethan dialogue remains (although, in 
hindsight, this isn't as ridiculous a thought as 1996's "Romeo & 
Juliet," with Leonardo DiCaprio and Claire Danes reciting Shakespeare 
amidst an urban 1990s setting). The fantastical story goes like this: 
Helena (Calista Flockhart), a disspirited young woman who is 
head-over-heels in love with Demetrius (Christian Bales), the planned 
suitor of the beautiful Hermia (Anna Friel), who herself is in love with 
Lysander (Dominic West), follows each of them into the forest one 
midsummer's night on her bicycle (a new invention), determined to steal 
Demetrius' heart. Things don't go quite as planned, however, when they 
unwittingly step into the forest of the fairies, headed by Queen Titania 
(Michelle Pfeiffer) and King Oberon (Rupert Everett). Oberon seeks the 
aid of his horned assistant, Puck (Stanley Tucci), to collect a few red 
flowers whose juices have the power to turn each person who comes 
physically into contact with it to fall in love with the first person 
they see upon waking. So as both Demetrius and Lysander are put under 
the spell, both of which set their sights on Helena, who simply believes 
they are playing a cruel trick on her, an overacting troupe member who 
has come into the forest to practice his latest play finds himself 
turned into a donkey when he slips on a magic hat, and lusted after by 
Titania, who has also fallen under the flower's potion.
"William Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream" falls under one of the 
major shortcomings of all of Shakespeare's works, which is that he wrote 
tons and tons of carefully planned and intricate dialogue, but always 
failed at developing his characters, who remained at a distance from the 
material and were written in a general and vague manner. Aside from 
perhaps his 'Romeo & Juliet," none of his many plays I have read have 
gotten me to care even remotely about any of the characters, or even the 
story. To me, the Elizabethan dialogue always felt like a mere gimmick 
to be flashy, and this film version of "Midsummer" is no different. Not 
at any time during the film did I ever really feel willing to get 
involved in what was happening on-screen, and the romantic plights of 
the characters are so thinly written that it is impossible to care about 
them. 
If anything, "A Midsummer Night's Dream" is a lighthearted fantasy, and 
with such a bewitching title, those exact sequences set in the forest 
were the most dull and lifeless, without even a hint of enchantment. 
Much of the problem goes to the major technical problems, including 
surprisingly atrocious cinematography by Oliver Stapleton, who 
overlights ever night scene to such an extent that it often was 
confusing to whether it had changed to the daytime or not. The last time 
I was out in the woods during the middle of the night, I couldn't see a 
thing, but in this movie, there seems to be a constant bright sun 
shining down on everyone, despite the dark skies. The qualms don't stop 
there, as the production design by Luciana Arrighi is thoroughly 
artificial and distracting, never once looking like anything but an 
extravagant movie set in the confines of a large studio. In one scene, 
Puck rides into view on a giant turtle that is so fake-looking and 
obviously mechanical that I felt as if I was watching a movie from the 
'60s or '70s. All of these problems within the main section of the film, 
mixed in with the overall amateurish performances, had me actually 
longing, instead, for the infinitely superior 1982 Woody Allen farce, "A 
Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy," which was funny, whimsical, and 
involving, three things this current film is sorely lacking.
Acting-wise, the performances are all over the map. Faring best is 
Calista Flockhart (vanquishing her "Ally McBeal" character), who seems 
to understand the difficult dialogue so well that each word that comes 
out of her mouth is instantly accessible to understand. Flockhart's 
Helena is also the only character I gave one iota about, as she is a 
frustrated and unhappy woman who feels like she belongs to Demetrius, 
even though he doesn't care about her. Kevin Kline is sometimes winning, 
and at other times downright annoying, as the dim-witted Bottom. 
Finally, Stanley Tucci makes somewhat of an impression and is well-cast 
as the sprightly Puck, but what is his exact purpose in the movie other 
than to narrate the conclusion? 
On the opposite side of the spectrum is Michelle Pfeiffer's dismal 
performance as Titania. Pfeiffer is a fine actress, but Shakespearean 
she's not, as she recites her lines without any thought, energy, or 
feeling. In a recent interview, Pfeiffer mentioned how she didn't care 
for Shakespeare, and since she obviously doesn't know how to hold her 
own against her fellow thespian, it leaves you wondering just why she 
took this role in the first place. Rupert Everett, an exciting actor so 
wonderful in "My Best Friend's Wedding" is given nothing to do here but 
show off his body, and without any motivation or purpose (aside from 
setting the whole story into motion), his fairy character comes off as 
more of an afterthought. And Christian Bale has to be the most largely 
sought-after bore in the history of film. I don't know; maybe Helena was 
having a slight bout of insomnia and though that going out with him 
would cure her, er, problem.
The various romantic couplings during the long midsummer night leads not 
to an enjoyable conclusion (although it has a false one), but unwisely 
goes on for another twenty minutes with Bottom and company throwing a 
play of "Pyrimus and Thisby." What is supposed to be a charming, 
humorous sequence is actually a situation we've seen so many times 
before that it is not funny, only juvenile. Regardless of my many, many 
criticisms, I did not hate "William Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's 
Dream." I hasten to add I didn't like hardly any of it at all, but it 
wasn't dispicable in the way that "Armageddon" or the recent "The Mummy" 
are. Director Michael Hoffman has made a respectable attempt at turning 
yet another Shakespeare play into a treasured motion picture, but 
ultimately fails to bring any sort of magic to the story or situations. 
If you hadn't already realized, "magic" was the one thing this movie 
desperately needed.
  - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
    Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Greg King
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM (PG).  
(Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Michael Hoffman
Stars: Kevin Kline, Michelle Pfeiffer, Christian Bale, Calista Flockhart, 
Stanley Tucci, Rupert Everett, 
Dominic West, Anna Friel, Sophie Marceau, David Strathairn, Sam Rockwell, 
Roger Rees
Running time: 121 minutes.
To see, or not to see?  That is indeed the question regarding
Michael Hoffman's rather disappointing and pedestrian adaptation of
Shakespeare's whimsical comedy about romance, mismatched lovers and a
little night magic.  Unlike other directors, such as Baz Luhrmann and
his brilliant contemporary version of Romeo And Juliet, Hoffman
doesn't take any creative risks with the material, which results in a
workmanlike production.  The only real change Hoffman makes is in
updating the play and relocating it to Tuscany, at the end of the 19th
century.  It's a change that doesn't add much dramatically to the
film, but it does enable a number of the central characters to ride
around on "that new fangled invention", the bicycle.
Hermia (Anna Friel) is engaged to the handsome Demetrius
(Christian Bale), a match that pleases her straight laced father
(David Strathairn).  However, Hermia really loves Lysander (Dominic
West), who comes from a lesser background.  Meanwhile, Helena (Ally
McBeal star Calista Flockhart) actually loves Demetrius, but he barely
acknowledges her presence.  These four lovers wander into the nearby
forest, which is the home of the fairy king Oberon (Rupert Everett).
They eventually fall under a magical spell cast by the mischievous
Puck (Stanley Tucci), which helps the four mismatched lovers solve
their problems.  Also caught up in one of Puck's spells is Bottom
(Kevin Kline), an egotistical actor with an amateur theatrical company
which is rehearsing a play in the woods.
Hoffman's pacing is rather laboured, and the film offers
precious few laughs until the final twenty minutes or so.  It is only
with the staging of the play within a play sequence that things really
pick up, and some much needed life is injected into the film.
Visually, the film is quite beautiful, and Oliver Stapleton's
typically lush cinematography of the Tuscan countryside is a major
plus.
The performances of the solid ensemble cast are mostly
workmanlike throughout, with most of the performers reciting their
lines without much passion or conviction.  Kline is wonderful and
brings some energy to his role as the pompous and bombastic Bottom,
while the always solid Tucci shines as the mischievous Puck.
Shakespeare's comedy has been filmed before, most notably in
Warner Bros' impressive 1935 version featuring an all star cast headed
by James Cagney, making this pale and uninspired adaptation almost
unnecessary.

Author
Michael Dequina
_William_Shakespeare's_A_Midsummer_Night's_Dream_ (PG-13) ***
The assembled talents of an all-star cast are exploited most delightfully
in Michael Hoffman's adaptation of
_William_Shakespeare's_A_Midsummer_Night's_Dream_.   While as sunny and
sweet as the Bard's original romantic comedy of errors, this update isn't
always dreamy, but its classic romantic spell should leave moviegoers
swooning.
The "dream" of the title is actually one very real night in the forest
where lovers are star-crossed, criss-crossed, or just plain made cross,
thanks to the magical machinations of Oberon (Rupert Everett), the King of
Fairies; and his impish right-hand sprite, Puck (Stanley Tucci).  Into the
forest that night come the hopelessly besotted Lysander (Dominic West) and
Hermia (Anna Friel), the latter of whom is lovelessly betrothed to
Demetrius (Christian Bale), who, in turn, is pursued, however clumsily, by
the unloved-by-anyone Helena (Calista Flockhart).  A few drops of a
flower's magical juice later, and a bewildered Helena finds herself the
object of desire for both Demetrius and Lysander, leaving Hermia by the
wayside.  The juice is indeed loose, for also falling under its power is
Oberon's wife Titania (Michelle Pfeiffer), who becomes enamored of an
ass--literally and figuratively.  His apt name is Nick Bottom (Kevin
Kline), a pompous ham of an actor who is transformed into a
half-man/half-donkey monstrosity by a playful Puck.
This section, being the part that gives the play its title, is the focal
point of the play and the film, but, strangely enough, it's also the part
that works the least well in the film.  Of course, it has nothing to do
with the parent text; Shakespeare's timeless barbs (mostly delivered by a
comically cruel Lysander to a disbelieving Hermia) would never lose their
edge in any translation. Neither are the actors at fault; they are all up
to the Shakespearean task.  The biggest revelation is Flockhart, who
displays exquisite comic timing as the very un-Ally Helena.  What is at
fault, is Hoffman's staging, or, rather, his stage.  This entire second act
was filmed on a soundstage, and it shows: the backdrops are flat; the same
tree sets are recycled over and over again; and--most distracting of
all--it's ridiculously overlit (it may be midsummer, but it still is
_night_).  A certain level of unreality should be brought to this
section--we are dealing with fairies and man-asses here--but it's one thing
to be unreal (as in a fantasy) and entirely another to appear artificial
(as in synthetic).
Hoffman has better luck with other directorial choices.  Most notable is
his change of setting from ancient Greece to 19th Century Italy, and this
adds a fresh new dimension to the material: fresh locations, fresh costumes
(no tights!), and, most notably, the advent of the bicycle, which adds some
needed movement to static scenes.  Hoffman also doesn't force fake British
accents upon his non-Brit stars (Pfeiffer, Flockhart, Kline, Tucci, David
Strathairn, and Sophie Marceau), sparing them and the audience a Kevin
Costner-as-Robin Hood-type embarrassment that would only distract from the
poetry of Shakespeare's words.
It is the timeless appeal of those words, the impassioned performances,
and a bring-down-the-house third act (in which Bottom and his inept troupe
of actors put on a hilariously disastrous play) that make this
high-spirited, if a bit overlong (115 minutes), production live up to its
title: a dream indeed--not without its fuzzy areas, but on the whole "a
most rare vision."  (opens May 14)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com


Author
Sean Townsend
STARRING:  Kevin Kline, Michelle Pfeiffer, Rupert Everett, Stanley
Tucci, Calista Flockhart, Christian Bale, Anna Friel, David Strathairn,
Sophie Marceau, Dominic West
DIRECTOR:  Michael Hoffman
WRITTEN BY:  Michael Hoffman
William Shakespeare has been dead for almost 400 years now, but his
plays are truly immortal as a source of entertainment-- not to mention
trepidation for young English students.  His colleague Ben Jonson (in
one of whose plays Shakespeare acted) wrote, "He is not of an age, but
for all time."  The recent trend for film directors has been to put that
theory to the test by setting the Bard's tales in entirely different
historical eras, but leaving the dialogue intact.  In 1996, Australian
director Baz Luhrmann transplanted Romeo and Juliet into modern-day
Verona Beach, complete with guns, gangs, and Leo.  This year, Michael
Hoffman (One Fine Day, Restoration) takes Shakespeare's early comedy,
changes the milieu from ancient Greece to 19th-century Tuscany, and
throws in a few bicycles for good measure.  These conceits aside, there
are some good moments in the film, thanks to thoughtful set design and
engaging performances by Everett as Oberon and Tucci as the, er, puckish
Robin Goodfellow.
If you want to know how the plot of this thing unfolds, read the
frickin' play, because it's pretty convoluted.  Let's just say it
involves a love triangle complicated by political intrigue, an attempted
elopement by night, a female stalker, a troupe of low-rent actors, and a
jealous fairy king whose schemes cause the sort of multi-layered
misunderstandings that would go on to inspire any number of Three's
Company episodes.  It's a comedy, though, so everything turns out
happily in the end.
In the wrong hands, such exquisitely mannered stuff can be either
stultifying or just silly.  The actors have to understand it deeply
enough to make it accessible to the audience, yet also utter the lines
as though they'd never been spoken before.  After 400 years, both
requirements are tougher than ever, but some of this cast pull it off.
Rupert Everett (My Best Friend's Wedding) in particular, with his
brooding, English handsomeness, brings the fairy king Oberon to life
with equal parts bitterness and mischievousness.  As Puck, Oberon's
underling and errand boy, Stanley Tucci (Big Night) also demonstrates an
easy facility with the Bard's turn of phrase.  When he bemusedly says
"What fools these mortals be," it seems so natural that it takes a
second to register that he's just uttered one of the most famous quotes
in all of Shakespeare.  Together, the two actors give their characters a
depth of mutual familiarity one would expect from immortals.  Michelle
Pfeiffer, for her part, is a beautiful (if strangely virginal) Titania,
and Kevin Kline has great fun making an ass of himself as the aptly
named Bottom.  Less successful are David Strathairn and Calista
Flockhart.  Strathairn, whose Theseus sounds like something out of a
high school drama class, should have been reminded that it's okay to
break the iambic pentameter rhythm.  As the lovelorn Helena, Flockhart
tries too hard, with too much Ally McBeal melodrama, and thus fails to
convince.
With all these characters (and more) flitting from scene to scene,
Hoffman and production designer Luciana Arrighi wisely chose to create a
small but effective forest set rather than film on location.  It's
stagy, but that's the idea; it allows for an Elizabethan intimacy, but
still looks wild enough to harbor sprites and nymphs and such.  This
latter aspect also heightens the film's sensuality, both in the scenes
involving Lysander and Hermia and in Titania's languid pillow talk with
Bottom.  Backed up by special effects which for once aren't intrusive,
it's a cozy environment that never steals attention from the actors.
The film tends to drag at first, but picks up the pace by the third act
and finishes strongly with the troupe's hilarious production of "Pyramus
and Thisbe" and the all's-well resolution.  While Hoffman's more modern
setting doesn't really matter, he makes it work without awkwardness, and
he restrains his directorial caprice enough to leave the writer's
dialogue alone.  By the time Puck finishes his final whimsical
disclaimer, that dreaded 400-year-old ghost of English class past won't
seem so bad after all.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Michael Hoffman
Cast: Kevin Kline, Michelle Pfeiffer, Rupert Everett, Stanley Tucci,
Calista Flockhart, Anna Friel, Dominic West, Christian Bale
Screenplay: Michael Hoffman
Producers: Michael Hoffman, Leslie Urdang
Runtime: 
US Distribution: 20th Century Fox
Rated PG-13: sensuality, nudity
Copyright 1999 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
I've always been sort of a purist when it comes to Shakespeare.  I
think it is possible to update his plays and place them in a period of
time in which they were not intended to be set.  But this is not an easy
thing to do.  Those who have seen William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet
have experienced the ultimate failure in an update of a Shakespeare
play.  Michael Hoffman's A Midsummer Night's Dream is much better than
that other movie, and I was thisclose to giving it a favorable review. 
And while I have nice things to say about it, the film just doesn't work
the way it should.  The first reason for this, perhaps, is that it's set
at the turn of the 19th century for no reason whatsoever.  It's also an
artistically confusing film:  why do all the sets look so obviously
fake?  Why do the actors feature an array of non-matching accents?  Why
do so many of the scenes occur in the exact same spot of woods?  These
are questions I had when I should have been concentrating on
Shakespeare's brilliantly-conceived story.
But I have to give Hoffman credit for following the play so closely. 
>From what I could tell, no scenes have been removed, and only parts of
speeches have been trimmed down.  Other than that, Hoffman has done the
source material justice with his script.  The story is a familiar one: 
The four lovers, Demetrius (Christian Bale), Lysander (Dominic West),
Helena (Calista Flockhart), and Hermia (Anna Friel), are manipulated
relentlessly by Puck (Stanley Tucci) and Oberon, the Fairy King (I stand
by my belief that Rupert Everett has this role as part of a Hollywood
in-joke).  Meanwhile, the lovable lout Bottom (Kevin Kline) and his
partners in stupidity work to put together a lame stage version of
Pyramus and Thisbe.  The basic set-up of the film lends itself to a
series of entertaining and/or tedious scenes in which lovers run around
and shout at each other in a forest near Athens.
The film is a mixed bag of scenes that are notably over-the-top and
others that are strangely perfunctory.  The best scene in the film is
the last one, in which the six lower classmen get to perform their play
before the aristocracy.  Here, Kevin Kline shows off his
well-established comic brilliance.  But Hoffman's direction of the scene
is really what carries it, as the players make desperate attempts to
impersonate walls, moons, and lions.  The other high points of the film
lie mostly in a few key performances.  Calista Flockhart is quite funny
as the love-starved and ravished Helena; even though Flockhart doesn't
attempt a British accent, she enunciates properly and does a good job
with her lines.  Everett takes an interesting angle on Oberon, playing
him as stone-faced and extremely pensive.  And Stanley Tucci makes a
perfectly indifferent Puck, roaming around the forest and making people
fall in love with each other just because it's amusing.
Many scenes are great, and they add up to a lot, but there are too many
failed moments to ignore.  Michelle Pfeiffer annoyed me, playing Queen
Titania as some sort of breathless, shiny-eyed nymph; I disliked most of
her scenes, and particularly the tedious ones in which she falls for
Bottom following his transformation into an ass.  David Strathairn
entirely misses the point of the paradoxical Theseus, and delivers his
lines with a cold, inappropriate American accent.  Hoffman also missed
the boat with Bottom and his crew; they're not nearly silly or stupid
enough, and scenes that are hilarious in the text come across as
detached and obligatory here.  Shakespeare makes explicit their misusage
of words and their inability to understand the point of drama, but here
Hoffman seems to blow right past all the jokes.
In general, I don't understand why the movie looks so flashy and fake. 
The forest of Arden looks particularly set-like, and pointless special
effects (like a CGI vine wrapping around Bottom's feet) call too much
attention to themselves.  I realize that live theater does not allow for
fancy special effects and sets, but films do, and a film version of a
play should not be made to look fake.  And then there's the needless
time period-change, which bothers me every time a director attempts it: 
people didn't speak like this at the turn of the 19th century. 
Hoffman's A Midsummer Night's Dream works on many levels -- nothing
could be as bad as that other movie -- but it doesn't go far enough with
some themes, and takes others way too far.  I think it all boils down to
a general lack of consistency -- what was Hoffman's vision?  What's with
the fake sets and the half-hearted "update?"  There are big laughs to be
had in this film, but Hoffman's puzzling artistic choices keep it from
being the really good update of a Shakespeare play that it might have
been.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Never before have the great Bard's words sounded more clunky than here
in Michael Hoffman's (One Fine Day) screen adaptation of Shakespeare's
whimsical romance.  What the Puck happened?
You can't blame the story – it's a classic.  But why does it take a full
60 minutes for Hoffman's script to really get moving?  You can't blame
the production crew (featuring Oscar winners for Howards End and The Age
of Innocence) – they create a wonderfully lush dream world.  But its
leafy green paradise is almost obscured by a bigger, brighter,
olive-hued disaster.
That's right – I'm talking about Calista Flockhart's teeth, and the way
she shrieks each line sort of makes you want to jam your finger down her
throat, too.  Love may make fools of us all, but Ally McAnnoying sets a
whole new standard.  (1:55 – PG-13 for adult situations and brief
nudity)

Author
Liz Rizzo
Starring Christian Bale, Rupert Everett, Calista Flockhart, Anna Friel,
Kevin Kline, Michael Pfeiffer, Stanley Tucci, and Dominic West.
Directed by Michael Hoffman.  Written by Michael Hoffman, play by
William Shakespeare.
`Over hill, over dale, Thorough bush, thorough brier, Over park, over
pale, Thorough flood, thorough fire...'
When A Midsummer Night's Dream is done well, it should take us on a
journey to a magical place and time, ignite our imaginations and stir
our hearts.  When Shakespeare is done well, the language and emotion
must flow out of every actor, making us understand even if we don't
quite follow every turn of phrase.  Michael Hoffman's film does all this
and more.  It is beautifully done and, for the most part, wonderfully
acted.  This is what theater brought to the screen should be.
Clearly an Oscar contender for costume and set design, this version has
been placed convincingly in the 1900s (and out of ancient Greece), a
trick which only jars occasionally and allows our heroes and heroines to
amusingly rush through the woods on bicycles.  The fairy kingdom is
enchanting, and the whole production shines with the time and care that
was obviously put into it.
There are several notable performances, including Kevin Kline in a
standout portrayal of Bottom, the acting enthusiast who wants to take on
every part in the play within the play, and Rupert Everett as a dark and
sexy Oberion, the fairy king, while the ever vivacious Stanley Tucci
seems to be having the time of his life playing his faithful servant
Puck.  As for the women, the best performance is clearly held by Calista
Flockhart in the frequently less-than-desirable role of Helena, who
spends the entire play throwing herself at the reluctant Demetrius,
played by Christian Bale.  Flockhart brings humor and sympathy to her
Helena.  For in typical Shakespearian comedy style, Demetrius is love
with Hermia (Anna Friel), who is turn in love with Lysander (Dominic
West), who is thankfully in love with her (Hermia).  At least most of
the time.
My least favorite performance was surprisingly that of Michelle
Pfeiffer, who is absolutely radiant and gives a good performance, but
somehow comes off as rather unbelievable as the fairy queen to Everett's
Oberion.  Other less than perfect moments include a glimpse of the child
she's adopted, who for some reason is very blue.  OK, he's from India,
but he's `mortal born,' and it struck me as odd.  He's very blue.  Also,
there's a mud wrestling scene that I could have done without.  I found
myself overly distracted from the dialogue.  Luckily, our heroes and
heroines lose the mud very quickly.  Must be that fairy magic.
What is most outstanding is the wonderful interpretation of
Shakespeare's work.  Many of the things one familiar with the play would
expect and hope to be there, are.  However, there are also many
surprises and interesting interpretations of lines and situations.  For
when all is said and done, this is Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's
Dream, a play in which it is sometimes hard to keep up the pace as it
shifts back and forth between the multiple story lines.
And yet, fascination and love of this play persists, and people love to
perform and watch it over and over again.  It's hard to imagine someone
doing another film version after this one, but someone will.  As Puck
might say, `Lord, what fools these mortals be!'  Ah but Puck... perhaps
not.  We can all use a little fairy magic now and again.

Author
Steve Rhodes
With large helpings of Shakespeare being so popular these days, Michael
Hoffman has prepared his own cinematic casserole based on one of the
Bard's livelier plays, A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.  (The movie is
formally titled WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM to avoid
confusion with Tennessee Williams's and other playwrights' versions.)
With an established pedigree in lavish costume drama from his respected
RESTORATION, Hoffman might seem a natural to cook up something special
for viewers.  He combines some of Hollywood's finest acting ingredients
but comes up with little more than leftover hash.
Partially modernizing the drama, Hoffman sets the action in Italy at the
turn of the 19th century.  The opening credits explain that it was a
time when the bustle was on the wane and the bicycle was on the rise,
which were compatible trends.  This humor is typical of the
too-cute-to-be-funny level upon which the movie operates.  When the
actors, dressed in 19th century costumes, begin to speak the language of
Shakespeare, it grates on the nerves like watching John Wayne with
Japanese dubbing.
The sets are sumptuous, the cinematography handsome, and the operatic
music stirring.  So long as the actors aren't speaking, the movie is a
feast for the eyes and ears, much like RESTORATION.
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM should have you alternately laughing and
grinning, but Hoffman's version leaves one staring quizzically, never
knowing quite what to make of it.  With a killer cast and a great play,
he manages to make the poetically beautiful surprisingly bland.
Many of the actors shine above the dullness of the direction.  Chief
among these is Calista Flockhart ("Ally McBeal"), who steals the show as
Helena.  With bewitching twitching, she flits about the set with
unbounded energy and infectious good spirits.
Michelle Pfeiffer and Rupert Everett, as Titania and Oberon, compete in
the movie's beauty contest.  Pfeiffer, who long ago seems to have
located the Fountain of Youth, gets my vote, but Everett is a close
second.  Neither give especially memorable performances, but looks count
for a lot when you have to sit through such a sleep-inducing production.
And if you've ever needed a reason to believe in fairies, Pfeiffer, as a
fairy, supplies a most convincing argument.
Kevin Kline gets to chew up the scenery playing a bad actor named
Bottom.  He makes an especially convincing ass during one of the fairy
sequences.  His play within a play at the end, however, is a disaster.
It is supposed to be laughably bad but is, instead, merely bad.
Stanley Tucci, who seems to enjoy every movie he's in, has a playful,
good time as Puck.
Hoffman, who also wrote the screen adaptation, makes many strange
staging choices; none more so than having Flockhart engage in mud
wrestling.  Like so much of the movie, this scene is more weird than
funny.
Given all of the other liberties Hoffman takes with the play, it is a
shame that he didn't shortened it more.  This version quickly becomes
tedious and frequently drags.  If he had brought the picture in at an
hour and a half, it could only have helped.
"Lord, what fools these mortals be," Puck complains.  This would be the
perfect tagline for this production for it is indeed quite foolishly
done.  On the other hand, lame Shakespeare is still Shakespeare.
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM runs too long at 1:58.
It is rated PG-13 for lots of partial nudity usually covered up with
strategically placed hair and flowers.  The film would be fine for kids
around 11 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Alex Ioshpe
After the incredible and unexpected success of "Shakespeare in Love", the
audience has again opened their eyes for Shakespeare. Michael Hoffman is one
of many that dived into the ocean of Shakespeare's poetry during the last
decade.
"A Midsummer Night's Dream" has been adapted to the big screen several
times, with no particular luck. It can be a dark nightmare, a slapstick
comedy, or a semi-serious melodrama, depending on the script adaptation.
Hoffman has chosen the most common and easiest way - light comedy. The
director creates an enchanting atmosphere, as he brings to the foreground of
the story beauty and elegance - a magical recipe for the recreation of a
timeless story that is as relevant today as it was when Shakespeare wrote
it.
Hoffman didn't move too far away from Shakespeare's original play: Egeus,
father to Hermia, has betrothed his daughter to Demetrius, a man who in turn
loves her with all his heart, and is determined not to let Hermia's true
love, Lysander, from inheriting his bride. Then Hermia and Lysander plot to
run away together to avoid this marriage, and even possible death. They
share their plot with Helena, a close friend, who unfolds on-stage her own
attraction to Demetrius. She then storms out to inform him of what Hermia
and Lysander are doing, which will benefit Helena later, as she suspects
that her decision to reveal this plan to Demetrius will show him how much
she loves him. The parallel story unfolds in the forest nearby, where magic
transforms the grounds into an enchanted parallel world. Here we meet the
fairies. Oberon (Rupert Everett) and Titania (Michele Pfeiffer ) are king
and queen of this charming race, but that does not prevent them from feuding
over an Indian boy Titania cares for. Returning home and falling asleep,
Oberon discusses a plot with his servant, Puck, to apply a nectar from a
forest flower to his queen's eyes so that, when she awakes, she shall fall
in love with the first ugly creature that catches her eye. Continuing with
this plan, the king hears the accounts of the four lovers as they become
separated from each other in the forest. He furthers his orders to Puck, who
is instructed to apply this nectar to Demetrius, so that he can fall in love
with Helena, and all will be solved. But the plan is distracted when Puck
gets the men confused, and applies the nectar to Lysander's eyes. He then
exits the scene, and Lysander, as you probably know, falls in love with
Helena at first sight. Before the dawn all of Puck's mistakes have been
corrected, the magic is gone, the madness ends and the right lovers fall in
love with the people they are supposed to.
With his 1996 production of "Hamlet", Kenneth Branagh showed that it is
possible to conceive a brilliant adaptation of the full text, but the result
will have a long running time, which would be unfortunate for a film like "A
Midsummer Night's Dream". Hoffman has chosen a more traditional approach of
snipping speeches by removing "extraneous" material. He is less successful.
Because of the minor problems in the script and unusually rare and difficult
language the acting feels at times cold and removed, as if the actors
themselves didn't quite understand the lines they are pronouncing. Christian
Bale is pale, Calista Flockheart and Anna Friel are acceptable and Dominic
West is at times interesting. But it is only Kevin Cline, Stanley Tucci and
Michelle Pfieffer that feel confortable in their roles and really give
extraordinary performances.
Hoffman's magical picture relies more on performances and atmosphere than on
special effects and depth of story. There are no computerized creatures and
characters, which is a nice break from Lucas and Besson. The technically
simple, but incredibly effective art/set direction dazzle the viewer with
golden sparks and fairies, shining in the air like gems, and silver
moonlight shining upon our lovers. Makeup and costume design are spectacular
in creating a variety of odd denizens, including a rather frightening- looki
ng medusa and a few alien-looking creatures. The movie captures the delicate
beauty of this Shakespearean comedy. In a magical fantasy setting like this,
lines as "The course of true love never did run smooth" and  "Lord, what
fools these mortals be" work exceptionally well.
The director changed setting from 16th century Greece to Tuscany in the late
1800s. The bicycle – a relatively new invention at the time – becomes a key
prop, allowing characters to pedal after each other instead of chasing
around on foot. It also provides one of the movie's most amusing sight gags.
But he is careful, this is not "Romeo + Julia". The modernizations aren't
too modern, and his changes to the original story are minor and almost
unnoticeable.
We have had many spectacular adaptations of Shakespeare's undying
masterpieces. And it is a tuff task to compare with them. Michael Hoffman's
new feature doesn't capture the depth and grandness of Kenneth Brannagh's
"Hamlet", nor does it possess the power and originality of Richard
Loncrane's "Richard III" . But its magical beauty and appealing plot make it
good enough to stand in such exceptional company.

Author
Scott Renshaw
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM
(Fox Searchlight)
Starring:  Kevin Kline, Michelle Pfeiffer, Rupert Everett, Stanley Tucci,
Calista Flockhart, Anna Friel, Christian Bale, Dominic West, David
Strathairn, Sophie Marceau.
Screenplay:  Michael Hoffman, based on the play by William Shakespeare.
Producers:  Leslie Urdang and Michael Hoffman.
Director:  Michael Hoffman.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, brief nudity)
Running Time:  115 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The cinematic cynic in me suspects that the lofty, unwieldy title of
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM has as much to do with
timely marketing as it does with a nod to literary fidelity.  After all,
when adults are flocking to the Oscar-winning SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE and
teens are catching "The Taming of the Shrew" turned into 10 THINGS I HATE
ABOUT YOU, the Bard would seem to be riding a unique wave of
cross-demographic hipness.  Then again, Shakespeare has always been
pitched both at the gallery and at the groundlings, mixing the matters of
kings with the matters of clowns.  To that extent, this MIDSUMMER NIGHT is
truly William Shakespeare's in its mix of disparate elements, with all the
delights and potential pitfalls that accompany them.
     Writer/director Michael Hoffman transports the tale from Greece to
19th century Tuscany, where many plotlines swirl around the impending
wedding of Duke Theseus (David Strathairn) and Hippolyta (Sophie Marceau).
Hermia (Anna Friel), the daughter of one of Theseus' courtiers, is
forcefully engaged to marry Demetrius (Christian Bale), but Hermia instead
shares a love with Lysander (Dominic West).  Demetrius, meanwhile, is the
object of affection of Hermia's childhood friend Helena (Calista
Flockhart).  Another thread finds a group of amateur actors, led by the
weaver Nick Bottom (Kevin Kline), preparing a play to be performed for the
Duke's wedding, perhaps to receive an award if it is well-liked.  The
paths of these characters all cross in the nearby forest, where
complications ensue as the machinations of the Fairy King Oberon (Rupert
Everett) and his mischievous servant Puck (Stanley Tucci) -- aided by a
little love potion -- cause every romantic entaglement to become further
entangled.
     At its most basic level, A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM is a precursor to
bedroom farce without the slamming doors (doors being hard to come by in
the forest).  As the enchanted lovers become a circle of frustration --
Lysander is made to love Helena, who still loves Demetrius, who still
loves Hermia, who still loves Lysander -- saucy exchanges alternate with
good old-fashioned female mud wrestling.  It takes more than a little
while for the film to find its pacing, hindered by the atypically awkward
work of Strathairn, but once the pleasantly low-tech, stage-set world of
the forest becomes the focus, the high and low comedy both begin working.
The one major hindrance may be the clash of acting styles:  while Bale,
Friel and West go for pure Royal Shakespeare, Flockhart plays Helena as a
neurotic mess fretting over her appearance a la Ally McBeal.  It's an
interesting interpretation, but one that doesn't always mesh with the
other players.
     The other major sub-plot becomes both A MIDSUMMER NIGHT DREAM's high
point and its source of greatest disappointment.  Kevin Kline, turning in
one of his better performances, plays Nick Bottom as a wonderfully
tragi-comic sadsack, an unhappily married laborer with grand dreams of how
the stage will offer him a chance at greatness.  When he is simultaneously
transformed into an ass and into the object of desire of the love
potion-affected Fairy Queen Titania (Michelle Pfeiffer), it's touching to
note how his moment of glory makes him oblivious to his physical state.
Unfortunately, Hoffman doesn't exploit Kline's performance for all it can
offer, never really delivering a satisfying resolution to the character he
has set up.
     He does, however, build to a wonderfully comic climax as the actors
finally perform their play within the play.  The bumbling performance is
pure slapstick -- malapropped lines, misaligned props, over-the-top acting
and, to quote SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE, a bit with a dog.  The one nice twist
comes as Flute (Sam Rockwell), the actor-in-drag performing the ingenue
in the play, breaks from character to deliver an earnest paean to true
love.  It's a sweet note on which to end a play of sometimes discordant
tones, perhaps making this DREAM seem less uneven that it should.  The
course of this tale about the course of true love never does run smooth;
it merely offers a fanciful comedy deserving enough of the author's name.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S 'A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S
DREAM'" (Fox Searchlight Pictures)
  Without doubt, Shakespeare is the most sought-after
screenwriter in Hollywood. And why not? The game-playing of his
characters and their efforts to grapple with reason and love seem
quite contemporary, and Shakespeare neither contests re-writes nor
demands royalties. Writer/director Michael Hoffman's clever adaptation
of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" is set in Tuscany around 1900,
coinciding with the advent of the bicycle. The plot deals with love in
all of its comical and fantastical forms, complicated by fairy
jealousy, love potions, and misbegotten romances. The wondrous evening
begins with Duke Theseus' involvement in a dispute involving Hermia
who loves Lysander but is being forced to marry Demetrius, who is
adored by Helena. In the forest, there are five amateur thespians
rehearsing "Pyramus and Thisbe," plus the love game between Oberon and
Titania, the King and Queen of the Fairies, complicated by the
trickster sprite Puck. There have been at least six film versions of
this 400 year-old play, including one with 11 year-old Mickey Rooney
as Puck, but this vibrant, all-star cast dazzles, particularly Kevin
Kline, Rupert Everett, Michelle Pfeifferand Stanley Tucci. Curiously,
Calista Flockhart transforms the obsessed Helena into another version
of her whining but spunky Ally McBeal character; her mud-wrestling
scene with Anna Friel, complete with clinging, wet clothes could only
be called bizarre. "What fools these mortals be!"  On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "William Shakespeare's 'A Midsummer Night's
Dream'" is a mischievous, whimsical 9. It's a charming, frothy frolic
that captures the enchantment and delight of Shakespeare's most
magical comedy.
