Title
Review for Snapper, The (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
     Why would a successful director like Stephen Frears (DANGEROUS
LIAISONS, THE GRIFTERS, HERO) go from the relative security of Hollywood
to the near-obscurity of Ireland to make a little film like THE
SNAPPER?  Frears himself supplied the answer by saying that as uneasy
as he felt about the decision, the opportunity to film Roddy Doyle's
wonderful script was more than enough to overcome any misgivings.  The
result speaks for itself.
     In the Curley household, unwed motherhood isn't the disaster it
might be elsewhere.  When twenty-year old Sharon (Tina Kellegher)
informs her father Desi (Colm Meaney) and mother Kay (Ruth McCabe) that
she's "up the pole," they aren't thrilled, but there's no display of
histrionics.  After asking who the father is (and not being told), Desi
invites his daughter out to the local pub for a drink.  Sharon's
friends are as interested as her family in the identity of the baby's
father, but she resolutely keeps mum about the truth until an event in
the neighborhood brings it into the open.
     THE SNAPPER is a very funny production, and it gets funnier as the
movie progresses.  Some of the humor is distinctly Irish in flavor, and
it takes a while to get used to the ebb and flow of certain jokes.  The
biggest obstacle to laughter in THE SNAPPER may be getting past the
heavy Irish accents.  Wisely, however, Miramax has decided against
subtitles, which would have ruined the subtlety of many of the wittier
moments.
     Those who think this is just another "unmarried girl gets
pregnant" motion picture are in for a surprise.  Rarely has a movie
honestly, yet humorously, shown how the pressures of pregnancy can tear
at the fabric of a close-knit, working-class family.  The relationship
between Sharon and her dad is more intimate than that of most
daughter/father pairings, and the things that these two have to admit
to one another are often heartrendingly difficult to say.
     In fact, it may ultimately be some of the dramatic elements of THE
SNAPPER that hold the humor in check.  It's hard to let loose with
unrestrained laughter when you recognize the pain that underlies a
scene.  There are several sequences that move from laughter to tears
back to laughter, bringing the audience along on the roller coaster
ride.  This structure doesn't always work, and that occasionally leads
to an unsettled feeling.
     The character that undergoes the most development is Desi, who
starts the film as the supportive father, but learns through experience
that loving his daughter requires more than taking her to the pub for a
pint.  This role could easily have turned into a type, but Colm
Meaney's intelligent portrayal makes Desi seem more like a real person
than a writer's creation.
     Tina Kellegher is solid as Sharon.  The actress has a
highly-expressive face which director Frears knows how to exploit, and
this is used to her advantage.  Many times Sharon doesn't have to speak
for us to know exactly what she's feeling.  Also impressive is
Fionnuala Murphy as Sharon's best friend Jackie.
     The best thing about THE SNAPPER is that it manages drama without
manipulation.  Every emotion generated is legitimate.  The script is
honest and takes chances, not all of which work, but one thing it never
does is set the audience up.
     It's refreshing to see an old subject dealt with in the refreshing
and original manner that THE SNAPPER handles pregnancy.  The marriage
of humor and drama is admittedly imperfect, but it works well enough to
occasionally spawn laughter and touch the heart, and there's a crucial
scene between Colm Meaney and Tina Kellegher that is beautifully
written, acted, and directed.
     I'm sure there's much more in this movie for a native of Ireland
than for a "foreigner," but the film contains moments of universal
appeal.  Even those who have trouble understanding the accents will
find that once the language barrier is broken and the slang deciphered,
THE SNAPPER has a surprising amount of depth.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE SNAPPER (UK, 1993) *** 1/2  Directed by Stephen Frears. Screenplay by
Roddy Doyle, from his novel. Photography, Oliver Stapleton. Production
design, Mark Geraghty. Editing, Mick Audsley. Cast: Tina Kellegher, Colm
Meany, Ruth McCabe, Colm O'Byrne, Pat Laffan. A Miramax release. 90 min.
Not rated. (If so, R for language).
At the 1993 Cannes Film Festival, "The Snapper" came as a relaxing break
from often long, sometimes solemn --albeit good-- big films. A "small"
movie made for BBC-TV, it was an instant crowd-and-critics pleaser and
confirmed the saying that often "less is more."
The 1991 film "The Commitments", about  young working-class Dubliners who
form a band that plays older soul music, had been  scripted by
schoolteacher Roddy Doyle from his own novel, the first of his Barrytown (a
fictional Dublin area) trilogy.  The other two books were "The Snapper" and
"The Van." Published soon after "Snapper-the-novie" came out, Doyle's
"Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha" also got much attention.  The writer  is no longer
a teacher, but his loquacious texts and scripts continue  to educate us
about the  gifts of the Irish, including the gift of gab.
"The Snapper" gets down to brass tacks while  you're still trying to settle
in your seat. In the Curley  home, 20-year old Sharon (Tina Kellegher), a
supermarket clerk,  the senior of six children, still unmarried, announces
to her parents with no preamble that she's going to have a snapper (Irish
for baby, kid, squirt). What would usually call for horrified or moralistic
reactions, or turn into high drama, falls on exceptionally tolerant and
sympathetic ears.
Although Sharon stubbornly refuses to reveal who the father is, there is no
pressure, no coercion from Dad Dessie (Colm Meany) and Mom Kay
(RuthMcCabe). Right away they close protective ranks around Sharon. Within
minutes Dessie states that he needs a drink  to recover from the shock ...
and invites Sharon to join him at the pub.
The Curleys are a high-spirited,  tightly-knit family. They live piled up
in a small semi-detached house but put up with the congestion through
patience, humor and bits of eccentricity.  When Junior Sister practices
baton-twirling in a garish, cardboard uniform, Dad asks her about her white
beard. "Shaving foam" replies the child. "Ah" says Dessie, and lets it go
at that.
Dad's life seems to be one of trips between home and pub, with endless talk
in both. He imbibes generously with his companions, all regulars. Sharon
and  her girlfriends also have their table there. In times when, especially
in North America, younger and older people hardly ever mix, it is
wonderful, heart-warming to see different generations coming together!
Sharon and her pals come all tarted up in heavy makeup, coiffures and
outfits that are presumably sexy in the eyes of the males of their social
class. Their entertaining  gossip is, of course, mostly about men. Jolly,
caustic comments are delivered with gales of laughter, whinnies and
giggles. It is a perfect reproduction of a certain milieu.
Without missing a beat, Sharon announces her pregnancy to her companions,
as Dad does to his.  Everyone understands and sympathizes.
Language-consciousness being a quintessentially Irish trait --and treasure
--  the pubsters turn everything into a maelstrom of words generally
enhanced by expletives. In their mouths, the latter are not four-letter
vulgarities but linguistic elements of  style.
Not that the locals' vocabulary lacks standards. "Uterus" shocks Dessie;
Sharon ridicules the maternity nurse for asking about her menstrual history
("why couldn't she say period?") and for saying "movements" instead of
you-know-what.
Sharon has fleeting moments of despondence, but her plain, potatoish face
mostly reflects an indomitable joie de vivre. For good reason too. Greater
Dublin must have half a million inhabitants, but the Curleys are the
particular citizens of a few hundred square meters  where everyone knows
everyone else -- and initially almost all are friendly to Sharon.
When, however, the father of the snapper is tentatively revealed ( I will
not point him out and spoil your discovery) there is an abrupt reversal of
fortune. Sharon loses the outsiders' support, is mocked and called names.
As a red herring, she concocts a story  in  surreally absurd terms about a
one-night stand with a Spanish sailor. Few are inclined to believe it, but
a least the tall tale adds more humor to the situation.
All backing is not lost though.  Sharon's best friend, the stalwart Jackie,
stands by her and laughter goes on during outrageous moments.  Dad,
becoming increasingly closer to his pregnant daughter, shows far much more
interest in the coming snapper than in the six previous deliveries by his
sweet, wise and pretty wife.
The Curley  household being bare of print materials -- even newspapers--
Dessie goes out and gets one book, about chilbirth. Entranced by the
mysteries of sex and anatomy, he applies them with his bewildered spouse.
Stephen Frears is known for films like  "The Hit," "My Beautiful
Laundrette" (to which he winks as Dessie's truck passes by a large
Laundrette  sign),"Prick Up Your Ears," "Sammy and Rosie Get Laid,"
"Dangerous Liaisons," "The Drifters," "Hero." Those were bigger, fairly
complicated, sometimes glossy and/or wild pictures. "The Snapper" on the
other hand is a return to the incisive simplicity and the making of
forceful points with concision that were  found in the many Frears  BBC-TV
movies--excellent  but unknown in the U.S.A.
As in most Frears telefilms, "The Snapper" sets up a plain, even
simplistic milieu, zooms in on, and milks its colorful authenticity. With
upbeat  whimsy and humor, the director says a great deal about the people ,
their distinctive culture and life-views.
Cultivated, higher-class spectators may feel some depression or snobbery
vis-a-vis the simple-minded Curleys and their friends, but the film's
vibrant buoyancy sees to it that natural simplicity will overcome raised
eyebrows.
The most un-intellectual "Snapper" is full of funny stuff.  It goes
non-stop through daily events and quirks, idiosyncrasies and affections,
keeps adding good touches. Among them, the sad-sack yet comical
none-too-bright fellow who had impregnated Sharon. He goes from utter
insensitivity to maudliness --then becomes a pariah himself.
Dessie's evolution is a joy to behold. It is hard to  realize that he is
the same Colm Meany who plays  O'Brien in" Star Trek, The Next Generation"
and in" Deep Space Nine," which, pace  the Trekkies, do not exactly strain
expressivity.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Brian Koller
"The Snapper" is a BBC made-for-television production.
The depiction of a contemporary Irish family has an
excellent (and surprisingly graphic) script by obscure
novelist Roddy Doyle, and there are enough plot complications
to keep things interesting.
"The Snapper" is Irish slang for a baby.  The film stars
Colm Meaney (best known for his work on two "Star Trek"
series) as the blustering head of an Irish household that
includes his wife and several children.  Tina Kellegher
plays his daughter, an unmarried young woman who has become
pregnant.
The small town delights in gossiping about who the father
is, until it is revealed that he is an aging, overweight
milquetoast.  The resulting derision causes stress between
father and daughter, that may compel Kellegher to leave home
against her family's wishes.
Judging from the script, Ireland is much more relaxed
than America about the subject of sex.  A group of young
women harass a younger male waiter, and frankly discuss
their sexual adventures.  The word "bitch" is so frequently
used that it can be taken as a compliment.  When the
unwed Kellegher becomes pregnant, her popularity actually increases.
She is only ostracized when the father turns out not to
be a sleek local stud, but a married man nearly old enough
to be her grandfather.  When Meaney finds out, his first
reaction is "Jesus, that bastard's older than I am!"
Another cultural difference is that the Irish seem
to drink heavily.  Meaney visits the pub nearly every
night, and Kellegher gets plastered at a bar even though
she is nine months pregnant.  When her brother pukes in the
kitchen sink (filled with dishes) after a binge, all
father has to say is that he expects him to do the dishes
afterwards.
I enjoyed all the petty squabbling and selfishness among the
family members.  Unlike "The Waltons", this is likely how most
larger families behave.  "The Snapper" is a drama that succeeds
even more as a comedy.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Richard Montanari
     Sharon Curley is havin' a snapper, wot?  A whippersnapper, that
is.  A baby.  Except the twenty-year-old Sharon's not married, see, and
still lives at home with her rather large, rather eccentric Dublin
family--her youngest sister wears shaving cream around the house,
her dad greets neighborhood dogs at the door, by name, and shows them
to the parlor. In defiance of all the cajoling and threats, Sharon is
simply not about to identify the father of the child.
     But Desi Curley, Sharon's father, can't let it go. He is
determined to get to the bottom of it. No matter how many pints of
Guinness Stout he has to imbibe in the process.
     And so goes life in THE SNAPPER, the second installment in the
Barrytown trilogy by Irish novelist Roddy Doyle. The first act, THE
COMMITMENTS, itself made into a smashing 1991 film by Alan Parker,
introduced us to a group of working-class Dublin kids hell bent on
forming a soul band.
     This time we meet the Curleys, an endearing cast of Dublin
characters headed by Desi (Colm Meaney), a man best trusted when the
statement in question is sworn to be true, "... on the Boible."
     The main suspect in putting Sharon "up the pole" is George Burgess
(Pat Laffan), a neighborhood stalwart and mini-pillar in the
community.  This causes some distress to Desi because George Burgess is
about ten years older than he is. Desi confronts the alleged lecher in
the pub one night, but the man denies it.
     So, why then is old Georgie following Sharon around Barrytown,
moon-faced and forlorn?  In spite of the repeated efforts of Sharon's
girlfriends--a tough-talking cat-pack reminiscent of the sexy backup
singers The Commitments--Sharon remains steadfast. She say she
wouldn't give it up, even if she'd " ... shagged the Elephant Man."
     As the blessed day draws near, the Barrytown intrigue rises, with
the possibility of a Spanish sailor being introduced as the potential
father, claims and counter-claims, attempted bribes, pub brawls and,
certainly not least, Desi's remarkable transformation into a sensitive,
working-class feminist, courtesy of a birthing book called Everywoman.
The change is so complete that even Mrs. Curley (Ruth McCabe) reaps a
few benefits, in the kip, if you know what I mean.
     By the time little Georgina is born (7 pounds, 12 ounces, "big for
a baby, small for a turkey,") the Curley clan is once again intact and,
for better or worse, the first thing the little snapper will see when
she gets around to opening her eyes.
     Director Stephen Frears (DANGEROUS LIAISONS, THE GRIFTERS, HERO)
returns to the working class milieu of MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE with a
remarkable comic touch, a sensitivity to the comedy of the mundane that
seems, for some unknown reason, exclusive to the Brits.  And while some
of the nuances of this very parochial Irish film may be lost on
American audiences (including this reviewer), and some of the accents
may go undeciphered, these moments are scant.
     Colm Meaney's performance as the beleaguered Desi Curley is a true
delight. The actor first staked out this character as the
Elvis-worshipping Mr.  Rabbitte, the father in The Commitments.  His
wide, earnest face is a perfect background for the train wreck of
emotions any father would feel at the notion, the very idea, of
grandfatherhood at such a young and, he might add, virile age.
     Yet THE SNAPPER is as much about modern-day Dubliners and the joys
and sorrows of a large family, as it is about the bond between a father
and his daughter--a relationship rarely explored on screen.
     THE SNAPPER is easily this holiday season's charmer.  I swear.  On
the Boible.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Colm Meaney, Tina Kellegher, Ruth McCabe, Pat Laffan.
Screenplay:  Roddy Doyle.
Director:  Stephen Frears.
     Television has given the term "situation comedy" a bad name, but
that might be the most appropriate epithet for THE SNAPPER.  This
bright and earthy comedy from Roddy Doyle (THE COMMITMENTS) deals with
an average Irish family coping with one of life's many little
difficulties.  There's no high concept, no men in drag or mistaken
identities.  THE SNAPPER is just remarkably adept at making the mundane
comic, at making us laugh at real life.  Thanks largely to Colm
Meaney's charming lead performance, it's just one of the most purely
enjoyable comedies of 1993.
     THE SNAPPER is Irish slang for a baby, which is exactly what
Barrytown, Dublin resident Sharon Curley (Tina Kellegher) is
expecting.  The one small complication:  twenty-year-old Sharon is
unmarried.  Her parents Dessie (Colm Meaney) and Kay (Ruth McCabe) are
more than understanding, but they don't understand why Sharon won't
reveal the father's name.  Her reluctance becomes clearer when George
Burgess (Pat Laffan), a paunchy, married neighbor and the father of one
of Sharon's friends, drunkenly announces that Sharon was "a good
ride."  Sharon denies that George is the father, insisting instead on a
one-night stand with a Spanish sailor, but soon all of Barrytown is
abuzz with the gossip, causing great consternation in the Curley
household.
     With such a simple premise, execution becomes paramount, and THE
SNAPPER is very well-executed.  Director Stephen Frears (DANGEROUS
LIAISONS, HERO) keeps the comedy human by concentrating on faces and
reactions, a technique used most effectively during pub scenes where
extreme close-ups of drunken individuals emphasizes distorted
perceptions.  These are loud and boisterous characters (a bit
excessively so in the case of Sharon's cackling clique), and Frears
allows this liveliness to permeate the film.  Without resorting to
location cityscapes, Frears creates a rich atmosphere peopled with
sparkling characters.
     The standout among those characters is Colm Meaney's Dessie.
Dessie is a unique creation, a loving father and husband who avoids the
slew of cliches typical of Irish characters and father characters in
general.  Yes, he enjoys his pint at the pub with the boys, but he's
also attuned to modern sensibilities.  "Times have changed," he tells
Sharon in one scene.  "When Craig was born, I was at work; when you
were born, I was at work; when Lisa was born, I don't know where I
was."  Meaney is perfect, playing a more nuanced version of the same
character he played in THE COMMITMENTS.  His moments with Sharon are
wonderfully warm, even through his frustration at the embarrassment her
condition has caused him; particularly good is a brief, low-key scene
as Dessie shares with Sharon his amazement at the contents of a book on
sexuality.  He's also a man who genuinely loves his wife, and you never
doubt for a moment that Dessie and Kay have been married for
twenty-five years.  It's a performance unlikely to garner much
attention for award nominations, but its as deserving of honors as any
work out there.
     The rest of the cast is a bit more uneven.  Ruth McCabe is equal
to Meaney as the acerbic mother Kay, playing good cop to Dessie's bad
cop.  Tina Kellegher is fine when she's toned down, but when she gets
fiery she gets annoying.  Even more so is Fionnuala Murphy as Sharon's
best friend Jackie.  Pat Laffan's George Burgess is a small role, but
he does quite a lot with it, making George a rather pathetic figure.
Generally, THE SNAPPER is better when it's not in the pub, and the
volume knob on the characters is turned down.
     Some viewers may be made uncomfortable by the circumstances
surrounding Sharon's sexual encounter, but I found the story depended
on those circumstances, and that Sharon's response to her situation
defined her character.  THE SNAPPER doesn't moralize, it just sets up a
scenario and lets characters react.  I found those reactions extremely
funny, although I needed to break out my Irish- to-American profanity
dictionary on more than one occasion.  You'll need to play close
attention to pick up all the dialogue in THE SNAPPER, but it will be
well worth the effort.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This is one of those artsy foreign Irish comedies (THE 
BROTHERS MCMULLEN, anyone?) with plenty of wry observations 
on life and biting humour (It's not spelled "humor" unless it comes 
from America). Still, even though I enjoyed THE BROTHERS 
MCMULLEN (a separate review I haven't written yet), I couldn't fully 
get into this one. The characters here were the loud, obnoxious kind 
who gather in pubs and gossip about their neighbors. That pretty much 
sums up the movie, pubs and gossip, not to mention gossip in pubs.
        There is a slight plot, though. Young adult Sharon (Tina 
Kellegher) is pregnant. Her parents aren't happy but they still support 
her even though she won't tell them who the father is. She won't tell 
anyone who the father is, not even her friends, whom she regularly 
meets at the pub to have gossip sessions with. Her father also meets his 
friends at the pub for some gossip, where he overhears from one friend 
that another friend said his daughter was "a great ride." That just goes 
to show you how distorted certain statements can become after being 
run through the rumour mill. It turns out the friend, when he used the 
phrase "great ride," was actually talking about the new roller coaster at 
Six Flags Over Ireland.
        Nevertheless, this bloke, older than Sharon's dad, is indeed 
the father of her unborn child. Sharon is pissed at him for letting the 
secret get out because now her entire family is ostracized from the 
community, no one believing her story that the baby's father is a 
Spanish sailor she met while drunk in a hotel room for one night of 
torrid animal sex. (That should make the parents feel better about the 
situation, don't you think?)
        There's not much to the movie. Like I said, pubs and gossip 
about cover it, but it does offer a few memorable lines and biting 
humour. (Sorry, I don't get enough chances to spell the word that 
way.) This Irish comedy may not have been my mug of beer, but it did 
get three-and-a-half stars out of Roger Ebert, comments like 
"Exceptionally funny!" and "Hilarious!" out of The New York Times 
and Newsday, not to mention awards at various film festivals. So 
someone out there likes these European films. THE SNAPPER also 
pretty much answers the question of why Irish people have drinking 
problems when it shows Sharon partaking in alcohol several times 
while pregnant. I'm no Surgeon General, but even I know that's bad 
for a child's health. Now back to my Hostess fried cherry pie...
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America for over 1/50th of a century!
