Title
Review for Hellraiser (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Non-stop slam-bang action creepshow
     makes writer-director Clive Barker seem sicker than he
     actually is.  Lots of sex and violence, full of sound and
     fury, signifying nothing.
     Clive Barker is the new *wunderkind* of horror fiction.  While Stephen
King writes pretty much in the well-trodden areas of horror--clairvoyance,
psi powers, vampires, etc.--Clive Barker seems to create startlingly new
ideas that are usually totally off the wall.  You cannot be sure what
territory a Barker story will take you to, but you can be pretty sure it
won't have anything as familiar and reassuring as a blood-sucking vampire.
You may encounter a malevolent talking pig, or a haunted burial shroud; one
of his more horrific stories involved a giant.  It was perhaps the first
horror story with a giant in two centuries.  Now following in the footsteps
of Stephen King, who wrote and directed his own horror film MAXIMUM
OVERDRIVE, Barker has written and directed HELLRAISER.
     Well,.... I heard someone in the audience echo almost word for word the
thoughts I had watching the film: "The guy who made this film is one sick
son of a bitch."  Take RE-ANIMATOR, remove the humor, than add more gore,
more graphic violence, and more imagination, and you have something
approaching HELLRAISER.  The story deals with a man who bought an ornate
puzzle box.  The box seems to be the key to a universe of sex and torture.
At least I think that was what it was.  Things are just not very clear.
Barker, who is usually a good story-teller, just fails to do a very good job
of story-telling.  Instead the film devolves into a sequence of imaginative
gross-out scenes with some very spare connective tissue.  Nothing makes a
whole lot of sense and there is little point in asking, "If that guy is
really the king of the dead, or whatever he is, why does he have his head
marked up like a Rand McNally globe and why has he driven all those nails in
his head?  Does he just think it looks 'punk'?"
     HELLRAISER must be the ultimate of some kind of film.  Whatever it is,
it certainly is very much what it is.  If you like the sort of thing that
HELLRAISER is, you're sure going to love this film.  And you might want to
get some therapy while you are at it.  I guess I'd give HELLRAISER a 0 on
the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Robert Dorsett
     This review contains spoilers, but believe me, I don't say anything you
can't guess 10 minutes into the movie.
     I *did* go into this one with high expectations.  I had been exposed to
media reports that this film would signify a departure from the slasher flicks.
I sort of expected another EXORCIST or THE SHINING.  I even put aside my
general rule of not seeing this type of film.  Boy, was I wrong!  Another
garbage slasher flick, the only difference being that *this* one has a story!
     The story, you ask?  Well, a scumball buys a Chinese puzzle from a guy in
an Arab souk.  He takes it home, somehow getting it past Customs :-) and starts
fiddling with it in his attic.  Lo and behold, after he takes it apart, three
demons appear and start taking him apart, but with meat hooks.  When they're
finished, his gizzards are hanging from the ceiling.  They botch up their
cleanup job, however, and manage to leave his heart (or some gland; I didn't
really recognize the organ) under a floorboard.  The guy's brother and his
brother's wife appear at the door soon after, and decide to move in.  They
throw away Scumball's belongings, and set up house.  Turns out that Wife is a
bit of a nympho, and screwed around with Scumball right before her marriage.
She starts having some wild hallucinations.  Later, Hubby spills some blood on
the attic floorboards (slow-mo special effects of the buckets of blood hitting
the ground--all from the tiny cut on his hand).  Said blood is eagerly sucked
up by Scumball's Organ.  The Organ grows into a Thing that requires Yet More
Blood in order to complete the Regeneration into a Really Ugly Thing.  It
establishes mind contact with Wife, who agrees to help him get more blood,
because she really wants to be screwed again.  So, she helps him kill three
businessmen.  Scumball, at this time, gradually gets his strength back and
grows all his organs back.  Problem is, he doesn't have any skin, and even
after three or four corpses, still doesn't get any skin.  He finally gets
some, though, but strangely enough, he ends up looking like his brother.
Guess they couldn't get the original actor back.  Who knows.
     Scumball (whose name is Frank) is not a nice guy.  He describes his
torture by the demons fondly, as the "ultimate pleasure and pain, since at that
level there is no difference between the two."  Somehow, I don't see getting
torn apart by 90 fish- and meat-hooks a lot of fun.  This guy is *so* bad ("How
bad *is* he?"), *so* bad that the *rats* cower in a corner in fear.  For good
reason, too; he crucifies two of them for fun, and carves a third while the
Nympho's horsing around with Hubby.
     Anyway.  Hubby's Daughter (who, if course, is not *WIFE'S* daughter)
starts to suspect something is wrong after she sees Wife going into the attic
with one of her johns and the ensuing screams.  The dumb bimbo meets Scumball,
and is not impressed.  She manages to escape with the Chinese Puzzle, and 
brings out the demons.
     At any rate, the demons are pissed off that they screwed up their cleanup;
they're normally quite meticulous about that type of thing.  The story boils
down to the demons trying to correct their mistake.  The demons are not,
however, the good guys.  The dumb bimbo's the good guy.  She somehow not only
gets them to take care of Frank, but also banishes them to Hell or oblivion,
we're not too sure which.  Not too shabby for someone with single-digit IQ.
     This is basically a "bad jinn" story.  It is an *awful* movie.  Awful
acting, bad focus in the photography, many scenes of skin being penetrated by
meathooks, which is really unrealistic, and looks like the latex that it is.
Continuity?  Who cares.  Acting?  *Terrible*.  Script?  Horrible.  Sounds
canned.  Unrealistic.  Story is so-so, but the impact is lost long, long before
the film ends.
     I do think the *rat* acting was quite good.  I have never seen rats look
afraid.  They should get nominated for an award.  Really good acting there, the
best in the movie.  "The envelope for Best Furry Rodent, please..."
     A "one star out of four" rating would be far too generous.  A "1/10"
rating (or -4 in the -4 to +4 rating system) is far more accurate.  This movie
is so bad that people in the audience were laughing, chortling at the bad
acting and crummy dialog.  I can see this film turning into the next ROCKY
HORROR PICTURE SHOW.  People were getting so fed up they were yelling warnings
up to the characters on the screen.  Had to have something to do.  Dumb, dumb,
dumb movie.   I was embarrassed that I spent money to see it.
     It goes without saying that I disagree with the other reviews on the board
that attempt to review the film for itself.  Lots of slime and red-dyed corn
syrup does not constitute "horror," in my opinion.  
