Title
Review for Isn't She Great (2000)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
James Sanford
         The biggest problem with "Isn't She Great," an otherwise
entertaining glimpse into the world of author Jacqueline Susann, is that
Paul Rudnick's screenplay omits some of the best bits about its subject.
         For instance, in 1963 Susann published "Every Night,
Josephine," a book about the adventures of her poodle in Manhattan (both
owner and pet frequently went out on the town in matching outfits, to
give you some idea of where Jackie's head was at). During Susann's tour
to promote "Josephine," President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in
Dallas, plunging the country into a week of chaos and mourning. But not
Jackie: She fumed to her friends about how unfair it was that the
Kennedy family was getting all kinds of media coverage. After all,
they'd only experienced a death in the family; she had a book to sell.
 There's another story about how Susann became obsessed with the
ancient Egyptian symbol of the ankh while on the road to promote her
novel "The Love Machine." She insisted on passing out silver and gold
ankhs to almost everyone she met, including the people in her publishing
house, all of whom accepted the gifts and thanked her for her
generosity. It wasn't until later that the recipients learned Susann had
billed all those pricey charms on her expense account and had been
buying the publishers presents with their own money.
 That kind of behind-the-scenes dirt is conspicuously absent
from "Isn't She Great," which gives its heroine all the rough edges of a
throw pillow, but manages to be frequently funny nevertheless.
Impersonating the queen of the pantsuits is Bette Midler, who has
Susann's chutzpah and charm, if not her strikingly offbeat looks. Nathan
Lane plays Irving Mansfield, Susann's devoted husband and partner in
crime.
 When it comes to the facts about Susann's life, Rudnick's
screenplay couldn't care less, and perhaps that's how it should be:
Certainly Susann would never have had a problem with twisting and
tweaking the truth if it made for a better story. She would, however,
almost certainly have trimmed the movie's slightly sticky sequences
about Irving and Jackie's autistic son and Jackie's battle with cancer.
Susann couldn't write sentiment convincingly and neither can Rudnick.
 Most of "Great" centers on the creation and promotion of
Susan's most enduring work, "Valley of the Dolls," a tawdry tale of
three young women who ricochet from bed to bed and coast to coast in
between bouts of alcoholism, pill-popping and cosmetic surgery. Although
Susann's prose could best be described as overripe ("Come here, you
beautiful golden wench!" her hero Lyon Burke cries just before bedding
the virginal Anne in the book), "Dolls" was a mind-bogglingly huge
success upon its publication in 1966 because of Susann's skills as both
a storyteller and a provocateur. The heroines of her novel indulged in
malicious backstabbing, performed unspeakable sexual acts, destroyed
their bodies and slept around in the hopes of scoring fur coats or
wedding rings. It may have been "chocolate-covered trash," as one
character in "Great" calls it, but millions upon millions of readers
gleefully ate it up.
 But writing was only part of what Jacqueline Susann was all
about. She never forgot her real product was herself. From the mid-1960s
until her death in 1974, Susann was a staple on TV talk shows, always
bedecked in a flashy frock and equipped with a few choice wisecracks.
Mansfield, a successful producer and press agent who eventually gave up
his own career to coordinate hers, was her one-man pep squad, constantly
urging her on.
 Midler and Lane both seem to have quite a bit of fun as these
larger than life lovers, as do Stockard Channing as Flo, Jackie's
gin-guzzling confidante (on the subject of authors, she says, "You think
about Hemingway and Dickens and, well, I'm sure there are others") and
John Cleese in an all too brief appearance as the so-hip-it-hurts
publisher who takes a chance on "Dolls." The production design team has
done a groovy job of recreating the Age of Aquarius, particularly Julie
Weiss' suitably loud and showy costumes, and the whipped creamy Burt
Bacharach score, featuring blissful voices murmuring over the melodies
and the ageless Dionne Warwick delivering the theme song, will make you
feel as if 1966 never really ended. James Sanford

Author
Michael Dequina
_Isn't_She_Great_ (R) * 1/2 (out of ****)
        "Great" is unlikely the word to come to the mind of audiences in regards
to author Jacqueline Susann after seeing her depiction in the loose comic
biography _Isn't_She_Great_.  More likely are the words "boorish,"
"brash," "annoying," and "untalented," which effectively sums up where
writer Paul Rudnick and director Andrew Bergman have gone wrong.
        "Untalented" is the key word out of those four.  _Isn't_She_Great_ is
less a biography than an episodic chronicle of the struggling film and
stage actress' (Bette Midler) obsessive pursuit of stardom, which finally
comes in 1966 when she pens the notoriously salacious
drug-addicted-and-sex-mad-starlets-in-Hollywood epic
_Valley_of_the_Dolls_.  I suppose Susann's tale of success is supposed to
be a tribute to the unwavering belief in one's dreams, and in reality it
may very well be.  Yet as presented in _Isn't_She_Great_, it's the story
of someone with no discernible talent achieving a wholly undeserved
success on sheer schmooze power.  And while her catty one-liners
(predictably delivered with gusto by Midler, who can do this character in
her sleep) are good for a chuckle here and there, all the attitude
doesn't necessarily make her more likable.
        What is designed to add some layer of likability is Susann's domestic
life, but it's botched in the execution.  She and her husband and
manager, Irving Mansfield (Nathan Lane) have an autistic son, but she has
hardly any scenes to establish a convincing love for the child (Mansfield
has more screen time with him).  Most of all, it's the romance between
Susann and Mansfield that's supposed to be the emotional hook.  However,
while I believed that he loved her (Lane's gentle performance help), I
always got the sense that she didn't love him so much as the help he did
her career.  This could not be more clear in a climactic scene where
Susann and Mansfield, having reached a crisis point, reconcile when she
asks him to be her agent.  The scene is played for laughs, but it hammers
home the point that it's his career aid and not his love that holds the
most importance to her.
        _Isn't_She_Great_ is never less than interesting.  If anything, the
one-liners from Midler and Stockard Channing (a bundle of meow as
Susann's actress friend Florence Maybelle) amuse, as does David Hyde
Pierce's warmed-over Niles Crane act as Susann's uptight editor Michael
Hastings; and the gaudy costume and production design serve as sweet eye
candy.  But bare minimum amusement cannot pass muster for a film that
dares to ask the question _Isn't_She_Great_.  Perhaps the real Jacqueline
Susann was, but one would be hard-pressed to pay the film incarnation the
same compliment.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of thsi review can be found at 
http://www.moviereviews.org/isn't_she_great.htm ---
Isn't She Great? No. Good? Nah. Mediocre? Not exactly. Borderline awful? 
Bingo.
Disclosure: I have neither read nor seen Valley of the Dolls, the book 
which made Jacqueline Susann famously trashy. Going into this movie, 
which is a many-liberties-taken adaptation of her biography, I had 
absolutely no intentions of checking out the sleazy novel or film 
anytime soon. The movie/book have now skyrocketed to the top of 
must-see/must-read list. That is the peculiar thing about Isn't She 
Great: the movie, atrocious as it is, makes you thrive its coveted 
subject material. Don't credit the film. Credit Susann.
Jacqueline Susann (Bette Midler) is a New York Jew with a dream of being 
famous. Irving Mansfield (Nathan Lane) is a New York Jew who's character 
isn't well-explained at all. For some reason, Irving craves Jacqueline 
(keep in mind that Midler is hardly a slender sex-star) and marries her 
under the condition that he make her famous. (Don't think Jacqueline is 
quick to marry though, she does seek G-d's approval when she drags 
Irving to Central Park and talks to a tree- something that doesn't look 
that odd for Central Park.)
Jacqueline, who admits "All I know about are aging astars, hopeful 
hookers and people popping pills and winding up in the gutter," is 
rather untalented in the performing arts. So, as history dictates, she 
earns her fame by writing about her aforementioned knowledge of a sleazy 
industry. En route to her pinnacle, there comes the humorless editor 
(David Hyde Pierce), who does the unthinkable when he orders mayonnaise 
in a deli, and assorted other characters that more closely resemble 
cliches and caricatures than real people.
How can a true story be accused of over-characterization and being too 
cliche filled? I quote the press notes when speaking of how the 
filmmakers "decided to loosen up the story a bit to make room for  the 
film they all wanted to make." So just how loosened were things? Well, 
this story isn't supposed to be a comedy, but the writers made it one. 
In becoming the comedy into which it has no right morphing, Isn't She 
Great finds its most serious problem. Jacqueline had cancer. Her son was 
mentally retarded. There is something decidedly pathetic and unfunny 
about a joke aimed at a dying woman's hospital suite- just one of the 
many cracks made in the 95 minute production. And the scenes that are 
genuinely funny, which, thanks primarily to Nathan Lane, there are a few 
of, are too embarrassing to enjoy in the middle of a poorly disguised 
drama.
Poor Nathan Lane. This is a great role for him and nobody will remember 
it in two weeks. He is absolutely fabulous as a constantly schmoozing 
New York Jew. And David Hyde Pierce is commendable as well, playing his 
typical straight man role. Even John Cleese is fun in a supporting role. 
As for Bette Midler, you would never be able to tell that she is the 
great performer she is by watching this movie. 
The opening lyric of Isn't She Great is "I don't know where I am going." 
Neither does the film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Andrew Bergman (STRIPTEASE) rolls out the treacle trucks in ISN'T SHE
GREAT, a story based on the life of Jacqueline Susann ("The Valley of
the Dolls").  Giving her life a bizarrely saccharine, Ozzie-and-Harriet
gloss, Bergman turns the queen of sleaze into a literary heroine.  And
he makes her life so excessively cute and over-the-top fun that you may
gag.  At any minute you expect the cast to stop and ask the audience "Is
everybody happy?"
Starring Bette Midler, as Jacqueline Susann, and Nathan Lane, as her
husband and agent, Irving Mansfield, the movie, thanks to Bergman's
overdirection, manages to bring out the most annoying parts of each
actor.  Although the movie is short, you'll find yourself secretly
hoping for the obviously fatal conclusion -- Susann is diagnosed early
in the picture with cancer -- to occur much sooner than it does.
Filmed by Karl Walter Lindenlaub with bright, peppy colors and scored by
Burt Bacharach for maximum cloyingness, the film doesn't have a subtle
moment.  Although Jacqueline wrote about a world of sex and drugs, the
movie provides no background on this.  In the picture, Jacqueline acts
like a woman who sometimes talks dirty but who doesn't have any sins,
save her tacky wardrobes.  She does sometime speak harshly to God, who
appears as the sunlight that filters through a Central Park tree.
As Jacqueline's lap dog of a husband, Nathan Lane plays obsequiousness
to the hilt.  During her fake suicide episode, he walks into the lake to
save her before she drowns.  He stops first, of course, to slowly take
off his shoes and sox and roll up his pants' legs.
The only saving graces in the movie are two of the supporting cast, to
whom writer Paul Rudnick (IN & OUT) gives some of the few lines with any
possibilities.  Stockard Channing, as Jacqueline's smart-mouthed friend
Flo, likes to tell it like it is.  When Irving suggests a book to
Jacqueline as the salvation for her sagging acting career, Flo, not
realizing that he means writing, tells him how stupid his idea is.  "Oh
come on, Irving," Flo says, "reading never solved anything."
As her anal-retentive, Brooks-Brothers-dressed editor, Michael, David
Hyde Pierce gives a prissy performance that's cute at first, but it's a
one joke idea.  His slow transformation out of his regimented life is as
predictable as the rest of the story.
"Talent isn't everything," Flo says.  And the mere collection of a
talented cast does not ensure that the movie can demonstrate any.  ISN'T
SHE GREAT was probably a bad idea from the beginning, and nothing in
this movie convinces us otherwise.
ISN'T SHE GREAT runs 1:30.  It is rated R for language and would be
acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Andrew Bergman.
Cast: Bette Midler, Nathan Lane, Stockard Channing, David Hyde Pierce, Amanda 
Peet, John Cleese.
2000 - 93 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and sexual innuendo).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, January 30, 2000.
Andrew Bergman, director of two of the brightest comedies of the '90s, 1992's 
"Honeymoon in Vegas" and 1994's "It Could Happen to You," has fallen on 
desperate times lately, first with the 1996 Demi Moore debacle, "Striptease," 
and now with "Isn't She Great," a rather cartoonish biopic of 
struggling-actress-turned-trashy-writer Jacqueline Susann. Susann, who looked 
nothing at all like Bette Midler, died at the age of 53 in the mid-1970s of 
breast cancer, but before her death became an icon for the general public, 
not because her writing was particularly good, but because it told the 
absolute truth. All she wanted was to be happy and successful, something she 
never found in her acting career, and according to the movie, it was her 
devoted husband, Irving Mansfield (Nathan Lane), who originally suggested she 
write a book. Susann is a bit hesitant at first, but after writing a brazen 
little number that tells it solely like it is, "Valley of the Dolls," and 
managing to sell it to a publishing company, it quickly tops the charts and 
stays there for 28 weeks, becoming the best-selling novel of all time.
What the public didn't know about, however, was that Jacquelyn's son was sent 
to an institution after being labeled Autistic, and that she struggled with 
cancer for many years. No one would buy a trash-talking book by a cancer 
patient, Susann though, so she hid it from everyone except her husband and 
the doctors, going in on a regular basis for chemotherapy. She ultimately 
lost her battle with the illness, but as she set out to do, was a star by the 
time she passed away.
Uplifting? Maybe a little. An appropriate story to build a wacky, fluffy 
comedy around? No way. Although any genre can surely be placed around any 
storyline and still be successful, it takes a firm, sure touch to sometimes 
pull it off. That is just one of the things that screenwriter Paul Rudnick 
(1997's "In & Out") is consistently missing in his disrespectful treatment of 
Susann, as he paints her as a crazy woman who talked to trees and thought it 
was God peering through the branches when the sun was shining. The only way 
to keep such a breezy tone and work, I think, would probably to have 
transformed the piece into a musical, a 'la "Evita." There are two scenes 
that are perfect setups for music numbers (and one of them actually does have 
Midler singing), and it is a missed opportunity that Rudnick did not realize 
this. Apparently, his brain was on autopilot while he penned the sloppy 
screenplay, anyway.
Worse yet is filmmaker Bergman. Plainly put, "Isn't She Great" is an 
astoundingly inept piece of direction, a surprise coming from someone who has 
proven his talent in year's past. From the schmaltzy narration by Susann's 
husband, Irving, to the episodic, bare-bones editing that seems to dwell on 
minor happenings in her life and then bypasses the most important elements, 
the film is never involving or emotionally satisfying because Bergman often 
seems to be too busy saying, "Look at Jackie Susann! Isn't she great?! Isn't 
she wacky?! Isn't she wild?!" Susann is only sporadically pulled out of her 
caricaturized character, and it is when she is (usually while she is telling 
things, no-holds-barred, exactly how they are) that the movie gets the little 
bit of charm that it acquires.
We rarely are able to believe anything in the film because of the 
unbelievable way in which it is presented. When Irving Mansfield, a publicity 
agent, spots Jacquelyn Susann on the stage, and then meets her in a 
restaurant, they end up spending the day together, with him confessing his 
undying love for her by the time night falls. It should be noted that they 
are standing waist-deep in a lake when this "touching" scene is played out, 
because Susann had just halfheartedly attempted suicide. Soon, they are 
married, but their relationship seems to be nothing more than close 
confidantes, as we never see them in bed together, or even kiss. And how are 
viewers to take it when Susann is earnestly talking to a tree in Central Park 
in one scene, and receiving radiation in the next? It simply does not work, 
and any cast or crew member should have discovered this when they read the 
script, unless they were all in it for the money and did not care about 
faithfully preserving the life of Susann.
Bette Midler overacts her way through the picture, but remains spunky and 
full of energy, thus making the proceedings a little more entertaining than 
they might have been had someone else been cast in the role. She can do far 
better, however, so let's hope that her next film, "Drowning Mona," being 
released next month, is a step up for her. Nathan Lane is a good sport as 
Irving, but usually is playing the straight man to Susann's bigger-than-life 
personality. Stockard Channing, as Susann's best friend, Flo, is a standout, 
spitting out her flashy lines with delightful panache. David Hyde Pierce, as 
Susann's editor; John Cleese, as her publisher; and Amanda Peet, as her 
promotional assistant, are mostly wasted, although Pierce gains a little 
extra mileage in the scenes where he sits down to edit the novel, only to get 
every one of his requested changes rebuked by Susann.
It is truly unfortunate that Rudnick sat down to construct a biopic of 
Jacquelyn Susann and could find nothing worthwhile to write aside from a 
string of one-liners, some of which are sharp zingers, to be sure, but do not 
aid in saying anything insightful about its subject. With only a brief glance 
at "Isn't She Great," which always feels like the outline to a movie, rather 
than a fully written motion picture, one thing is obvious: making the story 
of Jacquelyn Susann into a wistful comedy, albeit a badly made one, was an 
arbitrary, offensive decision, as many of the developments in her life were 
anything but a barrel of laughs.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Isn't she great? Well, she's actually a boisterous 2nd rate actress who
strikes it big after writing a gossipy trash novel filled with all of the
dirtiest stories she'd ever heard and calling it "Valley of the Dolls".
Hmmm...not so great in my eyes, but definitely an interesting
behind-the-scenes look into the life and times of one Jacqueline Susann and
her rise to fame. She's actually pretty so-so.
PLOT:
Director Andrew Bergman claims that this film is "loosely based" on the life
of Jacqueline Susann, a woman who began her career in showbiz with two-bit
parts and radio spots, and ended up as one of the most controversial and
successful novelists of her generation. Starting from the 1920s and into the
late 60s, this movie also accentuates the impact of her relationship with
husband/publicist Irving Mansfield.
CRITIQUE:
Interesting, funny at times, well cast, this movie works when taken in as
the story of an underdog whose determination, persistence, flair and tinge
of talent take her to the top, but surrenders to mediocrity when considering
itself an all-out comedy or romance drama. I didn't really know what this
film was about before entering the theatre, so just the fact that it was
able to keep me interested all the way through, is a point in its favor.
Having always held a strong interest in discovering the background of all
grass roots success stories, this film handed me a fine helping of
nutritious facts, despite some apparent "loosening" of her real-life story.
One of the areas of this film which didn't quite work for me on the other
hand, included the relationship with her husband/publicist, which seemed
arbitrary and just plain odd in my eyes. The humor was also pretty spotty,
with some solid guffaws from Midler, Lane and Channing from time to time,
but overall, it felt more like a chuckle-and-smile film than anything else.
David Hyde Pierce was also pretty solid as the tight-ass WASPy character, as
was John Cleese, whose small role was actually funny just for his 60s jive
and clothing. In fact, I really did enjoy most of the cast, despite my
reluctance to accept some of their obvious overacting early on, but when the
curtain call came to set, the whole thing just left me with a "whatever"
feeling. I suppose that the many people who do know of this lady, her books
or the movies made in their name, might enjoy this on another level
altogether, but if you're like me, and know little about this woman or her
sleazy novels, I don't think you'll be taken on to any kind of ROCKY
"let's-go-out-there-and-kick-some-ass-in-the-world" type feeling. I would
say that it's a nice movie, enjoyable to watch, but even easier to forget.
See it if you're in the mood for light laughs or appreciate the work of any
of its principals, and enjoy its underdog-done-good story in the meantime.
Otherwise, you could always wait until this puppy shows up on your local
video rental shelves or skip it altogether. Trust me, she's not that great
and your life will be fine without her.
Also, if you're like me, and you happen to live in Montreal, Canada, well,
you could also make a game out of this film, and try to spot any of the
local hangouts which were dressed up like New York in this camouflaged
movie.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Ironically, it turns out that the real Jacqueline Susann wasn't particularly
funny, and that her relationship with Irving Mansfield was actually
"somewhat unconventional", but I guess that's just showbiz!
Well-known critic Roger Ebert has one movie screenplay credit, and it came
by the way of his gig as screenwriter on the so-called "sequel" to the
original VALLEY OF THE DOLLS movie, called BEYOND THE VALLEY OF THE DOLLS.
Known for having written and directed such films as STRIPTEASE, THE FRESHMAN
and HONEYMOON IN VEGAS, this is the first time that director Andrew Bergman
directs a picture based on someone else's screenplay. Interestingly enough,
Bergman received his first writing credit along with four other men,
including Richard Pryor and Mel Brooks, for the 1974 hit comedy BLAZING
SADDLES. Bergman also has a Ph.D. in American History from the University of
Wisconsin.
Interesting casting note in the scene featuring Steve Lawrence and Eydie
Gorme singing at Jackie's "Valley of the Dolls" best-seller party: the part
of Steve Lawrence is played by their actual son, singer/songwriter David
Lawrence, and Debbie Gravitte, who has appeared as Eydie Gorme in the past.
All exterior shots in this film were completed in Manhattan, despite the
rest of the production being shot in Montreal, Canada, due to economics.
Screenwriter Paul Rudnick, best known for his screenplay of IN & OUT, is
rumored to be the writer of a monthly satirical film review column in
"Premiere" magazine, under the name Libby Gelman-Waxner.

Author
Christopher Null
     I'll start by saying up front that I really don't admire Bette
Midler.  I find her loud, hammy, a bit trashy, and generally obnoxious
in every way.  Oddly, this instantly qualifies her to play novelist
Jacqueline Susann, who was loud, hammy, a bit trashy, and generally
obnoxious in every way.
     If the name Susann doesn't ring a bell, it's because you're too
young.  "Jackie" was a washed-up actress and radio star when she penned
her first novel, The Valley of the Dolls, which went on to become, at
its time, the biggest selling novel ever.  Why?  In the late 60's the
tale of drugs and lurid sex against the backdrop of Hollywood was
shocking.  Now, it's quite tepid, and so is this film, exploring
Susann's rise to fame.
     And fame is what our Jackie was after.  She was what you might even
call a fame whore.  She prays to a tree for fame.  After getting cancer,
she bargains with God for ten more years of life so she can have more
fame.  Kids, this is not a role model.
     With the movie's tagline "Talent isn't everything," our heroes hope
to inspire the wretches of the earth to greatness, by showing that even
a loud, hammy, trashy, and generally obnoxious in every way person can
become a star with a little luck and grunt work.  But Susann/Midler is
so gratingly awful, not only when it comes to talent, but also as a
person, it's impossible to relate to the character.
     Oh, and this is a comedy.  You might think a comedy would really
blow if the lead is dying of cancer.  Oh, and how it blows.  I smiled
maybe once during this film, and what with jokes like "Table for three:
two adults and one Gentile," how can you blame me?  Everything from the
opening credits to Burt Bacharach's tinny score is just plain bad.  That
said, I was stunned to hear the laughter of our baby boomer-heavy
audience throughout this film.
     Maybe it worked for them, but boy did it fail for me.  Frankly I
would have preferred to go BEYOND The Valley of the Dolls.
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Is there anything worse than a comedy with no laughs?  You bet there is
– a comedy with no laughs and a screeching, self-absorbed lead character
that has an autistic kid and dies of cancer.  Actually, that description
makes it sound kind of interesting.  It's not.  It's Isn't She Great –
the horrible story of actress-turned-best-selling-novelist Jacqueline
Susann.
Susann (played here by Bette Midler, That Old Feeling), a
self-proclaimed `star of stage and screen' found her career sagging as
low as Midler's bust in the mid ‘60s.  The film shows her tossed off of
a game show called `What's My Job?' for ridiculing a dimwitted
co-panelist.  The business has already chewed her up and spit her out,
and the past-her-prime starlet gets by on residual checks.  Her
publicist Irving Mansfield (Nathan Lane, Mouse Hunt) proposes to her,
marries her and, through one of the stranger screen scenes I can
remember, sees a woman enjoying a book in Central Park, which gives him
the idea to prod Susann into writing a novel about the `real'
Hollywood.  The dirtier, the better.
The book, of course, is `The Valley of the Dolls,' which went on to
become the best-selling novel of its time.  Susann went on to write two
other stories, `The Love Machine' and `Once is Not Enough' (the latter
should have been the title of the last Bond film), but the film doesn't
mention either.  Instead, it concentrates on Susann and Mansfield trying
to find a publisher and an audience for her tawdry wares.  They
practically invented the idea of a promotional book tour, hocking the
novel from the trunk of their car as they barnstormed every local
bookstore from Pismal Beach to Walla Walla, Washington.
But Susann is more than a groundbreaking sales entrepreneur.  Her
character is perhaps one of the most annoying of all-time and I can't
recall a less sympathetic lead in the annals of Tinseltown.  She makes
Tom Ripley seem like goddamn Rocky Balboa, and if Susann were a figure
skater, she would have hired someone to whack Nancy Kerrigan in the
knee.  She was a fame addict and actually had the audacity to demand
that God make her more popular.  Truman Capote (portrayed eerily well by
Sam Street) claimed that Susann looked like `a truck driver in drag.'
He later issued an apology…to truck drivers.  Midler is perfect casting,
and so is the limp-wristed Lane.  Even Great's press kit calls their
relationship `unconventional.'
There's some tragedy, too.  Susann and Mansfield have the autistic kid
(this is what happens when a queen and a horse-faced diva try to
populate the earth).  And she gets breast cancer, just as God relented
to her constant yammering about her need for `mass love.'  While the
inclusion of these misfortunes attempt to soften Susann's brash
character, they just don't.  The script could have used some punch-ups,
like the rumors that Susann was a bisexual (and bedded, among others,
Ethel Merman, Coco Chanel and, I think, Mr. Ed).  Incredibly, Susann was
also invited to the party at Roman Polanski's house the night that Chuck
Manson's kids wiped out Sharon Tate, et al. (Tate appeared in the
theatrical version of Dolls, but Susann missed it because of her chemo
treatments.)  Either of these developments would have made the film a
little more interesting.  And it's not like there wasn't enough time,
with Great clocking in under an hour-and-a-half.
Great was directed by Andrew Bergman (Striptease) and the sorry script
was based on Michael Korda's New Yorker magazine article `Wasn't She
Great' (Korda was a Simon and Schuster editor on Susann's second novel)
and adapted by In & Out's Paul Rudnick (a.k.a. Libby Gelman-Waxner).
Midler is awful, Lane seems content to hide behind her wide hips, and
David Hyde Pierce (Frasier) offers further proof that he and Neil
Patrick Harris are actually the same person.
While Susann was probably a bit ahead of her time, Great is a bad comedy
that refuses to end.  The best part was watching the book binded in the
factory.  The second-best part?  When it was over.  The creators of the
film insist that Great is only `loosely based' on Susann's life, which
is comforting.  I feel safer thinking that a person this horrible didn't
exist in the world.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If you read the vibrantly masculine stories of Ernest
Hemingway, you're not surprised to find out that the author is
as macho as his novels.  Does it logically follow that the
writer of trashy, soap-opera accounts of Hollywoods stars,
 heir drug habits, their promiscuity and their suicidal
tendencies would herself be a woman who is not only vulgar
but who celebrates her style of life?  It does if you go along
with Paul Rudnick's concept of Jacqueline Susann, who
wanted fame more than anything else in life and whose
"Valley of the Dolls" put her squarely on the map.  Rudnick's
Susann, while somewhat fictionalized for dramatic effect on
the screen, is a woman of unbounded ambition, forceful
charm and limitless determination to make a name for herself
by following the standard advice to authors--write what you
know.  And what she knew best was the sort of chatter that
captivated women in the ladies' rooms of public places
throughout the nation but which had not been written about in
quite the gloriously trashy way that Susann made popular.
   The movie, directed by Andrew Bergman ("Honeymoon in
Vegas," "The Freshman") from an article written in The New
Yorker magazine by Michael Korda shows Jackie to be
anything but a cloistered librarian with a vivid imagination. 
The outrageous Bette Midler performs the role with a hair
style that might have done well in the L.A. competition
featured in Kevin Allen's "The Big Tease" (which opened
during the same weekend), decked out with delightfully
uncouth clothing, and best of all with a non-stop array of one-
liners.  With Nathan Lane as her publicist, agent, and
husband, Irving Mansfield, you'd expect the gags to flow, and
they do.  Then again, you can get that on any solid TV
sitcom week after week as the enduring "Cheers" pointed out
so well. What's missing is a sense of proportion.  Susann's
vulgarity is amicably on display.  But Paul Rudnick, one of the
funniest writers of the decade--whose "Jeffrey" tells the
poignant and hilarious tale of a gay male in New York who
swears off sex but winds up in a series of affairs with unlikely
people--seems intent on making her a saint.  
   Susann, dedicated to her autistic son whom she has
reluctantly placed in an expensive home, and given to talking
to God while facing the sun between the branches of Central
Park trees, is not really satirized in this movie.  As a substitute,
director Bergman throws the story across the screen in the
garish colors of the films of the fifties decade, colors which
you'd expect from a John Waters movie but which simply
reinforce the idea that crackling jokes aside, "Isn't She Great"
is mostly a lavish, full-screen sitcom.
   Not that this is bad--just that we should expect more of
Rudnick.  The laughs do come frequently, as when Jackie
meets Irving at a downscale restaurant, goes with him to a
more extravagant eatery, and finds out that Mansfield
impresses her by comments like "Do you know Perry Como? 
I handle his brother."  The best line comes from Jackie's
friend Florence, played by the versatile and always reliable
Stockard Channing, who comforts the author with "talent isn't
everything."  David Hyde Pierce ("Frasier") as Susann's
editor, is an ideal foil for the author, described by her
accurately as a tightass--a WASP who orders an American
cheese sandwich with mayo in a Jewish deli.
    We do get some clues about marketing. Susann's "Valley
of the Dolls" did not get to the top simply because it hit an
automatic high note with the public.  To get the novel
stationed in the best locations of bookstores throughout the
country, Susann, her husband and her adorable black poodle
do a cross-nation tour (like John Steinbeck with a similar dog
in "Travels With Charlie)," shmooze with the owners of even
the smallest emporium after having learned their names in
advance, and make sure that the flamboyantly decorated
tome is placed on eye level in the optimum spots.  
   Since Susann died of breast cancer in 1974, Bergman
milks the hospital scene with both poignancy and good
humor, showing an author who is a shadow of her former self
but who has never lost her sense of consummate vulgarity or
taken on the snobbish attributes of people who rise from
nothingness to the heights of celebrity.  What Bergman has
given us is an entertaining biopic of people who seem always
to be aware that the studio cameras are on them and who
are playing to the crowd more than interacting with one
another.
Rated R.  Running Time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
