Title
Review for In the Mouth of Madness (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Jon A. Webb
John Carpenter's "In the Mouth of Madness"
Directed by John Carpenter
Written by Michael De Luca
With Sam Neill, Julie Carmen, Jurgen Porchnow, Charlton Heston
     IN THE MOUTH OF MADNESS is one of those story-within-a-story
movies, like THE LAST ACTION HERO and the last Freddie film.  Given the
only occasional success of these films, one wonders why they keep
getting made; perhaps writers like the fun of writing, effectively,
about themselves.
     The problem with this kind of movie is that it is very hard to
motivate belief in the characters, because they are portrayed as being
nothing more than a fiction.  In the absence of belief there is no
reason to care about what happens to them and hence no reason to care
about the film.  The result, in spite of whatever technical skill the
director shows for horror films, is that the film falls flat.
     Another problem with the film is John Carpenter's failure to make
any of his characters outside the central one three-dimensional.  Sam
Neill is the complete character here, and he is right up until the end,
when he finally succumbs to the arbitrary manipulations of the script.
     Julie Carmen is okay through about half the film, when she starts
acting odd.  I suppose this is supposed to be the result of the book
taking her over, or something like that, but it comes across as dull
and strange.  Charlton Heston and Jurgen Porchnow have small,
inconsequential parts.
     I did like quite a bit of the film, though.  John Carpenter is a
real expert at making you jump; he excels at the technical aspects of
horror film direction.  And there's some oddness early on, when the Sam
Neill character comes on to the Julie Carmen character and she turns
him down.  It's just a little creepy and unmotivated and you get the
feeling something odd is going on, but you don't know what.  I don't
think that Carpenter intended the scene to play this way but it is
effective in advancing the theme of the film nevertheless.
     The main technical problem underlying all of this is that making a
film where you would actually care about the characters and plot would
require too much background.  You would have to be familiar with
"Sutter Cain"'s novels, know about the plots the characters in the film
think they're caught in, etc.  This is far too much background for a
feature-length film.
     I have, however, a solution.  It would be for the filmmakers to
drop the shallow and perhaps legally actionable (assuming King wasn't
involved in this movie; somebody King did the production, so maybe I'm
wrong) pretense that they're talking about someone other than Stephen
King when they refer to the best-selling author of all these horror
books and successful movies.  Instead, they should've made a film where
Stephen King really is the author and the town Sam Neill and Julie
Carmen end up in is Castle Rock (not "Hobbe's End", which is a
reference to "Crouch End," a Stephen King short story); let the dog the
children are chasing be Cujo, and the children themselves those of the
corn.  Then those of us who follow Stephen King's prolific career would
have familiar characters to care about and the fun of finding
references to his novels and other films; the rest of the audience
would at least have a few points of reference.  It could have been a
great, fun film instead of this technically good but in the end
disappointing piece.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Some time ago the author of this review met certain
individual rumoured to be of questionable mental sanity. The
man in question seemed normal from the outside, but the
source of rumour claimed that he couldn't because he had
spent all of his free time reading books by Stephen King.
Few years later I remembered this anecdote when I watched IN
THE MOUTH OF MADNESS, 1995 horror directed by John
Carpenter.
Protagonist of this film, tough and cynical insurance
investigator John Trent (played by Sam Neill) is hired to
find Sutter Cane (played by Juergen Prochnow), mysterious
author of wildly popular horror novels that are prone to
cause interesting mental side-effects among some of their
readers. The novelist has recently vanished together with
the manuscript of his latest novel, and the publishers want
him found before enraged fans realise that the said item
won't arrive to bookstores. Accompanied by Cane's editor
Linda Styles (played by Julie Carmen) they begin the search
for the missing author and end in the sleepy little town of
Hobb's End. The real problem is in the fact that the said
town doesn't exist anywhere else than in Cane's imagination,
which apparently began to literally, invade real world.
There are many great novels by Stephen King that turned into
major disappointments on the big screen. It seems that even
the film that tries to approach Stephen King through the
parody of his work can't escape such curse. Instead of
comedy we are presented by utterly serious by-the-numbers
horror in which the series of shocking and brutal scenes
increases viewer's unpleasantness as rapidly as the
protagonist loses his ability to differentiate between real
and fictional world. In the second half of film scriptwriter
Michael de Luca makes another mistake by introducing motives
inspired by the works of H.P. Lovecraft, another great
writer of horror genre. In some cases, this combination of
horror parody and horror homage could have worked, but John
Carpenter, once considered to be the greatest film director
of the genre, sticks by his trademark 90-minute format. As a
result, the plot develops too rapidly, the characters are
undeveloped (or not particularly interesting, like in the
case of the one played by Julie Carmen) and the ending is
rather predictable. Although there are few interesting bits
and pieces (like Orthodox church being chosen as the symbol
of utter evil - the detail which would definitely bring
attention of the audience in Southeast Europe), the general
of impression left by IN THE MOUTH OF MADNESS is
disappointment, unworthy of Carpenter, King or Lovecraft.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is ironic that while the Western seems to be in decline and
horror films just seem to pour onto video store shelves there are more
quality Westerns being made than quality horror films.  The horror
genre is a classic case of bad films driving out the good.  The horror
genre of late has been dominated by gore, splatter, plastic prosthetic
makeup effects, teenage protagonists, predictable jump scenes, and a
tired succession of sequels and remakes.  Imagination and creativity
are becoming increasingly scarce in most horror films.  Now that
impressive visual effects are easy, filmmakers are using them in lieu
of atmosphere, style, and imagination.  One filmmaker who still does
use some style and ideas in his horror is John Carpenter.  While he
falls short of the stature even of David Cronenberg in the same genre,
Carpenter does occasionally turn out a very original piece of horror
like PRINCE OF DARKNESS or THEY LIVE.  IN THE MOUTH OF MADNESS is not
up to those two films, but it is one of his better horror exercises.
     A bit too much of the premise is obvious from the trailer, but the
story concerns an insurance investigator, John Trent (played by Sam
Neill), who has been driven mad by his recent experiences.  Neill gives
a bizarre and quirky impression of madness.  Trent's experiences
involved looking for a missing horror writer, Sutter Cane (Jurgen
Prochnow).  As a publishing executive tells Trent, "You can forget
about Stephen King, Sutter Cane by far outsells him."  (If, in fact, it
is true in the world of the film, one wonders why Trent would have to
be told how popular Cane is.)  The trail to find the horror writer
leads to a small and strange New Hampshire town, Hobbs End--the story
is an expansion of an idea by H. P. Lovecraft but, like PRINCE OF
DARKNESS, contains more than one tip of the hat to Nigel Kneale and his
QUATERMASS AND THE PIT.
     Carpenter recognizes that the most disturbing images do not
require special makeup and visual effects.  Instead his most haunting
scenes involve juxtapositions distorted just slightly out of our
reality.  There is more wrong with Hobbs End than that it seems like it
could be the setting for a horror novel, but what is wrong in the town
is artificial and a letdown after we see how the citizenry of Hobbs End
react to the secret.
     Neill's performance as a madman in the early parts of the film is
a real departure for him, but he gives no signs of a severe strain in
the events leading up to his madness.  Charleton Heston, David Warner,
John Glover, and Bernie Casey have minor roles and are under-utilized,
though Glover is certainly of some interest as a doctor with a tenuous
grip on reality.
     At heart this story is an old idea--the small town that appears
innocent and hides a deeply sinister core, but Carpenter has hung
enough interesting gimmicks on the tale that his fans probably won't
mind.  I give this film a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
     The commercials for IN THE MOUTH OF MADNESS remind us that John
Carpenter is the man behind arguably the best modern horror film,
HALLOWEEN.  However, despite what the marketeers might wish us to
believe, the pictures have little in common except for a few
well-orchestrated scares.  HALLOWEEN was creepy, atmospheric, cunningly
scripted, and frightening.  IN THE MOUTH OF MADNESS is confusing,
weird, and not very involving.
     It's easy to sit back and impassively be impressed by some of what
IN THE MOUTH OF MADNESS attempts to do.  Without gratuitous sex or
gore, the film works to create an intelligent horror experience that
mixes nightmares, reality, and fantasy.  This is a tactic employed by
the far better WES CRAVEN'S LAST NIGHTMARE, and here it feels a bit
like a retread.  Also, in pursuit of all his nifty ideas and
mind-bending twists, writer Michael De Luca forgot to fashion
believable characters.  Despite a magnificently-entertaining
performance by Sam Neill, his John Trent never really connects on any
level with the audience.
     In trying to be inventive and unique, the story occasionally
manages instead to annoy and confuse.  There's too much of the
dream-within-a-dream-within-a-dream and other similar stuff going on.
A little of this might have created a nice sense of ambiguity, but
Carpenter overdoes it.  As a result, his story gets buried too deeply
beneath the overriding question of whether Trent is real and insane or
a fictional character who's the only one aware of what's going on.
     The uncertainty about Trent's identity arises because of a case
he's on.  As a hardboiled insurance investigator, he's used to dealing
with cons, but the case of the missing Sutter Cane (Jurgen Prochnow) is
like nothing he's previously done.  Cane is a tremendously-popular,
bestselling horror author whose books not only sell out as quickly as
they arrive in stores, but have been known to provoke extreme reactions
in some readers.  Take Cane's agent, for example, who goes after Trent
with an axe because of a passage in the latest book, IN THE MOUTH OF
MADNESS.
     Anyway, Cane has disappeared and, accompanied by his editor, Linda
Styles (played without flair by Julie Carmen), Trent is charged with
the task of locating the missing author.  The trail, which grows
increasingly bizarre, takes the pair to the deserted town of Hobb's
End, New Hampshire.  At this point, we're reminded of sleepy Castle
Rock in NEEDFUL THINGS.  A little later, when we get a look at Cane's
back, THE PUPPET MASTERS springs to mind.
     Admittedly, an intellectual horror story is infinitely preferable
to a gory slasher flick, but IN THE MOUTH OF MADNESS falls a step short
of being a worthy entry.  The final, missing ingredient--whether it's a
hero we can really root for, a more engaging script, or a better
actress as Linda--leaves Carpenter's latest firmly grounded in
mediocrity.  And, looking back to HALLOWEEN, we know he's capable of
rising far above that.  Maybe his next film, a remake of VILLAGE OF THE
DAMNED, will remind us of the kind of great horror the director can
give us.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Eric Grossman
     An intelligent horror film is one of the most rare treasures a
movie-goer can find.  A genre with enormous potential to engage our
minds as well as manipulate our emotions is most often just an excuse
to thrill teenage boys with sliced organs and buckets of fake blood.
Fortunately, John Carpenter, the director of HALLOWEEN, ESCAPE FROM
NEW YORK, and THE THING, has once again given the horror film a much
needed creative infusion with his new film, IN THE MOUTH OF MADNESS.
     John Trent (Sam Neill) is a cynical private investigator who is
hired by book publisher Jackson Harglow (Charlton Heston) to find
Sutter Cane (Jurgen Prochnow), an hugely successful novelist whose work
is known to have a disturbing, psychological effect on some of its
readers.  Cane had disappeared only days before his latest novel was to
be finished and his frenzied fans have already begun rioting in the
streets.  Skeptical that he is being used as part of a publicity stunt,
Trent nevertheless decides to take the case.  After a few sleepless
nights reading Cane's previous fiction, he deduces that author has
hidden himself away in Hobbs' End, a village that is not on any New
England map.  Trent and Cane's editor, Linda Styles (Julie Carmen)
travel to the town where the true "horror beyond description" begins.
     Owing a great deal to the works of H. P. Lovecraft, an early
Twentieth Century author who, next to Edgar Allan Poe, is considered to
be the horror genre's most influential writer, MADNESS is about
indescribable terror.  Creating suspense and tension on a cerebral
level, Carpenter and screenwriter Michael De Luca have succeeded in
alluding to the horror more often than showing it, and when the
"things" in the dark are revealed, it is in such a way that enacts
genuine fright, not simple revulsion or laughter.
     Neill is perfectly cast in his difficult role as Trent.  He
employs the right amount of humor and sarcasm to create a likable
character who we care about as he leads us on a macabre journey where
the reality we take for granted is ever changing.  Julie Carmen gives a
sharp performance as Styles, Cane's tough editor who discovers that she
knows a little too much about the village of Hobbs' End.
     In addition to Heston and Prochnow, the supporting cast includes
fine performances from David Warner and John Glover.  Powerful imagery,
sharp editing and better than average special effects create moments
that are real nail-biters.
     This is the best horror film I've seen in years.  It's great to
see John Carpenter back in true form.  Movies like this should be seen
on a big screen with a good crowd.  If you like mystery and a good
scare, don't miss this one, or who knows how many years you'll have to
wait for the next one.

Author
Andreas Kutschera
Recommendation: Worth paying extra money at a good theatre (7/10)
Production country/year USA 1994, New Line Cinema
Running Length: 95 mins.
     John Carpenter is back.  And my, was I scared.  After a long
absence from the screen, John Carpenter does again what he does best
and that is horror movies.
     The story starts very simple: John Trent is a private eye who is
mainly working for insurance companies until he is hired by a
publishing house.  His job is to find Sutter Cane, their premier horror
writer.  Cane is even more successful than Stephen King, his newest book
is late, fans are going nuts because advance orders cannot be
fulfilled.
     From that premise starts a journey into a nightmare.  Yeah, I
know, that's what they tell you about every horror movie.  In this one,
reality is soon mixed with fantasy as Trent and Styles (Cane's editor
at Arcane Books) try to find Cane somewhere in New England (and no,
they don't even go near Bangor, Maine).  People appear out of nowhere
and vanish again, things seem to be changing constantly, there are even
the obligatory "go back, before it's too late" warnings.  Of course,
there is also the unthinkable horror from Beyond.  It soon gets to a
point when no one knows anymore whether this is reality or not.
     And that is the scary part IMHO.  You have no control over what is
happening because you don't know if you dream or are awake.  Something
is happening to you and around you and even though everybody else seems
to be able to do something, you can't do anything to shape your reality
or your fate.
     "Them special effects is fantastic," but what else would you
expect from ILM? The story is rather consistent (if you accept the
basic horror premises :-) and the acting is very good, except for Julie
Carmen.  She only seems to have one face (except for two or three
scenes) and her voice shows absolutely no emotion.  That was one rare
instance when I wished I had watched the dubbed version.  Sam Neill
continues to impress me.  This is the third totally different role I
remember after THE PIANO and JURASSIC PARK and he still comes out
strong.  He's definitely not one-dimensional.
     I watched this movie in a THX theatre (the movie has DTS, so I
probably got a good estimate) and wholly recommed it for a big screen
with DTS.  It is definitely worth the Ecu 6-8 (1 Ecu ~ 1 $) they're
going to charge you.
I give this movie an 7 on the Movie Ratings Ballot.
- Andreas Kutschera (speed@shogun.ncp.sietec.de)
Oh, and one tiny little personal spoiler:
Charlton Heston does not die at the end of the movie.
