Title
Review for Serendipity (2001)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A guy and girl meet in a New York City department store when reaching for the
same pair of gloves. They talk, have coffee and it isn't long before the guy is
asking for the girl's number. Unfortunately, for the dude, a gust of wind blows
the piece of paper out of his hand. The girl determines that it was fate which
led to that predicament, and sets up two other possible chance meetings with the
guy, in the hopes of fate intervening once again and this time, proving that
they should be together. Phew. Anyway, it's about love and destiny...
CRITIQUE:
An okay romance with a decent premise and some respectable acting, that gets a
little redundant during its middle stretch, but ultimately comes through as a
cute date movie for adults. Not really humorous, although the great Jeremy Piven
is very funny as the best friend yet again and Eugene Levy shines is his small
role. Not totally dramatic, since we're all pretty sure how things are gonna end
up here. And not all that energetic, as things start falling into a definite
routine, with one twist of fate leading to another coincidence leading to even
more clues to the inevitable. But on the whole, it's easy to watch (barely runs
for an hour and a half), has some nice shots of the gorgeous New York City
during the fall and winter seasons, and gives us John Cusack, who is always
pretty entertaining as a rule. I don't think that this movie is going to become
a romantic classic by any means, but it certainly does take the premise of "fate
determining our futures" and pushes it to the max. For me, it was a little
personal because I actually went through something very similar with a girl back
in 1996. I was Holland, she was in the States, but everywhere I traveled around
Europe, signs pointed her way and we just couldn't wait to meet one another when
I got back home. The resolution of our adventure wasn't as perfect as the one in
this flick, but the idea of signs and fate always being present in our lives,
and our ability to "pick up" on them determining some of the direction of our
existence, is one to which I personally adhere.
Granted, this movie really exaggerates the "coincidences" and definitely
overplays this card, especially during the final scene, in which you just can't
help but say "Oh, c'mon...that just can't be!" but it's not the end of the
world. They're not trying to solve all of the world's problems here and if you
can appreciate the basic sentiment behind this movie, I think you'll be smiling
in the end, and I believe that's pretty much all that they were shooting for
here. The soundtrack is also joyful, the sights picturesque and even though
Beckinsale isn't the shiniest star in the sky, she and Cusack do connect in
their scenes together, and you can't help but sigh lovingly when the end of the
film rolls around. Unless of course, you're not in a "sappy" mood and you
consider the whole film to be utter drivel, which I could understand, since I'm
generally not a fan of the "typical" Hollywood romantic comedy scene either (see
list below). In the end, this fluffy piece is entirely predictable, with small
touches of humor and romance, but might also be what certain couples are looking
for nowadays. 
Where's JoBlo coming from?
America's Sweethearts (3/10) - High Fidelity (7/10) - Message in a Bottle (6/10)
- My Best Friend's Wedding (7/10) - Runaway Bride (5/10) - Sliding Doors (7/10)
- Someone Like You (4/10) - Wedding Planner (3/10) - When Harry Met Sally
(10/10) - What Women Want (4/10) - You've Got Mail (4/10)

Author
Karina Montgomery
What a delicious conceit that all the stars and fates and powers that be
have a hand in our destinies, so that we can stumble across the person with
whom we are meant to be through fortune alone.  It's definitely escapist to
be selfish, and what better way to be selfish than in the fictionalized
pursuit of true love?  This is definitely one of those movies where the
ending is in no doubt; the joy is in the journey. And thankfully, the
preview actually leaves us with some surprises! 
The characters in this movie wisely suggest on more than one occasion that
leaving everything to fate isn't living at all, and they are correct.  It's
entertaining as well to watch people who generally are intelligent and
well-read and the type to scoff at horoscopy new agey kinds of intuitive
pseudo-science to also be utterly captivated by the magic of their
connection.  It is, after all, magic that appears in a non-magical world
that is the most wondrous.  Seriously, how many times can magic happen in a
fairy-world before it becomes mundane?  It's the same kind of acceptable
magic that made Sleepless in Seattle such a winsome film.  Amusingly, all
their rational, scientific machinations to force fate into finding each
other again are nothing compared to the witless, accidental
almost-path-crossings throughout this film.  It's a delight to watch two
charming people, charmed by each other, twisting in the fickle wind of
destiny.
It also doesn't hurt that Kate Beckinsale is a dreamy perfect girl, and
it's no secret that every woman at some point has objectified John Cusack
as the perfect man.  How could they not be perfect for each other?  Instead
of holding up the jam box outside Kate's window, however, John has to
really get down to some stalker nitty gritty...meanwhile, the ladies are
all charmed that he would go to so much effort.  That's what's romantic,
that passion despite all reason.
Plotwise, their interest/love/connection has to be immediate and
distracting, and perhaps it's a little unfair to so easily discard their
existing mates.  Kate's mate is pretty annoying, but Cusack's is not.  My
companion wished she had been more villainized, but I disagree.  Sometimes
someone can be perfectly wonderful but still not The One perfect one.  If
she's a villain, then he's an idiot for being duped by her.  If she's a
sweetie, then only his predestined soulmate can trump her.
In the meantime, it's also beautifully shot with lovely music and pretty
little running visuals.  We sit in the dark, watching the screen for clues
(like watching The Sixth Sense for the 2nd time) and wriggling in delicious
agony every time they have a near miss...very nice teases.  The supporting
cast includes the under-appreciated Jeremy Piven and Eugene Levy,
supporting and/or not condoning this mad quest, as well as Molly Shannon in
a surprisingly Joan Cusack-esque best friend role.  (That's a compliment).
I would only recommend it as a date movie for people who are totally
convinced that they belong together, their meeting was pre-ordained, all
that good stuff.  Otherwise you are just planting the seeds of doubt and
worry where Hollywood certainly did not intend for them to go.  But it's
worth the money.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
These reviews (c) 2001 Karina Montgomery.  Please feel free to forward
but just credit the reviewer in the text.  Thanks.
cinerina@flash.net
Check out previous reviews at:
http://www.cinerina.com
http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com - the Online Film Critics Society
http://www.hsbr.net/reviews/karina/ - Hollywood Stock Exchange Brokerage
Resource
http://www.mediamotions.com
http://www.capitol-city.com

Author
Homer Yen
Did you ever make eye contact with a total stranger 
and feel that a mysterious connection had been 
established?  Do you think that fate has a funny way 
of bringing people together (or keeping them apart)? 
Do you believe in magic?  If you've answered "yes" to 
all of these questions, then you'll be happy to 
discover "Serendipity" at your local cineplex.  It's a 
delightful romantic comedy about two lovable people 
destined to be with each other. 
When Jonathan (Jon Cusack) and Sara (Kate Beckinsdale) 
first met, they had felt that mysterious connection. 
They first bumped into each in the days before 
Christmas.  With the holiday cheer wafting through the 
air, a lively Louis Armstrong soundtrack in the 
background, and their instant chemistry, audience 
members immediately want them to get under the 
mistletoe.  She writes down her name and number on a 
scrap of paper.  But as she hands it to him, a sudden 
wind carries it away.  Jonathan says to ignore that 
occurrence, but Sara says that it's a sign.  
Indeed, fate has a funny way of keeping people apart. 
To her, this means something.  Still, she's willing to 
give it one more chance, and writes her number inside 
the cover of a book.  Tomorrow she'll sell it, and 
maybe one day he'll find it somewhere at a local 
bookstore.  Meanwhile, she asks him to write his 
number on the back of a $5 bill.  She spends it but 
says that if things are meant to be, the bill will 
wind up in her hands again.  "How can you leave it all 
to chance," Jonathan asks incredulously?  "Have faith 
in destiny," she replies.  Sadly, the two separate and 
the chances of them ever finding each other are as 
likely as winning the Powerball. 
Years later, we see Jonathan engaged.  But he still 
looks through used bookstores every now and then. 
Meanwhile Sara is also engaged.  Yet she occasionally 
flips through her wallet for $5 bills.  Even apart, 
these two exude undeniable romantic tension.  And, 
when both of them realize that they need to find each 
other, the audience (those who believe in romance and 
magic) is ready to follow them to the ends of the 
earth. 
Fate begins to play funny tricks on these two as they 
begin an Agatha Christie-like pursuit for one another, 
tracking down years-old leads and falling back on gut 
feelings. They experience a series of cosmic 
coincidences, parallels, and agonizing near-misses. 
Maybe they are destined to be with each othermaybe 
not. 
While this so-close-yet-so-far setup will strike a 
chord with the romantic-at-heart, most would still 
appreciate the film's other element about best 
friends.  When times are confusing, best friends help 
to provide light.  Sara's friend, down-to-earth Eve 
(Molly Shannon), tries to convince her that she's on a 
wild goose chase to find a stranger that she only met 
briefly.  Jonathan's friend, 
I'll-do-anything-in-the-name-of-love Dean (Jeremy 
Priven), encourages his friend because this element is 
missing from his relationship.  We can all relate to 
Eve and Dean; we all need more friends like them.  And 
we can enjoy this pleasant film because it makes us 
believe that there is someone out there for all of us. 
 Ain't the universe grand? 
__________________________________________________ 
Do You Yahoo!? 
Make a great connection at Yahoo! Personals. 
http://personals.yahoo.com

Author
Bob Bloom
SERENDIPITY (2001). 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring John Cusack, Kate Beckinsale,
Jeremy Piven, Molly Shannon, John Corbett, Bridget Moynahan and Eugene Levy.
Written by Marc Klein. Directed by Peter Chelsom. Rated PG-13. Approx. 85 mins.
 Serendipity. What an apt title for a contemporary romantic comedy set in a
magical, fairy tale New York. 
 Yet through circumstances far beyond its control, this movie may stand as a
poignant reminder of what New York once was  and may someday be again. 
 It is difficult to watch this sweet outing without thinking about the horrors
that hit the Big Apple. Luckily, no scenes take place at the World Trade Center,
and it is only glimpsed for a second in an opening shot panorama of the city. 
 Yet its loss weighs heavily on this movie. 
 Because for now the wound is too fresh. It is difficult to think of New York as
a city of romance and love, when daily television reminds us of the death and
destruction that wounded its core. 
 Serendipity has become a slice of nostalgia before it even hits the theaters.
 The movie is one of those cute-meet, boy-girl stories that can only happen on
the big screen.  John (John Cusack) and Sara (Kate Beckinsale) meet over the
glove counter at Bloomingdales when both try to purchase the same pair of gloves
for their respective paramours. 
 They soon forget about the gloves and spend a magical evening roaming the city,
from Rockefeller Center to Central Park, luxuriating in each other's company. It
is love at first sight - or is it. Sara is a big believer in fate. She tells
John that if it is their destiny to be together, that they will find each other
again. She writes her name and phone number in a book, which she then sells at a
second-hand bookshop. 
 John, meanwhile, writes his name and number on $5 bill, which Sara spends. Her
logic - which, of course, is only credible in the movies - is that if they are
destined for each other, the $5 will come back to her, and John will eventually
find the book containing her name and number. 
 A few years pass, and it is the weekend of John's wedding. But, something is
nagging at him, so he recruits his best friend, Dean (Jeremy Piven), and they
begin seeking Sara. 
 Sara, who has moved to San Francisco, also is soon to be married. Her betrothed
is a self-absorbed New Age musician, Lars (John Corbett). She, too, decides to
go searching and shanghai's her best friend, Eve (Molly Shannon), and whisks her
off to New York. 
 You can already guess how all this turns out. 
 As usual, Cusack turns in a winning performance as the young romantic who - no
matter how hard he tries - cannot erase that one special night from his mind.
Cusack is one of those actors who - even with such routine material as
Serendipity - can transform the material into more than it is. If Cusack was a
chef, he could change ground beef into filet mignon. 
 Beckinsale is charming and resourceful as Sara. She is a lovely actress, easy
on the eyes. A nice chemistry develops between her and Cusack. 
 One minor objection is the sort of heartless manner in which John and Sara just
dump their prospective life partners at the last minute. It detracts from the
characters, giving them an air of unfeeling selfishness and self-centeredness.
 Neither's intended really seems to deserve such an emotionally painful
departure. Wisely for director Peter Chelsom both breakups occur off-screen. 
 Serendipity is a warm vessel with likable stars and an escapist story. If you
don't think too much about its setting, it is an enjoyable diversion. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Other reviews by Bloom can be found by going to www.jconline.com and clicking on
golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Jonathan F. Richards
Serendipity is a popular ice cream parlor on Manhattan's Upper East Side. 
It's a nice place to get a sweet syrupy confection, and so is the movie to which
it lends its name, although the latter's labored contrivances come close to
pushing it over the edge, or driving us over the edge, whichever comes first. 
What keeps the movie palatable is the irresistibility of its two leads, John
Cusack and Kate Beckinsale, and the siren appeal of New York City at its most
winsomely romantic, a city caught inside a sparkling snow globe.  
Jonathan (Cusack) and Sara (Beckinsale, with her real accent) meet over a
pair of cashmere gloves at Bloomingdale's in the Christmas rush.  It's love at
first sight -- but Sara is more of a believer in second sight, and other
mystical phenomena.  They spend a magical Manhattan evening together, eating ice
cream, making witty small talk, riding the elevator at the Waldorf Astoria, ice
skating in Central Park, and tracing on her freckles the heavenly outline of
Cassiopeia, "who made one tragic mistake, and paid for eternity."  But they both
have romantic entanglements, and she won't give him her name or phone number. 
She does, however, write them in a copy of a novel which she sells to a used
bookstore.  She has him write his on a $5 bill, which she immediately spends. 
If fate brings these items back into their possession, they'll know they were
meant to be together.  (The novel is Love in the Time of Cholera, which is about
as close as the movie comes to acknowledging that there may be a dark underbelly
to this world.)
Time passes.  You know time has passed, because you get clocks spinning
their hands, sundials sweeping their shadows, and then, just in case you didn't
get it, the words "A few years later" superimposed on the screen.  
Jon's about to be married to Halley (Bridget Moynahan).  She's a lovely
girl, bur she isn't Kate Beckinsale.  Sara's moved to the other coast, where
she's about to be married to Lars (John Corbett).  He's a New Age musician,
which is all the information you need about that.  Before taking the final
plunge into sparkless matrimony, they each decide to make one last whirlwind try
at finding that lost perfect love.  
Each is accompanied in this quest by a Faithful Friend.  Jon's is his best
buddy Dean (Jeremy Piven, Cusack's real-life sidekick), an obit writer at the
New York Times (another acknowledgement of life's tragic side.)  Piven is very
funny, especially in his rehearsal dinner toast.  Less successful is SNL's Molly
Shannon as Sara's pal Eve, who owns a San Francisco New Age shop but doesn't
believe that sappy mystical stuff.  Neither, by this time, does Sara, and small
wonder, seeing where that sort of thing has gotten her in the past.  The movie
uses these friendships to make several coy allusions to homosexuality, but
there's neither substance or purpose to them.
There are some wonderful scenes.  One of the best showcases Eugene Levy as
a devious martinet of a Bloomingdale's salesman.  But more and more, as the
story doubles back and forth across its paths of near-miss and extravagant
coincidence, the bubbly charm of the earlier scenes give way to the tortured 
tyrannies of plot, until the characters seem to be racing from place to place at
the demands of the script and the director rather than in response to any inner
voice of their own.  And as the movie whirls to its inevitable conclusion, it
dodges its responsibilities in dealing with the messiness that comes with the
disposing of pleasant characters who have become no longer necessary.  (It also
disposes discreetly of those awkward reminders of unpleasantness on the New York
skyline, the twin towers of the World Trade Center.)  
"Serendipity" is a romantic comedy, and there's no reason why it should
have to deal with anything it doesn't want to, as long as the romance is
romantic and the comedy is comic.  Screwball comedy thrived as a distraction to
the Great Depression, romantic comedy helped us through WWII, and there's
probably enough of what it takes in this slight but sweet indulgence to pry us
away from CNN and take us out of ourselves for an hour and a half of easy
watching.  It's predictable, and it's exasperating, but it's pretty inoffensive.
 "Serendipity" is "An Affair to Remember" without the accident and the
wheelchair, and with a lot more laughs.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
    CAPSULE: Familiar-feeling romantic comedy from director Peter 
    Chelsom.  Two people meet, like each other, and leave to fate 
    if they should meet again.  Years later each decides they 
    should be together and start searching for each other with 
    very standard sorts of results.  Fluffy and a lot like things 
    you have seen before.  Rating: 5 (0 to 10), low +1 (-4 to +4)  
A few years ago there was a light romantic comedy called THE NIGHT 
WE NEVER MET.  The point of that film was that two people whom the 
viewer knows are fated to find each other keep missing each other 
by inches.  SERENDIPITY is a reworking of that idea.  It is a 
story of Fate working overtime to have its two main characters 
meet.  Each time the dramatic tension is greater and each time it 
is another near miss.
In a prolog Jonathan Trager (played by John Cusack) and Sara 
Thomas (the attractive Kate Beckinsale of PEARL HARBOR) meet in 
Bloomingdales when each wants to buy the same pair of gloves.  
There is immediate attraction, but each goes his own way.  Then 
the two come together again.  Is it fate that is bringing them 
together?  Sara suggests they test it.  She writes her name and 
address in a book, Jonathan writes his name on the back of a five-
dollar bill.  Sara sells the book Jonathan spends the bill.  Will 
fate bring them back together?  Flash forward a few years and both 
are making plans to be married but neither is totally happy with 
his intended.  Each remembers the one that got away.  Each decides 
to give fate another chance.
Marc Klein's screenplay gives us a pleasurable and amusing froth 
of a romantic comedy, if a little too predictable and undemanding 
to plot.  It is easy enough to come up with any number of 
situations in which people just barely miss each other.  That 
builds a tension of sorts, but the audience has strong 
expectations how it will all turn out.  The viewer knows fate 
rules the lives of the characters since in this case the hand of 
fate is Marc Klein.
Few of the attempts at style or humor work.  Eugene Levy plays 
officious clerk who is more irritating than funny.  Worse to 
create a romantic effect director Peter Chelsom has not just music 
but songs on the music track.  Notable is a cameo role for Buck 
Henry.  There are also several opportunities to fit in the ever-
popular New York City landmarks.
This is a lighthearted and frivolous romantic comedy that will not 
have a lot of appeal beyond audiences specifically looking that 
sort of film.  In other words, though it is a cliche, this is a 
film for people who like this sort of thing.  I rate it a 5 on the 
0 to 10 scale and a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
SERENDIPITY (2001)
Rated PG-13; running time 85 minutes
Genre: romantic comedy
Seen at: Lowes Star Southfield (Detroit, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.serendipity-themovie.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0240890
Written by: Marc Klein
Directed by: Peter Chelsom
Cast: John Cusack, Kate Beckinsale, Jeremy Piven, Molly Shannon,
John Corbett, Bridget Moynihan, Eugene Levy
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsserendipity.html
Once again, I'm apparently bucking the trend: Rotten Tomatoes lists
SERENDIPITY as "rotten", according to roughly 60% of its registered
reviewers.  Say La Vee; I never was much on trends.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**)
By sheer random chance - or was it fate? - Jonathan (John Cusack) and
Sara (Kate Beckinsale) meet in a New York department store; instantly
attracted to each other, though they are each involved with other
people, Jonathan and Sara coyly try to make a connection.  Sara, being a
big believer in Fate, doesn't give Jonathan much background on who she
is; she offers a test of Fate, and they both fail.  Their connection is
broken, and they go their separate ways.  End of story...or is it?
A few years later, Jonathan is engaged to his girlfriend Halleh (Bridget
Moynihan), and Sara is with her boyfriend Lars (John Corbett).  But
Jonathan and Sara's chance meeting still weighs heavy on both their
minds; Jonathan enlists his best friend Dean (Jeremy Piven) to help him
find Sara - and Sara does the same with her best friend Eve (Molly
Shannon).
But really - what's the chance they'll ever see each other again?
The Upshot:
It's been a long time since I came away from a movie feeling so pleased
across the board.  I was very much taken in by the crisp writing by Marc
Klein, director Peter Chelsom's keen eye for time passages and for New
York (though having recently come back from San Francisco, I found
myself wishing that The City By The Bay had been as lovingly caressed by
Chelsom as was NYC), the soundtrack (which I'll probably buy), and
especially the acting by the four main players.
Which - for the at least half of that acting group - is a huge
compliment, coming from me.  John Cusack gives another solid
performance; his Jonathan could have easily been Lloyd Dobler's big
brother.  Likewise, Jeremy Piven's turn as Jonathan's friend Dean is
indicative of Piven's long history of providing strong character support
in whatever project he's in.  Together, Cusack and Piven took a
situation that could've been easily played for straight yuks, and
endowed it with a humorous but quiet dignity that made me smile.
But it was the fine work by Kate Beckinsale, and especially Molly
Shannon, that brought me up short.  Beckinsale, because as one half of
the dimwitted duo in BROKEDOWN PALACE (shoutout to all my AOHell BP
review "fans"! uh, end sarcasm.), she completely failed to register in
my Good Actress Radar; maybe it was Beckinsale's true Brit voice that
made her Sara work for me here, who knows.  And Shannon, because her
work on SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE and its dreadful long-skit movies, gave me
the hives.  Not so in SERENDIPITY, though; Shannon's understated
portrayal of Sara's friend Eve was so convincingly *normal* that I might
have to take back every nasty thing I've said about her right to breathe
the same air as me.
Eugene Levy's Anal Salesclerk schtick threatened to take this movie to a
place I really didn't want it to go.  And the unsurprising ending was
just that: unsurprising, though I was grateful that Chelsom and Klein
didn't take the totally easy way out by making Halleh and Lars unlikable
cretins that Jonathan and Sara just *had* to dump.  In the end, my
fortunate accidental discovery of SERENDIPITY was that it made a cool
Autumn afternoon a bit more pleasant.  And that's good enough for me.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
What I liked most about SERENDIPITY was its maturity in the face of an
implausible story; these characters were speaking in adult tones, in
spite of the ridiculous nature of this movie's concept.  The best of the
dialogue for them might not be words you or I would use in daily
language, but for me, they were words I *wish* I was clever enough to
use.  In this, SERENDIPITY was Light Romantic Fare at its best.
SERENDIPITY (rating: greenlight):
Okay, so SERENDIPITY is an unabashed chick flick.  Hey, this Chick has
no qualms with admitting to have been charmed outta my socks.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  SERENDIPITY (director: Peter Chelsom; screenwriter: Marc Klein;
cinematographer: John de Borman; editor: Christopher Greenbury; cast: John
Cusack (Jonathan Trager), Kate Beckinsale (Sara Thomas), Jeremy Piven (obit
writer, Dean), Bridget Moynahan (Hally), John Corbett (Lars), Molly Shannon
(Eve), Eugene Levy (Bloomingdale's Salesman); Runtime: 87; Miramax; 2001) 
They don't come gooier than this feel-good fluff piece without being too sugary
for consumption. It's a romantic comedy that spins every formulaic device
possible into overdrive to come up with its cutesy love story, missing only the
presence of Julia Roberts and any sort of genuine passion. It plays as if it was
an ad showing how the 'Beautiful People' spend some quality time doing the NYC
scene by taking in the Waldorf Astoria, Bloomingdales, Central Park's Wollman
Rink, and when looking up toward the skies they can even spot NYC's tallest
skyscaper--the Empire State Building. It was all so superficial and predictable.
The comedy was oooh so heavy-handed and the romance was unbearably contrived. To
get in the mood for this goo, one has to find numerous coincidental situations
believable even if they are not possible, which was asking too much from me. 
If you like a flick that's pretty to look at, has attractive leads, sells its
love story like a $100 hooker sells herself at night in Times Square, is
brainless and anti-septic, and requires no thought, then this film might be in
your diet. 
The lead character, the very beautiful British actress who plays Sara Thomas,
Kate Beckinsale, tells us that "Serendipity" has a nice sound for what it
means-- a fortunate accident. It also stands for the name of a sweets shop in
Manhattan where the two strangers first get to talk to each other while sitting
down over an ice cream sundae. 
The film opens in Bloomingdales during the Christmas season and Jonathan Trager
(Cusack) grabs for the same pair of cashmere gloves as does Sara and then he
looks in her luminous eyes, sees astronomical formed freckles on her arm, and
falls madly in love with her. When he asks for her number a gust of wind blows
the paper out of his hand. Sara sees this as a sign that their fate should now
be in the hands of the gods and sets up two other possible chance meetings with
him in the hopes of fate determining whether they will meet again. After all she
'reasons,' if that's a good word to use in this film review, they are both
currently involved with someone else. He writes his name and number on a $5 bill
which immediately gets passed on to a newspaper kiosk vender and she writes hers
on the inside of a copy of García Márquez's "Love in the Time of Cholera," which
she promises to sell tomorrow to a used bookstore. 
The movie shifts to three years later and they are both set to marry different
mates. They have had no contact, but with their impending weddings approaching
soon they begin to think of each other and yearn to meet again. Jon, a field
producer for ESPN, who wears his yuppie heart on his sleeve and agonizes over
not being with his ideal soulmate. He is set to marry the stiffly beautiful
Halley (Bridget Moynahan), who has nothing to say or do in this film but be
pushed over for another. Meanwhile, Sara, now a San Francisco therapist is to
marry a gimmicky New Age musician Lars (John Corbett), whose idea of romance is
to propose in the living room of their S.F. house before a fireplace and a bunch
of burning candles placed on stands at different heights in a setting that looks
like it's an ad for furnishings placed in a Bloomie's catalogue. Both feel
uneasy with their choices of mates who are easily expendable; so both decide to
look for each other. Can you guess if they will succeed! 
The film gets comedy relief from the supporting cast. The best comedy comes from
Dean (Piven), an obit writer for the N.Y. Times and Jon's best friend. The one
bit he does that saves this film for me, is write an hilarious obit for Jon
based on what the Greeks might have said if they wrote obits for someone who
died for love. Sara's best friend is Eve (Shannon), a New Age waitress, whose
cliché and underdeveloped role is as the good-hearted wisecracking best friend
who only exists for Sara. There's also some forced comedy via acerbic quips from
a stuffy Bloomie's salesman, who helps Jon track down Sara through her credit
card number. He provides some laughs, except he hangs around too long in the
story and begins to become tiresome. 
You can believe as this film does in "fate determining one's future," but it
does an awful job in proving its case. Though, I've seen much worst romantic
comedies. In this one, at least, the leads who didn't inspire me, didn't turn me
completely off. Which is the best I can say about this flick. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Serendipity (2001)
John Cusack, Kate Beckinsale, Jeremy Piven, Molly Shannon, Bridget
Moynahan, John Corbett, Eugene Levy. Cinematography by John de Borman.
Screenplay by Marc Klein. Directed by Peter Chelsom. 91 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Since the September 11 atrocities, entertainment writers have speculated
on what sort of film would be embraced by post attack audiences. I won't
presume to speak for others, but I can tell you that "Serendipity" did
it for me. The frothy romantic comedy showcases the magic of New York
City, from the bustle at Bloomingdales a few days before Christmas to
the charm of skaters outside Rockefeller Center, gliding like music box
dancers through the snowy night sky.
Reflecting on those scenes, a colleague of mine sighed and said, "Do you
think New York will ever be that way again?" Of course it will. In fact,
it will be that way this Christmas. To think otherwise is to
underestimate the amazing resilience of the people who live and work in
NYC.
A few months ago I would have criticized "Serendipity" for being
pedestrian and predictable, but these are frightening, uncertain times
and there is something soothing about watching a movie and knowing
exactly what is going to happen. Maybe that's why small children watch
the same video over and over and over again.
The story begins "a few years ago," when Jonathan Tragar (John Cusack)
and Sara Thomas (Kate Beckinsale) meet while Christmas shopping in New
York (Eugene Levy contributes a brief, entertaining performance as an
anal-retentive salesclerk). Despite the fact that each is involved with
another, the attraction between the two is powerful and they enjoy an
enchanted afternoon and evening together.
Jonathan wants Sara's full name and phone number, but she believes in
fate and he reluctantly agrees with her plan to put destiny to the test.
He writes his name and number on a $5 bill, while she writes hers inside
a copy of Gabriel Garcia Marquez's "Love in the Time of Cholera" (a
novel about a man who waits 50 years to unite with his love). Both the
money and the book will be put back into circulation  if Jonathan and
Sara are meant to be together, fate will guide the novel or the currency
to the proper hand.
Cut to "a few years from now." Sara has moved to San Francisco, while
Jonathan remains in New York. They are both about to be married: Sara to
a musician named Lars (John Corbett) and Jonathan to Halley (Bridget
Moynahan), a New Age shopkeeper who is skeptical of her own merchandise.
As the day of the nuptials draws near, they each remember that fairy
tale evening together and wonder if destiny has forgotten them.
We know the answer, of course (if you don't, then I'd like to welcome
you to the secular world and urge you to keep in contact with your
relatives in Amish country  oh, and please do not read the next few
paragraphs). With this sort of cookie cutter romance, the author has
only two chores: to come up with clever ways for the couple to almost
bump into each other, and to figure out how to separate them from their
fiancées while keeping their characters sympathetic.
Screenwriter Marc Klein engineers a suitable number of near misses,
while keeping each party occupied by his or her best friend. And so Sara
confides with Eve (Molly Shannon) while Jonathan frets with Dean (Jeremy
Piven). Shannon makes a serviceable enough confidante, although she too
often falls back on physical traits of her various "Saturday Night Live"
personas. The pairing of Cusack and Piven works better; the men have
been friends in real life since childhood and their affectionate rapport
shows up onscreen.
As for the fiancés, each is given one mildly annoying behavior to
justify being dumped. Lars is presented as self-absorbed and Halley
comes off as a bit cranky. When the film reaches its inevitable climax,
both breakups occur off camera. Note to the ex-Amish: It's safe to begin
reading again.
In the roles of Jonathan and Sara, John Cusack and Kate Beckinsale
establish a nice chemistry. I would have preferred to see more of the
two of them together interacting and less of the standard-issue plot
mechanics, but that, of course, is not the nature of this beast.
"Serendipity" is designed to be an old-fashioned romance and it never
challenges the constraints of its format.
When I look back at this review in a year or two, I may curse myself for
recommending a piece of cotton candy like "Serendipity." But right now,
as the images of crashing planes, collapsing buildings and thousands of
shattered lives still roll through my head, I relish sitting back in my
seat in a darkened theater and watching unfailingly loyal best friends,
glittering New York streets and the steady hand of destiny making sure
that true love will find a way.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Life goes on as a delightful romantic comedy, SERENDIPITY, comes to our
theaters.  Set in the Big Apple, it proves that terrorists can blow up
buildings, but they can't take away the world's love affair with New York.
Sara Thomas (Kate Beckinsale) is a fate fanatic, and Jonathan Trager (John
Cusack) is just an old fashion romantic.  While Christmas shopping, these two
strangers meet over a pair of gloves in Bloomingdales.  He wants the last pair
of black gloves for his girlfriend, but Sara wants them for her boyfriend. 
Their amicable disagreement turns into an enchanted few hours together. 
Although he wants them to exchange names and phone numbers before they separate,
she insists that they leave it to fate.  His name and number go on a five-dollar
bill, and hers on a book ("Love in the Time of Cholera").  Both items are then
put into circulation.  If it is their destiny to be together, then they will
find the items someday.  Someday.
This message-in-a-bottle story by Marc Klein has certain inevitable events, but
how and when they occur are the movie's sweet surprises.  Director Peter Chelsom
has just the right touch with the material.  His masterful staging of the
predictable ending gives it a graceful subtlety as well as a magical moment. 
(Psst.  If you promise not to tell, I'll reveal the identity of Peter Chelsom's
last film.  It was the disastrous TOWN & COUNTRY.  I know.  It's hard to believe
that it could be the same person.)
Cusack (HIGH FIDELITY) turns in another of his flawless performances, and
Beckinsale redeems herself after starring in PEARL HARBOR.  The two of them have
great chemistry, which is hard to do since they have relatively few scenes
together.  Most of the movie happens a few years after the glove incident, when
they have (almost) given up looking for each other.  Now about to be married --
he to Halley (Bridget Moynahan), and she to Lars (John Corbett) -- they are
(almost) completely happy.
Among the excellent supporting cast, Jeremy Piven, as an obituary writer, plays
Jonathan's best friend, and Molly Shannon, as a non-believing New Age bookstore
owner, plays Sara's best friend.  But the scene stealer is Eugene Levy (BEST IN
SHOW and the AMERICAN PIE series), who plays a hilarious clothing salesman.
Your audience will undoubtedly "ooh" and "aah" a lot as Jonathan and Sara keep
almost connecting.  And as you leave the theater, you'll probably let out one
long "aah," as you float away in bliss.
SERENDIPITY runs just 1:25.  It is rated PG-13 for "a scene of sexuality, and
for brief language" and would be acceptable for kids about 9 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave it ** 1/2.  He thought the film was funny but said
that he liked Cusack a lot better in films like GROSS POINTE BLANK.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 5, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
While a large audience may be expected to stream to
"Serendipity" with the view that this is the kind of movie we need
after the terrorist attack of September 11, I couldn't help thinking
of New Yorker magazine's critic David Denby's piece quoting
Dana Walden, president of 20th century Fox Television in the
October 1 issue, "A lot of people will be looking for blue skies and
escapist dramas and programs as an alternative to the realities
that all of us are dealing with now."  Denby states that this
amounts to a misreading of the moment, noting that even during
the Second World War "bland family entertainment attracted a lot
of movie-goers...but the early forties were also the time of highly
popular noir melodramas, Preston Sturges's boisterous
comedies, and Humphrey Bogart's emergence as a sardonic new
hero."  Nothing about "Serendipity" says "Preston Sturges."
Despite John de Borman's gorgeous views of upscale Manhattan
areas, particularly the upper East Side's Bloomingdale's coupled
with some surreal images of people in motion, Peter Chelsom's
film based on Marc Klein's script is cotton-candy-predictable, a
meet-cute romantic comedy derivative of classics like "The
Graduate" and even (though it's a stretch) "Miracle on 34th
Street."  While its saving grace is the lovely and elegant Kate
Beckinsale--who class-wise is in a different league than John
Cusack--the film's side roles are inhabited by the unappealing
Molly Shannon in the role of the prospective bride's best friend,
Jeremy Priven as the slightly obnoxious brother of the intended
groom, and a bevy of upper-middle class parents and friends of
the leads who seem to have come out of Mme. Tussaud's. 
Chelsom cannot even make good use of comic genius Eugene
Levy, so flat-out hilarious in "American Pie" and its sequel, who
this time plays a Bloomingdale's salesman fond of repeating ad
nauseum that customers must stand behind the line separating
the employees from the customers.
Were Kate Beckinsale in the role of an eccentric British
expatriate Sara just a tad less desirable, we might wonder why
John Cusack (playing the thirty-something Jonathan) would be
willing to play along with her hard-to-get machinations.  When the
two young people meet while competing to buy a pair of black
gloves featured on the rack at Bloomie's, they are attracted like
magnets, but despite a magical evening together at an ice-cream
parlor on E. 60th Street called Serendipity 3 and later blading on
the ice at Rockfeller Center, Sara insists that fate decide their
future.  She writes her name and phone number in a novel,
instructing Jonathan that she will sell the book and, if the
pleasant suitor should happen to find it in a used book store, he
may feel free to call her.  
This is the sort of movie that used to open up about
Christmastime before the year that December was reserved for
major Oscar contenders.  Indeed the sight of falling snow adds to
the romantic allure of the picture and could make the folks who
live in Southern Cal, Florida and Arizona a mite envious of their
East Coast countrymen.  The mood cast by Mr. de Borman's
lensing competes with Ms. Beckinsale herself for loveliness but
as a story, "Serendipity" is too calculating, too bereft of any
genuine accidents to be a fortuitous happening.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 91 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
When Jonathan Trager (John Cusack) and Sara Thomas (Kate Beckinsale, "Pearl
Harbor") both reach for the same pair of gloves in the midst of Bloomingdale's
Christmas shopping madness, sparks fly.  While both were grabbing those 
gloves as a gift for a significant other, John wants to pursue possibilities,
but Sara's a fatalist who believes that if they're meant to be, they'll
be blessed with "Serendipity."
Unfortunately, John Cusack, the romantic comedy lead of a generation, comes
up 0 for 2 in 2001 (as has its director Peter Chelsom following up "Town and
Country").  While "America's Sweethearts" had its moments, few
went his way, and the film, overall, didn't live up to its potential.
Cusack is in his element here as a sincere, thoroughly charming,
hopeless romantic, but "Serendipity" is a labored, joyless film.
Although it's obvious Jon and Sara have made a connection, Sara proceeds to
throw up painfully obvious screenwriting 101 obstacles designed to keep them
apart until the end of the film.  She has Jon write his name and telephone
number on a five dollar bill which is put into circulation to see if she
ever comes across it again.  To be fair, she writes her name (which she 
hasn't given to Jon) and number inside a hardcover copy of "Love in the Time 
of Cholera," telling Jon she'll sell it to one of the hundreds of used book 
stores in New York City.  To give Jon one last chance, she has him board
a different elevator in the lobby of the Waldorf Astoria, spinning the
roulette wheel on them both hitting the same floor's button - of course they
do, but Jon is sidelined by an obnoxious tyke who hits the button of every
floor in between and so he misses Sara by a hair's breadth.
Years later, Jon is engaged to Hally (Bridget Moynahan, "Coyote Ugly") but
still pining for the mysterious Englishwoman, much to his best buddy,
New York Times' obit writer Dean's (Jeremy Piven, "Rush Hour 2")
consternation.
Now in San Francisco, Sara's fiance is New Age Nordic flutist Lars (John
Corbett, HBO's "Sex and the City"), yet she also has misgivings met with
disgust by her best friend Eve (Molly Shannon, "Superstar").  As Lars'
career threatens to overshadow their upcoming nuptials, Sara flees to NYC,
dragging Eve along under false pretenses.
It's generally not a good sign when a film's stars' sidekicks generate greater
empathy with the audience than the stars themselves.  Cusack mainly suffers
from having to be attracted to a ridiculous character, but Beckinsale is
forced to make one unbelievable move after another by Marc Klein's script.
John Corbett does a bravura filmic turn as Lars, generating some of the film's
best laughs as the self-important, yet likeable, cult/trendy musician.
Cusack buddy Jeremy Piven also gets mileage out of being the sounding board
to, yet admiring of nonetheless, his dementedly romantic friend.  Molly
Shannon, so fearless in the underrated "Superstar," makes Eve the type of
feet-on-the-ground friend every woman should have.  Eugene Levy, as a 
Bloomingdale's salesman, is funny initially, although his presence in the
film becomes more and more forced, particularly in the thud-echoing coda.
Director Chelsom, who created the whimsical "Hear My Song," vastly underrated 
"Funny Bones" and sweetly fantastical "The Mighty," can't obscure the rigging 
which holds up a plot that should be lighter than air.  Cinematographer
John de Borman's work can't be faulted, showcasing NYC in all its romantic
holiday finery and making the 'if it's meant to be-ness' ironic with
timelapse overhead shots of New York City's everyday chaos.  Kudos to whoever
created Lars' wonderfully wacky music and accompanying insane video.
"Serendipity" per Webster's dictionary is 'the faculty of finding valuable
or agreeable things not sought for,' while "Serendipity" the film strenuously
searches for things that should just be, but aren't.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Max Messier
I must admit I'm going to be a bit biased in my review of the new
romantic comedy Serendipity, because that also defines how I met my
current girlfriend.  The magic and mystery of our fated encounter is
also embodied in the quirkiness and freshness of the very funny and very
romantic Serendipity.  I am not a big fan of the romantic comedy genre,
but something drew me to this film.  Maybe it was the casting of the
underrated Jeremy Piven in a supporting role, and the hilarious Eugene
Levy.  Maybe it was my hope that John Cusack would get the redemption he
justly deserves after such crap as High Fidelity, Con Air, and Pushing
Tin.  But maybe it was because I feel as giddy as a school kid right now
with this whole romantic thing currently in my life.
The story of Serendipity is simple.  Two people, John Trager (John
Cusack) and Sara Thomas (Kate Beckinsale, looking ever so hot), have a
chance encounter over a pair of gloves -- with Buck Henry smack dab in
the middle.  Charmed beyond repair, these two knuckleheads grab a sundae
together at a café called Serendipity, talk about that irresponsible
thing called fate and the avenues it leads people down, and spend a few
hours at the local ice skating rink.  But with each of them already
involved with other parties, Sara has John write his name and number on
a $5 bill and she writes her name and number on a copy of Love in the
Time of Cholera.  Sara declares that if this "thing" -- let's just call
it love -- is destined to happen, fate will bring them together in the
future.
Years later and on opposite coasts of America, John and Sara -- both
engaged but still unsure whether they have found their soul mates --
decide to seek each other out to rest their doubts.  What happens then
is an enjoyable and often hilarious cat-and-mouse game with the fates -
involving such items as mistaken identity, a Graduate homage, John
Corbett as a freaky New Age musician, and Eugene Levy as an irate and
crazed salesman -- to find out if that "thing" was right after all.
Fortunately, first-time screenwriter Marc Klein has sketched strong,
well-rounded, characters to propel a predictable and corny narrative. 
Coupled with deft directing by Michael Chelsom (director of the very
unfunny Town and Country and the very funny Funny Bones) and the use of
time-lapse camera work to illustrate the passage of years -- the film
comes off with genuine believability and sincerity.  Both Piven and
Molly Shannon make nice sidekick characters
On the flipside, films such as You've Got Mail, Made in Heaven, and even
High Fidelity are the quiet inspirations for the film's main journey at
hand.  But it's what happens to the unexpecting characters left behind
in the romantic wake after John and Sara find happiness this is the most
unsettling part of the picture.
Director: Peter Chelsom
Producer: Peter Abrams, Simon Fields, Robert L. Levy
Writer: Marc Klein
Starring: Kate Beckinsale, John Cusack, Jeremy Piven, Molly Shannon,
Eugene Levy, John Corbett, Bridget Moynahan
http://www.serendipity-themovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
"What's your favorite New York moment?"
Starring John Cusack, Kate Beckinsale, Eugene Levy,
Molly Shannon. Directed by Peter Chelsom. Rated PG-13.
There's no doubt that 95% of romantic comedies follow
a distinct pattern: guy sees girl, guy wants girl, guy
goes through unreasonable obstacles to get girl, guy
gets girl. In rare cases, the genders are flipped.
Predictability is a given. Rarely, though, is a
romantic comedy as cheap, as obvious, or as pointless
as Serendipity, a film that uses its "theme" as an
excuse for its plot contrivances. "Lightweight"
doesn't begin to describe it. This is like
anti-gravity.
It begins in a New York City Bloomingdale's, a product
placement that rivals Cast Away's FedEx for sheer
blatancy. Jonathan Trager (John Cusack) and Sara
Thomas (Kate Beckinsale) both go for the same pair of
gloves. After going through the perfunctory motions,
Jonathan gets to keep the gloves and the two of them
go out for ice cream, followed by ice skating.
Jonathan falls hard, and Sara is charmed. When she
writes her name and number down on a piece of paper, a
truck rumbles by and blows it out of her hand. She
takes this as a sign from fate that they shouldn't be
together; Jonathan is flabbergasted. To pacify him,
she comes up with an idea: Jonathan will write his
number on a 5 dollar bill, which she will promptly
spend. When she gets home, she will write her name and
number inside a book ("Love in the Time of Cholera")
and sell it to a used bookstore. If the bill gets back
to her or the book to him, it will mean that they are
meant to be together.
Three years later. Both Sara and Jonathan are now
engaged to other love interests. Both realize they
aren't content. Both go looking for the other. What
happens now is so absurd that I'm almost tempted to
recommend the film for the sake of seeing it. The two
of them run circles around each other in a set of
incredible "coincidences" that I would describe as
contrivances if it weren't for the film oh-so-cleverly
dismissing that criticism by building its plot around
"serendipity." Of course, since the movie is about
fate, the screenwriter can do anything he damn well
pleases. I'm not buying it.
There's no suspense in any of this because we know
exactly what's going to happen, but Serendipity
insists on drilling its purportedly "adorable"
non-story into our heads. Instead of "Will they meet?"
the question we're asking is "When will they meet
already?" To make matters worse, every "coincidence"
is telegraphed from a mile away; by the last reel I
was bored enough to actively look for signs that
something else "incredible" was going to happen.
Cusack is fine and Beckinsale, at least, isn't saddled
with another lumbering, clunky screenplay (she's had
bad luck, what with Brokedown Palace and Pearl Harbor
on her resume), just an inanely pointless one.
Serendipity also relieves the tedium with the amazing
Eugene Levy, who plays a snarky Bloomingdale's
salesman.
What's the interest in watching a movie that spirals
around and around a predestined (no pun intended)
conclusion? Serendipity wants to tug at the
heartstrings, but it only tests our patience. 

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Have you ever tasted anything so sweet it makes you sick to your stomach?
If you like that feeling, there's more than a good chance you'll like
Serendipity, a new humdrum, paper-thin version of Sleepless in Seattle with
John Cusack and Kate Beckinsale taking over for Tom and Meg.  The film is
forced and utterly predictable, despite two decent performances from the
very likeable, charismatic leads.  Other than that, the best thing I can say
about Serendipity is that it's short.
The action begins a decade in the past where Jonathan Trager (Cusack,
America's Sweethearts) and Sara Thomas (Kate Beckinsale, Pearl Harbor) meet
in a Christmas-shopping free-for-all at Bloomingdale's.  Each has a
significant other, but when they reach for the same pair of black cashmere
gloves, the sparks fly and the two spend a few hours ice-skating and eating
at a trendy cafe called Serendipity.
Although she's clearly interested in Jonathan, Sara lays some destiny
twaddle on him and refuses to give him her name, letting fate determine the
outcome of any potential relationship.  Sara makes Jonathan write his name
and phone number on a $5 bill (which she uses to by some mints), while she
scribbles her name and number on the inside of the novel she's reading
(which she sells to a used bookstore the following morning).  If Jonathan
and Sara are somehow able to find each other (via the book or the fin),
that'll be destiny's way of saying they're meant to be together. The book,
by the way, is Gabriel Garcia Marquez's Love in the Time of Cholera, which
is about a man who waits 50 years to get the girl.
Nobody would want to see 75-year-old versions of Cusack and Beckinsale get
together, so Serendipity makes them wait only ten years.  At this point,
Sara is living in San Francisco and has just gotten engaged to a kooky
Eastern music star (John Corbett, Dinner Rush).  Meanwhile, Jonathan is
still in New York City and about to marry his slightly bitchy fiancee
(Bridget Moynahan, Coyote Ugly).  It's hard to say whether Jonathan is still
obsessed with finding Sara or if he just has cold feet, but he continues to
track down the girl of his dreams, who ironically is headed to Manhattan the
same weekend his wedding is scheduled to take place.  Sara says she's going
away to clear her head but is really hoping to run into Jonathan.
The two search for each other, and narrowly miss meeting a dozen or so
times.  What's the point?  You know they'll eventually find each other and
make sweet love down by the fire.  To liven things up, each has their own
comedic sidekick (Osmosis Jones' Molly Shannon and The Family Man's Jeremy
Piven) to aid in their seemingly impossible effort.  Piven plays Jonathan's
best man, which is somewhat scary considering his hijinks at the bachelor
party in Very Bad Things.
It's no surprise to learn Serendipity's contrived screenplay came from Marc
Klein, whose biggest previous foray into feature film was working as an
assistant on the equally syrupy While You Were Sleeping.  Director Peter
Chelsom continues his downward slide since helming the enjoyable Funny Bones
(he followed that with The Mighty and Town and Country).  The best parts of
the film revolve around Eugene Levy (American Pie 2), who logs a memorable
performance as an uptight Bloomingdale's salesman.
1:25 - PG-13 for a scene of sexuality, and for brief language

Author
Michael Dequina
_Serendipity_ (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
        "A fortunate accident" is how Sara Thomas (Kate Beckinsale) defines the
concept of "serendipity" to Jonathan Trager (John Cusack) early on in Peter
Chelsom's romantic comedy of the same name.  Accident or not, _Serendipity_ the
film can certainly be described as a "fortunate" arrival in multiplexes during
this less-than-stellar year.  The film is hardly a groundbreaker, but it most
certainly a big-hearted charmer--and when it comes to the rom-com genre, that's
all that matters.
        Much of the charm comes from leads Cusack and Beckinsale, who establish
a palpable romantic rapport in the film's extended prologue.  It's rush holiday
shopping season in 1990 New York City, and Jonathan and Sara meet when fighting
for the last pair of black cashmere gloves in a crowded department store.  A
search for gloves appears to have become a discovery of love, for the strongly
attracted pair then spend one long night on the town getting to know each other
and falling hard.  But the timing is off for the attached Sara, and she proposes
to Jonathan an unusual plan where they part, leaving their reunion entirely up
to the powers of fate.  Years later, Sara and Jonathan are in committed
relationships with other people, but both still keep watch for possible
signs--and consider the idea of taking destiny into their own hands.
        Notions of fate and destiny aren't an alien concept in romantic
comedies; in recent years the concept has become somewhat of a staple, playing a
role in films from 1993's smash _Sleepless_in_Seattle_ to the recently released
_Happy_Accidents_.  Writer Marc Klein doesn't make many, if any, deviations from
tried-and-true formula.  Not only do the pieces of the plot fall into their
expected places at all the regularly scheduled intervals, the characterizations
also have a ring of familiarity.  Both Sara and Jonathan have best
friends/sounding boards who have quirky senses of humor; the current love
interest for the female is eccentric to say the least, and the one for the male
has her share of neuroses.
        While innovation is always a welcome addition to any film, it's not
entirely necessary in a film like _Serendipity_.  What matters most is the
manner in which it goes about its familiar business, and those behind
_Serendipity_ have made an immensely likable entertainment.  Not only do they
strike convincing sparks together, the affable Cusack and the luminous
Beckinsale are able to engage the audience individually, a critical component
considering they spend most of the film carrying separate halves of the film. 
However, they are strongly helped by the well-cast supporting players.  The
lively comic instincts of Molly Shannon and Jeremy Piven elevate what could have
easily been stock best friend roles; in Piven's case, his lifelong off-screen
friendship with Cusack makes for an added level of convincing on-camera
cameraderie.  As the potential spoilers to a Jonathan-Sara pairing, John Corbett
and Bridget Moynahan are also appealing, albeit in different ways.  Moynahan's
Hallie isn't so much ill-suited for Jonathan than simply not as an ideal a match
as Sara; Corbett's eccentric, egocentric new age musician Lars is harder to
like, but his charisma makes Sara's attraction to him understandable.
        Such sharp casting and performances is a testament to the wonderful
directing job by Chelsom.  From the first frames he sets up the right atmosphere
of fairy tale romance; contributing mightily to that is John de Borman's
cinematography, which captures all the visual splendor of winter in the Big
Apple (a sight that is even more powerful and magical in light of recent
events).  More importantly, however, Chelsom found the right rhythm for this
story, and the film comes in at an efficient sub-90-minute run time.  There
isn't a wasted moment, and as such _Serendipity_ leaves one with a pleasant
feeling few films generate: that of wanting more.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23
