Title
Review for Jesus Christ Superstar (1973)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Eric Walker

When I was four years old, my mother took me to the movies and we saw
"Jesus Christ Superstar" -- the filmed version of Andrew Lloyd Weber's
so-called "rock opera."  I still don't know why she took me, because I
didn't understand what was going on in the least...but I loved it
nonetheless for the music and the weird visuals.  During the song "Damned
For All Time" when Judas is being chased by tanks (talk about subtle
symbolism!), I shouted out "Batman!" because the musical beat was very
similar to the "Batman" TV series, which was in reruns at the time (1973) 
and which I followed religiously.  Several other moments in the film
having to do with the actors climbing up and down on scaffolding
(sheesh!), or Judas being lowered from Heaven by a rope to sing the
climactic number "Jesus Christ Superstar" remained in my mind for a long
time afterwards...and since the soundtrack album starring Ian Rennie of
Deep Purple was played fairly regularly in our home for years afterwards,
this movie was probably one of the strongest influences on my "faith" adn
"belief" as I was growing up. 
As I grew older, I thought about he movie every so often and pondered
it...eventually deciding that it was written by Lloyd Weber in order to
identify with the cynical anti-establishment culture that existed around
1970, as the flower-power movement ate itself up and descended into
anarchy.  (Woodstock to Altamont, perhaps?)  The musical (and the movie) 
takes the famous moments from the Gospel and turns them on their side,
portraying Jesus as a disillusioned rabble-rouser who was getting tired of
running around the countryside and who wondered if his work would outlast
him, or if it would die with him; while at the same time Judas sees Jesus
as becoming enamoured with his own myths, believing the hype.  The movie,
in turn, is definitely a product of the early 1970s, and the visuals
haven't aged very well.  Every time I watch this film and see the
long-haired actors singing their roles, I get an urge to wear bell-bottom
pants and not take a bath for a week.  The movie outraged many religious
figures when it came out, of course; but then again, even "The Greatest
Story Ever Told" had bomb threats being sent to movie theaters.  If
there's *any* movie about Jesus that hasn't sparked a firestorm of
controversy, then I haven't heard of it. 
The film's use of modern-day images as a way of "symbolising" the
relevance of the Biblical story, while updating it for modern audiences,
seems very awkward.  The Roman soldiers wear modern-day Army uniforms and
carry machine guns, while jet planes soar overhead to represent "angels"
during the moment when Judas betrays Jesus.  The beginning of the film
shows the cast members arriving at the site of the film on a bus, and the
film ends on a solemn note as the cast boards the bus and looks back sadly
at the cross they've left mounted.  These moments are meant to tell us
that this isn't a "literal" telling of the Gospel story, but it almost
certainly caused people to scratch their heads in confusion when the movie
was first released (like I said, I was too young to understand it myself),
because heavy-handed symbolism of this sort tends to fly over the heads of
most audience members. 
And yet, despite the film's flaws, there's still an underlying message
underneath that is re-worked in Martin Scorsese's "The Last Temptation Of
Christ," and which influenced my own beliefs as well..the idea of Christ
as a human being, one who is struggling to change the world and who is
afraid of the fate awaiting him.  This is a portrayal of the idea of
Christ that I've grown to accept, and it's one that I've personally found
more comforting than the one portrayed more commonly in church: that of
the omnipotent judge sent down with complete knowledge of what was going
happen, and who didn't break a sweat even when he was being crucified. 
Maybe it's just the cynic in me, but I find the idea of Jesus as a *man*
instead of *God* more comforting, because it inspires me to find strength
within *myself* -- just like he did. 
So if "Jesus Christ Superstar" is a dated product of the 1970s that people
can point to as a way of showing how silly the hippie movement could be,
it's still a thought-provoking movie that I found a lot more inspiring
than "Godspell." 

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Norman Jewison
Writer: Melvyn Bragg, Norman Jewison, Tim Rice, and Andrew Lloyd Webber
Starring: Ted Neely, Carl Anderson, Yvonne Elliman, Josh Mostel
Anyone who's ever heard Andrew Lloyd Webber's rock opera, "Jesus Christ
Superstar," is familiar with its liberal approach to the gospel.  It's
not just some dumbing down way of presenting the story of the death of
Jesus to the hippies in the 60s, but also a new look at it.  With cool,
hummable music, a new perspective (told mostly from that of Judas), and
a satirical look at not only Judas's outlook on Jesus, but of his
followers, who turned on him after he was arrested for merely preaching
the word of God.  The film is also a liberal version of the telling,
combining gospel fashions with that of camp 70s clothes, and machine
guns, hard helmets, tanks, and airplanes, creating a film that is camp
AND satirical.  It's also a really cool flick.
The film chronicles the death of Jesus from before Palm Sunday to his
crucifixion.  It starts off with the actors getting ready during the
overture (extended just for the film), then the film takes off with
Judas (Carl Anderson, who apparently started some controversy since he
was black - yes, that's real bad, guys) singing about how he thinks
Jesus is not really the Messiah, but has great ideas, and has become to
obsessed with power.  He tries to warn him about his ever-increasing
popularity, and some of his alleged hypocrisy, seeing that he's in love
with the whore Mary Magdelene (Yvonne Elliman, who would go on to sing a
cool tune for "Saturday Night Fever"), and how he uses valuable lotion
for himself.  But Jesus explains in calm and logical terms that everyone
is good in his sight, even whores, and that there will always be poor
people and we should just take advantage of what we have.
Of course, Judas is right about his increasing populairty, as a bunch of
leather-clad pharises led by the Barry White-voiced Caiaphas and his pal
Annas, the high priests of the bunch, get together and talk about
getting rid of him, even as he is riding into town and having palms
thrown at him.  And Judas is still pissed off at him, especially when he
goes into a temple and starts throwing stuff around, claiming that
they're blaspheming his house of worship by gambling in it.  So Judas
inevitably is conned by the pharises to help them find and arrest Jesus.
And the inevitable of that happens, Judas gives Jesus away with a kiss,
and he is taken off.  Almost immeadiately, his 12 apostles flee,
claiming not to know him, and all his other followers turn against him
in the big trial, telling Pontious Pilate, who in this way is given a
sympathetic perspective as he has no choice but to crucify him, even
after he tells them "this man has done no wrong," which he hadn't.  We
almost wonder if Jesus died to save our sins or was he just betrayed by
us.  And, of course, was he really the Messiah?
I'm an agnostic, but was a Christian for years.  I believe that Jesus
was a person, but with all these people coming out and saying their
prophets (i.e. David Koresh), I have had trouble thinking about it.  Was
Jesus really the Messiah, or just some crazy Israelian?  Or was he just
one nice guy?  Ted Neely's performance opens up some new levels to the
"Was Jesus the Messiah?" question.  He brings a human level to the
character.  Andrew Lloyd Webber and Norman Jewison don't know if Jesus
was the Messiah, and leave this question open, since there can be no
real proof on either side of the argument.  I mean, for all I know, I'm
the second coming of Jesus.  Probably not.
The acting's very good, especially from Neely and Carl Anderson as
Judas.  Anderson has a big problem, since Judas is always seen as the
villain of the bible, betraying Jesus and all.  But this film reveals
him to be a tragic hero, like some sort of Brutus.  He's a good guy who
believes in the beliefs of Jesus (though he questions his divinity), and
the film (and opera) nicely show his descension into being a paid baddie
for the jerk system.  I mean, Judas had no choice but to hang himself at
the end (sorry if I'm spoiling the storyline).
This film opens a lot of biblical questions which are not really
standard, and also takes a very original approach, much like the rock
opera.  Even if you're not a Christian, you should dig this flick.  For
it's unique style, approach, and the overall coolness of it all, I give
this a high reccomendation.  But I warn you, get ready to laugh at some
of the costumes, especially Herod's (Josh Mostel, from "City Slickers"
fame), who sports funky glasses and a pair of boxers.  If only all
biblical films could be this groovy...
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
