Title
Review for I Yabba-Dabba Do! (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:32, not rated, Animated/Comedy, 1993, Made-for-American-Television
Director: William Hanna
Voices of: Henry Corden, Jean Vander Pyl, Megan Mullally, Frank Welker,
           B. J. Ward, Jerry Houser, Joseph Barbera, William Hanna
     Fred Flintstone (voice of Henry Corden) loses all of his money on a
bet.  Pebbles (voice of Megan Mullally) and Bamm-Bamm (voice of Jerry
Houser) have grown up and are planning to get married.  Fred has to find
a way of getting back his money and paying for Pebbles and Bamm-Bamm's
wedding.
     I YABBA-DABBA DO! is the first in a series of Flintstones films
being made for the ABC television network.  It aired on Sunday, February
7 and will probably be repeated soon.  I used to watch "The Flintstones"
as a child and was expecting a very good movie.  I YABBA-DABBA DO!
didn't make all of my expectations, but it is still fun to watch.  I
will now look forward to the next Flintstones movie.  On a scale of zero
to five, I give I YABBA-DABBA DO! a four.
     I YABBA-DABBA DO! is well-animated.  It is not as well animated as
a Disney film, but is much better than "Batman: The Animated Series".
Fans of animation will probably enjoy watching this film for the
animation alone.
     The voice of Wilma Flintstone is done by Jean Vander Pyl, who did
Wilma on the television show "The Flintstones" but Alan Reed, who used
to do the voice for Fred Flintstone is no longer doing it and it is now
done by Henry Corden.  William Hanna and Joseph Barbera (of
Hanna-Barbera) have brief voice cameos as themselves in this film.
     I YABBA-DABBA DO! is well-written.  Fred Flintstone and Barney
Rubble are great and I think will amuse the young and old alike (at
least those that were fans of "The Flintstones").  The writers did a
good job of making Pebbles and Bamm-Bamm older.   Unfortunately the
script has some slow spots in it.  Some of the comedy in this film is
aimed at adult viewers to keep them entertained.  There is also a lot of
slapstick humor that will entertain both adults and children.
