Title
Review for Mostro, Il (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Italy, 1994
U.S. Release Date: beginning 4/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:52
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Sexual humor, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Roberto Benigni, Nicoletta Braschi, Michel Blanc
Director: Roberto Benigni
Producers: Yves Attal and Roberto Benigni
Screenplay: Roberto Benigni and Vincenzo Cerami
Cinematography: Carlo DiPalma
Music: Evan Lurie
U.S. Distributor: C/FP Distribution
In Italian with subtitles
     THE MONSTER is a mediocre motion picture wrapped around a number of 
very good scenes.  Starring Italian comic sensation Roberto Benigni 
(JOHNNY STECCHINO, SON OF THE PINK PANTHER), this enjoyable-but-
inconsistent slapstick farce rolls through peaks and valleys of 
laughter.  When it's funny, it's very funny; when it's not, it borders 
on tiresome.
     Benigni is a gifted physical comic with a manic style incorperating 
elements from the repertories of Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton, John 
Cleese, Steve Martin, and Robin Williams (to name a few).  There's no 
doubt that THE MONSTER was designed as a showcase for Benigni -- after 
all, he not only stars in it, but he also directed, co-wrote, and co-
produced it.  From beginning to end, this film offers a sample of his 
considerable talents.
     The plot borders on irrelevant -- it's just a useful envelope for a 
number of variably funny sketches.  When THE MONSTER opens, we learn 
that there's a serial rapist/killer on the loose.  Over a span of 12 
years, he has killed 18 women, and the police have become desperate to 
get their man.  Aided by a profile compiled by the psychiatrist (Michel 
Blanc) assisting on the case, the cops begin a comprehensive search for 
this monster, this "Mozart of vice."  Through a series of bizarre 
coincidences (which I won't describe here, since they wouldn't be funny 
in print, but are on screen), a nerdy, out-of-work, petty thief named 
Loris (Benigni) is pegged as the chief suspect.  An attractive female 
police officer (Benigni "regular" Nicoletta Braschi) is sent under cover 
to use her charms to catch Loris red-handed.
     THE MONSTER starts out slowly, with only a few sparse laughs during 
the 30-minute setup.  After that, however, it's a roller coaster ride, 
with the lulls coming as unwanted distractions between comic peaks.  
There's a lot of sexual humor here, but, unlike American productions, 
where such comedy usually consists of a few stale, dirty jokes, 
Benigni's material is fresh, uninhibited, and sidesplittingly funny.
     As a curious aside, it should be noted that because this film was 
released into the mainstream Italian market, where it became a huge hit, 
it's in Italian.  However, four of the actors (including Michel Blanc) 
either don't speak the language, or speak it poorly.  As a result, their 
voices were dubbed into Italian, and the poor synchronization of speech 
creates an unintentionally amusing side effect -- a subtitled movie with 
embedded dubbing.
     THE MONSTER is Roberto Benigni's film, and, watching him roar 
through it like a tornado, it's easy to understand his immense 
international appeal.  Whether ogling women, disposing of a dead cat, 
fending of Nicoletta Braschi's advances, or dousing a (literal) fire in 
his pants, the actor is a delight to watch, and THE MONSTER is 
worthwhile because of him.  This isn't a masterpiece of comedy, but 
there are enough hilarious moments to earn it a lukewarm recommendation.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE MONSTER (IL MOSTRO) is an Italian sexual farce staring Roberto
Benigni as Loris.  Benigni is being hailed as Italy's Charlie Chaplin.
To me THE MONSTER is like an old Jerry Lewis movie, but more bawdy.  If
you like heavy physical comedy with lots of slapstick humor and plenty
of sight gags, then this is your show.  It plays like a related series
of "Saturday Night Live" skits, and accomplishes what it sets out to
do.
     Loris is a shop-window outfitter and gardener who is told by a
friend that a woman at a party is a nymphomaniac.  When he is not
looking the woman leaves and another takes her place.  When he tries to
fondle the new woman, she runs away.  Later she meets him when he has
his gardening chain saw out, and he falls into her with his chain saw.
She goes to the police and tells them about both attacks.
     The police decide he is the serial killer they have been looking
for, but they must get an undercover policewoman to get him to make a
pass at her first before they can arrest him.  Officer Jessica
(Nicoletta Braschi) is the only one brave enough to volunteer.  She
goes to his apartment, gets him to agree to let her be his paying
roommate, and stays naked most of the time to get him to make a pass,
which he never does.
     The movie has many subplots.  In one Loris tries to learn Chinese
to get a job at a Chinese Import/Export company.  He does the Chinese
with exaggerated Italian hand gestures and bizarre sing-sing Chinese
intonations.  In another subplot he keeps trying to evade his landlord
who wants to sell the apartment Loris is renting.  In the most
disgusting subplot, the neighbor's 6 year old girl keeps killing cats
and dumping them in his apartment.  Later he retaliates by decapitating
her favorite doll and then pulling all of its limbs off.
     As an example of the humor from the trailer and one that my
audience was in riotous laugher over, Loris bumps into a guy with a lit
cigarette.  The cigarette falls into Loris's pants and lands in his
groin area.  At first he does not notice it as he is ogling an
attractive blonde.  When he realizes he is in pain, he starts beating
his crotch area furiously and finally grabs a one liter bottle of
mineral water and sticks the neck down his pants to quench the fire.
The woman behind me was in uncontrollable laughter at this point.
     Most of the humor is of scenes that look sexual, but aren't.
Typical of these are when Loris gets his coat caught in a mannequin he
is moving.  From a distance, Officer Jessica thinks he is having sex
with the mannequin.
     For such a risque show, there is nothing actually shown.  All of
the sequences that looks like sex, is stuff that is misinterpreted as
sex by one of the other characters, and all of the nudity is not shown
but is described by one of the other characters.  The most that is
shown is some not particularly revealing lingerie that Jessica wears.
     I never laughed a single time in the entire show, and I saw every
minute of it.  Half of my audience was as silent as I was, and the
other half could barely ever shut up.  I do not like humor that relies
solely on the physical.  The script by Roberto Benigni and Vincenzo
Cerami has little dialog of merit, and the director and star Roberto
Benigni relied upon his skits to carry the film.  I did not care for
Benigni, but did like the work of Nicoletta Braschi.  She was much more
human.  I should point out that the ending is the best part so hang in
there until the last if you can.
     THE MONSTER runs 1:52, which was too long and repetitive for me.
It is in Italian with English subtitles.  The film is not rated, but
would probably get an R for all the explicit sexual references and
language.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence.  The film would be
fine for any teenager.  Although I can not recommend the film and did
not like it, I think it is well made if you like Jerry Lewis style
comedies and so I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Brundage
Written by Roberto Benigni, Michel Blanc, and Vincenzo Cerami
Starring Roberto Benigni, Michel Blanc, Nicolette Braschi, and Franco
Mescolini
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 I suppose that the problem with subtitled films is one of being literary.
Sure, you can watch intelligent films until the cows come home, but the
passerby on CNN's "Showbiz Today" said it best when he said "I don't like to
read when I go to movies."
 The fact is that most people don't like to read anymore.  I am highly
unusual in my affinity for the written word (I not only read books, but
write them as a hobby), in my love of conversation as an art form.  A small
percentage of America likes that.  This is the latter half of the 20th
century.  The information age where the only things that we like to read
anymore are WebPages.  Our stories are told to us through movies.  Our book
reports are done courtesy of Cliffs (who, don't ask me why, did
"Slaughterhouse Five", one of the easiest reads ever).
 Who really blames anyone nowadays for having "subtitle-itis?"  I have a
friend who wouldn't see Life is Beautiful until his editor demanded it, and
he's a critic.  Perhaps this is partially because we have this association
in our minds with subtitles being "high brow" and "intellectual" films that,
much to my personal pity, the general public is not interested in.  Perhaps
it is just because literacy has been shelved.
 Kurt Vonnegut said in "Slapstick" that in 20 years there would be
scribes -- a select few which would be able to read and write -- once again.
Of course, that book was written more than 20 years ago, but who cares?
 Back to the subject of "subtitle-itis", this new epidemic has existed for
years.  We have this expectation that we don't have to read more than a few
notes when we go to movies.  Hell, some people have a problem that
Trainspotting didn't get dubbed into American English because of heavy
Edinburgh accents.  The subtitle translates to the average person as a stay
away sign because it means that they'll actually have to use their brains at
a time when they normally wouldn't.  Not to mention the films that people
associate with being translated are the ones that are touchy-feely stories
without any macho lines.
 To address this I offer a film review and a factoid.  The factoid, for guys
who think foreign films have nothing to offer them, is that 1939's Ecstasy,
with Hedy Lamar, was the first film to feature nudity.  So there.  The film
review is that of 1994's Il Monstro (The Monster), an Italian sex-comedy
from the director of Life is Beautiful.
 Loris (Roberto Benigni) is a short con man who does odd jobs and slacks off
on his maintenance bill.  Through a mishap with thinking an old lady is a
nymphomaniac and a later mishap with a chainsaw going out of control, Loris
becomes suspected of being Il Monstro, the serial killer stalking the
streets of the city.  An obsessed detective assigns Jessica (Nicholetta
Braschi) to trap him by using her... charms to catch him red handed.  As put
by the detective, "we need to trap his hand in the cookie jar, and one of
you needs to be the cookie."
 Almost as childish as There's Something About Mary, I can assure you that
there is absolutely zilch that is high brow or ultra-intelligent about Il
Monstro.  It's childish, it's fun, and you can get it without understanding
a single word of Italian... well, maybe not the third part but you still
don't have to use your brain all that much.
 For those who didn't want to be depressed by the Holocaust in Life is
Beautiful, Il Monstro is the Roberto Benigni film you should check out.
It's a guaranteed cure for "subtitle-itis."

