Title
Review for Welcome to the Dollhouse (1995)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Chad Polenz
Welcome To The Dollhouse
Chad'z Rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, R, 87 minutes [1 hour, 27 minutes]
[drama/satire]
starring: Heather Matarazzo (Dawn Wiener), Brendan Sexton Jr. (Brendan
McCarthy), Eric Mabius (Steve), Matthew Faber (Mark Wiener), written,
produced, and directed by Todd Solondz.
Kids can be so cruel. We'd like to think that in America we live in a land
of individuals, and we do for the most part, but never in educational
institutions - why is that? Nowhere in the world is the invisible caste
system so rigid and strict as that of children in Junior and Senior high
school. "Welcome To The Dollhouse" is a different, creative, funny, and at
times disturbing story of a girl who isn't accepted at all. It makes us
wonder why she has to be such a pathetic victim.
Every school has at least one or two kids who never have and never will fit
it to any of the social groups because they are different and do everything
wrong. Heather Matarazzo stars as Dawn Wiener, a girl who fits that mold perfe
ctly. This is obvious right from the get-go as we see her walk through the
cafeteria in a desperate search for a seat where she might be "accepted."
Immediately we are given that feeling of cruel fate just from this shot
alone, but reality sinks in even more as the cheerleaders ask her if she is a
lesbian. We've known Dawn only a few minutes, and already we feel for her and
see the world through her eyes. No matter how hard she tries she'll never
win.
But the film is not entirely a dismal outlook, it's a serious drama but it
has a satirical tone to lighten it up. Reality isn't the same here because
everything is portrayed through Dawn's perspective. A bully named Brendan
(Sexton) tries to copy her test, but when she tries to turn him in she gets
in trouble too. To make matters worse, Brendan continues to taunt her during
the punishment without the teacher noticing. You just want to yell at the
teacher at tell her to look up for a second so justice might be done...
Dawn's home life is portrayed as just as unfair and satirical as school. Her
brother Mark (Faber) is a computer geek who also happens to have Steve
(Mabius), the guy all the girls want, in his garage band. But she can't
appreciate this because she always distracted by her annoying little sister
who can do no wrong in the eyes of her parents. 
These relationships often make for funny but sad encounters, such as when
Dawn and her sister get into a name-calling argument. Of course her sister
tattles and we hear a shouting match between Dawn and her mother in the
background. This is a great method of storytelling because it's reminiscent
of the times we went to our friend's house and heard them get in trouble with
their parents in the other room. The sibling rivalry comes to a boil when
Dawn purposely forgets to give her sister a message from her mother about
getting a ride home and results in her being kidnapped!
I realize Solondz is trying to make a point through exaggeration and brutal
reality, but sometimes it's difficult to tell where the reality ends and the
satire begins. For example, when Dawn is constantly harassed by Brendan, to
the point where he threatens to "rape" her, it seems a little out of touch
because he doesn't know what rape is. Just the fact Dawn agrees to go along
with him is unbelievable. 
"Welcome To The Dollhouse" is a good depiction of children's caste system
and cruel mistreatment of each other without purpose. There's a lot of unfair
things about life, it's nice to see a film play upon that universal truth. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
James Brundage
Written, Directed, and Produced by Todd Solondz (Happiness)
Starring:
 Heather Matarazzo (The Devil's Advocate, 54) as Dawn Weiner
 Brendon Sexton III (Empire Records, Pecker) as Brandon McCarthy
Being a previous New Jersey resident who went as a different person during
the long, boring years of Junior High School, WWPMS (West Windsor Plainsboro
Middle School: the PMS was the but of constant jokes), this movie holds a
special place in my heart (or lack thereof).
Welcome to the Dollhouse tells the story of Dawn Weiner, nicknamed Weinerdog
by her classmates.  Dawn Weiner, just like most New Jersey youths, lives as
one of three children of which the parents only wanted one the baby.  The
older brother is a nerd destined for the Ivy League and the younger sister
is a little girl stereotype who takes ballet lessons all the time.  All of
the other students at her middle school hate her.  All the girls call her a
lesbo, she's a pariah to all the guys.  And, like every other person living
in a vastly superficial world, she just wants to be popular.
Her plan to be popular is as devious and darkly comic as Solondz's script:
seduce a high school senior who will sleep with anything that moves.  Sadly,
as admittedly unattractive as Dawn is, she's just not equipped for the task.
Be that as it may, she puts all her energy into trying to act nice, while
the school bully, Brandon, is falling in love with her.
On one level the movie is devilishly funny, with creative, interesting lines
like the following: Dawn: Do you think about girls?  Mark:  Are you kidding?
I want to get into a good school!  On another level it earns the 1996
Sundance Grand Jury Prize by taking on the harsh issues of being picked on,
kidnapping, jealousy, love, and the other issues of youth in suburbia.
It's not a film for a conservative to watch, though.  In fact, if you're a
conservative, BACK OFF.  The film's either weakest or strongest aspect is
its willingness to have lines like "I don't mean to be a c*nt" and the
threat of rape into the movie.  The same applies for ultra-liberals, who
have to deal with the standard conservative American parents.  Everyone in
between, and everyone who loves independent movies, however, should run down
to the video store and pick this one up.  I mean buy, not rent, by the way.
The Movie Critic's Heaven
http://members.tripod.com/~criticsheaven/

Author
Long Che Chan
Middle school is the beginning of academic hell for young people.  It is
a difficult experience with other kids verbally maiming other kids
because they are different.  It isn't fun.  However, my middle school
experiences were never as horrific as those of the suburban jeer-target
seventh-grade girl shown here, Dawn "Wiener Dog" Wiener.  Played by
Heather Matarazzo in a near-flawless performance, Dawn is a misfit, an
outcast.  She is the butt of countless jokes because she is, to put it
as simply as one of Dawn's classmates did, "ugly."  She isn't ugly, but
she looks different and that is what spawns the mockery and violence in
this school.  Dawn is disliked/hated by nearly everyone except her
timid, small male friend who is the only other member of her Special
People Club.
The film begins with Dawn trying to find a lunch table to sit at (poor
girl).  She finally ends up at the table occupied by a scruffy-looking
girl who later joins a group of girls who begin to banter Dawn, calling
her a "Lesbo".  Her teachers are no more understanding.  During a test,
a boy sitting next to her named Brandon continually bothers her by
mouthing obscenities.  She raises her hand to get him to stop and the
unjust result is that both of them have after-school detentions.
Whenever Dawn tries to do right, she ends up ruining her life more.
There is a scene at a school assembly where she is the target of an
endless stream of spitballs.  The two boys behind her are performing
this well-known middle school ritual and she plans to keep quiet and
ignore.  She soon busts, as anyone would, and plans to hit them with
spitballs, too.  She ends up hitting a teacher in the eye, resulting in
her near-expulsion and the teacher nearly becoming blind.
Her parents are the pinnacle of movie-parent scum.  They claim to they
love all their children equally but that's basically a load of crap.
Here is a list of their children, in order of how much they love them:
1) Missy, a hopelessly awful young ballerina, 2) Mark, a nerdy teenager
whose only goal is to enrich his college resume, and 3) the loathsome,
unloved Dawn, who refuses to take down her Special People Club House to
make room for her parent's twentieth anniversary in the back yard.  Mark
has formed a garage band (to further adorn his college resume) with the
most popular hunk in high school, a long-haired dude named Steve.  Dawn
immediately falls head-over-heels in love/infatuated with him and plans
to weave a web of niceness towards him to capture him, seduce him.  She
finally gets him alone in her house and fills him up with junk food to
please him.  He is indifferent.  She holds religious prayers in her
bedroom in which she speaks to Steve's ID card (which she stole) in
front of a fire and whispers and chants "You will love me!"
Back at the dreaded inferno of a school, the scruffy girl we saw in the
first scene tells Dawn to leave her man alone- Brandon is hers!!!  The
truth is that Dawn was never pursuing Brandon.  Later, Brandon sets a
date with Dawn to "rape" her and tells her to "BE THERE" and it is
hilarious when she actually turns up to get "raped".  Both of them, I
think, have no knowledge of what the word "rape" actually means so
nothing like that really happens, just mindless smooching.  Turns out,
Brandon and Dawn are falling in love.  And the sparks fly.
Welcome to the Dollhouse has a wonderful, fresh comedy that coats the
infuriating drama of Dawn's middle-school voyage.  This is the perfect
antonym for TV shows and movies that depict middle school as a child's
haven.  Dawn, as Roger Ebert said, will hopefully become famous and
successful and those she was hurt by will be a part of society's
lower-class.  I enjoyed this film because of its honesty (maybe the
horrors of middle school were a bit too dramatized) but I loved it for
its comedy - its satirical derision of all those kids you just hate in
middle school, those kids who hated you.  Here's to the memories of
those years of pre-adolescent suffering.

Author
Mike Joyce
An "offbeat" film about a young girl who has just entered junior high
school and is taunted by her peers. Dawn Wiener (played by Heather
Matarazzo in her first feature film) is the most unpopular and disliked
girl in her year level. Her locker is covered in graffiti of harsh insults,
and she is taunted by many of the students. This film brings back, with
haunting reality, the horrors of high school, and reminds one of just how
cruel kids can be. Is it any coincidence that her surname (Wiener) is
"nerdy"? I think not. The film revolves around Dawn, with her poor dress
sense, and looks at her life at school and at home. Both of which are sad
and unhappy. Dawn's older brother has a band, and Dawn falls in love (or
thinks she does) with the 'cool' lead singer. She is oblivious to the
reality that she has no chance with him (and because of her obsession
rejects offers from a boy in her class who really likes her). Meanwhile her
younger sister, who constantly wears a tu-tu and dances around the house,
is the obvious favourite of Dawn's parents. This means that Dawn is often
ignored and given second preference to by her parents. This adds to her
unhappiness.
Welcome to the Dollhouse is a black comedy, and one often feels guilty for
laughing at Dawn's predicaments. All in all, it is a sad (yet somehow
funny), look at poor Dawn's life. One can't help but think that she could
get somewhere if she would just get a new wardrobe, new glasses, and a new
hairdo. However, if she did that, it would effectively be another
unrealistic, Hollywood-style film with a happy ending. I recommend this
film to anyone who enjoys black comedies, or who wants to be taken back to
the terrors of high school.
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: See it. Screamingly, painfully funny, perfectly observed and acted
gem about the cruelties of being at the bottom of the social heap in
school. Todd Solondz's extremely promising first movie doesn't just cut
deep; it bites.
Everyone needs someone to hate. We all remember the hated ones in junior
high school: the kids with too-big glasses, the nerds, the fat kids, the
stammerers, the terminally shy, the scrawny. Dawn Wiener (played perfectly
by Heather Matarazzo) is like an acrostic of all of the above. She's a
smart but hopelessly unopoular girl in seventh grade, with all the odds
stacked against her. The other kids slam her with epithets like
"wiener-dog" and "lesbo". Her locker is the only one with graffiti on it.
The teachers always punish her instead of her tormentors.
WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE is about Dawn's torment, but it's not so much
depressing an enragingly funny. It finds the blackest imaginable humor in
its story and nurses it thoroughly. Remember being lectured by the
principal while over his shoulder, through the office window, your enemies
are giving you the finger? Or trying to return a spitball to the class
bully and hitting a teacher in the face instead? Or delivering a speech in
front of the whole school, only to be drowned out by everyone's teasing?
Things are no better for Dawn at home. Her younger sister is a ballerina, a
darling of the family. Her smarter older brother just gets what he can out
of the family (his unilateral piece of advice is to do what'll look good on
your college resume). Her parents are hypocritical in the way they treat
their children. Dawn's short-shrifted constantly, with both sweet and harsh
words. At dinner we get lines like, "Dawn, you don't leave this table until
you tell your sister that you love her!" Dawn refuses. Cut to Dawn, still
at the dinner table hours later.
Dawn has a younger friend she later abandons, a frail little kid who the
other boys call a "fag". Like all other kids that age, Dawn is impossibly
curious about sex, and manages to ask all the (hilariously) wrong
questions. She forms a crush on the lead singer of a band that her brother
assembles (another cynical move on his part to get something for his
college resume), but he's years older and has ambitions about being Jim
Morrison. He might as well be from Saturn. Even worse, she becomes an
object of torment/affection for the predatory Brandon (Brendan Sexton,
Jr.).
One of the best scenes in the movie has Brandon calling up Dawn and
threatening to rape her. Dawn at first resists, but then decides to try
going along with it. She's that desperate for human contact. What happens
next is difficult to describe, but I was holding my breath during the whole
thing, because I have never seen a movie pull off a scene so hazardous and
dead-on real.
DOLLHOUSE could have fallen apart in half a hundred ways, but both Solontz
and the actors involved are exactly right in the notes they hit. Heather as
Dawn is the best of the bunch, because she has the tough job of trying to
make Dawn likeable even when she's sullen and fed up with being victimized,
and taking revenge on random passers-by in unpleasant little ways. It all
works.
I laughed a lot during DOLLHOUSE, both because it was funny and because it
was incredibly painful. We laugh, that we may not cry. After the credits, I
realized I had summoned back up the names and faces of a whole roll-call's
worth of tormentors during the film -- kids whose sole reason for life
seemed to be found in tormenting me. WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE brought all
that anger flooding back to the surface, when survival meant getting the
hell out of the school and getting home before your enemies showed up.
I had one regular junior high school tormentor, whose name I don't even
recall now. But I do remember arranging things so that I could just grab my
knapsack and run out of the front of the building as fast as possible, to
avoid getting the stuffing beat out of my by him. The man he became is, I
hope, a totally different person, but do I ever remember the bully.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Remember being 11 years old and in junior high?  Cast your mind
back to when you got your tray in the cafeteria and looked out onto the
mass of humanity trying to figure out with whom you could sit.
Remember that feeling of potential rejection around every corner?
Remember the horror of puberty?  I have never seen a film that captures
the inner terror of that time better than WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE.
     This film is being billed as "deliriously wicked" or "hilarious
black comedy."  Certainly the film is funny, but to me it is first and
foremost a gripping tragedy - sad and somewhat disturbing.  I was so
touched by the excellent and realist script and the moving acting by
Heather Matarazzo as the protagonist Dawn Wiener that I was near tears
through out the entire show and stayed right on the edge of my seat.
It is extremely easy to empathizes with Dawn.  I would rate this film
in the most see category for parents, but it is so brilliant, I
sincerely hope everyone sees it.
     Dawn has looks, that while not ugly, are subpar.  To this she
dresses herself in gaudy clothes (costumes by Melissa Toth) and wears
unattractively framed glasses.  She is ostracized by her fellow
students who call her "Wienerdog," and who torment her at their every
chance.  In junior high, homophobic epithets are particularly popular.
Dawn is nonplused by her treatment and asks one of her tormentors, "Why
do you hate me?"  To which the simple reply is, "Because you're ugly."
Think back now.  Yes, junior high is like that for some.
     Dawn has other problems than junior high.  At home she has a 5
year old sister, aptly named Missy (Daria Kalinina), who has the looks
of a child model and who is always in her ballet costume demonstrating
her great artist abilities.  Dawn is jealous of her and complains to
her that "you are so lucky."
     She has an older brother Mark (Matthew Faber) who is currently in
high school, but is in the fast lane to a good college and from there
to be an entrepreneur who will probably be worth zillions.  When his
Dad (Bill Buell) goes into the hospital, he is too busy to visit
because he has "a big forensic society debate."  His mother (Angela
Pietropinto) agrees that is more important seeing his father.
     Both siblings view Dawn as a misfit in their family.  At the
dinner table one night, Dawn says something about her sister, and her
mother gets angry and pointing her finger at Dawn she demands, "Dawn,
you do not leave this table until you tell your sister that you love
her!"  I like the realistic way this dispute gets resolved in the show.
     A lot of the story deals with adolescence's obsession with sex.
Dawn asks her brother, "Do you think about girls?"  He glares at her
from his computer and responds, "Are you kidding?  I want to get into a
good school."  Dawn has no such aspirations.  Her grades are poor and
her artistic abilities are, well, limited.  Most scripts would have
coped out by compensated Dawn's mediocre looks with strong academic
strengths, but not this one.
     When Dawn is not just spending her time coping, she dreams of
making it with the most popular kid in high school, Steve Rodgers (Eric
Mabius).  In my favorite small scene from the show, she sits on a car
swaying to Steve's singing "Welcome to the Dollhouse" in a band that is
practicing in their garage.  This is one of the few times she is really
happy.
     Dawn spends most of the film in search of happiness.  She muses
that perhaps it lives just over the horizon in high school.  Mark
breaks this bubble by informing her, "High school's better than junior
high.  They'll call you names, but not as much."  Well, that's sure
reassuring.
     The film is filled with strong acting by even minor characters,
including Victoria Davis as Lolita, Christina Brucato as Cookie,
Brendan Sexton Jr. as Brandon McCarthy, Telly Pontidis as Jed, Herbie
Duarte as Lance, and Scott Coogan as Troy.  The acting by the leads is
even better.  Daria Kalinina is excellent as a supercilious brat.
Angela Pietropinto is a perfect mother from hell to the daughter she
wished she didn't have.  Matthew Faber has pompous obnoxiousness down
pat.
     The reason for the overwhelming success of the picture comes from
two factors.  The first is the acting by Heather Matarazzo.  In a
single performance she is able to embody all of the fears we had in
that dark era we know as childhood.  So much of her acting is perfect,
right down to the way she carries herself.  She acts like her glasses
are not quite strong enough, and, in addition, she must avoid being
seen, the net result is she kind of slinks around the school.  Although
barraged with insults, Heather breathes an inner strength into her
character and shows that underneath her character sees herself as a
radical.  In the press kit, the director said that he feared "that
Heather would lost interest in the movie after she discovered how
tedious and dreary the film production process is and tell her mother
midway she'd rather enroll in basketball camp (her original summer
plans)."
     The second, and most important reason, the show works so
marvelously is Todd Solondz.  He wrote, directed, and produced the
film.  This first time film maker has come up with a show that critics,
including yours truly, say will certainly be on their best films of the
year list.  The script is intelligent, funny, poignant, and wise.
Although sometimes shocking, it is never manipulative.  The director
said of the casting that "Although there is no sex, nudity, or violence
in the movie, many parents were reluctant, if not unwilling, to allow
their children to participate in the film."  He said that some parents
found the film "unsettling" or "depressing" which he "took as a
compliment as that reflected the world he was trying to portray.
Unfortunately, there were many parents who found the script
'delightful' and this had him concerned, particularly when he could see
the frozen smiles on their children."
     The music (Jill Wisoff) is an effective blend of old Tchaikovsky
classical pieces and modern rock ones.  The picture was filmed on
location in Caldwell and West Caldwell, New Jersey.  We lived in a
lovely place in New Jersey for many years, and the sets (Susan Block)
of typical middle class homes of bad carpet and clutter look realistic
and familiar.
     WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE flies by at just 1:27 thanks to dead on
editing by Alan Oxman.  The film is rated R.  Just as the director
said, there is no sex, nudity or violence.  There is some bad language
including some uses of the F word.  The main reason for the R rating
probably is that there is one attempted rape scene.  This can be a
disturbing show because of its realism, but it begs to be seen and the
humor dulls some of the pain.  I would like to think that kids as young
as 10 will go see this film, but only with their parents.  Without
parents, I would only let mature teenagers go.  I was blown away by
this tour de force of a movie, and it will certainly be high up on my
best of the year list.  I give the film my strongest recommendation and
award it a full ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Todd Solondz
Starring: Heather Matarazzo, Angela Pietropinto, Bill Buell, Brendan
Sexton Jr, Matthew Faber, Daria Kalinina, Eric Mabius
I can distinctly remember junior high as being the worst days of my
life.  Not only was I picked on more than O.J. at a comedy club, but my
self-loathing sense of humor had yet to be developed, which would later
cushion the blows of anyone and everyones' mockery aimed at me.  Not
only was my last name mispronounced more than "Sade" is, but I actually
took it personally.  Not only that, but for about a year, I was referred
to as "Erection Boy" because my jeans made a little adjutting in a
particular area.  Those were the days, my friend.
What "Welcome to the Dollhouse" does is present an accurate, darkly
comic view of an entire school year (I think seventh) in the life of the
most-picked on student in a Junior High School: Dawn Wiener (Heather
Matarazzo).  In the first scenes, we see her being picked on as "Wiener
Dog" (ha ha), be called a lesbian by a bunch of vapid cheerleaders, and
suffer one of the most horrific aspects of those lovely years: the
journey for somewhere to sit during lunch.
Dawn seems to be the patron saint of the admonished: she's everybody's
target.  Even a poor helpless little nerd who she tries to help after he
has been picked on by some other students calls her a name.  You would
think a girl like this could escape this world when she goes home.
Guess again.  She was blessed with being the middle child, and her
parents (Angela Pietropinto and Bill Buell) obviously prefer her the
least of all.  Her older brother (Matthew Faber) is a near genius,
always working towards college, like forming a band just so it can go on
his record.  And her younger sister (Daria Kalinina) is mommy's little
princess, always doing ballet, and is cute as an Olsen Twin.
Instead of just meandering around her being picked on, the film
introduces little elements into her life.  One day, she finds that her
brother is helping out a slacker, angst-filled wannabe musician (Eric
Mabius), who she immeadiately falls into a crush with.  He joins the
band, making them sound better, and she starts a sick obsession with him
(in one scene, hysterically trying to feed him, and play the piano for
him while he waits for her brother).
Also comes a mean Nick Stahl-looking jerk (Brendan Sexton Jr) who picks
on her, and one day threatens to rape her after school.  When she
actually shows up, they start a bizarre and meaningful relationship, and
we find out exactly why he's that way over the course of the film,
although there's no turning back for him.
The director wisely doesn't let her get away without any blame.  She's a
selfish, talentless girl, who does all she can to become popular, not
only never suceeding, but actually burning her bridges on her hopeful
way to selfish popularity.  She has a friend who's also very unpopular,
but she begins turning her back on him gradually throughout the film.
And whenever she tries to stoop to the level of her perpetrators (i.e.
doing the old spit ball back at them), she makes things horribly worse.
The never pulls any of his punches.  The ugly duckling never blossoms
into some kind of Ariana Richards mutation, and she doesn't end up like
the protagonist at the end of a John Hughes flick.  At the end, she is
semi-optimistic about the next school year, but you know that it might
actually be worse.
The direction and writing by Todd Solondz (who, if you've ever seen a
picture of, would realize that this might be an autobiographical
story...well, slightly) is incredible.  He paints a surprisingly
intelligent portrayal of Junior High, deepening the parts that go on in
the film instead of letting them just lie as cruel jokes.  The bizarre
thing that he pulls off is that while the students, and her family mock
Dawn, we find ourselves laughing along with them until we catch
ourselves and find ourselves either identifying with the distraught
Dawn, or discovering how cruel we were to these poor kids...or both.
"Welcome to the Dollhouse" is an amazing little film that was snubbed
for any Oscar nominations.  They called this year the year of the
independent film, but if it was truly the year of the independent film,
they would have nominated this (and "Fargo" or "Trainspotting" would
have won best picture).  Now, I'm not going to get into my view on the
Oscars, but I think a nomination for the screenplay would have been
pretty cool.  But nevertheless, this is a fantastically executed film,
and a wonderful black comedy.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Dennis Schwartz

WELCOME TO THE DOLL HOUSE (director: Todd Solondz; cast: Heather
Matarazzo, Victoria Davis, Christina Brucato, Christina Vidal, Siri
Howard, Brendan Sexton Jr., Telly Pontidis, 1996)
A film about an unpopular girl (Heather) who can't fit in with her
seventh-grade classmates, who wants so much to be like them and to have
them love her, that she is willing to do just about anything to fit in,
even be raped by the school bully, if need be. She goes by the name of
"Dogface Weiner" to her cruel schoolmates, who also taunt her that she
is a "lesbo," which she stammers out, is not so. Solondz pulls no
punches, pointing out the utter futility of adolescence for someone like
her, who can't help being a nerd and who receives no emotional support
from home. She, in fact, looks a lot like the director. So we can guess
that some of these horrible experiences are something that might have
happened to him in puberty. This loner theme is belabored and beaten
into the story, so much so, that the obvious couldn't be made more
obvious. There are no subtle messages. There is, also, no revenge of the
nerd, or any analytical probes into what she can do about her low
self-esteem (and I am most grateful for that). This is simply a film
that looks at why schools and families, for the most part, impart no
concern about "culture" in the children they teach and raise, and why
they can't respond with civility and intelligence to those students who
need the most help that they can get. Heather is so beaten down, that
she just wants to gain some self-esteem from her school experience, any
kind of encouragement would have been enormously helpful.
What sums up her situation and is her main concern, can be found in this
conversation with her classmate, when she asks, "Why do you hate me?"
and the response is given so bluntly: "Because you are so ugly." Her
home life is also filled with angst and bitterness. The parents are a
cardboard caricaricture of a successful New Jersey suburbanite
household, who dote on Heather's cute younger sister, leaving Heather
out in the cold, and they respect but do not love their high school son,
who is a nerd but is able to function very well in school, and has even
gone as far as repressing his sexual drive so that he can be concerned
only with getting good marks in school and  thereby getting into a top
college. He acts more like he was an adult than a teenager, even the
rock band he starts, is not a rebellious one, but he does it because it
will look good on his resume for college. For Heather, the parents
simply have no understanding or love, she is reduced to either trying to
be a child again by retreating to a clubhouse in her backyard, or trying
to foolishly hangout with an older high schooler, the phoney stud, who
sometimes plays in her brother's band. In any case, whatever she does
seems pathetic, and even though she is very smart, she does not do well
in school.
Since the film sinks or swims, depending on how credible Heather is in
depicting this unhappy youngster with her vulnerabilities, it is safe to
say that she fitted the role perfectly. The film was intense and
pulsating when it zoomed in on Heather's travails, but lost something
when it brought unnecessary action into play, such as a child kidnapping
and the problem of drugs being sold in school. There was no place to go
in developing Heather's character by adding these major societal
problems to Heather's story, that's for another film.
You would think, that with Heather being a victim of persecution, that
would ensure her to be kind to others who are picked on. But that is not
the case, she shows a mean streak by striking back at them when it suits
her fancy, for example, hurting the young kid she stays with in the
clubhouse, who is as lost as she is, unnecessarily calling him "a
faggot."
Solondz knows his subject well, he is able to understand and convey what
it is to be brought up with self-hatred and how such people can react by
being sometimes just as cruel as the society they are a product of, and
the result is an unusual movie that focuses in on a subject very few
filmmakers have chosen to do.
It was unfortunate that Heather never evolved, so the cruelty we
observed in the beginning of the film was also the way she was observed
when the film ended; nevertheless, an honest effort was put forth by the
filmmaker to see how school age children cope with their unique problems
they have.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Zak Forsman
I must say that I wanted very much to enjoy WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE. I'd
watched the trailer and laughed hysterically at each line. However, in its full
theatrical version, this film is a complete failure. DOLLHOUSE definitely
has its moments, but mostly this film spent its time flip-flopping between
attempts to be satirical and poignant--often failing. Writer/director,
Todd Solondz, unfortunately has no ability to pleasantly mix the two sides
it seemed he wanted to express. 
The impression I had of the writing was that the draft used wasn't very
far from the first one. Everything was presented as is, there was not one
ounce of subtlety. Dawn Weiner, the young girl who's life is pure torment,
at one point calls a bully a retard. Later, the bully, Brandon, takes Dawn
to a junk yard where he plans to rape her. Instead, he tells her that his
brother is retarded, implies his feeling were hurt and they start a
relationship. As written, this scene was pulled off in the worst way
possible because it suffered severely from clichi-itis. Brandon's
character steps up to the fence, into close-up and makes his declaration,
"...he's not in any grade, he's retarded." Todd Solondz assumes we'll
start to feel Brandon's pain, however the scene is too contrived toward
that expectation and it proves that Solondz thinks an audience will react
to 'sad scenes' like damned, pre-programmed machines.
As a director, Mr. Solondz is rarely competent. Too often do we watch
actors move for the camera. As in the scene I described earlier when
Brandon walks to a
close-up by the fence. This technique kills any possible sense of reality
within the performances because we are too aware of their staging. I have
long been of the opinion that actors are not a tool to serve the camera,
but the camera is the tool to capture the actors' performances and even to
add to it. All to often, I think, directors stage their actors in service
to 'the shot' when they should be doing the opposite. A great example of
this is GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS. If you watch, you'll notice that director
James Foley is moving his camera, not his actors, for effect.
The performances in the film are usually pretty good with a few exceptions and
there's really not much to say here other than a few of the actors deserve the
attention this film will bring--specifically Dawn Weiner, her mother, her
brother, her sister and even Steve Rogers.
Lastly, there was a moment in the film where Dawn goes to New York to find her
little sister. She goes to sleep and suddenly wakes up to see a man running down
the street with her sister screaming under his arm. I remember thinking at
that point that because this film had already lost all integrity, this
dream sequence actually did tricked you only because something this
ridiculously inept was possible within WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE. And it is
for reasons like this that I think Todd Solondz did a horrible job as both
writer and director. He seemed desperate to shake our views of teenage
life--to be an iconoclast--but fell into clichi, which I despise.
This film won best picture at the Sundance Film Festival and like THE BROTHERS
MCMULLEN last year, they both proved that independent filmmakers can make
films as cliched as Hollywood can.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Sony Pictures Classics)
Starring:  Heather Matarazzo, Brendan Sexton Jr., Matthew Faber, Daria
Kalinina, Eric Mabius, Bill Buell, Angela Pietropinto, Scott Coogan.
Screenplay:  Todd Solondz.
Producer:  Todd Solondz.
Director:  Todd Solondz.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Dawn Wiener (Heather Matarazzo), an 11-year-old resident of suburban
New Jersey, is a typical seventh grader, which is to say that she's
miserable.  Actually, she may be more typical, which is to say more
miserable.  Saddled with intelligence, less than spectacular looks and a
cruelly unfortunate name, Dawn lives in a daily hell in which finding a
safe place to sit in the cafeteria is an ordeal and a good day is one in
which she isn't called "Wienerdog" or "lesbo."  Tortured at school and
ignored at home, Dawn is the kind of character which in a more mainstream
movie would find some inner reserve of strength or discover a heretofore
unknown talent, and become loved and respected by all.  Well, WELCOME TO
THE DOLLHOUSE, Todd Solondz's brutally funny portrait of the nightmare
that is adolescence.
     It should be made perfectly clear that WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE is
not, in that favored film terminology, a "coming-of-age" story.  No one
becomes an adult at 11, and while Solondz features such rites of passage
as Dawn's first big crush and first kiss, she learns no great truths about
life.  No, WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE is about a much more basic truth --
that there is no more unpleasant time in a human life than the middle
school years.
     WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE is an episodic story which follows Dawn
through several weeks of her seventh-grade year, and some of those
episodes are so perfectly handled that they are painful to watch.  When
Dawn is forced by a teacher to read an essay on "The Importance of
Dignity" in front of the class, she reads quickly and almost silently,
wanting nothing more than for the moment to be over and to shrink into the
walls.  In a later scene, Dawn plays piano for the object of her desire,
her brother's garage band-mate Steve (Eric Mabius), and practically glows
when he pays her an off-handed compliment.  It is surprising that Solondz
has captured the world of a young girl with such detail, but he is dealing
with a time where the horrors of unpopularity are very similar between the
genders, and where knowledge about sex is still too abstract to make the
psychology of adolescence completely different.  Dawn is a girl, but she
didn't have to be.
     The fact that she _is_ a girl simply allowed Heather Matarazzo to
nail the part with a startling willingness to look completely homely, and
to be less than heroic.  One of the things which makes Dawn such a
convincing character is that she is no less vicious than the classmates
who tease her; she simply doesn't have the power over them that they have
over her.  When she finds someone over whom she _does_ have power, like
her younger sister Missy (a distressingly adorable child perpetually
wearing her pink ballet outfit and prancing about, played by Daria
Kalinina) or wimpy playmate Troy (Scott Coogan), Dawn lashes out at them
in exactly the same language with which she herself has been victimized.
Solondz realizes that the essence of this time between childhood and
adulthood is status, established through threat, insult, appearance and
conformity.  Dawn is petty and vindictive, and given the opportunity, it
is clear that she would treat other classmates the way she is being
treated.  The magic of Matarazzo's performance is that we feel for her not
because she is better than those who torment her, but because her fate is
so familiar.
     When Solondz does stumble, it is because he tries to move beyond the
simple truths of Dawn's life to big-picture issues, or to give his story
an artificial sense of resolution.  A school bully (Brendan Sexton Jr.)
with whom Dawn develops a strange friendship is given a bad home life to
explain his behavior, and the plot takes an implausible turn as Dawn goes
on a quest in New York.  Some of the surreal comic moments (like Dawn
nearly blinding a teacher with a spitball) are funny, but they pull us
away from the everyday horrors of Dawn's life, which are funny only with
the remove of years.  The old saying that comedy is simply tragedy plus
time is most certainly true when it comes to adolescence, and WELCOME TO
THE DOLLHOUSE is a winning portrait of the only story that matters when
you are eleven years old and different:  getting out alive.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 6/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:27
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/10/96, 5/11/96
Cast: Heather Matarazzo, Victoria Davis, Christina Brucato, 
      Christina Vidal, Siri Howard, Brendan Sexton Jr., Telly Pontidis
Director: Todd Solondz
Producer: Todd Solondz
Screenplay: Todd Solondz
Cinematography: Randy Drummond
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE, which won the Grand Jury Prize at the 
1996 Sundance Film Festival, is Todd Solonz' counterattack against the 
WONDER YEARS nostalgia that clouds movie memories of adolescence.  After 
all, junior high school isn't the endless series of halcyon days that 
television and films would have us believe.  Especially for those who 
aren't members of the "in" crowd, the pre-teen and early teen years can 
be an extremely painful time.  In this impressive debut, Solonz doesn't 
pull any punches in conveying the side of junior high that THE WONDER 
YEARS never depicted:  the naked cruelty that some boys and girls suffer 
at the hands of their classmates, their teachers, and even members of 
their own family.
     This is the story of Dawn Weiner (Heather Matarazzo), or "Dogface 
Weiner", as just about everyone at school calls her.  Bespeckled and not 
blessed by perfect features or a good complexion, Dawn is not a popular 
girl.  A loner by nature, she has only one friend -- a sickly elementary 
school boy who is as much an object of derision as she is.  At school, 
she is pelted by spitballs and epithets.  When she asks a classmate "Why 
do you hate me?", the response is simple and succinct:  "Because you're 
ugly."  The teachers at Benjamin Franklin Junior High seem to go out of 
their way to humiliate Dawn, accusing her of grade-grubbing and forcing 
her to write essays about the meaning of dignity.  At home, as the 
middle child, she is the most frequently neglected.  Her older brother 
is a nerdy computer whiz and her younger sister is her parents' 
favorite.  The only time Mom and Dad take notice of Dawn is when she 
does something wrong.
     One might wonder how a man, Solondz, could write, produce, and 
direct such an insightful examination of preteen female pain.  At Dawn's 
age, however, there's not that much difference between the indignities 
and humiliation endured by boys and girls who aren't functioning members 
of specialized cliques.  Loners become magnets for despite, and gender 
has little to do with it.  Dawn could just as easily be Don, and, while 
script changes would be necessary, the themes and emotion would have 
remained on the same level.
     Despite its grim subject matter, WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE isn't a 
complete downer.  Dawn is resigned to her fate, and, though her dearest 
wish is to be popular, she's able to accept her lot.  Solondz has 
injected a fair amount of natural humor into his script.  Some of the 
audience's laughter will be in response to uneasy situations, but there 
are a few genuinely funny situations, such as when Dawn avenges herself 
against her fairy princess sister (who often appears on screen to the 
strains of "The Nutcracker") by taking a saw to a doll's neck.
     Solondz's plot becomes a little too ambitious.  Instead of focusing 
on all the simple, everyday indignities of Dawn's life, he tries for 
something more momentous.  As WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE moves into its 
final third, kidnapping, possible child molestation, and drug dealing 
have all been added as plot elements.  Dawn is still the central 
character, but it's less easy to identify with her as her circumstances 
arc beyond the realm of the mundane.  WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE is at its 
best when we forge an intimate identification with the main character, 
who embodies the adolescent insecurities of even the most popular and 
well-adjusted pre-teen.
     The most effective scene of WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE is the first 
one, which shows Dawn entering a junior high cafeteria.  Alone, she 
drifts through the room, looking for a place to sit.  No one wants her 
at their table, and, when she finally finds an unoccupied seat, she's 
informed that the reason it's available is because someone barfed there 
earlier.  In many ways, this sequence is excruciating to watch, but it's 
also right on target.
     Heather Matarazzo is entirely believable in this unglamorous role -
- we can feel Dawn's isolation, longing for a "normal" life, and 
bitterness at the way everyone rejects her.  When a boy threatens to 
rape her, Matarazzo conveys the girl's ambivalence.  Rape is a horrible, 
violent crime, but Dawn so desperately wants acceptance that she's 
willing to submit to almost anything.  Her relationship with that boy, 
incidentally, is one of the film's most interesting.
     WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE is sort of like ANGUS, but without the 
false Hollywood sheen and forced happy ending.  Solondz's perceptiveness 
is acute, and, at one time or another, it will make most viewers feel 
uncomfortable.  It's not a perfect motion picture, but, as far as taking 
a cold look at an over-romanticized period of childhood, it's 
uncompromising.  WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE won't make you wistful for 
your lost junior high years; it will make you glad you grew up.

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
Heather Matarazzo stars as a Junior High student with the   
unfortunate name of Dawn Weiner. She is more than just a    
little awkward in her appearance. her brother is a computer 
geek who seemingly only does anything because "it'll look   
good on my college transcripts." Her sister is a ballerina  
who sleeps with her dolls and spends much of the movie      
dancing around in the front yard. Her parents undoubtedly   
favor the other two children over her. Life isn't going very
well for her to say the least.                              
Two people enter her life, which starts causing some        
turmoil. One of them is the lead singer of her brother's    
band, a hunky rebellious type who Dawn is instantly         
attracted to. There is a hilarious scene where she fills him
up with junk food trying to get him to stay at her house    
longer. The other guy that enters her life is Brandon, a    
popular classmate of Dawn's who is very cruel to her. There 
are some very interesting twists involving his character,   
perfectly played by Brendan Sexton Jr.                      

Author
Lewis Butler
WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE is a painful movie to watch.  I found myself
cringing in my seat throughout.  However, unlike most films that cause me
physical pain, WTTD is a good film.  The pain comes from reliving Jr. High
school, a fate that can seem worse than death.
The story, such as it is, revolves around Dawn Wiener, aka "Weiner Dog",
played with near-tragic precision by Heather Matarazzo.  Dawn is 11 years
old, is in Jr. High, and her life sucks.
Dawn lives in a surreal version of suburbia.  Her younger sister, Missy, is
so pretty and perfect that the audience can't help wishing great harm to
befall her.   Her brother is the ultimate nerd, even to the point of trying
to start a rock-band (drums, keyboards, and clarinet) to fill an
extra-curricular slot on his college resume.  Her mother hates her, and her
father is ineffective.  These aren't real people, these are caracatures
seen from Dawn's point of view.  Face it, all older brothers are hopeless
dweebs to an seventh grade girl, and all little sisters are perfect and
pretty and revolting.  And all mother hate eleven year-olds, it's how the
world works.
The audience is caught up in Dawn's view of the world, and Dawn's view is
distorted by the sudden realization that most of use have had that life
sucks.  Life is not fair.  Life, and especially Jr. High life, bites.
There's quite a bit of irony in the fact that Missy, who we all hate,
becomes the focal point of the movie near the end.  Here we've been,
thinking, "someone should really strangle that child" when all of a sudden,
there's a real possibility that someone might have.  Director Todd Solondz
(who also wrote, drawing on personal history) has set the audience up,
fulfilling their wish, and turning that against them.  We sit there,
uncomfortable in our seats, and we identify with Dawn's feelings of guilt.
She thinks it's her fault Missy is missing, but we know better.  We know
it's because of US.  Because of our hatred.
It's a dangerous trick, making the audience feel guilty, but Mr. Solondz
brings it off without a hitch.  He makes everyone identify with Dawn.  It
doesn't matter if you were the most popular kid in school, you're going to
identify with Dawn.  Everyone felt like Dawn at some point in their lives.
Maybe for you it was 6th grade, maybe it wasn't until your freshman year of
college, but we've all been there.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100
WWW URL: ">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme> 
[303/722-2009] Vox
[303/777-2911] Data

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     First-time writer/director/producer Todd Solondz won Best Picture
at the Sundance Film Festival with this cute, cutting, and very black
comedy about a seventh-grade girl desperately trying to survive in
Junior High Hell.  Newcomer Heather Matarazzo touches the heart as the
tragic Dawn Weiner, huh huh huh, the bespectacled school outcast who is
repeatedly dumped upon by her teachers, friends, and family.  Though
nowhere near as funny as the rave reviews have suggested-- any episode
of "The Simpsons" crackles with more knowing wit-- WELCOME TO THE
DOLLHOUSE still succeeds as both a character comedy and a social satire.
As in Larry Clark's KIDS, the story situations-- and the accompanying
language-- are also brutally frank.  Pay attention to the psychology
behind a young man's threat of sexual violence and Dawn's response to
same.  I'm tempted to label this movie as "anti-Disney" or, if you
prefer, the antithesis of mainstream family fare.  However, as Mickey
owns Mirimax, the corporate giant could well be the next home for Mr.
Solondz and his remarkable talents.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Christopher Null
     Once again I have to agree with the mass of critics proclaiming a film
as spectacular.  First was FARGO, the best movie of the year.  Now there's
WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE, a close second.
     The winner of the Grand Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival this
year, WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE has earned every award it has and every
award it will get.  Writer/director/producer Todd Solondz's intensely
personal tragicomedy about an 11 year-old girl (Heather Matarazzo) facing
vicious ridicule in junior high is an often somber (and more often
hilarious) look at pre-teen "society."
     Her name is Dawn Wiener, a.k.a. "Wienerdog," and she has three strikes
against her from the start.  Not particularly attractive, not overly
bright, no personality to speak of -- the perfect tragic hero.  But as an
audience, we are instantly attracted to Dawn because she reminds us of all
the awkwardness that we had during that time in our lives (although mine
was more in 9th-10th grade).  If you were Homecoming Queen, you might as
well stop reading here.
     Dawn's life is like Solondz describes about himself, "just counting
off days and checking them off... interested in survival."  Her family
loves the darling youngest daughter Missy (Daria Kalinina).  She is bullied
by everyone at school, especially Brandon (Brendan Sexton, Jr.), with whom
she develops an intricate love-hate relationship.  She has in her backyard
a dingy clubhouse for the "Special People Club," which has two members, and
which her parents want to tear down in order to have a party.
     Basically, life sucks.  But things start to look up when brother Mark
(Matthew Faber) and his horrid band get the coolest guy in high school,
Steve (Eric Mabius), to join in return for tutoring.  Dawn finds herself
instantly falling for Steve, and he, surprisingly, doesn't push her away.
I could expound on the movie's rich plot like a "normal" film critic, but I
won't.  Instead, I'll let you savor the rich and juicy story that develops
over the course of the sparse 87-minute running time.  I will say that it
never lets up.
     Story is only one facet of what makes this film great.  The acting is
universally top-notch, especially considering these are all newcomers, and
Matarazzo deserves special recognition -- even the villains overcome
stereotyping.  Randy Drummand's photography is innovative and always
interesting.  The use of music, particularly Dawn's angry theme, is
excellent, and Solondz's little touches (like Dawn picking on Missy exactly
as the kids at school pick on her, continuing the cycle) make every scene
fresh and enthralling.
     Although there is a minor structural problem near the end, that really
doesn't detract from the overall success of the film.  And by the way,
cartoonist Lynda Barry should take a look at how her very similar (but not
*nearly* as good) comic strip would look as a movie.
     The social statement of WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE almost guarantees
that it will never be seen by the pretty boys and girls that really need
to.  That's too bad.  My highest recommendation.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
