Title
Review for Tumbleweeds (1999)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Hot on the heels of--and certainly not to be confused with--that
other mother-daughter road picture currently doing the rounds (the Susan
Sarandon/Natalie Portman "Anywhere But Here"), Gavin O'Connor's
"Tumbleweeds" tumbles into town  and will likely tumble right back out
again.
        Writer/director O'Connor, who also appears in the film as a
melancholy truck driver, might think he has something going here but what
he has is a Performance (capital P) and a handful of secondary characters
and situations that don't amount to much.
        That Performance comes courtesy of Janet McTeer, a respected
English stage actress who won a Tony for her performance as Nora in the
1997 West End revival of Ibsen's "A Doll's House."  In "Tumbleweeds,"
McTeer makes a radical departure by playing Mary Jo, a sassy West Virginian
single mom.  McTeer throws herself into the role with aplomb: Mary Jo is
brash and uninhibited, dresses for sexual success, and has zero talent when
it comes to picking suitable mates (or "future ex-husbands" as her
12-year-old daughter likes to quip).
        Your enjoyment of the film will entirely depend on just how
irritating you find Mary Jo's character.
        Ava, her daughter, is played by newcomer Kimberly J. Brown.  She's
adequate in the role, but no Natalie Portman, and serves mainly as a
sounding board to McTeer's liberated ebullience.
        As the film opens, Mary Jo is in the middle of yet another domestic
argument.  She and Ava pack up and hit the road.  If we all upped and ran
every time we squabbled with our spouses there'd be a heck of a lot more
traffic on the interstates.  Where to this time?  Ava suggests California
after a breeze through Missouri leaves an unappetizing old flame standing
with reverse-tire tracks burned into his driveway.
        But it's not long before Mary Jo sets her sights on some other
wagon-hitching material.
        O'Connor's character, Jack, is an odd one--hapless and sullen.  I
swear he doesn't smile once in the entire picture.  OK, so perhaps when he
first meets our female protagonists, when their car runs out of water on
the highway--"I should've used my piss!" squawks Mary Jo alluringly.
        While some might find Mary Jo's vulgarity a little much at times,
there's no denying that her relationship with her daughter is an open and
loving one.  The film, however, takes the all too obvious tack of having
the mother be the carefree, irresponsible one with the daughter providing
the centered, calming influence.  "Tumbleweeds" rushes to summarize this
familiar dichotomy in a creaky metaphor concerning Mary Jo's reluctance to
go near that big Pacific ocean.  You don't need to have seen "Anywhere But
Here" to know it'll be Ava who serves as her swim coach.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Christopher Null
     Mother and daughter pack up from hillbilly land and head for
California: Does it sound like we've been over this ground before?
     The similarities between TUMBLEWEEDS and ANYWHERE BUT HERE (the
corpse of which is not even cold) are astonishing.  In TUMBLEWEEDS, Mom
Mary Jo (McTeer) is a put-upon single mother; daughter Ava (Brown) is
brash and headstrong.  The two drive to California, intent on "starting
over," -- in the case of TUMBLEWEEDS, an escape from physical abuse, or
at least the treat of it.  ANYWHERE BUT HERE: same story, sans the
abuse.
     Both films bumble through experiences with lovers (mother and
daughter), school, work, and the other rigors of daily life, eventually
focusing on the relationship between mom and kid.
     The former movie was a piece of junk, and TUMBLEWEEDS is not a
terribly better movie than the disaster of ANYWHERE BUT HERE.  It's safe
to say that your feelings about one will apply to the other.
TUMBLEWEEDS does manage to redeem itself above its competitor, though.
For starters, cross-eyed British actress McTeer does an astonishing job
at playing West Virginian.  Brown's Ava is sure to launch her on a Jena
Malone-path to child stardom.  And the supporting characters are
universally good in this film, unlike the former.
     But perhaps the most astonishing facet of TUMBLEWEEDS is the
discovery that it was co-written and directed by one Gavin O'Connor, who
turns out to play the post-dumb, not-quite-abusive truck driver
boyfriend from whom Mary Jo and Ava eventually run away.  That alone
makes TUMBLEWEEDS interesting as a curiosity.  O'Connor should be put in
a museum next to Forest Whitaker.
     In the film, these tumbleweeds ultimately have to decide whether or
not to settle down, and that at least gives the movie some closure.  The
story along the way is choppy and predictable, with the exception of a
few gross-out moments: I'm quite sure I could have done without the
mother-daughter farting scene.
Director: Gavin O'Connor
Producer: Greg O'Connor
Writer: Gavin O'Connor, Angela Shelton
Starring: Janet McTeer, Kimberly Brown, Gavin O'Connor, Jay O. Sanders,
Lois Smith, Laurel Holloman
http://www.tumbleweeds-movie.com/
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Check out G-Rex.com Personal Shopper at http://www.g-rex.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
This delightful indie one-up of Anywhere But Here features better acting
leads and a slightly meatier, more realistic story.  Like the Susan
Sarandon/Natalie Portman vehicle, Tumbleweeds features a single mother
and her teenage daughter leaving a small rural town to find their
fortune in Southern California.  They even pick furniture out of rich
folks' trash, too.
In Anywhere, the Augusts' departure from Bay City, Wisconsin was a
well-planned move about which friends and family knew.  In Tumbleweeds,
the Walkers' move from West Virginia literally happens in the middle of
the night.  Mother Mary Jo (Janet McTeer, Wuthering Heights) has a
knock-down/drag-out her current boyfriend while screaming for asthmatic
daughter Ava (Kimberly J. Brown, The Guiding Light) to pack up her
things.  No stranger to midnight uprooting, Ava quickly stuffs her
belongings into a bag and the duo hit the road in a car with both broken
head and taillights.
Although she seems a bit scatterbrained, Mary Jo has a plan.  An old
high school sweetheart in Missouri (or `Misery,' according to Ava) with
an automobile dealership has extended an open invitation to Mary Jo, who
envisions a better life of lavish extravagance and new cars.  But things
don't work out quite as nicely as she planned, so Mary Jo and Ava take
off again, aiming their beat-up vehicle towards the Golden State.  Ava
wants to head for San Diego, which they do despite Mary Jo's fears that
it will fall into the ocean.
Mary Jo has a pattern of bailing instantly at the first sign of failure,
leaving a trail of bad jobs and awful relationships with pathetic men.
She is also the type that falls in love with anyone that makes eye
contact with her.  Her intentions are good but not always well thought
through, as Mary Jo often puts her daughter's life secondary to her own
affairs of the heart.
With a mother as crazy Mary Jo, Ava seems even more jaded and discontent
than Anywhere's princess-y Portman, which makes her character than much
more effective and sympathetic.  She seeks stability and a father
figure, wanting to stay in one place long enough to establish roots in
school and develop normal relationships with her peers.  Ava's greatest
fear is that Mom will want to book town before her big role in the
school's production of Romeo & Juliet.
Written and directed by Gavin O'Connor (Comfortably Numb), Tumbleweeds
offers a glut of wacky characters, from Mary Jo's perverted boss to her
quirky co-worker that enjoys coffee enemas.  But the film is still a
very touching and very realistic portrayal of a relationship between an
idealistic mother and her levelheaded daughter.  The Tony Award-winning
McTeer is British, which makes her brilliant turn as a Southern belle
who grew up way too quickly all the more impressive.  Her Oscar-worthy
performance is as good as any you will see this year.  The precocious
Brown is nearly as good, creating an extraordinarily convincing
pragmatic character.
1:44 - PG-13 for adult language, adult situations and a scene of
domestic discord

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Janet McTeer, Kimberly Brown, Gavin O'Connor. Rated PG-13.
Tumbleweeds is very much an actor's movie, one with little going for it
besides the potential for tour de force performances. The script,
indeed, is a thespian's dream, complete with explosive domestic abuse
scenes, teary-eyed monologues and screaming fits aplenty. The
performances from the small-name cast are some of the year's best, an
Oscar goldmine, but the movie itself is predictable and simple.
Certainly not bad, as bad movies go; I was never bored and often times
I found myself engrossed. Still, as one of the characters in it would
probably say, this ain't no gem.
The movie opens with Mary Jo Walker (Janet McTeer, a renowned stage
veteran and Tony Award winner) having a brutal fight with her husband.
He chases her around the kitchen, knocking things over, as she taunts
him to give her a big bruise in the eye "so [her] lawyer can see it."
Right away, she sticks her head into her daughter Ava's room and tells
her to "pack up, we're leavin'!" Ava is way ahead of her, her suitcase
is already half packed and with a roll of the eyes and a groan she gets
into the car and they take off.
You see, this is Mary Jo's fourth marriage and she has had more than
her share of experiences with abusive husbands. She and Ava have moved
around a lot. Ava is sick to death of it and just wants to settle down
in one place, with a father figure or, preferably, without, go to
school, make friends and live a normal life. No can do -- her mother is
a veritable jackass magnet: every guy she marries gets violent with her.
So Ava persuades Mary Jo to move to San Diego, which Ava falls in love
with. They get there. Mary Jo gets a boring but seemingly lucrative
job. Ava goes to school and makes friends. Everything is perfect until
Mary Jo makes really good friends with a sexy trucker named Jack (Gavin
O'Connor, who -- I couldn't believe it, from the looks of the guy --
also directed) and faster than you can say "divorce" they've moved in
together. The relationship seems to be just right at first -- it always
does. But soon we get little hints that everything is not as dandy as
it should be. First, Jack gets really miffed that Mary Jo didn't ask
her about his day. Then he almost has a contusion because of the low
quality of her goulash. Before she knows it he's throwing a hissy fit
in a restaurant.
The characters are attentively developed, interesting and involving.
We're immediately engaged in Mary Jo and Anna's relationship and
dilemma. We grow to hate Jack just as much. There's a distinctively
human quality to these people and that allows for an entry point into
the movie, a place where we can emotionally attach ourselves and then
watch the rest of the movie from that particular viewpoint.
The problem, to the extent that there is one, is that we know how the
movie will end as soon as one of the supporting characters smiles. With
such an interesting array of players, it's a shame to see a script take
such a painfully standard course of action. The experience, then, is a
strange one: we basically know everything that is going to happen
before it actually does and yet we somehow enjoy it. There isn't a
single positive thing I could say about the storyline itself; it's all
in the characterization.
Janet McTeer is terrific in a role that fits her like a glove. She
manages to be imposing and caring at the same time adding a level of
depth to her relationship with her daughter. The daughter is played by
newcomer Kimberly Brown in an intelligent, precocity-free performance.
Also turning in an impressive performance is O'Connor, who is
formidable and rather frightening: just the note his character is
supposed to hit.
Tumbleweeds lacks any real insight into love or life and it certainly
isn't rife with surprises and originality. It is involving and
entertaining, working an all the levels it was supposed to in the first
place. Nothing new, but I'll take it.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TUMBLEWEEDS (director/writer: Gavin O'Connor; screenwriter: based on the
memoirs of Angela Shelton; cinematographer: Dan Stoloff; editor: John
Gilroy; cast: Janet McTeer (Mary Jo Walker), Kimberly J. Brown (Ava
Walker), Jay O. Sanders (Dan), Gavin O'Connor (Jack Ranson), Michael J.
Pollard (Cummings), Laurel Holloman (Laurie Pendleton), Lois Smith
(Ginger); Runtime: 102; Fine Line Features; 1999)
A very obvious melodrama about the relationship of a southern-white
trash mother-daughter. A congenial bonding story, where the lesson the
mother learns is so plain, that when she learns her lesson, it appears
such an insignificant accomplishment, one that any child should have
already known. The story is not the thing here, but the unflappable,
zesty performance Janet McTeer gives, as she becomes absorbed in her
part and plays it with emotional force, carrying this picture for all
its worth.
The females bond on the road, as we see them leave West Virginia after a
battle with mother's current abusive boyfriend and head West to Missouri
to find that the man she dated from high school 10 years ago has become
obese and lives on a broken-down  junkyard type of farm, and so she
takes one look at him and doesn't even get out of the car and continues
heading West, as the two make their way down to a small southern
Californian oceanside town.
The mother always leaves town after a spat. She married at 17, and has
since had four husbands and many boyfriends, all of the belligerent and
possessive kind. She has travelled to different parts of the South to
get away from them, seemingly wandering aimlessly around. The British
actress Janet McTeer gives an earthy performance as the attractive Mary
Jo Walker, someone who always picks the wrong man. The 12-year-old
daughter Ava, is played with adolescent tenderness by Kimberly J. Brown.
She is someone who is disturbed by her mother's behavior, who loves her
mother but is upset with her for only thinking about sex.
Stuck with a broken hose in the middle of the desert, the pair are
rescued by a strapping truck driver, Jack (Gavin O'Connor). He fixes the
hose, flirts with mom, which she reciprocates, while Ava mumbles aloud,
here we go again. When they leave Jack, never expecting to see him
again, they settle in Starlight Beach, California. This conveniently
turns out to be where Jack lives. Mary Jo says it is an act of fate.
Mother and daughter settle into Jack's house, and since Jack is a carbon
copy of every man she has gone out with, we wait for the explosion
between them to occur. Meanwhile Mary Jo gets a clerical job with a
twerpy boss (Pollard), who is also a pervert. She makes friends at the
workplace with another female clerk, and avoids the nice man in her
workplace, Dan (Sanders), who is attracted to her but can't make contact
with her, except as a friend. Ava likes the gentle widower and tries her
best to push them together.
Ava finds that she likes living in this pleasant town, where she gets
the part of Shakespeare's Romeo in the school play. She also kisses her
first boy and feels the first pangs of puppy love.
The predictable fight then comes between the quick-tempered and bossy
Jack and the hard-luck Mary Jo, but this time Ava refuses to run away
from town with her mother. The two move out of Jack's and try to make a
go of it in town, as all indications this is where they will stay for
awhile. Whether Dan is Mr. Right for her, is left up in the air, as one
wonders if she is attracted to him. But, at least, the mother shows
signs that she is getting wearied of abusive relationships and that
maybe her next choice will be a better one.
The immature mother learns from her mature daughter, and this modest
slice of Americana road film, which gets into the lives of real people,
works in a limited way. My problem with the film, is that it didn't
absorb me in its story. I just thought the mother-daughter were likable
and the film was pleasant, but not far-reaching.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Gavin O'Connor.
Cast: Janet McTeer, Kimberly J. Brown, Gavin O'Connor, Jay O. Sanders, Laurel 
Holloman, Ashley Buccille, Cody McMains, Lois Smith, Michael J. Pollard.
1999 - 100 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, November 26, 1999.
Writer-director Gavin O'Connor's "Tumbleweeds" bears more than a passing 
resemblance to another current film, "Anywhere But Here," starring Natalie 
Portman and Susan Sarandon. Higher-profile and with bigger stars, the latter 
Hollywood version, for once, is actually superior to its indie counterpart, 
particularly in its more intimate screenplay. That isn't to say "Tumbleweeds" 
is a failure, however, as it boasts remarkably natural performances from the 
two leading ladies. It is these two actresses, and a handful of memorable 
supporting work, that buoy the film above mediocrity as, ultimately, the 
story itself is overly familiar and occasionally by-the-numbers, especially 
in its portrayal of domestic abuse.
At the opening, 40-year-old Mary Jo Walker (Janet McTeer) is being assaulted 
once again by her nasty-tempered husband. He's her fourth hubby (she has 
problems saying, "no," to marriage proposals), but she also is not the kind 
of woman who will allow being mistreated. Soon after, she and her 
preadolescent daughter Ava (Kimberly J. Brown) have hit the road, like they 
always do when Mary Jo has man troubles, headed in no particular direction. 
They have never seen the beach, so they end up moving to San Diego, CA, where 
Mary Jo gets a job as an office secretary and Ava becomes fast friends at 
school with fellow classmates Zoe (Ashley Buccille) and Adam (Cody McMains). 
After a chance meeting with Jack Ranson (Gavin O'Connor), a truck driver who 
previously had helped fix their car, Mary Jo, once again, believes that Jack 
is "the" one, and before long, Mary Jo and Ava have moved in with him. Ava 
clearly doesn't like Jack; she can see right through his thin facade, and 
fears that if the relationship between her mother and him grows rocky, she 
will find herself uprooted to another town somewhere else.
As a mother-daughter tale, "Tumbleweeds" is meticulous and believable. The 
relationship between Mary Jo and Ava is so very unaffected because the 
screenplay, by O'Connor and Angela Shelton, knows exactly what goes on 
between a close parent and child. The dialogue exchanges between the two are 
also right on the money, as is the casting of the two central roles.
Janet McTeer, an English stage actress, is exceptional, not only pulling off 
a southern accent with nary a flaw in sight, but also transforming Mary Jo 
into a strong-willed woman whose best friend is her daughter, and gives her 
all the love and care a child should have. That isn't to say Mary Jo is 
perfect; she grows scared and dispirited if she doesn't have a husband or 
boyfriend at all times, and, inevitably, also seems to pick the wrong men. 
Mary Jo fools herself into believing a man stands for security and can fill 
up the missing hole in her personal character, but all it really does is 
cause her constant hardships. When things don't seem to be going well, Mary 
Jo simply packs up (and sometimes even leaves her belongings) and sets off 
for another town, never looking back.
Kimberly J. Brown, as Ava, has the more difficult role because she is the one 
who acts as the voice of reason for her mother. Ava is dedicated and loyal to 
Mary Jo, rarely ever complaining about her severely dysfunctional life of 
settling down and moving out, but she is also growing into a teenager, and 
realizes that running away isn't the answer for everything. Brown, a newcomer 
to feature films, is not at all a child actor who mugs in front of the 
camera, or attempts to steal a scene away from others. She doesn't need to, 
because she often does this without even trying. Brown compliments Ava as a 
girl on the edge of her teenage years, still in the learning process of 
boyfriends and kissing. Ava can sometimes act spoiled or bratty, but that 
only comes with the territory of being a child, and otherwise, is a likable 
character who we can't help but follow with a close eye through the story.
Lending fine support are two impressive supporting turns by Laurel Holloman, 
as Mary Jo's friend and coworker Laurie, and Jay O. Sanders, as Dan Miller, a 
kind widower who may be the perfect match for Mary Jo, if only she could see 
it. In the subplot involving Dan, the turnout isn't exactly as expected, but 
seems nothing if not truthful to the characters.
When Jack Ranson, played by writer-director Gavin O'Connor, enters the 
picture as Mary Jo's new blossoming boyfriend, the film instantly becomes 
more conventional and predictable. We, as the audience, know that Jack isn't 
quite as charming as he may appear to be at first glance, and it is 
inescapable that bliss will only last so long, and Mary Jo will want to get 
out of San Diego as quickly as possible. There then will be a confrontation 
where Ava will attempt to get her mother to understand they don't have to run 
away any longer, that she is her own person and her life shouldn't have to 
revolve around that of men. 
The way "Tumbleweeds" ends is understated and, looking back, very little is 
solved. Without giving anything away, it is unavoidable to wonder whether 
Mary Jo really will follow through with her new path in life or not, and 
Ava's blossoming sexuality is cause for concern. Ava may be the one that sees 
the mistakes her mother makes, but you have to question whether she might end 
up just like her when she gets a little older. "Tumbleweeds" is a delicate 
drama, short on plot but rich in memorable characters. It may have its fair 
share of shortcomings, but the stunning work by McTeer and Brown is cause for 
celebration, all by itself.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Sometimes there is no better demonstration of a concept poorly
executed than the same concept well executed. Take TUMBLEWEEDS, for
instance. It's the story of a Mary Jo Walker (Janet McTeer), a flighty and
frequently irresponsible woman, and her smart-aleck adolescent daughter
Ava (Kimberly J. Brown), who cringes at her mother's suspect 
decision-making. After the collapse of Mary Jo's latest bad marriage,
mother and daughter jump in their car and flee their home for greener
pastures, eventually landing in Southern California (the San Diego suburb
of Starlight Beach, to be precise). Ava tries to make the best of the
situation and find some stability, but Mary Jo simply jumps headlong into
another questionable relationship, this time with gruff trucker Jack
(co-writer/director Gavin O'Connor).
     Sound familiar? It should -- the plot is virtually identical to that
of the current Susan Sarandon/Natalie Portman film ANYWHERE BUT HERE. Of
course there are elements unique to each central relationship, and there
are idiosyncrasies in the personalities of the lead characters.
Essentially, however, each film is the story of a mother/daughter
friendship where the maturity hierarchy has been inverted, set against the
backdrop of the California sun. TUMBLEWEEDS just happens to be a rich
character study that feels genuinely human, instead of like a Hollywood
construct.
     It doesn't start out looking that way. The early scenes find Mary Jo
and Ava flinging their clothes out the car window in an act of liberating
littering, and tracking down an old high school classmate of Mary Jo's who
turns out to be less dreamy than she had hoped. The wacky set pieces smack
of contrivance, turning TUMBLEWEEDS into a low-budget variation on
mainstream tales of female bonding. Even the hand-held camera work starts
to seem more like a contrivance than a tool to evoke a sense of urgency
The very grittiness O'Connor is aiming for becomes just another brand of
glossiness.
     Then, right about the time the Walkers arrive in Starlight Beach,
something just clicks. Newcomer Kimberly J. Brown's performance as Ava,
which had seemed too rough around the edges, develops into something
intriguing and unique, not at all the typical mature-beyond-her-years,
foul-mouthed-beyond-prime-time movie kid. Janet McTeer's brassy Mary Jo
similarly blossoms into a character easy to understand but considerably
harder to pin down. The relationship between the two shows all the twists,
turns and knots of a complex mother/daughter pairing, but there's never a
sense of manufactured conflict. These people behave like real people;
their battles don't sound scripted, and their interdependent affection is
thoroughly convincing.
     Brown and McTeer are both pretty darned good, but the reason
TUMBLEWEEDS starts to work so well is that O'Connor doesn't force the
story to rest entirely on their shoulders. ANYWHERE BUT HERE was a
mother/daughter story in which the mother and daughter sometimes seemed to
be the only two humans in the city; TUMBLEWEEDS develops the characters
through their interactions with friends and co-workers. Ava's flirtations
with a goofy classmate show an edgy side to her emerging sexuality; Mary
Jo's scenes with Jack show her tendency to use men as a prop in her life,
as well as her problems dealing rationally with disagreements (similarly
shown in her abrupt departure from a mundane job). TUMBLEWEEDS gives its
two central characters a context in which to operate, something sadly
lacking in ANYWHERE BUT HERE. Verisimilitude isn't necessary for every
kind of film, but it's fairly useful in a character study. In TUMBLEWEEDS,
Gavin O'Connor effectively portrays a mother and daughter trying to find
their way in the world, because he effectively portrays their world.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Since TUMBLEWEEDS opened right on the heels of the remarkably similar
ANYWHERE BUT HERE, let's make it clear which is which.  Both feature
likeable mother/daughter buddies who are off to California to make a new
life for themselves since the mother is relationship-challenged.  Both
even feature moms who shop for furniture in the closest trash.
The differences are in the casting and the budget.  The more critically
acclaimed and obviously lower-budget film is TUMBLEWEEDS.  And, whereas
everyone knows the stars of ANYWHERE BUT HERE (Susan Sarandon and
Natalie Portman), few people will have heard of Janet McTeer, known
mainly for her stage work, and relative newcomer Kimberly Brown.
Mary Jo Walker (McTeer) feels obligated to leave the state whenever she
changes husbands, she's had 4, or boyfriends.  This means that she and
her 12-year-old daughter, Ava (Brown), named after Ava Gardner, have
lived in more states than they can count.
On their way to "sunny San Diego," they are aided by a large,
good-looking truck driver, Jack Ranson, whom Mary Jo will eye as a
possible number 5.  Jack's played by Gavin O'Connor, who is also the
producer, director and co-writer (along with Angela Shelton).  Mary Jo
has an unbounded energy for life.  She's a good mother who likes her
daughter as much as her men.  In a life of constant flux, her daughter
provides her only stability.
The slice of life story is remarkably uneventful and rarely compelling.
Generally avoiding clichés, the movie's typical scene is Ava's first day
at school.  In the movies it is de rigueur for the other kids to
ridicule any new kids in class.  In contrast, Ava is welcomed without
fanfare, and the only remark she hears is a kind one, as one girl
whispers a compliment about her dress.
Much of the story is quite predictable.  As soon as Ava mentions that
she hasn't had her first period, you can bet that it will happen during
the movie and at an awkward moment.
Qualifying as the picture's strangest episode is the incident at Mary
Jo's new place of work in California.  Soon after she meets her
coworker, Laurie Pendleton  (Laurel Holloman), Laurie suggest she join
her later for a coffee enema.  And she's not kidding.  Laurie goes on to
detail the joys that coffee enemas can bring.
Finally, showing that it is a hip modern picture, Ava plays Romeo in the
school play.  Her boyfriend says that he wished he had known that she
was trying out for the part.  If he had, he would have tried out for the
part of Juliet.
TUMBLEWEEDS runs 1:44.  It is rated PG-13 for language, sensuality and a
scene of domestic discord and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
The road movie is a genre not likely to die anytime soon because it represents
the American landscape of searching for your identity. Now the road movie about
a single/divorced/widowed mother searching for a new place and a new man with a
daughter or son in tow is nothing new, and a certifiable genre in its own
right. From "Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore" to "This Boy's Life," the genre
has been milked dry of all possibilities, but then comes "Tumbleweeds," which
mildly reverses expectations. 
The change is the casting of English actress Janet McTeer as the Southerner
from North Carolina, Mary Jo Walker, a vibrant, energetic woman who has just
left her husband, and hastily leaves with her daughter, Ava (Kimberly Brown),
to another state. They disagree over where to go to and finally decide on San
Diego, California, near a beach. Ava goes to school and discovers she a talent
for acting, and thus prepares for a role as Romeo in the school play of "Romeo
and Juliet." Mary Jo works for a telephone wake-up call service, and has a
strange boss (Michael J. Pollard) watching her every move. Everything seems
perfect, including the truck driver she's dating, Jack Ranson (Gavin O'Connor),
who asks them to move in to his house. Ava smells trouble from the start,
already devising an escape route from her bedroom. 
Mary Jo has always escaped from her life and her abusive boyfriends and
husbands, and Ava loves her mother dearly but she also knows her too well.
Their relationship and need for each other is at the core of "Tumbleweeds," and
it is pinpointed in one scene where Ava explains to Mary that everything may
seem fine with the new beau, but six months is longer than Mary should expect
to stay attached.
Everyone who is a film buff can predict where "Tumbleweeds" will go with its
premise. Jack seems nice but he's also tempermental, and ignores Ava. We know
that Jack will be all wrong for Mary Jo, yet her co-worker, Dan Miller (Jay O.
Sanders) may be what she needs - someone who can take of her and who
understands the iambic pentameter in Shakespeare. We also are aware that Mary
Jo will finally realize that she is, in effect, only running away from herself.
Janet McTeer is sheerly perfect as Mary Jo - those penetrating yet soothing
eyes and luscious smile give us everything we need to sympathize with her and
her plight. She has a very touching scene with her co-worker and best friend,
Laurie (Laurel Holloman), where she admits that she does not know why she's
always leaving. The beauty is all there in this beaming, dreamy Mary Jo, but
she is also emotionally fragile.
Kimberly Brown gives one of the best, purest and most naturalistic performances
of any child actor this year as the presumptuous, smart Ava. I found myself
laughing heartily whenever she secretly winked or nodded to her mother, and
plus she has some truly humane scenes with McTeer. One particular example is
when Mary Jo is showing Ava how to kiss using apples, and the way it is shot
and timed makes the scene as simple and real as any other film could be. I also
liked an earlier scene where they toss out old clothes from their car, trying
to start anew.
My big reservation about "Tumbleweeds" is that it ends just as the story is
getting more interesting. This is one of those independent films tht would have
benefitted from a 2 hour-plus running time, especially with the introduction of
characters such as the widower Jack , the kind gardener Ginger (Lois Smith), or
Mary's best pal, Laurie. I also would have preferred a less formulaic approach
and not so many cliches (the film often feels more episodic than the rambling
character study it aimed to be). Still, benefitting from the amazing
performances by McTeer and Brown, "Tumbleweeds" has moments of true beauty and
realism that will make you tumble with joy. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or comments at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
Gavin O'Connor's "Tumbleweeds" is a tour-de-force of character study, a 
narrative whose whirlwind plot whips up our interest only to let us down 
gently in the end.
The opening scene jolts us with a fight between Mary Jo Walker (Janet 
McTeer) and her latest husband.  The vehemence of the quarrel makes us 
wonder why the movie has only a PG-13 rating.  (There's a love scene later 
that sets us wondering, too.)  But we are quickly convinced that Mary Jo is 
right to get her daughter Ava (Kimberly Brown) out of there - away from this 
abusive stepfather.  The mother and daughter pair sets off in on old 
Pontiac, leaving North Carolina and heading west towell, they don't know 
where.
That's one of the best qualities about the movie, its whimsicality.  This 
spontaneous mother, who does not get upset at things that would make normal 
mothers livid, carries much of the movie with her eccentricities.  We enjoy 
watching her lack of vexation when the car breaks down - inevitably - on a 
remote highway somewhere in the dusty middle of the country.  When a trucker 
stops to help, Mary Jo looks over his body as he looks under her hood;  
meanwhile, Ava, a little girl wise beyond her years, pouts about her 
mother's flirting.  For a long while "Tumbleweeds" acts like a road movie, 
as the two decide where they might end up on their flight away from the last 
abusive man.  We know, by the way, that Mary Jo has been married four times; 
  what's at least a little puzzling is that she has not been put off 
starting new relationships almost the hour the old ones are sunk.  So when 
the pair settles in the "Pink Motel" not far from the Pacific Ocean, we 
think their lives will be calmer.
Big mistake.  Her feelers out for a relationship, Mary Jo actually spots the 
helpful trucker - Jack, played by director Gavin O'Connor - in a bar.  They 
begin a romping romance while Ava is at a sleepover at a new friend's house. 
  The scene in which the girl returns home prematurely reveals a great deal, 
actually, about Jack.  Predictably, this young man ends up not quite meeting 
the expectations of this impulsive womanand vice versa.  Not even Mary Jo's 
job is stable, as she is subjected to harassment and whining by her boss 
boss, a despicable homunculus.  Throughout her strife, the anchor in her 
life is Ava, the girl she named after the glamorous Ava Gardner.
And the chemistry between them is very watchable.  We can imagine O'Connor 
in many scenes just turning McTeer loose, her southern drawl and her lack of 
inhibitions on full throttle.  Several episodes are shot seemingly without 
script, improvisations that show the strength of the mother-daughter bond.  
McTeer is at her best when she gets fully into the skin of this promiscuous, 
rather permissive mom.  It's the incongruity of her behavior that engages 
and mildly shocks us.  At the foundation of her character is sadness, 
though, as we discover when a co-worker friend of Mary Jo's asks her "Why 
are you going to Arizona?   Tell me." again and again.  We feel a subtle but 
powerful impact when the script commences to dig into Mary Jo's psychology.  
Even Ava deserts her at one point.  We begin to ponder, not for the first 
time, if Mary Jo isn't a terribly bad example, though we probably excuse her 
stupidity when we remember her affection for the girl.
Kimberly Brown is quite a find.  Her accent is also markedly Southern, her 
manner often more mature than her mom's.  Her Ava handles the tension 
between her mother and various father figures quite well, not wholly 
succumbing to the conventional pouting and sullenness of children in similar 
fixes.
Gavin O'Connor acts naturally as Jack the trucker/jerk.  He's a little too 
young for Mary Jo, however, and the script causes him to reveal vital 
information - like an accident and a job loss -- a little later than he 
should.
Another male, a co-worker named Dan (Jay O. Sanders), gets along famously 
with the aspiring actress Ava.  Sanders does a modest and strong job as Dan 
Miller, though the script handicaps him by positioning him as the knight in 
emotional armor:  he's single, having lost his wife in a car accident that 
he apparently caused.  Further, Dan is conveniently available when Mary Jo 
drops Jack.  Sound like a few too many clichés?
A lot of things are nicely realistic about "Tumbleweeds."   The characters' 
lives unfold realistically, albeit a bit dramatically.  But larger than life 
is how most of us like our characters, and Janet McTeer's Mary Jo is a 
bundle of likable contradictions.  "Tumbleweeds" doesn't quite know where to 
go in its final moments, though unlike many films, it does not wander off 
and die.


Author
Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Home (Screener tape courtesy of Fine Line Features USA)
Released in the UK by Entertainment Film Distributors on March 3, 2000; 
certificate 15; 102 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Gavin O'Connor; produced by Gregory O'Connor.
Written by Gavin O'Connor, Angela Shelton; from a story by Angela Shelton.
Photographed by Daniel Stoloff; edited by John Gilroy.
There is an early scene in this movie which shows the main character, Mary Jo 
Walker, throwing all her clothes out of a car window and letting them fly off 
down the highway. She's trying to make a point to her daughter about how they 
should leave their old lives behind and look forward to the future. Never 
mind that she has no money to buy new garments -- she's being carefree, 
everybody!
Moments like this don't exist in the real world, and for all its dirty 
locations and documentary-style hand-held camera movement, hardly a second of 
"Tumbleweeds" does. It resides in that particularly farfetched cranny of 
Hollywood where audiences are expected to root for obnoxious trailer trash 
sluts like Mary Jo simply because she keeps saying "I'm gonna get me a new 
life, yessir!"
The woman is played by British actress Janet McTeer as someone who cannot 
settle down even after childbirth, four marriages and numerous attempts at 
relocation. She's leaving one of her husbands as the movie opens, and young 
Ava (Kimberly J. Brown) seems to know the drill, getting from the house to 
the car so fast it's as if she'd expected the break-up sooner, and had been 
getting impatient.
The plot goes through the same motions as all other mother-and-child road 
movies, which range from "Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore", released in 1974, 
right up to last year's "Anywhere But Here". We know certain obligatory 
things must happen: The mother's recitals of lines about how things can only 
get better. The child's groaning, complaining and rebelling. Comic relief in 
the car. Sentimentality in motel rooms. Pigging out after mom gets her first 
new job. Romance, separation. More romance, another separation. Reunion. 
Happy ending. (Yippee.)
There are some good things about the film, including McTeer's Oscar-nominated 
performance. She never makes Mary Jo likeable -- that would be an impossible 
task -- but her American 'Southern belle' accent is faultless, and she 
follows a set of mannerisms so subtly distinctive that it's hard to deny she 
has inhabited the character. Even greater kudos to Brown, who is just as 
convincing in a more emotionally complex role, wanting to love and support 
her mother, but often feeling neglected and unguided by her.
Several good passages of dialogue can also be found in the picture -- one 
involving "coffee enemas" will not soon leave my memory. But little moments 
such as these don't quite conquer our animosity toward Mary Jo, who is an 
insecure tramp, ill-equipped with parenting skills and lacking in self-worth. 
Enjoyment of "Tumbleweeds" requires us to abandon logic and values from the 
real world, so we can blindly cheer on the characters. We're supposed to feel 
happy, for example, when Mary Jo walks out on her typing job at an alarm 
company, destroying lots of files on the way out. But would you really be 
happy if YOUR security details were destroyed? Methinks not.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Fine Line Features
 Director: Gavin O'Connor
 Writer: Angela Shelton (story), Gavin O'Connor
 Cast: Janet McTeer, Kimberly Brown, Gavin O'Connor, Jay
O. Sanders, Lois Smith, Laurel Holloman, Michael J. Pollard,
Noah Emmerich, Ashley Buccille, Cody McMains
   Many people complain that movies are increasingly
divorced from real life.  Surely popcorn flicks like "End of
Days," "Stigmata," "The World is Not Enough," and "Toy
Story 2" do not reflect what goes on your daily life or mine.
Still, horror and action-adventure stories are popular largely
because they take us out of ourselves into new worlds made
all the more convincing and stirring as technical effects keep
improving.  By contrast, folks who prefer more down-to-earth
stories may appreciate the indies, the small productions
released without the hope of earning megabucks but which
provide cultural fulfillment for those wanting a more
sensible look into the nurture provided by human
relationships of recognizable people rather than the nature of
Satan, anarchists, and evil spirits.
   The danger faced by filmmakers who eschew the occult,
the outlandish and the incredible is that they may turn to the
other extreme--by providing us with down-home stories easily
replicated on the smaller screens of home television.  Such is
the difficulty with "Tumbleweeds," a movie which garnered
accolades from independent circuits through which it has
traveled because of its lifelike portrayal of a mother-daughter
alliance.  Despite good acting by the two principals--"a
towering performance" if you believe Box Office magazine--
played by Janet McTeer and Kimberly Brown, the story is so
humdrum and the mother unlikable in her self-
destructiveness that I found myself squirming in the plush
seat of a top-notch movie house.
   Like the similar "Anywhere But Here," which is superior
because of a tighter script and more expensive production
values, "Tumbleweeds" focuses on a 12-year-old girl who is
more mature and more stability-seeking than her puerile
parent. Mary Jo Walker (Janet McTeer), so damaging to
herself that she has been through four tempestuous
marriages and keeps begging for more punishment, has just
run out on number four after a close encounter with a raised
fist.  Traveling west with all the permanence of the thistled
plant for which Angela Shelton's story is named, Mary Jo and
her 12-year-old girl Ava (Kimberly Brown) run into a truck
driver, Jack (played by the director, Gavin O'Connor) and
soon set up housekeeping in his home near San Diego--a
location much favored by beach-loving Ava, who finds true
joy playing Romeo in the school play and getting a boy friend
of her own.  Ava's dream is about to be shattered as the
unstable Mary Jo tells off her new boss, Mr. Cummings
(Michael J. Pollard) and her relationship with Jack
deteriorates in much the way her previous connections had
done.  Ready once again to run away--this time to
Arizona--she is stopped in her tracks by her headstrong
daughter, who forces her mom to stand still and perhaps
develop a connection with an educated man, Dan Miller (Jay
O. Sanders).
   I'll go along with online critic James Berardinelli, who
reports that director Gavin pays "careful attention to character
development and relationship building," but would not agree
that these directorial efforts will inevitably make us feel a
sympathy for both characters.  While Mary Jo and Ava do
share a solid, affectionate bond, observing Mary Jo wiggle
her butt at the men she meets, opening her eyes to simulate
expressiveness, and imitating adolescents in her joyful
war-whoops becomes tiresome after a half hour or so.  
   Like Ann and Adele who, in Wayne Wang's "Anywhere But
Here," mom and daughter are terrified of losing each other,
though Ava appears willing to risk all to stop the immature
adult from pulling up roots yet again.  But while those overly
enamored of character development may find great appeal in
"Tumbleweeds," the story is too loose and rambling to hold
the interest of those who agree with Plato who, in the classic
study of theater called "Poetics" holds (more or less) that
plot--not character development--is the soul of a good story.

Author
Walter Frith
I've always disliked the notion that a certain film has to be a 'guy' or
'girl' flick. It would be nice if directors, writers, and actors could give
a movie some interaction to make all films appeal at least in some part to
everyone. But I guess this is wishful thinking and while it's hard to make a
film like 'Rambo: First Blood Part II' appeal to women and a film like 'The
First Wives's Club' appeal to men, 'Tumbleweeds' has a look and feel to it
that appeals equally to men as it does to women whom I suspect were the
target audience. It's an interesting film that can be enjoyed by both
genders but I wouldn't recommend it as a date film.
There's a movie from 1990 with Cher, Winona Ryder, Bob Hoskins and Christina
Ricci entitled 'Mermaids'. In this movie, Cher plays a mother raising her
two daughters with a large degree of instability. She travels around the
United States from one city to another and takes odd jobs and when she's had
enough, she packs up and moves again. An experience which can be good or bad
for children growing up, depending, of course, on the individual.
'Tumbleweeds' has a similar pattern but is a rather scattershot way of
telling a story.
Janet McTeer stars as Mary Jo Walker, a mother with similar habits as the
Cher character....traveling from one city to another with a young daughter
in tow and as the film opens, there is a scene of domestic unpleasantness,
something that would sort of set the tone for the rest of the picture which
doesn't have a lot of focus but one that is extremely well acted by the
entire cast. McTeer's character echoes trailer park trash. The booze, the
men, the affairs, all done while her daughter Ava (Kimberly Brown) knows
exactly what her mother is up to. Given the fact that McTeer is English,
makes her performance all the more remarkable as she has to master a
southern U.S. accent and learn the habits of a completely different culture.
She has a knack for selecting the wrong friends, both male and female which
usually lands her in trouble.
Ava finds a leading part in her latest school's play and tries to make the
most of it and do something that will make herself and her mother proud.
Given the fact that her mother has been married four times, gives Ava the
longing to do something productive and it's rare and quite nice to see a
daughter teach her parent something rather than the other way around. There
is something unusual that gives Ava a different look at life. The play she
stars in at school is a version of 'Romeo and Juliet' where she will
play.....Romeo! The reversal of gender for the sake of a school play seems
like a good idea but not all are crazy about the notion.
Another plus for the movie is how it teaches us not to judge people so
quickly. There is strong shade of decency underneath Mary Jo's wild and open
lifestyle. She really cares for her daughter. She is willing to be a loving
wife to the right man and her
willingness to be accepted by other people seems secondary to her
independence.
The challenge for first time director Gavin O'Connor is finding something of
a revelation in the lives of these characters that embodies something
original or at least something familiar with a refreshing twist. One thing I
enjoyed was the fact that O'Connor plays one of Mary Jo's beau hunks in the
film, a truck driver named Jack. She is usually scared off by the wrong kind
of man. Imagine her surprise when she inflames his seemingly good nature and
scares him off with her wild ways.
Even with all of these good things pointed out about the film, it stops just
short of getting a recommendation for several reasons. The film looks
hurried and rushed through production. It smacks of a low budget that shows.
Low budget films are often better than the real expensive Hollywood
offerings, but in this case, it looked too much like a film that could have
used more rehearsals, sort of like those 1940's war time pictures that were
done with only a couple of takes because film, like all things during that
period, were rationed.
Secondly, as appealing as this film is to both men and women, the male
characters are given a rather secondary role in the film and we never get to
know any of them extremely well. The very under rated Jay O. Sanders isn't
given a whole lot to do and a familiar actor like Michael J. Pollard, who
plays Mary Jo's boss, is little more than a hack character, sort of like the
inept way he played in 1989's 'Next of Kin' where he played a flophouse
manager with an IQ of about 1. Here, his job is a little more important but
he still plays it like 'Forrest Gump'. 'Tumbleweeds', written by director
O'Connor and Angela Shelton, would have been better off as a play, with the
chance to re-vamp its story where you can do many things in live theatre but
the art of film is permanent, not always a good thing for those who don't
always make the right decisions.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "TUMBLEWEEDS" (Fine Line Films)
Why see Tumbleweeds? One very compelling reason: Janet McTeer,
who's been dubbed "the next Meryl Streep."  The plot, involving a
flighty, narcissistic mother and profane, outspoken adolescent
daughter who hop in a car and head for a new life in California,
sounds like Anywhere But Here, but this affable, low-budget comedy is
far more focused, character-driven, and less artificial than the Susan
Sarandon/Natalie Portman star vehicle in which the supporting players
seemed like cardboard cut-outs. Besides, there's Janet McTeer, a
remarkable, highly respected British actress who won Broadway's Tony
several years ago as Nora in a revival of Ibsen's A Doll's House. The
Amazonian McTeer plays a working class woman from North Carolina who
drags her smart-aleck teenage daughter (Kimberly J. Brown) through her
many abusive, failed relationships, finally trying to settle down in
Starlight Beach, a quiet seaside town near San Diego, and find
happiness with a long-haul trucker (Gavin O'Connor) who's
contemptuously referred to as "the future ex-husband." There have been
four previous ex-husbands. Directed and co-written by Gavin O'Connor,
the story is loosely based on the relationship between screenwriter
Angela Shelton (O'Connor's ex-wife) and her own strong-willed,
free-spirited mother. And the tone of the film is curiously
reminiscent of Martin Scorsese's Alice Doesn't Live Here
Anymore. Twitchy supporting actor Michael J. Pollard makes a brief but
memorable appearance, looking not much older than he did in Bonnie and
Clyde, back in 1967. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
Tumbleweeds is a rueful but significant 7, because of Janet McTeer's
complex, funny, multi-faceted performance which includes an impeccable
Southern accent.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TUMBLEWEEDS (1999) ***  Directed by Gavin O'Connor.Written by 
O'Connor and Angela Shelton, based on Shelton's memoirs. Photography, 
Dan Stoloff. Editing, John Gilroy. Production design, Brice Eric 
Holtshousen. Music, David Mansfield. Produced by Gregory O'Connor. 
Cast: Janet McTeer (Mary Jo Walker), Kimberly J. Brown (Ava Walker), 
Jay O. Sanders (Dan), Gavin O'Connor (Jack Ranson), Michael J. 
Pollard ( Cummings), Laurel Holloman (Laurie Pendleton), Lois Smith 
(Ginger). A Fine Line release. 98 minutes. PG-13
Merryl Streep is getting serious competition in the domain of 
accents.  It would take Sherlock Holmes to figure out that Janet 
McTeer is British and not a would-be Southern belle.
McTeer? Who she? She won the Tony Award in 1997 for Best Actress (in 
the revival of Ibsen's "A Doll's House"). She is big on the British 
stage, has been on TV, had smaller roles in movies. Now, in her first 
starring movie McTeer rates an 8.3 on the Richter scale. She's been 
Oscar nominated and collected a huge bouquet of awards and other 
nominations.
The reasons for those triumphs: Janet McTeer endows a two-dimensional 
character with a strong three-dimensional performance  She plays Mary 
Jo Walker, a North Carolina gal in her late thirties who is a serial 
bad-chooser of men. Her life has been a long road trip between 
husbands (four of them), and, undoubtedly, lovers too. (Those who 
might sniff at her lifestyle might consider   the machine-gun 
successions of marriages and affairs in the world of "celebrities," 
especially in show business.)
Each time Mary Jo quits a relationship she moves to another state. 
It's good for geographic knowledge of the land, especially the South. 
It's bad for Mary Jo and her now 12-year old daughter Ava --named 
after Ava Gardner who had a host of husbands and lovers. Yet there is 
one positive constant: the unshakable bond between mother and 
daughter.
In the low-budget, quickly shot "Tumbleweeds" we meet the duo in West 
Virginia as she is having a drag-out fight with her latest male. 
Pulling up stakes again  Mom and Ava get in their beat-up car and hit 
the road. What possessions they take along are limited. It's like the 
rapidly packed minimum that frequent fliers have at the ready. 
Obviously this kind of "blitz" departure is old hat to Ava. She takes 
it all like a veteran of earlier wars.
The youngster's comments and body-English expressions are critical of 
her single parent. But never mind. There is  much giggling, singing, 
laughing and joking on the highways and in rest stops.
The gals are heading west, without any specific plan or destination. 
The trip is relatively uneventful, save for a broken water hose that 
a passing stranger, truck driver Jack, fixes.
The encounter with Jack sums up a lot of Mary Jo's personality. She's 
a big gal with big looks and manners, a born flirt  done up in 
man-trap ways,  big hair, big cleavage, anklet and such.  No clear 
clues are given as to when all this takes place, but I suspect it is 
not today. Otherwise Mary Jo might also have had pierced body parts 
and a tattoo.
They are going West, all the way, and end up in Starlight Beach, by 
the sea, near San Diego. You can't say that they settle there because 
it is blindingly clear that Mom is a recidivist. There's bound to be 
another man and another split.
What would movies do without coincidences? The man, met at a watering 
place, turns out to be Jack-of-the-highway. You guess the rest. MJ 
and Ava move in with him. Mother, now employed, has to put up with a 
deadly dull receptionist-type job and with a weird boss (Michael J. 
Pollard, under-used). Ava, always tsk tsking, is happy in school, 
gets "a new best girlfriend,"(shades of peripatetic Mom's 
relationships), discovers her thespian talent as the class competes 
for Shakespearean roles. (She studies Juliet, ends up as Romeo).
Nothing lasts of course, especially Mary Jo's relationships, except 
for the rock-steady love between the mother and pre-mature (read: 
slowly entering womanhood) Ava.
Mary Jo is perfectly drawn as cheerful, spunky and essentially very 
ordinary. She is based  on the real-life memoirs of Angela Shelton, 
the ex-wife of director O'Connor (he also plays Jack). There's more 
than a mere ring of authenticity here. The people as real. Their 
portrayals avoid the temptations of pathos, heavy sugar, forced 
picturesqueness or comedy. At the movies Ava gets her first kiss. 
It's a fiasco compounded by gaucheness and asthma. But later, after a 
demonstration by Mary Jo,  kiss #2 is a success. "My mother taught 
me" says the girl. In this phrase there's filial love, pride and a 
reminder of Mom's unorthodoxies.
Ava has gotten Mom down pat. The child is mother to the mother, which 
may be a deja vu all over again movie theme but mostly found in films 
about higher classes, typically with flighty socialite moms and 
sensible daughters. I can't say why exactly but the relationship in 
this film reminds me more of "Paper Moon"'s than of other movies.
Mary Jo is a true but not really interesting creation. She's a 
round-heels dame, common, even vulgar, but not coarse.
The lady  may be close to trailer-trash but not quite that. She rises 
above  this in ways rather akin to Anna Karina's 
prostitute-by-despair in  Godard's "My Life to Live." In that film a 
little schoolboy's essays about "La Poule" (French for chicken, but 
also meaning a broad or a whore )  goes: A chicken has an outside and 
an inside. Remove the outside and you see the inside.. Remove the 
inside, and you see the soul." Which you do see in Mary Jo's quiet 
moments, in closeups where her essential loneliness jumps out at you.
What holds your interest here is how the women are drawn, how those 
two are confidantes, acolytes, fellow-plotters.
The construction of "Tumbleweeds" is smooth and believable. My only 
objections  is that within one shot the jiggling camera goes 
unnecessarily from face to face. Also, Mr. Nice Guy widower called 
Dan, who works in Mary Jo's office and befriends Ava  of the camera, 
is a potential replacement after Mom's break with Jack, but he's far 
and away too educated. thoughtful and classy for her.  Minor flaws, 
major performances.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/
