Title
Review for Doomsday Gun (1994) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Once again HBO's docu-dramas prove
     that there are good films being made for cable.  The
     story of Gerald Bull and his attempts to build a super-
     gun for Saddam Hussein's pre-war Iraq was under-reported
     in the press, in spite of the natural fascination of the
     material.  This film is a sort of TUCKER-meets-Tom-
     Clancy based on fact.  Rating: +2 (-4 to +4)
     I think I have a special fondness for HBO docudramas.  They
generally have a good feel for how to make recent history engrossing
and dramatic.  Whether they choose to base it on pre-existing material,
as they did in last years adaptation of Randy Shilts's AND THE BAND
PLAYED ON, or whether they write their own story based on research as
they did with DEAD AHEAD, their quality is generally more than a rival
for what is playing in the theaters.
     With DEAD AHEAD they had their work cut out for them.  This was
the story of the Exxon Valdez disaster and the politics of what
followed.  It is not easy to make that material really engrossing, and
they managed.  DOOMSDAY GUN suffers from no such handicap.  The story
of Gerald Bull and his super-gun already has the makings to be Tucker-
meets-Tom-Clancy.  Add to that the fact that the story was really was
under-reported in the press and you have a fairly engrossing piece of
entertainment.
     Frank Langella plays Gerald Bull, a child-man with a fascination
with large artillery pieces and the engineering intellect to build the
guns that he dreams about.  His inspiration since boyhood has been
Jules Verne's FROM THE EARTH TO THE MOON with its cannon large enough
to send a shell and its passengers to the moon.  The Canadian has built
guns for the United States and many of its allies, including Israel,
whom he helped to defend the Golan Heights.  After a falling out with
the Americans he decides that he will sell his services and that of his
small organization to the highest bidder ("except the Russians").  The
highest bidder turns out to be Saddam Hussein who is militarizing and
fortifying Iraq.  Alan Arkin plays an Israeli intelligence officer with
the uncomfortable job of convincing a friend and former ally not to
built his gun and place it in the hands of Hussein.  Meanwhile Bull has
to get the industrialized nations to build the parts he needs under the
noses of their own intelligence agencies.  Then there is the larger
story of how much governments' intelligence agencies knew and even had
complicity in the arming of Iraq.
     If you go into DOOMSDAY GUN expecting CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER,
you are sure to be disappointed.  But if you are expecting a modest
little made-for-cable film, you will probably be very pleasantly
surprised.  DOOMSDAY GUN ranks very well with what is in release in
theaters.  If you consider all the boxing matches and stand-up comics
ad nauseum that made-for-cable fare is becoming on the "premium"
services, DOOMSDAY GUN at least shows that some quality material is
still being made.  I would give DOOMSDAY GUN a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.
