Title
Review for Violent Years, The (1956)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        "This is a story of violence, of violence born in the 
uncontrolled passions of adolescent youth and fostered by this 
generation of parents, those who, in their own smug little world of 
selfish interests and confused ideas of parental supervision, refuse 
to believe today's glaring headlines. But it _has_ happened. Only 
the people and places have been given other names." That's the 
narration that opens THE VIOLENT YEARS, a movie so bad it's 
hilarious. What else could you expect from a film scripted by Ed 
Wood himself?
        As the narrator reads his Jack Webb-like intro, the four 
main characters of THE VIOLENT YEARS walk into frame one by 
one. They're four high school girls who have formed their own 
gang of violence and aren't too big on traditional authority. We 
can pretty much guess this as they walk in front of a blackboard 
reading "Good Citizenship, Self-Restraint, Politeness, Loyalty," 
and sneer defiantly. These girls have none of these things, especially 
their leader, Paula.
        The movie begins with Paula's parents being chewed out 
by a courtroom judge for being so lax in raising the girl that she 
turned to violence. Flash back to the beginning of it all, when Paula 
tells her mother she wants to have a "heart-to-heart" talk with her 
and the mother replies, "What could be so important in your young 
life as to warrant my attention so drastically?" So Paula instead goes 
out with her friends and robs a gas station, the logical next step after 
your mom tells you she's too busy to talk.
        Word of the robbery gets to Paula's dad, a newspaper 
editor. "These fool kids. When will they learn?" his star reporter 
asks him. "These aren't kids," he replies. "These are morons." But 
the joke's on you, dad. The reason Paula has turned to such crime 
is because you're busy with your newspaper, and the reason you're 
so busy with your newspaper these days is because of this femdom 
violence. Alanis Morissette has yet to dream of a situation that 
ironic.
        The next night, the girls take their tyranny one step further 
and assault a couple making out in a car. They force the girl to take 
off her sweater and skirt and steal her jewelry. As for the "pretty" 
boy, "Maybe he's got more to offer than money." Another girl adds, 
"Under conventional circumstances, he could be very interesting." 
So they take him into the woods and, one by one, have their way 
with him. To a teenage boy, a more horrendous form of torture 
could only be imagined.
        The next day is Paula's birthday, but neither of her parents 
can make it to the party. Better that they don't, though, because it 
turns out to be a four-on-four orgy of 50's proportions. However, 
even in its depiction of perversions, THE VIOLENT YEARS 
embodies each and every 50's cliche, from "You're a peach" to 
"Hi, gang." The girls are never believable as hoodlums and everyone 
else simply can't act. Mixed in with Wood's atrocious dialogue like 
"I'm not in it for the money. There's plenty of that at home... It's the 
thrill that gets me -- the thrill of the chase," it turns into one of the 
absolute worst movies of all time.
        Finally comes the climax, as Paula and the gang are 
offered a job that will pay more money than all the gas station 
jobs combined, although we all know it isn't the money Paula is 
after. No, there's plenty of that at home. But getting paid by a 
bunch of Commies to trash the school will provide the thrill of a 
lifetime, as the girls overturn desks, write rebellious phrases on 
the chalkboard and throw globes into the wall. As bad luck would 
have it, though, the cops show up and plug one of the girls where 
it counts. "It ain't supposed to be this way," she wails before falling 
over dead.
        Paula is finally captured after killing her fence and a cop, 
leading to the final court scene, in which the judge lets his mouth 
run wild. "You killed for the love of killing," he tells Paula. "A kill 
for a thrill." We get even more Poetry With Ed Wood when the 
parents finally realize the error of their ways and lament, "We've 
given Paula everything -- everything but real love. A new 
dress instead of a caress, a new car instead of a heart-to-heart 
talk."
        Wood throws in a plot twist at the end involving Paula's 
illegitamate child that makes the movie even worse. As Paula's 
mother says, "It all seems like a bad dream." I'd have to agree with 
her on that one, and even more so with the judge's final speech 
about the youths of today (who are now over fifty) when he says, 
"Their callous attitude is summed up in two words: 'So what'." So 
what indeed.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
