Title
Review for Hour of the Pig, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Raymond Johnston
Director: Leslie Megahey
Starring: Colin Firth , Ian Holm, Donald Pleasence, Amina Annabi, and
          Nicol Williamson
A BBC/ CiBy 2000 film distributed in the US by Miramax
     The absolute worst thing about this film is the poorly conceived
US ad campaign.  Faced with an offbeat tough sell project, Miramax
decided to try to use their old CRYING GAME strategy and hope for
lightning to strike twice.  The ad implores you not to reveal the
identity of the client.  The still in the ad shows a minor character in
a costume not seen in the film holding a sword.  There is almost no
swordplay in the film.  Those looking for a sword and sorcery epic will
be sorely disappointed.  Fans of THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE and THE
NAME OF THE ROSE, however, are in for a real treat.
     The very first frame of the film gives the secret away.  A mule is
about to be executed for her role in an unnatural act.  There was a
time when animals were held as culpable for there actions as humans.
The film takes place in the middle ages.  Colin Firth is a Paris
trained lawyer who has taken up practice in a small town near the
French border.  Much of the film is a play on the city boy in the
country motifs.  With the time left over from his various romances,
Firth uses his new-fangled legal notions as a kind of public defender.
Firth's modern notions of justice simply have no place among the great
(and quite literally) unwashed.  His attempts to use logic in cases
simply confounds the court.  Like modern lawyers, he then has to resort
to exploiting centuries old loopholes to delay cases and waste the
court's money, hoping they will simply drop the case.
     One of his cases, the one the ad implores people not to divulge,
is the trial of a pig for killing a Jewish boy.  From this case we see
many of the popular notions of the Middle Ages, questions of whether
non-Christians are counted as people or something less, of whether the
person is on trial or the evil spirit that compelled the person.
     These legal questions become the backdrop to a well handled
mystery.  For reasons everybody except the advocate seem to know,
everybody wants the pig case disposed of quickly with few questions
asked, except of course, the Gypsies who own the pig.
     The mystery is the heart of this often quite funny and quite
erotic little film.  Although the film takes place on the French
border, it is in English with an excellent cast of mostly Shakespearean
actors.  Besides Firth, Nicol Williamson and Donald Pleasence create
quite believable characters.  Amina Annabi gives a very earthy and
sensual performance as the Gypsy.
      This film was cut from the European original to get an R rating.
In Great Britain it was released as THE HOUR OF THE PIG.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The year is 1452 and Paris lawyer Richard Courtois is tired of the
legal entanglements and corruption of city law.  He wants to use his
talents to help common people, so he and his clerk Mathieu travel to
the small town of Abbeville.  There he indeed finds that law is
different, though no better and in some ways a lot weirder.  Rural law
cases involve accusations of witchcraft, devil pacts, and sodomy with
animals.  And the law extends to human and animal alike.  If a farmer
is shown to have had sex with his donkey, both might be hung on the
same gibbet.  Animals may also be called to court to be sworn as
witnesses.  One of Courtois's first cases is a very bizarre "murder
trial," at least by modern standards.  Today such an incident would not
fall under the category of murder, but we are looking at a very
different culture.  Incidentally, the case really did get tried as it
is portrayed in the film according to historical records.  It seems at
first like a ludicrous and trivial court action until Courtois starts
sensing that the state's case is invented and may be a part of a larger
conspiracy.
     THE ADVOCATE is a film with a lot going for it.  First and
foremost is the setting.  Years go by between good films set in so
remote a historical period.  Even without a good plot the historical
detail by itself would keep this film intriguing.  The historic detail
that gives the film its texture and gives a feel of being very well
researched.  The viewer is consistently astonished by the differing
attitudes and life-style of the 1400s.  Unfortunately too often the
attitudes we see are a mix of that century's and our own.  Similarly to
THE NAME OF THE ROSE, the photography often appears inspired by the
master artists of the time like Breugel and Bosch.  The peasants look
grizzled and a bit grotesque.
     But beyond the historical detail the plot is also enjoyable by
itself.  The mystery is not one of the best or most unpredictable, but
it is likely to keep the audience guessing.  THE ADVOCATE is at once an
intriguing mystery film and a well-written drama with comedic
overtones.  One historical detail that the film makes clear is that in
the Middle Ages people were a good deal less sensitive about being seen
without clothing.  That, however, tends to make me suspect it would get
some editing before American public television would show it.  But
clearly it seems intended for some wide audience because of a major
budget and a cast of familiar actors including Colin Firth in the title
role, Ian Holm as a likable but corrupt local priest, Donald Pleasance
as Abbeville's other attorney, Michael Gough as town judge, and Nicol
Williamson thoroughly enjoying his role as a local lord.
     THE ADVOCATE was written and directed by Leslie Megahy, a director
nearly unknown in the United States but who has made several TV movies
for the BBC.  This is his first feature film and deserves attention.
My rating would be a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Even before the opening titles and credits are completed we knew
we were in for something more ribald than even a Boccaccio would have
dared.  Based on documents and court records circa 1450, THE ADVOCATE
relates the story of a young, handsome, dashing lawyer, Richard
Courtois, (Colin Firth) who leaves Paris to travel the countryside and
help the people who lead more simple lives and whose problems are of a
different nature than those to which he has been accustomed.  How
different they are astonish not only him but will shock you as well.
     Superstition in the countryside is the norm.  Between the powerful
Roman Catholic Church and the feudal noblemen of the time, and the
simple-minded folklore of the citizenry, life here is far, far
different than in Paris.  When a band of Gypsies arrives from Africa
they are greeted with hostility and fear.  Among the new arrivals is
the smokily sultry Samira (Amina Annabi) with whom Courtois falls in
love.  When she runs afoul of the ludicrous laws of the town, it is he
who takes her case to fight the prosecutor, (Donald Pleasance) who, in
fact, is but a lackey of the local landowner, the Seigneur.
     In this strange setting is the beautiful Filette, (Lysette
Anthony) the not-right-in the head daughter of the Seigneur, the result
of years of in-breeding.  There is the priest, Albertus (Ian Holm),
who knows right from wrong, and befriends the Advocate ... but  is
careful not to overstep himself because he would lose his power over
his flock.  The Seigneur is played by Nicol Williamson with a nice
haughty manner as befits a Lord who runs the town.
Written and Directed by Leslie Megahey
