Title
Review for Cube (1997)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Shane Burridge
The less you know about this one beforehand, the better: avoid all video 
slicks, talkative friends, and careless reviewers.  This is engrossing 
science fiction that, once seen, is not easily forgotten.  In fact it really 
should be seen only once and then left to linger for years in the memory.  
Story opens with a group of strangers awakening to find themselves in a 
square room with identical doors set in the walls, floor, and ceiling.  Each 
door in turn leads to another room of the same design.  It's tempting to 
think that because each character has been roused from sleep CUBE is merely 
a dream or hallucination, but no: its story generates tension because what 
happens to the people in it is horribly real despite the absence of any 
rationale.  We are put in the characters' place, unaware of the meaning of 
the scenario while trying to puzzle it out as best we can.  But there's 
little time for us to think independently - the screenplay (by Andre 
Bijelic, Graeme Manson, and director Vincenzo Natali) moves us along at a 
relentless pace.  The claustrophobic setting and faceless appearance of each 
character (they wear drab prison outfittings) become hypnotic after a while; 
because they do nothing but move, sleep, and die it's about as purely 
existential an experience as you can find in cinema.  The writers are smart 
enough not to have their characters pontificate on these themes however - 
the premise does well enough alone without having 'meaningful' dialogue 
thrown in to remind us what it stands for.  As would be expected, there is 
the usual cross-grouping of character types to provide confrontation, but 
even these provide no anchor for our viewing sensibilities - characters 
change, sometimes in an instant.  Heroes, villains, defeatists, and 
pragmatists all switch among each other - every character in turn is brave, 
fearful, angry, and calm.  Only one thing is certain - every one of them is 
expendable.
Film has many offbeat, humorous lines and moments but is also unbearably 
tense at times - we are alerted early into the film that the labyrinth is a 
sadistic death trap.  One scene, in which there is no sound for several 
minutes, is unbearable to watch in a cinema (and strange as it may seem - 
given the limiting nature of its sets - this really is a film to be seen in 
a cinema).  Yet the major irony of the story is that the characters 
brutalize each other more than the sinister machinations of the Cube - in 
fact this is taken to excess near the film's conclusion, and is the only 
misstep the screenwriters make.  Otherwise CUBE is a perfect blend of 
thought and action.  You can sense the devilish fun that Natali and friends 
must have had assembling their intricate game - was this dreamed up by a 
frustrated Rubik's Cube owner??  Sensibly, the impressive effects are used 
only when needed.  Wonderfully edited, photographed, and directed 
(especially considering the limitations of the setting).  The cast, who 
provide the humanity - and inhumanity - central to our involvement with the 
story, command our attention on screen.  It's hard to say who stands out, 
but my pick would be Nicole de Boer (as a student who makes maths look 
pretty cool and exciting!), a determined Maurice Dean Wint, and Andrew 
Miller, as the least likely companion of the others).


Author
ram@csb.stanford.edu
/Cube/ has been compared to the recent spate of virtual reality films,
such as /The Matrix/, /eXistenZ/, and /The Thirteenth Floor/. However
I don't think the comparison is merited.  /Cube/ is really about a
character study of people trapped in an artificially constructed
world, whereas the latter movies are primarily about the nature of the
worlds the character inhabit (and not the characters themselves).
The Cube at first glance (from the inside) appears to be a bunch of
interconnected cubic rooms with six openings, forming some sort of a
maze. Some of the rooms are booby trapped to render death with quick
succession.  Five people suddenly find themselves thrust together in
the Cube: Quentin, a police officer with ingrained prejudices and a
lot of anger; Leaven (Nicole de Boer of Star Trek: Deep Space
Nine fame) a bit of a mathematical prodigy (even though she
takes too long to figure out a number ending in 5 cannot be prime);
Worth (David Hewlett), an architect partially responsible for the
design of the Cube; Holloway (Nicky Guadagni), a doctor; and Kazan
(Andrew Miller), an autistic savant.
As the five strangers become acquainted with themselves and their
surroundings, they are unable to figure out what the purpose of the
Cube is, and who or what is responsible for its construction.  The
only visible purpose appears to be intimately tied to the plight of
the five people (i.e., the Cube is defined by those trapped in
it). Each must depend on the skills of the others in order to survive.
For some, this is easier than others: Kazan has no choice but to trust
those around him.  For Quentin, this is incredibly difficult given his
profession. Needless to say, given the claustrophobic nature of the
rooms, the fact that they have no means of nutrition, and frustration
at failed attempts to unearth the mystery of the Cube, there is a
tremendous amount of interpersonal conflict.
Director Vincenzo Natali's skills are definitely laudable in that he
takes the story of five people trapped in a room and makes it into an
interesting and worthwhile movie to watch.  The claustrophobic nature
of the story is reminiscent of Jorge Luis Borges and Harlan Ellison
(/The Library of Babel/ and /I Have No Mouth and I Must Scream/
respectively). The performances are solid.  The bleak set design
almost transcends the low-budget nature of this film. There is a very
cool suspense sequence at the end, where the characters must traverse
a cube in total silence.
The science fiction aspect of this film lies in the fact that each of
the rooms is identified by a set of numbers, and the characters must
utilise mathematics to understand the nature of the cube and to escape
from it (with some interesting cryptographic implications given the
relative difficulties of testing primality (which Leaven possesses the
ability to do) and factoring).  But this is only of marginal interest.
As I say above, /Cube/ is really a study of the human condition. As a
result, we never know anything about the Cube itself.  In the end, it
is the people who are primarily responsible for each others' fates,
and not the object they're trapped in.
The ultimate "moral", if you can call it that, is that in spite of his
limited abilities, Kazan is the only person who gets out of the Cube
(a la /Pi/ and /Forrest Gump/).  The contrast between a character like
Kazan and the angry Quentin is stark: who is a better and a more
content person?


Author
Steve Kong
One set, five actors, bad acting, even worse dialogue and a sadistic 
director.  In one sentence that is what the movie Cube is about.  Saying 
that the movie is innovative is only telling half the story.
Five strangers awaken to find themselves stuck in a cubic room.  There are 
six hatches, one on each side, and these hatches lead to other cubic 
rooms.  These rooms are either safe or they are booby-trapped to kill upon 
entering.  Like a good episode of The X-Files, Cube starts off mysteriously 
and then with the original question it develops even more questions.  And 
like the cube that these five are stuck in where every room leads to yet 
another one, every question leads to another.  The audience is left to 
wonder why are the characters there?  What is the reason behind the 
Cube?  How did the characters end up in the Cube?  The level of paranoia in 
the movie rises quickly.  But, this all unravels as the film slows to a 
grind and becomes increasingly more and more boring.
The script is to blame.  The film is innovative, I mean, how many films 
have you seen that have been shot completely on one set?  And the idea 
behind the film is pretty ingenious.  The script itself stinks.  The 
characters are wholly unbelievable and the words that come out of their 
mouths are amateurish.  To add to insult, the actors themselves are not up 
to par either.  Maurice Dean Wint is terrible on screen, absolutely 
terrible.  Wint plays a cop who takes lead of the group.  Nicky Guadagni is 
just as bad as a "bleeding heart" liberal doctor.  The others are OK, the 
best being David Hewlett as Worth, the man with a secret, but even these 
actors have nothing good to work with.
The director Vincenzo Natali has a great eye for detail, he is quite 
creative, and his visual style is wonderful.  He sure can make the film 
look good, what he can't do is wrangle good performances.  And his 
creativity goes a bit overboard with some of the booby traps that are 
downright sadistic.  Some made me cringe hard.  Natali does a decent job of 
shooting the film and knows how to build tension within scenes.  Once he 
learns how to coerce good performances from his actors I think he'll be a 
decent director.
Should you rent Cube?  Only if there's nothing else to rent.  The movie is 
OK, but I really don't think it is worth watching if there is something 
else that you can spend 90 minutes with.  Sure, the film is beautiful and 
innovative, but this all doesn't mean anything if there are no real 
characters to bring you into the film.

Author
Mr Q. Z. Diablo
A review submitted to rec.arts.movies.reviews of CUBE (1997)
Mr Diablo has been long awaiting the opening of CUBE in his home town. 
He had heard about it through an acquaintance and was struck by the
originality of its premise.  Having stumbled across the title in the
local paper, he saddled up and made his way to the local art-house
cinema in order to partake of an evening's entertainment.  Despite the
fact that aspects of the film have been lambasted by several critics, Mr
Diablo was enthusiastic about the venture so he picked his way through
the gloom of the sparsely populated theatre in order to place himself in
an optimal viewing position.
CUBE is a science fiction film with horror overtones regarding a group
of people who have been placed, for reasons that they do not understand,
in a gigantic structure consisting of a large number (over 17000, as the
cast repeatedly reminded Mr Diablo) of interlocking cubes.  Each cube
contains six doors leading to adjacent cubes, some of which are equipped
with deadly booby traps (the nature of one of which is illustrated in
the startlingly executed opening scene).  None of the protagonists
remember how they came to be inside the titular edifice and nor are they
aware of what purpose is served by their plight.  Given these facts, it
seems imminent that they find a way out, which they attempt to do.
The first thing that struck Mr Diablo about CUBE was how good the film
looked, considering the low budget.  He is saddened to note that
$1000000 is considered a minuscule budget in these overblown times but,
nonetheless, CUBE looks far more lavish than he would have possibly
expected for such a sum.  CUBE is director Vincenzo Natali's first
feature and Mr Diablo suggests that Mr Natali will be a talent to watch
over the next few years.  The set (and there is only really one of them)
is far and away the star of the show and, in itself, lends an air of
claustrophobic desperation to the proceedings.  Mr Diablo regards this
as a very good thing as he has gripes regarding several other aspects of
the film that would have sunk it were it not for its stylistic strengths.
Mr Diablo's first niggle concerns the dialogue.  The small audience was
observed to giggle disturbingly frequently as idiotic lines were
followed by even more idiotic speeches.  Maurice Dean Wint playing
Quentin, a policeman, is heard to claim that his job is to "see through
people - like X-rays" on a number of occasions.  It almost seems that
scriptwriters Natali, Andre Bijelic and Graeme Manson have imposed
dialogue on characters who have had no previous existence outside the
time span covered by the film.  One does not develop a character by
having an actor mouth said character's every waking thought - audiences
come to understand portrayals through observing a number of things about
an actor's performance; mannerisms, reactions to situations and so
forth.  It is simply not necessary to spell things out to even the
dimmest cinema goers.
The dialogue is so bad, in fact, that it had moments of making Mr Diablo
feel almost sorry for any cast expected to recite it.  Almost any cast,
anyway.  In most cases, the performances are almost amateurish. 
Attempts at terse exchanges between the macho Quentin and the neurotic
Holloway (a doctor, played by Nicky Guadagni) are laughably overwrought.
 While there is no stereotyping according to race, occupation or
anything similarly obvious, the characters represent certain personality
types and most of the cast seem incapable of instilling any kind of
nuance into their performances in order to expand their personas.  Mr
Wint and Ms Guadagni seem also to equate the depth of feeling that 
their characters have regarding certain ideas with a compulsion to
deliver their lines at extremely high volume.  After only a short while,
Mr Diablo found himself reflexively cringing every time these two
worthies even looked like they were going to engage in any kind of
discourse, no matter how brief.  On a more positive note, the
performance of Andrew Miller as the intellectually disabled Kazan is
very convincing, although Mr Diablo's lack of knowledge regarding autism
and related conditions prevents him from making a truly informed
judgement.  Nicole de Boer playes a nervous school student as blandly as
can be imagined and David Hewlett turns in an overwhelmingly uninspiring
performance as a former office worker with a dark secret.  Wayne
Robson's turn as the escape artist, Holloway, is fairly difficult to
evaluate owing to his early and gruesome demise.
Mr Diablo's last major problem with CUBE was the research put into key
aspects of the script.  A large component of the resolution of the film
is to do with prime numbers (don't ask Mr Diablo to explain this - he
feels that it is a major spoiler).  Leaven, the edgy but mathematically
gifted student, when asked whether a number (say, 765) is prime umms and
aahs almost interminably before announcing that the number is not prime.
 She then proceeds to factor it as 51 x 15.  This is all very well but
any student of mathematics, however indifferent (and Mr Diablo is a fair
measure more indifferent than most), knows that a number ending in 5 is
never prime because it may be divided by five.  Mr Diablo found very
quickly that he had to bite his tongue quite whenever any of the
"mathematical" sequences occurred in order to avoid annoying the
black-clad, trendy clientele of the cinema by yelling out the answers.
Despite its obvious flaws, CUBE is not a bad film.  Mr Diablo
particularly liked the baroque look of the sets (as alluded to before),
which brought to mind aspects of Clive Barker's overrated HELLRAISER and
its (superior) sequels.  Some of the CGI work is astounding, producing
spikes, razor-sharp wires and endless-seeming shafts descending into the
bowels of the earth completely convincingly.  The make-up effects, which
are extremely well executed, complement the sets and CGI perfectly in
contributing to the impression of hopeless panic at which Mr Natali
appears to be aiming.
Mr Diablo was also impressed with the camerawork which is, by and large,
both interesting and restrained.  Most shots of the action are taken
with the camera at an angle of 15 degrees or so above the performers,
giving the impression that they are somehow being observed by some
unknown entity.  The use of dissolves to denote the passage of time is
not nearly as irritating as Mr Diablo usually finds it but he would
prefer that film makers realised that it just looks plain hokey.
CUBE recalls, in concept, Satre's _No_Exit_ and could have been executed
more competently than it was.  Mr Diablo was grateful, however, to be
given a science fiction morsel that attempted to provoke thought in its
audience - a perfect panacea for the hype of EPISODE I - THE PHANTOM
MENACE, which he has not yet been brave enough to see, owing to the
legions of dweebs from all walks of life who still populate cinema
foyers, replete with plastic light sabres and clad from head to toe in
hessian potato sacks.  CUBE misfires in several important departments
but when it comes down to sheer, raw style it manages to attain a pretty
convincing thumbs up.  Let's hope that Mr Vincenzi can find some decent
writers and go on to produce bigger and better things in the next few
years - genre cinema is desperately in need of talents such as his.  In
the interim, Mr Diablo will hold off from viewing the first of the STAR
WARS prequels and consider the purchase of a VCR to ease the horror
drought that seems to be afflicting the filmgoing public at present.

Author
Michael Dequina
Wanna make a science fiction thriller, but don't have the money for
big-budget effects?  Then turn to math, as have neophyte feature filmmakers
Vincenzo Natali and Darren Aronofsky for their films _Cube_ and _Pi_,
respectively.
_Cube_'s story is fairly thin: six strangers (Nicole deBoer, Nicky
Guadagni, David Hewlett, Andrew Miller, Wayne Robson, and Maurice Dean
Wint) wake up to find themselves trapped in a 14' by 14' cube, with doors
on each wall, the ceiling, and the floor.  This cube, as it turns out, is
simply one of many in a much larger structure, and the six try to find
their way out of the labyrinthian prison--that is, if they can crack the
mathematical code that will lead them to the exit.  With a piddly budget of
only $365,000 (in Canadian dollars), _Cube_ is more visually inventive than
films that cost twenty times more.  Natali shot _Cube_ on a single 14'x14'
set, made to look like many different cubes through the use of
different-colored lighting; the effect is entirely convincing.  But for all
his creative ingenuity, Natali and co-writers Andre Bijelic and Graeme
Manson could have come up with a stronger script.  As claustrophobic as the
setting is, the film is remarkably unscary.  The queasy promise of the
chilling opening scene (in which an unfortunate prisoner is sliced and
diced into cube steak by a booby trap) soon dissipates with the
introduction of the flat, uninvolving characters, who predictably come at
odds because of personality conflicts, anxiety, insanity, or any
combination of the three.  Too much time is spent on these interpersonal
conflicts and too little on the mechanical ones, i.e. evading traps like
those in the prologue.  Adding to the narrative tedium are the often
laughably amateurish turns by the justly unknown cast.
Aronofsky had even less--only $60,000--to work with on _Pi_, but he
achieves the overpowering atmosphere of fear and paranoia that Natali and
company obviously strived for in _Cube_.  Aronofsky, Sean Gullette, and
Eric Watson's story is sometimes confounding; it details an math genius's
(Gullette) rapid descent into madness when he finally discovers a
long-obsessed-over mathematical pattern to the stock market, Jewish
mysticism, and, it appears, the universe itself.  But story seems to be a
moot point in Aronofsky's frenzied vision; the intent is to create a living
nightmare of psychological horror, and he succeeds most unsettlingly
through his use of stark, sometimes grainy, black and white photography;
frenetic editing; and a pulsating electronic score.  Many films purport to
be something "unlike you've ever seen"; few films actually deliver.  The
stylish and scary _Pi_ is one of those few.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Nicole de Boer, Nicky Guadagni, David Hewlett, Andrew Miller,
Julian Richings, Wayne Robson, Maurice Dean Wint
Written by: Andre Bijelic, Graeme Manson and Vincenzo Natali
Directed by: Vincenzo Natali
Running Time: 90 minutes
You wouldn't think that a Canadian production combining elements of
science fiction, horror, gore, and mathematics
would come together into an entertaining film.  But in Cube, it does.
The premise of Cube is very similar to an episode of "Star Trek:The Next
Generation," but without the predictable
TV series ending.  Six strangers find themselves trapped inside of a
giant cube filled with smaller cube-shaped
rooms.  Certain rooms are trapped however, so it's not so easy to find
an exit.  To counter this, each person
seemingly possesses certain skills to help proceed through the maze and
find their way out.  But then to counter
that, each person also seems to be able to hold the group back.  So why
are they there?  Who's there to help and
who's there to hinder?  Will they be able to escape?
Normally I don't like movies that don't explain themselves, but
sometimes vagueness can be done well (for example,
nothing in the movie Tremors was explained, but it was still
entertaining).  The same goes for Cube.  Nothing is ever
explained.  You won't ever know what's going on, but yet it's still
entertaining to watch.  It's fun to watch the
characters try and figure out the situation that they are in (and you
have to admit, being trapped in a giant cube is
pretty original).  Some of the character's motivations towards the end
started to bug me a little bit (one character
in particular seems to overreact to the situation much more than
expected), but it all ultimately blends together
nicely into a vague yet compelling experience.  [R]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email:chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1999 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be reprinted
without permission.

Author
Matt Williams
Vincenzo Natali directs this science fiction thriller with an intriguing
premise.  Unfortunately, there's little to Cube besides that premise and
some creative filmmaking techniques.
The plot of Cube seems to have fallen right out of the Twilight Zone.
Six complete strangers (well, there's a seventh...but he's a goner
pre-credits) awaken in a strange place.  They're stuck in a series of
identical cubic rooms.  Each room has a door in the center of each wall,
in the floor and in the ceiling.  Each door leads to another identical
room.  Well, not quite identical...the rooms vary in color and many of
the rooms contain elaborate deathtraps.
Quick to take charge of the situation is Quentin (Maurice Dean Wint), a
cop who believes they can conquer the situation with teamwork and strong
leadership.  Rennes (Wayne Robson) has a different idea. He's a master
escape artist, confident he can escape this bizarre prison.
Holloway (Nicky Guadagni) is a bleeding-heart doctor who's wary of
anyone wanting to take charge.  Worth (David Hewlett) seems to know more
than he lets on.  Leaven (Nicole de Boer), a math student, has no idea
why she is here, and Kazan (Andrew Miller) is an autistic man who
doesn't seem to be of any help at all.
Can these six people survive the deathtraps and one another to discover
the purpose of (and escape from) this cube-maze?  Can they survive one
another?
Any film which essentially drops its six actors into a box for its
duration is obviously going to need strong characters and dialog.
Unfortunately, that is exactly what Cube lacks.  The characters are mere
archetypes (including one who inexplicably switches as the film goes
on).  Their interactions are forced and uninteresting. Nicole de Boer
displays a little charisma as the most likable prisoner.  But after the
first hour, even she begins to wear thin.
What are Cube's strengths?  Well, it does have an ingenious set design.
Only one cube-room was actually designed and used to represent the
entire structure.  The special effects are also particularly good (if a
bit gruesome)...you can't tell the film had a shoestring budget.
But an interesting premise and an interesting design can't change the
fact that while watching Cube, you feel like you're in your own
deathtrap cube room.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Greg King
Ever since he first picked up a video camera and started
making his own short films at the tender age of eleven, Canadian
writer/director Vincenzo Natali has been intrigued with macabre
fantasy worlds and the darker side of human nature.  These same
elements shape his strikingly original debut feature film, the
visually stunning and imaginative sci-fi thriller Cube.
Six strangers wake up inside a surreal chamber.  It is part of
a labyrinthine system of interlocked chambers and passage ways.  But
some of the rooms are booby trapped.
Quentin (Maurice Dean Wint) is a street wise cop, who brings
with him all the fears, prejudices and suspicions that have become
ingrained over the years.  Leaven (Nicole de Boer, a regular guest
star on tv) is a mathematics student who deciphers the code that
guards each portal.  Holloway (Nicky Guadagni, from Crash, etc) is a
doctor whose intuitive insights into her fellow hostages unlocks their
potential.  Worth (David Hewlett, from The Boys Of St Vincent) is an
architect who suffers from low self esteem and a sense of guilt,
knowing that he unwittingly contributed to the construction of this
insidious structure.  Rennes (veteran actor Wayne Robson) is an
escaped convict whose knowledge is instrumental in helping them
navigate the intricate series of interlocked chambers.  The autistic
Kazan (Andrew Miller) is initially seen as a danger to the other
prisoners, until his hidden abilities come in useful.
These six very different people have to work together as a
group in order to survive.  But, inevitably, personality conflicts and
self interest surface, adding to the air of tension that already
exists.  Cube is a story about survival and human nature.  It cleverly
forces the audience to ponder the question of how they would react if
placed in a similar situation, in an unfamiliar and dangerous
environment with total strangers.
In Cube, Natali (a former story board artist on films like
Johnny Mnemonic, etc) and his collaborators deftly tap into our own
nascent paranoia.  We don't learn who built this formidable structure
- was it the shadowy military/industrial complex, or is it grotesque
joke from some alien intelligence?  We don't learn its purpose, and
the lack of logic is somehow even more frightening.  Nor do we learn
why these six people were chosen to run the gauntlet of this lethal
labyrinth, or indeed, if other people have fallen foul of its booby
trapped chambers.  It is these unanswered questions that contribute to
the film's menacing air.
Natali suffuses the film with an uneasy, claustrophobic
atmosphere.  The opening sequence itself is certainly quite impressive
and grabs the audience's attention.  The set design and visual style
of Cube is impressive, and belie its low budget origins.  This
ambitious film goes far beyond anything achieved by the fecund
imagination behind the recent Dark City, which inevitably disappointed
with its contrived and conventional ending.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   In his existentialist work "No Exit"--which may have been
the inspiration for "Cube"--playwright Jean-Paul Sartre
conveys the theme that "Hell is other people."  In that drama
first produced in 1944, a valet brings three characters into an
elegant, windowless room.  Each is dead and will spend
eternity with the others.  Each has a distinct character--a
cowardly womanizer; a socialite adultress; a jealous lesbian. 
Each is thwarted and held in check by the others.  While "No
Exit" may not be the great play which some consider it, it was
a thematic breakthrough in its time.  
   The subject is no longer a new one though there is room
for an imaginative film team to cast an engaging production. 
"Cube" is not such a creation.  The claustrophobic film is
inhabited by six uninteresting individuals who'd have you
climbing the walls in 90 minutes, much less an Sartrian
eternity, and in fact the movie provides its own evidence of
this.
   In Vincenzo Natali's concept, six people inexplicably find
themselves imprisoned in a set of cubes, a diabolical
construction designed to test their ingenuity and, more
important, their teamwork in calculating an escape.  With their
minds curiously concentrated, would they be capable of
working together, or would their conflicting personalities drive
them further to a slow death by starvation and thirst?  To
raise the ante, the cubes are booby-trapped.  While moving
from one unit to another, the reluctant tenants could be
eviscerated by a score of knives, sent tumbling down
a bottomless pit, or severely burned.  By pooling their natural
talents, however, the six could conceivably make successful
departures into the sunlight.
   The actors are bogged down with melodramatic posturings
excessive to the point of caricature.  Quentin (Maurice Dean
Wint), in particular, owns a pair of eyes whose very gaze
would strike terror in the heart of a lion, but his fiery look is so
fixed throughout the narrative that it becomes laughable.  Wint
plays the role of a cop and therefore a natural leader, but one
whose hostilities are so rampant that he is unable to
contribute constructively to the group.  He is irritated
particularly by Holloway (Nicky Guadagni), a doctor at a free
clinic whose liberal views consign her, in the cop's vision, as a
bleeding heart.  Firing off a stream of invectives, he informs
her that she and her family would not even be alive if it were
not for the ruthless actions of the police forces.  Politically
separated, the two become instant enemies, with Quentin
labeled by others in the group as a Nazi.
   Those who contribute to the group's survival include Leaven
(Nicole de Boer), a mathematical genius who, like Max Cohen
in Darren Aronofsky's movie "Pi" believes there's a pattern to
everything.  As Worth, David Hewlett feels some guilt that he
has unwittingly contributed to the building of the Picasso-like
prison, and at first resigns himself to dying therein as he feels
he has no purpose in life.  Rennes (Wayne Robson) uses his
skill as a man who has escaped from prison seven times
while Kazan (Andrew Miller), an autistic young man, surprises
the group with his savant calculations.
   Its lame dialogue and flat plot notwithstanding, "Cube" does
enjoy superior special effects for a low-budget job, chief of
which is an opening scene of a man whose body falls apart
into neat slices and tumbles to the floor without a whimper. 
The physical layout is impressive: a progression of cubes of
varying colors which Rubik would have a tough time
negotiating and whose perils are represented in part by
sinister colors, with red as the most intimidating.
   With all its limitations, Mr. Natali's production heralds good
contributions in the future if he can more closely model
himself after horror-master David Cronenberg.  No other
director can touch Cronenberg's portrayal of the intensity of
human frailty and decay: the technique of giving corporeality
to anger, disease, dread and hope with films like "Dead Zone"
(about a man able to see the end of life in anyone he
touches), "Videodrome" (which depicts how films and TV alter
our notions of reality), and "The Fly" (a screwball romance
about the kinship of freaks with the rest of us).  "The Cube,"
by contrast," merely puzzles.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
MPAA: Rated R for some strong sci-fi violence/gore and language 
Runtime: Canada:90 / UK:87 / France:86 / Japan:91 
Directed by: Vincenzo Natali 
Screenplay: Gerami Manson, Andre Bijelich and Vincenzo Natali 
Cast: Nicole De Boer, Nicky Guadagni, David Hawlet, Andrew Miller, Julian Richings, Raine Robson, Maurice Dean Wint 
Six persons: a police officer, an escape artist, a doctor, a math -
genius, an engineer and a mentally demented boy, wake up inside a
giant, mysterious complex. None of them remember how they got there or
where they are. There is no food or water, no reason, logic or
explanations. Instinctively they try to explore the structure, but
soon find out that it is a Rubik's Cube-like prison. A complex of some
17,000 interconnected, perfectly square equal cells, filled with
traps, deadly ways and dangerous paths. And so the increasingly
paranoid prisoners must co-operate, using their different abilities,
moving from block to block in order to reach the surface. What is the
purpose of this? Is somebody watching them? Meanwhile their strength
is running out and their minds start changing...
The first-time director Vincenzo Natali creates an incredible
atmosphere. Claustrophobic and nerve-wracking. Shocking and
original. The feeling of being trapped, isolated and slowly going
paranoid has rarely been manipulated so well as in this movie. The
film slowly transforms into a terrifying psyho-thriller, where the
humanistic attitude is lost in the harsh competition for
survival. Slowly you see how these normal people change into
--->animals. Their minds become more frightening than the horrible
traps around them. The characters and the situation itself are so
primal, so grounded and basic that it momentary connects with the
audience. There is something indescribably frightening about such
simplicity. It effectively dismisses all unnecessary technical and
scientific details and concentrates on the most important -- the human
elements, an issue almost forgotten by sci-fi directors of today. We
can literally dive into people, exploring their complex
characters. Important philosophical, ethical and moral issues are
raised.
No unnecessary characters or scenes delude you from the purpose. There
are only six people and the only scene is the cube. The characters
undergo an evolution that has rarely been captured on film. The
psychological aspect of this film is unusually complex and incredibly
effective. The audience knows as much as the characters, desperately
trying to figure out the purpose of their situation and a way out of
it. Is it a governmental experiment? Aliens? A sick joke? Virtual
reality? The aspect of time disappears completely and after a while
you won't remember what your past world looks like. For you there is
nothing except the cube. Outside of it -- nothing exists. Maybe there
is no point in escaping? Maybe it is impossible? Maybe there will be
nothing outside the cube?
The ending is as mysterious and original as the rest of the film, and
(unlike in most science fiction films) it doesn't alienate it from the
rest of the picture, making it look primitive (such as in 'Dark City'
and '13th Floor'). Nothing is obvious. Nothing is primitive. Nothing
is conventional. And all you can do is presume and guess. In the
beginning the performances may seem a bit flawed, but they quickly
recover and by the end of this film nobody questions their
authenticity. Diana Magnus' fascinating art direction is an incredible
achievement. The sets are complex, strange and yet completely
convincing. The rest of the team handles the job well, though not
quite award worthy. In the end it is Natali who deserves all the
credit for his dark, unpleasant vision.
'Cube' is a story about ordinary people and products of our safe,
protected society that are suddenly transferred to a place where
everything is unknown, where nothing is safe or obvious, where no one
except themselves can protect them. And here, where only the strongest
survives, the makeup is gone, the mask slips off and the true, pure,
savage human nature is revealed. It is a story about the ways of
science seen from a lab-rat's eyes. And here the cube is a symbol of
science itself -- cruel, and too complex and powerful for our own
meaningless stupidity. The film is a representation of the human being
-- the specter of emotions, an analysis of the human mind and human
nature. Natali has created a brilliant and original psycho - analytic
tale that is probably one of the greatest science fiction films that
hit the silver screen during this decade.
