Title
Review for Cell, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Laura Clifford
A serial killer (Vincent D'Onofrio, "Men in Black") who likes to watch 
his victims drown in his special chamber falls into a coma while his 
latest capture still awaits her fate.  Psychotherapist Catherine Deane 
(Jennifer Lopez, "Out of Sight") attempts to enter his twisted mind in a 
race against time to discover the location of "The Cell."
"The Cell" is the feature directing debut of noted visualist Tarsem Singh,
whose commercials and videos are held in the permanent collection of the
Museum of Modern Art.  Is "The Cell" art?  It's magnificent to look at,
but at the half way mark the visuals get so far out they cease to serve
the sketchy story.  
Mark Protosevich's script is standard stuff which takes one concept
already explored in "Manhunter" (the original Hannibal Lecter movie) a
bit further - instead of a serial killer hunter thinking like his prey,
here people can hook themselves up to a Neurological Cartography and
Synaptic Transfer System, which, along with psychotropic drugs, allow
them to truly enter the mind of another (or allow another into their mind).
Otherwise, the story is simply plotted like "The Bone Collector," where
several people try to put together clues in order to save a victim within
a designated time period.
We're introduced to the device (where people hang suspended in musculature 
suits looking like the patients in "Coma"), as Catherine attempts to
interact with Edward, the seven year old son of a billionaire (Patrick Bauchau, 
"Twin Falls Idaho") who's threatening her boss, Dr. Miriam Kent (Marianne 
Jean-Baptiste, "Secrets and Lies"), with pulling funding if he doesn't get
tangible results soon.  Unbeknownst to us, we're already in Edward's
mind as the title credits roll - a land of red sand dunes against a 
brilliant blue sky where Catherine, in a white feathered gown, rides to
him on a black horse.  The African location cinematography by longtime
Tarsem collaborater Paul Laufer is stunning.
Then we meet Carl Stargher as he drives his black pickup out
to two lone silos in the middle of a wheat field.  Beneath the ground is
his cell, a small glass chamber (not unlike Lecter's cell in "The Silence of
the Lambs") where a woman floats, dead.  Carl takes the body home where
he 'processes' it before enacting his ritual, which involves suspending
his body from the ceiling by the steel rings pierced through his back (shades
of "Hellraiser").
FBI agents Peter Novak (Vince Vaughn, "Psycho") and Gordon Ramsey
(Jake Weber, "U-571") track down Stargher via clues left with his last
victim (albino dog hairs and vehicle identification) and raid his home,
only to find the schizophrenic killer has lapsed into a coma on his
kitchen floor.  A medical specialist hooks them up with the dream team at the
Campbell Center and Catherine agrees to attempt to make contact.
"The Cell" is creepily suspenseful right through Catherine's first mind
trip, where she makes contact with a young Carl (Jake Thomas) in subterranean
murk with Lynch-like horror tableaus of vibrating dogs, bloody bathtubs,
garishly posed bleached victims and a horse which gets cross-sectioned
before her eyes.  A second trip also features some creeps, but the script's
weak stab at serial killer profiling begins to strain (Carl was an abused
child, but what's up with his white fixation?).  When Vince Vaughn
joins the fun to 'save' a non-responding Catherine, logic is thrown to the
wind and things begin to get ludicrous - just why would a serial killer's
mind be full of Oriental art, harem imagery and sea creatures (the water
imagery from his past involves a river, not the ocean).  Things go further
downhill when Novak takes off from Stargher's mind on a sudden hunch and 
Catherine rashly goes back to save Carl's inner child.
Technically, "The Cell" is of the highest order.  Production design by
Tom Foden ("Psycho"), art direction by Guy Dyas and Michael Manson, costume
design by Eiko Ishioka and makeup by Heather Plott and James Ryder show
collaberation of imaginative artisans.  Original music by Howard Shore
("The Game") features discordant horns with an Arabic tinge.
If "The Cell" was stripped of all pretensions of storytelling it could
play as an intriguing experimental art film (the sectioned horse was ripped
off from artist Damien Hurst's cow, after all).  It hasn't, though, 
and the mind-bending visuals only take us so far.  It would be interesting
to see Tarsem collaborate with Lynch, a man with a little method behind
his madness.
Catherine Deane (Jennifer Lopez) is a talented child psychotherapist who is a
member of a research team that has developed an experimental technique for
entering the inner depths of the mind of a patient. A psycho killer is captured
by the FBI, but only after the madman kidnapped a new victim and has her
stashed away. The killer falls into a coma and FBI agent Pete Novak (Vince 
Vaughn) seeks Catherine's help to delve into the killer's mind to save the 
girl before time runs out in "The Cell."
Award winning music video director Tarsem Singh makes his feature film debut
with a psychological, science fiction drama that, quite literally, digs into
the human mind. Working with a script from another newcomer, Mark Protosevich, 
the director utilizes high-powered visuals, special F/X and flashy set design 
and costume to propel us into the psyche of a serial killer. The killer, Carl
Stargher (Vincent D'Onofrio) has the modus operandi of sealing his victims in a
glassed-in room, slowly flooding it while videotaping the poor woman's panic,
suffering and, finally, death.
The FBI, under the leadership of Novak, has been dogging the trail of Carl for
some time, collecting data and, slowly, closing in on the killer. Carl made a
boo-boo at his last killing and left some dog hairs, from his albino German
Shepherd Valentine, at the scene where the body was found. Accurate forensics
and quick legwork allows Pete and his team to get the drop on Stargher and
arrest him - but not before he drops into a coma. They learn of yet another
kidnapping and, knowing Carl's MO, realize that the latest victim has less than
40 hours to live with no way to find out where Carl's lair is located.
Enter Catherine and here research team who have developed a "neurological
synaptic transfer system" that allows a therapist to get into a patient's head
and, in theory, help cure that patient of whatever mental demons are tormenting
them. With so little time left to save Carl's latest victim, Catherine decides
to forego protocol and try the transfer system to get into Carl's mind and find
out where the girl, Julia Hickson (Tara Subkoff), is hidden. The
psychotherapist, necessarily, casts caution to the wind and enters the mind of
the murderer and is able to begin to bring out the troubled boy inside Carl's
head, but not the location of Julia.
Pete Novak, who has studied the killer and his methods from the very first
murder, thinks he can get the required info and both he and Catherine enter
Carl's sick mind. Revelations take place and Pete, with his newfound insight,
knows he can save the day. Catherine, the penultimate psychotherapist, throws
personal safety aside in order to save the scared, troubled little boy in the
near demonic Carl's megalomaniac mind.
Performances, as we see time and again with F/X extravaganzas, take a back seat
to the visual effects and the eye candy that the technicians on the film have
crafted so nicely. Jennifer Lopez is OK in her acting as the dedicated
Catherine, but stands out more when impressively costumed and coifed in her
journey into the killer's head. She's more object than character as things play
out and the actress's striking looks and physique help center the visual tone
of the elaborate production.
Vince Vaughn and Vincent D'Onofrio are interchangeable actors who could have
been selected for their respective roles by a draw of straws. As such, neither
gives much character to their roles as the dedicated cop and the sick psycho
loony. Supporting cast is uniformly wasted. Dylan Baker ("Happiness") and
Marianne Jean-Baptiste ("Secrets & Lies"), as research scientists Henry West
and Dr. Miriam Kent, are left the task of pushing buttons and watching the 
inert, futuristically clad bodies of their patients (the action is in the mind)
without much involvement. At one point, it looked like the story was going to 
take a twist and Jean-Baptiste was going to get an expanded role. She didn't 
and the writer went for the routine hero-heroine story. Jake Webber ("U-571") 
playing Pete's partner, FBI agent Gordon Ramsey, doesn't fare much better as 
his character is left in the wake of Novak's single-handed bravery.
Of course, if you've seen the trailer, you can readily see that the special F/X
and surreal quality of the film are the draw to get you to see it. Despite the
flaws and inconsistencies in the story and the lack of depth to the principle
characters, the visual acuity of "The Cell" is enough to recommend it. It is
reminiscent of "Coma" and is the first film to delve so deeply into the human
mind since Ken Russell's 1980 film, "Altered States." The film is stunning to
look at and tech credits are superior. Photography, by Paul Laufer ("Frankie
Starlight"), is slick, sometimes beautiful, and is a major credit to the movie.
Production design, by Tom Foden (Gus Van Sant's "Psycho"), costuming, at
different times by April Napier ("Your Friends and Neighbors") and Eiko Ishioka
(Academy Award for "Bram Stoker's Dracula"), and make-up, by two-time Academy
Award winner Michele Burke ("Quest for Fire," "Bram Stoker's Dracula"), all
work to make this a superior looking flick. The F/X team, led by Clay Pinney
("Independence Day") and Kevin Tod Haug ("The Game"), are excellent.
One point the script makes in the midst of all the psycho babble that permeates
the film is that the FBI solves crimes and saves people by their understanding
of forensics and their doggedness in following clues, even insignificant ones,
to get their man. The story does not downplay the hard work of America's
crime-fighters in doing their difficult jobs.
There is more to a movie than just F/X and flash and good looks. A carefully
constructed story and three-dimensional characters are needed, too, to make a
film great. "The Cell" makes it part way and I give it a B-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
     And I thought I'd seen some twisted movies.  Get ready for the real
psych-out of the year, the long-awaited Jennifer Lopez vehicle The Cell,
the most daring production to come out of Hollywood since Fight Club.
     Note however that daring does not necessarily mean good.  While The
Cell is a deeply disturbing picture, it doesn't always impress.  And
though I am fine with digitally vivisectioning a horse into ten
quivering pieces for dramatic effect, I'm not sure I needed to see
Vincent D'Onofrio poking a hole in Vince Vaughn's stomach in order to
pick out some intestine to spiral around a rotisserie.  (No, really.)
     The Cell is a hodgepodge of The Silence of the Lambs and
Dreamscape, with bits of Psycho and Kiss the Girls thrown in for
effect.  The film opens by introducing us to Catherine (Lopez), an
ex-social worker now employed by an experimental medical company that
can connect two minds together via a funky machine.  In practice, this
is being used by Catherine to try to heal a young kid now in a coma. 
But kid-in-coma does not a thriller make, so to spice things up,
Catherine is given the chance to enter the mind of the also-comatose
Carl Stargher (D'Onofrio), a serial killer who secrets his victims away
in a glass cell for 40 hours, until the cell fills with water and they
drown.  (The convolution gets more forced than that, but I'll spare
you.)
     Vaughn plays FBI agent Peter Novak, who rushes Stargher to
Catherine's offices so she can jump into his brain to locate the
well-hidden glass cell where Stargher's final victim is still awaiting
her watery doom.  Through an increasingly bizarre turn of events, Novak
hops in as well.  Considerable mucking around ensues.
     The Cell owes its freakiness not just to some whacked subject
matter, but also to a truly bizarre use of photographic tricks. 
Slow-motion, fast-motion, upside-down, sideways, underwater,
hallucination-inducing graphics -- you name it, The Cell has it -- and
it often combines them for an even bigger effect.  Add in a
demonic-looking D'Onofrio and Lopez's even stranger wardrobe and you've
got the makings for a movie that's going to give plenty of pre-teens
nightmares when they catch it late at night on HBO.
     The Cell is certainly not for all tastes.  In fact, it may not be
for any tastes.  Pure freak fans will likely be happy, but real
moviegoers will probably be disappointed.  For example, while the story
is twisted enough to make any closet Lynchian giddy, there are enough
stupid holes in it to make the entire go-inside-his-mind plot
irrelevant.  In the end, Carl's brain dump doesn't provide the clues to
the cell's whereabouts, the answer is sitting right there in his
real-world basement.
     With its ultra-hip sensibility, cool threads, and post-modern
thematics ("the cell" as metaphor for the human mind, get it?), The Cell
is clearly a movie to be treasured, hated, and debated by wannabe film
snobs.  But did I actually like it, you ask?  I'm still trying to figure
that one out.  Ask my shrink.
Director: Tarsem Singh
Producer: Julio Caro, Eric McLeod
Writer: Mark Protosevich
Starring: Jennifer Lopez, Vince Vaughn, Vincent D'Onofrio, Marianne
Jean-Baptiste, Jake Weber, Dylan Baker
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CELL, THE (director:Tarsem Singh; screenwriter: Mark Protosevich;
cinematographer:  Paul Laufer; editors: Paul Rubell/Robert Duffy; cast:
Jennifer Lopez (Catherine Deane), Vince Vaughn (Peter Novak), Vincent
D'Onofrio (Carl Stargher), Dylan Baker (Henry West), Jake Weber (FBI
Agent, Gordon Ramsey), James Gammon (FBI supervisor,Teddy Lee), Tara
Subkoff (Julia Hickson), Marianne Jean-Baptiste (Dr. Miriam Kent),
Patrick Bauchau (Mr. Baines), Colton James (Edward Baines); Runtime:
110; 2000)
A visually stunning serial killer film, with mind-bending special
effects, computer imaging, special F/X, and gorgeous costumes, as
directed by commercial and music-video director Tarsem Singh, in his
debut feature film. The cinematic beauty and originality of this
pioneering visual film hides the banality of the story and the weak
storytelling, as the director doesn't know quite what to do with the
film after setting it up with set designs that are simply breathtaking.
He doesn't know how to close the story or how to keep it suspenseful.
This is an arty serial killer film that is not necessarily an art nor is
it a mainstream film, it's an in-betweener, where what is seen is more
than what there is, which leaves a terrible void when trying to get past
the colorful, disturbing, and enjoyable display of images, and then
deciphering the content. But the visuals are so stimulating, that they
almost cover up all the film's loose ends.
Catherine (Lopez) is a child psychologist, who has a special gift for
getting children to trust her and open up. She is very sensitive to
their hurts and speaks in a hush inflection, showing them much love. She
is currently working with the child (Colton) of a billionaire who is in
a coma. The radical method used is an experimental procedure, which
allows her to become connected with her patient by entering their mind,
where she will communicate with them on a subconscious level, as she and
the patient hang suspended in rust colored vinyl suits. Dr. Miriam Kent
(Jean-Baptiste) and Henry West (Dylan Baker) serve as her supervisors,
backups, and as the research scientists on the project who support her
efforts to enter her patient's mind. The visuals inside the mind are
spectacular images of lunacy and are laced with compelling and original
art designs, all of the images are beautifully colored. In the child's
head, she is dressed as a princess in a white feathered gown, standing
on glistening island sand with a crystal clear sky invading the senses
with an array of brightness, that could be as inviting as a tourist
commercial for travellers, except there is a bizarre quality about these
images that is more than an eyeful for an ad.
Most of the film, is spent taking a mind trip with Catherine as she
explores the subconscious of both this child and of a serial killer,
while the chase of the killer is not particularly interesting, playing a
secondary role to the cinematography of the mind.
Carl Stargher (D'Onofrio) is the psychopathic serial killer, who is
diagnosed with a severe case of a rare schizophrenia. His thing is to
kidnap women and place them in an underground bunker in a Plexiglas cell
with just some food and a toilet. He has the cell setup to videotape
them as he derives great pleasure watching the woman suffer while he has
an automated water system that submerges them after 40 hours of this
mind torture, and when they are dead he dumps their bleached bodies
someplace where they can be easily found. He has just kidnapped Julia
Hickson and has taken her to his secret place, when the FBI, under the
supervision of the workaholic Peter Novak (Vaughn) trace him through his
albino dog and arrest him in his apartment. But he goes into a catatonic
state and can't be awakened to tell them where he is keeping Julia. The
FBI playing against time, desperately ask the experimental scientists to
help them and Catherine agrees to get into the killer's head, even
though this is a more dangerous task than what she usually does.
When Catherine experiences some danger in the killer's head, Peter makes
the experimental journey with her and when he comes back to earth he
finds a clue where the killer got his water system from, and follows
that lead the way the FBI usually doggedly operates. Meanwhile,
Catherine realizes that she is pressed for time to locate the hideout,
so she reverses the process and has the killer enter her mind, which is
perilous since it is easy to lose track of reality this way. A series of
Frances Bacon-like images are conjured up along with a multiple score of
other very artfully manifested designs, including Catherine going into a
mind cell, as she eerily probes the killer's memory bank when he was an
abused child at the hands of his tyrannical father.
The main focus of the film is the visual journey itself, therefore the
actors are mostly asked to blend in and not steal the scenery from the
visuals. It is something they successfully do. Jennifer Lopez is
surprisingly credible as a therapist and the one the film hinges on to
take us on this mind trip, Vince Vaughn plays his low-key role in an
expressively adequate manner, and Vincent D'Onofrio elicits some
sympathy for being a victim of child abuse while also seen as an
over-the-top psycho, someone who is capable of torturing women for no
logical reasons. He is so strange, that he is most comfortable when he
is suspended in air or has hooks sticking in his back. But one is always
reminded that the actors are not as important as the cinematography is,
as the film always returns to the visualizations of the mind to keep the
intensity going. The film had enough visual material to keep you looking
at it and wondering what does it all mean since it wasn't a very
frightening serial killer picture, and its mind explorations did not
take us down some unmarked Jungian trail. It ends up by having the hero
rescue the heroine in the nick of time, allowing the film to wend its
way back into the conventional way serial killer films usually conclude.
Perhaps, with a more razor-sharp story and requiring more from the
capable cast, the film could have lived up to its visualizations and
have been a masterpiece, instead of settling for being an engrossing
film that is very entertaining, a film that certainly sets a new high
standard for photography.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Tarsem Singh.
Cast: Jennifer Lopez, Vince Vaughn, Vincent D'Onofrio, Marianne 
Jean-Baptiste, Dylan Baker, Jake Weber, Jake Thomas, Tara Subkoff, James 
Gammon, Gareth Williams, Colton James, Patrick Bauchau.
2000 - 117 minutes
Rated R (for violence, gore, profanity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, August 19, 2000.
Following a fairly disappointing summer, where every movie seemed to be a 
cliched take-off of a film already made, acclaimed music video director 
Tarsem Singh's "The Cell" is a visionary masterpiece, not quite like anything 
you've ever seen before, nor will likely ever see again. A disturbing, 
evocative journey into the human mind, the film recalls your spookiest 
dreams, most forbidden fantasies, and darkest past memories, strung together 
in an unforgettably bold visual palette. That such a creative and bizarre 
motion picture was made at all is relatively surprising. That such a creative 
and bizarre motion picture was made in the big-budget world of mainstream 
Hollywood is nearly a miracle.
Catherine Deane (Jennifer Lopez) is a hard-working, sympathetic child 
therapist who, for seven years, has been working for Dr. Miriam Kent 
(Marianne Jean-Baptiste), the head of a top-flight institution and the 
creator of the Synaptic Transfer System, which allows a person to literally 
go into the subject's mind. Recently, Catherine has been working with a 
comatose young boy named Edward (Colton James), attempting to bring him back 
into reality, but the process of directly connecting with him is proving 
time-consuming and frustrating.
Meanwhile, the body count has risen once again with the discovery of the 
eighth body of a woman, found in a lake and bleached completely white, made 
to look like a porcelain doll. The schizophrenic killer is Carl Stargher 
(Vincent D'Onofrio), who seeks pleasure in kidnapping women, locking them up 
in a small Plexiglas room for 40 hours, and then flooding the room completely 
with water. What he does next, including suspending himself above his victims 
by fourteen metal rings deeply pierced into his body, is best left unsaid. 
His latest potential victim is Julia Hickson (Tara Subkoff), who has gone 
missing from the area and has forty hours to be found before she drowns. 
Worst of all is that Carl Stargher has just lapsed into a coma, preventing 
him from being able to tell anyone where Julia is located. 
Enter FBI Agent Peter Novak (Vince Vaughn), whose only hope of saving Julia's 
life is persuading Catherine to go into Carl's mind. While the chance of 
success for such short notice is slim, Catherine agrees, not knowing what 
severely twisted things lie within the mind of such a pathological, mentally 
unhinged person.
A creepy horror-thriller with large helpings of fantastical imagery, "The 
Cell" puts a fresh spin on the tiresome Serial Killer genre by not only being 
about saving the latest victim in jeopardy, but also focuses on the 
inner-workings of a sick mind. A thought-provoking triumph, the film is 
possibly one of the most visually imaginative films ever put to celluloid, 
aided by director Singh, screenwriter Mark Protosevich, and, arguably the 
star of the picture, cinematographer Paul Laufer. Using jump cuts, slow 
motion, fast motion, upside-down and sideways shots, and many more stylish 
techniques, Singh and Laufer have created an entirely new world, one that is 
as beautiful and awe-inspiring as it is threatening and nightmarish. If 
Tarsem Singh ever had a blueprint to model "The Cell" after, his original 
film source would clearly be Luis Bunuel's mesmerizing "Un Chien Andalou," in 
which every grotesque moment was a powerful metaphor for the unfortunate toll 
that schizophrenia had taken on a person.
Carl, whose mind portrays his adult self as a powerful ruler who delights in 
the torture of all creatures that find their way into his lair, also has 
created a version of himself as a frightened child (Jake Thomas) whose father 
physically and verbally abuses him. Catherine quickly realizes that the only 
possible way to get through to Stargher and find out where Julia is is to 
warm up to the child in him, whom she grows to deeply feel for under the 
discouraging circumstances.
The beautiful Jennifer Lopez (1998's "Out of Sight"), who has gained added 
popularity in the past two years from her debut pop album, "On the 6," should 
be applauded for taking on such an undoubtedly daunting project as this. 
Lopez appropriately underplays the role of Catherine, who sympathizes with 
the abused Carl and seems to connect with him due to something unmentioned 
from her own past. While more development could have been done with her 
character (the thinly written roles are the picture's sole sore spot), Lopez 
brings much-needed maturity and subtlety to Catherine, and believably 
portrays a therapist.
Vincent D'Onofrio is both menacing and poignant as the ill Carl Stargher, and 
like Lopez, gets to take on many different role and costume changes, 
depending on what his mind does with him. The film calls for him to be 
psychotic and frightening at certain points, and lonely and scared at others, 
and D'Onofrio pulls it off. Vince Vaughn is professional, if unextraordinary, 
as Peter Novak, and does exactly what is required of the role, and not much 
more.
Featured in supporting roles are Marianne Jean-Baptiste (1996's "Secrets & 
Lies") and Dylan Baker (1998's "Happiness"), as the two scientists who head 
the project of synaptic transfer; Jake Weber, as Peter's partner, Gordon 
Ramsey; and Tara Subkoff, who manages to be powerful in only a few small 
scenes, as Carl's last victim, Julia Hickson.
A genuinely rewarding and surprisingly touching experience, "The Cell" is a 
one-of-a-kind motion picture that is not only a feast for the eyes and ears 
(the music score, by Howard Shore, is erratically memorable), but also works 
up and lays bare emotions that are rarely felt in films nowadays. That "The 
Cell" is a visually astounding work of art, as well as satisfying on a story 
basis is cause for celebration, and director Tarsem Singh deserves all the 
praise one could possibly get for making a debut feature as strong as this 
one.

Author
Ron Small
Starring: Jennifer Lopez, Vince Vaughn, Vincent D'Onofrio, Dylan Baker, 
Marianne Jean-Baptiste, James Gammon, Jake Weber, Patrick Bauchau, Gerry 
Becker, Tara Sunkoff, Jake Thomas, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Catherine Sutherland
THE CELL is chock full of some of the most repulsive imagery I've ever seen 
in a major motion picture. Also some of the most creative. Its director, 
Tarsem Singh, who comes from a music video and commercial background, is a 
visual stylist of the highest order and in some scenes he's orchestrated what 
could be called visual poetry. THE CELL is often a feast for the eyes though 
unfortunately almost never a feast for the soul.
Last week Roger Ebert and his smarmy co-host Richard Roeper breathlessly 
raved, deeming it a masterwork, one of the best films of the year. Just a 
week prior, Ebert panned COYOTE UGLY, exclaiming "There has to be something 
for the gray matter. Something". Well I've seen THE CELL and I don't recall 
it offering much of anything for the gray matter. It had promise (but doesn't 
every movie, hell, TEACHING MRS. TINGLE had promise), but it's more 
interested in operatic images than it is in story (the same of which could be 
said for a music video). The scenes between its characters feel oddly cold 
and removed like in many Stanley Kubrick films, but in those the stiffness 
served a purpose, Kubrick made satire and Tarsem has made a straight genre 
film, which should have likeable characters in order to make us, you know, 
give a damn. Whatever artistry the director brings to his visual palettes he 
clearly lacks with his actors; all their voices might as well be dubbed in 
seeing as how their delivery lacks discernable emotion. Tarsem is clearly not 
at all interested in them, but he realizes that he has to give those pesky 
characters some screen time before getting to his visual feast. And he 
complies, though obviously quite begrudgingly.
So I find myself in something of a quandary. While parts of THE CELL 
disgusted and even offended me, parts of it thrilled me and served as a 
reminder of what this medium is really capable of. THE CELL plays it safe 
with its story line, already described by some as SILENCE OF THE LAMBS meets 
MATRIX, but it doesn't in individual sequences, which is refreshing after one 
of the most conventional movie summers in some time.
Tarsem may not be much of human storyteller, but he manages to capture the 
dream state better here than in any other film I've seen. When the picture 
opens, Catherine Deane (Jennifer Lopez under pounds of make-up), a 
progressive child psychologist, has been placed into her patient's 
subconscious by a group of scientists testing out a revolutionary new dream 
therapy that enables the patient to interact with their therapist in their 
own head, thus uncovering secrets that may be too painful to be revealed 
consciously. Once in the patient's head, Deane finds herself decked out in a 
flowing white gown amid a serene desert vista that could've been spliced in 
from a Calvin Klein ad. She's trailing up a sandy dune as Tarsem's camera 
lingers, watching from afar. Next she's on a black horse riding to her 
patient, jump to her with the patient, the horse behind her, now an inanimate 
life-size figurine. Tarsem captures the odd incongruous shifts that we 
encounter in our dreams, a state where unbelievable things occur and seem 
downright believable as they transpireâŚuntil we wake and ponder; wait a 
minute, I can't fly. In the world Tarsem creates, anything is possible.
For its first thirty five minutes THE CELL shows a great deal of promise, 
expertly cutting between three separate stories so as they build to their 
inevitable interlocking we feel tension from each overlapping into the other. 
In one, dogged FBI agent Peter Novak (a dulled Vince Vaughn) is narrowing in 
on Stargher (Vincent D'Onofrio), a schizophrenic killer who performs some of 
the most revolting acts I've ever seen get past the MPAA with an R rating of 
approval. Stargher has constructed a cell encased in glass, containing only a 
toilet and a bench. He kidnaps women and locks them within it. He leaves them 
there, alone, setting a timer for water to intermittently shower down from 
the ceiling. He films them from a stationary camera as they drown, slowly. 
Later, after they've died, he takes their nude bodies, places them on a slab 
and levitates above them (you see this wacko has inserted steel rings into 
his back which he connects to chains that hold him above the bodies, his own 
skin stretching out like molten latex) while he masturbates over their 
corpses.
Audiences have always had a morbid fascination with how serial killers 
operate, and these sort of films have been growing decidedly more gruesome 
and kinky with their killer's fetishes, but THE CELL has crossed boundaries 
that I didn't have any desire to see crossed. I don't mind perversion if it 
has a point (as it did in SEVEN and SILENCE OF THE LAMBS) but here it serves 
no purpose other than to titillate and jolt an audience that's probably sat 
through everything from KISS THE GIRLS to THE BONE COLLECTOR. THE CELL has 
gladly matched the evil we've seen in all those films and now we can sit and 
wait to see someone match it.
After discovering several clues that lead to the killer, the FBI tracks 
Stargher down, who lays in a coma, passed out after failing to get to his 
medication. The agents have discovered he has another victim in his cell, and 
it's only a matter of time before she drowns. Problem is they don't know 
where Stargher keeps the cell and since he isn't conscious they have no way 
of finding out. This is when the stories collide. The cops go to the 
revolutionary scientists with the proposition to put the progressive 
psychologist inside the killer's mind, befriend him and get him to confess 
the location of his cell. Thus begins the visual orgy.
Amongst the madness is Jennifer Lopez, who, here, lacks everything that made 
her so charming in OUT OF SIGHT. Lopez looks stunning always, her hair 
perfect, even when mussed it's stylishly so. Here, she truly gives a star 
performance, and I mean that in the worst way. Gone is the energy and glow, 
in its place a Melanie Griffith acting job complete with cotton candy affect 
and adorned with a small country's supply of lip gloss.
Another acting causality is the usually immensely likeable Vince Vaughn, a 
highly individual actor who's managed to inject personality in even the most 
banal roles (his cowboy serial killer in CLAY PIGEONS), though in this film 
he walks through the part looking tired, speaking in measured tones, not 
really doing much of anything. If you're gonna cast a talent like Vaughn why 
not give him something to do besides a tired Charlie Sheen impersonation?
Not to mention (but I'll do so anyway since it's sorta my job) the myriad of 
character actors given nothing roles, like Dylan Baker, Marianne 
Jean-Baptiste, and Pruitt Taylor Vince, though in a major motion picture this 
is to be expected. Vincent D'Onofrio manages to make something of an 
impression in early scenes when he plays his schizoid killer like a nerdy 
mouth breather type, seemingly more afraid of human interaction than death 
itself. Though once we get into his mind D'Onofrio's performance becomes more 
typically over the top.
The script's attempts to give us hints as to why Stargher turned out the way 
he did are awfully pretentious (you see, he was abused by his father who took 
to calling him "faggot"), but writer Mark Protosevich and director Tarsem 
Singh nonetheless deserve credit for birthing some of the most oddly 
compelling (and deeply disturbing visuals) I've ever seen in a picture not 
directed by Fellini or Argento. The visuals aren't total originals, but they 
come to life as such with Tarsem's world combining Tarot card images with odd 
religious torture devices into the grimmest fairy tale universe since 
CINDERELLA before it was sanitized. But ultimately, all those smoke and 
mirrors weren't enough to tide me over. I mean, there has to be something for 
the gray matter. Something. Doesn't there?
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
Christian Pyle
It's probably inevitable that the popular virtual reality genre ("The 
Matrix," "eXistenZ") would collide with the even more popular serial-killer 
genre ("Kiss the Girls," "Se7en").  The result should have been more 
interesting than "The Cell."
As the movie opens, therapist Catharine Deane (Jennifer Lopez) treats a 
catatonic boy (Colton James) by entering his mind through some sort of 
virtual reality technique that's never fully explained.  After months of 
therapy sessions in a surreal desert, Catharine has no success to report.  
Meanwhile, killer Carl Stargher (Vincent D'Onofrio) has claimed another 
victim.  His particular hobby is to kidnap young women, keep them in a glass 
cell overnight, and drown them.  He takes the corpse and soaks it in bleach, 
then suspends himself over the body and jerks off while watching a video tape 
of the drowning.  Although Carl's been doing this for awhile, he's recently 
become sloppy, and FBI Agent Peter Novak (Vince Vaughn) is closing in fast.  
Not fast enough, though, to keep Carl from sticking another woman (Tara 
Subkoff) in the cell or to catch him before he suffers a schizophrenic attack 
that leaves him in a coma.  From the videos in Carl's house, Peter can see 
that the drowning cell is automated and will fill with water forty hours 
after the abduction.  To save the kidnapped girl, Peter has to find the cell 
before the end of the day, and comatose Carl's not talking.  So off they go 
to Catharine in the hope that she can go inside Carl's mind and find out 
where the cell is in time.  
The focus of "The Cell" in on the ornate interior of Carl's mind, but the 
universe director Tarsem Singh creates seems more an exercise in 
computer-generated spectacle than an exploration of the psychotic 
personality.  For the most part, it's style without substance.  In his own 
mind, Carl is a decadent emperor in flowing robes, Ming the Merciless, as 
well as a frightened boy (Jake Thomas) abused by his father.  All in all, the 
mind of a psycho killer turns out to be a strangely dull place, and I kept 
wishing I could fast-forward to the next development.  
Singh is best known for directing music videos, particularly REM's "Losing My 
Religion," and "The Cell" seems very much like a really long, really slow MTV 
video with the sound deleted.  Singer Lopez seems to think she's in a video 
as well; she devotes more time to posing in elaborate costumes than she does 
to acting.  
The premise had great promise.  The computer-generated world within Carl's 
mind could have been a bizarre, surreal universe governed by insanity and 
symbolism rather than logic.  The first room Catharine enters in Carl's head 
shows this promise.  She finds a horse standing in center of the room; 
suddenly, sheets of sharp-edged glass fall into the horse, dividing it into 
segments.  The panes of glass separate, pulling apart the pieces of the 
still-living horse.  This scene is twisted, disturbing, and 
thought-provoking, because the psychological importance of the horse and its 
fate is left to the viewer to ponder.
Another element that should have been developed is the effect on Catharine of 
merging with the mind of a psychopath.  Their minds begin to bleed together 
at one point in the movie, and this should have provided an opportunity to 
discover the dark corners of Catharine's own psyche.  Like Sidney Lumet's 
"The Offence" or Michael Mann's "Manhunter," "The Cell" could have explored 
how the madness of the killer brings out a repressed darkness in the 
investigator.   However, Catharine's character is hardly developed at all, 
and Lopez has no depth to offer the role.
Bottom Line:  Don't get trapped in this one.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Cell (2000)
Jennifer Lopez, Vince Vaughn, Vincent D'Onofrio, Jake Weber, Dylan
Baker, Marianne Jean-Baptiste, James Gammon, Tara Subkoff, Colton James,
Patrick Bauchau, Gareth Williams. Screenplay by Mark Protosevich.
Directed by Tarsem Singh. 107 minutes.
Rated R, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Initially, my expectations for "The Cell" were low, primarily because of
its mid-August release date. August is the month studios traditionally
use to burn off those movies they consider too anemic to compete against
the big summer flicks and too insubstantial to face off against headier
autumn fare.
Then Roger Ebert got me all stirred up. On his weekly TV show (which the
local affiliate thoughtfully airs on Saturday nights at 3:30 a.m.),
Ebert and his new partner raved about the production, calling it one of
the best movies of the year. After gushing over the eye-popping visuals,
they went on to praise the story, claiming that it worked on multiple
levels.
I'm glad Roger and his comrade in arms had such a fine time. As for me,
"The Cell" turned out to be just another late summer disappointment,
filled with flashy images and little substance.
Created by award-winning commercial and music video maker Tarsem Singh
(he now bills himself simply as Tarsem, you know, like Charo), the film
comes off like a grisly, feature-length perfume commercial with
delusions of grandeur. What a drag.
Jennifer Lopez plays Catherine Deane, a psychologist involved in an
ultra high tech form of therapy. Using a whiz bang machine, she can
enter the subconscious of her patients. Decked out in a body suit that
appears to be made of red Twizzlers, Catherine closes her eyes and
awakens in the dreamscapes of her clients, where she wanders through
trippy MTV style video sets, dispensing psychological bromides while
wearing the kind of outfits that Cher and Madonna trot out for award
shows.
The story begins within the mind of Edward Baines (Colton James), a
comatose little boy. Set against blue skies and majestic desert sand
dunes, we watch as Catherine tries to win the trust of the child, hoping
to eventually draw him back to the real world. The segment is
impressively shot and, unfortunately, the high point of the film.
While Catherine strolls through the psychic Sahara, whacked out serial
killer Carl Stargher (Vincent D'Onofrio) wages a terror campaign outside
the lab, torturing women to death and then turning their corpses into
animated dolls.
After the lunatic is captured and falls into a coma (how convenient),
straight arrow FBI agent Peter Novak (Vince Vaughn) turns to Catherine
and her comrades for help. Somewhere, Carl's latest victim, Julia
Hickson (Tara Subkoff) is trapped in a huge torture tank that fills with
water every few hours. The young woman is destined for a horrible death,
unless Catherine can enter his mind and discover the location of the
lethal aquarium. The bulk of the movie hops between Catherine's forays
into the killer's cranium and disturbing shots of a frantic Julia trying
not to drown.
The makings of a solid film are present, but Tarsem is so fixated on
creating groovy tripscapes that he neglects everything else. While
Julia's situation remains dire, there is no sense of danger with any of
the principal players. Character development is virtually nonexistent,
leaving Lopez and Vaughn stuck in one-dimensional roles.
Despite setting much of the film in Carl's deranged brain, the story
stays at a Psych 101 level. Catherine attempts to build a rapport with
Carl's inner child, learning that the killer was abused as a boy.
Meanwhile, the adult Carl skulks about, sporting a series of
over-the-top costumes that Elton John would surely die to own.
When Spike Jonze ventured into the mind of another person in the
wonderful "Being John Malkovich," he was smart enough to realize that
outrageous ideas are best presented in a low key, matter-of-fact
fashion. Tarsem seems incapable of turning off the flash. Even in the
real world scenes, he uses swooping camera shots, jump cuts to extreme
close-ups and other visual stunts. As a result, nothing in the film
feels genuine.
To make matters worse, the subconscious segments suffer from overkill.
Too often, Carl's costumes, created by April Napier and Japanese
designer Eiko Ishioka, appear more silly than imposing. As for the
general look, imagine REM's "Losing My Religion" video (also directed by
Tarsem), magnify the excesses by 10, toss in some gross out footage and
you'll know what to expect.
Ultimately, "The Cell" is little more than creepy, vapid eye candy, with
a story barely grafted on. Ads for the movie use a quote describing the
production as "'The Matrix' meets 'Silence of the Lambs.'" What a load
of crap. "The Cell" lacks the imagination, excitement and thrust of the
former film, and the character development and storytelling expertise of
the latter, leaving viewers staring at an overlong, inert music video
peopled with lavishly costumed characters all dressed up with nowhere to
go.

Author
John Beachem
Serial killer Carl Stargher (Vincent D'Onofrio) is murdering young women by 
placing them in a sealed glass room for forty hours and then flooding the 
room till they drown. FBI agent Peter Novak (Vince Vaughn) has finally 
tracked the killer down, but Stargher has fallen into a coma from which he 
will never awaken. This wouldn't be a problem except for the fact that he 
kidnapped one last girl who is in that very room, and she's running out of 
time. Novak has no idea where the room is, so he employs the services of Dr. 
Catherine Deane (Jennifer Lopez), a child psychologist, who can use a 
technology to enter peoples' minds. It seems Catherine is able to make her 
patients trust her better than any psychologist who has tried the machine 
before. Novak hopes Stargher will trust her and tell her the location. She 
agrees to enter Stargher's mind, but she's never experienced anything like 
Stargher's mind before. Soon she's lost in the disturbing world of 
Stargher's sub-conscious, unable to tell she's no longer in the real world. 
So Novak decides to go in and fetch her, but Stargher's mind is ready for 
him.
Stephen King once said, regarding Stanley Kubrick's adaption of "The 
Shining", "I think you want to hurt people with this movie." I disagree with 
his assessment of Kubrick's horror masterpiece (In my humble opinion 
anyway), but I think his words can be accurately applied to Tarsem Singh's 
travesty, "The Cell". There's nothing remotely likeable about this film. The 
only thing I could think of that I somewhat enjoyed were a few special 
effects sequences. Other than that, I was experiencing only three different 
emotions: bored, confused, and outraged. It's also the only movie this year 
that I've almost walked out of. Is it worse than "Battlefield Earth"? Of 
course not, but at least that piece of tripe was so bad I could laugh at it. 
"The Cell" is one of the most pretentious, stuck up movies I've ever seen 
(it even beat out "Magnolia"), completely convinced of how important its 
message is. It's one thing for a movie to feature a controversial message, 
it's quite another for the writers to cram that message down your throat. 
Singh and Protosevich do just that in "The Cell", and I hope never to see 
another film from either of them.
So how does the acting fare in this horrendous movie? Well, you've got 
Vincent D'Onofrio ("13th Floor") playing a serial killer; something he seems 
to enjoy very much, but he sleepwalks his way through the role. I heard him 
in a recent interview discussing the types of roles he now takes, and he 
stated "I take only the roles which interest me." If that's the case, and 
this role interested him, I think Mr. D'Onofrio might be in need of serious 
medical attention. Jennifer Lopez (who was wonderful in last year's "Out of 
Sight") seems to be convinced, throughout the film, that speaking softly all 
the time is the same thing as acting concerned. The only problem is I 
couldn't hear half the "concerned" things she was saying. Vince Vaughn 
("Swingers", the horrible "Psycho" remake) isn't given much of a chance to 
act since his character is so underdeveloped. Protosevich's idea of 
developing the character seems to be for him to say that he doesn't agree 
with killers blaming their crimes on their childhood. When Lopez's character 
argues with him about this however, he doesn't really fight back. Watch for 
a cameo by James Gammon ("Major League") as a local police officer.
In that first paragraph I mentioned a message being crammed down our 
throats, and that message is basically all there is to "The Cell". Singh 
tries to hide it behind bizarre visuals and overly dramatic dialogue, but 
all I noticed was the message being shoved in my face. What was this message 
that I refer to with such bitterness? Simply, that inside every psychopathic 
serial killer there's a scared little person trying to get out. What a 
serial killer does is really just a cry for help so people will listen to 
him, since his parents were abusive when he was a child. I figure there will 
be three different groups of people seeing this movie: first will be the 
group to which I belong - outraged that this message was being thrown at us; 
second is the group that agrees with the message and thinks it's wonderful 
that it's being shown in a movie; and last is the luckiest group, those who 
either don't notice or don't care about the message and just sit there 
dazzled by the pretty colors on screen. If you're in the first group, I urge 
you to stay away from this movie. If you're in the second group, I adamantly 
disagree with you. If you're in the third group, I envy you.
Obviously, one of the biggest draws of "The Cell" is the shocking visuals, 
and I'll admit, they look nice in about a scene and a half. Other than that, 
they generally resemble poor attempts to imitate Clive Barker. It's as 
though the film makers were thinking "let's see what bizarre/disgusting 
image we can hurl at them next", without using images that went along with 
the story. Tarsem Singh's filming style involves giving all the dream 
sequences a washed out look for no other reason than to distinguish between 
dreams and real life (as though the floating people and pools of blood 
weren't tipping us off). It also involves making everything from the 
dialogue (except Jennifer Lopez's) to the music (an obnoxious score by 
Howard Shore) to the sound effects gratingly loud and in-your-face. Tarsem 
Singh is a first time director, and I can only hope he'll never be handed 
another project. "The Cell" runs a long 105 minutes. I'd recommend it only 
to psychology majors who want to either argue or agree with the film's 
message and to aspiring directors so they can see how not to present strange 
visuals. I give the movie one and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Brian Matherly
See this review as it was intended at: http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
Cast: Jennifer Lopez, Vince Vaughn, Vincent D'Onofrio, Marianne
Jean-Baptiste, Jake Weber, Dylan Baker, Patrick Bauchau, Gerry Becker,
James Gammon, Catherine Sutherland, Jake Thomas, Pruitt Taylor Vince 
Written by: Mark Protosevich 
Directed by: Tarsem Singh
Catherine Deane (Jennifer Lopez) is a psychologist who has been hired to
participate in a project where she can enter the minds of comatose
victims and try to interact with their subconscious in an attempt to
wake them up.  She has been experiencing moderate success with a young
boy in a coma, but the boy's parents aren't happy with the apparent lack
of progress and the toll of her job is having adverse affects on her
regular life.  As if trying to assure the boy's parents wasn't hard
enough on her, a new development arises that furthers the strain on
Deane's mental faculties. 
A vicious serial killer named Carl Stargher (Vincent D'Onofrio) has been
kidnapping women, locking them in an automated cell that drowns them
slowly in a matter of days, then soaking the corpses in bleach to turn
them into life-sized dolls.  Just after kidnapping his latest victim and
locking her in the cell, Stargher has a traumatic experience that
triggers a schizophrenic virus in his brain and causes him to sink in an
eternal catatonia.  The police, led by FBI agent Peter Novak (Vince
Vaughn) are able to locate Stargher by some clues he left while dumping
his previous victim's body, but they feel all hope is lost for his
current victim due to his vegetative state.  In a last ditch attempt,
they ask Deane and the scientists that created the project to undergo
the frightening task of entering Stargher's mind to try and find the
location of the victim locked in the deadly cell... a cell which will
completely fill with water in the next 40 hours!
Initial reports about this film described it as a cross between The
Silence of the Lambs and The Matrix.  While it does share some
characteristics with both films (particularly the first forty minutes,
which seem almost like a condensed version of Lambs), The Cell also
seems to contain elements of Dreamscape and Brainstorm.  The buzz around
this project is that first-time feature film director Tarsem Singh (who
won many awards for his video of R.E.M.'s "Losing My Religion") wanted a
script that he could fashion images out of instead of a cohesive story,
and a good portion of this film supports that theory.  
Despite the borrowed elements from the aforementioned films and a script
that contains several logically questionable moments, The Cell does
feature some remarkable imagery.  All of the sequences where we delve
into someone's mind are incredibly beautiful (including the dank mind of
Stargher, whose thoughts are reminiscent of an H.R. Giger painting come
to life mixed with a Tool music video), proving that Singh is as adept
at filming strange and wonderful images as his acclaim would lead us to
believe.  The first sequence that takes place in Stargher's mind is by
far the best, featuring one of the most ingenious traps I've ever seen
in a film (involving a horse, which no one seeing this film will
probably forget), a zoo-like display of Stargher's victims which are
animated like marionettes, and Stargher himself in a giant purple cape
that spans the walls of his mental throne room.  If the film had
continued within this dirty monstrous world I would have deemed the film
brilliant, but alas, the sequences only become more silly as they go
along (despite a painful nipple ring removal later in the film). 
The cast is basically just an excuse for there to be some moderate plot
semblance during the parade of images, but at least Vincent D'Onofrio
turns in his usual bizarre and psychotic performance (magnified by ten,
thanks to the environment in which the film has been placed).  In my
opinion, D'Onofrio was one of the best creepy actors I have ever seen in
a film, but his film choices as of late have been so completely awful
(i.e.- The Newton Boys, Feeling Minnesota, The Thirteenth Floor, and The
Velocity of Gary) that I have begun to rethink my initial assessment of
him.  The character of Stargher is an excellent role for him though, and
will probably lead to a bit of typecasting for him.  
Detractors of violence and disturbing images will want to stay far away
from this film, as it contains heavy doses of both.  Besides the nipple
ring removal I mention above, there is also Stargher's penchant for
hanging suspended off of the floor by the rings that pierce his back and
legs (prior to his catatonia and capture) which will have audiences
recoiling.  A sequence where Catherine enters Stargher's mind and finds
him recreating the disemboweling of his first victim is also pretty
disquieting.  One moment also features a character having his intestines
slowly removed from his body by an old fashioned hand cranked spit-like
device. 
As a narrative film, The Cell is sorely lacking.  As a collection of
images though, The Cell is extremely well done.  Although the latter
sequences in the film contain fewer disturbing imagery than the first
half, Singh has done what he supposedly set out to do: make a film
solely for the purpose of stringing some remarkable images together. 
Unfortunately, a well-written script should have been considered too,
because without it The Cell just seems like any other music video we
could see on MTV (provided, of course, that MTV allowed for the use of
graphic violence and language in music videos). 
Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
AOL Instant Messenger: Widescreen25
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Editor - The Jacksonville Film Journal
http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Watching THE CELL is akin to watching a demo reel for the film's art
directors, makeup artists, production designer and costume designer --
which, I'm sure, it will end up being. Make no mistake about it, THE CELL
is the kind of film technical craftspeople lie awake fantasizing about. 
They get the opportunity to create entirely new worlds, where the only
rules are the limits of their imagination and creativity. The result can
be the eye-popping stuff of Oscar nominations (and wins), a film people
walk away from thinking what all art directors, makeup artists, production
designers and costume designers secretly want viewers to walk away
thinking: "Boy, that looked incredible."
     THE CELL does look incredible, and since it is evident in nearly
every frame that its primary purpose for existing is to look incredible, I
suppose you'd have to say that it works in its own strange way. If only
that look seemed less familiar, or more resonant. The premise finds a team
of scientists working on a risky experimental procedure. Psychologist
Dr. Catherine Deane (Jennifer Lopez) has been acting as a guinea pig,
chemically stimulated to tune into the brainwaves of a catatonic young boy
and enter his sub-conscious. The procedure has yielded only the slightest
success, but it becomes the best chance for F.B.I. agent Peter Novak
(Vince Vaughn) to save a woman's life. Serial killer Carl Randolph
Stargher (Vincent D'Onofrio) has been rendered comatose by a rare form of
schizophrenia, leaving his latest victim stranded in an unknown location. 
If Deane can enter Stargher's mind and find out where the woman is, Novak
might be able to save her.
     First-time feature director Tarsem Singh (director of music videos
like R.E.M.'s "Losing My Religion") is clearly going for a SILENCE OF THE
LAMBS-meets-SEVEN vibe, a commercially wise decision given the financial
success of those films. There are heroes with their own demons to banish,
interactions between killer and profiler, a screaming woman to be saved,
some stark desert landscapes and some grisly images you'll just want to
purge from your brain. The parts are right, but they're not put together
in a way that adds up to anything. Both Deane and Novak get 30-second
character development moments to explain their motivations, including a
provocative hint at Novak's own dark childhood, while most of the film
treats them like props to throw into Stargher's messed-up head. 
Considering the film takes nearly an hour to throw them there -- spending
an inordinate amount of time on the police work that locates Stargher,
when that's not really the point of the story -- the fuzzy 
characterizations are eminently noticeable.
     Eventually THE CELL does dive into Stargher's messed-up head, and
things briefly start looking up. Singh's shots are often effectively
disorienting, including one arcing shot that ends with the camera swinging
upside down into water. Many of the nightmare concepts (a hideous bit of
psycho-torture) and directing tricks with which Singh dresses up his film
are utterly unique; nearly as many are stuff out of Intro to Music Video
Auteurs' Freaky Surrealist Visuals. There's a bathtub full of blood,
flocks of white birds, Lopez in Virgin Mary attire, jangly edits and
plenty of pasty-faced women. Eventually, it becomes difficult to take THE
CELL seriously, because so much of the imagery feels cribbed from 20 years
of MTV. The 1984 Dennis Quaid fantasy DREAMSCAPE at least found some fun
in walking through another person's psyche. THE CELL is supposed to be
terrifying, but when a serial killer's mindscape resembles an S&M
variation on a Robert Palmer video, his power to intimidate can't help but
diminish.
     The climax of THE CELL actually becomes two parallel climaxes: Novak
trying to save Stargher's victim-in-waiting, and Deane trying to save
Stargher's inner child from his inner pale-eyed demon lord. The
juxtaposition of the two stories allows each protagonist the opportunity
to get a big dramatic moment. Unfortunately, they have nothing whatsoever
to do with one another, which is yet another example of THE CELL's
fundamentally flawed storytelling -- it takes far too long to get into its
central concept, then tries to make up for that mistake by lingering there
once it's already served its purpose. I didn't necessarily expect THE CELL
to be a film that would stand up to much scrutiny. I did expect something
that would provide the shock of the new. Singh and his crew don't provide
enough that's shockingly new to make up for THE CELL's lapses as a
narrative. Boy, THE CELL's visuals looked incredible ... especially nine
years ago, when they were in R.E.M.'s "Losing My Religion" video.

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     Tarsem is a successful director of music videos who has added the 
gravitas of a last name, Singh, for his first foray into feature films.  
You'd think "Singh" would work for the musical stuff, and could be 
dropped when he went tuneless (unless you count Howard Shore's 
cacophonous score.)  But I digress...
     His attitude toward movies seems to be that it doesn't matter what 
you say or do as long as it looks good.  And at times it looks very 
good.  The opening, with Jennifer Lopez swathed in brilliant white 
pacing the knife-edged tops of dramatically shadowed desert dunes, is 
the pure distilled essence of an expensive commercial.  She is at the 
time prowling the subconscious of a small boy (more on this later), and 
we can only assume that this is a small boy who will grow up to be a 
fashion photographer - these are not images that dominate the 
subconscious of your typical prepubescent male.
     All right, here's the deal - she's a psychologist working in an 
experimental scientific program that allows her, suspended in midair in 
a form-fitting corrugated body suit alongside her patient, to enter the 
kid's subconscious and find out what's gone wrong in there.  The science 
is reminiscent of '50s sci-fi potboilers.  Things aren't so bad in the 
little boy's brain, but they take a turn for the worse when FBI agent 
Novak (Vince Vaughn) finds out about this program and recruits her to 
take a side trip into the brain of a comatose serial killer (Vincent 
D'Onofrio), who has a victim stashed somewhere and there's no time to 
lose!
     Singh cares little enough about dialogue that he allows 
screenwriter Mark Protosevich lines like "If we can't stop him, he ain't 
gonna stop himself," and to be on the safe side he imports plot and 
style elements from movies as diverse as "Silence of the Lambs", 
"Altered States", and the animated "Fantastic Planet".  He has stocked 
his cast with middle-echelon stars, and seems not to have wasted much 
time directing them, with the result that Lopez spends most of her time 
trying to look sympathetic and concerned, Vaughn looks worried and a 
little lost, and D'Onofrio just looks crazy.  Ultimately, Singh is 
banking everything on his slick visuals, and while sometimes he nails 
it, as often as not it gets away from him.  A recurring image of 
Jennifer Lopez as the Virgin Mary is one that could be charitably 
forgotten.
     If you like shots of kidnapped young women being systematically 
drowned in a plexiglass cell, screaming "Daddy!  Mommy!  Help!" as the 
water level rises, you'll be treated to them randomly throughout the 
movie.  If you're fond of disemboweling and vivisection, look no 
further.  If you're a fan of crisp story, character, and credibility, 
hang in there.  Something's bound to turn up soon.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Tarsem Singh
WRITTEN BY: Mark Protosevich
CAST: Jennifer Lopez, Vince Vaughn, Vincent D'Onofrio, Marianne Jean-Baptiste, Jake Weber
MPAA: Rated R for bizarre violence and sexual images, nudity and language
Runningtime: USA:107
What if you could see your dreams come alive? What if you could walk amidst your thoughts, emotions, memories and desires as if they formed a world of their own? A world where laws of physics do not apply, where everything is possible.
"The Cell" is created by a team of newcomers, who have not yet been influenced by the stereotypical film industry, and feels therefore as a much needed breath of fresh air. It's imaginative, bizarre and probably one of the most beautiful films Hollywood has created since Francis Coppola's "Dracula".
Your dreams, thoughts and feelings take physical form and you can interact with them as with your present surroundings. In a not too distant future this is a reality, and psychiatrist use this to gain a more complete understanding of their patients. Catharine Deane, a very clever child psychiatrist is working on a boy that has lost touch with reality. At the same time, within the confines of an abandoned rural farmhouse, Stargher, a psychologically disturbed killer has built The Cell, a glass-encased chamber where he drowns his innocent female victims before continuing a sadistic post-mortem ritual with their bodies. The horror and despair that the kidnappings have created, makes the FBI agent Peter Novak react. In not too long, they make the arrest, but too late. The killer falls into a deep coma, while his final missing victim only has a few hours left to live. Now it is up to Catharine to enter the mind of a killer in the search for the answers to uncover the location of th!
e missing girl. 
Written by first-time writer Mark Protosevich, "The Cell" takes the story from "Silence of the Lambs" as a frame for first-time director Tarshem Singh's ingenious imagination. Singh has a beautifully sculptured pace. No time is wasted on scientifical explanations, that ruins most of the films, and he elegantly leaps to the emotional and psychological core of the story. The film really takes off when Catharine enters the killers mind. The result is shocking and spectacular. 
Like David Fincher (Fight Club, Se7en), Singh had been a director of musical videos, before he was discovered by the clever producers. His first motion picture does bare the mark of these elements. His visual style is more rich and colorful than anything that Coppola and Tim Burton have created so far. In musical videos the key is visual imagination, a rare talent of portraying your emotions and thoughts through images. And Singh has this talent. He is a composer of images. He makes music come to life and paintings start breathing. Repulsively graphic, bloody, twisted, surreal, weird, magical, frightening and almost poetic with its dreamy symbolism. There are no words that can describe the grotesque world that is created, but I can promise you that you'll have an incredible experience. Singh's attention to detail and symbolism is nothing less than astonishing. Desert dunes, catacombs, Middle Eastern-flavored chambers, images of dismemberment, decay, torture and religious salva!
tion, snow, cherry blossoms, monsters, horrors, water, light, air -- an extraordinary palette of weirdness and expressive arcane. Even the shadows cast by tree leaves seem meticulously art-designed.
In a way this is the most psychological of psychological thrillers to date. A film that portrays a deeper understanding of the complex human mind than the rest of the movies of its kind, presenting it as a unique world of its own. There are no actual characters in this film, except the psychologist and the killer himself, whose personalities are reflected through their virtual minds and connected to their actions. When it comes to acting, that is almost nonexistent. The actors are more like puppets on a stage, not quite knowing what they are doing, and since there is no real story, they are completely in the director's mercy. Singh is the only one that knows what's going on, and the actors' job is simply look pretty in the frame, which Lopez certainly does. She can act, and she can provoke sympathy (which is more than I can say about most of the models and singers that turn to acting). So it doesn't have a concrete plot, no real characters to speak of, no deep-going acting, an!
d yet "The Cell" is incredibly interesting and complex nonetheless. It crawls into your mind, under your skin and make all the little hair on your neck stand up. It is a rare experience, both emotional and psychological. 
Like all brilliant works of art, it's brilliance lies in its simplicity. You take with you what you bring to it. This film is entirely individual and every one will understand it differently. The experience of watching it can be compared with admiring a painting or listening to music. It's abstract and engrossing. To me this is pure brilliance brilliance and a haunting experience, and I hope that it will refresh a genre that needs all the help it can get

Author
Chad Polenz
It's difficult to sell a serial killer movie these days. Audiences want 
another "Silence of the Lambs" or a "Se7en" but more often than not end up 
with scripts some second-under-sub-assistant-co-producer was using to keep 
his kitchen table sturdy. They're a way to win a box office for a weekend or 
two and usually fade away without much recognition. "The Cell" is along the 
lines of those flicks only this time there's a real effort made on part of 
the director and producers to come up with something original and shocking - 
they accomplish that but that doesn't make it a great movie. 
This film is basically your run-of-the-mill mystery thriller about cops and 
the Feds trying to track down a really sick and twisted serial killer. The 
story wastes no time with a lot of details and instead just jumps right in to 
the authorities' hunt for the madman and within two or three scenes they've 
already tracked him down. We already know who he is - a nutty loner with a 
penchant for drowning women and turning them into his own personal dolls. 
He's one of the most mentally disturbed villains I've ever seen in a movie 
(and that includes supernatural horror flicks). The guy gets off on dangling 
his own flesh from chains while watching his victims die. 
Of course for every bad guy there has to be a hero or at least a few 
wannabe/mini-heroes that add up to one almighty solver of the problem. 
Jennifer Lopez plays Catherine Deane, a child psychologist who can literally 
enter the mind of other people in a really high-tech futuristic lab that only 
exists in sci-fi movies and the like. Vince Vaughn is FBI Agent Peter Novak - 
a relatively weak character without much motivation other than the generic 
story of how a criminal walked on a technicality and he's dedicated his life 
to making sure that doesn't happen again. Somehow Novak and his crew learn of 
Deane's process and want to use it on the killer who is in a deep catatonic 
state when they catch him. There's a lot of jive about how he suffers from a 
rare form of schizophrenia and he'll never snap out of it. That sucks because 
there's one more still-living victim to be found and she'll die if they can't 
find out where she is. Put two and two together and you've suddenly got a 
journey into the mind of a madman on the slight chance they might be able to 
reach his logical side for a moment to discover the girl's location. 
Now that that's said and done we can get to what the REAL point of the film 
is - the dream sequences. Actually it isn't so much a dream as it is an 
exploration of the subconscious. The human mind is a strange and fascinating 
thing we'll never be able to understand fully, which means if you're going to 
make a movie about the inside of a killer's mind it's a license to go hog 
wild. At least "The Cell" succeeds on this level. For large bulks of time 
it's basically a filmed acid trip - an animated M.C. Escher or Salvidor Dalî 
painting. It's sci-fi, horror, fantasy and drama all mixed into one. There's 
a lot of disturbing, creepy images that go beyond S&M and are just plain 
psychotic. It's shocking and it's not - shocking because the art direction 
and production design are so meticulous in detail to convey such an 
atmosphere that would and should be terrifying if it didn't seem like such a 
cliche horror movie set. We see what made the killer who and what he is and 
we're supposed to feel sorry for him. 
What keeps the film from being great is that this is pretty much all it has 
going for it. There's virtually no characterization and the screenplay is 
pretty mediocre. How the mind transferring process works isn't explained (and 
should be because the reality of the film is the same as our own, it's not 
like the reality from "The Crow" or something). Lopez's character doesn't 
seem like a psychology professional at all, just a cartoony heroine. Vaughn's 
character at least has some built-in motivation due to the fact he's an FBI 
agent and the case is personal to him (has there ever been a movie where the 
FBI didn't take the case personally?). All the supporting characters are 
simply pawns with no apparent free will of their own - they just do whatever 
Lopez and Vaughn tell them to. 
Their purpose of going into the killer's mind is to find the girl's location 
- they don't learn that directly. Instead, a symbol in his mind points out 
something to the detectives and starts a chain reaction. Had they done better 
police work to begin with the whole mind-meld thing wouldn't have been 
necessary in the first place (but then the film would only be about 10 
minutes long). 
Although "The Cell" has something of an original plot and direction going for 
it, the screenplay is too weak and cannot support it. There's a lot of 
interesting stuff to look at here but it's mostly gratuitous art direction.
-------------------------------------- (here's where my e-mail ends and my 
signature begins)---------
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of nearly all mainstream movies playing 
today! Get my reviews of everything playing at your local cineplex so you can 
better make an informed decision on what to see. Don't forget to vote on my 
poll and sign the guestbook!

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  Let's say you're one of the record number of visitors to New
York City this summer.  After hitting the usual spots, your
artsy friend takes you to the Museum of Modern Art--which
you shamefully enter despite the strike.  You spend three
hours looking at works of Kandinsky, Picasso, Magritte and
your feet are tired and your mind is a blur.  You go outside
and your friend suggests that you head right on uptown to the
Guggenheim after which you would finish the day at the
Museum of the American Indian.  What do you say? 
Something unprintable?  Of course.  This is not to say that
you're a boor.  You certainly did appreciate the colorful and
imaginative works that MoMA had to offer, but when the
colors blend into a shapeless rainbow, you've had enough
and want nothing more than to head across the street for a
burger, get a nap at the hotel, and then take in a Broadway
show that has a real story and not just a bunch of impressive
visuals.
   That's how I felt about "The Cell."  This sci-fi movie with
horror-genre undertones is a painter's palette of color and a
Jungian melange of dreamlike imagination.  Tom Foden's
production design, particularly of a glorified and dangerous
fish tank that can hold thousands of gallons of water and yet
empty out in eight seconds is a stunner.  April Napier's
costumes could get window space at New York trendiest
boutiques.  Paul Laufer's lensing captures the vastness of a
North African desert and the interior of a person's mind with
equal aplomb, and who better to helm the pot pourri than
music video director Tarsen Singh or to parade about the set
than Jennifer Lopez--whom "Variety" critic Emanuel Levy has
just called "the sexiest woman in Hollywood"?
   But alas, the weak spot is Mark Protosevich, the
screenwriter and co-producer of this lavish spectacle, as his
chronicle is swallowed by the ocular.  The tale does have
some suspense, particularly involving the race against the
clock to find a young and frightened woman who is trapped in
a fishbowl, the water about to rise above her head in a matter
of hours if she is not found by the dauntless men of the FBI. 
And as one of the scientists explains, even though the villain
is in an irreversible coma, the man could actually cause
bodily harm to the good guys who have entered his mind--I
guess in much the way you can have a nightmare and, not
realizing that you are simply dreaming, will wake up in a cold
sweat, teeth chattering, mind discombobulated.
   Inspired, perhaps, by such sci-fi movies as David
Cronenberg's "eXistenZ," in which a virtual reality game
designer gets trapped in one of her own games with a man
who is supposed to be protecting her; and Ken Russell's
1980 work, "Altered States," about a scientist who uses
himself as a guinea pig; "The Cell" opens enigmatically in a
stunning African desert as Catherine Deane (Jennifer Lopez)
rides a stately stallion while wrapped in a drop-dead white
costume as she proceeds toward a small boy, Edward Baines
(Colton James).  The real Baines is in a coma: she has
entered his schizophrenic mind to see what makes him tick
with the goal of helping him by this unique understanding.
The so-called synaptic-transfer machine that enables her to
do this was invented by Henry West (Dylan Baker), and
presided over by Dr. Miriam Kent (Marianne Jean-Baptiste). 
While this transpires, a far more gruesome scenario is being
enacted as serial killer Carl Stargher (Vincent D'Onofrio)
tortures and kills young women by dropping them into an
hidden underwater tank.  When Stargher is caught, comatose
as a result of a brain disease, FBI Agent Peter Novak (Vince
Vaughn) runs the unconscious killer over to Henry West's lab
with the hope of discovering the location of the water tank. 
Stargher is the only one who knows this, and he is no longer
able to help.  There is one hope. Catherine must enter the
sick man's mind to see how he thinks, win his trust, and get
him to divulge the information before his latest victim, Julia
Hickson (Tara Subkoff), is drowned.
   The major part of the enterprise is taken up by Tarsem's
desire to impress the audience with his direction of some
startling scenes, astonishing even when compared to his
typical MTV work and designed to unnerve even the cynics
who have seen it all and have played the video games.  The
film would have been much better had Tarsem balanced his
visuals with more dialogue, not only psychological palaver but
political exchanges between Catherine and Peter.  Peter, for
example, explains that he had been a prosecutor who gave
up that career and became an FBI agent, disgusted when a
killer is freed on a technicality and proceeds to dismember a
new victim.  Catherine, by contrast, is what Peter might call a
bleeding-heart liberal, a woman who has extraordinary
empathy with the deviant and the sick and uses her gift to
bring them back to some degree of normality. 
   Instead we are taken into a world that would please
painters like Heironymous Bosch, Magritte, Salvador Dali and
the like, a continuous array of startling imagery broken up
from time to time with breaks to the real world.  While the
optics are indeed bold and imaginative, they are overdone
and what's more, Vincent D'Onofrio--a terrific actor who
scared the pants off many a viewer as a psycho killer in
Kubrick's "Full Metal Jacket"--is not at all frightening this time
around.  Instead he is almost laughable in his array of 
costumes and facial contortions, expressions of what is going
on in his sick mind which Catherine has entered.  Vince
Vaughn is convincing as an FBI agent who, considering his
hard-core conservative views of crime is surprisingly laid-back
and whose mellow tones mesh with the near-whispers of the
lovely Ms. Lopez.  
   If you're not overly concerned about narrative, "The Cell" is
worth seeing for its brazen visual concept, and for its
believable acting particularly by side roles performed by Jake
Weber as the straight-arrow FBI agent, Marianne Jean-
Baptiste as the wary but ultimately daring scientist, and
Gareth Williams as a monstrously abusive father.
Rated R.  Running time: 107 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Tarsem. Screenplay by Mark Protosevich. Starring Jennifer
Lopez, Vincent D'Onofrio, Vince Vaughn. Running time: 107 minutes. Rated
AA by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 22nd, 2000.
Whatever the medium, surrealism is a difficult technique to pull off.
Often, it comes across either as overly complicated, an indulgment in
weirdness at the expense of a logical storyline, or as too mundane, taking
perfectly evident plot points and tarting them up needlessly. The first
type usually leaves its audience hopelessly confused (or, at best,
requiring multiple screenings) while the second frequently just makes one
wonder what all the fuss was about.
Although it makes a valiant effort, "The Cell" falls into this latter
category. The film, by first-time director Tarsem Singh (pretentiously
going only by his given name), tries to put a novel spin on the "bizarre
serial killer" concept popularised by films like "Silence Of The Lambs"
and "Se7en". Whereas those movies merely speculated about how the minds of
their antagonists worked, "The Cell" literally takes us inside its
villain's head. But while the visuals accompanying these scenes are
stunning, the sequences are too elementary in their conception, lacking
the shrewd symbolism which is the hallmark of great surrealism.
"The Cell" opens on a vast desert landscape, through which a woman in a
feathery white dress, Catharine Deane (Jennifer Lopez), is riding on a
black horse. We soon learn that all this is taking place inside the mind
of a young coma patient. Catharine, a child psychologist, has had her
consciousness inserted into the boy's mind using revolutionary new
technology, and is trying, so far without success, to coax him into
awakening.
Meanwhile, FBI agent Peter Novak (Vince Vaughn) tracks down a serial
killer named Carl Stargher (Vincent D'Onofrio). Stargher has murdered
several women by trapping them in a sealed container which automatically
fills with water after forty hours. He then bleaches their flesh to make
them look like dolls before dumping their bodies. Just before his arrest,
Stargher experiences a massive seizure, plunging him into a coma from
which he will likely never emerge. Unfortunately, he has recently
kidnapped a woman, and has left no clues as to where she is being kept.
With less than two days to rescue her before she drowns in Stargher's
contraption, Novak turns to Catharine Deane, who reluctantly agrees to go
inside Carl's subconscious.
It is these scenes, set inside the mind of the killer, that form "The
Cell"'s centerpiece, giving Tarsem a tremendous opportunity to strut his
stuff. Having cut his teeth on such visually memorable music videos as
REM's "Losing My Religion", Tarsem brings a number of striking touches to
"The Cell". Consider, for example, a disturbing scene in which Catharine
walks through a gallery of Stargher's previous victims, all in various
stages of becoming doll-like and mechanically acting out vaguely obscene
movements. Also very impressive is Stargher's representation of his evil
side, a demonic-looking figure brilliantly realised by costume designers
Eiko Ishioka and April Napier. Tarsem does a fine job of filming
D'Onofrio in these scenes in a manner that gives him a sensation of
absolute enormity.
But one of the joys of surrealistic works is in deducing the meaning
behind the symbols. But Tarsem does not make much use of symbolism in "The
Cell". Though he does paint an eccentric and original mental terrain,
Tarsem mainly depicts Stargher's mindscape as simply a collage of moments
from his past. This makes the whole thing at times feel like nothing more
than a heavy-handed way to insert flashbacks into the narrative. Most
things in Carl's subconscious are exactly what they seem to be, and while
there is enough of the bizarre and the fantastic to impress the eye, I
found myself left with a slight feeling of hollowness.
Indeed, I was sometimes more intrigued by the boy Catharine is treating
than I was by the Stargher storyline itself. Here we do get flashes of the
sort of clever associations I was anticipating (inside his mind, the boy
lives in fear of a creature Catharine later reveals is derived from Mother
Goose), and it is unfortunate that these sequences were used only as
bookends for the main action. They had the potential to form the
cornerstone of a very intriguing movie in their own right.
The two main protagonists, Lopez and Vaughn, give passable performances.
Lopez's Catharine seems rather weak and half-formed throughout. This may
have been intentional, to contrast the character with the way she behaves
after falling under Stargher's thrall, but these sequences are too brief
to support the decision. Vaughn, meanwhile, plays Peter with little
variation on the standard FBI stereotype. Intriguing hints that he may
have gone through much the same childhood experiences as Stargher are
left disappointingly underdeveloped.
D'Onofrio, on the other hand, ably handles the variety of material he is
given, playing everything from a simpering child-man to an imposing beast.
The biggest problem is that Stargher just is not a particularly memorable
villain. Although scriptwriter Mark Protosevich gives him some interesting
characteristics (he has hooks embedded in his back so that he can hover
from ropes over his victims, for example), these just seem like so much
window dressing. Stargher's own personality is pushed to the background
for much of the film.
"The Cell" also goes a little overboard in trying to make Stargher seem
like less of a monster, passing the blame on to his abusive father.
Although this does provide some insight into Carl's motivations, it also
feels like something of a cop-out. And surely, if we are expected to
excuse (or, at least, understand) Stargher's behaviour on this basis, then
mightn't his father be worthy of the same consideration? Isn't it a little
too pat to just set him up as the ultimate villain?
It is unfortunate that "The Cell" does not tackle such issues, nor take
better advantage of its great premise. Instead, it ends up as essentially
just another serial killer movie. It can be recommended on the basis of
its visuals and sheer entertainment value, but it falls short of being a
great movie, unfortunately settling for just being pretty good.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/TheCell.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Jerry Saravia
Villains of any size, shape or form, whether depicted in cinema or 
literature, are often interesting when they are made to see human, 
particularly when there is a side to them that we can identify with. Often 
such identification results in disgust because we see that we are as capable 
of murder, torture or an assault of any kind towards humanity. The same holds 
true of serial killers, and the best film about them is still John 
McNaughton's "Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer," the most potent film 
imaginable about diseased minds, all the more disturbing because it shows a 
man who could be your next-door neighbor. "The Cell" is not one of those 
films, it has a glossy sheen to it but it lacks much human interest and is 
seemingly submerged in gory visuals. 
The serial killer in this film is Carl Stargher (Vincent D'Onofrio) who 
kidnaps his victims with the help of his albino dog (a rare breed) and keeps 
them encased in a subterrranean glass box before submerging in water and 
videotaping their helpless ordeals. And, to make matters worse, he turns them 
into dolls, masturbates with them by suspending himself from the ceiling, and 
then dumps them in reservoirs under bridges. This Carl is certainly monstrous 
and evil enough but he also has enormous headaches and ends up in a coma 
(partly due to a viral schizophrenic condition). The FBI eventually finds 
him, but there is still one living victim about to be submerged in water 
within 40 hours! 
Enter the good social worker, Catherine Deane (Jennifer Lopez), who interacts 
with her patients by entering their subconscious via cables and wires 
(reminiscent of the sleeper hit from eons ago, "Dreamscape.") Catherine is 
enlisted to enter the mind of Carl, and at first hesistant, she chooses to 
find a way of making Carl trust her long enough to find the latest victim. 
What follows are vividly oversaturated colored dreamscapes, evoking the style 
of Dali and the tortured psyche of David Lynch, and many of these scenes are 
incredible designed and photographed. I love the opening sequence of Lopez 
walking in the desert with a flowing white robe, or the images of horses, 
blinding white lights in the form of crystals, crimson red neck braces, gold 
dresses littered with thousands of rhinestones, and so on. Never has the mind 
of a serial killer looked so inviting and yet so dangerous. 
The artwork, cinematography, and lighting of all of these dreams are 
spectacular and one of first-time director Tarsem Singh's strengths. But, as 
is often the case with music video directors, the visual style of such scenes 
seems to be its only strength. Singh barely uncovers much depth in any of 
these characters, including Lopez's Deane, a social worker who lives with a 
cat. That is it, that is all we discover about her and that she has a thing 
for driving herself into the subconscious of kids in coma states. 
As for the Stargher character, minimal attempt is made to make this sexual 
monster human. D'Onofrio has shown shards of sympathy for his characters 
before (notably his crazed Gomer Pyle character in "Full Metal Jacket") but 
here, he is at the mercy of the director's deliberately overdone visuals, 
which shed precious little insight into this schizo's personality. 
If "The Cell" did not depend on plot as much as characterization (eliminating 
the race-against-time-to-save-the-victim angle might have helped), then it 
could have had the humanity of something like "Silence of the Lambs." "The 
Cell's" frenetic energy, purely caffeinated, 
pounding-like-an-ultra-sound-bass musical score deflate any essential 
particulars like depth or substance. I want to recommend "The Cell" based on 
its often strong visual imagination but its generic police investigation and 
thin characters (including Vince Vaughn as an FBI expert on serial killers) 
diminish whatever the potency the story had.    
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        A triumph of style over substance, "The Cell" looks like the
product of a meeting between that darling of the British Film Institute
Peter Greenaway ("Prospero's Books," "The Pillow Book") and the costume
designer for "Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace."  It's as if they
got together one day and decided to make a horror film.
        There are more elaborate gowns, sets, and funny goings on in "The
Cell" than in all of the "Star Wars" pictures combined, and if Greenaway
thinks he holds a monopoly on outrageous headgear and collars that stick
way out to here, he's got another thing coming.
        "The Cell," unfortunately, remains a mixed bag because for all of
its strikingly creative visuals (think a high art version of "The Silence
of the Lambs"), it's a bit of a non-starter in the storytelling department.
        Jennifer Lopez plays a pretty psychologist who's recruited to
"enter the mind" of a serial killer so that she can discover where he's
stashed his latest potential victim.  The psychopath is boldly played by
Vincent D'Onofrio, looking remarkably like rocker Neil Young.  The film's
title refers to a nasty little chamber in which Carl Stargher (D'Onofrio)
likes to hole up his victims (all women), eventually drowning them and
turning them into dolls with some industrial-strength bleach.  This sicko
is also into body piercing and likes to suspend himself from chains with
metal rings cutting into his flesh, just for grins you understand.  He also
has an albino German Shepherd and drives a Ford pickup which provides the
FBI (in the form of a scruffy-looking Vince Vaughn) with a rather easy way
of tracing him.
        About that mind-entering stuff.  Catherine Deane (Lopez) is
employed by a bunch of company crackpots (among them "Secrets & Lies"'
Marianne Jean-Baptiste) who have developed this dubious scientific method
for allowing one person to engage with another, cerebrally.  The technique
is used for helping schizophrenic adolescents recognize and face their
fears, such as in the film's opening sequence set in a desert.  What the
process amounts to is having the two willing (or not so willing in the case
of the comatose Stargher) participants outfitted in blood-red Twizzler
suits, suspended above the floor while cloths with chic microchip designs
are laid over their faces, and cranking the knob until it hits eleven!
        This process allows the filmmakers, former music video director
Tarsem Singh among them, to spend most of the film buried inside Vincent
D'Onofrio's head.  Think about that for a minute.  If the bulk of the film
is all dream material, then they can go hog wild on the visuals, right?
And hog wild they pretty much go.  It's amazing stuff indeed, and if you've
seen the prevalent trailer you'll get a good sense of what you can expect.
(I liked the visual of the three women cloaked in monochromatic Medieval
garb sitting in a plowed field, their heads held high to the sky with their
mouths wide open like baby birds.  They turn to talk to Vaughn's character
but only for a moment, snapping their heads and mouths immediately back
into an upright, open position.  Now *that's* the stuff of dreams!)
        But where's the story?  There really isn't one.  But for most of
"The Cell" it won't matter; just sit back and enjoy the creepy, dazzling
ride.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Susan Granger
 Cinema is defined as "the art of motion pictures" and, for
director Tarsem Singh (best known for R.E.M.'s "Losing My Religion"
music video), the emphasis is on art.  Jennifer Lopez stars as a
pediatric psychotherapist who is involved in an experimental research
program, working with a youngster in deep coma, when she's recruited
by an FBI agent (Vince Vaughn) to delve inside the mind of a
schizophrenic serial killer (Vincent D'Onofrio) in hopes of saving his
most recent victim (Tara Subkoff). It seems the diabolical,
voyeuristic killer kidnaps young women, tortures them in an
underground tank, drowns them, and finally bleaches, slices and dices
their corpses while watching videotapes of their suffering as he's
suspended by hooks in his back, simulating weightlessness. This
gruesome, thoroughly repulsive journey inside the landscape of a
perverted patient's mind is made even more perilous since the
empathetic therapist risks losing contact with reality. The sadistic,
repetitive child abuse theme of Mark Protosevich's screenplay lacks
psychiatric plausibility. And with her seductive, whispery voice and
gallons of pink lip gloss, pop-culture diva Jennifer Lopez is hardly
credible as a virtual reality expert, serving instead as a shallow,
ultra-chic fashion model doing perfunctory posing in a chaotic
dream-world. But the daring, obsessive fantasy is amazing. Tarsem
Singh's vision combines David Cronenberg with Salvador Dali, Federico
Fellini with Heironymous Bosch - with a bit of "Hellraiser" thrown
in. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Cell" is a visually
arresting but deeply disturbing 6. If digital design and stylized
symbolism intrigue you, go to this unpleasant but meticulous
mindtrip. But be aware that it's style over substance, amounting to
less than meets the eye.

Author
Ross Anthony
Whew... I'm almost speechless, thoughtless ... out of my mind. I've been
assaulted with music video images (Rated R for graphic violence) for nearly
two hours. I'm not sure what to think.
Well, I had to eat (that's for sure). After mentioning that I'd just seen
"The Cell" the waitress at a local restaurant asked, "Oh, how was it? I want
to see it?" My head just went blank. Hmmmm. The film's strange, so strange
that the quick rating neuron in my brain kind of flickered 'E' for error.
The film opens with Jenny, in a flaming white dress, on the back of black
horse trotting across the ridges of barren and endless sand dunes. She meets
a child and tries to encourage him out of his shyness. But it's not real,
she's in his mind and he's in a coma. This is the set up. Shift attention to
a serial killer, who has kidnapped his latest beautiful victim, caged her in
an automated torture cell and then collapsed into a coma himself. The cops
find him, but have no idea the location of "The Cell." By now we begin see
Jenny's use here, a psychologist in a futuristic facility capable of mind
connections.
All of this is filmed beautifully (though at times grainy) with keen
attention paid to transitions and sound. The film has big audio. Even in the
real world, the John Woo feel of direction gives a surreal edge. But once
into the minds of our principals ... sit back and enjoy the wild imagery.
High kudos to the art directors and costume designers.
Disturbing, sick, with moments of out and out gore, the film is a twisted
mix of last year's two big hits "The Sixth Sense" and "The Matrix." Though,
interesting and respectably compelling, not quite as fulfilling as either.
Bones? Okay, I've got nothing against Jennifer's butt, but not in this
film - she's a psychologist! An earlier gratuitous shot of Jen in her
underwear is clearly beneath the picture. Additionally, her glamour make up
is distracting. Perhaps it works in the mind sequences; but in reality, I
think a more plain/stark appearance would have complemented the film (as
with Tomei in "The Watcher"). Lastly, we're asked to buy into this sci-fi
techno-potentiality ... I was willing, but why the actual "mind-connecting"
room was fitted for locks is completely over the top hard to believe. One
must unfortunately chalk it up as a contrivance used only for plot
progression.
That said, good story telling, excellent direction, never a boring moment.
The Cell. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Jennifer Lopez, Vince Vaughn, Vincent D'Onofrio, Marianne
Jean-Baptiste, Jake Weber.
Directed by Tarsem Singh.
Written by Mark Protosevich.
Produced by Julio Caro, Eric McLeod at New Line.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Perfect timing! This movie is being released at the best moment for me
personally, having just begun my "Hollywood movies are getting so cliched,
lame and predictable" stage, with the recent crop of summer flicks just not
popping any of my corn. But here comes a movie that doesn't let you just sit
down and watch, it rather asks that you stare in awe and experience a new
kind of movie! The kind that will have you taking notice whether you like it
or not. A breath of fresh air. A nice kick in the stomach. A visual feast.
It's nice to be back.
PLOT:
A serial killer who gets off on watching his victims drown to death is on
the loose, but not for long. As the FBI bust his ass, the killer falls into
a deep coma, while his final missing victim only has a few hours left to
live. Enter a therapist hip to a new technology that allows her to enter the
mind of a comatose person. Once inside the killer's mind, the doctor tries
to uncover the location of the missing girl.
CRITIQUE:
Not for everyone, this film moves at a quick pace, delivers a decent serial
killer story, and seduces you through an infectious ride of cinematic
paintings, ripe with originality, surrealism and otherworldliness. A big
thank you to director Tarsem for slapping me across the face with this film
and forcing me to wake out of my year 2000 cinematic nap. This is the kind
of movie that sets a new standard for moviemakers. It takes the cinematic
canvas and rewrites the rules with its daring use of staggering imagery,
visual experimentation and camera tricks. Imagine a painting come to life. A
story unfolding in a dual world, one set in our day and time, with
characters attempting to find the solution to a mad man's insanity, and
another dripped in a dream-state, a place where the unseen thoughts, loves
and fears of one's mind are visually transformed into breathtaking sequences
never before seen on the big screen. I wasn't sure if the balance of the two
"worlds" would work, whether or not things would start getting complicated
or if the director would just slow the whole film down to a pretentious
halt. But my fears were quickly laid to rest, as the film grabbed me by the
balls at scene one and didn't let go until I was transported back to my seat
a little over an hour and a half later.
But there were many other things that I really liked about this movie as
well. I liked the pace of the film, which didn't waste much time on
scientific mumbo-jumbo or inappropriate romance. I liked all of the
performances, especially Vaughn, whose always been a favorite of mine and
who delivers a good showing here, and Lopez, who surprisingly really clicked
as the intelligent shrink with a big heart. And if you love her ass, you
also get a side shot of it hiding behind its underwear, right after Lopez
smokes a joint in front of her iMac. I also liked the soundtrack, which got
really chaotic and pronounced when downloaded into the subconscious world,
but perfectly so. And despite the actual story of the "serial killer chase"
not breaking any major ground, I did really appreciate the new way that they
decided to chase after the nutball in this movie. Go inside his head...it
works! Oh yeah, one more thing. This movie actually creeped me out in
several points. Not sure if it will give me any nightmares or anything
(although I might regrettably find that out tonite), but the visual panorama
of the serial killer's ultimate evil mindset just struck a chord of terror
right through me.
But in the end, it is the film's unique style that will set it apart from
all of the other serial killer movies in the years to come. It's a brave
move on the part of the filmmakers, attempting to visually portray the deep
rooted evil set inside the mind of a madman, and in this case...it works!
Suspense-wise, the film certainly doesn't compete with SEVEN (then again,
what film does?), but it more than makes up for it through its bold,
cinematic experimentation. Kudos to Tarsem and Protosevich for pumping some
life into this year's regurgitative movie season.

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE CELL is surrealistic grand opera as choreographed by the Marquis de 
Sade.  As first-time screenwriter Mark Protosevich accurately points out 
in the press kit, he wanted to take the next step beyond THE SILENCE OF 
THE LAMBS.  Even this critic, who generally has an iron constitution 
after years of watching 300 films a year, was squirming in his seat on 
this one.  Taking itself completely seriously, the movie blends science 
fiction technology with an old fashioned hunt for a serial killer and 
his dying last victim.  
The result is an edge-of-the-seat thriller that should have been rated 
NC-17 but was given an R.  Consider THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS as your 
personal benchmark.  If it was too much for you, then you do not want to 
see THE CELL.  Other the hand, this is one of the best movies of the 
summer, and you can always close your eyes if you have to.
The story opens in an imaginary landscape as psychologist Catherine 
Deane (Jennifer Lopez) tries to help a young boy, Edward (Colton James), 
break out of his coma.  Through a new transcendental science, she is 
able to work her way into his unconscious mind.  As she and the boy wear 
red-ribbed bodysuits, they are suspended on cables from the ceiling.  
Once up in this contraption, her mind goes into his.  It sounds silly 
and looks a bit ridiculous, but the story shoots for and achieves 
intelligent science-fiction rather than camp.
The majority of the credit for THE CELL should go to first-time feature 
film director Tarsem Singh, who crafts audacious scenes of great visual 
power.  He puts his background as a music video director to work, 
finding inventive and beautiful ways to stage scenes.
Paul Laufer's stunning cinematography, with its dark, oversaturated 
colors, calls to mind another Lopez film, Oliver Stone's U-TURN.  THE 
CELL's striking visuals along with its fantastical costumes absolutely 
mesmerize the viewers.
Even though she had little luck with poor Edward, Catherine is called 
into service by the FBI.  After a dramatic investigation, the FBI, led 
by FBI Agent Peter Novak (Vince Vaughn, CLAY PIGEONS) captures serial 
killer Carl Stargher (Vincent D'Onofrio, Abbie Hoffman in STEAL THIS 
MOVIE!).  But there is a problem.  After putting his last victim into a 
cube slowly filling with water, Carl fell into a coma.  Carl, the doctor 
explains, is "not just catatonic.  He has disappeared."   The doctor 
says that Carl will never regain his consciousness.  This means that, 
unless Catherine can enter his mind and find the location of the torture 
chamber, his last victim will die by nightfall.
Along her terrible journey into the creepy unknown of a schizophrenic's 
mind, we witness a plethora of horrible and beautiful images.  Jake 
Thomas, as the young Carl, is sometimes Catherine's tour guide.  The 
scene of someone's intestines being slowly ripped out is not even the 
worst of many nightmarish incidents that we encounter.  Carl appears a 
malevolent king of his terrifying netherworld.
"Remember, it's not real," one of the institute's scientists (Marianne 
Jean-Baptiste) admonishes someone about to try the machine for the first 
time.  Yeah, right.  It looks pretty scary to the audience, so one can 
just imagine how frightening it would be going inside the head of a 
serial killer.  Nevertheless, the movie makes this voyage completely 
engrossing, like reading a book that you can't put away until you've 
read every page.
Although the movie may make you embarrassed for not having more 
elaborate dreams, it could also have another effect.  It may make you 
wish that the future described in the story would get here sooner.  
Imagine arranging for Jennifer Lopez to appear in your dreams with a 
disk that you could insert into your bed's electronics.  Now that would 
be a movie tie-in worth purchasing.  
THE CELL runs a blazingly fast 1:45.  It is rated R for bizarre violence 
and sexual images, nudity and language,  but it should have been rated 
NC-17.  It would be acceptable for high school seniors and older.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http:/www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     THE CELL is one more story of the FBI trying to catch a serial
killer and free his captives.  But when it seemed that there was not
much more that could be done with that tired plot, this film has
some refreshing new ideas.  It is the premise that some unspecified
technological advance allows psychotic and psychologist to enter the
other's dreams and walk around in that surreal landscape.  Similar
ideas have been tried before in films.  In SPELLBOUND, Alfred
Hitchcock took us through the mind of a neurotic's nightmare in a
symbolic surreal world designed by Salvador Dali.  The concepts of
actually visiting inside another person's mind or dreams were
explored in DREAMSCAPE and BRAINSTORM.  The latter film even
suggested that there was a particular danger being inside a
psychotic's mind.  NATURAL BORN KILLERS suggests a natural disorder
to a psychotic's mind, though it explores that disorder without use
of science fictional devices.  All these ideas come together in an
otherwise simplistic violent serial killer plot.
     Catherine Deane (played by Jennifer Lopez) is a psychologist
trying to get into the mind of her young patient, Edward.  A new
device allows her to do it in a much more direct fashion than what
we see used today.  The invention lets her visualize his mind and
dreams and actually become a character inside of them.  It is a
tremendous leap toward understanding her patient.  And the vistas
within his mind are strange even if the boy has a rather standard
normal mind.  Then Deane is given an opportunity to enter a most
unusual mind.  The FBI has captured a serial killer, Carl Stargher
(Vincent D'Onofrio), and has him under sedation.  But his most
recent target is still alive in a death trap somewhere.
     FBI agent Peter Novak (Vince Vaughn) would like Deane to go
into Stargher's twisted, violent mind and retrieve a clue as to
where he is hiding and torturing his current victim.  That said,
there is not much more plot to the film.  The serial killer plot is
abbreviated and for the most part predictable.  The real story goes
on inside the heads of Deane and Stargher and we see it as fantasy
worlds.
     The success of THE CELL becomes very much the property of
production designer Tom Foden (of cable TV's "The Hunger") and art
directors Guy Dyas and Michael Manson.  Dyas is debuting as an art
director, but he has been a production illustrator on several major
films including MEN IN BLACK, MIMIC, ARMAGEDDON, and GALAXY QUEST.
The worlds this team created in Stargher's mind are dank and
forbidding, twisted, dark and bloody.  Religion is an important
aspect of both Deane's and Stargher's mindscapes but it has very
different roles in each of those worlds.  Each uses religion in a
different way.  There are many other tantalizing ideas floating
around.  There is a strong hint that two different people seeing the
same subconscious world will see it quite differently yet each will
find the others actions consistent with the world they see.
     First-time film director Tarsem Singh directs a script by
first-time writer Mark Protosevich.  Singh intentionally mutes the
colors of the film to heighten the oppressive effect.  So much of
the film is taken up with the fantasy world action, the real world
story is somewhat shorted.  How Stargher was able to build his
ornate torture device leaves many unanswered questions.  Other
writing problems are obvious.  The film had a nearly perfect ending
very shortly after the action ends.  Unfortunately the film keeps
going to tie things up more pleasantly and warmly and out of keeping
with the cold style of the best of what had preceded it.
     The viewing public hardly needed another serial killer film.
But if another must be made, at least this is the way to do it.
Combine it with something fresh and creative with ideas.  I rate THE
CELL a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Chad Polenz
It's difficult to sell a serial killer movie these days. Audiences want 
another "Silence of the Lambs" or a "Se7en" but more often than not end up 
with scripts some second-under-sub-assistant-co-producer was using to keep 
his kitchen table sturdy. They're a way to win a box office for a weekend or 
two and usually fade away without much recognition. "The Cell" is along the 
lines of those flicks only this time there's a real effort made on part of 
the director and producers to come up with something original and shocking - 
they accomplish that but that doesn't make it a great movie. 
This film is basically your run-of-the-mill mystery thriller about cops and 
the Feds trying to track down a really sick and twisted serial killer. The 
story wastes no time with a lot of details and instead just jumps right in to 
the authorities' hunt for the madman and within two or three scenes they've 
already tracked him down. We already know who he is - a nutty loner with a 
penchant for drowning women and turning them into his own personal dolls. 
He's one of the most mentally disturbed villains I've ever seen in a movie 
(and that includes supernatural horror flicks). The guy gets off on dangling 
his own flesh from chains while watching his victims die. 
Of course for every bad guy there has to be a hero or at least a few 
wannabe/mini-heroes that add up to one almighty solver of the problem. 
Jennifer Lopez plays Catherine Deane, a child psychologist who can literally 
enter the mind of other people in a really high-tech futuristic lab that only 
exists in sci-fi movies and the like. Vince Vaughn is FBI Agent Peter Novak - 
a relatively weak character without much motivation other than the generic 
story of how a criminal walked on a technicality and he's dedicated his life 
to making sure that doesn't happen again. Somehow Novak and his crew learn of 
Deane's process and want to use it on the killer who is in a deep catatonic 
state when they catch him. There's a lot of jive about how he suffers from a 
rare form of schizophrenia and he'll never snap out of it. That sucks because 
there's one more still-living victim to be found and she'll die if they can't 
find out where she is. Put two and two together and you've suddenly got a 
journey into the mind of a madman on the slight chance they might be able to 
reach his logical side for a moment to discover the girl's location. 
Now that that's said and done we can get to what the REAL point of the film 
is - the dream sequences. Actually it isn't so much a dream as it is an 
exploration of the subconscious. The human mind is a strange and fascinating 
thing we'll never be able to understand fully, which means if you're going to 
make a movie about the inside of a killer's mind it's a license to go hog 
wild. At least "The Cell" succeeds on this level. For large bulks of time 
it's basically a filmed acid trip - an animated M.C. Escher or Salvidor Dalî 
painting. It's sci-fi, horror, fantasy and drama all mixed into one. There's 
a lot of disturbing, creepy images that go beyond S&M and are just plain 
psychotic. It's shocking and it's not - shocking because the art direction 
and production design are so meticulous in detail to convey such an 
atmosphere that would and should be terrifying if it didn't seem like such a 
cliche horror movie set. We see what made the killer who and what he is and 
we're supposed to feel sorry for him. 
What keeps the film from being great is that this is pretty much all it has 
going for it. There's virtually no characterization and the screenplay is 
pretty mediocre. How the mind transferring process works isn't explained (and 
should be because the reality of the film is the same as our own, it's not 
like the reality from "The Crow" or something). Lopez's character doesn't 
seem like a psychology professional at all, just a cartoony heroine. Vaughn's 
character at least has some built-in motivation due to the fact he's an FBI 
agent and the case is personal to him (has there ever been a movie where the 
FBI agent didn't take the case personally?). All the supporting characters 
are simply pawns with no apparent free will of their own - they just do 
whatever Lopez and Vaughn tell them to. 
Their purpose of going into the killer's mind is to find the girl's location 
- they don't learn that directly. Instead, a symbol in his mind points out 
something to the detectives and starts a chain reaction. Had they done better 
police work to begin with the whole mind-meld thing wouldn't have been 
necessary in the first place (but then the film would only be about 10 
minutes long). 
Although "The Cell" has something of an original plot and direction going for 
it, the screenplay is too weak and cannot support it. There's a lot of 
interesting stuff to look at here but it's mostly gratuitous art direction. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of ALL mainstream movies playing today! Surf 
on over to my web page today and take the poll on which is the better way to 
rate movies.
