Title
Review for Make Way for Tomorrow (1937)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MAKE WAY FOR TOMORROW (1937) Directed and produced by Leo 
McCarey. A touching drama that Hollywood would not dream of 
making today. Impecunious old couple Beulah Bondi and Victor 
Moore lose their house and are not properly looked after by 
their five children, now grown-up and married. 
Since no one wants them as a couple, they have to separate. 
Bondi goes to the New York apartment of son Thomas Mitchell 
and his wife Fay Bainter. Moore stays in  a small town with  a 
daughter. Both feel unwanted, even as singles. 
Bondi volunteers to go to a home for aged women, under the 
pretext of frail health. Moore will be sent to another 
daughter yet, in California. The two oldsters get together one 
last time and have fun being driven in a car and revisiting 
their honeymoon hotel. 
The film has an appropriate old folks tempo, is quietly 
pathetic, affecting and gripping. It concentrates on Bondi and 
the unease of her stay with the weak-willed Mitchell,  the 
impatient Bainter, and their happy-go-lucky daughter. Yet it 
paints none of them as a villain. Their sin is more 
insensitivity than malice. Arguably, those characters and the 
particulars of their situation are not sufficiently explored, 
while the Bondi-Moore sweetness and naivete are a bit 
overstressed.  
Perhaps some viewers will think too that a bit mechanical 
--albeit very warm--is the small lineup of strangers who show 
kindness to the old couple: Maurice Moscovitch as a Jewish 
small-store owner; a car salesman who thinks he might make a 
sale; a hotel manager; a band leader who plays for the couple 
"Let Me Call You Sweetheart." But those are trifles, 
attributable to the period's studio cine-esthetics. In any 
case the everyday details are observed with precision and 
there's a welcome absence of forced effects or histrionics. 
At the 11th hour the old people's children realize how 
shabbily they had treated their parents, but the movie has the 
good sense of avoiding an artificial, last-minute shift to 
give us a  happy ending. In 1937 Moore was 60, Beulah Bondi, 
Thomas Mitchell and Fay Bainter were all 45. The excellent 
makeup job by Wally Westmore helped the very talented Bondi 
look convincingly old. So does her superb performance and body 
English. The casting is additionally interesting as Bainter 
for a change does not play a sunny,  sweet matron; as Mitchell 
is not his usual lovable type; and as Moore, a comedian, is 
cast against type in a serious role that he handles very well.  
The film was most popular the year of its release.  
Additional points of interest: The home for old women is 
called Idylwild; in the 1932 " If I Had A Million," also a 
Paramount film, such a home was Idylwood. The music is by two 
fascinating people, the melodious, prolific Victor Young, and 
the little-known George Antheil. Antheil was an American but 
has often been mistaken for a Frenchman, what with his family 
name and his work in France. There, he had written the score 
for the famous, experimental "Ballet Mecanique" ( 1924),  made 
by French painter Fernand Leger and the American Dudley 
Murphy. (Edwin Jahiel)
