Title
Review for Maybe Baby (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Redbus on June 2, 2000; certificate 15; 104 minutes; 
country of origin UK; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Ben Elton; produced by Phil McIntyre.
Written by Ben Elton; based on his novel "Inconceivable".
Photographed by Roger Lanser; edited by Peter Hollywood.
To see Ben Elton's "Maybe Baby" is to suffer one of the most embarrassing of 
things -- a comedian straining to be funny. Successful humour comes out 
naturally and clearly; it doesn't need to be underlined, shouted or propped 
up by outlandish gags. There is a scene in this movie where a guy is being 
read the results of a sperm test, which tell him that a percentage of his 
little tadpoles are sluggish. "Sluggish?!" he cries. "Couldn't they have 
figured out a better way of putting it, like 'relaxed'? Relaxed sperm!" When 
he's told that some are swimming in the wrong direction: "Hello?! They're in 
a plastic cup!!"
These same lines could be funny, if the guy was desperately muttering them to 
himself, as rambling thoughts. I can picture Woody Allen playing it like 
that. But Hugh Laurie, the actor onscreen, shouts and makes expressive 
gestures, as if playing to a sitcom laughter track. A lot of "Maybe Baby" is 
like that -- although on the surface the problem seems to be a cheesy 
screenplay, it's actually the delivery that's off. I kept imagining what the 
dialogue would sound like if spoken more calmly, and much of it would be 
witty, warm and funny. That is not a defence of writer-director Elton, but 
simply an observation. Comedy is a fifty-fifty balancing act of writing and 
performing, so to screw up even one of these is no small matter.
The story involves a thirtysomething married couple -- happy, well-off, but 
desperately in want of a child. Sam (Laurie) and Lucy (Joely Richardson) make 
love morning and night, in time slots carefully planned around Lucy's 
menstrual cycle, but months go by without any sign of pregnancy. So they 
begin to try In Vitro Fertilisation treatment; a long, frustrating process 
that alternately tests their wits and brings them closer together, what with 
its great need for patience and emotional commitment.
It would be fascinating to see a real movie about the subject of IVF. "Maybe 
Baby" is not it. We don't get answers to our obvious curiosities, such as 
whether or not Sam and Lucy get a kid, or how they react to that success or 
failure. Instead, the plot veers off into Sam writing a screenplay about his 
marriage, producing it in secret, and then having to heal Lucy's anger when 
she finds out. Even when Elton is concentrating on the IVF storyline, he 
seems more interested in the goofy side-characters it gives him a chance to 
introduce. Among them are a loudmouth Scottish film director (Tom Hollander), 
a burlesque Australian nurse (Dawn French), and an insane gynaecologist who 
sadistically dangles his instruments (Rowan Atkinson). None of these people 
are believable, and since this isn't a slapstick comedy, that means they're 
not funny.
As I've said, anything perceptive that might have existed in the dialogue is 
ruined by the over-the-top delivery, so ultimately we're left with nothing 
interesting but a couple of sexy shots of Joely Richardson. Elton based 
"Maybe Baby" on his novel "Inconceivable", which he has said was inspired in 
concept but not content on his own IVF experiences. His reason for not making 
it more autobiographical was that he felt it would be more personally 
comfortable to invent contrived humour for the story than use the truth. 
That's exactly the opposite of how comedians are supposed to work.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website at 
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 USA Films  
 Director: Ben Elton
 Writer:  Ben Elton (Novel "Inconceivable" and screenplay)
 Cast: Hugh Laurie, Joely Richardson, Adrian Lester, Anna
Lindgren, James Purefoy, Tom Hollander, Joanna Lumley, Rowan
Atkinson, Dawn French, Emma Thompson, Matthew Macfadyen  
   Men have only one thing on their minds.  Agreed.  But women do
as well.  The difference is that what women have on their minds
has greater repercussions.  Women want babies and when they
can't have them, they will resort to all sorts of procedures to get
them.  In Federico Garcia Lorca's story "Yerma," the title
character kills her husband for his inability to help her out in that
department while in Ben Elton's movie "Maybe Baby," the woman
is the one who takes on most of the hardships for being
presumably inconceivable.
   "Maybe Baby" is a light comedy but it is not a fluffy one, one
that you can forget about two minutes after leaving the theater. 
Its success can be attributed in part to a clever script by Ben
Elton based on his own novel entitled "Inconceivable," but mostly
by the writer-director's excellent casting.  He's put together a
team which bounces dialogue off one another smartly with
particularly amusing performances from character actor Rowan
Atkinson as a gynecologist and Tom Hollander, an English
performer who adopts an uncanny Scottish accent in the role of
an egotistical, over-the-top film director.
   "Maybe Baby" features the attractive and charming Joely
Richardson in the role of Lucy Bell, married to Sam (Hugh Laurie-
-considered by the director to be the Tom Hanks or perhaps even
the George Clooney of his native Britain).  Sam is a well-paid
scripter who is currently blocked not just in the writing
department.  His wife Lucy is in her thirties, desperately wants a
baby, and in a fast, attention-getting opening scene buzzes her
husband on his cell phone to report that she is ovulating and that
he must stop what he's doing to bike right home.
   While a considerable part of the film deals with the frustrations
of baby-making--which makes sex more of a mechanical and
anxiety-producing process than one of ecstasy--Elton takes us in
a Pirandellian fashion into the business of making a film about a
couple desperate to make a baby.  When Lucy discovers that her
own ideas have been plagiarized by her husband, who has
written the screenplay for the film, she goes ballistic, threatening
their marriage..
   On the negative side, Elton throws in hackneyed accounts of
sperm-bank donations, setting up the usual stick figures such as
the hysterically friendly nurse giving instructions to the poor male
who must now convert his main teenage pleasure into a
gruesome laboratory procedure.  This is nothing, of course,
compared to what a woman must go through, including a process
of in vitro fertilization presided over by a sadistic doctor (Rowan
Atkinson) who wields metal instruments like a modern
Torquemada and who recites a litany of diseases that his patient
does not have.  Ben Elton succeeds in turning a couple's pain
into effective comedy while at the same time refusing to make
light of their anguish.
Rated R.  Running time: 93 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
