Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 3 (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Jose R. Perez
     I went to this movie with very low expectations for a variety of
reasons: first, and unlike the other two, it has gotten mixed reviews in
the media (although mostly good); secondly, the net has also had mixed
opinions; and last and foremost in my apprehension, Shane Black (the
writer of the others) has apparently departed the LW team.  However,
since Richard Donner and the regulars were back, I decide to gamble on
seeing it.
     To my surprise, LW3 surpassed by far my expectations; I am still
amazed that some opinions in the net hint of not enough action.  One big
part of the LW movies is the action, and the incredible stunts; (IMHO)
this movie had more than enough spectacular and new action and
situations to blow me away.  Another part of the LW movies, and what is
almost as important, is the buddy cop relationship between the
characters.  With Mr. Black departed, I was concerned the relationship
(and the chemistry) wouldn't be as strong.  Again, I was pleasantly
surprised, as the Riggs-Murtaugh relationship is stronger than ever, and
even though Mr. Leo (okay, okay, okay!) Getz is on screen for few parts
of the movie, the character is still interesting.  What's more, Rene
Russo worked *perfectly* for me as an addition to the usual duo, even
though she is only a female Riggs.  The last Shane Black movie THE LAST
BOY SCOUT disappointed me, in that the relationship seemed strained and
in that I *hate!* Tony Scott's directing style of almost complete
constant closeups and grisly violence.  Kudos to Mr. Donner and
Mr. Jeffrey Boam (who has written the last two LW screenplays and the
LW3 story) for making LW3 as good as it was.
     As to the plot, it had as much of it as the others.  To me the LW
movies are simply this: Completely fleshed out characters interact with
each other with expertly done humor and action with unbelievable (and
new) stunts.  LW3 delivered in all these counts.  Plot is not irrelevant
in these movies, but does demand a little suspension of disbelief;
thankfully, since the action and humor are so well done, and the movies
are so well filmed by Mr. Donner and his crew, the fun experienced by
the movie-goer more that makes up for the occasional "oh, sure...."
LW3 simply delivers.
On that note, the LW movies get the following ratings:
     These series are evolving into the American Bond movies, (IMHO).
Let's hope the fourth one (if there is one) is as good as LW3.
     Russo's character didn't die!!!  HURRAAAYYYYY!  Maybe it was for
the best that Mr. Black departed; he seems to kill all the females :-)
Who knows?  Maybe Russo will save Riggs on the next one (Big :-))
     To some people, the ending seemed tacked on; to me, ever since
Riggs told Murtaugh that by retiring himself he would be retiring them,
I *knew* he wasn't going to retire.  To me, it was a treat to relive his
birthday scene in the first one with his retirement party; guess they
didn't change the bathroom much after the explosion :-).
     Next weekend: ALIEN^3 - Maybe I'll be pleasantly surprised again.

Author
Frank Maloney
     LETHAL WEAPON 3 is a film directed by Richard Donner, written by
Jeffrey Boam.  It stars Mel Gibson, Danny Glover, Rene Russo, Joe Pesci,
and Stuart Wilson.  Rated R, for violence and profanity.
     LETHAL WEAPON 3 is the latest installment in the highly profitable
series that teams Mel Gibson and Danny Glover as cops, buddies, and a
union of opposites.  The formula has been milked again in a cynical,
mechanistic, and pointless way that is at the same time the very epitome
of the art of the Hollywood movie.  The highest levels of
professionalism here are thrown away again and again in the pursuit of a
mindless entertainment.  It succeeds in doing exactly what it sets out
to do; millions will flock to see it and walk out satisfied and replete.
It is my unhappy fate to be no longer able to be cajoled by this
particular machine.  I have enjoyed the earlier installments, although
the second less so than the original; I wanted to enjoy this one, but
for the most part I found myself uninvolved and distantly removed from
the fast-paced action, the mayhem, the ludicrous story, the male
bonding, certainly from the low-level homophobic jokes, from the love
stories (man meets dog, man meets sergeant), the multiple and
violent--but poetically justifiable--deaths, the tightly edited fights
and shoot-outs.  It was all so perfunctory, so antiseptic, so unhuman.
     Of course, one has to admire the many skills so willingly exercised
in pursuit of ticket sales; these are men and women who know exactly
what they want and how to get it.  They are whores, but they are
handsomely paid whores.
     For one example, take the presence of Joe Pesci in this movie.
Pesci's here because he was the best thing about LETHAL WEAPON 2.  He
has nothing to do with the story; in fact, the script expends what
little cleverness it possesses in finding ways to get Pesci out of the
way.  His is not a character, it's a marketing ploy (as Jeff Shannon
remarked in the Seattle Times).  He's about as functional as the opening
scene's exploding (imploding?) building; we've been seeing that in
trailers for months, it links to the exploding toilet opener in the
earlier installment; it makes no sense and has nothing to do with
anything that follows, but as a marketing device it is so successful
that it is reprised after the credits with another one.
     For another example, the stars cannot help but impress with their
talent.  Mel Gibson as Riggs is as sexy and funny as ever he was.  He
knows how to have fun and how to share the fun with us, whether that fun
is kidding Murtaugh his partner, risking his life in another grandstand
play, or seducing a guard dog or another (female) cop.  He does lose me,
a little, when he stops having his fun and tries to be honest, tender,
and caring; he has a scene with Murtaugh that is faintly embarrassing
for its paint-by-numbers approach to emotional honesty, as well as its
bottled-in-bond approach to men loving men.
     Gibson has a scene with Rene Russo in which these two, who begin as
adversaries-by-default--one of the hoarier cliches in cop movies--are
one-upping each other in the display of battle scars.  Never mind that
this scene was played out with more stripping and less sex in MOUNTAINS
OF THE MOON between Patrick Bergin as Sir Richard Burton and Bernard
Hill as Dr. Livingstone.  It is funny and sexy here, and fans of
underwear ads get a good peep at Gibson.  Russo is, in fact, the
freshest, most interesting element in this movie.  She's tough and
brutal; naturally, Riggs is going to be attracted to her.  They have a
pretty good scene in a men's room, too.  If there's a LETHAL WEAPON 4
(and who is so bold as to rule that out?), I look to Russo to get more
air time, to be finessed into a new partnership with Riggs.
     Mel's scene with the killer dog is almost as funny a seduction, by
the way, as his scene with Russo.  If not quite as believable.
     Danny Glover as Murtaugh presents a problem to a disgruntled
reviewer.  Glover has presence, there's no mistaking it.  He lends
dignity and weight to even the fluffiest role merely by taking it.
Murtaugh is not a challenging characterization for Danny Glover, but he
manages to make the character more impressive than he ought to be.  The
role is as mechanical as Gibson's.  The bonding scene is just as phony
from Murtaugh's side.  But Glover can kid us into accepting fluff for
substance and that is a major skill.  He pushes buttons, Murtaugh's and
ours.
     The entire movie is a matter of very sharp people pushing buttons.
I keep thinking of the scene in THE PLAYER about getting rid of the
writers.  Just plug in the formulas.  It's all the same, ain't it?  The
point is selling tickets, right?  LETHAL WEAPON 3 is a monster of
efficiency; most of the people who see it will love it; ticket sales
will exceed the GNPs of many third-world countries; everyone is happy.
Forget that everyone in the movie is prostituting him or herself.
Forget that everyone in the audience is the john.  The pace is
everything; keep up the pace and we will never have to think about any
of this.
     I am really sorry to go on like this.  But it is so disheartening
to see the waste, the cynicism of turning intelligence and talent into
machinery.  And for those of you who will write "Get a life.  This is
just a movie."  You are right, of course.  I should just plug myself
into my slot and surrender to the wonder of it all.  I regret that I
cannot do that any more.
     If you're of a mind to, you will enjoy LETHAL WEAPON 3.  As Euell
Gibbons used to say when he prostituted himself for a cereal commercial:
"Many parts are edible."  I won't recommend it, however; I won't need
to.  Some of you will not be able to stay away, and why should you?

Author
Brian L. Johnson
120 min., R, Comedy/Action, 1992
Director: Richard Donner
Cast: Danny Glover, Mel Gibson, Joe Pesci, Rene Russo, Stuart Wilson
     Danny Glover and Mel Gibson are back (unfortunately Glover's cat
and Gibson's dog aren't for some unexplained reason).  Glover is going
to be retiring soon, and doesn't want to mess anything up.  The two come
across a case that is being hidden by Internal Affairs.  They join with
Gibson's female equivalent, Russo, from Internal Affairs, to catch a cop
killer.
     LETHAL WEAPON 3, although it is not as good as LETHAL WEAPON or
LETHAL WEAPON 2, is fun to watch, although it has little substance.  I
recommend this film to fans of the LETHAL WEAPON series.  I don't think
that you will be disappointed.  On a scale of zero to five, I give
LETHAL WEAPON 3 a four.  LETHAL WEAPON 3 is rated R for explicit
language, adult situations, and violence.
     LETHAL WEAPON 3 will soon be coming to video, and most likely that
is the only way left to see it.  This is one of those films that will be
most spectacular on the big screen, so if you have a chance to see it
in the theater, it is worth it.  The story isn't as well written as in
the first two, but Gibson and Glover have enough charm to carry the film
with no problem.
     One thing that I didn't like very much was Pesci's annoying
character, which worked in the second film, but didn't work as well
here.  I think that the film is just using his current star power to
bring more people to see the film.  Not much was gained by his character
(although he did have some great moments) and somebody else probably
could have carried the role.
     The way this series is going, I don't think that there will be a
LETHAL WEAPON 4 (but they may surprise me).  There is a lot more drama
mixed in with the action, and a little less comedy.   There is a heavy
anti-gang message through the film.  The beginning title was creatively
done and I liked it.   Unfortunately, those who end up seeing the film
on video (when it comes out) will miss the full impact of it.
     One new addition to the film was Rene Russo, who acted off Mel
Gibson perfectly.  A lot of the comedy comes from this pair.   Glover's
retiring jokes began to get tiring by the end of the film and I think
that 1/3 of them should have been edited out of the film.  The Mel
Gibson and Danny Glover combination works out great.

Author
J. Boyajian
     About 20 minutes into LETHAL WEAPON 3, my nephew turned to me and
asked, "Does this movie have a plot?"  And that question represents
everything that is wrong with LW3.  Quite frankly, the movie is a mess
on a number of levels.  A *funny* mess, to be sure, but still a mess.
As the Bard of Avon would put it, it was full of sound and fury,
signifying nothing.  It was just about everything a bad sequel usually
is.
    o Joe Pesci's appearance in the film smacked of dollarsigns.  Not
      just because he's "hot" at the moment, but because it seemed to
      exploit his contribution to LW2.  His character and performance
      in LW2 was what made the film -- his presence as "the Third
      Stooge" made it distinctive enough from the original.  To put
      him in the third film seemed to be nothing but repetition of a
      successful ingredient in place of doing something else more
      innovative.  Storywise, there was absolutely no reason for him
      to be in the film.
    o The character of Murtaugh seemed to be relegated to second class
      status.  The high point of the WEAPON films has been the utterly
      charming, and disarming, chemistry between Gibson and Glover.  The
      reason to see the films is to see *them* bounce off each other.
      Here, the Gibson/Glover team was largely pushed aside in favor of
      the Gibson/Russo team.
    o Even worse, this last bit *looked* like a last-minute rethink.
    o The Gibson/Glover chemistry was still there, and if anything, it
      felt even stronger than in the previous two films, almost as if
      they realized that with the downplay of their partnership, each
      moment their shared was more precious and they packed as much as
      they could into them.
    o I liked Russo's character.  Intelligent, attractive, competent,
      and a complete match for Riggs.  Their love-making scene was
      delightful, going from comparing bullet wounds and other scars,
      to passionately kissing on the floor.  The cut-away before any
      explicit was something of a pleasant change from the norm, as
      was the fact that this time, it was the *guy* who stripped to
      his underwear while the woman stayed fully clothed.
    o While Murtaugh was being pushed aside as Riggs' partner, they did
      a lot of nice solo stuff with him.  Kudos go to Glover for his
      sensitive performance of a man wracked with guilt over shooting a
      kid, despite it being completely justified.  The later scenes with
      Roger's son were also very touching, as were the scenes at the
      funeral with the dead kid's parents.
All in all, I have to say that I enjoyed seeing the film, but my heart
just isn't in it to recommend it.  It doesn't even come close to either
of the first two films in the series.  In the last three or so months, I
had occasion to see LW1 on video/cable.  As soon as the film was over
each time, I felt the urge to immediately spin up my laserdisc of LW2
and watch that all the way through (and I did).  I don't know if I'll
buy LW3 when it comes out on disc, but if I do, I doubt very much if
I'll watch as much as I'll watch the first two.
--- jayembee (Jerry Boyajian, DEC, "The Mill", Maynard, MA)
    boyajian@ruby.enet.dec.com

Author
Mark Santora
     It has been a couple of years since we last saw Riggs and Murtaugh
battle the forces of evil.  And now they are back to battle them once
again.  Sounds like fun, don't it?
     First off, it is refreshing to see the two actors, Mel Gibson and
Danny Glover, back at work in my favorite roles of theirs.  The two
always look like they are having fun in these rolls.  Even as the
characters progress, it is easy to see how the relationship between the
two actors and characters has developed.
     As for the characters in the third installment of the "Lethal
Weapon" films, they face their most difficult challenge yet, Murtaugh's
retirement.
     Yes, sports fans, the film opens with Murtaugh being only eight
days from retirement.  But there is one great adventure left for them.
In LETHAL WEAPON 3 they face an ex-cop who has stolen confiscated guns
and is selling them back to the streets.  Let's also not forget that
there are armor-piercing bullets to be had throughout this movie.
     As required, Mel Gibson has a love interest in this film, played by
Rene Russo.  She plays an internal affairs cop who is the female version
of Riggs.  She loves the Three Stooges, is well versed in martial arts,
and can go body scar for body scar with Riggs.  This leads to the
required love-making scene.
     Joe Pesci is back as Leo Getz.  Now he is a real estate broker
trying to sell Murtaugh's house so they can move after his retirement.
He is also the source of information about yet another bad guy.  This
leads to a great scene during a King's hockey game and hospital scene.
Joe Pesci is not in the film a lot, but does play a principal part in
the storyline.
     What LETHAL WEAPON 3 lacks, however, is an interesting bad guy.  In
both the first and second film, the bad guys were forces to contend
with.  In LETHAL WEAPON 3, he is little more than a pain in the ass with
a gun.  He is not a real challenge for the two and in fact is found a
little too easy.  I would have preferred a little more challenge to him.
     Also what the film misses is the dark look of the first two.  They
had a dark feel to them that added to the excitement and suspense.  Now
they play the film for laughs and gags while having a lot of things
blowing up around them.  I am not saying this is bad--watch for a great
scene when they are busted down to patrolmen and catch a jaywalker.
This is a classic scene.
     LETHAL WEAPON 3 also attempts to undertake the children with guns
theme.   Murtaugh kills a 15-year-old boy, who happens to be a friend of
his son's, in self defense.  There is drama.  In fact until the glasses
and hat are removed from the body people believe it to be his own son.
This would have seriously crippled the film.
     The action is there.  The gags are there.  It is just the overall
feel of the first two that is not.  There is something different, and it
is entertaining, but not great.  The film is good entertainment.  Too
bad it is nothing more.
      ALSO STAY THROUGH THE CREDITS AT THE END OF THE FILM.  There is a
sight gag at the end worth hanging around for.
