Title
Review for Ultimo uomo della Terra, L' (1964)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
George Romero's knockout zombie film NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD may have 
influenced many imitators from the late 60s on, but if you dig a little 
further back you'll find it had roots of its own in this AIP adaptation of 
Richard Matheson's novel 'I am Legend'.  Vincent Price (who had already 
starred in half a dozen previous Matheson scripts) plays Robert Morgan, a 
scientist eking out a lonely existence in a world devastated by plague.  The 
screenplay divides neatly into thirds: the first act looks at Price's daily 
routine, the second is a flashback tracing the antecedents of the 
apocalypse, and the third is a mini-drama contained within itself, with new 
characters and plot turns.
As it turned out, Matheson, who co-scripted the screenplay, disliked the 
finished result so much that he credited himself with a pseudonym.  It's 
hard to tell what he may have been disappointed with but it could have been 
that THE LAST MAN ON EARTH isn't sufficiently scary.  This is easier to take 
in retrospect because contemporary audiences don't expect old 
modestly-budgeted AIP productions to scare them anyhow.  As far as horror is 
concerned, the film is let down by Sidney Salkow's lethargic direction of 
its monsters: the ghouls that surround Price's house, moaning his name and 
pounding ineffectually against the walls are strikingly redolent of the 
zombies from LIVING DEAD but far less frightening.  It was a mistake of the 
film-makers to show Price - no he-man himself - pushing away marauders early 
on in the story (one potentially scary scene, when Price realises he has 
dozed off until the sunset, is otherwise spoiled); only much later in the 
film do we hear him explain that he doesn't really fear them due to their 
limited mental and physical state.  Their slow, dazed state also pushes 
aside the vampire theme in the novel, which is treated sporadically here.  
Mirrors, garlic, and zombies?  It doesn't quite add up.
Monsters aside, LAST MAN ON EARTH is worthy of attention from horror buffs.  
Instead of frights it offers a somber look at an entropic world.  Life after 
the apocalypse isn't scary or exciting, just dull: Price performs daily 
rituals perfunctorily; the only time we see him listening to music is when 
he is drowning out the sound of the ghouls outside; his cars of choice are 
black, hearse-like stationwagons; his stooped figure wandering outdoors in 
bright, harsh sunlight becomes no more than a dried husk moving about in a 
lifeless world (even his name, Morgan, connotes death).  In this film we 
start at the end and are then nudged along to the very end - there's one 
nice touch in a flashback when Price realises that the disease is airborne 
and the camera cuts to dead autumn leaves blowing in the wind.   Price's 
saturnine persona works well in this film - he can see there's no point 
being hammy this time around - which makes the story's dramatic punctuations 
more effective (the bodies being consigned to the pit remind us disturbingly 
of the Holocaust).  The film's low budget arguably works in its favor, too.  
We're not presented with city-wide panic, hysterical crowds, riots, or 
looting.  Budgetary constraints limit our experience of the plague to a 
newspaper clipping, a few military trucks, and a growing detachment with 
friends and colleagues.   The whole planet is just slowly winding down.  THE 
LAST MAN ON EARTH is undeniably as much mood as it is concept, but its final 
line of dialogue does make the theme of the novel more patent: if there is 
one human living in a world of vampires, which becomes the monster?  This 
gives one brief scene of Price attacking a young female ghoul - who cowers 
on a bed in fright - more weight than you may first think.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com
