Title
Review for Always (1989)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     There's something very special about a Steven Spielberg movie starring
Richard Dreyfuss.  Dreyfuss tends to give some of his more thoughtful work, and
Spielberg tends to give him pretty interesting roles.  ALWAYS, which sounds a
lot like an old escapist movie (and is, in fact, based on "A Guy Called Joe")
is just a wonderful, engrossing movie.  A solid 8 on the movie scale.
     The story is simple---a pilot who fights fires is killed and is called by
Hap (Audrey Hepburn) to be the guardian angel of a fire pilot in training.
Before Pete (Dreyfuss) is killed off, there are some terrific fire-fighting
scenes, and a long, rowdy night in a bar as we follow Pete, his lover Dorinda
(Holly Hunt), and their friend Al (John Goodman).  The chemistry between
Dreyfuss and Hunt is great.
     Talking plot in a movie like this is pretty meaningless.  What counts are
the performances and they are uniformly wonderful.  Goodman continues to be the
ultimate support man, and is very powerful when he's angry.  Hunter, Dreyfuss,
and Brad Johnson (an incredible hunk (who wears glasses even!)  who plays the
new fire pilot) are great.  The fire-fighting scenes are very exciting.  The
ending was so engrossing that I completely stopped hearing an annoying alarm
that was going off in the theater until the credits rolled.
Laurie Mann   **   harvard!m2c!jjmhome!lmann  ** lmann%jjmhome@m2c.m2c.org

Author
George Drettakis
     Ever since DUEL, Spielberg has shown fascination for the mysterious and
fantastic, for fire and exploding vehicles.  ALWAYS is a wonderful combination
of all of the above.  The plane fire-fighting scenes are gripping, full of
suspense, and just plain wonderfully shot.  You can almost feel the heat and
the smoke, the agony of the pilot fighting through the burning forest.  The
explosions and fire  far surpass anything in DUEL, EMPIRE OF THE SUN or the
latest, INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE.
     Of course, ALWAYS is not just about fire.  Capitalizing on a clever idea
from the original book, Richard Dreyfuss gives a wonderful performance of a
very human, jealous, possessive ghost-soul, with a mission to inspire a young
upcoming fire-fighter pilot.  Holly Hunter gives a strong, powerful
performance, and manages to rise above the pressing need to prove herself as a
star actress that seemed to dominate her BROADCAST NEWS role.  She is much more
relaxed, and shifts easily from strong, angry woman, to passionate, loving and
caring.
     ALWAYS is funny too.  Following the trend of making comedies out of tragic
events (WAR OF THE ROSES), this film manages to use death and parting from your
loved ones into a special kind of tear-jerking comedy.  The classic Spielberg
fairy-tale dimension is ever present, allowing you to feel sad and happy
simultaneously, in a way that only his films do.  John Goodman, one of the more
gifted comic actors of today, fits perfectly into the role of buddy, loving
friend, and amusing guy.
     In my books, Steven Spielberg has yet to come out with a film that is of
lasting value, a monument in the history of cinema.  But from the time of DUEL
it was obvious that he has the ability, and ALWAYS shows that he is beginning
to find the way to balance his film-making to achieve this desired end.  See
this film, you won't regret it.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
The words "not bad" have never summed up a movie so well. Then again, the
words "not that great" also apply here. ALWAYS, Steven Spielberg's film to top
off the 1980's, is quite the example. The cinematography, acting, and even the
overall idea isn't too bad, but this movie is still nothing to get excited
over. Mostly, it's just a semi-decent rental when you've already seen
everything else.
ALWAYS is a remake of the 1943 film A GUY NAMED JOE, a supposed favorite of
Mr. Spielberg himself. Richard Dreyfuss stars as Pete, a pilot with a passion
for fighting forest fires - a passion so intense, it leads to frivolous stunts
and in-the-air horseplay, much to the dismay of Pete's pilot girlfriend,
Dorinda (Holly Hunter). Dorinda has had enough high anxiety and, professing
her love, convinces Pete to finally settle down and take a teaching position
in a small Colorado town. But before he quits the job he loves so much, Pete
finds himself fighting one last forest fire, but this time he doesn't come
back.
The excessive foreshadowing doesn't allow for any real surprise at Pete's
"sudden" death. In fact, it takes too long trying to create a heavy fairy-tale
atmosphere and romance before it gets to this point. When Pete does get to the
other side however, he is welcomed by an angel named Hap (Audrey Hepburn - now
we know how she's spending her afterlife). Hap tells Pete he must go back and
help a young hopeful named Ted Baker (Brad Johnson) succeed as a fire-fighter
pilot. As obvious as it is to the audience, Pete doesn't realize he is
actually helping Ted find Dorinda, and therefore find true love. For this to
take place however, both Pete and Dorinda need to get on with their life (or
afterlife), something they don't seem to want to do.
John Goodman has a role as Pete's pre-death best friend Al. In fact, it was
Al's life Pete was saving when he was killed, a less-than-affective attempt at
turning the protagonist's death into a touchy piece of heroism. Al's role in
the film is a bit undefined, and it's very hard to tell the importance, if
there is any, of his character. When the film ends, there is still no answer.
It's obvious this film is aching to be a magical "make you laugh, make you
cry" experience, but instead, it comes off rather corny. It's a sad failure in
excellence, especially when it's so obvious Spielberg (and even Dreyfuss)
really want it to work. You can sense their dedication to the project, but
dedication or no, the gas tank was empty, and ALWAYS just couldn't get going.
It was also quite forgettable, and I'm already finding it difficult to
remember what happened outside the basic plotline. Flat, unimpressive
characters haven't left anything to chew on either.
ALWAYS gets a simple * * for being a bearable two hours of boredom. Watching
airplanes take off at the airport is cheaper and perhaps a bit more exciting,
but if you're just looking for a cure to insomnia that won't upset your
stomach, this could be the answer.
