Title
Review for Clifford (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by Paul Flaherty
Written by Jay Dee Rock and Bobby Van Hayes
Stars Martin Short, Charles Grodin, Mary Steenburgen, and Dabney Coleman
MPAA Rating     "PG"
Running Time    Approx. 90 minutes
     Martin Short as a troublesome ten-year-old.  That's it, that's
all, that's the whole, "hilarious" concept of CLIFFORD--the newest
nugget of fool's gold mined from the vaults of bankrupt Orion
Pictures.
     Actually, Short is only one-half of the Equation That Should Add
Up.  CLIFFORD costars always-annoyed Charles Grodin as Martin, the
unfortunate uncle who must care for Clifford (Short) while his parents
party in Hawaii.  Martin wants his fiance, Sarah (Steenburgen), to
believe that he likes kids, so he unknowingly welcomes the miniature
Hilter into his home....
     Needless to say, CLIFFORD must've looked *great* on paper.
     Picture Martin Short, standing small and wearing knee pants,
nagging Charles Grodin in scene after scene after scene until the
expected blow-up and resulting comeuppance.  Easy, right?
     (Actually, the title-role was written for a *child* actor.  But
I'm sure Kit Culkin would've passed on it, anyway. :-))
     A host of problems conspire against CLIFFORD.
     The script never defines Clifford's character and Short plays the
role *way* too broadly.  Unlike, say, Tom Hanks in BIG, Short plays
Clifford with too much intelligence to be comfortably cute or
completely cranky.  Frankly, it's like watching a bad SCTV or SATURDAY
NIGHT LIVE skit gone long.  Or, in this case, 75 minutes long.  The
script also sets up a host of absurd situations--from the awful
framing device to a super-stupid "Dinosaurland" climax that isn't even
a JURASSIC PARK slam because CLIFFORD was filmed *before* RAPTOR'S
LIST.
     Charles Groden has done better comedy--even opposite enormous
dogs that get named after deaf composers and, somehow, find their way
on stage during boring Academy Award ceremonies.  He gets a couple good
scenes and that's about it.  Neither Mary Steenburgen nor Dabney
Coleman are as lucky.
