Title
Review for Little Vampire, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Jon Popick
I admire Cameron Crowe as a writer and director but am feeling a strong
urge to kick him in the balls for unleashing Jonathan Lipnicki on the
world. The precocious little runt from Crowe's Jerry Maguire is on his
fourth go at the typical 15 minutes of fame.  After Maguire, Lipnicki
had a short-lived sitcom (Meego) and almost completely turned me off to
Dawson's Creek when he made several guest appearances last season.
There's something a little disturbing about seeing Creek's hot babes in
one scene, and then Lipnicki in the next.  It's enough to give you
limpdicky.
The diminutive actor's latest attempt at taking over the world via cute
expressions is The Little Vampire, a truly awful film that will frighten
little children and drive parents mad with boredom.  In it, Lipnicki
(Stuart Little) plays Tony Thompson, a nine-year-old boy who has just
moved from San Diego to an isolated town in Scotland.  Tony's had the
same dream every night he's spent in Scotland – something involving a
comet, the moon, a magic amulet and vampires, the latter of which causes
him to wake his parents in the middle of the night and earn the scorn of
his teacher and classmates, who call Tony names that are ordinarily
reserved for Jose Canseco (`stupid Yankee').
Long story short, Tony befriends a young vampire boy (they save each
other's lives) and learns that vampires are simply misunderstood and
want only to become human again.  Tony's dream about the comet and
amulet explains how the vampires are to go about becoming mortal.
Inexplicably, Tony goes from pissing his drawers at the mere mention of
the word `vampire' to wanting to become one in the span of about five
minutes.
Tony and the vampires have 48 hours to find the magic amulet (they've
been searching for it since the 1600s), which is also being hunted for
by a vampire killer (Jim Carter, Shakespeare in Love).  Until they can
find it, the kindly vampires don't feed on humans, but do suck blood
from cows, which proceed to obtain glowing red eyes, float through the
air and defecate on things.
There are several remarkable things about the film, such as how much it
isn't for kids.  The other child actors run circles around Lipnicki, who
is no longer cute and has the talent of thumbtack.  There's a confusing
subplot where Tony's dad tries to get him to be the next Tiger Woods.
And the vampires don't seem to obey the traditional rules of the undead,
like not being able to enter people's homes without being invited.
Vampire was directed by Ulrich Edel, who hasn't directed a feature film
since Madonna's 1993 debacle Body of Evidence.  It's based on a series
of children's books written by Angela Sommer-Bodenburg, which were
lethargically adapted by Karey Kirkpatrick (Chicken Run) and Larry
Wilson (Beetlejuice).
1:35 – PG for blood sucking and frightening stuff like that

Author
Steve Rhodes
To an aristocratic Scotland of large estates and big castles, 8-year-old 
Tony Thompson and his family have come on temporary assignment from San 
Diego.  Tony's parents are the types who tell the Scots to speak English 
when they have trouble understanding them.  While there, Tony befriends 
and bonds with a little vampire, Rudolph (Rollo Weeks), about his own 
age -- for the past 300 years.
Jonathan Lipnicki, charming in STUART LITTLE but cloying in JERRY 
MAGUIRE, is relatively benign this time as Tony.  With spiked hair full 
of gel, nerdy glasses and a frozen expression, he does nothing to 
enliven Ulrich Edel's THE LITTLE VAMPIRE, which is as dead as a vampire 
with a stake through its heart.  One supposes that the movie is meant to 
be taken as a comedy, but it is a low-key and lifeless one with its best 
scenes generating only a small grin.  It does, however, give a new 
meaning to the old expression, "I could eat a cow."  Nothing in this 
flat film is worth outright laughs.  
With its cheap special effects and unattractive, bleak cinematography, 
the movie isn't much fun to watch either.  It's an unimaginative, 
low-budget feature that you would expect to be released as a 
direct-to-TV movie on a kids' cable network.
In a blend of the crazy exterminator from MOUSE HUNT and the maniacal 
snowplow man from SNOW DAY, Rookery (Jim Carter) comes to kill off a 
local "infestation of vampires."  Dressed like a bum and acting like a 
madman, Rookery carries a glowing cross made out of florescent tubes to 
control the vampires.  Of course, Tony will be threatened but will end 
up saving the day.
Parents need to be warned about this film whose trailers look innocent 
and which comes with just a PG rating.  It has significant potential to 
frighten younger viewers.  Among many troublesome scenes is one in which 
Tony emerges with a bloody mouth and face as if he has been sucking 
blood from someone's neck.  Later we briefly see a ketchup bottle 
sitting on a table, but kids will have long since been scared and 
probably won't notice the bottle anyway.  Another has Tony apparently 
buried alive in a casket with rats.  And overall the movie is filled 
with dark images and spooky atmospherics.
The childish story doesn't have much to recommend it to those over 12.  
Those under 9 could end up with some major nightmares.  The 9 to 
12-year-olds, however, are the perfect demographics for this lame 
production.  They deserve much better, but if you've got kids in this 
limited age group, they'll probably like it.  My son did.
THE LITTLE VAMPIRE runs 1:37.  It is officially rated PG for "some mild 
peril," but remember my warning.  It would be acceptable for most kids 
over 8.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, gave the picture ****.  He said that he liked 
the way the movie had a strong but simple plot and that Rudolph was his 
favorite character.  His only complaint was that he didn't like the 
ending scene and that the PG rating was too mild.  He wanted a new 
"PG-8" rating for it.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
Just when you thought movies couldn't get any more ridiculous, along
comes a film that poses the question, "Did Dracula ever have a teddy
bear?"  I'm talking, of course, about The Little Vampire, a movie about
a nuclear family of vampires that feed on cows, live in Scotland, and
make friends with the little kid from Jerry Maguire.
In The Little Vampire, Jonathan Lipnicki plays Tony Thompson, recent
émigré to the Highlands.  Rather than go the traditional route for
Scottish fantasy and pick up a wooden sword and proclaim, "There can be
only one," Tony begins dreaming of vampires.  Night after night, Tony's
slumber is disturbed as he dreams of a rite being performed by a clan of
vampires.  What it means, Tony has no clue.  So Tony simply does what
any other eight-year old stereotyped by cinema does: Goes to mommy
(Pamela Gidley) and daddy (Tommy Hinkley), sleeps in their bed for the
night, and then gets ridiculed by everyone he knows for his "wild
vampire fantasies" during the day.
Lo and behold, one night a guy named Rudolf (Rollo Weeks) happens upon
Tony incanting what he heard in the dream, and before the night is
through the two have saved each other's life, fed on cows, and played on
top of a blimp.
Should I even bother telling you at this point that The Little Vampire
is kiddie fare?
As kiddie fare goes, The Little Vampire is actually one of the more
imaginative offerings in recent memory.  In a highly vapid genre, The
Little Vampire injects a quasi-sardonic imagination (and sense of humor)
into the field  There are enjoyable running gags (such as the vampiric
cows who disappear one-by-one, much to the chagrin of the forlorn
farmer) and a storyline that doesn't absolutely reek.  Sadly, the rest
of the film doesn't fare quite so well.
In fact, the rest of the film runs rather hot and cold.  One minute, the
acting is terrific, the next minute, you're wondering if this is the
players' first film.  One minute, the humor is sidesplitting, the next
it's too melodramatic to stand.  In the end, The Little Vampire is
really only a good film if you view it next to a contemporary like, say,
Pokemon.  Without that, it's just another movie to float into the mist
of mediocre cinema.
Director: Ulrich Edel
Producer: Richard Claus
Writer: Karey Kirtpatrick, Larry Wilson
Starring: Jonathan Lipnicki, Rollo Weeks, Pamela Gidley, Alice Kridge,
Richard E. Grant, Tommy Hinkley
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE LITTLE VAMPIRE
(New Line)
Starring:  Jonathan Lipnicki, Rollo Weeks, Richard E. Grant, Jim Carter,
Alice Krige, Pamela Gidley, Tommy Hinkley, John Wood.
Screenplay:  Karey Kirkpatrick and Larry Wilson, based on the series of
books by Angela Sommer-Bodenburg.
Producer:  Richard Claus.
Director:  Uli Edel.
MPAA Rating:  PG (adult themes, mild profanity, violence)
Running Time:  95 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     THE LITTLE VAMPIRE falls squarely in the center of the "family film" 
continuum -- a place few family films tend to occupy. On one end, we find
those films that appeal to viewers of all ages with imagination and a lack
of pandering (TOY STORY, E.T., BEAUTY AND THE BEAST). On the other end, we
find those films that appeal either to marketing concerns (POKEMON, MIGHTY
MORPHIN POWER RANGERS) or toilet humor (most live-action Disney films of
the last decade). True mediocrity in family filmmaking is quite a rarity,
which makes THE LITTLE VAMPIRE an intriguing pop culture curiosity: It's a
simple and whimsical tale that keeps flirting with inappropriateness.
     One-time JERRY MAGUIRE moppet Jonathan Lipnicki stars as Tony
Thompson, an 8-year-old dragged by his parents (Tommy Hinkley and Pamela
Gidley) from San Diego to Scotland for his dad's assignment designing a
new golf course. As though bullying by his xenophobic schoolmates and
being a Chargers fan were not horrifying enough, Tony discovers that his
new hometown is filthy with vampires. Fortunately, they're a kinder,
gentler vampire family that prefers to dine on bovine blood, and actually
wishes to be rid of its curse. Among them is Rudolph (Rollo Weeks), a
309-year-old in the form of a 9-year-old who becomes Tony's pal. He also
enlists Tony's help to find a lost artifact that can help the vampires
regain their humanity -- provided nasty vampire-hunter Rookery (Jim
Carter) doesn't find it first and use it to destroy them.
     Based on a popular series of children's books, THE LITTLE VAMPIRE
comes complete with many of the standard set-ups of the family classics. 
Like the protagonists in E.T., THE IRON GIANT and A LITTLE PRINCESS, Tony
is an isolated only child looking for a friend who finds that friend in an
unexpected place. There are the expected scenes of Tony and his new
vampire buddy getting back at his tormentors, as well as plenty of shots
of the spiky-haired Lipnicki (who hasn't quite outgrown his cuteness yet) 
yelling "Wow!" and/or "Cool!" while being borne aloft by Rudolph. Jim
Carter, in his Tex Cobb-circa-RAISING ARIZONA wardrobe, makes for a good
nasty-comic villain, and the script (co-written by CHICKEN RUN and JAMES
AND THE GIANT PEACH scribe Karey Kirkpatrick) includes at least a few
clever lines like, "It's not easy for a father to hear, but your son is a
blood-sucking fiend." Much of it is silly, but there's also a dark side
that many of the better children's tales have always had.
     There's also a perplexing dose of questionable content. The entire
concept of vampirism could be troubling enough for some children, but THE
LITTLE VAMPIRE adds to it a strange sub-plot involving Rudolph's younger
sister Anna (Anna Popplewell) and her crush on Tony. You see, Anna is a
307-year-old in a 7-year-old's body, making her advances slightly more
sophisticated than giggles and goo-goo eyes. In fact, in one scene she
sits on Tony's bed and -- in her best Lauren Bacall come-hither tones --
asks Tony, "You know how to whistle, don't you?" Though it's likely to go
right over the heads of the very young, there's something icky about using
a lascivious pre-pubescent as a punch line -- even ickier than the giant
pasture patty dropped from the sky by a flying vampire cow during the
film's "Far Side"-meets-John Hughes climax.
     It's not terribly surprising to find THE LITTLE VAMPIRE straying from
the kid-friendly straight-and-narrow, considering it was directed by Uli
Edel, the man behind such innocent entertainments as LAST EXIT TO BROOKLYN
and Madonna's 1993 sex stinker BODY OF EVIDENCE. Edel's pacing is fairly
sluggish for a children's film, and the rest of it is a bit too bland for
parents to get excited about. Yet there's still some fun adventure here,
and it's not all designed to get its viewers to buy action figures. It's
hard to know quite how enthusiastic to be about a family film that's
occasionally pitched at the wrong crowd, but at least isn't stupid or
actively offensive most of the time. And that, unfortunately, is a sad
statement on "family" filmmaking in 2000: Simple mediocrity is starting to
look pretty good.

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Little_Vampire_ (PG) ** (out of ****)
"But it's only a kids' movie."  That's the likely response to any
criticisms leveled at _The_Little_Vampire_, a fantasy-adventure-comedy
that is unmistakably made for the younger set--who, I have no doubt in my
mind, will react positively to the film.  Yes, the movie is clean.  Yes,
the movie will hold the tots' attention.  But should that be ample reason
to subject your children to such a shoddy product?  I don't think so.
Jonathan Lipnicki plays Tony Thompson, who along with his mother (Pamela
Gidley) and father (Tommy Hinkley), has just moved from America to the
Scotland countryside.  Tony's problems fitting in at school are made
worse by his recurring dreams about vampires--the reasons for which
become clear one night when he is visited by Rudolph (Rollo Weeks), the
little vampire of the title.  The two quickly become best friends, and
soon Tony finds himself helping Rudolph and his family--father Frederick
(Richard E. Grant), mother Frida (Alice Krige), sister Anna (Anna
Popplewell), and older brother Gregory (Dean Cook)--locate the missing
piece of an amulet that could grant them their greatest wish: to become
human again.
Sounds all nice and cute, which it probably was in Angela
Sommer-Bodenburg's original novels.  But something has been lost in the
translation.  While the effects, photography, and costuming (though
Rudolph is made to look like a miniature member of the '80s band a-ha)
are decent,  Karey Kirkpatrick and Larry Wilson's script has a fair share
of irritating plot holes (just exactly why is Tony able to have psychic
visions?), and the comic sequences are rendered annoying by director Uli
Edel's (yes, the same Uli Edel who last directed the 1993 Madonna
fuckfest _Body_of_Evidence_) heavy hand.  Case in point: a subplot
involving a weirdo vampire hunter (Jim Carter).
What proves most ruinous, however, are the performances that range from
phoned-in to barely-there.  The central performance falls in the latter
category.  Four years after stealing scenes in the not-for-kids
_Jerry_Maguire_, the now-10-year-old Lipnicki is given his first starring
vehicle with _Vampire_, and the moppet proves far from up to the task. 
Adult actors certainly can't coast by on cuteness alone, and that goes
tenfold for child stars, whose smiles and giggles can get really annoying
really quickly.  The case of the bespectacled Lipnicki is even worse, for
his cuteness factor is rapidly diminishing; now that the size of his body
is about caught up with that of his head, there's nothing distinctively
"cute" about him.  One's left to focus on whatever acting ability is
there, and between his robotic line readings and stone face--which, it
seems, can only be smiling or sullen--one would be hard-pressed to find
any.
One would also have difficulty finding much of anything in
_The_Little_Vampire_ that will appeal beyond the target kid audience. 
For some parents, that will be enough, but shouldn't a so-called "family
film" truly have something of worth to offer to everyone of every age?
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

