Title
Review for Brat (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
BROTHER (BRAT) (director/writer: Alexi Balabanov; cinematographer:
Sergei Astakhov; cast: Sergei Bodrov (Danila), Viktor Soukhoroukov
(Viktor), Svetlana Pismmitchenko (girlfriend), Maria Joukova (Kat),
1997-Rus.)
Home from the Chechen War, where he was a h.q. clerk, Danila (Sergei
Bodrov) is now aimless and unemployed. His mother tells him to leave
this small village and go to St. Petersburg, formerly Leningrad and see
his older brother Viktor (Soukhoroukov); he is the only hope for you. He
will help you get work.
In St. Petersburg, he finds that Viktor works for the Russian mob and is
in trouble with a Chechen mobster who has control of the black market
operations in town. Viktor gets Danila to do some of the dirty gun work
he can't do himself against his stronger opposition. This is all played
out against the background of a Russia falling apart as a world power;
its cultural roots are in decay as its youth is turning to drugs and a
decadent Western style of rock music, and its cities are becoming safe
havens for gangsters to act with impunity, causing a breakdown in law
and order.
Danila is fiercely proud to be Russian, anti-intellectual, and a newly
converted fan of the Russian rock group Nautilus, who have a hit cd
Wings he has a hard time finding in any store. It was easier for him to
be pulling off his first job against the Chechen mobster than buying a
Nautilus cd. On that assignment, he ends up killing one of the Chechen's
henchman; and in his escape, he is slightly wounded, as he hops onto a
tram and gets help from the driver, Svetlana (Svetlana). Her husband is
in jail, which gives him the opportunity to have sex with her. In his
forceful and blunt way, hiding his violent tendencies with the warmest
smile in St. Petersburg, he professes to have a real romantic interest
in her, sincerely sympathizing with her that men are often beating her
up. She seems to so passively accept her beatings as part of her life,
which I guess is symbolic of how Russia treats its women.
Everything that we learn about the new Russian attitudes comes from
seeing it through Danila's naive eyes. He is someone searching for a
morality that seems to have evaporated from the old Russian cities. When
he befriends a German peddler, by protecting him from mobsters who are
trying to shake him down, he does so because he feels it is the right
thing to do. He expresses gratitude that the peddler is not a Jew but a
German, because he doesn't like Jews but he doesn't have anything
against Germans. The German turns out to be a man who doesn't know
anymore what is happening to society, but he likes to live by this
saying, "What is good for the Russian, is death for the German." At a
later point in the story, he tells the country boy, "that the cities are
dark forces, the strong come here, but they get weak. The city takes
over their strength." This scene for one thing tells how xenophobic the
Russians have always been and still are.
Danila's entry into the drug and rock scene, comes about when he is
attracted to a young druggie hipster, the pert blond, Kat (Joukova), who
gets him to spend money on drugs so that they can party together.
Meanwhile he continues working for his weak-kneed brother, by helping
him knock off a few of the Chechen mobsters. The brother is startled at
how good Danila is with a gun, something he probably learned during the
war, even though Danila is evasive about what he did during his army
tenure.
Danila doesn't complain that he is doing all the dirty work, he now has
plenty of money for the girls; and, enough money to buy himself clothes,
and to get the cd's he loves listening to and talking about. His
mindlessness and quiet charm, and the heroic qualities he often
displays, are both chilling and pitiful to observe. All his
accomplishments seem to come through the force of a gun.
If anything, this slickly done gangster thriller, should be taken as a
political warning by the West that Russia is a wounded animal and still
dangerous, and a wounded animal is frightened and will often do anything
to lash out at those it perceives as hurting it. There were many
diverting scenes that make that point crystal clear. In a drugged and
alcoholic stupor, at a party with Kat, he lashes out verbally at a
musician he thinks is American. When told that he is French, he replies,
"same insults go for him."
In another scene that shows his hatred for things that are American, he
is in MacDonalds and refuses to eat the American food; but Kat, who is
heavily into the Western scene, is seen gleefully gulping down a hot
apple pie.
What should make Danila's character frightening to the West, is that his
prejudices and violent acts are readily accepted by the movie-going
Russian public as the proper way to act.
When Viktor betrays Danila to the Chechan mobsters, who invade Viktor's
apartment to set a trap for the brother, he outfoxes them and succeeds
in killing off his brother's enemies, sparing the life of his cowardly
brother. He then reverses the mocking remarks his mother told him when
he first came home from the army: as he now mockingly tells the
sniveling Viktor to hitch-hike back to mamma and take care of her with
the money he just gave him; she is an old lady and needs you. It seems
there is a special place in his heart for the Russian, even if he is a
betrayer, after all, he is a Russian (brother).
Danila backtracks to his girlfriends. But they don't love him or even
want to know him. So he leaves one a musical tape and the other a little
money he collected from his criminal efforts and he grabs a ride from a
truck driver who is heading to Moscow. That should be another stop where
his resume as a gangster will come in handy for the future.
Sergei Bodrov is devastating as the symbol of the "old" Russian coming
back as the "new" Russian. His performance gives the film a
reverberating force, depicting the chaos currently going on in a
deteriorating country, and how difficult it would be to reach someone
like him, when he can be so deceptive by just smiling and so distant by
tuning out what he doesn't want to hear. It is in his soul that rests
the centuries of Russia's life of misery and war, whose struggle is
never over but always seems to be just beginning. He has infused the
film with a raw power, that touches the nerves of the things that
Westerners understand the least about the Russians. All this makes for a
fascinating film, one that is popular in Russia, and is quite different
from the usual Russian films exported to America. It is one of the most
insightful films I have seen about modern Russia and how organized crime
has taken a foothold in the country. It is a film that has its finger on
the problems the severe economic decay in Russia and the rise of
criminals to fill the void of a lost morality, has caused. Russia is now
a country where even a brother might be taken for a stranger, except for
our gangster hero, who is trying to make some sense of what he sees
going on since the collapse of Communism, whose simple forceful ways to
back up the wrongs he sees seem very attractive to a desperate and
cynical people who yearn for a hero to save them from all the
corruption. This film has the look and tone of those old American B
movies, but with a little more depth in its political aims and much more
pessimism for its country'sfuture.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Louis Proyect
Alexei Balabanov's "Brother," now showing at NYC's Film Forum, is the
first post-Soviet film that accurately reflects life after the fall of
Communism. This cynical, hard-boiled gangster film does not deal in
nostalgia for some glorious Stalinist past, however. Like many new
post-Soviet intellectuals, Balabanov is mesmerized by the callous and
hedonistic society taking shape. The brave new world of drugs,
rock-and-roll, crime and nihilism might be dragging the world down
around them, but the characters in "Brother" plan to have a good time
in the process, like a party on the deck of the sinking Titanic.
Danila (played by Sergei Bodrov, Russia's hottest new actor) has just
arrived in St. Petersburg, formerly Leningrad, to look up his older
brother Viktor (Victor Sohurukov), a free-lance hit-man. Danila has
just finished serving in the Russian army and is unemployed. Without
any fanfare, Viktor drafts his younger brother into the family
business. Viktor asks him if he was taught how to shoot a gun in the
army. The laconic younger brother replies that they took him to the
firing range like everybody else, but he spent most of his time at
h.q.
The running joke of the entire film is that the baby-faced,
sweet-natured younger brother turns out to be the most proficient
killing machine since Rambo. Although he never brags about his
prowess, clearly he has become an expert on the battlefields of
Chechnya or some other post-Soviet killing ground. It is in fact a
Chechen gangster who is Danila's first target. Danila first rents a
room downtown near the market where the Chechen gang boss takes his
morning constitutional and kickbacks from merchants. He then stakes
out the area in disguise, and once he settles on a plan, goes back to
his room where he constructs a bomb made of matchstick heads and
gunpowder to use against the Chechen.
When Danila is not busy killing bad guys, he behaves like any young
Russian. He listens to his favorite rock-and-roll music, played by the
Russian group Nautilus, on his beloved Sony Walkman. He picks up a
street drug peddler after getting paid for his first hit. The
punked-out young woman takes him first to a disco and then to a
private party where everybody is smoking pot, drinking vodka from the
bottle and listening to the latest rock-and-roll. All the young
murderer wants to do is talk about his favorite band, Nautilus.
The telephone wakes Danila early next morning, in the middle of a
terrible hangover. His brother has lined up another job for him. He is
to accompany two creepy hit-men on a raid against a rival gangster.
When they burst in to his apartment, only one of his underlings is
there, whom they bind and gag. Danila asks the other hit-men and the
captive if they have any aspirin. When they reply no, he wanders into
a party in progress upstairs. People are listening to rock-and-roll,
smoking pot, playing pool and conversing pleasantly. They give him
some aspirin and invite him to stay and enjoy himself but he can't
stay because he has business downstairs that must be taken care of.
After returning downstairs to rejoin his fellow killers, he answers a
knock at the door. It turns out to be a invitee to the party upstairs
who has wandered into the wrong place. They pull him into the
apartment and tell him to keep quiet and he won't be harmed. It turns
out that the new captive is a music video director whom Danila
immediately befriends. He also promises him that no harm will come to
him as long as he is there. He then starts to pump the terrified man
all about the music business and raves to him about Nautilus, his
favorite group.
After several hours, when it becomes clear that their intended target
is not going to show up, Danila's fellow hit-men stab the bound and
gagged lieutenant to death. Just as they are about to do the same
thing to the director, Danila intervenes and kills them instead. He
tells the frightened director that he always keeps his promises.
Danila might be a professional killer, but true to gangster film
formalism, he is a professional killer with a heart. In an earlier
scene, he steps into a confrontation between a cowed streetcar
conductor and two hooligans who refuse to pay their fare. He sticks a
gun in their face and makes them pay their fare. Danila's attitude
must strike a strong chord in Russian audiences, who have made this
the highest-grossing film of 1997. Perhaps the only way to deal with
the scum of Russian society is through vigilante action, like the kind
celebrated in Charles Bronson's "Death Wish" films.
Balabanov has clearly immersed himself in American B movies and has
made a movie to compete with them on their own terms. But "Brother"
has more intelligence than this. You sympathize with the main
character, who has lost his moral moorings, because the rest of
society has also. There is no other way to survive. Danila allows
himself to get sucked into the jungle, but tries at the same time to
preserve his own integrity. More than any other professional killer in
cinema history, Danila will remind one of the samurai Toshiro Mifune
played in Yojimbo and Sanjuro. The out-of-work swordsman hires himself
out to gangsters and warlords who are making life hell for the
peasants, but brings peace by killing the rivals, one faction after
another.
Organized crime in the former Soviet Union is not only a inviting
topic for film-makers, it is also a genuine problem for those trying
to introduce capitalism there. Fred Weir writes in "Revolution from
Above" that 70 to 80 percent of private industrial and financial
institutions are forced to make payments of 10 to 20 percent of their
annual revenues to organized crime. Two members of the Russian
parliament were murdered by hit-men during 1994-95. Even more
alarmingly for those of us living in New York City or wherever real
estate is at a premium, Weir states that some residents of
well-located Moscow apartments have been murdered in scams aimed at
obtaining ownership of newly privatized apartments.
Meanwhile Russia has just received a $20 billion IMF loan, which
nobody expects to bring the ailing economy to life. Gangsterism will
not disappear either, since it is endemic to the sort of capitalism
that is taking root there. In a society that worships material success
but that does not give outsiders a means to such success, criminality
is just another way to succeed. Meanwhile there is convincing evidence
that drugs are as important to the Mexican economy as oil is to Saudi
Arabia. The downwardly spiraling world economy practically insures
that crime will continue to be big business in Russia and the rest of
the world.
For Marxist discussion: www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html
