Title
Review for Goűt des autres, Le (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Laura Clifford
THE TASTE OF OTHERS (Les Goutes des Autres)
Have you ever misjudged someone, treated them badly, then felt horrible 
about it?  This and other aspects of the human condition are explored
in cowriter/director/star Agnes Jaoui's Best Foreign Language Film Oscar
nominee "The Taste of Others."
The film begins by following the seemingly unrelated conversations of two
tables of diners.  Castella (cowriter Jean-Pierre Bacri, "Place Vendome") is 
a businessman attempting to sneak a sweet past his controlling wife Angelique
(Christiane Millet) while also carrying on a business lunch.  At another
table, storytelling Franck (Gerard Lanvin) and literal Bruno (Alain Chabat, 
"French Twist") appear to have little in common until we learn that Franck
is Castella's bodyguard and Bruno his driver.
Castella interviews Clara (Anne Alvaro, "Danton") as an English teacher, but
dismisses her when she doesn't produce a fun technique.  Later, when he's
dragged to a stage production of Berenice by his wife (his niece has a small
part in the production), Castella is entranced by Clara in the lead role and
begins to ardently pursue her, much to her dismay (she needs his English lesson
money, but finds him boorish and uneducated).  Meanwhile Bruno encounters Manie
(Agnes Jaoui) tending the bar at a cafe and she informs him they once slept
together.  While they aren't successful rekindling the former flame (Bruno
can't believe he didn't remember while Manie can't believe she did), Manie
begins a relationship with Franck.  Manie's also buddies with Clara and 
the rest of the theatrical troupe customers, closing the circle of the main
cast.  A subplot, where Angelique forces her interior decorating skills
upon her sister-in-law Beatrice (Brigitte Catillon, "Artemisia"), most
literally conveys the film's title.
This warm, funny, all too human story is about how people's myopia can lead
them astray in their search for happiness.  It's an assured, typically French
(conversation heavy) piece of work by Jaoui and her costar Bacri.  Jaoui gets
top notch work from her entire cast.  (Oddly, the central characters all
resemble American stars with Jaoui herself looking like "Ally McBeal's"
Courtney Thorne-Smith, Bacri like "L.A. Law's" Alan Rachins, Clara like
Lily Tomlin and Bruno like Peter Riegart.)  The film is beautifully editted
(Herve de Luze), sometimes for comic effect (Flucky, Angelique's puffball
little dog who 'always bites for a good reason,' gambolling about) or to
jump across time while one character glides from one encounter to the next.
"The Taste of Others" is both heartbreaking and hopeful.  Alvara's final smile
is like something out of a constellation while Bruno's mysterious, solitary
flute playing is given satisfying closure for both the character and the film.
Small moments, even when anticipated (Castella placing his newly purchased
modern painting amidst his wife's flowery, fluffy decor), bring large payoffs.
"The Taste of Others" is a real treat.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
THE TASTE OF OTHERS  (Le gout des autres)
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Artistic License Films/ Offline Releasing
 Director: Agnes Jaoui
 Writer: Agnes Jaoui, Jean-Pierre Bacri
 Cast: Anne Alvaro, Jean-Pierre Bacri, Alain Chabat, Agnes
Jaoui, Gerard Lanvin, Christian Miller
   Racine meets Moliere in the utterly delightful French
comedy of manners co-written and directed by Agnes Jaoui--
who also turns in a crackerjack performance as a hashish-
peddling bartender together with her real-life husband and
film's co-writer Jean-Pierre Bacri.  This French entry into the
Oscar competition blends parody and affliction so seamlessly
that members of any audience fortunate enough to watch the
story may effortlessly identify with the poignancy of the
principal character's condition while at the same time smile
broadly at the way he boorishly tries to fit in with a crowd
whose breeding is so different from his own.
   Filmed in Rouen, "The Taste of Others" (or, if you prefer,
"Le gout des autres") highlights the tribulations of successful
businessman Castella (Jean-Pierre Bacri), married to a
neurotic interior decorator, Angelique (Christiane Miller)--a
dog-owning woman whose taste in home decor is as
excessive as is preference for animals to human beings. 
Bourgeois in her desire to attend performances of artsy plays
by the likes of Racine--though neither liking nor
understanding their purport--she drags her reluctant husband
to a performance of "Berenice," at which time he becomes
swiftly and grandly infatuated with its title character played by
the 40-year-old Clara (Anne Alvaro).  Determined to press his
suit with her, he propels himself into her world of actors,
director, and crew and despite their attempts to get rid of him. 
They regularly make fun of his philistinism and 
ultimately exploit him for his money, the starry-eyed executive
sees no evil.
   Jaoui imbues the screen with an ensemble of Castella's
satellites, including his bored bodyguard Moreno (Gerard
Lanvin) and his chauffer, Deschamps (Alain Chabat)--both of
whom pursue an affair with Manie, an independent-minded
barmaid (Agnes Jaoui) who would like to be married.  She is
reluctant, however, to accept the proposal of a conventional
man whom she likes but who'd insist on transforming her
from a popular barkeep and hashish dealer into a
housekeeper who'd devote her years to taking care of his
children.  Among the miserable characters, Clara shrugs off
the applause of her theater fans, depressed by her inability to
find a father for the children she would like to have.
   Any among us who have ever been embarrassed by a
friend who acts inappropriately in our presence--by telling
scatalogical jokes to a group of cultivated people more
interested in discussing Ibsen or by casually and obliviously
insulting gays while in the presence of a couple of
homosexuals--will treasure Bacri's appearance at the table of
a crew of aesthetes.  They scoff at his boorish choice of
expressions while at the same time leaving him clueless
about the source of their animosity.  The ensemble is so
sublime that we'd have difficulty singling out any of the
players for special merit.  Jaoui's carefree demeanor is
contrasted with Alvaro's nervous energy while Bacri's
churlishness contradicts the grace and artistic intelligence of
the theater company.  
   Ms. Jaoui had intimated in an interview communicated in
the production notes that no matter how open-minded we'd
like to think we all are, we can expect any attempts on our
part to cross social borders mighty difficult if not
heartbreaking.  She adds that from the time we've all been in
grade school we've tried to fit into one clique or another,
occasionally getting rejected while clueless about the cause. 
As we look back on the so-called good-old days of our youth-
-a time actually charged with heartbreaks and pathos--we can
perhaps grin at our naivete, our grandiosity in believing that
everyone would love us as much as did our mothers. 
Distancing ourselves from the afflictions of our youth, we
Monday morning quarterbacks can now react with greater
understanding of the errors of our ways.  Mercifully, time
heals, but for the mostly hapless folks who populate Ms.
Jaoui's wonderful film with its exquisitely observed
personalities, the taste of others has been bittersweet at best.
Not Rated.  Running time: 112 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 TASTE OF OTHERS, THE (Goűt des autres, Le) (director/writer: Agnčs
 Jaoui; screenwriter: Jean-Pierre Bacri; cinematographer: Laurent
 Dailland; editor: Hervé De Luze; cast: Anne Alvaro (Clara),
 Jean-Pierre Bacri (Castella), Brigitte Catillon (Béatrice), Alain
 Chabat (Bruno Deschamps), Raphaël Defour (Benoît), Xavier De
 Guillebon (Weber), Agnčs Jaoui (Manie), Gérard Lanvin (Frank Moreno),
 Anne Le Ny (Valerie), Christiane Millet (Angélique),Wladimir Yordanoff
 (Antoine); Runtime: 112; Offline Releasing; 1999-France)
As husband-and-wife actors and screenwriters, Agnes Jaoui and
Jean-Pierre Bacri have been the creative team behind Alain Resnais'
"Same Old Song" and Cedric Klapisch's "Family Resemblances." Here Jaoui
takes on the directing duties as well. This was a smash box office hit
in France and was nominated for and won many top Cesar awards, but lost
out to "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" as Best Foreign Film in the
Oscars.
A touching romantic/comedy ensues about diverse people trying to find
love in a cold world. It becomes a matter of taste if love can be won by
Castella (Jean-Pierre Bacri), a bored, married, industrialist tycoon, in
a provincial French city, not far from Paris. He has no taste for
culture, but suddenly finds he's smitten by his cultured new
English-tutor. He fails to notice how much she attracts him as a tutor,
but accidently sees her onstage and falls in love with her as an
actress. She has been hired by his Parisian business consultant Weber
(Guillebon), so that he could learn to talk English directly to all the
international clients he has. The intellectual tutor, the 40ish,
lonely-heart, Clara (Anne Alvaro), feels the pains of not making it big
in the theater and is despondent because she feels her age is starting
to work against her. She is appearing as Berenice in Racine's 17th
century verse play that Castella's overbearing wife Angélique (Millet)
drags him to see because their niece has a bit part in it.
Clara is appalled at how crass her student's taste is and the way he
always seems to say the wrong thing, and how he thinks he can impress
her with his wealth. But he is blind to the way she sees him and
continues to pursue her because he really likes her. He has become
stifled by his interior decorator wife who forces her taste upon him.
She treats her pet dog with more respect than she does him, as she just
loves animals more than she does humans. When he buys a painting from
one of his new artsy theater acquaintances because he likes it, she
refuses to hang it on her precious pink walls.
Weber has also advised that he and his wife get a bodyguard, Frank
Moreno (Gerard Lanvin), and, a chauffeur, Bruno (Alain Chabat), who are
there for around-the-clock service, until he signs his big business deal
with the Iranians. These two are also going through personal problems:
Bruno's girlfriend writes to him that she's been unfaithful to him in
the States. While Frank has slept with as many as 300 women, but does
not trust women because of his bad experiences when he was more
vulnerable and got hurt by love.
When the film isn't telling about Castella's frustrating pursuit of the
dismissive Clara, the story tells of the trusting chauffeur's run in
with a barmaid named Manie (Jaoui), whom he slept with 10 years ago but
doesn't remember. The more experienced bodyguard, a tough ex-cop, also
becomes aware of her and manages to sleep with her; and, though he's
attracted to her and likes her, he's put off that she's so popular with
the men and deals hashish on the side.
The crass Castella is not a mean guy, he's more of a nice guy who's a
twit with a hangdog expression; he doesn't realize that Clara's theater
crowd is taking advantage of his ignorance of the arts to make a fool of
him in the cafe where they regularly meet. Also, he's impatient with his
formal English lessons, wanting them to be more "fun" and feels more
comfortable when it takes place in an English tea restaurant. When he
makes a declaration of love there to Clara, he has shaven off his bushy
mustache because she mentions that she doesn't like mustaches. But he is
still told by her that they have irreconcilible differences, and he
realizes for certain now that he is unhappy with just his comfortable
materialistic life and must try to better himself culturally. Clara
represents that new standard he shoots for.
The charm in this plot less film is that everyone presented is so much
different in lifestyle and yet with all their flaws and differences,
they all have something going for them that might be appealing to
someone else. The story allows us to see each of their points of view
clearly as their character is fully developed; it is so smartly and
subtly done without patting itself on the back, that it becomes a
pleasure to watch such an intelligent presentation on the problems of
love and of one developing taste. And, isn't life all about developing
taste and evolving! The more limited one is, the more limited one's
friendships and love will be! The performers all do a marvelous job of
getting this across and they make the film a joy to see. It's thankfully
a film that has a life of its own and shuns any formulaic way of
resolving this tale, which should only disappoint zombie viewers of
familiar Hollywood love stories.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Julia Levin
In The Taste of Others, a wealthy suburban businessman named Castella
gets infatuated with a theatrical actress and becomes a frequent visitor
of her bohemian circle of friends.  The premise might not be very
original but the delicious twist of the story is that it is not so much
about Castella's pursuit as it is about how different social strata are
formed and how they intersect with one another.
Castella (Jean-Pierre Bacri) and his wife have to attend a local stage
production of Bérénice, in which their daughter plays a small part. 
They don't care for the theatre and can't understand the verse, but, to
Castella's own surprise, he finds himself unusually moved by a leading
actress Clara.  The charming point here is that Clara isn't a young
aspiring theatrical diva but an aging, harried, and often unemployed
actress from a small provincial theatre.  Castella, however, doesn't see
her that way: For him, she brings into his dispassionate routine the
whiff of a free-spirited life including cozy, drunken late-night talks
and vibrant gallery gatherings.  Through happenstance, Castella's new
business arrangement requires him to learn English, and Clara (Anne
Alvaro) becomes his teacher.
Despite the fact that Clara's friends are contemptuous of Castella for
his ignorance, plebian tastes, and crass jokes, the businessman shows up
at every reception or theatrical premiere.  His is not a vicious fellow,
not by any stretch, and his homophobic remarks are devoid of malice --
he is simply too unimaginative to go beyond his usual milieu -- and as
long as he is dancing on his toes, Clara is ferociously dismissive of
his courtship.  The film elegantly hints, however, at the fact that even
a small reversal of fortune can bring up a philistine in the most
uncompromising of artists.
The film doesn't shock the viewer in any way, but it is full of
delightful, witty, and keen observations on human behavior, the social
fiber of people's close circles, and those quiet, under-the-breath
moments that capture the essence of people's tastes and choices.  It
also makes a curious observation of the mechanism that brings two people
together and how impossible it is to explain the complexity of
attraction between seemingly incongruent people.
Castella's wife, for example, with the ironic name Angelique (Christiane
Millet), is an easily recognizable type of a rich bored housewife.  An
interior designer by profession, Angelique decorates her house to make
it look like a flower shop, and she herself is always decked out in
unbearably motley dresses.  She is the film's emotional freak, oblivious
to anything but her rabid little dog and a philosophy of the moral
superiority of animals over humans.
The cast's regular bartender Manie (Agnes Jaoui, who also directed the
film) is sleeping with both Castella's bodyguard Moreno (Gerard Lanvin)
and the chauffeur Deschamps (Alain Chabat).  She is accepted among the
artists, for she is uncompromisingly independent and fearless, while
Castella gets laughed at in his face.  An interesting development takes
place when Manie and Moreno discover that they perhaps stumble into a
serious relationship: Moreno's morality doesn't allow him to accept
Manie's selling drugs to supplement her income but does allow for his
own brainless, painfully boring job.
Agnes Jaoui's directorial debut is shot in a plain, well-paced style:
Nothing is rushed or crumpled and, besides following the story, there
are always snippets of other people's life as background, helping you
remember the larger tapestry of life.  Also, the filmmaker uses the
charming device of starting a scene in one place and, nonchalantly,
ending it in another, giving the story a sense of both completeness and
fragmentation at the same time.
The Taste of Others doesn't reach into the deeply-rooted causes of why
people end up having one circle of friends and not another.  It does
show, however, that we tend to be reluctant to accept others into our
established boundaries.  This 112-minute long film has a light yet
precious tinge of the great British writer William Somerset Maugham's
wit and irony, but without his incisive and cynical attitude toward
life.
Director: Agnčs Jaoui
Producers: Christian Bérard, Charles Gassot
Writer: Agnčs Jaoui, Jean-Pierre Bacri
Starring: Anne Alvaro, Jean-Pierre Bacri, Brigitte Catillon, Alain
Chabat, Gerard Lanvin, Christiane Millet, Wladimir Yordanoff, Agnčs
Jaoui
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Jean-Jacques Castella (Jean-Pierre Bacri) is an unpolished industrialist
whose social contacts are only through the efforts of his condescending
wife, Angelique (Christiane Millet). Things change when he reluctantly
attends a play featuring his niece in a small role and he becomes smitten
with an actress, Clara (Anne Alvaro). Though she thinks he's just a dolt,
he eventually charms her off her feet in "The Taste of Others."
Writer/director/actress Agnes Jaoui, with cowriter/costar, Bacri, have
crafted a terrific little slice of life in today's France, but the action
could take place anywhere. Monsieur Castella is a well-to-do businessman
whose steel barrel-making company is about to go international. His wife,
Angelique, is a demanding shrew who fashions herself to be a talented
interior decorator and arts patron. His driver, Bruno (Alain Chabat), meets
an old flame, Manie (Agnes Jaoui), but forgot that they made love one night
years before. Castella hires struggling actress Clara to teach him English
and falls for her in the process. And his temporary bodyguard, Frank,
begins a noncommittal romance with Manie. There is all this and more going
on in director Jaoui's Oscar nominated film.
In what may well be one of the best ensemble performances this year, "The
Taste of Others" is a simple tale of one man's mid-life crisis,
Jean-Jacques Castella, which takes place while life unfolds, too, for those
around him. Jean-Jacques is an uptight, aggressive manufacturer whose wife
dominates his home-life, along with her nasty little dog, Fluckie. When he
is forced to attend a play with his wife, becomes captivated with Clara. He
asks her to teach him English and, in his own sometimes-boorish ways, tries
to insinuate himself into her life. She resists - strongly. Meanwhile, life
goes on for everyone else and they have their own trials and tribulations.
Jaoui and Bacri don't tell us a conventional kind of story, opting instead
for the slice of life and love that centers on Castella, but fully involves
the rest, too. There is depth to all of the characters with Bacri first
among equals as Jean-Jacques. He is almost unlikable when we first meet
him. He is taciturn, almost rude, when he interviews Clara for a tutoring
job. When he realizes the actress in his niece's play is the same woman, he
becomes obsessed with her and realizes the sham his marriage has become. We
get to know the man and enjoy his metamorphosis into a kinder, gentler and
much more likable guy.
The rest of the cast is uniformly first rate with Anne Alvaro a standout as
Clara. She's 40 years old, still has to struggle to get decent roles and
has to teach English to make ends meet. The years of hard work and
dedication to her profession shows on her face and her attitude is
somewhere between despairing and pissed off. The friendships that develop
between Frank and Bruno, Bruno and Manie, and Frank and Manie are handled
neatly and with feeling by all three actors. Christine Millet, in the tough
role as the witchy wife, is funny, with her horrible taste in home
furnishings, and sad, as she fails to see the changes taking place in her
husband.
Helmer Jaoui does an exemplary job in mustering the numerous talents
(herself included) that appear on the screen. Besides the large principal
cast, there is also a bevy of supporting characters that flesh out the
background fully. "The Taste of Others" was France's submission for Oscar
contention this years (instead of the great "Girl on the Bridge," but I
digress) and is a sound introduction to America for Jaoui and the rest of
the talented cast and crew. I give it a B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
