Title
Review for Hitler's Daughter (1990) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Scott Hamilton & Chris Holland
For the html version of this review with screen captures, please point
your browser to http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
Hitler's Daughter is a surprisingly violent TV movie that aired in 1990.
We saw this in the local TV listing recently and just had to see it. What
you need to understand is that six months ago we happened to buy a bad
little pot-boiler by the same name at a used book sale. The cover declares
"Hitler's Daughter... Wants to occupy the White House." How could we
resist? And lo and behold, the movie, which was on at 2 in the morning,
sandwiched between an endless variety of sex talk line commercials, is in
fact based on the book! We were in cannabalistic pop culture heaven!
We are introduced to the main character, Ted Scott (Patrick Cassidy), and
he spends the rest of the movie wondering why he doesn't have a last name.
Just kidding. Ted is a White House press aide working for a lame duck
president during election season. The incumbent Vice President, Elliot
Benedict, is running for his boss' job. Virgil Rutledge is running for the
other party.
One day, Ted gets a call from an old professor of his named Bauman (Donald
Davis). The professor wants to meet with Ted because he has some very
important information to give him, but Ted blows him off. This is why Ted
is surprised when the Bauman somehow gets into the secured parking garage
at Ted's place of business just as Ted is leaving work. Bauman has a
package he wants to give Ted, but before he can, both Ted and Bauman are
attacked by men posing as security guards. Bauman is killed, Ted is
knocked out, and one of the guards shoots himself in the shoulder so Ted
will be framed as a killer. Then, taking a cue from every James Bond
villain ever, they leave Ted in a car rigged to explode along with
Bauman's bullet-ridden file, and they don't check back to make sure Ted is
actually dead or the file destroyed when the car explodes.
The car doesn't explode the way it should (the conspiracy has a lot of
trouble with that) and Ted is soon on the run with the file. It's the
oldest of suspense plots: the good guy has a file (or more recently,
computer disk) and the bad guys will do anything to get it back. All of
these plots take place in an alternate dimension, where copy machines do
not exist and the bad guys believe the good guys when they say they
haven't made a copy of the file... because it's actually true! Whether
it's the 39 Steps or The X-Files, we can hardly go to the movie theaters
or turn on the TV without seeing some poor schmuck (or beautiful woman)
running from faceless minions trying to get that darn file back.
Now what should raise this silly plot above all of the other versions of
this story we've seen is the tabloid nature of the file: That Hitler's
daugter is alive... And she wants to occupy the White House! All right,
now we're talking! That Hitler even had a daughter is only a remote
historical possibility, but it's fun to think about, in a Hard Copy/Jerry
Springer kind of way.
Which brings us to the central question... Who is Hitler's daughter? Well,
we don't know. The movie is structured in such a way that we have three
suspects, and we don't know which one is the titular character. All three
characters (a reporter, the VPs wife, and a Senator) seem to be power
hungry, and all three seem to be willing to claw (or sleep) their way to
the top, but because we aren't supposed to know who is really Hitler's
daughter until the end of the movie, none of the women ever actually do
anything particularly evil! It's not so much "Hitler's daughter wants to
occupy the White House" as "Hitler's daughter wants to be on Melrose
Place."
So, what are we left with? Not a whole lot. The story doesn't unfold very
smoothly, and there is nothing in this plot that we haven't seen before in
any number of other conspiracy movies. Besides, why would Hitler's
daughter go into politics? These days, the easiest way to spread evil
throughout the world is to write bad TV movies.
This review copyright 1998 by Chris Holland and Scott Hamilton of Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews. http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
