Title
Review for Big Squeeze, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Chuck Dowling
The Big Squeeze (1996) **1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Lara Flynn Boyle, Peter
Dobson. Writer and Director: Marcus DeLeon.
Lara Flynn Boyle has always struck me as an odd actress.  Not odd as in she's
weird, but odd in her choices of characters.  In interviews she has always
come across as someone you'd want to hold in your arms and protect her from
everything evil in this world.  But ever since the second (and final) season
of TV's "Twin Peaks", she's mostly played cold, ruthless, and sometimes
downright evil women.  Almost to the point where she'd be typecast in that
type of role.  So when a movie like "The Big Squeeze" comes around, no matter
how her character is presented, you think she has some sort of ulterior
motive.
As the film begins, Benny (Peter Dobson from "The Frighteners") is being
thrown out of a moving train for having five kings in his hand during a
poker game.  He goes to a local bar where Tanya (Boyle) is bartending.  He
tries to pick her up, but finds out she's a married woman.  So he tries
another bartender and the two strike up a relationship.
Tanya's husband is a former minor league baseball player named Henry.  Two
years earlier he injured his knee in an accident and hasn't played the game
since.  Also since the accident, Henry has found God and visits the local
mission every day, mostly to pray for himself to be able to play ball again,
but also to pray for forgiveness after he has sex with his wife. He's an odd
guy.
Tanya took the bartending job because Henry's insurance would not pay for
his injury.  One day she opens his mail and discovers that he did in fact
receive a settlement of over $100,000.  Now she thinks that she's entitled to
half of the money.  And she's right.  Henry, however, believes that money is
evil and will not let her have a dime.  They fight, and she leaves him.
Now the plot happens.  Tanya wants her half of the money, so she asks for
Benny's help.  At the same time, the mission which Henry visits daily
desperately needs over $100,000 to repair earthquake damage.  Benny then
concocts a scheme involving the mission's plight to raise money in order to
swindle Henry.
"The Big Squeeze" is pleasant enough, it just doesn't pay off well in the
end. The tone set early on makes it seem as though some sort of double
cross may occur (aside from the OBVIOUS double cross which we all know is
coming), but nothing else really happens. Dobson gives an interesting
performance, and it looks like he might be a mainstay, along with Ms.
Boyle, in this type of low-budget independent film in the years to come.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE BIG SQUEEZE is a whimsical fable.  As soon as the opening
credits of unaligned type appears with their multicolor shades of
pastel, the audience is served notice that a light hearted comedy is
approaching.  As the quote above from the press kit shows, writer and
director Marcus DeLeon wants to weave a web where you are never quite
sure who is on the up and up, and who isn't.  If you are tired of big
message films and epics and want to kick back and just be entertained
with a simple little film, THE BIG SQUEEZE is just the flick for you.
     As the action starts, con man Benny O'Malley (Peter Dobson) is
kicked out of a boxcar because his hand inconveniently has not just
four kings, but five.  Down but never out, he heads into a local bar
broke, but looking for action.  He tries his come on lines to bartender
Tanya Mulhill (Lara Flynn Boyle from THREESOME and RED ROCK WEST), but
since she is married, they don't go far.  He later switches his
approach to the other bartender, Cece (Teresa Dispina), who hits it off
with him.
     Tanya is married to minor league ex-baseball player Henry (Luca
Bercovici from PACIFIC HEIGHTS).  Henry got hurt in a car accident a
couple of years ago and has never worked again.  He spends his days at
the mission run by Father Sanchez (Sam Vlahos), and when he isn't there
he reads constantly from his well worn Bible.
     One day, Tanya opens Henry's mail and is aghast to find that Henry
has been keeping his insurance settlement of $136,000 from her all of
this time.  His righteous stance is that, "Money is the devil's calling
card.  He is not welcome in this house."  She wants to divorce Henry
and get her half of the money, but he is a Catholic so he does not
believe in divorce.
     The show is about her conniving with Benny to separate Henry from
the money.  Since the mission fortuitously needs $136,000 for
earthquake repairs or it will be closed down, Benny comes up with an
ingenious scheme that he hopes will get the money from Henry.  Along
the way, Tanya goes to stay with a sweet gardener named Jesse Torrejo
(Danny Nucci from ERASER and THE ROCK), and Jesse gets roped indirectly
into the con as well.
     Benny is a classic con artist.  He laments to Henry that, "Whoever
invented money?  Personally, I could kill them.  What with all the
frustrations and temptations."
     The show has an ensemble cast.  Everyone seems at the top of their
form.  The director does let the show drag some, but the cast always
gives it their all.  Especially endearing are Boyle and Nucci playing
two likable and compelling characters.
     I have always been a fan of Lara Flynn Boyle, but this has to be
her best picture to date.  She plays the role in a low key fashion, and
yet manages to own any scene she is in.  I especially like the way
Jacques Haitkin filmed her.  He shows that her skin is not your typical
glamour model smooth, and it is full of freckles, and yet, she looks
alluring and seductive without doing much more than just standing.
     The music by Mark Mothersbaugh is a whimsical blend of xylophones
and flutes.  The script is a delight from beginning to end.  Speaking
of the ending, it will have you guessing until the last.  The are
several endings possible, but in this life affirming little show, it
doesn't really matter which one the writer chooses.  Other than I wish
the director had not let the show bog down as often as he did, and I
wish he had kept the energy a bit higher, I have no other criticisms.
A sweet little comedy.
     THE BIG SQUEEZE runs about an hour and a half, but the press kit
did not give the exact time.  It is rated R.  There are two fairly tame
fistfights, a little sex, fairly mild language, but no nudity.  The
film would be fine for any teenager.  I love the show and recommend to
you.  It gets *** in my book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     For all the talk about how safe and predictable Hollywood film-making
has become in recent years (and well-deserved talk it has been), I think
the independents have been getting a bit lazy as well.  The big studios
may try to duplicate the formulas of their blockbusters, but the small
distributors are just as eager to duplicate the successes within their own
ranks, which is why you see a lot of two kinds of film at your local art
house:  talky generational relationship comedies, and gritty, violent
capers.  Many cinephiles find the former particularly annoying, but I have
grown more tired of the attitude-heavy but substance-light films which
worship at the altar of Tarantino and turn out sour garbage like THINGS TO
DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD.  THE BIG SQUEEZE is a nice idea for a spin
on that trend, an unspectacular but surprisingly sunny film noir -- a film
blanc, if you will.
     Set in Los Angeles' low-rent Highland Park neighborhood, THE BIG
SQUEEZE is the story of Tanya Mulhill (Lara Flynn Boyle), a bartender
forced to work long hours to support her husband Henry (Luca Bercovici), a
former minor league baseball star crippled by a knee injury a few years
earlier.  Tanya is content to watch her tips go to the local mission where
Henry prays for a miracle to restore his knee, until she learns that Henry
has been hiding away a $130,000 insurance settlement.  When Henry refuses
to share the wealth, Tanya asks for help from Benny O'Malley (Peter
Dobson), a con man who has been frequenting the bar.  Together they hatch
a plan to separate Henry from his money, employing Jesse (Danny Nucci), a
bar regular with a crush on Tanya, as well as a few well-planted magnolia
trees and the promise of a miracle.
     I suppose that on a basic plot level not much separates THE BIG
SQUEEZE from those same gritty, violent capers I criticized en masse.  It
includes sex, greed, double-crosses and characters with a certain
in-your-face quirkiness, and all have an uncomfortable familiarity.  What
director and writer Marcus DeLeon understands is that a change in tone can
make for an entirely different story, and THE BIG SQUEEZE is a film which
always seems to be more inviting than ominous -- Jacques Haitkin's
cinematography is bright and cheery most of the time, Mark Mothersbaugh
provides a bouncy score, and the characters are generally likeable.
DeLeon takes the substance of a dark crime drama, paints it and throws up
some curtains, and suddenly finds himself with a comedy on his hands.
     That little trick impressed me, and it is characteristic of the minor
pleasures which allow THE BIG SQUEEZE to overcome its familiar story arc
and deliberate pacing.  Peter Dobson's Benny is shown from the beginning
as a con artist whose efforts have a tendency to backfire, making his the
cocky demeanor of a losing gambler convinced that his luck is just about
to change.  Henry is also an intriguing character, a man whose pose at
piety masks a profound selfishness and self-obsession; it is a great gag
when Henry believes he is making an amazing contribution to the Church by
parting with his California League championship ring.  Part of what makes
THE BIG SQUEEZE fun to watch is that Benny's plan is based on completely
mistaken assumptions about the other people involved -- neither Tanya nor
Jesse is as obsessed with the money as he is, and Henry may actually be
_more_ obsessed with it.
     I wish DeLeon had been content with a silly subversion of noir
conventions, because his attempts at more thematic depth fall somewhat
flat.  That is partly the result of a listless performance by Lara Flynn
Boyle, who gives Tanya a flaccid personality which doesn't seem to warrant
so much fascination by so many men.  Tanya's realization of what she wants
from life is one of several sub-texts in THE BIG SQUEEZE which are lost in
the shuffle, and there is a somewhat disconcerting cynicism to DeLeon's
rationalization of the opportunistic exploitation of religious faith.  But
for all its unevenness, THE BIG SQUEEZE provides an unexpected twist to a
genre in which guns and gloom generally carry the day.  In this case, it
is a pleasant surprise to find not a single bullet fired, and every
character experiencing some kind of happy ending.  Apparently DeLeon
prefers to make love, not noir.
