Title
Review for Living in Oblivion (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Are you in an easy job?  Probably not.  I know my job isn't
simple.  I have to be diplomatic at times, I have frustrations, people
I deal with make mistakes.  In fact, my job seems a lot like that of
director Nick Reve (played by Steve Buscemi) in LIVING IN OBLIVION.
This is less a story than a catalog with dramatization of the problems
a director faces getting three scenes shot for a film called LIVING IN
OBLIVION.  The name "Reve" means dream but Nick's life is anything but
a dream.  The problems Nick faces with assistants who have their mind
on other things, equipment that fails or that nobody on set knows how
to use are driving him into hysteria.  The film is nearly plotless, as
for most of the film the viewer sits on the shooting stage like a fly
on the wall and watches what happens.
     What the viewer does see is an incredible number of foul-ups,
personality clashes, and accidents.  Nick has to act as confessor,
mediator, diplomat, counselor, and general seer.  We are presented an
unending chain of weirdos, people with chips on their shoulder, and
people who think they can do Nick's job better.  It is easy to believe
each of the problems that Nick faces; it just stretches the credibility
to say he faces all these problems just filming three scenes.
Admittedly one expects more problems working on a low-budget film with
cheap equipment and with fewer assistants than on a big Hollywood
production.  Still, it is hard to believe that this day is typical.
There is internal evidence in the film that this really is not all
happening in a single day.  But that is not clear due to logic holes in
the script by writer/director Don DiCillo that I will discuss in a
spoiler section after the review.
     There is a good deal of discussion of the different production
methods that have to be used in low budget independent films and in
polished but empty Hollywood productions people on set refer to as
"Hostess Twinkie films."  But again the sort of problems faced in
making the independent film cannot be all that different from problems
in any small semi-technical operation.
     Steve Buscemi is a good actor and one of those actors who appeal
to low-budget, independent, cult directors much as John Turturro does.
One will nearly always see him somewhere in a film by Quentin Tarantino
or the Coen Brothers.  Not as familiar are Catherine Keener as an
insecure actress who is all too easily crushed by any criticism at all
and James LeGros as a supremely egocentric but untalented actor.  The
two actors, have slept together the night previous to the shooting and
have a comic battle of wills on the set.
     The photography makes good use of both monochrome and color
photography, though it is not consistent as to where it uses each.  As
films about the making of films go, this one is certainly one of the
most informative.  It suffers from its limited scope and an
insufficient number of different things to go wrong to keep the
audience amused.  In the end the viewer has been edified more than
satisfied.  Give this movie a rating of 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Spoiler...Spoiler...Spoiler...Spoiler...
     Dreams are very important in this film.  There are three
sequences, two of which turn out to be dreams and a third is the
filming of a dream sequence.  As I pointed out above, Nick's last name
is French for "dream."  Tito criticizes Nick for not understanding how
dreams work, but DiCillo does not seem to understand any better.  I
believe (but am willing to be corrected) that dreams are always from a
subjective point of view.  In sequences that turn out to be dreams,
characters see themselves as another person.  A dream would always be
from the inside of the person dreaming looking out.  I think it is also
very unlikely for a person to dream a scene where he or she is not
present.  Perhaps someone who know a little more about the psychology
of dreaming can tell me if these two assumptions are correct.  They are
certainly true of all my own dreams that I remember.  Things that
happen in dreams seem to carry over to the filming of the third
sequence, which is apparently not supposed to be a dream.  For example,
Wolf's eye is injured in one dream, but that seems to be carried on to
other sequences.  My suspicion is that at some point the first two
sequences were not originally written as dreams and the script was
patched to say they were dreams at a later point.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1994 
U.S. Availability: 8/95 (limited) 
Running Length: 1:31 
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, sexual situations, brief nudity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Cast: Steve Buscemi, Catherine Keener, Dermot Mulroney, James LeGros, 
      Danielle Von Zerneck 
Director: Tom DiCillo 
Producers: Michael Griffiths and Marcus Viscidi 
Screenplay: Tom DiCillo 
Cinematography: Frank Prinzi 
Music: Jim Farmer 
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics 
     Over the past few years, there have been a number of "behind the 
scenes" movies about the film making world -- enough, in fact, that this 
category almost deserves to be considered as a genre in its own right.  
Most of these films, like MISTRESS, are forgettable.  A select few, such 
as MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND, have risen to the top, largely because of 
their ability to mix humor with pseudo-realistic events.  The arrival of 
Tom DiCillo's LIVING IN OBLIVION proves that the well has not yet run 
dry.  This movie is keen, clever, and -- most important of all -- a 
nonstop exercise in hilarity.   
     LIVING IN OBLIVION details one day in the life of director Nick 
Reve (Steve Buscemi), who is trying to put together an independent film 
on a shoestring budget.  This particular morning, he's due to shoot 
scene six.  Little does he know that Murphy's Law is in full force.  
Nightmares -- real, figurative, and cinematic -- will plague the 
production, and what eventually emerges will be nothing like what anyone 
envisioned. 
     Reve's leading lady, Nicole (played by a shining Catherine Keener, 
who was in DiCillo's previous movie, JOHNNY SUEDE), is fraught with 
angst about her career choice.  Does she belong in front of the camera 
or behind the counter at some greasy dive?  The male lead, a stuck-up 
star by the name of Chad Palomino (James LeGros), has no worries about 
his ability.  With an ego too big for the tiny set, Chad spends most of 
his time complaining to Reve and flashing smiles at the assistant 
director (Danielle Von Zerneck) and script girl (Hilary Gilford).  The 
cinematographer (Dermot Mulroney, Keener's real-life husband), an eye-
patched character who looks like Rambo but has the emotional sensitivity 
of Alan Alda, rarely lets a take go by without arguing the choice of 
shot. 
     The mishaps of scene six provide ninety minutes of unbridled fun.  
There are missed shots, booms in frame, exploding smoke machines, actors 
with bad breath, a vomiting camera operator, a senile mother on the set, 
and an irate dwarf in a red room (an obvious poke at David Lynch and 
TWIN PEAKS).  Life imitates art, art imitates life imitating art, and 
all this happens in switches from black-and-white to color.  
     Often, the best comedies are blatantly stupid.  In this case, 
however, we are presented with an intelligent and occasionally 
insightful screenplay.  Not only are several real-life incidents from 
DiCillo's private stock of failures and frustrations represented, but 
the director isn't afraid to let fly with satirical barbs at just about 
any target, named or unnamed.  Amidst all the humor is an opportunity to 
learn a little about the difficulties of creating an independent feature 
-- a process far less glamorous that some might believe it to be.  
LIVING IN OBLIVION is wonderfully photographed, with the color-to-black-
and-white transitions handled smoothly (these aren't just an "art 
device" -- there's a legitimate reason for them), and several different 
film stocks in evidence.  DiCillo has crafted a near-masterpiece that 
may make more than a few best-ten lists at year's end. 
     LIVING IN OBLIVION is packed with laughs and twists, and comes to 
an end far too soon.  It's rare that a movie rolls the credits too 
early, but when this film fades to black, we're still longing for at 
least one more scene with Reve, his cast, and crew.  While it's true 
that we don't get much sense of these people off the set, they're so 
wonderful in and around the camera that it doesn't matter.  Best of all, 
LIVING IN OBLIVION doesn't demand that the viewer be a film buff -- just 
that he or she enjoys laughing. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Christopher Null
     Tom DiCillo wrote and directed this new low-budget story of making
a film-within-a-film, and it comes off superbly better than most of its
predecessor "movies about movies."  DiCillo has assembled the most
perfectly matched cast I've come across in ages, featuring Steve
Buscemi as Nick, a film director for whom nothing will work out,
Catherine Keener as a much too sensitive leading lady, Dermot Mulroney
as a leather-clad cinematographer, and James LeGros as an unbelievably
shallow leading man--possibly his best role ever.
     With the help of a misfit/wannabe crew, Nick leads us through one
"nightmare" after another, where the problems of shooting a few simple
scenes are never-ending but, fortunately for our benefit, are
hilarious.  While it may help to know something about the way a film is
made before you go in, LIVING IN OBLIVION will, at least, leave you
with a better understanding of the travails of film production, and, at
most, leave you in stitches.
     While LIVING IN OBLIVION is more of a "fun" picture than a "deep"
one, it's an awfully enjoyable way to spend 91 minutes.  The film's
problems are mostly cosmetic (a crummy soundtrack and a sometimes slow
third act), and the movie is a great success.  DiCillo's direction is
perfect, and needs to be seen on the big screen to be truly
appreciated.  The comic touches he adds to what would otherwise be some
ordinary scenes are also worthwhile.
     It ain't SCHINDLER'S LIST, and it's not supposed to be.  But
DiCillo gets done the job he set out to do: to send us home with a
smile and to hope for an equally good follow-up film.
-Christopher Null, Mike's FEEDBACK Magazine / null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Film Critic, Screenwriter, Novelist (Mailing list available)
