Title
Review for Birdcage, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Christopher Null
     It's a rare event when a remake of a film rivals the greatness of the
original.  THE BIRDCAGE, based fairly closely on LA CAGE AUX FOLLES,
achieves just that, memorably updating the earlier film's script with
modern humor and a distinctly American setting.
     The story has been done a thousand times, but LA CAGE AUX FOLLES was
one of the originals.  Armand Goldman (Robin Williams) is an openly gay
drag club owner in South Beach, Florida.  Albert (Nathan Lane, best known
as the voice of the weasel in THE LION KING), aka Starina, is Armand's
feature performer...and his "wife."  When Armand's son-via-one-night-stand
Val announces his impending marriage to Barbara (a dead ringer for Audrey
Hepburn), Armand freaks.  When Barbara's arch-conservative parents (Gene
Hackman and Dianne Wiest) drop by for a visit, it gets even worse.
     The most choice parts of the story involve Albert's attempt at
transforming his very non-butch persona into a faux "man," from his John
Wayne swagger to his mustard-spreading technique.  In the process, Lane
manages to do what has heretofore been impossible:  to upstage Robin
Williams, who plays a distant second (or even third) fiddle to his
costars.  The potential second is an almost unrecognizable Hank Azaria as
the couple's unbearably hilarious Guatemalan house boy.
     Of course, bits and pieces are lacking in THE BIRDCAGE, most notably
stuck-on subplots involving Val's real mother (Christine Baranski) and the
tabloids coming after the gang, but on the whole the film is a hilarious
modernization of its acclaimed predecessor.
     And while THE BIRDCAGE isn't really what I'd call insulting to any
particular group, don't expect any political correctness awards to be
handed out for the film.  Instead, just expect to hear a whole lot of
light-hearted laughter.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter  /  Novelist  /  Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Elton John has a new favorite movie. This homosexual 
transvestite farce isn't one of my personal favorites, though, and not 
because of the flamboyant gayness aspect either. THE BIRDCAGE is 
only sporadically funny, with too many jokes and scenes that just 
don't work and not enough of the ones that do to balance it out. 
The key phrase for what would improve this movie is tighter 
editing, but obviously there's nothing tight in THE BIRDCAGE.
        Robin Williams, looking too much like Kevin Kline with a 
moustache, plays the owner of a nightclub where people go to see 
men dress up as women and lip synch old disco songs (eerily 
reminiscent of my seventeenth birthday party). The featured 
performer is Robin's longtime companion, Albert (Nathan Lane), 
who I have to say makes the ugliest woman ever. Lane contributes 
the most hilarious performance of the movie by reinforcing every 
gay stereotype in existence. I guess it's only politically correct to 
make stereotypical gay jokes if the people making the jokes are 
gay themselves.
        The conflict arises as Robin'sis 
wedding to a woman (oh, the horror). Worse, she's the daughter 
of conservative senator Gene Hackman, co-founder of a Moral 
Majority-type organization. And still worse, they're all driving 
down for dinner with Mr. and Mr. Williams. Still worse yet, the 
daughter has told Hackman and his wife (Dianne Weist) that her 
fiancee's parents are your average businessman-housewife combo, 
something any upstanding Republican senator's daughter can be 
proud to marry into.
        So Williams gives in to his son and agrees to redecorate the 
house. The anatomically-correct nude sculptures have to go. And so 
does Albert, until he convinces Williams that he can play the role of a 
straight uncle. It's obvious he can't, though, during one of the funniest 
scenes in the movie, which also has Williams trying to teach him to 
act "like a real man," complete with crotch-grabbing, spitting, football 
conversations and repititions of the phrase "f---in' A!" And in the role 
of Williams' wife, the mother of his child (and the only woman he ever 
slept with), Christine Baranski from "Cybill."
        The entire last third of THE BIRDCAGE features the actual 
dinner between Hackman and Williams' families, which complicates 
itshen Baranski gets caught in traffic, Albert decides to play the 
role of his career and a group of tabloid journalists gather outside to 
get pictures of Hackman's meeting with a gay couple. Like the rest of 
the film, it does have some genuine laughs as well as tedious scenes 
that just don't work and should have been cut. THE BIRDCAGE is, 
at its current length of two hours, a mixed bag of entertainment with 
great actors doing great things some of the time and mediocre things 
the rest of the time. At an hour-and-a-half it would be a genuinely 
good comedy because we all know length does matter.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robin Williams, Nathan Lane, Gene Hackman, Dianne Wiest, 
      Dan Futterman, Calista Flockhart, Hank Azaria, Christine Baranski
Director: Mike Nichols
Producer: Mike Nichols
Screenplay: Elaine May, based on LA CAGE AUX FOLLES
Cinematography: Emmanuel Lubezki
Music: Jonathan Tunick
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     Mike Nichols, the director of such well-received films as THE 
GRADUATE and WORKING GIRL, has taken the outrageous 1978 French farce, 
LA CAGE AUX FOLLES, and, by tweaking, updating, and Americanizing it, 
come up with a huge winner.  THE BIRDCAGE, as it's called, is one of 
those rare motion pictures with side-splitting laughs where the humor 
never stays dormant for long.  Using the talents of choreographers and 
set designers who don't know the meaning of "moderation", this movie is 
a triumph of the stylistically absurd.
     This is the third "big" cross-dressing movie to reach American 
screens in as many years (the other two being THE ADVENTURES OF 
PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT and TO WONG FOO, THANKS FOR EVERYTHING! 
JULIE NEWMAR), and the first to have a short title.  But, as flashy and 
splashy as the man-dressed-as-a-woman scenario can be, THE BIRDCAGE 
(like PRISCILLA) is as much about being gay as it is about 
transvestitism, and it advances a message of equality, love, and 
acceptance.  "We Are Family" isn't just the film's opening number; it's 
the theme song.
     For some twenty years, Armand (Robin Williams) and Albert (Nathan 
Lane) have lived together as husband and wife (so to speak).  Both are 
openly gay, and comfortable with their sexuality.  They are partners in 
business as well as out of it -- Armand operates a drag nightclub where 
Albert is the star performer.  They have a son, Val (Dan Futterman), the 
product of Armand's one-night tryst twenty-one years ago with big-time 
executive Katherine Archer (Christine Baranski).  As far as his 
upbringing is concerned, Val is as much Albert's son as Armand's, and 
he's not ashamed of his unusual family situation -- at least not in the 
normal course of things.
     But things are no longer normal.  Val is engaged to the 18-year old 
daughter of Senator Keeley (Gene Hackman), the co-founder of the 
Coalition for Moral Order who believes that Billy Graham is too liberal.  
Since there's no way that Keeley would sanction a marriage between his 
daughter and the son of a gay couple, Val pleads with his father to 
pretend to be straight, if only for one night.  The result of this, as 
might be expected, is a hilarious disaster.
     Although most of the jokes come from Elaine May's screenplay, it's 
the performances that make them funny.  Robin Williams, despite his 
reputation for unfettered mania, is surprisingly restrained throughout 
most of THE BIRDCAGE, doing a little serious acting along the way.  
Nathan Lane, playing the effeminate Albert, is the real star, whether 
he's trying to swagger like John Wayne (to act manly) or costumed like a 
housewife.  Williams and Lane work well as a couple, feeding off one 
another in the fashion of all great comedy twosomes.
     Gene Hackman has the straight man's role, and he fits into it 
wonderfully.  His antics to escape reporters and his reaction to Val's 
parents are two of the film's comic highlights.  Dianne Wiest, Dan 
Fullerman, Calista Flockhart (as Val's fiancee, Barbara), and Christine 
Baranski all turn in solid supporting performances.  The only one who's 
too over-the-top is Hank Azania as Armand and Albert's houseboy, 
Aggedor.  His exaggerated mannerisms are frequently as irritating as 
they are amusing.  
     THE BIRDCAGE rivals A MIDWINTER'S TALE for the funniest movie 
released thus far in 1996.  In fact, the film is so boisterously 
entertaining that it's easy for the unsuspecting viewer not to realize 
that there's a message here.  The structure of THE BIRDCAGE is designed 
to show us that there isn't much difference between conservatives and 
liberals or straight and gay people.  Nichols' picture preaches 
tolerance and understanding, but neatly camouflages such themes beneath 
gaudy sets, colorful costumes, and unrestrained humor.  The script has a 
few lulls, and there are times when it doesn't make a lot of sense, but 
there are few better ways to spend a chilly winter evening than peering 
through the bars of THE BIRDCAGE.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Though you think we'd be tired of the drag gags after TO WONG FOO,
WIGSTOCK, and PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT, this respectable remake of
LA CAGE AUX FOLLES (1978) successfully reminds us that there are few
sights funnier than that of a man dressed as a woman.  Here, the "woman"
is Albert (Nathan Lane), a star drag queen in South Beach, FL, and the
shrill half of a happy gay couple.  Her longtime companion is Armand
(Robin Williams), the straighter man in the relationship and the owner
of the all-ages club where Albert performs.  Together, they must
scramble to reinvent themselves for the impending arrival of Armand's
son's fiance's right-wing parents (Gene Hackman and Dianne Wiest).
     Despite the inclusion of several awkward, though timely, political
statements-- Hackman's character is both a Republican Senator (!) and
the founder of the Coalition for Moral Order (!!)-- THE BIRDCAGE is a
surprisingly wholesome comedy that preaches nothing more than the
virtues of acceptance.  The super-swishy caricatures are probably passe,
sure, but director Mike Nichols and writer Elaine May bring a sincerity
to the characters that overrides any outdating.  Of course, by the end,
any and all messages are moot as the ensemble gets down to brass tacks.
     THE BIRDCAGE is first and foremost a farce, which means that every-
thing-- plot, character, etc.-- is secondary to set-up.  The entire
movie is spent in preparation for what befalls Armand and Albert when
the In-Laws-to-be arrive.  (Though the biggest laughs come at the end,
there are many funny bits peppered throughout.  Such as a hilarious
sequence of Williams trying to teach Lane how to "act like a guy.")
Though not without problems-- the poor definition of Hackman's character
is a big one-- THE BIRDCAGE delivers a minor message and some major
laughs, and, in a movie season as dry as this one, that's hardly a drag.
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>
-- 
Evelyn C. Leeper | +1 908 957 2070 | eleeper@lucent.com
The review above was posted to the
rec.arts.movies.reviews newsgroup (de.rec.film.kritiken for German reviews).
The Internet Movie Database accepts no responsibility for the contents of the
review and has no editorial control. Unless stated otherwise, the copyright
belongs to the author.
Please direct comments/criticisms of the review to relevant newsgroups.
Broken URLs inthe reviews are the responsibility of the author.
The formatting of the review is likely to differ from the original due
to ASCII to HTML conversion.

Related links: index of all rec.arts.movies.reviews reviews


Author
Philip Lam
Directed by: Mike Nichols
Written by: Elaine May
Cast : Robin Williams (Armand Goldman), Gene Hackman (Senator Kevin
Keeley), Nathan Lane (Albert Goldman/ Starina), Dianne Wiest (Louise
Keeley), Dan Futterman (Val Goldman), Calista Flockhart (Barbara
Keeley), Hank Azaria (Agador), Christine Baranski (K atherine)
Produced by : MGM/UA / Mgm/ua Distribution Co. (distributor) / United
Artists
Rating : *** out of *****
The problem with watching a movie where well-known actors appear in
drag is that invariably the movie just becomes a vehicle for said
actors trying to stretch the comic buck of the dressing-up thing for
as much as they can. Remember TO WONG FOO, THANKS FO R EVERYTHING,
JULIE NEWMAR? Acting, even by Hollywood standards, is at a serious
premium here at BIRDCAGE.
But then again, that's obviously not the reason why one would go to
watch this movie. It's a comedy, or at least that's what it's billed
as. Adapted from the french movie LA CAGE AUX FOLLES or "The Cage of
Madmen," this movie doesn't live up to the origin al. Isn't it funny
how so many good movies from France lose something when they get
Hollywoodised? (A little qualifier would be THE ASSASSIN, but that's
only because they copied the whole movie line for line, and Brigette
Fonda is kinda cute). Clearly the french title loses something with my
translation and the Hollywood version actually sounds nicer, but hey,
I could just be a poor translator.
The story revolves around the lives of two families, the
Goldmans and the Keeleys. Robin Williams and Nathan Lane play Armand
and Albert Goldman, owners of the eponymous Birdcage, a drag
nightclub, while Gene Hackman and Dianne Wiest are Senator and Mrs
Keeley, believers in the sort of conservatism that would have made
them burn the Puritans at the stake for Caligari-like decadence.
The two families collide when their children Val and Barbara decide to
get married. Barbara needs to convince her Senator Dad that the
marriage is the right thing despite the fact that she's only 18. He is
initially reluctant as he's too busy planning his re-election.
Circumstances change and he's led to believe that the only way to
salvage his political career is to be seen doing something with a
"feel-good" factor, and there's hardly anything more likely to tug the
heartstrings of the public than a good 'ol-fashioned wedding. Val
panics and enlists the help of his dads in an attempt to make them
look like a normal family for one day as the Keeleys come to visit.
What results is embarassingly obvious and really, the audience just
laughs because it feels obliged to. Nothing original happens in this
movie and Robin Williams shows once again that he's a cotton candy
actor: any good feelings about him disappear strai ght after walking
under the exit sign. What's worse in this movie is that he's abysmally
insipid throughout. He's an actor who's realized that him trying to
act really isn't all that commercially viable (be honest: anyone could
have done DEAD POETS' SOCIE TY; and THE FISHER KING, who understood
that??). Reversion back to Mork-mode was inevitable. Doing that
properly may have at least salvaged something of this mess. He's so
boring in this movie that he actually makes Nathan Lane look good.
Yeah sure, you'v e probably seen the shots of the movie and heard the
touting of Nathan Lane stealing the show. Well, it isn't so much a
case of him stealing the show as everyone else throwing it at him. His
drag impersonation is laboured and definitely gets on the nerves
quickly. That scene with Williams trying to teach Lane "How To Be a
Man" was definitely a 10 on the cheesy scale.
That's not all. Like father like son and here, Val (Dan Futterman)
feels some genetic need to emulate Williams' perfomance. He maintains
this unfazable look through all the tribulations his character is
supposed to be going through. Anyone else would have done a decent
portrayal of a young man whose life is about to come apart. This is
obviously below Val and one suspects that he's incapable of doing
anything but look cool. He certainly looks like he'll be more
comfortable in a "Top Gun" sort of movie tha n a funny-farm drag
misadventure.
Scraping the bottom of the barrel, we get a couple of plus points. You
get a little look at Miami's South Beach where the film is set and we
get to see Gene Hackman's finest hour in the last minute of the movie.
Be warned though: Don't watch this movie un less you're prepared to
not think about it ever after. It's the stuff nightmares are made of.
REVIEW's rating system:
* Wait for the video.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.

Author
Will FitzHugh
Yes!  Finally, Hollywood makes a version of 'La Cage Aux Folles'
that the average American can appreciate.  Now that we've been
softened up by the adorable 'Mrs. Doubtfire' and 'To Wong Foo,
Thanks for Everything, Lee Meriweather', cross-dressing and
homosexuality can be funny without being disturbing to grandma
and grandpa.
This is good, I suppose.  Better than 'Philadelphia' which seemed
like a calculated 'gay' movie and much better than director Mike
Nichols' recent work ('Wolf', 'Working Girl', 'Regarding Henry'
and the massively disappointing and suppressed 'Closing Time').
There's political humor as a gay couple's son wants to marry the
daughter of an Alan Simpson-like ultra-conservative senator (played
by Gene Hackman, who Simpson might want to consider as a double the
next time he angers reasonable citizens.  Full-time job, that).
He somehow convinces his parents, Robin Williams (not in a dress, and 
luckily, much less annoying than he is on talk shows) and
Nathan Lane, to act like a nuclear family for the senator and his
wife (Dianne Wiest, doing an impersonation of a giant mouse).  This
plan is doomed to failure but good for lots of laughs.
The cast is rounded out by Hank 'Apu' Azaria as the nutty houseboy
Agador and Christine Baranski (from 'Cybill') as Williams' ex-wife.
Lane's mincing wears a bit thin in spots but he picks up a full head of
steam when impersonating the traditional mom that the senator expects.
Hackman, who realizes somethings up, takes to mom as a Barbara Bush-
type wonder woman and forms an opinion of Williams as a playboy.
Well, the whole charade unravels, people fall down, there's a fair
amount of semi-naughty good humor and a happy ending.  I had a good
time at this movie, really, but let's think about this a minute.
After seeing a few Hollywood 'gay' flicks, your average small-town
moron thinks that these people are funny, good with makeup and have
nice tans.  A lot of them have kids and ex-wives, too, for some
reason.  Makes a good link to the heterosexual world, I reckon.  The
closest 'The Birdcage' comes to sex is some risque dinnerware and the
closest Nichols comes to any lasting satire is Hackman in a dress.  He
doesn't seem to realize that crowd-pleasing can only get you so far.
Alan Simpson would have taken one look at that white knee-length item
and foamed at the mouth.  I realize the ending was probably the same in
the French version so he can use that as an excuse but sharper writing
could have made more of this.
You fuck!  Can't even go out for a good laugh without bringing politics
into it.  You and Robert Redford can go make boring movies together in
your Aspen love-nest.  Hollywood big shots have just as much right to
free expression of thought as Barbara Streisand does.  People who want
a little current events can go suck on Barbara Walter's (or Hugh
Downs', if you must) glass teat and shut up so I can relax after a hard
days work at Philip Morris.  Now go home and wait for Sylvester
Stallone's or Demi Moore's (I can't tell them apart in a PG-13 flick)
next movie and leave me alone.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
The Birdcage *** Produced and directed by Mike Nichols.
Written by Elaine May, based on the play "La Cage aux Folles"
by Jean Poiret, and the screenplay by Francis Veber, Edouard
Molinaro, Marcello Danon and Poiret. Photography, Emmanuel
Lubezki. Editing, Arthur Schmidt. Production design, Bo Welch.
Music, Jonathan Tunick. Cast:Robin Williams (Armand), Gene
Hackman (Sen.Keeley), Nathan Lane (Albert), Hank Azaria
(Agador), Dianne Wiest (Louise Keeley), Christine Baranski
(Katharine), Dan Futterman (Val), Calista Flockhart (Barbara
Keeley) et al. A United Artists release.118 mins. Rated R
(inoffensive sexual language)
In 1978, Edouard Molinaro, a French journeyman director, had
his biggest international hit with the gay-themed "La Cage aux
Folles." In 1980 he made a lesser sequel. A third "La
Cage...," weak, irrelevant and directed by Georges Lautner,
came out in 1985. 
The milking of the cash-cow through remakes and sequels is
common in the world's film industry but nowhere as frequent as
in US cinema. Hollywood, first and foremost re-does its own
movies. In second place, far outdistancing the rest of foreign
sources, comes a long list of American versions of French
movies.
It is axiomatic that, with rare exceptions, remakes and
sequels are artistically far inferior to the originals.
Box-office profits can be high, however.
This said, "The Birdcage" does a good job of Americanizing and
updating "La Cage aux Folles," and following the original's
plot almost step-by-step, down to details.
In both movies a longtime gay couple run a gay nightclub,   
respectively in St.Tropez ("La Cage") and in Miami's South
Beach ("The Birdcage").
The American pair are Armand (Robin Williams) who owns and
runs the club, and drag queen Albert(Nathan Lane),its star
performer. An unexpected big rock disturbs the peace of the
high-pitched but essentially contented pond when 20-year old
Val--Armand's accidental (and straight) son from his one and
only sexual experience with a woman,--announces that he will
marry 18-year old Barbara. It happens that she is the daughter
of Senator Keeley (Gene Hackman), R-Ohio, the very rightist
co-founder and Vice-Chairman of the Coalition for Moral Order.
The Senator is running for re-election. Suddenly he is all
over the media. His sidekick Senator Jackson, the Coalition's
President and other founder, has dropped dead in the bed of an
underage black prostitute. "Black!" exclaims Senator Keeley,
as this were the straw that broke the camel's back.
(For the French viewers of "La Cage" it was a clear reference
to the notorious case of a President of the French Republic.
In 1899, Felix Faure suddenly died in his bed while exerting
himself with a habitual guest, an upper-level courtesan. To
make matters worse, the bed was at the Elysee Palace, the
Presidential residence. The scandal, fanned by politicians,
had major repercussions--but this did not prevent a major
street of Paris and a Metro station to be named after
Mr.Faure).
Fleeing the press, Mr., Mrs. (Dianne Wiest) and Miss Keeley
drive to Florida to meet the family of Val, whose father is
vaguely described by Barbara as "a cultural attache'."
Val is the apple of the couple's eyes. He loves his father and
his "mother"(Albert) and is totally at ease with their
homosexuality and lifestyles. But the senatorial visit calls
for drastic measures, for an impossible job of camouflaging
the gays as straights. The deceits become the center of the
movie, complete with mascarades, confusions, double-entendres,
gags, jokes, and quid pro quos.
"The Birdcage" is a funny film. It opens cleverly with a long,
swooping shot that takes us from the sea, past the beach, to
the street and inside the club. Those places teem with people,
mostly minimally clad. More street shots will are added
throughout the film. They baffled me at times as South Beach
is supposed to be a gay hangout yet it gave me the impression
of being laden with straight couples too. Was this done in
order not to alienate a conservative public? To single out the
protagonists? 
After this good start comes the interior of the club, with a 
dancing drag chorus singing the interminable and dull "We are
Family." In the subsequent early parts, the tempo drags
compared to what I remember of "La Cage" but picks up fairly
soon and keeps its energy.
I felt rather uneasy with the portrayal of gays, mostly the
flamboyant, self-absorbed and self-pitying Nathan Lane as "a
screaming queen"--his own words. Think how "un-queenly"
Terence Stamp was off-stage in "The Adventures of
Priscilla..." and the cliches or caricatures in "The Bird
Cage" jump out at you. However,Lane does his shtick very well. 
There was also much more feeling and warmth in "La Cage,"
especially between the two partners/lovers and in their
rapport with Val.
The US version will no doubt delight a public that's looking
for something other than screen mayhem or dumb and dumber
comedies for mindless teens. Almost certainly it will cause an
outcry in some quarters. The first salvo has already been
fired in an interesting article by cultural critic Bruce
Bawer, in the New York Times of March 10: "Why Does Hollywood
Continue to Get Gay Life Wrong?"
Though disinclined to add fuel to the fire, I must point out
that "The Birdcage, "while true to the events of "La Cage,"
deviates in spirit. It takes something away from the French
matter-of-fact and affectionate mood, replacing it with over
the top political satire. Curiously, the understanding of gay
life in the less "evolved" and more "in the closet" days of
1978 had empathy that the 1996 "Bird" lacks. It is as though
the dates had been switched.
The no-holds-barred mocking of Senator Keeley is a
diversionary tactic that could not have been better timed,
given the nature and hollow speeches of politicians on the
campaign trail in the pre-election, 1996 United States. The
ridicule is far stronger and more topical than in the original
since in Europe, then as now, the Moral Order thing has been
seen as a risible quirk rather than the force it is in this
country.
The gap between gays and the Keeley couple is made even wider
because we seem to have dirtier minds than denizens of many
other lands. There, ordinary people leer much less than we do.
Think of the casualness with which nudity has been treated for
decades in European life and media, as opposed to the
prudishness of our film ratings, while at the same time sex is
blatantly exploited in the media for selling products and
services.
Note too than in "Bird" the outrageous Agador (the Latino male
maid) and Albert are shown as quite dumb. Still, they are
small potatoes compared to Mr. and Mrs. Keeley who, in plain
language, are plain idiots (she doesn't even know what a
cultural attache' is)... and very funny in their naivete'.
It's all most unreal, always at someone's expense. Yet here
comes the big BUT. As the Birdcagers are preparing for the
Senator's family (in impossibly record time), Val instructs
Armand on heterosexual procedures from changing the decor to
changing behavior. In turn Armand instructs Albert. Scenes
that could be or are offensive can also be very comical, as
when Albert is schooled in how to speak or how to put spread
on toast. A hilarious moment is the illustration of John
Wayne's walk, which, we realize, is weirder than we ever
suspected. 
Then, in the key scenes of the meeting of the two families,   
scripter Elaine May reaches comedic heights simply with the
Senator's attempts at small-talk. Another telling touch comes
when  Keeley learns that Val's parents are gay ...  and Jewish
to boot. His reaction: "You can't be Jewish!!!"
Verbal and physical farce distract the viewer from the movie's
more reprehensible aspects. So does the outrageous,
well-orchestrated ensemble acting. The hardest role belongs to
Robin Williams. This once, he acts well below the top, in 
rather sober, straight-man fashion. He does not conceal from
us his gayness,but he does not flaunt it.
No matter what the resistance to "The Birdcage" might be, the
movie's key and kernel lies in one fleeting sentence. Speaking
to Armand about his plans and college life, Val says:"I have a
role model. I'm the only guy in my fraternity who doesn't come
from a broken home." I wish this had been underlined by the
remake, as in the French model. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE BIRDCAGE is a well constructed one joke movie that audiences
seem to love and that some critics like and others don't.  This critic
admired Robin Williams's performance as well as some of the minor
actors, but found the film's depiction of gay people more insulting to
them than funny.  Then again, perhaps I am too sensitive or maybe I
just want more from a movie than caricature.
     THE BIRDCAGE is based on the French film LA CAGE AUX FOLLES.  Its
premise is that Armand (Robin Williams) and Albert (Nathan Lane) are a
happy gay couple who have been together for decades and who have one
son, Val (Dan Futterman).  Albert is Armand's star in his transvestite
nightclub.  Although the other male singers in the club are quite
convincing as females, Albert isn't and looks more like a male actor
trying to play a transvestite.  This is consistent with Lane's
performance.  Although I found Williams believable as gay, Lane
overacted so much that I never found his character believable.
     Val announces that he is going to marry Barbara (Calista
Flockhart), who is the daughter of the founder of The Coalition for
Moral Order, conservative Ohio Republican Senator Kevin Keeley (Gene
Hackman).  It seems that, whereas Armand and Albert are a real family,
the Republicans are all hypocrites.  Senator Keeley is backing fellow
Moral Order Senator Jackson for President until Jackson is killed in
the bed of an underaged black prostitute.  The screen adaptation by
Elaine May ridicules Senator Dole by name many times in order to make
the movie topical and to make sure that audience knows they are serious
about the Republican hypocrisy point.
     Val wants to keep his family's sexual orientation from the Senator
and his wife (Dianne Wiest) so he gets his Dad (Armand) to remove all
of the pornographic art from their apartment, which makes his Mom
(Albert) faint because she misses her pornography.  Albert decides to
become a man again and play the part of Val's uncle while Val's
biological mother, whom Val has never met, is asked to return to be to
his Mom for an evening.
     Let's cut to chase.  The reason I do not like the show is the
repeated single joke.  Take, for example, Armand's teaching Albert to
act masculine.  Albert keeps sticking his pinkie towards the sky while
drinking only to have Armand slap it down.  Every time he hits the
pinkie, the audience roars.  Every time Albert use the female pronoun
to refer to himself, the audience goes crazy.  In general, every
exaggerated gay behavior sends the audience wild.  Albert keeps
claiming he is going to faint, he drives 20 mph for miles with his
parking brake on, etc., ad nauseam.  I found the antics demeaning to
gays and highly repetitious.
     Albert and Armand have a "houseboy" (Hank Azaria) who is a gay
Guatemalan.  The audience gets to laugh at him a lot, and I do mean
"at" him, because he can not walk in shoes without falling on everyone
and because he is portrayed as both a stupid character and one whose
sole, supposed charm is that he has a strange accent.  This character
is the most insulting of them all.  Director Mike Nichols should have
been ashamed to have used such cheap shots.
     There are some lines I liked.  When Armand is trying to teach
Albert how to act straight, he says, "What do you think about those
Dolphins?"  Albert, trying his best to act macho, answers in an
attempted deeper voice with, "How do you think I feel? Betrayed?
Bewildered?"  In another scene, Armand describes his predicament as,
"It's like riding a psychotic horse toward a burning stable."  Senator
Keeley does not trust the American public saying, "People in this
country aren't interested in details.  They only trust headlines."
     There are two aspects of the show that deserve special mention.
The cinematography (Emmanuel Lubezki) and the sets (Cheryl Carasik) are
garish and great.  Full of bright colors of limes, yellows, and roses.
The costumes, especially those of Armand's done by Stephen Shubin, are
both outlandish and visually compelling.  Elvis would have killed to
have Armand's outfit of extremely wide white linen pants topped with an
elaborate black and gold jacket and with shoes straight out of "The
Arabian Nights."
     Today we have the Internet Movie Data Base to answer every
question we ever want to ask about stars, as well, of course, as a way
to find old reviews.  There is one actress in the movie that plays the
secretary to Val's biological mother.  I believe I wrote down her name
correctly as Francesca Cruz.  She is not listed anywhere on the Web,
which really bothers me.  I know I have seen her somewhere before but I
can not figure out where.  If anyone knows, I wish they would drop me a
line.  She has a trivial part in the film, it is just that I can not
figure out where I saw her before.
     THE BIRDCAGE runs a little too long 1:58 thanks to editor Arthur
Schmidt.  The film is rated R for some mild language.  There is no sex,
nudity or violence.  The film should be fine for teenagers.  Although I
do not recommend this show, I should point out in fairness that my wife
liked it and was laughing right along with most of the rest of the
audience.  I suspect the film will make a bundle.  I give the movie *
1/2 for William's performance plus the well done minor performances of
Flockhart and Wiest, but I found little worth rewarding in the rest of
the cast and found the script demeaning to gays and insulting to
Republicans.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Joan Ellis
"The Birdcage" is showing its age. This latest take on "La
Cage aux Folles" is curiously flat in spite of the very big
talents of Robin Williams, Nathan Lane, Gene Hackman, and Dianne
Wiest. Elaine May and Mike Nichols have teamed up to update the
dialogue and direction. Cast and production team just couldn't be
better--so what's wrong?
Start with the story. Armand (Robin Williams) and Albert
(Nathan Lane) have raised Val (Dan Futterman), Armand's son by
his one experience with a woman 20 years back. Now Val has
announced the unthinkable: he is going to marry a girl, and the
girl is the daughter of Senator and Mrs. Keely. 
The senator, a giant in "The Coalition for Moral Order," has 
recently announced his support for presidential candidate Eli
Jackson, who has just been found dead in the bed of a black
prostitute who heard her customer's last words: "Your money's on
the dresser, Chocolate." The senator and his wife bring along an
appropriate load of anxiety when they arrive in South Beach to
meet the parents of their daughter's intended. Will Val's parents
be put off by Keely's embarrassing endorsement of a fallen leader
of "family values?"
In South Beach, meanwhile, Armand is staging an elaborate
charade for his son. To create a mainstream family, he enlists
Val's mother Katherine (Christine Baranski) to play her real role
and tries unsuccessfully to hide Albert, who refuses to be left
out of the proceedings. 
The earlier film and stage play did all this with a grand
blend of hilarity and pathos. In 1996, the assumptions seem all
wrong. The decade has given us state-of-the-moment drag films
("Priscilla, Queen of the Desert," "Paris is Burning") that
advanced public understanding of the transvestite culture.
Watching Albert try to walk like John Wayne and keep a stiff
wrist is a little like watching Butterfly McQueen play Prissy in
"Gone With the Wind." The world has moved beyond the
stereotype--a little, at least. 
Robin Williams responds by playing Armand with quiet
dignity. Dianne Wiest and Gene Hackman have a field day
straight-facing the Moral Coalition couple that Elaine May
created to bring the story into the 90s. Mr. Hackman, just by
mouthing right-wing pieties without embellishment, pierces the
skin of the hypocrisy. Christine Baranski jumps into the pretense
with high spirits, only to stand mute when her role is dropped.
Nathan Lane's caricature performance is part of the problem.
Topical it may be, but the warmth is gone. There isn't a
scintilla of evidence of real affection between Armand and
Albert, no feel of their love for Val or his for them. The film
is powered only by the desperate need to fool the Keelys. Asking
too much? Perhaps. But if this modernized, brittle version of "La
Cage" is very funny, it is also without heart. On the road to
topical comedy, it lost its power to be affecting.     


Author
Michael Redman
This remake of "La Cage aux Folles" features a gay couple pretending to be
straight in order to pull the wool over the eyes of their son's future
in-laws. The couple (Robin Williams and Nathan Lane) are about as archetypal,
or as the less kind might put it  stereotypical, gays possible. Williams owns
a nightclub featuring drag queens where his partner performs as the featured
star. They live above the club in what could not possibly be mistaken as a
heterosexual abode.
Williams is excellent as should be no surprise. Gene Hackman as right-wing
potential father-in-law is refreshing in one of his few comedic roles. The
real star is Lane. His attempted transformation from one of the most obviously
gay men in the world to the straight-shooting uncle is hilarious.
Perhaps it is a personal failing on my part, but the crying and screaming drag
queen faux high drama just grates on my nerves and the first few minutes of
this film are filled with it. Luckily (for me at least), it doesn't last long
and the rest of the story focuses on the relationship between the men, their
son and the deception.
The question of stereotypes is a touchy one. These guys personify the
homophobic gay image. You can almost hear the swishing. If you think that they
are supposed to be representative of every gay man in the world, you'll be
outraged. But if you can accept the view is that this is a movie about gay
individuals, you'll love it. Your choice.
[This appeared in the 4/25/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Ed Powell
Starring:  Robin Williams, Nathan Lane, and Gene Hackman.
Directed by Mike Nichols, a United Artists release.
This is a terrific movie for the 1990s.  "The Birdcage" is a tale about a
young man (whose parents are a gay couple (played by Robin Williams and
Nathan Lane) and he has never met his biological mother), who meets a
young woman (whose father is an ultra-conservative Republican senator
(played by Gene Hackman) and mother looks and sounds like she came
straight out of the world of "Leave it to Beaver") and they decide to get
married.
The problem is that the woman's parents want to meet the man's parents. In
order to keep the woman's parents from flat-out going insane at the
concept of the inlaws being a gay couple (as a stereotypical conservative
Republican is want to do), they try (with very limited success) to make
everything seem like a normal, "moral ideal American" family.
Robin Williams proves once again that he is a great dramatic actor as well
as a foot-stompingly funny comedian, Nathan Lane played his role as a man
acting as a woman so well, it scared me, and Gene Hackman is, as always,
good in anything.
Although I have never seen "La Cage Aux Follies", on which this film was
based, I imagine that an extensive rewrite was required to make this film
a
fable for the 1990s.  We could all learn a little something about
tolerance
and accepting lifestyles that are unlike our own from this film.  Bravo to
the writers, bravo to director Mike Nichols, and bravo to the actors and
actresses who made this film an entertaining work of art.

Author
Ben Hoffman
          It was way back in 1978 that La Cage Aux Folles, the
hilarious French film about homosexuals, the transvestite nightclub,
the owner, his partner (in more ways than one), first arrived here.
It was an instant critical and box office success.  That could only
mean one thing: a sequel.  Three years later that arrived but the
truism about sequels held and so that was an instant flop.  Since
everyone thinks "I can do anything better than you," another sequel
arrived 3 years later and it was an abomination.  That brings us to
today's version,  "The birdcage ."   directed by Mike Nichols and
oooh!. Vive la difference..
          Nichols'  version brings the story not merely up to date but
demonstrates the difference between the "family values."  rightwing
politicians are pushing and what the value of a family really is.
And Nichols' direction plus Elaine May's script are right on target.
          About the cast:  Everyone is exactly right; the casting is
perfect.  So much has been said and written about Robin Williams (who
here plays the father of a "straight" son) it is almost superfluous to
say more.  But in a couple of seconds he can take you from laughter to
tears and back.  Would that there were more fathers like Armand
Goldman, the gay father.
          In the most wonderful performance of a very successful
career in cinema, the one who got to me as the most brilliant was
Dianne Weist as Louise Keeley, the wife of the conservative Senator
(Gene Hackman) who are the parents of the lovely Barbara (Calista
Flockhart).  Special mention should be made, too, of Dan Futterman.
who plays Armand's loving, devoted son to his father and father's
partner,  Albert (Nathan Lane.)  Lane, who  is mostly known for his
work on the Broadway stage, is terrific.  The whole movie is
terrific.  Did I like it?  No, I loved it..
