Title
Review for Musketeer, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
David N. Butterworth
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A young French boy sees his parents killed before his eyes by Tim Roth, oops...I
mean, an evil man. He vows revenge on that man and is taught the ways of the
Musketeer by some old dude who used to be one himself? Anyway, fourteen years go
by and...arrgh, well, you know the rest...swish-swish-zzzzzzz! 
CRITIQUE:
This is a pretty bad movie. Let's see, where should I start? Okay, first of all,
the story is just plain boring. It's not original, is entirely predictable and
lacks energy. Okay, what's next? Acting, you say. Hmmmm, well, the main actor,
Justin Chambers, is basically an uncharismatic version of Chris O'Donnell but
with less range (think about that!), and Mena Suvari, is just plain off. Not as
bad as Thora Birch was in DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, but entirely miscast, with bad
deliveries, awful sequences and a piss-poor accent that comes and goes. Now I'm
not sure if this was Ms. Suvari's fault or the director's, but I've definitely
seen her at a much higher level than in this film. The only semi-saving grace
actor-wise is Tim Roth as the irrepressible "bad guy", but once again, it's not
something that we haven't seen before...a thousand times...by the same guy!!
Tim, please...for the love of God, beg your agent to ask the marketplace for
some modern day "American roles" for you as a "nice guy" in a romantic comedy or
something. Stretch, dude...stretch!! We all know that you can do much better
than this gunk. Alright, what else was bad in this film? Oh yeah, the score!
Yikes, how's about taking it down a few notches there, fellas? This thing blares
in your ear whenever it feels the need to accentuate a certain scene, but
actually does little more than annoy. I think it's important for the man behind
the music to recognize that this film isn't a "real epic" by any stretch of the
imagination. It's a fluffy rehashed cake-walk created by some "shrewd" studio
heads who decided to take advantage of the whole "kung-fu" phenomenon in films,
and test it out on an old classic. Dudes...you failed all around! (keep
reading)
The editing is also pretty shoddy in this movie, the dialogue banal and stilted
and the plot problems...plentiful! (why does the guy on top of the horse
carriage just stand there when his opponent takes forever scampering his way
back to the top? why don't they just cut the mouseketeer's rope at the top of
the tower, instead of jumping down on their own chords and fighting him while
hanging? why doesn't anybody look a day older, when the sequence says "14 years
later"? (at least...change your shirt, man!) Keep in mind that I have never
strayed away from championing certain movies that are created simply for the
sake of a "fun time", but this flick just didn't cut it for me. It was boring
for stretches, the acting was atrocious at times (the "romantic" scene between
Suvari and Chambers next to the lake reminded me of plays in high school which
made you cringe), there was little reason to care for anyone and since when were
the Musketeers fat?
I will give the movie this much, and that is that its main reason for being (its
"raison-d'etre", as the French would say), its fight sequences, do come through
despite the lack of their numbers in the film. I was hoping that the movie would
be packed with cool stuntwork as promoted in its trailer, but what you see
there, are essentially the snippets from the two major (and cool) swashbuckling
sequences from the film. The first comes right at the beginning of the movie,
while the other essentially finishes the film off, hanging from the tower and
juggling off ladders. The ladder sequence itself is a definite keeper but
unfortunately the rest of the movie is just regurgitated crap. And can anyone
please tell me how Catherine Deneuve got her name placed at the top of this
film's credits? Hullo? The film is called THE MUSKETEER and stars a dude name
Justin Chambers. Deneuve is barely in this movie! Ugh, just another small thing
that annoyed me about this trash.
Now say it together, gang: "All for one, and one for all...we vow to stay away
from it all!!" Thank me later.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
A Knight's Tale (7/10) - American Outlaws (5/10) - Crouching Tiger, Hidden
Dragon (7/10) - The Matrix (8/10) - The Replacement Killers (6/10) - Romeo Must
Die (3/10) - Shanghai Noon (6/10)

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Justin Chambers, Mena Suvari, Stephen Rea,
Tim Roth, Catherine Deneuve. Directed by Peter Hyams.
Rated PG-13.
Alexander Dumas' The Three Musketeers is one of the
most often-adapted literary works, and for good
reason: the swashbuckler is a legend rather than just
a story. Perhaps The Musketeer, a new film that
"reimagines" the novel in the spirit and style of The
Matrix, is one adaptation too many. It's just awful:
spiritless, silly and unforgivably boring,
transforming the timeless classic into a mish-mash of
old-as-time clichés and incoherent, repetitive action
sequences.
This time, D'Artagnan is played by Calvin Klein model
Justin Chambers, who can't even pronounce his
character's name. As a boy, he watched his father get
killed by Febre (Tim Roth), a lackey of power-hungry
Cardinal Richelieu. He vowed to have vengeance. After
undergoing intense training under an expert swordsman,
he goes looking for his enemy.
On his quest, he embroils himself in a struggle for
control at the highest levels of the French
government. The Royal Musketeers have lost their
gusto, what with their jobs being taken over by the
Cardinal's own guards. Only a few loyal swashbuckers
remain, among them Athos and Portos (who are only
figureheads in this movie). Together with D'Artagnan,
they fight to extricate the Queen (Catherine Deneuve)
from the traps that Febre and Richelieu are trying to
plant. Oh, and as an afterthought, D'Artagnan falls in
love with the poor maid at the local inn (Mena
Suvari). Just thought I'd mention that.
Now, look: I don't know whose idea this was, but
whoever is responsible deserves a severe
tongue-lashing. I have nothing against "modernizing"
classic works of literature - at the very least, they
can inspire viewers to actually read the book - but
films as dull as this have no positive side effects.
Director Peter Hyams, known for such masterpieces of
modern cinema as Timecop and End of Days, has
jettisoned everything that was great about Dumas'
masterwork: the sense of excitement, cause, and
camaraderie. Instead, we get impressively
choreographed but somehow vacuous, uninvolving action
sequences that emerge from emptiness and lead to
nothing. When the musketeers finally get to holler
"All for one, and one for all," I could have sworn
that was Dumas rolling in his grave that I felt.
Maybe the reason for the utter lack of suspense here
is the Hyams's tone, which is unreasonably dark and
brooding when you consider the Reader's Digest
condensed version of the story that he gives us. It's
as though anything that may have been construed as
"fun" was purposely expunged from the production. The
joylessness of the proceedings, from the oppressively
shady lighting to the mechanical fight scenes, can be
felt in every frame.
Chambers can't act; Suvari, Roth and Deneuve can, but
aren't given the chance. And when push comes to shove,
the use of stunt doubles is distractingly obvious,
though at least Roth gets to play a villain without
having to wear an ape suit.
Some movies seem sloppy and careless, clearly made for
a quick buck. With The Musketeer we get the sense that
it was meticulously crafted to be awful. The film is
intricate, stylish and precise, hitting the wrong note
every single time. 

Author
Dennis Schwartz
Susan Granger's review of "THE MUSKETEER" (Universal Pictures)
   Hollywood launches another assault on classic literature with this
$50 million adaptation of Alexandre Dumas's novel that's strong on action but
weak on drama, fusing Hong Kong martial arts with 17th century swordplay. The
story chronicles the adventures of  the dashing D'Artagnan (Justin Chambers)  as
he leaves his village of Gascogne, headed for Paris, to join King Louis XIII's
elite guard, the Royal Musketeers, and to search for the man who killed his
parents 14 years earlier. This puts him in conflict with the formidable Febre
(Tim Roth), vicious henchman for conniving Cardinal Richelieu (Stephen Rea). The
traditional Musketeer trio - Aramis (Nick Moran), Athos (Jan Gregor Kremp) and
Porthos (Steve Speirs) - don't offer much help so he turns to the feisty
Francesca (Mena Suvari), chambermaid to the Queen of France (Catherine Deneuve).
Scripter Gene Quintano and director-cinematographer Peter Hyams are primarily
interested in the derring-do, as evidenced by choreographer Xin-Xin Xiong's
elaborate - but not original - stunts, including a fast-paced stagecoach chase,
a tavern brawl on rolling barrels, high-wire acrobatics with the combatants
dangling from ropes, and a ladder-fight sequence. Filmed in southern France, the
scenery, sets and costumes are spectacular, but the lighting is too dark and
editing is filled with choppy, restless MTV'ish cuts. As the swashbuckling
D'Artagnan, bland Calvin Klein model Justin Chambers buckles where he should be
swashing, totally lacking on-screen charisma, not to mention acting skill. Mena
Suvari, so impressive in "American Beauty," seems like a contemporary interloper
in the royal court. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Musketeer" is a
cinematic but shallow 3. "All for one and one for all"? Not this time 'round.

Author
Homer Yen
If Alexandre Dumas only knew that his most famous
work, "The Three Musketeers," was going to be adapted
into umpteen big screen variations, his conversation
with Hollywood might go something like this: "I'll
take $100,000 for every good adaptation and a million
dollars for every bad adaptation."  Well, with this
latest effort, Dumas would be a millionaire.  
Actually, that's a bit unfair, for this installment is
not terrible.  It's a pretty looking film.  There is
obviously great care taken to evoke the 17th-century
French atmosphere from its verdant countryside to its
beautiful castles, from the regal nobility to the
gloomy street urchins.  It also boasts some
imaginative action sequences.  
But from a story telling point of view, it's not any
more rousing or dramatic than any of its predecessors.
 In fact, the story of the Musketeers seems so
familiar that even when they sound their battle cry of
"all for one and one for all," it is practically an
expected occurrence rather than a spirit-lifting
charge.  Without new dramatic juice, it's like being
served leftovers with only a new piece of garnish.
That garnish, however, is the wild sword fights.  The
trailers for this Musketeer adaptation have touted it
as a completely reimagined piece of work, which is
largely attributed to this.  There are about a dozen
or so battles, and the incredible athleticism
displayed seemingly requires a black belt in martial
arts, an ability to fence while blindfolded, as well
as two years experience performing with the Cirque du
Soleil troupe.  It's not surprising that there are 25
stunt doubles.
The film's plot revolves around D'artagnan (Justin
Chambers), who as a child, sees his parents
slaughtered by the evil Febre (Tim Roth) and vows
revenge.  He grows up wanting to be a Musketeer,
protectors of the King, and eventually learns about
the machinations of Cardinal Richelieu (Stephen Rea),
who is trying to undermine his highness in an attempt
to seize power.
The word "Musketeer" should conjure up a vision of
heroism.  But Chambers-as-D'artagnan lacks neither the
needed heft nor the charisma to fill the shoes of a
hero.  He delivers all of his lines with a similar
amount of intensity whether it's "You're beautiful" or
"Don't fight me, for you will die."  But casting this
pretty-boy suggests that the movie studio is looking
to appeal to an age group that watches Dawson's Creek,
who perhaps are more concerned with good looks rather
than a moving story.  
Yet, it's easy for D'artagnan to lose focus as during
the course of his comeuppance, he meets a slew of
ill-defined characters.  They include a feisty ingenue
and love interest (Mena Suvari); a despondent
Musketeer army led by Athos, Portos, and Aramis; a
sympathetic queen (Catherine Deneuve), as well as the
scheming Cardinal and arch-enemy Febre.  The story
thus becomes needlessly complicated, saddled with
unnecessary scenes.  
Again, the main draw is the fight sequences, and most
are neat to watch.  A climactic battle atop a series
of careening giant ladders, for example, is something
that most American moviegoers have never seen.  Yet,
the action is so over-the-top that instead of
achieving a sense of escapism, it becomes somewhat
absurd and goofy.  In one scene, D'artagnan's steed
even collapses before he does.  
We can live with the so-so characterizations and can
likely enjoy the fighting sequences.  But we needed a
more compact and affecting story.  Someone has
forgotten that the pen is mightier than the sword.


Author
Steve Rhodes
The bland lead the bland in THE MUSKETEER, the three-thousandth screen
adaptation of Alexandre Dumas's novel.  This time this twist comes from Hong
Kong martial arts master Xin Xin Xiong's action choreography.  And I do mean
"twist," since he has the musketeer twirl his opponents to death, causing them
to die more from dizziness than sword wounds.  
Director Peter Hyams (END OF DAYS), working from a DOA script by Gene Quintano
(POLICE ACADEMY 3 and 4), isn't able to coax a decent performance out of any of
the actors.  Justin Chambers, Jennifer Lopez's fiancé in THE WEDDING PLANNER, is
horribly miscast as D'Artagnan.  His utterly lifeless and charmless work,
however, is a bit better than the pathetic performances by the other musketeers,
Jan Gregor Kremp as Athos, Steven Spiers as Porthos and Nick Moran as Aramis. 
The strong supporting cast is wasted.  Mena Suvari (AMERICAN BEAUTY), who can be
so impressive in contemporary stories, is embarrassingly bad in this costume
drama, playing Constance Bonacieux, a commoner who is a confidant of the queen. 
Stephen Rea gives an unintentionally funny performance as Cardinal Richelieu. 
Normally reliable Tim Roth, as the villain Febre, turns in a subpar piece of
acting that is, nevertheless, head and shoulders above everyone else's.  Even
Catherine Deneuve is flat as the queen.
If you close your eyes and listen to David Arnold's stirring music, you can
convince yourself that the movie has some merit.  Just don't make the mistake of
opening them again.  
"You have an interesting fighting style," one of D'Artagnan's enemies remarks. 
"Where did you acquire it?"  I wanted D'Artagnan to answer that he discovered it
while watching Chinese movies.  Now that would have been funny.  And since the
movie failed miserably as an action drama, any attempts at humor would certainly
have been appreciated.
THE MUSKETEER runs a long 1:46.  It is rated PG-13 for "intense action violence
and some sexual material," and would be acceptable for kids around 6 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, who gave the movie **, said it was like "Jackie Chan
meets CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON in the 17th century."  He liked some of the
action sequences but, overall, rated the film as just okay.  The more he thought
about the movie; the less he liked it.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Karina Montgomery
While it may seem petty, in light of this week's events, to decry this
movie as an abomination, well, that is what it felt like sitting in the
theatre.  The Musketeer starts out in an average enough fashion, with
slightly wooden dialogue, Tim Roth over acting, super tight shots of abrupt
movements.  Then, an appalling 1970's student film takes over for the
opening credits.  Apparently paying Xin Xin Xiong (the fight choreographer,
whose name was the only one billed in the previews) left no cash for the
titles.  My companions giggled uncomfortably during the weird and horrible
early 80's TV movie titles.  Still, chin up, we will survive this - and
besides, the teaser portion of the movie looked just fine.  Key word:
Looked.  Please note the past tense.
Then the movie reverted back to normal.  The sucking began slowly,
gradually, imperceptibly.  An out of focus shot here, an overly dark action
sequence there, inexplicable behavior and silly dialogue scattered like
breadcrumbs in the dark woods.  It was still the first real scene in the
film, it could just have been a ham-handed bid at mystery.
The first fight scene is elaborate, almost cartoonish in its
fifty-moves-where-one-will-do, with fingerhold balance absurdity.
Impressive hiding of the wires, however - it was so dark in this scene they
could have been suspended from nautical ropes.  Was it dark?  You bet -
almost totally Asian stunt team (according to the credits) probably did not
resemble their white French Gallic patrician characters very much, so the
director opts for a muddy too-close soup of stupidity.
The director, Peter Hyams, is also the cinematographer (in a low attempt to
be Robert Rodriguez, I suppose) and his name set off clanging Notre
Dame-size bells in my head - but from what?  End of Days, that wasn't so
bad (but now that I think about it, it was dark), Timecop - and The Relic.
Long the butt of my movie crowd's derision, The Relic was only used as an
object of positive comparison after Phantoms came out.  Similarly, The
Musketeer is only watchable when compared to the truly unwatchable, like
Battlefield Earth.  We did have a lot of laughs watching this film, and it
is extremely MST3K-friendly, but man is it rank.
Enter the dame, modern American Virgin/Beauty/Pie's Mena Suvari, whose
period acting is comparable to Winona Ryder's.  "Sexual tension" is played
as flat wit after being translated into various languages.  Then it gets
worse.  Continuity is non-existent - bad guys disappear when they are
dispatched like a Playstation game, and turn up with the same logic-free
silliness.  By the end we were holding our pounding heads in agony (like
Relic companion SJ's forehead bruise after pounding his fist there
repeatedly during that film), rolling our eyes, gasping in horror, and
inserting our own superior dialogue.  Instead of calling in, say, William
Goldman or Carrie Fisher, apparently all the script rewrites were done by
Koko (the gorilla) - didn't Cardinal Richlieu at one point say "drink drink
apple me kill D'Artagnan?"
Bad dialogue, dark dark scenes, Stephen Rea & Tim Roth yawning through
their scenes, Catherine Deneuve looking like she shot up heroin just to
tolerate the job, and D'Artagnan (The Wedding Planner's Justin Chambers)
almost irritatingly serious throughout.
Good points:  production design, art department, locations, makeup,
wardrobe, all fantastic.  The ladder scene (even if it is ridiculous, it's
still extremely cool.)
Bad points:  Everything else.  The entire movie is a flimsy and needlessly
complex construct to justify the admittedly cool ladder scene.  FYI:  The
Ladder Scene is one hour, 45 minutes into the film.  Do yourself a favor:
buy a ticket to Rat Race, watch these 5 minutes of the Musketeer, and then
go see Rat Race.
Hong Kong actioners generally don't need such dense and elaborate plots to
show off cool fight choreography.  The Must-Not-Hear is low on fights, big
on badly explained 17th century French politics, and long on suck.  The
HTML code on the home page for The Musketeer would be a better screenplay.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
These reviews (c) 2001 Karina Montgomery.  Please feel free to forward
but just credit the reviewer in the text.  Thanks.
cinerina@flash.net
Check out previous reviews at:
http://www.cinerina.com
http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com - the Online Film Critics Society
http://www.hsbr.net/reviews/karina/ - Hollywood Stock Exchange Brokerage
Resource
http://www.mediamotions.com
http://www.capitol-city.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Universal Pictures/Miramax Films
 Director:  Peter Hyams
 Writer:  Gene Quintano, novel "The Three Musketeers" by
Alexandre Dumas pere
 Cast: Catherine Deneuve, Mena Suvari, Stephen Rea, Tim Roth, 
 Screened at: Sony Lincoln Sq. NYC 9/4/01
   When Rudyard Kipling exclaimed in 1889, "Oh East is East and
West is West and never the twain shall meet," he could not have
seen Peter Hyams swashbuckler, "The Musketeer,"  but
somehow he must have known that if director/cinematographer
Peter Hyams were to attempt a marriage of the Western
swordplay in the classic Dumas pere tale with Eastern
oscillations, a swift divorce would follow.  For this version of the
action drama situated in Seventeenth Century France, Hyams
seeks to put his original spin by piggy-backing on the wild
success of Ang Lee's "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon," but
instead of employing crackerjack choreographer Yuen Wo-Ping--
who performed similar chores on "The Matrix"--he utilizes the
talents of the second-tier dance-director Xin-Xin Xiong, whose
claims to fame include jobs as stunt-and-action coordinator on
"Time and Tide," "The Blacksheep Affair," and "Double Team."
   If East does not meet West in "The Musketeer," all would not
be lost.  Unfortunately, the film is as tasteful and inspiring as a
17th Century French crepe served at Lutece restaurant in the
year 2001.  Not that swashbuckling is necessarily outdated
today, particularly when there's a whole generation of young
movie buffs who never had the pleasure of watching Errol Flynn
before he deteriorated into the murk and fog of illegal drugs,
heavy drinking and chain smoking when still in his forties,  or
Tyrone Power, who could have used his incredible good looks to
bring "Solomon and Sheba" to life had he not died in Madrid
while filming the Biblical epic.  What's wrong with this version is
just about everything: there are narrative gaps, inane
performances by actors who mumble their words as though
thinking appropriately enough in French but verbalizing in
English, poor scripting, an editing nightmare, generic music, lazy
direction, and ho-hum choreography.
   What should give the Dumas classic--as interpreted in as
shallow a manner as possible by Gene Quintano's screenplay--
its verve, its pizazz, its charm would be a more than simply perky
performance by the lead actor in the role a guy with aspirations to
become the most famous of King Louis XIII's elite guard,
D'Artagnan.  But when Justin Chambers, spotted for his more
appropriate role in Barry Levinson's "Liberty Heights," says the
most famous of Dumas's line, "All for one and one for all," the
audience would not be blamed for thinking he's talking about the
weather.  Though he has boyish good looks, he's hardly the
magnetic type that would appeal instantly to the equally
antiseptic Mena Suvari in the role of the French queen's
chambermaid, Francesca, but who was born instead to excel in
the more suitable guise of the object of Kevin Spacey's lust in
"American Beauty."  As Francesca, Ms. Suvari comes across in
this modernized adaptation as a liberated woman who, when
accidentally spotted naked in her bathtub by a blushing
D'Artagnan, teases, "Haven't you ever seen a naked woman
before?"  Yet she turns flush when D'Artagnan in a moment of
forgetfulness appears to her in frontal nudity (his back to us in
the audience) and turns around, shocked, though not without
some admiration of the man's supposed accoutrements.
   "The Musketeer" begins when young D'Artagnan witnesses the
violent death of his unarmed father, a former musketeer, in the
arms of the vicious Febre (Tim Roth--who is terrific and  the only
fellow in this film worth watching).  Vowing to seek revenge, he
gets his chance fourteen years later as a grown man seeking
admittance to the legion of the king's guards.  "The Musketeer"
turns road-and-buddy movie as D'Artagnan begins his odyssey
to Paris (the southwestern French town of Sarlat standing for the
City of Lights in the 1600's).  Meeting up with a less-than-colorful
stack of opponents, he cuts his way to the capital, searches out
Aramis (Nick Moran), Athos (Jan Gregor Kremp) and Porthos
(Steve Speirs), the most elite of the elite guards, finding them
demoralized, without commission.  Allying up with Francesca, he
moves to save the queen--who has been captured by the
conscience-less Febre.
   You come to a movie like this for swordfights, but instead of
seeing an Errol Flynn duplicating his first swashbuckling role in
Michael Curtiz's 1935 film "Captain Blood," we get the usual
MTV-style editing backed up by David Arnold's incredibly banal
score, with the result that we wonder why Mr. Chambers needed
to develop his fencing talent for a whole month as he claims to
have done.  Nor do we quite understand the role of Cardinal
Richelieu (Stephen Rea--who was a lot better in his Irish roles 
such as "Danny Boy" and "Michael Collins and in his element in
"The Crying Game").  Worst of all is the role spun out by director
Hyams for the great Catherine Deneuve, given first credit despite
her minuscule part as the queen of France--who at one point
disguises herself as a commoner, plays cards with the
unwashed, and knocks over one of her enemies with her bare
hands and legs.  Deneuve, already smarting from being woefully
miscast as a factory worker in Lars von Trier's "Dance in the
Dark," does not help her rep any in this travesty.
   Go ahead.  See the movie, then rent a video of "Captain
Blood," and watch how Errol Flynn, also in his first role as a
fencer, is shown in a better light fifty-six years ago than Hyams is
able to conjure up with all of today's special effects techniques at
his disposal.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 98 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Karina Montgomery
Alexandre Dumas meets Hong Kong action with newcomer Justin Chambers
reprising the oft-played character of dashing swordsman D'Artagnon in
director Peter Hyam's adventure "The Musketeer."
For some reason that I may figure out later, I don't know why the time,
money and effort were put into the making of "The Musketeer." It may be
that someone had the clever idea of combining the Dumas characters and
story with the current enamor with the action work of Hong Kong imports
like this film's Xin-Xin Xiong ("Once Upon a Time in China") and Yuen
Woo-Ping from "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon." The result is a mix of
genres that don't mesh well.
Elements of the Ritz Brothers-style comedy (for those few who remember that
comedic troupe from the 1939 "The Three Musketeers"), the Man with No Name
from "A Fistful of Dollars" (D'Artagnan demands that the bad guys apologize
to his horse in a direct ref to the Clint Eastwood spaghetti western) and
Hong Kong action choreography are all utilized in the original script by
Gene Quintano. The result is an action flick that bears little resemblance
to its source material while it makes contemporary that material in an
effort to grab the "Matrix" crowd. Alexandre Dumas may well be rolling in
his grave if he knows what was done to his classic oeuvre and characters.
The real problem with the "The Musketeer" lies in the casting of the two
lead, romantically intertwined characters, D'Artagnan and Francesca (Mena
Suvari). Chambers has the boyishly handsome good looks for the character, a
la Chris O'Donnell, but lacks any onscreen charisma. Suvari has the
doe-eyed, pretty looks as the chambermaid who has the ear of the queen, but
she, too, does not have the chemistry to command the screen. If "The
Musketeer" makes them any money, they should invest in acting lessons.
Stronger performers may have helped to raise the bar on this one.
The supporting cast is, on the surface, impressive. Catherine Denueve plays
the Queen of France and lends her character an air of royalty, dignity and
humor, especially when she plays off of D'Artagnan's mentor, Planchet
(Jean-Pierre Castaldi, who reminds of Andre the Giant in "The Princess
Bride). Stephen Rea looks good in the part of the conniving usurper
Cardinal Richelieu, but is given very little to help flesh out his
character. Tim Roth is the kind of bad guy you love to hate as the
Cardinal's chief henchman, Febre. He is so bad he makes Simon Legree look
like a boy scout. The rest of the players, particularly the three
musketeers Aramis (Nick Moran, "Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels"),
Porthos (Steve Spiers) and Athos (Jan Gregor Kremp), are background fodder
whose role is to come to D'Artagnan's aid when needed.
Peter Hyam's does double duty as director and cinematography and may be too
stretched to do both well. A stronger hand at the helm could have helped
the mediocre performances of the leads and better utilized his veteran
thesps. Photography is straightforward action fare that goes through all
the appropriate action flick motions - D'Artagnan takes on a tavern full of
thugs and bests them single-handed; he fights a gang of Febre's henchmen
aboard a speeding coach to protect the queen (with the obligatory branches
hanging over the road); he goes one on one with his lifelong enemy, Febre,
who murdered D'Artagnan's folks years before. It is all routine stuff.
The renowned wire work developed by the Hong Kong action masters is used to
artificial effect as the players leap, defying gravity, up walls and from
horse to horse. It works in a sci-fi film like "The Matrix" or in a
classical fantasy like "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" but just calls
attention to itself in "The Musketeer." At one point I could swear I saw
the stunt wire being used. It did not make me a believer and I am very
disappointed. With a run time of 106 minutes it should have been more like
80 and I give it a D.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
And now the high-flying Hong Kong style of filmmaking has made its way
down to the classics, and it isn't pretty.  This time out the nod to
Asia goes by way of France in the excruciating bland and lukewarm
production of The Musketeer, a version of Dumas's The Three Musketeers. 
By bringing in popular Asian actor/stunt coordinator Xing Xing Xiong --
whose only prior American attempts at stunt choreography have been the
laughable Van Damme vehicle Double Team and the Dennis Rodman cinematic
joke Simon Sez -- our Musketeers are thrown into the air to do their
fighting.  The end result is a tepid and dull action/adventure rip-off
that stinks of Indiana Jones and bad Asian kung fu.
The story is so simple my grandmother could have adapted the
screenplay.  D'Artagnan (Justin Chambers) is the vengeful son of a slain
Musketeer.  He travels to Paris to join the Royal Musketeers and find
the man that killed his parents.  In Paris, he meets the cunning
Cardinal Richelieu (Stephen Rea), who is trying to overthrow the King,
and Richelieu's man-in-black associate Febre (Tim Roth), the killer of
his folks.  He finds the Musketeers in Paris disbanded and drunk, so he
rounds up Aramis (Nick Moran), Athos (Jan Gregor Kremp) and Porthos
(Steven Spiers) to free the Musketeer's wrongfully imprisoned leader
Treville from the King's prison.  D'Artagnan and his new frisky love
interest/chambermaid Francesca (Mena Suvari) play footsy and coo at each
other as the Cardinal hunts down the Musketeers until finally the Queen
(Catherine Deneuve) ends up being captured by the menancing Febre,
forcing the Musketeers to regroup, with D'Artagnan leading the charge,
and save the day.
Director Peter Hyams (End of Days) obviously wanted to blend eastern and
western filmmaking styles, but here it's a disaster.  One problem is
that, in reality, most eastern films have taken their lead from western
ones.  Jet Li's High Risk is a rip-off of Die Hard -- not the other way
around.  Ironically, there is awfully little swordplay or action in the
film at all -- maybe ten minutes of swashbuckling spread over five
scenes.  Most Asian action films carry the bulk of their production with
20- to 30-minute action sequences, because they know the scenes have to
carry the picture.
The Musketeer instead weighs itself down with a predictable and
monotonous screenplay by Gene Quintano (Sudden Death), horrible acting
by Stephen Rea and Tim Roth, and the prosaic attempt of Justin Chambers
(The Wedding Planner) to deliver his mousy self as a leader.  Chambers'
D'Artangnan isn't a Musketeer -- he's a Mouseketeer!  And Hyam's use of
candles and torches to light the grime and filth of 17th century Paris
are well-noted, but that's the only standout in an overall flat
production.
Director: Peter Hyams
Producer: Moshe Diamant, Rudy Cohen
Writer: Gene Quintano
Starring: Catherine Deneuve, Mena Suvari, Stephen Rea, Tim Roth, Nick
Moran, Justin Chambers
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Musketeer_ (PG-13) * (out of ****)
        It appears that venerable, time-tested approaches to adventure yarns
just aren't good enough for Hollywood these days.  Coming fresh off the
ready-for-the-WB-network Gen-Y western stylings of _American_Outlaws_ is
_The_Musketeer_, which presents an even more curious take on melding the
traditional with the current cinematic trends: placing Hong Kong-style wirework
choreography in the world of Alexandre Dumas' ageless swashbuckling heroes.  Not
a terrible idea per se, but entrusting a hack like Peter Hyams to pull off such
a risky endeavor is.
        Xin-Xin Xiong, an esteemed HK action veteran who has worked with no less
than Tsui Hark on several occasions, choreographed the high-flying swordfights,
but as captured by Hyams' inept camera, it's difficult to tell if he's done a
noteworthy job.  If there is a wrong angle to shoot from or an ill-advised edit
to make, Hyams goes for it, and the choppy result are a number of incoherently
assembled flips and leaps being passed off as action scenes.  Hyams only figures
out where to place the camera for an elaborately staged duel that takes place on
a number of unsteady, ever-shifting ladders, but this one genuinely interesting
set piece--the only one that allows one to clearly follow the action--also
happens to be the film's last.
        But there are plenty of other problems plaguing _The_Musketeer_.  The
title character is young D'Artagnan (Justin Chambers), who has two goals in
life: to follow in his father's footsteps and join the King's royal fighting
force; but most of all to seek out the man who killed his parents 14 years
prior: Febre (Tim Roth, appropriately camping it up), a ruthless enforcer to the
scheming Cardinal Richelieu (Stephen Rea, sleepwalking).  That the film is
called _The_Musketeer_ rather than _The_Three_Musketeers_ is no accident;
actually, a more appropriate title would've been _The_Super-Musketeer_, for this
version of D'Artagnan is downright invincible, able to defeat any number of
opponents with his gravity-defying derring-do.  Such a heavy-handed approach is
made even more ridiculous by the charisma vacuum known as Chambers, who lacks
the forceful presence to make an engaging hero, let alone a convincing
superhero.
        However, it's doubtful any lead could have made the awful script by Gene
Quintano (who previously worked with Hyams on the Van Damme vehicle
_Sudden_Death_) any more tolerable.  The primary revenge plot is a bore, which
is still better than can be said about D'Artagnan's soggy romance with a
chambermaid (a very out-of-place Mena Suvari); that thread is memorable for all
the wrong reasons, in particular some forced and downright embarrassing sexual
innuendo.  Too bad Quintano didn't heed a line he gave the Suvari
character--"Sometimes it's better to say nothing"--for the dialogue as a whole
is atrocious, especially the clanging one-liners that pop up at the most
inappropriate moments.  Take this gem during what's supposed to be the "tense"
climax: "I'm not dead, so why don't you hurry up and kill him already?"  While
enduring the ordeal that is _The_Musketeer_, you may find yourself asking the
person next to you--that is, if there is anyone else in the auditorium--"I'm not
dead, so why don't you hurry up and kill _me_ already?"
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23
