Title
Review for HouseSitter (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian L. Johnson
105 min., PG, Comedy, 1992
Director: Frank Oz
Cast: Steve Martin, Goldie Hawn, Dana Delany, Peter MacNichol,
      Robert B. Shull, Laurel Cronin, Julie Harris, Donald Moffat
     Steve Martin first meets Goldie Hawn at a party and then later
waitressing at a restaurant.  He gets invited into her house and tells
her about a house he owns that is empty.  The next day, unknown to
Martin, Hawn moves into the empty house.  She starts making up stories
about her and Martin to explain why she is there.  Martin is in love
with Dana Delany, who is in the town that the house is located in.
Martin finds out what Hawn has done and tries to use her to get Delany.
     I saw HOUSESITTER the weekend that it opened and am just getting
around to finishing my review on it.  HOUSESITTER is a very funny film
and is well worth seeing.  I don't know whether to recommend that you
see it in the theater or wait for the video.  The film will lose nothing
on video, but if you can't wait to see it you would be better off going
to the theater to see it.  I give HOUSESITTER a four on a scale of zero
to five.   HOUSESITTER is rated PG for adult situations and explicit
language.
     HOUSESITTER is the first of two films coming out this summer with
Goldie Hawn, the second is DEATH BECOMES HER.  I have always been a fan
of Goldie Hawn's films and sometimes of Steve Martin's, so I hurried out
to see this one.  Both Goldie Hawn and Steve Martin did a great job
acting.  They were both funny, but not in an obnoxious sort of way, like
Steve Martin sometimes is.  Dana Delany does a great job in her
supporting role and adds a lot to the film.  The two bums, Robert B.
Shull and Laurel Cronin, I think, were excellent.  Peter MacNichol's
character was, in my opinion, a very annoying character, but then again
that is all MacNichol seems to play.  Steve Martin's father, I don't
know who played him, was excellent  and very convincing.  The jokes in
this film were, for the most part, hidden under the surface and just sat
there allowing you to laugh if you caught it and if you missed it there
is another waiting just around the turn of the film reel instead of
forcing you to laugh like slapstick comedies do.
     The film is well written and doesn't have many holes in it.  It
definitely keeps you entertained.  The characters are interesting and
well molded.  They seem to come alive on the screen and do their own
things.  The sets and locations are great.  The town where the house is
located looks like any little town and is simple in its ways.  The house
itself I don't think was well designed, however, at least I wouldn't
want to live in it (maybe it's just me).

Author
Frank Maloney
     HOUSESITTER is a film directed by Frank Oz and written by Mark
Stein.  It stars Steve Martin, Goldie Hawn, and Dana Delany, with
Richard B. Shull, Laurel Cronin, Julie Harris, and Donald Moffat.
Rated PG, for mature humor, mild profanity.
     HOUSESITTER gives us a one-joke movie that is amusing and
entertaining without actually being anything particularly memorable.  We
have Goldie Hawn in her best role in 20 years as the gifted liar Gwen
(Steve Martin's Newton says, "You're the Ernest Hemmingway of
bullsh*tters!"); I hereby officially and publicly forgive her for BIRD
ON A WIRE.  She is funny and endearing without being silly, stupid, or
reminding us of her bimbette persona from "Laugh-In".  Steve Martin as
the architect who becomes her victim and her partner in her fantasies
has a couple of good set pieces in which he gets to amuse us by
thoroughly embarrassing us -- the gawkiest seduction you've ever
squirmed through and a reluctant crooning of a lullaby in a very
un-lullaby-ish setting.  Then there's Dana Delany (from "China Beach")
who plays Newton's love object, Becky; Becky is a second banana and
introduces a twist on her character at the last moment that doesn't seem
particularly well set up, but Delany appears to an acceptable movie
presence.
     Characterization is the most common problem in Hollywood comedies,
and this one has its share.  The plot is mechanical and completely
predictable, so the interest ought to devolve to the characters, but I
found them mostly either undeveloped or incompletely so.  Gwen is the
most fully developed and in that sense this is Hawn's movie more than
Martin's, although they do seem to work well together.  We see Gwen
working her fantasies and we are given a reason for them and for her
actions; it's not exactly a rigorous analysis, but any attempt to give a
third dimension to her character is welcome.  Martin's Newton is more
problematic.  We are told repeatedly that he is a dreamer, a fantasizer,
a wild and crazy guy, as it were, but what I see is someone thoroughly
pedestrian and little inept socially; it's not that he dreams, he merely
assumes facts not in evidence.  He supposed to have a complicated
relationship with his father (Donald Moffat), but it's mostly an excuse
for Gwen to weave some of her lies and benignly ensnare some more
victims.  Julie Harris plays Newton's mother, but it could have been
played by just about any middle-aged white woman; one of the great
actors of the American theater is completely wasted here.
     There are two really fine supporting performances by Richard
B. Shull and Laurel Cronin as a pair of crazed street people who are
recruited to play Gwen's parents.  They give their small parts their all
and their all is very fine indeed.
     As for the plot, if you've ever seen CHRISTMAS IN CONNECTICUT
you've seen a funnier, faster, and more frantic version of HOUSESITTER.
This movie could have been paced a bit faster and I would not have
minded a bit.  It doesn't quite drag, but it does slow down from time to
time.  It probably doesn't live up to its comedic possibilities and
could do with a touch more confusion and chaos.  Frank Oz might have
turned to the screwball comedies of the 30s for a model that would have
served us all better.
     This is Martin's third movie with Oz (LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS and
DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS).  When Oz turns Martin loose, he does it with
great pacing.  Oz also gets a lot of atmospheric effects out of the
Massachusetts towns, Concord and Cohassett, which provide the kind of
scenery that is almost too lovely to be real.  So far I find myself
being mostly of two minds about Oz's films (although LITTLE SHOP is
nearly perfect).  They seem to be nice, little movies, nothing that
really sticks to the craw or one remembers without a prod or two.
SCOUNDRELS was mostly unable to live up to its trailer, but there's
always the possibility that I'm not hip enough to really get it.  WHAT
ABOUT BOB I thought was mostly silly and irritating that failed to
stretch or challenge its stars.
     So, that's pretty much what have here, a nice little movie that
challenges neither its stars or its audience over much, neither does it
really insult anyone.  I doubt that many of us will remember having seen
it a year from now.
     If you go to HOUSESITTER, and I don't know why you shouldn't, go to
a discount matinee.  That's about the right price.
