Title
Review for Prince of Central Park (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Keystone Entertainment
 Director: John Leekley
 Writer:  Evan Rhodes (musical play), Donald Sebesky, Gloria
Nissenson
 Cast: Danny Aiello, Frankie, Harvey Keitel, Cathy Moriarty,
Frank Nasso, Jerry Orbach, Paul Sorvino, Kathleen Turner
   Usually critics don't discuss the films they've screened as
they leave the theaters but in this case I was perplexed, so I
broke the rules.  "I can't figure this out," I said to my fellow
riders in the elevator leading to New York's theater district. 
"Is this movie supposed to be for kids?"  "For very slow kids,"
drawled a laid-back critic to the guffaws of our little crowd. 
And indeed it is.  This putrid sentimental pap will have any
pre-teen with an I.Q. over 80 begging his parents to take him
to "American Pie" or "South Park" just to settle his stomach. 
Though billed by the company as a modern-day Huck Finn,
"Prince of Central Park" has as much in common with the
Clemens masterwork as a medieval morality play has with
"There's Something About Mary."  What's more it's as far
removed from an authentic story of childhood angst such as
Truffaut's "The 400 Blows" as Shakespeare's "Macbeth" is
from Barbara Garson's Vietnam-war spoof, "MacBird."
   Major credit should go to the actors who, to a person, were
able to hold back from breaking out into raucous laughter--
though we can guess how many takes were required to get
their serious faces screwed on straight.  The tale centers on
JJ Somerled (Frank Nasso), offspring of a Scottish father
(deceased) and a French mother (who had entered a New
York hospital for radiation treatment--though the production
notes say that her cancer was considered "untreatable"). 
Somerled has the trendy notion to track down the mother who
apparently abandoned him to the wolves, or specifically to a
foster home which in turn handed him over to the tawdry and
trashy woman, Mrs. Ardis (Cathy Moriarty)--who makes her
living taking in what she calls throwaway kids, getting paid
$300 a month for being their foster mom.  While the kid runs
away to Central Park, he is mugged by a somewhat older kid
from his projects, Easy (Mtume Gant), who steals the hapless
lad's cash, portable keyboard, medallion, and, earlier on,
even his jacket, shirt and pants.  Fortunately he has friends. 
Rosa (Lauren Velez), the caseworker who is piled up with 55
youngsters to look after seems to have time only for JJ.
Rebecca (Kathleen Turner) takes a maternal interest in him
as does the husband (Paul Sorvino) who has just left her,
Noah (Danny Aiello)--who is appropriated named as his
hobby is sailing his remotely controlled clipper ship on the
Central Park lake.  (Though Rebecca seems to us like a
loving woman with a strong character, the production notes
inform us that she is "a woman whose life was shattered by
the frowning of her 14-year-old son.)  Best of us he is
watched over by a strange individual who lives in the park
like a troll and is called The Guardian--played by Harvey
Keitel who gives the picture its note of originality: Harvey
does not take off his clothes this time around, alas.  Oh yes,
also Jerry Orbach sings a Scottish song for the kid, leaves
him a fin, and disappears from the movie.
   Will JJ find trust after having his self-confidence and ability
to love shattered early in life (as the production notes assure
us were indeed shattered)?  And what will become of his
romance with an 11-year-old girl, Sophia (Carmen Moreno),
who (according to the production notes again) is "deeply in
love with him"?  Ah, that's where the real suspense kicks in. 
This "Prince is Central Park" lives up its title: one big royal
pain.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 111 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
