Title
Review for Cats Don't Dance (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
It makes me sad that I can essentially expect a "kid" film to be bad. Even
sadder is the fact that Hollywood puts such low levels of effort into these.
And so it is with yet another family film, CATS DON'T DANCE, an animated
musical set in the 1930's.
CATS DON'T DANCE tells the story of Danny (voiced by Scott Bakula), a young
cat with the dream of becoming a star. From his little hometown in Indiana,
Danny sets out to Hollywood, determined that because he loves acting, singing,
and dancing, he should have no problem becoming a success within the first
week. It isn't long before Danny finds himself playing a small role in the new
Darla Dimple film. Darla (spoken voice by Ashley Peldon; singing by Lindsay
Rideway) is America's sweetheart, known for her excessive sweetness, yet
actually brutally cruel to all those she works with. Like an anti-Shirley
Temple, Darla finds a particular bone to pick with Danny, whose enthusiasm is
a bit much for the production.
After a negative first day on the set, Danny can feel his naive hopes being
crushed under the weight of reality. But on the set, Danny also makes a couple
of friends: Tillie Hippo (Kathy Najimy), T.W. (Don Knotts), a depressed turtle
with bad luck and the fortune cookie fortunes to prove it, and most
importantly, Sawyer (spoken by Jasmine Guy; sung by Natalie Cole), an
attractive female cat. It is these animals who must bond together to face
Hollywood, a world that doesn't care enough about its non-human actors.
Determined to show the humans what they're made of, the group then decides to
make a film of their own, all the while Darla growing more and more enraged at
their existance.
The problem is, CATS DON'T DANCE was so hectic, I actually had a hard time
telling what was going on, or even what the characters were saying half the
time. This movie had the ability to distract from itself by being so overly
busy, which, if you can't tell, is a very bad sign. Not only the animation
quality (which was very two-dimensional and boring), but the comedic devices
and storyline played more like a Saturday morning episode of "Loony Toons"
than an elaborate Disney production. Don't get me wrong - I'm not requiring
that all animated films be on the same level as BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, but
films like CATS DON'T DANCE don't deserve a run in theaters. In fact, even the
direct to video market seems a bit higher quality than this.
Being a musical, CATS DON'T DANCE sure lets us down in the song department as
well. There are no catchy tunes that you'll find yourself humming after the
movie, and there are no songs that even attempt to turn this film into a
magical experience. Most of the songs are so uneffective, you might find
yourself using them as an excuse for a bathroom break!
The voice talents here aren't so bad, but they don't have a good enough script
to hang on. Knotts' T.W. Turtle is the most fun, but he isn't used nearly
enough. Positive note should be given to Matthew Harried as Pudge, the cute,
chubby little penguin who winds up being the most enamoring aspect of the
film. But even as cute as Pudge is, he's nothing that makes this film worth
seeing.
CATS DON'T DANCE is worthy of two stars because older little kids will
probably find enough to be entertained, and at least the premise is somewhat
original. There is also a fun part at the end where we get a slideshow of
famous movie posters, altered to fit the animal stars (example: FREE TILLY
with the hippo replacing the whale). But as incredibly dull as the rest of the
film was, I can't really say it's a worthwhile effort. As overplayed as they
are by now, you'll probably be better off pulling an old Disney video off the
shelf again - at least you know you'll have something to whistle afterward.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "No animals were harmed during the making of this movie.
      Although some were erased and had to be redrawn."
     CATS DON'T DANCE is a cartoon musical featuring song and dance
numbers by animated animals with a story in-between.  The film had a
brief run in the secondary theaters and is now playing in the bargain
basement chains before moving to video.
     Distributed by Warner Brothers, the film has all new cartoon
characters, but most are takeoffs on older real actors.  The all too
cute human figure named Darla Dimple (speaking voice by Ashley Peldon
and singing by Lindsay Rideway) can be thought of as Shirley Temple's
evil twin.  She is so mean that she eats the heads off of all of her
animal crackers.
     The script was written by the committee of Mark Dindal, Robert
Lence, Brian McEntee, Rick Schneider, David Womersley, Kelvin Yasuda,
Robert Gannaway, Cliff Ruby, Elana Lesser, and Theresa Pettengill.  For
such an amalgamation of writers the style is amazingly consistent.  The
surprise in the approach is that the dialog is written at a much higher
level than in most kids' movies, which is both a blessing and a curse.
The adults will find more of interest, but the little kids may be lost,
especially in the story's many allusions to older films, like GONE WITH
THE WIND, and film stars (Cary Grant, Laurel and Hardy, Bette Davis,
and W. C. Fields).  The dialog tends to be more clever than funny.  ("I
hear that hippopotamuses are very big on Broadway," says Tillie Hippo,
voice by Kathy Najimy.  "Hippos are big everywhere," retorts another
animal.)
     The musical numbers are full of color and glitz worthy of old
Busby Berkeley numbers.  The animation uses a palate heavy on the
roses, pinks, and pale blues, and the images are drawn more for bold
imagination than realism.
     The story opens with a cat named Danny (voice by Scott Bakula)
leaving Kokomo on a bus for Hollywood.  He has a five day plan for
making it big in motion pictures.  ("See you in the Movies," being his
favorite expression.)
     Once he gets to Tinseltown, he faces discrimination because he is
an animal.  He gets a one-line part ("Meow") in the latest Darla Dimple
movie.  When Danny tries to upstage the star, her bodyguard Max (voice
by Mark Dindal), who has a body like the Rock of Gibraltar and a head
the size of an orange, throws Danny out.
     Danny spends the rest of the movie as a virtual warrior in a sort
of Animal Liberation Front.  "If we all work together, we can make our
dreams come true," he tells the animals in a classic pep talk.  "Let's
show the world what we can do."
     Some of the scenes may prove too dark and serious for younger
kids.  Danny's girlfriend Sawyer (speaking voice by Jasmine Guy and
singing by Natalie Cole) does a sad, but pretty, singing number in the
rain.
     Many of the scenes need crisper editing by Dan Molina.  And
Director Mark Dindal seems too infatuated with his obsession with
mimicking Hollywood of old to concern himself properly with the show's
timing.
     After a razzle-dazzle musical ending complete with battleship
guns, we are shown a set of movie posters from TWISTER to BATMAN AND
ROBIN to FREE TILLY with the show's animals in place of the normal
leads.  CATS DON'T DANCE is a highly forgettable romp of a movie which
can best be described as, well, cute.
     CATS DON'T DANCE runs just 1:15.  It is rated G and has little
other than a few ominous images to offend anyone.  Jeffrey, age 8,
thought the film was "excellent," and he especially liked Danny.  His
friend Amara, age 5 1/2, liked the film too but got a bit scared when
Max chased Danny.  A close call, but I do recommend the film and give
it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Voices of Scott Bakula, Jasmine Guy, Natalie Cole, Ashley
Peldon, Kathy Najimy, John Rhys-Davies, Matthew Herried, Mark Dindal.
Screenplay:  Roberts Gannaway, Theresa Pettengill, Cliff Ruby and Elana
Lesser.
Producers:  David Kirschner and Paul Gertz.
Director:  Mark Dindal.
MPAA Rating:  G
Running Time:  73 minutes, plus 7 minute Foghorn Leghorn short.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Ten years ago, feature film animation was on the endangered species
list.  Industry leader Disney had all but given up on animation, and no
one else believed that G-rated cartoons could be anything but box-office
poison.  That was before the booming family video sell-through market made
the risk seem less risky, and before a succession of Disney features --
THE LITTLE MERMAID, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, ALADDIN, THE LION KING -- put
the luster back on animation to the tune of over $2 billion in profits
including merchandise and ancillary sales.  Suddenly everyone wanted a
piece of the action:  chief rival Universal (home of the AMERICAN TAIL and
LAND BEFORE TIME films), Fox (the upcoming ANASTASIA with Meg Ryan) and
now Warner Bros.  I'm not sure the contenders for Disney's throne have
learned a key lesson, though:  story is king.  Cute critters and peppy
tunes, like those in Warner's CATS DON'T DANCE, aren't enough to support a
flimsy script and simplistic animation.
     CATS DON'T DANCE is set in Hollywood circa 1940, where a cat named
Danny (voice of Scott Bakula) has just arrived from Kokomo, Indiana with
dreams of fame and fortune.  Unfortunately, song-and-dance cat Danny is
about to learn a hard truth from animal agent Farley Wink (Frank Welker):
the movies don't want cats who sing and dance, they want cats who go
"meow."  After invoking the wrath of child star Darla Dimple (Ashley
Peldon) by upstaging her in one of her movies, Danny is ready to join the
ranks of disappointed animal performers like Tillie Hippo (Kathy Najimy),
Mammoth Studios mascot Woolie (John Rhys-Davies) and lovely Persian cat
Sawyer (spoken by Jasmine Guy, sung by Natalie Cole).  But Danny is
determined to fulfill his dream, and tries to rally his new friends to put
on the show of their lives.
     That plot is the perfect set-up for an animated film, giving animals
plenty of chances to break into song, and indeed CATS DON'T DANCE is a
fairly lively endeavor.  Unfortunately, there is little focus to all that
energy.  The film barrels along for a tidy 73 minutes, cranking out Randy
Newman musical numbers which seem to peter out after about a dozen bars;
even the show-stopping production number "Big and Loud" is over
practically before you realize it's supposed to be the show-stopping
production number.  The over-riding philosophy of CATS DON'T DANCE seems
to be that if you blast through everything at a breakneck pace, perhaps no
one will have time to notice the lack of attention to detail.
     No such luck.  CATS DON'T DANCE doesn't just feel rushed -- it looks
rushed, like the result of a deadline coming up a bit too fast.  The
background animation is frequently sketchy and drab, a pale imitation of
the vibrant land and cityscapes characteristic of Disney's features, while
the character animation relies on Hirschfeld-style celebrity caricatures
and animals who seem to be recycled from Warner's afternoon "Animaniacs"
series.  Even the most interesting character, the psychotically
egotistical Darla Dimple, is a gloss on "Tiny Toon Adventures"' wee
she-demon Elmyra.  At least Darla, a wicked poke at celebrity petulance,
is entertaining to watch, as is her monstrous bodyguard Max (voiced by
director Mark Dindal).  Most of the other characters are overly familiar
-- Kathy Najimy's jovial hippo is a re-tread of her jovial nun from the
SISTER ACT films, and adorable little penguin Pudge (Matthew Herried) is
THE LITTLE MERMAID's Flounder with wings -- or a waste of the voice
talent.  There's little excuse for lining up Hal Holbrook or the legendary
Betty Lou Gerson (the original Cruella DeVil) and giving them four or five
lines each.
     That probably won't mean very much to kids, who will likely be amused
by the high-spirited goings-on, but that's just not enough after the way
Disney has raised the bar in the last several years.  The House of the
Mouse has been smart enough to hitch its wagon to timeless stories,
resonant themes and memorable characters.  CATS DON'T DANCE is lightweight
stuff, a simple "naive kid makes good" story as much _from_ the 1940s as
_about_ the 1940s, and that's not necessarily a bad thing.  In order to be
more than a diversion, however, a film like CATS DON'T DANCE needs
something more:  a song you'll be humming for the rest of the day, a
visual style which keeps you enthralled, a character you wouldn't mind
seeing turn up in a direct-to-video sequel.  There's not much of a
creative spark to CATS DON'T DANCE, especially after it opens with a
Foghorn Leghorn short which won't make anyone forget Chuck Jones' Warner
Bros. glory days.  It's something to fill a family-friendly spot on the
spring break release schedule, good business but not a very good film.
