Title
Review for Searching for Bobby Fischer (1993)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Joe Mantegna, Ben Kingsley, Max Pomeranc, Laurence Fishburne.
Director/Screenwriter:  Steven Zaillian.
     SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER is the kind of film that can easily
get lost in the glut of summer releases.  It boasts no superstars,
includes no gunfire or velociraptors, and has as its focal point the
game of chess.
     Let me repeat that: a movie ... about chess.  No, let me amend
that: a wonderful movie about chess.  SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER is
an emotionally satisfying and surprisingly understated film that takes
the tried-and-true formula of such crowd pleasers as ROCKY and THE
KARATE KID and adds some welcome thematic depth.
     SEARCHING is based on the true story of Josh Waitzkin (Max
Pomeranc), a seven-year-old New York boy whose parents (Joe Mantegna
and Joan Allen) discover that he is a chess prodigy.  He learns the
game from park chess hustlers like Vinnie (Laurence Fishburne), who
encourages daring and aggressive play, and is then brought by his
father to former master Bruce Pandolfini (Ben Kingsley).  Pandolfini is
reluctant to act as Josh's teacher, but agrees because the price is
right and because he sees in Josh a natural talent similar to that of
the legendary American champion Bobby Fischer.  Pandolfini is also a
purist who shuns the strategies of speed players like Vinnie, and wants
to instill in Josh the calculated single-mindedness and contempt for
opponents that characterized Fischer's play.  The film then traces
Josh's experiences with the youth tournaments, and his growing fear
that once he's the best, it's no longer "okay to lose."
     This examination of the win-at-all-costs ethos of competition
provides one of the film's most potent thematic touchstones.  After his
baseball team wins a game in an eary sequense, Josh looks on
sympathetically as the losing team walks away dejectedly.  He loves to
play, but he doesn't love to win.  It's an attitude which infuriates
Pandolfini, who tells Josh he must hate his opponents, only to receive
the simple response, "I don't hate them."  It's also a foreign concept
to his father, a sports writer who begins to live vicariously through
his son's victories.  Sports parents are given a firm tweaking,
particularly in a hilarious scene at a tournament where a fight breaks
out between two fathers.
     As Fred Waitzkin, Joe Mantegna presents a fully-realized portrait
of one of these parents.  He is a loving father who initially
encourages his son's gift out of selflessness, but slowly gets caught
up in the winning.  His feelings are brought out in a confrontation
with Josh's school teacher, whom he tells, "Do you know how good he
is?  He's better at this than I've ever been at anything in my life."
Mantegna's performance is rich and effective, and only one of many
super acting turns.  Kingsley deftly handles the cold, slightly
embittered Pandolfini, allowing him to be unlikeable but
understandable.  Fishburne has fun with his small part as the
trash-talking park player, as does David Paymer as a nervous "chess
dad."  However, it's Max Pomeranc's show, and he carries it.  With his
hair hanging just above his eyes and his mouth perpetually in something
just less than a smile, first-time actor Pomeranc projects Josh's
earnestness and ever-present tension in sighs and eye movements.  It's
a delightful performance, made even more surprising by the fact that he
is being handled by a first-time director.
     That director is Steven Zaillian (Oscar nominated as a
screenwriter for AWAKENINGS), and it's a remarkably confident debut.
He delivers the chess scenes with tremendous energy, a challenge if
ever there was one.  He frames his scenes with a sense of purpose, and
his actors are always focused.  Most tellingly, he demonstrates the
ability to develop his story visually, beginning with the opening
sequence where Josh finds a carved chess piece, is offered a softball
in trade by Vinnie, and chooses to keep the piece.  Without a single
word of dialogue, Zaillian conveys a change in focus for Josh, and the
beginning of his new life.
     If there is one place to find fault, it's with the emotional
string-pulling that's common to the "competition" genre.  James
Horner's overwrought score practically screams, "Cry now!" in a manner
I had thought only John Williams had mastered.  The climax manages to
avoid cliches, however, and I have to admit that I was grinning and on
the edge of my seat along with a couple hundred fellow moviegoers.
     Both as intelligent cinema and rousing entertainment, SEARCHING
FOR BOBBY FISCHER is a winner not to be overlooked.  Chess ... who'd
have guessed?

Author
Pedro Sena
SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISHER is the story of Josh Waitzkin, a young man who
has an ability to play chess that draws some comparisons to the Grand Master
Bobby Fisher.  Where Bobby Fisher was known to be an eccentric, that
disliked the circles of the chess playing community, the young Waitzkin has
all the makings of another man that will  play chess forever, and become
either a good player with all the trappings for failure, or a good player,
who is also a good person behind it all.  This is what the film is really
about.
The young Josh, gets the inclination to play chess in his young days, and
sets out to learn the game on his own.  And at a certain point, he decides
he wants to check out the chess bums in the park, who seem to have a daily
thing going for a few dollars. Josh takes a liking to Vinnie, a black young
man who may be  a good player, but does not have the upbringing to take his
game to another level.  But what Vinnie lacks in upbringing, he has in his
ability to play like a cat... he is quick, and he is
clever, and he knows how to set up an opponent, something which the streets
of Brooklyn are surely full of.
In due time, Josh's father decided to take the young man Josh to a chess
school and get him some instruction on the game, perhaps a chance to get
better.  In the school he meets some of the well known chess players in the
world, and the teacher first shows his disdain for the inner discipline that
many of them lack.  The young man Josh now has to come to grips with
something which is difficult to do for him, which is to project far enough
ahead in order to play a better game, something which people his age do not
do.
Eventually, the young Josh starts playing tournaments, but he lacks the
killer instinct that is sometimes necessary in order to survive these
slaughter houses.  He plays well, but he has found the closest thing to an
enemy, which he is afraid to  face.  His deliberations take him back to the
park for some fun chess ( for him ) and back to the teacher, who is not very
happy with the young man's forays into the area where chess is not an art,
but just a game.
During this time, the Josh's family begins having a few problems. The well
meaning father, has accidentally drawn up plans for his genius son.  But the
mother is concerned that the child is missing out on his childhood.  And
this battle has an effect on the young man who is just trying to play to
indulge his ability to think, and have some fun with it. And in the final
tournament, in Chicago, Josh comes to meet his nemesis for the first time.
He is a rich kid, that has been supported by an older line of chess players,
and his style is dry, and quiet, and just play on... ruthlessly.  But the
kid does not know how to enjoy the game.  Josh finds himself trapped, and
loses a major piece.  Vinnie immediately states that Josh is setting him up,
much to the chagrin of the instructor who does not like games.  And when all
seems lost, Josh finally sees that he has got his opponent where he wants
him, even if it isn't true.  The young man does not know how to lose and
challenges Josh to continue.  And the real battle really begins, and Josh
finally traps the king. Before this, Josh had offered a draw, because he
knew that he could trap his opponent, who was good at set games, but not
very good at free play... or at playing the style which the parks in
Brooklyn had taught him.
A fabulously well directed film, with one outstanding factor that is
immediately visible.  The film is shot, in its entirety, with single lights
for highlight, and also a very real effect. It has shadows ( like every
corner of your house and room ) and the camera deals with it.  It adds a lot
of suspense, and thinking to any shot, and helps isolate each character in
their own little world.  The concept is not new.  It is very old, and the
one that we live with everyday.  But it is rarely used in many American
films whose tradition is steeped by the television styles, which is overly
lit, and is not real.  It makes for a moody film, but in this case, it is
not a brooding film, but one that tries to help us define that little space,
where the character sits, or stands.  CONRAD L HALL's vision is now clear,
and set. And the director Zaillian knew how to work with it.  The concept
was well thought out previously, and Mr. Zaillian must have been well aware
of the way this film needed to be shot.  ( See the film VISIONS OF LIGHT for
Conrad's discussions on his use of lighting..  or lack of. )
This film is very well cast, and Ben Kingsley is very good.  But the
character most interesting to watch, is Lawrence Fishburne playing Vinnie,
in a role where he can be his street person, and street smart.  It helps the
kid grow up, but it also helps him be a kid, because it is fun.  This is
always in contrast to the brooding, and very serious chess teacher.  Vinnie
never touches a chess piece indoors, and Bruce never touches one piece
outdoors. And Josh becomes the best of both worlds, because he mixes the
two.
A very well done film, with a very nice little story line that goes beyond
the world of chess.  Josh has another little friend, and he takes him aside
towards the end.  He may lose a chess game, but he still has a friend to
play with, and that is more important. The ending line, with his little
friend, is so very satisfying, and one of the reasons which makes this film
so pleasing to anyone, chess fans or not.  A great kid story.  And a real
nice look at an outcast from the chess world, which Bobby Fisher is.   More
of a  renegade against a stuck up system than anything else is the point
that the film seems to wish to make.
Worth seeing, and with some electrifying performances, and moments of very
nice tension.  Few film directors can draw up such a well done piece of
work, but it may have been the eye of the cinematographer that made this
film the excellent piece of work that it is.  Right from the start.

Author
Jason Overbeck
Hey do you want to know why no GOOD family films are made?  BECAUSE YOU
WONT SEE THEM!  Hollywood is an enterprise and reacts to money, if you
don't shell out 7 bucks to see something smart like Searching for Bobby
Fischer and do for trash like Lost in Space, you will get more stupid
films.  I don't want to hear that no good family films are made because
you didn't see Searching for Bobby Fischer and wouldn't know what to do
if another such brilliant film came your way.
That being said, Searching for Bobby Fischer is one of the best and
smartest family films ever made.  A film that is heart-wrenching as it
is true to the family relationship.  I loved this film, it has an
insight on how children relate to their parents and how the parents want
to see them succeed in everything.
Josh (Max Pomeranc) is an ordinary 7 year-old kid who loves playing
baseball.  One day Josh is playing outside and finds a chess piece.  He
then teaches himself to play chess.  One day he is walking with his mom
(Joan Allen) and convinces her to stop at a park were hustlers play
competitive chess for money.  Josh sits and plays against a grungy man
and loses, but catches the eye of one hustler (Lawrence Fishburne) who
sees the move Josh puts on the guy and writes down his name as someone
to look out for.
His mother tells his father (Joe Mantegna) that he played chess and so
the father challenges the son to see how good he really is.  Josh loses
somewhat quickly and gives his father a shrug, but his mother sees
through this.  "Josh doesn't want to beat his dad." She tells him, so
the father plays him again.  This game is won by inspired play from
Josh.
The father finds a teacher for Josh, in a crusty old-timer (Ben Kingsly)
who teaches him first the basics and then to play like Bobby Fischer. 
Bobby Fischer is the greatest chess player of all time, who started at a
young age and went on to beat Russia and then go into captivity.  Many
parallels are made between him and Josh but there is one big difference,
Josh has too big a heart to hold his opponents in contempt.  Josh uses
the mixture of his teacher's knowledge and the street-smart chess
hustler to make it through chess tournaments.  
I made the statement that this film is one of the best family films ever
made, it is also one of the best films made in the nineties and a film I
have seen on repeated outings.  I also said that I love this film, and I
firmly believe that you will too if you see it.  You have no excuse now
that you have read this review.  We so rarely get to see truly great
films, please don't miss the chance to see this film.

Author
Jon A Webb
     This is the story of the discovery of a ten-year old chess genius,
and the conflicts between the intense study and concentration needed to
reach the highest ranks of chess and the more prosaic pursuits of a
young boy.
     I thought the tension between chess and normal family life was a
little overplayed.  After all, this movie would not have been made if
the father or teacher had been successful in pushing the boy to be
obsessed about chess only, so why create a dramatic conflict over
whether they will be able to do this?  The conflict over the boy's
playing speed chess in the park seems a little silly, too.  But it's
interesting how it all gets turned into chess, to the boy "bringing his
queen out too early".  And the fight between our hero and the "evil
chess robot child" is not believable or interesting.
     But the movie is rescued by the sweet and compelling performance
of Max Pomeranc, as the young Josh Fisher.  He's such a nice boy, you
want to see him succeed.
     There's a level of chess that was alluded to in interviews I've
seen about this film, which is based on a true story: the level at
which chess is a complete psychological conflict. I suppose this is the
heart of this film, but it doesn't really come across, though perhaps
it could not, in a film based on child actors.
     Joe Manetegna plays the father: I wish he'd stick to roles where
he can show more anguish. Browbeating ten-year olds just doesn't make
it. Ben Kingsley is the teacher, and he is adequate if a little too
Gandhi-esque to be believably pushy. Laurence Fishburn is the
speed-chess playing counterweight to Kingsley; I liked his
performance.

Author
Alex Lopez-Ortiz
Starring:  Joe Mantegna, Ben Kingsley, Max Pomeranc, Laurence Fishburne.
Director/Screenwriter:  Steven Zaillian.
     SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER is a top contender for the best movie
of the summer.
     It is hard to imagine a more difficult topic for a movie than
chess. It is not a popular game/sport, and as countless flicks have
proven, sports movies are seldom a success. It seems that the battles
of the field in a sports match are already cartoonish enough so as to
tolerate another layer of dramatization in the big screen.
     And even among the few sport movies that excel there is a common
complain: the sports footage is completely unrealistic, thus making the
movie insurmountable for sport aficionados.
     Director Steven Zaillian took the challenge and passed with flying
colours. SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER is a movie that appeals to a large
audience and to chess experts alike. Technical assistance by the noted
chess player Bruce Pandolfini paid handsomely.
     On a first approach, SEARCHING is a movie about the true story of
chess prodigy Josh Waitzkin, and how he and his family adjust to having
a wunderkind at home. Even if this is all what you get from the movie,
it is worth your time and money to see it.
     But there is more to SFBF than what meets the eye. Think about
chess as a 8x8 mock up of life ordeals; suddenly it is not just a
game.  In fact, there is nothing more offending for a professional
sportsmen than telling him/her that their sport in question is "just a
game". You live and breath through playing.
     From this perspective, SEARCHING is also about the extremes
of chess (and life) so skillfully represented by Pandolfini, Vinnie,
Josh's dad, mom, the chess parents, and Josh's opponent and his
trainer.
     The last facet of this movie, which has been seldom mentioned in
the reviews, is the search for the real Bobby Fischer, portrayed
through some skillfully interspersed footage of Fischer during the
1960-1970's.
     SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER is, in black and white, a search for
the past.
     America was strong. It had just beaten Russia in their national
pasttime. Those were happier times: "we were young and we were
strong".  But all this is gone. It just disappeared.
     SEARCHING is also about this search, we want back the innocence of
our young years, we want back the security of the streets, we want back
the comfort of a well paid job. We want our champion past back.  Is
Josh (this generation) the Prometheus of a new future? Pandolfini hopes
it is so....
Rating: **** (out of five)   (8.5 out of 10).

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So are you searching for a good movie for the whole family?  Does
your household have preteens in it who have outgrown the little kid
movies, but still would like to see shows that are exciting and that
can inspire them?  Do you like shows that not just for preteens, but
the whole family can enjoy?
     Let me take a little different approach in this review.  Think of
it as a questionnaire.  Do you like movies where
     If you were able to answer in the affirmative to most of these
questions, I recommend SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER and give it ***.
Even if you know nothing about the game of chess, I still recommend it
to you.  Knowing chess will improve your enjoyment only slightly of the
film and is not necessary.
     With a strong cast including Max Pomeranc as chess whiz Josh
Waitzkin, Joe Mantegna as his wise but not too pushy dad Fred, Joan
Allen as his mom Bonnie, Ben Kingsley as the expert Bruce Pandolfini,
and a great Laurence Fishburne as the local park chess king Vinnie.  A
sweet and heartwarming show.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Brundage
They should really let writers direct more often. Sure, they aren't trained
for it all the time, but it has a good track record. Take David Keopp
(writer of the infamous The Lost World), the bane of modern literature when
not directing, but able to turn out a stylish character drama and thriller
when he is (The Trigger Effect). Then take a look at the independent world.
Quentin Tarantino, and Steven Sodorberg (Sex, Lies, and Videotape) to name a
couple. Oh, yeah, Plesantville, let's not forget that one. And, of course,
we have Steven Zallian, who turned out Awakenings and Schlindler's List,
directing the family drama Searching for Bobby Fischer.
A family at its roots, the film follows the true story of chess prodigy Josh
Waitzkin, a kind New York youth who teaches himself to play chess by
watching other play in the park and rises to become the national youth
champion. A story like this would have generated the money alone, but,
unlike some of his counterparts in studio cinema, Steven Zallian has never
been content for a mediocre money-maker film. He brings in the element of
family drama strongly showing how the relationship between father and son is
torn apart and brought together by the game.
Zallian's pen leaves no character is left untouched, even the villains in
the film are stikingly human. The chess teacher is brought in as the man who
pushes Josh but still loves him. Lawrence Fishburne is the Central Park
chessplayer who unconditionally cares for the boy. Joan Allen portrays the
mother who only wants her son to remain decent, and cares more about him
than the game itself.
The remarkable human element isn't what surprised me about this film, it was
it's ability to do so without sacrificing any of the interest in the story,
which moves quickly through the 1:50 long film. Face it, people, writers
just do better when a like mind handles their project. After all, he turned
out his own film and I have only one complaint: the little kid can't
pronouce an "s" worth crap.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Max Pomeranc, Joe Mantegna, Joan Allen, Ben Kingsley, 
           Laurence Fishburne
Director:  Steven Zaillian
Producers:  Scott Rudin and William Horberg
Screenplay:  Steven Zaillian based on the book by Fred Waitzkin
Music:  James Horner
Released by Paramount Pictures
     At the tender age of seven, Josh Waitzkin (Max Pomeranc) becomes
fascinated by the game of chess.  Without giving up Little League
baseball, he learns how to play, hanging out with Vinnie (Laurence
Fishburne) and a group of speed chess hustlers who occupy nearby
Washington Square.  It isn't long before Josh is able to beat them
all.  His father, looking to take him to the next level, employs
ex-chess master Bruce Pandolfini (Ben Kingsley) as a teacher.  Under
Pandolfini, Josh matures as a player and, for the first time, he starts
to fear losing.
     SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER is based on the true life story of
Josh Waitzkin who, at the age of sixteen, is currently the
highest-ranked American player under eighteen.  It isn't just Josh's
tale, however.  The name and image of the mysterious chess genius Bobby
Fischer infiltrate this movie.  Fischer is as much an icon to this game
as Babe Ruth is to baseball.
     How important are games to the American way of life?  Have they
become so crucial that we lose sight of the people playing them?  And
at what point does the need to win become so important that the game
ceases to be fun?
     These are some of the questions that SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER
probes.  It certainly can't answer them (since there are no definitive
solutions), but the film offers fodder for thought as it explores
Josh's early career and examines the relationship between the young
chess master and his sports writer father, Frank Waitzkin.
     Josh starts playing chess because it fascinates him.  As soon as
Frank recognizes his son's gift, however, he begins to apply subtle
pressure.  Winning becomes important--perhaps too important--and Josh
is afraid that to fail at the game is to risk losing his father's
love.  It's then that chess becomes a burden and he stops enjoying it.
     Josh has two mentors--the street-smart Vinnie, who teaches him to
play the opponent, not the board; and Bruce Pandolfini, a man who has
suffered an unspecified loss in an unnamed competition, but knows the
game inside out.  Each has a different perspective to offer, and Josh
learns from them both.  One lesson, however, he is unable to take to
heart--he cannot hate his opponents, no matter how much they despise
him.
     We never learn exactly what demons haunt Pandolfini, and it's a
credit to this film that it doesn't make them explicit.  There are
enough clues that they can be guessed at, and SEARCHING FOR BOBBY
FISCHER relies upon the intelligence of its audience to put the pieces
together.
     There are four key relationships in this film, each of which is
explored with varying success.  Even the weakest, that of Josh and his
mother (Joan Allen), has an emotional depth unusual for the amount of
screen time accorded to it.  Of all the adults in the film, only Bonnie
Waitzkin never loses sight of what's best for her son.
     Also treated in a cursory fashion is the unusual friendship that
develops between Josh and Vinnie.  It's clear that the two are fond of
each other, and Vinnie's tactics become important to Josh's development
as a player, but we don't see enough of the two of them together to get
a genuine sense of the mutual respect that grows between them.
     Perhaps the most complex relationship is that of Josh and his
father.  While Frank never stops loving his son, there comes a point
when Josh's winning becomes more important to him than to his son.
This kind of pressure is too much to put on a young boy, no matter how
gifted he is, and it takes a threat by Bonnie to make this clear and
put the situation in perspective.
     Also explored in some detail are Josh's interactions with Bruce
Pandolfini.  Like Frank, Pandolfini loses sight of his young charge's
innocence and age, and tries to mold him into a chess-playing machine.
In some sense, Pandolfini is perhaps attempting to fight the ghosts of
his past through Josh.  It isn't until the end of the film that he is
finally able to accept and love his student for who he is.
     Ben Kingsley and Joe Mantegna do excellent jobs bringing their
characters to life.  These are men with faults, but it's those
imperfections that enable us to empathize with them.  Neither actor has
an overabundance of screen time with which to develop a personality,
but good performers can do quite a bit with an economy of scenes.
Having only a handful of appearances, Laurence Fishburne faces an even
more difficult challenge, but he nevertheless manages to convince us
that he's a true friend to Josh, concerned more about the boy's
happiness than his success.  Joan Allen, despite often being relegated
to the background, gives a convincing portrayal of a mother who cares
so much about her son's well-being that she's willing to take him away
from his father, if necessary, to assure it.
     When casting SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER, the production team
decided that instead of choosing a young "name" actor who might know
little or nothing about chess, they would choose someone who was a
chess player first and an actor second.  Realism was important to the
film makers--they wanted chess-playing viewers to be spared the
indignity of watching someone faking playing the game.
     In Max Pomeranc, an excellent choice was made.  Not only is he an
experienced (as experienced one can be at that young age) chess player,
but he acquits himself admirably in the role of Josh.  He's not the
best child actor to grace the screen, but he avoids the awkward
obviousness of many.
     SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER is an intensely fascinating movie
capable of involving those who are ignorant about chess as well as
those who love it.  The focus of the film is less on the actual game
than it is on the people, emotions, and pressures surrounding Josh.  It
is a tale of human trials and triumph, not a sports movie that panders
to a certain segment of the population.  Chess may not be the most
exciting activity to watch, but SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER makes for
engaging entertainment.
     One final note:  even though this film might seem like a perfect
family movie with its lack of violence, profanity, and sex, I would
caution parents considering taking their children to SEARCHING FOR
BOBBY FISCHER.  With its focus on character development and drama, many
younger viewers will likely become quickly bored.  This is an "adult"
movie ill-suited to those with short attention spans.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
