Title
Review for Slacker (1991)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Kevin Patterson
Richard Linklater's "Slacker," made in 1991 for a budget of only $23,000,
immerses itself in the twentysomething,  college-town culture of Austin,
Texas. Most of these characters are either unemployed or work jobs that are
apparently too menial to be worth mentioning. Their lifestyle is a sort of
passive resistance to the idea that people should go out and actively pursue a
career after graduation; they seem content to sit around spouting off about
the inadequacy of American democracy, the pervasiveness of slave morality, the
subtle messages in pop culture, and such. Ask them what they've been doing
lately, and they'll more likely than not reply, "Oh, you know, just hanging
out." Linklater uses an interesting technique to examine these characters: the
camera follows one person for a few minutes, then someone else walks by and
the camera follows that person, who walks into a diner just as another person
is walking out the door . . . . 
It's certainly a lot of fun listening to these characters talk: some of them
are clearly very intelligent and have some genuinely insightful ideas, some of
them are just plain weird, and some of them think their ideas are a lot more
profound than they really are. The opening monologue, delivered by Linklater
himself to a taxi driver, tosses around ideas about alternate realities that
nicely set up the meandering structure of the film. Other characters along the
way offer observations about everything from dating relationships to the
history of anarchist philosophy, while groups of pseudo-intellectuals kick
around ideas about the nobility of sitting around and doing nothing or the
subtle bribery-based morality in "Scooby-Doo." 
For the most part, however, the best moments are the ones involving the
slightly unhinged types. Near the beginning, a paranoid man follows a
pedestrian for several blocks, warning him about government conspiracies
involving everything from global warming to secret colonization of Mars.
Another man seems to be collecting televisions, keeping at least fifteen sets
running at the same time and playing tapes of a graduate student who recorded
himself having a nervous breakdown and destroying the camera. And in a scene
that drew a big laugh from everyone present when I saw the film, a man tries
to achieve closure after a failed relationship by reciting poetry on a bridge
and then throwing a typewriter into the creek below. 
The only problem with "Slacker" is that it starts to run out of steam towards
the end. Since Linklater only spends a few minutes with each character, the
introduction of the new characters gets repetitive after a while. There are
only so many times you can hear, "Hey, what's going on?" "Not much, what are
you up to?" "Nothing really, just hanging around," before it gets on your
nerves; the film might well have benefited from a slightly slower pace and a
little bit more characterization. And the dialogue in the second half of the
film is by and large not quite as interesting as that in the first half; a JFK
buff, for example, seems like a pale imitation of the previous conspiracy
theorist, and many of the characters just generally aren't as weird or unique.
Instead of depicting a city populated by mostly normal people and then showing
us the strangeness that we might not have noticed at first, Linklater shows us
the oddballs first, then stops and reminds us that ordinary people live there
too. 
"Slacker" is a good film and a wonderfully offbeat and entertaining comedy,
whatever its flaws, and its status as a cult classic is well-deserved. I just
can't help but think it might have been even better if Linklater had slowed
down a little bit and filmed these scenes in reverse order. 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     Thanks to the festival circuit (Sundance, San Francisco, among
others) SLACKER was eventually picked up by a commercial distributor.
In the Pesaro (Italy) Festival's huge section on American Independent
Films, where I first saw it, this work was one of the very best
entries.
     In and around the West Campus of the University of Texas (Austin),
students, former students, drop-outs, academics and non-academics of
all types hang out.  They are "slackers", the latest breed and variant
of what used to be called beatniks, and, according to Linklater, "the
generation that would have been aborted; it just wasn't hip at the
time."
     There are 105 of them, mostly in their twenties but with older
people thrown in too.  Very few in the cast had any acting experience.
About 30% of the 105 were acquaintances.  The rest came off the street.
     SLACKER depicts a period of 24 hours in their lives.  Since the
movie deals with many types, all democratically given equal weight, it
cannot be an in-depth portrait of any one individual.  Rather, it is
the casual, off-the-wall and often very funny illustration of a
whole--not a collective but the sum of its parts.
     The camera starts on A who is a compulsive talker.  A meets meets B
(as a rule, also a compulsive talker).  B's path crosses that of equally
loquacious C who discusses life and things with D ... and so on.  By
the time we reach Z the daisy-chain stops.  There is no circle to
close, no plot or story to satisfy.  Instead, the zig-zags flow to an
end, as in real life.
     SLACKER is original, inventive and undjudgmentally ironic.  Its
approach is systematic but not at all monotonous.  Imagine a road novel
or movie, dense in characters but sparse in physical scope.  What we are
given is like fragments of a picaresque work, with routine events
devoid of high drama, and contained within one day and a few city
blocks.
     There is neither rush nor claustrophobia in this strategy.
Linklater's scripted yet candid semi-documentary does a great job of
its subculture , a subculture not one unified by purpose but rather by
aimlessness.  There is an odd passivity here, but it is not total:
there are active touches brought in by gentle freaks and semi-nuts.
     The transfer from person to person is done less through the camera
than through looking and eye contact.  The development is done through
talk.  This ranges from sophomoric profundities to mythomania, manias,
delusions or illusions.  And this talk can be hilarious, as when a
spaced-out girl tries to sell a phial of Madonna's Pap test.
     The place being Austin, where Charles Whitman shot people from the
Unversity's Tower, and the state, Texas, where John F.  Kennedy was
killed, it is no wonder that a lot of the slackers are obsessed with
murder--especially Presidential--and with conspiracy theories that
encompass politics as well as outer space.
     SLACKER is not an improvised movie.  Everything was tightly
scripted and rehearsed before the camera rolled.  Carefully planned too
was the style of the movie, a choreography based on long takes and
minimal use of montage. "This style would not fit an action film, but
it is perfect for a study of characters, since we wanted to avoid
distracting the viewer with an excessive use of the camera."
(Linklater).
     Richard Linklater, born in 1962 in Houston, briefly studied
English literature in college, dropped out, briefly worked on an
offshore oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico and briefly visited courses at
the University of Texas.  Disappointed by the way film was taught, he
quit and made his first movie, in Super-8, IT'S IMPOSSIBLE TO LEARN TO
PLOW BY READING BOOKS (1987).
     Linklater's passion for film (he was involved in the Austin Film
Society, a local operation by movie-buffs) shows in his work. "SLACKER"
he says "is an amalgamation of everything I've seen in the last five
years."  But whereas too many films use movie references gratuitously,
Linklater incorporates his organically, with freshness and creativity.
For example, the influence of Jean-Luc Godard in SLACKER's absurdist
gags is pleasantly obvious, as in the opening scenes with Linklater as
a cabbie's voluble fare, and the subsequent accident which has echoes
of BREATHLESS.
     Most of SLACKER's 97 minutes are varied, vastly entertaining,
perspicacious and sometimes touching.  College people should not miss
it, nor, for that matter, anyone else who needs the comfort of unusual,
non-commercial, imaginative film-making.

Author
Lon Ponschock
     People in Austin TX are crazier than people in Appleton WI right?
Who knows?
     SLACKER is a verite style film which means it's meant to look like
it just happened.
     Actually SLACKER *just happened* in the mind of the director,
Richard Linklater.  It's full of spew.  Spew is a word you should get
intimately acquainted with when using these systems.  Some of it is
valuable, other of it is trash.
     SLACKER takes you on a tour of Austin TX.  And there are a few
way-humorous episodes in it ... the Madonna one scored big points with
me.  But SLACKER is mostly spew:  young people with half-baked ideas,
old people with fully baked wacko ideas and a bunch in between who can
hang out on the street all year long because it's warm down there.
     Up here in Appleton, it sounds like spew, the spew you can hear
anywhere people have played out all the ideas they have but are young
enough to be able find each other and chat about it.
     For the discriminating "cult classicist," SLACKER is touted as a
must-see.  So see it if you must.  It'll give you something to chat
about.

Author
Jeff Inman
     SUMMARY:  SLACKER is a new, professional-looking, low-budget
     film in which the camera rides piggyback, from character to
     character, across the fringes of Austin, Texas.  We take brief
     snapshots of character and then move on, like some intelligent
     interstellar virus, transmitted through air, gathering
     information on humanity before the big invasion.  The people we
     meet are mostly going nowhere, but they are interestingly human.
     If you've seen Juzo Itami's TAMPOPO, you must remember the
startling but effective detours, in which the camera suddenly follows a
seemingly irrelevant background character, veering off into a brief
tangential story.  These deviations are a little confusing at first, but
one soon appreciates the suggestion that there are many other stories
lying just to the left or right of the one Itami is concerned with.  He
seems to be casting his eye around, noticing how deeply interconnected
things are, even if individuals remain unaware of much of the larger
pattern.
     New director Richard Linklater carries the tangential-story
technique to its logical conclusion in SLACKER.  There is no central
story to return to.  His "story" is just a thread in the vast
interconnected web of interactions among friends and strangers in the
outskirts of Austin, Texas.  Have you ever been sitting on the train, or
been walking on the street and thought about how the people around you
are all involved in their own movies for which *you* are one of the
"extras"?  Here are five strangers walking past each other, all at
(roughly) the same place and time, but each moving off into a different
story.  Which one shall we follow?
     In SLACKER, we are constantly making this decision.  We follow an
unending chain of interactions; a young woman wearing a fishbone T-shirt
throws a coin into the open guitar-case of a street musician (whom we've
just been following).  She continues down the street into a cafe.
Inside we overhear a conversation and the camera discovers the people
involved.  [paraphrasing] "What happened to Mark, anyhow?  Anybody seen
him recently?"  "Hmmm, he just hasn't been around."  We listen for a
while and then follow one of the guys who leaves.  As he walks, a
stranger from the cafe catches up with him.  The stranger says,
[paraphrasing, again] "I heard one of your friends is missing", and
proceeds to provide a cogent, if whacked, story of how the USA and
Soviet Union have been colonizing the moon and Mars since 1952, funded
through the Medellin cartel.  "I just hope your friend isn't ... well,
nevermind."  We ride piggyback from character to character, following
them to their houses, in their cars, to the bars, cafes and junkyards.
Instead of following one story, we ride through a cross-section of
humanity, wonderfully crazed, creative, and mostly-unemployed humanity.
     The production values are not up to Itami's standard (anyhow,
Linklater is following his own genius), but at $23,000 this movie is a
f*cking miracle.  It is simple and straight, but looks surprisingly
professional.  I noticed only one goof (and I wasn't wearing blinders),
in the next-to-last scene, in which a reflection of the cameraperson can
be seen in the back window of a car.  I would think, I would strongly
hope, that repeated viewings might turn up glimpses of characters from
earlier scenes in the background of later scenes, rather than goofs.
     What to say about the title?  Before seeing the movie, I had gotten
various indications that the title is a label for a type of person who
is, well, not too ambitious.  Most of the characters are drifting,
marginally employed dreamers in their mid-twenties, but they've got
character and the movie doesn't laugh at them.  We've seen enough
predictable middle-americans, or alienated loners, in the movies.  It's
about time we got a chance to see the unrecognized-but-unrepentant,
day-to-day weirdness that is usually filtered out or wrapped in
cellophane by the commercial media.  These are people, as Linklater
says, with "... an Active mind and too much time.  You've worked your
life out to not have to make payments on a car ... and you don't need as
much money to get by, so it equals active mind, time, and no outlets.
... Anything can happen -- revolution, terrorism, subversion."  [Boston
Phoenix, 10-4-91]
     CAST:  The credits roll by too damned quickly.  I am not usually a
credit-hound, but after this film, I wanted a chance to read each of the
roles (or monikers describing people we've met in the movie), like "Guy
who should've stayed at the bus station", (Linklater himself) or
"Madonna PAP smear salesperson."  Presumably, the actors are friends,
and friends-of-friends of Linklater, as he couldn't have afforded to pay
actors much, given his budget.  Thus, it is all the more incredible that
he gets some authenticity in just about every character.
     POTENTIAL TO OFFEND:  Gimme a break.  Some language.  Violence
described, advocated, etc, but not exactly shown.  No nudity.  A great
pick-up scene in which not a word is spoken.
     RECOMMENDATION:  If you need Plot, Moral, and/or Special Effects,
this is not your film.  However, if you (like me) are constantly looking
for new vision and feeling in film, then this is a movie that may stay
with you for a long time.  My rating: 7.5/10.
