Title
Review for Swinger, The (1966)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
Ann-Margret remains one of the most vivacious, electric screen presences of 
the 60's and beyond. Her star turn in "Bye-Bye Birdie" lead to more serious 
acting roles in films such as "Carnal Knowledge." What I can't quite fathom 
is her role in this forgotten 1966 picture called "The Swinger," which is as 
pointless and boring as one can imagine. It is essentially a promo for 
Ann-Margret as a physical, sexy presence, nothing more. 
Ann plays an ambitious writer named Kelly Ollson who is seeking to publish a 
profile on swingers in a Playboy-type magazine headed by the handsomely rich 
Ric Colby (Tony Franciosa). Of course, she is rejected by Ric since she is 
too innocent to be a swinger herself. At this point, I found it silly to 
believe that Ann-Margret would be considered remotely innocent by anyone but 
never mind. Kelly decides to prove she is a swinger to get the job, or so I 
figured. She has her body painted in an outrageous pseudo orgy and does a 
photo montage in various styles of dress, though there is barely any nudity 
to be found. She also proves to be an amoral drunk just to convince him she 
is a swinger! Ric is mesmerized by her and falls in love, seeing that she is 
sweetly innocent after all. 
"The Swinger" is purpotedly a romantic sex farce but we mostly get older men 
chasing women in offices, endless, unfunny sexist jokes, and Ann posing 
lovingly before the camera not to mention acting like a complete fool when 
the screenplay requires her to. Oh, and there is a teaser ending that is as 
stupidly unconvicing as they come, and some fast-motion shots of Ann riding a 
motorcycle sans a helmet.
"The Swinger" is excruciating to watch from beginning to end, serving as 
neither entertainment nor as a pop culture curio. Directed by George Sidney 
who helmed the similarly awful "Viva Las Vegas," this is as empty-headed and 
clueless as they come bearing little charisma and zero laughs. At least, the 
stunning opening sequence is a keeper in the pop culture time capsule as we 
see Ann singing the title song in a tight black jumpsuit while sitting on a 
trampoline. The brief title sequence offers more pizazz and sexual energy 
than the rest of this lifeless film can possibly muster.  
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com
