Title
Review for Mat i syn (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Cynthia Bussiere
_Mat' i syn_ is a 73-minute meditation on the extraordinarily close and
compassionate relationship between a dying woman and her adult son.
Described by Nancy Ramsey of "The New York Times" as a "reverse
Pieta," the film portrays part of a day in the shared life of the two 
characters.
The mother and the son, who have no given names, share a dacha in
the woods somewhere in 19th century Russia.  Suffering from an 
unspecified terminal illness, and occasionally in great pain, the mother
is too weak to walk or to feed or otherwise care for herself.  Her son
carries and feeds her.  When she is thirsty, he gives her liquids from 
a baby bottle.
The pair shares an unusual physical closeness and a deeply spiritual
bond.  Because of the mother's illness and weakness, their roles are
frequently reversed such that the son becomes the parent, nurturer,
and caregiver, and the mother becomes the child.  Thus, when she 
naps, he lies down on her bed and naps with her.  He also holds, 
embraces, and caresses her, much as one holds and cuddles a baby.
Spiritually, the two are so close that they dream the same dreams.
Despite the mother's total dependence on the son, and the resulting 
constant proximity of the two, their relationship is characterized by a
profound mutual respect.  From their conversations, which comprise
the film's only dialogue, one learns that even though their relationship
has always been close on many levels, it has not always been without
its difficulties.
Apart from the gentle and touching nature of the story and its characters,
the beauty of this film lies in its pace, its photography, and its sound.
Paced very slowly indeed, the story plays out gently, poetically, and 
almost in real time.  This careful, deliberate pacing lends the film what
J. Hobel of "The Village Voice" has called its "incredible stillness."  The
pace also imbues the film with a great reverence for its characters and 
their relationship.  Both the pacing and its substantive effects on the film
are reminiscent of Tarkovsky's similarly slow-paced work (for example,
_The Sacrifice_ and _Nostalghia_).
Photographically, the film alternates between tight shots of its characters
and wide, expansive eye-level and aerial shots of the countryside and
the sea.  The film is in color, but its colors are subdued and often washed
out.  Interestingly, a number of scenes are shot through mirrors.  Other
scenes are shot through filters of painted glass placed in front of or 
behind the camera's lens.  The resulting mild distortion and blurriness
give the film its dreamlike and painterly qualities which, in turn, add 
further to the film's qualities of stillness and other-worldliness.  Indeed,
Sokurov apparently deliberately sought to evoke the style and natural 
imagery of Caspar David Friedrich, the 19th century German romantic
painter.  In its expansive exterior shots, the photography is also 
reminiscent of Angelopoulos' films (for example, _Ulysses' Gaze_).
In terms of sound, the film contrasts the low and quiet speaking tones
of its characters with heightened and amplified sounds of nature---
the rush of wind through trees, the gurgle and babble of a running 
creek, the breaking of waves on the seashore.  Against this great,
natural, outer world, life in the small, inner world of the mother and
son plays out.
The film's two actors bring an unusually high degree of understated
authenticity to their roles.  Such an accomplishment is all the more
unusual in light of the fact that these actors are not "professionals,"
in the sense that they don't make their primary livings as actors.
Geyer works in documentary films in Germany.  Ananischnov, whose
family Sokurov has known for a long time, manages a Pepsi plant in St.
Petersburg.  Ananischnov also appeared in Sokurov's 1988 film _Dni
Zatmeniya_ (_The Days of Eclipse_).  Regardless, or perhaps because,
of their "non-professional" backgrounds, both actors bring a depth and
sensitivity, together with a complete absence of sentimentality, to their
portrayals that is rarely seen in films, especially in films of such little
conventional action and dialogue as this one.
There are no characters in the film other than the mother and the son.
Yet there are indications of human life outside the little world of the 
dacha and its immediate environs:  A long shot of a train periodically
crossing a valley in the distance, and an aerial view of a three-masted
schooner in full sail just off the coastline.  By this visual contrast of the
ongoing course of life in the outside world with the small, private world
of mother and son, the film articulates one of its opening lines and 
perhaps one of its themes.  As the film opens, the son is recounting to
his mother a dream in which he was searching, unsuccessfully, for 
some words.  The mother supplies the words which are, in effect:  
"God only exists in my consciousness.  He does not extend outward 
to the world in the ordinary course of things.  This imperfection makes
my heart heavy."
Like many of the films of Alain Resnais, especially _Providence_,
_Mat' i syn_ is a filmmaker's film.  It comprises a story that cannot
be told in its entirety and completeness in any medium other than 
film.  For this reason, the very act of watching the film is an
immensely pleasing and deeply satisfying aesthetic experience.
