Title
Review for Arrival, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Michael J. Legeros

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A paranoid radio astronomer stumbles across some aliens talking across his
airwaves and is immediately relieved of his duties from his superiors. After
finding his partner murdered, the suspicious man follows the
extra-terrestrial signal down to Mexico, and finds something beyond even his
spectacular imagination: an apparent alien invasion preparing to take over
the world.
CRITIQUE:
Think John Carpenter's THEY LIVE mixed into a less-pretentious version of
CONTACT, and you've got yourself a pretty neat ALIEN thrill-ride featuring a
pretty solid story, good special effects and enough twists and turns to keep
you interested all the way through. I will be the first to admit that I
never thought I'd see the day that Charlie Sheen would ever make a good
movie again, but boy was I wrong, because this movie is actually quite good,
and intelligent! It's one of those movies that fell through the cracks in
the theatres (Unfortunately it graced the big screen right around the time
that the vastly inferior INDEPENDENCE DAY made its tragic debut), but should
definitely be caught on video, if you are any kind of sci-fi fan. Charlie
Sheen is perfect as the "guy caught in over his head" in a story which moves
along at a decent pace and actually provides some real suspense. It probably
could have used a more powerful ending, but all in all, I had a pretty cool
time watching this flick. If you dig science-fiction, want to see Charlie
Sheen in a good role for once and enjoy the X-Files and their alien
conspiracy theories, there is no reason why you should not be thoroughly
entertained by this intense thriller. But don't take my word for it, Siskel
& Ebert also gave it "two thumbs up!" : )
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film is director David N. Twohy's directorial debut. Before this
picture, he was primarily known for having penned a couple of Hollywood's
most infamous screenplays including 1995's WATERWORLD and 1993's THE
FUGITIVE. His career began in 1988 with a much less-ambitious script called
CRITTERS 2: THE MAIN COURSE.
Charlie Sheen's real name is Carlos Irwin Estevez.
Actress Lindsay Crouse starred in the 1987 directorial debut of
playwright/screenwriter David Mamet called HOUSE OF GAMES. The couple were
married at one time and have two daughters together.
This film was originally titled SHOCKWAVE.

Author
Michael Redman
Starting off the summer's science fiction onslaught, Charlie Sheen stars in a
quasi-intelligent fifties-retro alien invasion conspiracy. (How many oxymorons
can you find in that sentence?) 
Sheen is a nerdish radio astronomer in the SETI (Search For Extraterrestrial
Intelligence) program and spends most of his time sitting around awaiting
signals that would indicate sentient beings out there.  It's a lonely life
until one night the indicators go off the scale.
Sheen takes the tape to his superior (Ron Silver) who dismisses it, fires him
and destroys the tape. The conspiracy begins and the plot thickens. When our
hero's co-worker meets an untimely demise shortly after G-Men types confiscate
all the data, it's certain that there's something going on and we don't know
what it is.
In a surprise to no one, Sheen obsessively takes on the mystery. The
investigation takes him to Mexico in some of the best and heavily textured
scenes in the film. Here he runs into a scientist (Lindsay Crouse) also on a
quest: hers, to find the cause of localized global warming.
This is not an effects film but they are good enough, if not spectacular.
Suitably alien aliens and a spectacular underground building work well and
even the goofy copper ball weapon isn't dumb enough to wreck the tale.
The movie is an updated version of about a zillion B films from 35 years ago.
Evil aliens invade to take over the earth. One man finds out and has to defeat
them by himself. The ETs conspire to stop him. He discovers the one thing that
will defeat them (germs, light, electricity or ...) Sheen's speech to the
intruders at the finale is copied from every second-rate sf film of that time.
Oddly enough this is an asset, not a problem although the movie does have its
defects. It seems to take forever for the story to come together. The science
is a bit shaky. The most disappointing is that fascinating characters (Crouse,
Sheen's girlfriend, his assistant, a street-wise black kid) show up only to
disappear and then re-appear later for just a few minutes, never staying
around long enough to fulfill their potential. 
Good fun, enough action for the short-attention-spaners and plenty of story.
[This appeared in the 6/6/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
Charlie Sheen stars as Zane, a radio astronomer who listens 
for sounds from other lifeforms. When he finally gets one,  
his boss destroys the tape and fires him. Naturally, Zane is
not ready to give up, and he comes up with an ingenious way 
to do this himself. He is aided by a young neighborhood kid 
and they discover that the sound is coming from Mexico. So  
Zane goes down there to investigate, and runs into a lady   
studying why the temperature of the earth has dangerously   
risen so suddenly. Zane is having marital problems at the   
time, and an offer by her to spend the night with him is    
very tempting. Hearing Charlie Sheen deliver the line, "I   
guess there is something to be said for celibacy" is the    
funniest thing I have ever heard in a movie since Matthew   
Broderick discussed asexual reproduction in Wargames.       
This is just the setup, and I don't want to give too much   
away, because a large part of the movies fun is the         
surprises. Charlie Sheen, who has had a rocky career as of  
late, is in top form here. He is funny, serious, and        
determined to accomplish his goal. Sheen's absolutely       
terrific performance is another big plus to this movie. The 
story is ingeniously devised by Twohy, who also wrote and   
directed the equally clever cable movie Grand Tour: Disaster
In Time. The films major flaw is a very slow pace, and not  
much happens in the earlygoings. Viewers may be growing     
restless for a while, but trust me if you stick around and  
keep your head in it, you will have a good time.            

Author
David N. Butterworth
A film review by David N. Butterworth
Copyright 1996 David N. Butterworth/The Summer Pennsylvanian
Some might find it hard to take Charlie Sheen seriously these days.
>From his pumped up, exaggerated roles in HOT SHOTS! and its wackier sequel,
HOT SHOTS! PART DEUX, to his spotty appearance on the TV hit FRIENDS,
saying that Sheen's recent performances have bordered on self-parody would
be like saying TWISTER is a movie about the weather.  But it's his earnest
performance in THE ARRIVAL that raises this extraterrestrial flick above
your average We Are Not Alone science fiction thriller.
Sheen stars as geekazoid radio astronomer Zane Ziminski--where do they get
these names?--doing "dish time" from a secluded NASA-funded outpost,
tracking F-class stars and listening for signs of "non-Earth based" life.
It's like STAKEOUT with a glossier Sheen.
For the most part a radio astronomer's career is not an eventful one...
Until one night, when tracking star Wolf 336, 14.6 light years away, Zane
and his co-geek astronomer buddy get a "spike" on their oscillator, and
look out boys cuz it's a big one!
But Zane's gaga enthusiasm is quickly quashed by his icy, unsympathetic
boss Gordian (played by icy, unsympathetic Ron Silver, similarly corrupt in
TIME COP and BLUE STEEL).  Gordian tells Zane "If you can't confirm it, it
doesn't exist."  Forty-two seconds of non-random, non-Earth-based signal
doesn't amount to a hill o' beans if it doesn't repeat itself.  And, to add
insult to injury, Zane shortly learns that his position at the Jet
Propulsion Lab is being eliminated-government cut-backs and all that.
Sounds like a cover-up to me.  And Zane thinks so too.
So, with the help of some playful jump-cutting techniques, Zane signs up as
a satellite television repairperson and rigs up an elaborate scheme to
confirm his There's Something Out There notion, uncovering an equally
elaborate conspiracy of global warming and master plans.
Lindsay Crouse plays eco-botanical geologist weather person thing Ilana
Green, whose path crosses Zane's down in Central America (she's concerned
about thermonuclear temperatures or some such, and there's a creative
opening sequence in which you wonder why she's wearing such a big coat).
Zane has managed to trace the radiowaves to somewhere in Mexico: "one
signal sky-based, one signal earth-based."  Zane might look more like the
rocket scientist but even I could figure out what that means!  But by the
time he gets to the radio station broadcasting the signal...  Well, it's
toast.  Sounds like a cover-up to me!  Yep.  Zane's with me on this one.
And from there Zane finally stumbles upon the whole enchilada, when we
finally get to see the little green men for the first time--no "flashlight
fingers or metal teeth" here, but anatomically correct aliens of the
illegal variety.
The large-scale special effects are decent overall, but it's the little
ones that add more to this movie: the aliens' imaginative--if
under-utilized--dialect, for example, and the spinning copper sphere which
clears a room faster than anything in TWISTER.  And, of course, Sheen's
energetic, bug-eyed performance, technically not an effect but special
nonetheless.  Writer and first-time director David Twohy (he wrote the
under-appreciated WATERWORLD) keeps the production running smoothly, even
if his "the polar icecaps are melting" theorizing is starting to sound a
little too familiar.
The buzz on the street is that THE ARRIVAL is a slight, under-hyped
precursor of the Really Big summer alien invaders picture, ID4.  But if
you're already disappointed by the first wave of summer blockbusters, you
could do far worse than to check out this competent piece of S.F.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     These are the times that try a critic's soul, these summer months of
high budgets and low expectations.  They are the times that can make me
begin to question what it is I am looking for in escapist entertainment,
as I read raves for hyped-up disappointments like TWISTER and MISSION:
IMPOSSIBLE and wonder what it is that I am supposed to be missing.  They
are the times when a piece of fluff like DRAGONHEART seems that much
better when compared to the competition, and they are the times when a
film like THE ARRIVAL, lacking a big star or never-before-seen special
effects, will likely drown in a sea of higher-profile releases.  But THE
ARRIVAL is the kind of thriller which reminds me _exactly_ what I'm
looking for in escapist entertainment:  a script which has genuine wit,
genuine intelligence, and genuine excitement, and which convinces me that
the writer spent at least as much time creating it as I spent watching it.
That perfectly describes THE ARRIVAL.
     Charlie Sheen stars as Zane Ziminski, a radio astronomer working at a
Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI) facility, searching the
skies for signals of other-worldly origin.  On one late-night shift, that
is exactly what he finds, yet Zane's boss Phil Gordian (Ron Silver) seems
remarkably cool to the news, and in fact informs Zane that he is being
laid off.  But Zane refuses to let go of his discovery, and his continuing
investigation leads him to Mexico.  There he hooks up with Ilana Green
(Lindsay Crouse), an atmospheric researcher studying global warming.
Together, they begin to discover a conspiracy which suggests that the
aliens aren't just coming -- they're already here.
     THE ARRIVAL marks the directing debut of writer David Twohy (THE
FUGITIVE and the under-appreciated TERMINAL VELOCITY), and he demonstrates
such a keen understanding of what makes an action thriller work that it
seems he was born for the job.  In the first minute of the film, he
grabbed me by the collar with a beautifully constructed opening sequence,
and for the next 109 minutes he simply refused to let go.  There are
sequences in THE ARRIVAL which play like textbook examples of how to build
tension, particularly one involving a room full of scorpions which is
guaranteed to have you squirming if you have a pulse.  There is a kind of
suspense which plots based on paranoia are much better at generating, and
Twohy nails it, as well as turning it to humorous effect by connecting the
greenhouse effect and the failure of the Hubble telescope to alien
visitors.
     That is really what separates THE ARRIVAL from the pack:  a sense of
humor which surpasses most of the so-called comedies I see in any given
year.  Sheen has a solid, deadpan sense of comic timing which worked well
with Twohy's TERMINAL VELOCITY script, and again he wraps each line in a
wry self-awareness.  Zane is not a particularly dynamic role -- he's
gung-ho about finding extra-terrestrial life, but it's never quite clear
why -- and another actor might have given it more depth.  However, Sheen
makes the comic lines feel un-scripted, and he appears to be adept at
playing Twohy's favored hero -- a resourceful individual whose actions
under duress seem natural and basically intelligent.  Plus, there is a
priceless irony to Sheen, the most notorious and unapologetic customer of
"Hollywood Madam" Heidi Fleiss, reading the line, "There's something to be
said for abstinence."
     THE ARRIVAL is so effective in some of its early scenes that the big
sequence in the aliens' lair comes as something of a disappointment, since
Twohy seems less concerned with maintaining the pace than he is with
showing off his visual effects.  There are a few logical errors I caught
upon reflection, and the abrupt ending is likely to leave some viewers
feeling a bit unsatisfied.  But THE ARRIVAL is a rarity so far this summer
movie season:  it is a smart and tightly-plotted film that I couldn't
always out-guess, and didn't always find myself _trying_ to out-guess.  I
was so instantly aware of how skillfully David Twohy could manipulate me
that I simply let him.  And that, friends, is how I define "willing
suspension of disbelief."
o help us understand
her; she is merely presenting us with the facts of an individual's life
and the world surrounding that individual.  I SHOT ANDY WARHOL is
exceedingly well-documented, and that makes it great journalism.  Mary
Harron directs her actors and her environment to perfection, and that
makes it great theater.  What is missing is human drama, and a sense of
what this story is really about.  That, quite simply, does not make a
great film.

Author
James Berardinelli
     The biggest alien invasion picture of the summer of 1996 is 
INDEPENDENCE DAY.  But it's not the first.  THE ARRIVAL, with a 
significantly lower budget than Fox's July 3 release, has that 
distinction, and, while this particular film doesn't boast any radical 
or surprising ideas, it combines numerous familiar plot elements into a 
suspenseful, entertaining whole.  Best of all, perhaps, is the 
realization that some thought went into writer/director David Twohy's 
script.  This is not a dumb movie; in fact, with its heavy reliance upon 
real science, it's startlingly credible.
     When aliens can disguise themselves as humans, as in THE ARRIVAL, 
we're never sure who's a friend and who's a foe, and the best science 
fiction/horror films of this ilk continuously keep us guessing.  
Conspiracy lovers will have fun sorting through the layers of cover-up 
and treachery here.  And those who crave scary-looking, otherworldly 
creatures will get their fill from the aliens in their natural forms.
     The premise is rather simple.  The aliens hail from a planet 
orbiting Wolf-336, an unstable star located 14.6 light years from Earth.  
A colonizing force has arrived here incognito with the goal of readying 
this world for inhabitation.  That process involves accelerating the 
greenhouse effect -- intentionally polluting the atmosphere so that the 
global temperature rises, causing the polar ice caps melt.  
     Zane (Charlie Sheen) and Calvin (Richard Schiff), a pair of CETI 
radio astronomers, intercept communications between Wolf-336 and Earth.  
When they report this to their boss, Phil Gordian (Ron Silver), Zane is 
fired and Calvin suffers an unfortunate accident.  With the help of Kiki 
(Tony T. Johnson), a neighborhood boy, Zane begins investigating on his 
own, ignoring his girlfriend (Teri Polo) in his quest to determine who's 
out there.  But Zane isn't the only one observing strange goings-on.  A 
UCLA environmentalist (Lindsay Crouse) has noticed the alarming increase 
in global warming, and it's only a matter of time before she and Zane 
meet each other and compare notes.
     THE ARRIVAL is low key, which is refreshing at this time of year, 
and it's as much horror as pure science fiction.  This is the kind of 
movie that a director like John Carpenter might have made during his 
late-70s/early-80s heyday.  It's creepy and atmospheric, and, after a 
rather protracted opening forty minutes, well-paced. 
     Spectacled and bearded, Charlie Sheen is surprisingly effective as 
the paranoid protagonist.  He's more of an everyday sort of guy than a 
superhero, and, as a result, is easy to identify with.  Everyone else in 
the cast is basically a supporting player, including Ron Silver as an 
oily CETI executive, so the responsibility for the movie lies fully on 
Sheen's shoulders, and he carries the burden admirably.
     X FILES fans will discover a lot worth appreciating about THE 
ARRIVAL, which shares certain core similarities with the TV show.  This 
film, however, takes things much further.  Believability is a tremendous 
asset in a picture like this.  1993's FIRE IN THE SKY, supposedly based 
on a "true" story, was incredibly hard-to-swallow.  On the other hand, 
THE ARRIVAL, a completely fictional tale, is easy to accept.  David 
Twohy should be commended.  In a summer when tornadoes, impossible 
missions, and flying dragons are grabbing the headlines and the big 
money, his smaller effort has shown more creativity than any of those 
blockbusters.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Craig Good
This year I'm in a real Summer Movie Mood. I saw "Twister" on opening
night. I saw "Mission: Impossible" on the night of the "sneak". I'm
looking forward to ID4, "The Eraser" and even "The Rock". Heck, I'm
even going to go see "Dragonheart". Both "Twister" and "M:I" were fun
in their own right, as long as I was in a forgiving mood, which I was.
This weekend I ran out to see a film about which I knew practically
nothing. I went with my same easy-going summer movie attitude.
And then "The Arrival" turned out to be such a pleasant surprize that I
realized I didn't have to cut it so much slack. This is a tightly
scripted Sci-Fi thriller which is every bit as effective as "The Thing"
or "Invasion of the Body Snatchers" albeit for subtly different
reasons. The best surprize in the movie? It was the fact that there
were surprizes!  At least three times during the film I said, "Now I
did not see *that* coming". The next best surprize?  That it remains
true to itself and does not degenerate into an action picture in the
third act. No fist fight. No snappy one liners after killing someone.
Wow.
Being science fiction it does, of course, take a few liberties with
physics and technology. But it only does so when it needs to, and
always at the service of the story. It's not at a Larry Niven level of
accuracy, but compared to any "Star Trek" episode it comes off like a
physics textbook. The effects range from adequate to stunning. The most
important thing about them is that they always serve the story. I guess
that makes "The Arrival" the "Anti-Twister".
By now you've noticed that I'm being pretty vague about the content of
the movie. That's because I had the pleasure of seeing it "cold", and
I'd like you to have the same. If I even tell you the *kind* of
surprizes it holds in store, I could ruin some of the fun for you. I
will say that the performances are engaging, especially in the case of
Charlie Sheen. Screenwriter David Twohy slips into the director's chair
for the first time (not counting one TV movie) and proves that he has
some seriously good chops.
If you haven't seen "Twister" and "Mission Impossible" yet, skip them
until later. Do yourself a favor and catch "The Arrival" instead.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Over the years there have been very few science-fiction films that have
turned me on, for the simple reason that they are usually hokey,
completely unbelievable   It was therefore a pleasure to watch a film
of that genre that deals with the subject matter that is based on
current scientific knowledge.   Further, the music, composed by Arthur
Kempel, fits perfectly with the story yet is unobtrusive;  the sets are
realistic, and the special effects by Charles L. Finance were exactly
right for the film.  In short, not only is the story a good one, it
includes a warning  for those of us for whom Planet Earth is our only
home. Pretty nearly everything in the film is superb.
Zane Zaminski (Charlie Sheen)  is a scientist  whose hobby is listening
to the skies for  a sound, an indication, that life on some other solar
system is trying to communicate with us.  He spends night after night,
for many years, just listening with huge antennas.  This leads to
neglect of his wife, Char (Teri Polo) as he cannot tear himself away
from his "hobby."  Working and listening with him is another scientist,
Calvin (Richard Schiff).
It is generally conceded by most people who are knowledgeable about
such things that mathematically, it is almost a certainty that given
the incredible number of solar systems, with each star in the heaven
being a sun, that Earth is the only place where a life form exists. It
therefore is reasonable to assume that one day we will hear from them.
To the great delight and awe that their dream and efforts have come
true,  Zane and Calvin hear and see on their computer's monitor what
can almost surely be a signal from some far away solar system. They
record the sound and the picture on the screen and rush to their
superior at the JPL laboratory to show what they have found.
To their astonishment, their boss, Gordian (Ron Silver) belittles the
whole thing and tells them to forget it as it is only nonsense. They
beg him to take a look at the tape and give him a copy.  When they
leave, he breaks the tape and throws it in the trash.  Ron Silver, by
the way, straightfaced throughout the film, gives a great performance
as one of the key figures in the film.
Shortly after the discussion with Gordian, Zane is fired  because of
downsizing??? The next day his friend, Calvin, is killed.  He is one
among others who mysteriously die.  Is someone trying to keep a
secret?  Is the government afraid that news of communication with
another solar system will panic the people on Earth?
At this point, the film begins to pick up even more speed and
excitement.  There is the pre-teen black kid neighbor, Kiki (Tony T
Johnson) who is curious and Zane lets him in to his lab and shows him
the computer.and other instruments.  Kiki will play an important part
in the film as it develops.   Scientist Ilana Green (Lindsay Crouse) is
worried about the increasingly warm weather the Earth is having each
year, as we all should be.   If this continues the ice at the poles
will begin to melt and our seas will rise and the beaches and nearby
cities will be under water.  It is something about which the
governments of the world (as well as the people) should be concerned.
Here, then, is a fine film you will not want to miss.  It is unlike any
science-fiction film you have ever seen.  Charlie Sheen is great as the
serious scientist who wants to get to the bottom of what he sees as a
conspiracy.   Find out about the Aliens for yourself!

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Tired of overhyped shows with big budget stars?  Want to see an
old fashion grade B sci-fi flick?  Well, I have just what you are
looking for, THE ARRIVAL.  Within the parameters of this genre, THE
ARRIVAL is a fun and surprisingly good film.  It is funny without ever
lapsing into self-parody.  Even the hokey plot somehow evolves into
something bordering on plausibility if you just turn your brain off and
go with the flow.
     In the opening, that I worried would be an omen for the audience,
scientist Ilana Green (Lindsay Crouse) looks out on a green field of
wildflowers in the Arctic and proclaims a single sentence, "Shouldn't
be here."  It turns out that I was glad I was at this show, but in the
next scene when I saw nerdy Charlie Sheen as radio astronomer Zane
Ziminski, I began to worry again.  Zane has classic bad glasses, a
goatee from the 60s, and a burr haircut to boot.  A highly overdrawn
character to say the least.
     Zane works at a Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI)
facility.  One night he finally hears something out in space
communicating back to earth.  When he plays the 42 second tape to his
boss at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Phil Gordian (Ron Silver), Zane
does not get the response he expects.  Gordian tells him, "searching
for ETs in this political environment is a tough sell."  He then goes
on to explain how Zane is being downsized out of his job effective
immediately.  Zane is nonplused calling his find, "the premier
scientific discovery of the twentieth century."
     As in most B movies, there are a couple of unnecessary romantic
subplots.  Zane can not understand his beautiful wife and successful
stock broker Cher (Teri Polo).  Looking at her he remarks, "Boolean
logic I trust.  Algorithms I trust.  Beautiful women are beyond me."
     Soon the mysterious holes in the atmosphere that Ilana Green is
investigating and the communication from outer space that Zane Ziminski
(love that name) is digging into, become linked in a massive problem
for the entire planet.  Along the way, the script mixes in a lot of
natural comedy, both in words and in action.  Zane threatens Gordian
with, "What do I want to do?  I want to blow a hole in your head and
donate your organs to science, but I've got a few questions first."
Later Gordian warns, "If you can't tend to your own planet, you don't
deserve to live here."  The funniest scene in the show is the bathtub
one, which will have you in stitches.  The show is also inventive, a
good example of this being how Zane extricates himself when trapped
underground.
     THE ARRIVAL runs a little long at 1:55, but it keeps your interest
up.  It is rated PG-13.  There is no sex or nudity, and only a little
violence, mostly of the non-threatening sci-fi variety.  Probably the
scariest scene involves big scorpions hidden in Green's bed.  The show
would be fine for kids over say 8 and perhaps younger.  I recommend the
picture to you and rate it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
The Flying Inkpot
Directed by: David N. Twohy
Written by: David N. Twohy
Cast: Charlie Sheen (Zane Ziminski), Ron Silver (Phil Gordian), Lindsay
Crouse (Ilana Green), Teri Polo (Char), Tony T. Johnson (Kiki), Richard
Schiff (Calvin Leon Rippy)
Produced by : Orion Films
Rating : ***1/2
Run Time: Approx. 115 Minutes
Despite having Charlie Sheen as its lead (with a goatee, no less, and as
a radio astronomer. eww!) and a tacky environmental message, THE ARRIVAL
is a nicely paced movie with good special effects that don't yell "Big
Budget" in your face the whole time you're watching it.
Sheen plays Zane Ziminski, an obsessive paranoic scientist who
along with his partner (Richard Schiff) records a clear radio
transmission from space one night. Despite initial rejoicing, things don't
develop the way you'd expect when the authorities receive evidence of this
transmission. Ziminski gets fired, his partner gets killed and suddenly the
whole world's just a heck of a lot more complicated for Ziminski than he
likes.
It's hard to say what else happens without giving everything away. Trying to
track and reconfirm the same signal he received, Ziminski builds a makeshift
satellite while masquerading as a cable man (I guess there are more than
just movie stars on Cable Vision!), and his discoveries soon lead him to an
ominous-looking plant in Mexico. There he meets an environmentalist whose
work is increasingly troubling in its extraordinary reports on the earth's
atmostphere.
The story probably sounds a little cliched, but THE ARRIVAL is a better
movie than usual, and recent, alien fare like INDEPENDENCE DAY, or SPECIES.
This is because it develops, and keeps to, an almost believable storyline,
one that engages the viewer continually as it reveals information in various
steps throughout the movie. Director Twohy, who was a screenwriter for ALIEN
3 and THE FUGITIVE, also does a good job of building and maintaining
suspense, preferring wisely not to just rely on the special effects team for
impressing its audience.
All in all, I'd say this movie's worth its S$7 ticket. Hey, anything that
makes me want to watch it through despite having Charlie Sheen in its lead
role is worth seven bucks.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
* Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Start with a standard conspiracy and cover-up story.  However,
instead of making the villain be the government or the Mafia or enemy
agents, this time make it be aliens.  That gives you a little latitude
for a few nice special effects and allows you to exploit the publicity
for INDEPENDENCE DAY.  That seems to be what happened with THE ARRIVAL.
The plot is pretty much a standard loner-on-the-run not knowing whom he
can trust that has been around since THE 39 STEPS and probably longer.
David Twohy proves that it does not take a whole lot of effort to make
this tried-and-true suspense formula into a science fiction film.  Two
previously wrote and directed DISASTER IN TIME, and there he did a
reasonable job.  That adaptation of C. L. Moore's "Vintage Season"
added adventure elements to a classic story and arguably actually
improved on the original.  However he also co-authored the script for
WATERWORLD, which depended too much on all-too-familiar action film
devices.  With THE ARRIVAL he is back to re-framing the all-too-
familiar, once again writing and directing.
     Zane Zaminski (played by Charlie Sheen) is a radio astronomer
working for NASA on the Search for Extra- terrestrial Intelligence
project when he receives a signal from space that seems to be a message
from something intelligent.  Bringing it to his supervisor, Gordian
(Ron Silver), he finds that some people, and especially Gordian, seem
more anxious to hush up the discovery than to act on the tremendous
implications of the signal.  Zaminski finds himself fired and the tape
of the intercepted signal is destroyed.  He determines that he can
search for the signal again by hijacking all the television satellite
dishes in the neighborhood, re-rigging them so that he can direct them
at will, and using them to try to again find his signal. The
information he gets is sufficient to tip him off that there is
something odd that has to be investigated in Mexico and the chase
begins in earnest.
     Twohy's script really needed to use its science fiction premise
more effectively in the plot.  Too often the premise of the aliens is
relegated to McGuffin.  If a character is hanging onto something for
dear life, does it really make this a science fiction film if the thing
held onto is a radio telescope rather than the Statue of Liberty?  Does
it make the story any more exciting?  And for an action plot, THE
ARRIVAL's is rather flaccid with only one scene of any real tension,
and that involving poisonous insects and not aliens.  Charlie Sheen
could have used a winning performance to his credit, but his radio
astronomer is neither winning nor believable.  Lindsay Crouse, whose
wooden performance was the only major problem with HOUSE OF GAMES,
gives an only slightly better performance here.  Tony T. Johnson is the
little boy next door, to whom Sheen can explain what would not
otherwise be obvious to the audience.  Teri Polo, the Christine Daae of
the 1990 TV version of THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA, is along as the female
companion of Zaminski, but neither the character nor the actress is
very much help.
     I somehow think that David Twohy wanted to have made a science
fiction film, but did not have his heart in writing science fiction.
This chase/action film gets a high 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER...
     The idea that Zaminski could build his own radio telescope to find
the signal again is ludicrous since it would take more money than he
could put into the project and putting all the television satellite
antennas out of commission would give him away before he could use the
scheme.  My guess is that this handful of small dishes would not
accomplish his purpose in any case.  Radio telescopes have to be really
large because they generally use very large wave lengths, though
admittedly the script says that Zaminski was looking in the FM band.
The Very Large Array near Socorro, New Mexico has 21 antennas, each 81
feet high and 422 feet in diameter.  They are on a Y-shaped rail track
22 miles across.  They can be brought in to the center in a tight
configuration or spread out over the whole track, having the equivalent
effect of looking with a wide-angle lens or with a telephoto lens.
However, this array is very often used in conjunction with other radio
telescopes in other parts of the world so the huge array that so
astounded Zaminski at one point in the plot should not have been even a
novel idea to a real radio astronomer.  Another problem that is
conveniently overlooked is the length of time it takes the aliens to
communicate with "something that moves like a star" and not a
satellite, so presumably it is a star.  There is also a plot problem
involving the note that Kiki left for his grandmother.
