Title
Review for Total Recall (1990)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Jaye Mathisen
Summary:
     Sometime in the future, Douglas Quaid finds out that he's not
     who he remembers himself to be.  From there, the plot takes a
     downturn into aliens, violence, Mars,violence, air on Mars,
     violence, and memory implants.
     Up until now, I've always liked Schwarzenegger movies.  They're
usually not too intellectual, have lots of action, lots of violence,
babes, guns, chases, muscles, and all the other good things that make an
action film an action film.  Until now.  While TOTAL RECALL had lots of
violence, the special effects got in the way of what could have been a
good movie.  It doesn't bother me to watch people get hung, shot, karate
chopped, or what-have-you, but gallons of blood spraying everywhere tend
to be distracting, rather than "entertaining".  I know I'm not squeamish
about blood (having worked for a fire department and an ambulance
company), but slow-mo of globules of blood flying through the air just
doesn't do it for me.
     The plot of TOTAL RECALL is okay, right up to where Schwarzenegger
gets to Mars.  (The plot's complicated, I'm not going to attempt to
explain it.)  The memory implantation stuff reminded me of the many and
various SF books that deal with "sensies," or "feelies."  (Movies/things
that allow you to sense what the characters on the screen sense).  Some
poor special effects of people in a vacuum, outright ridiculousness of
the ending, and the lack of believability in the story-line in general
ruined it.
Enjoyability
     Bleeech!  When I go to a movie, I like to "immerse" myself in
     what's happening on the screen.  Movies like STAR WARS and
     friends, I can believe, because it's way beyond where we're at,
     but is nice to think about.  TOTAL RECALL on the other hand, was
     hard to believe in.  "Aliens build air-producing reactor, that
     creates a perfectly breathable atmosphere in every detail for
     the human life form, on a planet-wide scale, in a matter of
     seconds, by converting old fashioned ice at the core of planet,
     into life-giving oxygen.  This air-producing reactor hasn't been
     tested, and the switch to turn it on is a large ball that you
     put your hand into.  Film at 11."  Naaaah.  1 star out of 4.

Author
Randy Parker
        The Arnold Schwarzenegger thriller TOTAL RECALL explodes onto the
screen with extravagant action, eye-popping special effects, spectacular
sets, and gallons and gallons and gallons of blood.  The film is literally
an assault on the senses, and yet, it is much more than a mere roller
coaster ride.  TOTAL RECALL is also an intriguing mystery, a throwback to
the film noir tradition where nothing is as it appears.
        TOTAL RECALL asks the eternal question: is it live or is it
Memorex?  The movie is set in the year 2084; Mankind has developed
"recall," a technology for implanting memories into a person's brain.  For
example, if you can't afford a vacation to Saturn, you can get the next
best thing: the MEMORY of a vacation to Saturn.  In the film,
Schwarzenegger plays a construction worker who is haunted by nightmares
about Mars, which in the 21st century is a politically unstable mining
colony.  Schwarzenegger has never been to Mars so he wonders where these
nightmares are coming from: are they just dreams or are they partially
erased memories bubbling into his subconscious?  He travels to Mars to
unravel the mystery.
        Like ALIENS, DIE HARD, and THE TERMINATOR, TOTAL RECALL rarely
surfaces for air once it plunges into the action.  ROBOCOP director Paul
Verhoeven has achieved the ultimate in wham-bam, rock 'em-sock 'em,
rip-roaring movie-making.  TOTAL RECALL is a violent and gory tour de
force, a virtual bloodbath with stomach turning makeup and special effects.
Fortunately, the film has a captivating story line which offsets the
gratuitous gore.  The elaborate and intricate plot is full of double
crosses, triple crosses, and even quadruple crosses, with mind games
galore.
        In the tradition of BLADE RUNNER and BRAZIL, TOTAL RECALL offers a
vivid vision of the future.  Verhoeven creates an entire society on Mars,
complete with a sleazy red-light district.  The ornate sets reflect both a
fertile imagination and a loving eye for detail.
        As for the acting, Schwarzenegger is in his element, reaffirming
his status as today's premier action hero.  The rest of the cast, on the
other hand, is somewhat pedestrian, except for Sharon Stone who makes for a
deliciously bitchy villain.  Unfortunately, TOTAL RECALL veers out of
control at the end, providing science fiction which is heavy on fiction and
light on science.
        When all is said and done, however, TOTAL RECALL sets a new
standard for action which should be difficult, if not impossible, to beat.

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the most popular concepts in 1990s science fiction is
virtual reality. Rapid development of computer technology is
most evident in more and more realistic special effects in
Hollywood movies and television. Future world where
computers would be able to fool other human senses doesn't
require much imagination. In such world it would be very
hard, almost impossible for humans to distinguish real world
from those created in computer simulations. There were many
novels, comic books, movies and TV shows based on such
concept, MATRIX being most successful of them. However, such
concept isn't new; it used to be explored many decades ago
in the works of Philip K. Dick, one of the most important
and influential science fiction writers of 20th Century.
Dick in his stories and novels often wrote about different
realities created with supertechnology of the future, and
consequent loss of the identity among human beings. Some of
those fears found the way to manifest themselves into
extraordinary films. Dick was one of few giants of science
fiction literature lucky enough to have not one, but two
great science fiction films. First one is BLADE RUNNER, 1982
cult classic, and another, that stood in its shadow for the
past ten years, is TOTAL RECALL, 1990 film directed by Paul
Verhoeven.
Plot of the film is loosely based on Philip K. Dick's short
story "We Can Remember It for You Wholesale". The year is
2084 AD and Doug Quaid (played by Arnold Schwarzenegger)
seems to have everything he needs in life - a good home,
steady job of construction worker and beautiful wife Lori
(played by Sharon Stone). However, his idyllic life is
troubled by dreams he has each night; in those dreams he is
on Mars, in company of beautiful and mysterious brunette.
Because of such dreams, he wants to travel to Mars, but he
can't afford it. Such problems are usually solved by
"Rekall", company specialised for inserting false memories
into people's minds. Quaid goes there and orders two weeks
of false memories about his being on Mars. Routine procedure
goes terribly wrong because somebody had already implanted
false memories into his mind. Quaid is suddenly being
attacked by his friends, co-workers and even his wife; they
are all operatives of all-powerful Agency, whose top
official Richter (played by Michael Ironside) spares no
effort to kill him. It seems that Quaid used to be secret
agent of Vilos Kohaagen (played by Ronny Cox), ruthless
governor of Mars colony, and had his memory erased after
betraying him for the sake of Mars freedom fighters. Quaid
must travel to Mars in order to solve the mystery of his own
identity and find the girl of his dreams.
Filmmakers took great liberty with original story, but,
luckily Dan O'Bannon and Ronald Shusett, experience writers
of science fiction cinema classics, were members of
script-writing team. As a result, TOTAL RECALL has an
original, exciting, intelligent and thought-provoking
script, one of the best produced in Hollywood in the last
few decades. Most interesting aspect of the film is the idea
that the sufficient level of technology can erase any
difference between objective reality and subjective
perception of the world. For most filmmakers today, the best
mechanism is virtual reality. For Dick in the story, and
screenwriters in this film, such mechanism was somewhat more
primitive technique of implanting false memories. Such
technology, although crude, exists today (at least, if we
are to believe reports about alleged alien abductees being
manipulated into fabricating their stories under hypnosis),
so it isn't hard to imagine its widespread use in the next
hundred years. Suspension of disbelief is even easier when
it comes to that technology being misused for some nefarious
purposes, like in this movie. But the most disturbing
consequences of such practices is human inability to
distinguish reality from fantasy - if memory can be
manipulated, and people can't trust their own past, they
consequently can't trust their present. The hero of this
film is constantly faced with such dilemma - are
all-important events in this film real or just his fantasy?
Movie leaves this question unanswered, forcing the audience
to watch it many times in order to find subtle clues. This
unanswered question could have spawned the very same endless
debate as the Android controversy in BLADE RUNNER.
Unfortunate thing for the reputation of TOTAL RECALL (and
good for its quality), was the fact that execution of this
script had been left to Paul Verhoeven, author of ROBOCOP,
another hidden gem of science fiction, made three years
earlier. Verhoeven was never associated with cult science
fiction, at least not with science fiction as infantile
entertainment, dominant trend in 1980s. Verhoeven always
used Hollywood resources to paint subversive picture of some
disturbing trends of contemporary America, always disguised
as standard commercial films. TOTAL RECALL, perhaps, wasn't
so radical or obvious like ROBOCOP. However, some elements
of 1980s are still present in Verhoeven's vision of the
future - some unknown yet recognisable variation of Cold War
is still fought somewhere in the background, corporate greed
at the utter expense of Have Nots still dominates the
economy, raw consumerism still dominates the culture and the
killing of helpless civilians and summary executions are
normal modus operandi of the legitimate government. This
grim picture is, on the other hand, well hidden with the
huge amounts of action, and consequent huge amounts of
violence. That violence is most graphically depicted - few
films are able to show people literally stepping over dead
bodies to achieve their goals. Verhoeven even manages to
insult feminists with scenes of nudity and with almost
all-important female characters being portrayed as whores.
The audience, however, barely has time to think about that,
because Verhoeven turns the film in one big roller-coaster
ride, using non-stop action through superb editing.
Verhoeven did great job not only in directing very good and
memorable action scenes, and neatly tying them with
thought-provoking and intelligent plot. He also managed to
create specific atmosphere of the film, which was supposed
to make huge Dickian contrast between bright
supertechnological future and its grim consequences for
human beings. Production settings of futuristic Earth and
Mars colony are quite believable, and special effects, still
good after having to compete with CGI for almost a decade,
provide many memorable scenes, especially at the spectacular
end of the film. Verhoeven obviously took great care about
details, providing some amusing product placements (ads for
"Mars Today") and interesting in-jokes and pop culture
references. Always reliable Jerry Goldsmith provides another
very good musical score, quite appropriate for this film,
quite in rank with his previous classics like ALIEN and STAR
TREK.
Some critics were led to disregard TOTAL RECALL because its
lead actor was Arnold Schwarzenegger, until that time always
associated with brainless action films (or, to be more
precise, what mainstream critics used to call "brainless
action films"). In this film he again plays unstoppable
killing machine with almost superhuman abilities, but there
is difference; this time the machine happens to be very
human. Quaid is man who is suddenly forced to swap his
boring, but safe existence with constant life for life and
the struggle to find his true identity, and, above all, he
is never sure whether he lives in a dream. Such trials and
tribulations were nice opportunity for Schwarzenegger to
show some of his, usually unused, acting abilities. His role
shadowed everyone else, mostly because they had limited
screen time. That happened even with great character actors
like Ronny Cox (who actually replayed his role of corporate
villain in ROBOCOP), Michael Ironside and even with his
nominal partner Rachel Ticotin. Some, on the other hand,
provided great episodes - Ray Baker was nice as sleazy
"Rekall" executive and Mel Johnson Jr. gave quite humorous
performance as Martian cabby. But the most memorable
supporting role was played by Sharon Stone; her portrayal of
Quaid's treacherous wife prepared her very well for the role
of Catherine Trammel in BASIC INSTINCT, the most ultimate
Bad Girl of 1990s cinema.
Of course, there are some that aren't pleased with TOTAL
RECALL for quite different reasons. Most obvious flaw in the
movie could be found by subjecting the movie to the basic
scientific nit picking. The ending, although spectacular,
seems unrealistic and as well as some scenes in Mars colony.
However, those who like to defend TOTAL RECALL might
disregard those nit-picks by seeing scientific
implausibilities as quite believable in the context of
Quaid's dream. All in all, TOTAL RECALL is well paced,
entertaining and thought-provoking piece of science fiction
cinema, a truly superb, yet disregarded gem of that
particular genre.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Robert Dorsett
     Arnold Swarzenegger stars as a rather mixed-up guy in the
somewhat-distant future.  The movie begins with him having a deep
hankering to go to Mars.  His wife isn't keen on the idea, so he settles
for something second-best--to have the *memories* of a trip to Mars
implanted in his brain.  He chooses the company's "Secret Agent" option;
the next thing we see is that the procedure goes wrong--he starts
playing the secret agent after getting doped up, but before the new
memories have been implanted.
     The rest of the film is more or less an action-adventure, with a
few plot twists (is it all a hallucination, or isn't it?) to spice
things up.
     As a science-fiction movie, all I can say is that I'm reminded of
the old actor's adage about Star Trek: it doesn't matter how
preposterous the story is, you've just got to *believe* in it.  The cast
here, by and large, does their best to make the movie fly.  The story,
though--let's face it--is preposterous (I was willing to buy the memory
bit, but the physics in the rest of the film ... yuck), and leans less
on science fiction than on pure fantasy.  The whole thing comes across
like a 50's/60's-era sci-fi flick, with many things not quite clicking
into place.  Even Swarzenegger's trademark humor is (intentionally?)
somewhat sterile, although there are some bright moments.  
     The flick sort of reminded me of Sean Connery's OUTLAND, which was
a far better movie, and made far better use of the cramped mining
town/oppressive environment gimmick.  Swarzenegger's last SF film,
PREDATOR, was a lot slicker.  This one, however, tries to be a
combination of both, with a bit of ROBOCOP (which I didn't care for) and
COMMANDO thrown in for good measure.
     There are product placements everywhere: Evian, Hilton, Heinz, Jack
in the Box, USA Today, and hundreds of others which I didn't catch.
They are all listed at the end of the film.  These are used, generally,
to provide "texture," but abnormally tilted labels always pisses me
off.  I've yet to see a kitchen in which all the shelves are piled up on
the counter, with every single label pointed straight at you.  :-)  If
one were cynical, one would find some pleasure in seeing these companies
portrayed in the way they were (Jack in the Box, for instance, is
located next door to a whorehouse; "Mars Today" is the organ of a
demagogue; the Hilton's the site of several shoot-outs and terrorist
incidents).  And I did.  :-)
Rating: 6/10, or a B- on the Summer Grading Scheme.

Author
Christopher Null
Arnold Schwarzenegger made a smart bet with Paul Verhoeven's futuristic
splatter-pic Total Recall.  Unlike most of the hulking killers from his
body of work (The Terminator, Conan the Barbarian), befuddled
construction worker Douglas Quaid is at a loss over how to proceed with
his memory-bending dilemma.  No amount of physical brawn will crack the
central question: Who am I?  Am I who I think I am, and if I'm someone
different, does that mean I can move beyond my former crimes?  The sleek
band of assassins are chasing him through the Orwellian streets, and
poor Quaid may be kicking the hell out of them, but Arnie is as
terrified as he's ever been.  Inside of this mountain is a mousy
everyman -- he never asked to become a superspy.
Quaid should be A-OK.  He seems satisfied with his job as a construction
worker and is married to a seemingly docile wife (Sharon Stone).  He
gets on well with his fellow employees, though his head is often in the
clouds as he dreams of Mars.  How to solve the problem?  A handy-dandy
trip to the false memory transplant center will make all his dreams come
true, asking the technogeeks to make him believe he's a top secret agent
en route to Mars on a mission (with the woman of his fantasies being a
sassy brunette, as opposed to his demure blonde wife).  No sooner has he
received the implanted memory than he starts to freak out, beating
people up, claiming that he is not Quaid.  When he wakes up, he's
himself again but unexplained killers are out to destroy him, his wife
cheerfully tries to knife him in the kitchen, and videotapes of "Quaid"
appear, telling him he's an indispensable part of the underground
resistance fighting corrupt political figure Copenhagen (Ronny Cox,
perfectly smarmy).
For the first 45 minutes, we're playing catch-up.  Is Schwarzenegger
really a spy whose trip to the false memory center triggered a series of
disturbing flashbacks, or is he just stuck in a psychotic dream world
where he gets to become the hero in his own life?  This audience
mind-bender was based on a short story by Philip K. Dick (Blade Runner),
whose fiction often dealt with different levels of perceived reality. 
Read into it what you will, it's basically The Twilight Zone with guns
and ample bloodshed.  When Rachel Ticotin shows up as the dark haired
woman of Arnie's dreams, it brings to bear the fantasy world as
escapism.  (The fact that Total Recall turns out to be a cop-out in the
Philosophical Discourse Department shouldn't surprise anyone -- it's a
popcorn movie, for cryin' out loud!)
Total Recall begins on a futuristic earth which bears more than a
passing resemblance to the financial districts of most major cities. 
Paul Verhoeven continues the mordant humor and plastic-sheen aesthetics
of his superior Robocop (and none of the Total Recall villains are as
memorable as Kurtwood Smith's nerdish superfreak, Clarence "You Burnt
the Fuckin' Money" Boddiker, who was half the size of Robocop and thrice
as deadly).  It's fast paced and surprisingly inventive with the gadgets
Quaid employs to get himself out of danger -- these include the
obligatory tracking equipment, but also a memorably eccentric "masking"
device that almost gets him through the airport terminal unharmed (as an
overweight female tourist in a bright sunflower dress.  Trippy, man. 
Phil Dick might've dug it.)
Verhoeven is unable to keep a good thing going, though.  The entire
philosophical premise and sleek look both corrode when Quaid arrives in
Mars.  Sitcom antics involving various goofball aliens in a bar give way
to endless shoot-outs.  When you can't think of anything else to do,
bring out the big guns and start splattering villains in memorably
gruesome ways.  There seems to be a desperate need to fill the audience
entertainment gap: We can't figure out how to end this flick, so let's
bring out the fireworks!  Faster, Pussycat!  Kill!  Kill!  On top of
that, the bright red textures of Mars are gauche and tacky.  Red Planet,
for all its flaws, managed to find a unique color scheme of exotic
shades (finding room for lush greens and radioactive purples).  Total
Recall is not half as ambitious, bathing everything in an unflattering
lava lamp red.  Yuck.
One more thing:  Arnold Schwarzenegger is a fool to think he'll make it
as the Johnny Carson of action films.  Sometimes it's fun, but more
often than not his reflex gag one-liners remind me of the empty Reagan
years.  On the surface, we're supposed to be amused, but there's not
much going on underneath besides heaps of bullshit-bathed swine, rotting
in the kennel.  This actually ties in with the nihilistic violence
Verhoeven relishes in.  A bullet in the head is easier to take if the
hero makes a joke after the fact.  Who's gonna cry over spilled milk or
broken bones if we're "lighthearted" about it?  Honey, I don't want to
marry you.  Excuse me while I bury the hatchet in your forehead.  Got
it, baby?  Consider that a divorce.
Director: Paul Verhoeven
Producer: Buzz Feitshans, Ronald Shusett 
Writer: Ronald Shusett, Dan O'Bannon, Jon Povill
Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Rachel Ticotin, Sharon Stone, Ronny
Cox, Michael Ironside
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
B Keen
     Carolco pictures and Dutch director Paul Verhoeven (ROBOCOP) came
together to create the 1990 mega hit that is TOTAL RECALL.  The film is a
masterpiece of sets, action, and special effects.  Action and science
fiction just don't get any better than this!
The story involves a construction worker named Douglas Quaid (Arnold
Schwarzenegger) who lives on Earth with his beautiful wife Lori (Sharon
Stone).  Quaid is obsessed with Mars and decides to go with the second
best choice; a brain implant (fake memory) of a two week vacation on Mars.
 While being implanted a memory cap is triggered and the doctors realize
that Quaid's memory has previously been erased.  Now the people who did it
are after him.  Quaid must find out who he really is and why these people
want him dead.  The plot unfolds at a rapid pace explaining itself through
great action, special effects, and twist after mind-boggling twist.  It
grabs you and never lets go!
This film is a winner from beginning to end.  The plot is superb;
combining the best elements of science fiction and psychological mystery
to create a rip-roaring saga.  Schwarzenegger gives his best performance
ever, and the supporting cast is good too.  The action and stunts are
terrific.  The sets are huge and elaborate with a lot of attention payed
to detail.  The music and sound effects are perfect for the film and
really add a certain level of impact to the action.  The make-up effects
by Rob Bottin (THE HOWLING, THE THING, and ROBOCOP) are top notch, not to
mention extremely outlandish.  The visual effects by Dream Quest (THE
ABYSS) and Industrial Light and Magic (STAR WARS TRILOGY, JURASSIC PARK,
and TERMINATOR 2) are phenomenal!  The visuals had such a state of the art
"slickness" that they won an Oscar.  Of course the film isn't always
realistic; it's more fiction than science.  For example, it is true that a
body won't explode in the vacuum of space but in TOTAL RECALL they do. 
Who cares?  It's a movie.  Movies are supposed to entertain.  And in my
opinion this film achieves an entertainment level in film that is so
terrific, it may be impossible to beat.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Violence, chases, thoughtful plotting,
     special effects, gore, Arnold Schwarzenegger, a few
     intelligent ideas.  They don't all seem as if they could be
     in one film.  Nobody will be totally happy with TOTAL RECALL,
     but there is a surprising degree of good science fiction in
     what could be Arnold Schwarzenegger's most intelligent
     fantasy film to date.  Rating: +2.
     I have to say that I usually am not very impressed by action or
violence in films.  How much variation is there in chase scenes from one
film to the next?  To my mind there is almost none other than the
background scenery changing.  The same goes for violence.  There are
about as many ways to tear apart a human as there are to carve a turkey.
It is a special effect that has been done so many times in film that it
no longer is of any interest to me to see it.  I am well aware that
there are people who can enjoy chases and violence in film after film
and enjoy them every time, just as there are people who listen to the
"Top 40" radio stations and can enjoy hearing the same songs over and
over.  Chase scenes and violence to me seem like unimaginative filler.
In addition and amazingly, I find I have this weird psychic ability to
know at the beginning of a fight scene who is going to win the fight.
If there are four armed thugs taking on an unarmed Arnold
Schwarzenegger, psychic vibrations tell me at the beginning of the fight
who is going to win.  The vibrations work for chase scenes also and
there, too, they remove much of the suspense.
     There have been a number of films that have tried to marry action
to a science fiction plot.  They have been films such as THE TERMINATOR,
PREDATOR, THEY LIVE, and ROBOCOP.  I consistently like them less than
the general public does and it is more than likely because the action
and violence scenes have so little value for me.  What I think I am
really rating is the science fiction film that frames the action and
violence-- often making for a much shorter film.  Take the action and
violence from the four films I mentioned and none is a particularly good
science fiction film.  Only THEY LIVE has a particularly engaging
premise.  That may be because THEY LIVE is an adaptation of a
pre-existing, published science fiction story so to some extent the
story has stood on its own.  TOTAL RECALL is a new action film also
based on an existing science fiction story and starring Arnold
Schwarzenegger.
     An Arnold Schwarzenegger action film based on a story by Philip
K. Dick sounds almost like a contradiction in terms.  Dick writes
cerebral--not to say neurotic--science fiction about people who
generally seem to live inside their heads.  You could not fit
Schwarzenegger into a Dick story with a crowbar.  The main character of
Dick's "We Can Remember It for You Wholesale" is a mousy, hen-pecked
government clerk.  Changes were inevitable if the story was to be made
into an action vehicle and vast changes were indeed made.  Yet the
screenplay has retained much of the  plot and most of the engaging ideas
of the story before going off in its own direction.  Even when it does
diverge, some of the concepts it adds are thoughtful and intelligent.
Of course, some unfortunately are not.  I know of nobody who actually
liked the last ten minutes or so of the film.  Like many films, TOTAL
RECALL was damaged by somebody's idea of a big finish.
     This is a story with a lot of twists, particularly early on when it
is still being faithful to the original story.  This means that I cannot
be very informative about the plot, but I can say that it starts out
being about a sort of an average 21st century man with big muscles and
an unusual problem.  He keeps dreaming about Mars.  There is nothing in
life Doug Quaid wants more than to go to Mars.  (In the story his name
was Doug Quail, but it was changed, possibly because it sounded too much
like Dan Quayle.)  Unfortunately, only relatively few people can go to
the mining colonies on Mars and Quaid is not one.  Well, the next best
thing to being there is having *been* there.  The difference between
having been there and not is having the memories.  In this future world
a company called REKALL can put artificial memories into your head more
vivid and believable than real memories.  So Quaid agrees to buy an
artificial memory of Mars--just a minor adjustment to his reality.  But
any Philip K.  Dick fan can tell you things go awry when you start
adjusting reality.  They certainly do for Quaid.  The script is a
remarkable piece of work that allows the viewer to look at the altering
of reality to be a minor plot complication in an action film or it could
be what the film is all about.  My wife came up with reasonable internal
evidence that the surface interpretation of what happens in the film is
wrong and another interpretation of the reality is correct.  Clearly the
script is richer than one usually expects from a Schwarzenegger action
chase film.
     Visually there are some very unconvincing effects and some very
nice ones.  Some of the model work is below average for Industrial Light
& Magic and Dream Quest, but there are some very impressive sights also.
Audiences seem to enjoy the subway security station as an effect
different from what ILM and DQ have done in the past.  the special
effects have been described as "eye-popping," a pun that will be
appreciated in the first five minutes of the film but also an accurate
one.  That brings us to the gore.  This film is directed by Dutchman
Paul Verhoeven.  He is generally good but uses a very great deal of gore
and violence, particularly in his later films.  This is a very violent
film and viewers should go expecting that.  Also go expecting to see a
lot of familiar brand names that helped to finance the film.  (Of
course, Dick mentions a typewriter company by name in the original
story, so there are precedents.)
     In summary, TOTAL RECALL is a lot of different films.  It should
please pretty much anyone who likes science fiction films.  It should
have a broad range of appeal on many levels.  I rate it a +2 on the -4
to +4 scale.
     [The novelette "We Can Remember It for You Wholesale" can be found
in the following magazines, collections, and anthologies:
   - MAGAZINE OF FANTASY & SCIENCE FICTION, April 1966
   - MAGAZINE OF FANTASY & SCIENCE FICTION, 30th Anniversary Issue
   - THE PRESERVING MACHINE by Philip K. Dick
   - ALPHA 5 edited by Robert Silverberg
   - THE BEST FROM FANTASY & SCIENCE FICTION 16 edited by Edward L. Ferman
   - EARTH IN TRANSIT edited by Sheila Schwartz
   - NEBULA AWARD STORIES 2 edited by Brian W. Aldiss and Harry Harrison
   - THE ROAD TO SCIENCE FICTION, edited by James E. Gunn
   - TWENTY YEARS OF FANTASY & SCIENCE FICTION edited by Edward L. Ferman
     and Robert P. Mills
   - WORLD'S BEST SCIENCE FICTION: 1967 edited by Donald A. Wollheim and
     Terry Carr]

Author
Elisabeth Riba
     You really need a break, but you haven't the time or the money for
an extended holiday.  That's where Rekall can help.  For a fraction of
the cost and an evening's time, they will provide you with memories of
vacation--guaranteed indistinguishable from reality.  To make your
enjoyment complete, you can even assume another persona, from idle
playboy to secret agent.
     But when memories can be altered for pleasure, what can people do
with malicious intent do?  And if memories can be implanted, what then
is reality?  Those questions form the premise of TOTAL RECALL, Arnold
Schwarzenegger's latest movie.  Schwarzenegger plays Doug Quaid, a
construction worker of the future.  He is constantly plagued by dreams
of Mars, and of a beautiful brunette.  He goes to Rekall, to relive (or
relieve) these dreams.  True to form, all hell breaks loose.  To say
more would be unfair.
     Originally based upon a story by Philip K. Dick, TOTAL RECALL
quickly devolves into another Schwarzenegger action slugfest.  Directed
by ROBOCOP's Paul Verhoeven, it paints a very convincing picture of the
future.  And it is a fun one.
     How was the acting?  Well, Arnold was ... Arnold.  He seemed
incongruous as the happy husband of the beginning.  It almost felt like
he was waiting with the rest of us for the action to start.  But once he
got moving, he appears to have as much fun as the viewers.
     His female co-stars were not up to his standard, though.  Sharon
Stone, recently featured in PLAYBOY, plays his wife.  She could handle
the feminine roles, but when she tried to get physical, forget it.
Whirling around in fake Oriental moves only looks ridiculous.  Rachel
Ticotin managed the action scenes, but her character lacked motivation.
Her feelings toward Schwarzenegger heat and chill more frequently than
Boston weather.
     The rest of the cast featured a who's who of recent SF.  Verhoeven
recast ROBOCOP villain Ronny Cox as the big corporate bad guy.  He plays
basically the same character, although wielding much more power this
time around.  Michael Ironside from V works for him.  He holds a
personal grudge against Quaid, but it all felt tired.  I also spotted
two guest-stars from STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION, one of them utterly
delightful as a triple-breasted whore.
     But when you watch the film, none of that matters.  Verhoeven's
direction pulls you along for the ride.  He manages to closely focus the
attention through both fast and slow-paced scenes.  The tension level
remains high throughout.
     The script also deserves credit.  Philip K. Dick's work usually
provokes thought and this is no different.  For those unfamiliar with
his work, his novel DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?  inspired
BLADERUNNER.  TOTAL RECALL comes from his short story "We Can Remember
It For You Wholesale."  Although the adaptation certainly takes
liberties, it still raises powerful questions like those mentioned at
the start.
     The future we get seems quite plausible.  No one presents us with
utopia or dystopia on a platter.  We feel at home with the Quaids.  I
wish the year had been pinpointed more clearly--some details seem
anachronistic.  (Mining machines exist, yet they still use jackhammers?)
It also includes a lot of product placement, but that didn't get in the
way of the story (keep your eyes peeled for the copy of Mars Today).
     Generally, the effects are strong.  With a few exceptions, the
alien makeup is convincing.  My main complaint regards something I've
noticed in many recent films.  It appears that someone has lost the
secret to good blue-screen.
     Like Robocop, TOTAL RECALL is incredibly violent.  However, about
halfway through the film, the gore stops amusing.  You can't cheer the
bad guys' deaths because there are too many of them.  The cliff-hanging,
eye-popping finale runs a little too long.
     Also, their research seemed quite sloppy.  Too often they
sacrificed believability for the sake of drama.  Again, the ending
really disappoints.  Verhoeven has a Ph.D. in Physics; one might think
he'd study Mars a little more.  People in glass airlocks shouldn't throw
stones.  One moment's thought can puncture more holes than their
automatic weapons did.
     But the pace doesn't allow you that much time to think.  All these
nitpicks come to mind long after seeing the film.  When watching the
movie, I loved it.  And, yes, I'd probably go see it again.
     So, if you like your fun mindless and don't mind a bit of gore and
violence, by all means see TOTAL RECALL.  For those who want something a
little more intelligent, read the short story and wait for it to come on
cable.

Author
Jesse Kaplan
Cast:  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Rachel Ticotin, Sharon Stone, Michael
Ironside, Ronny Cox
Directed by:  Paul Verhoeven
    This simply Arnold Schwarzaegger's best movie.  Forget about T2, and
TRUE LIES.  This is the most violent, most expensible made, most
perverse Arnold movie.  We got mutant martians, Sharon Stone, and too
many questions about whats going on.
        I've always loved movies that make you think about what's going
on.  12 MONKIES, MISSION IMPOSSIBLE are some like  those.  In TOTAL
RECALL its the same.  Is the movie really happening?  Or is it simply
Arnold's recall from the movie.  I still have no idea.
        Schwarzenagger stars as Douglas Quaid, a constuction worker
living on Earth in 2084 with a beaufitul wife of eight years, Lori,
(Sharon Stone, whom we almost see topless, oh well).  He frequently has
dreams about Mars and another girl.  Thinking it will help, Quaid stops
into Rekall Inc,which can implant memories of a trip into your head.
Cheaper and Safer then vacations!!!  However after Quaid orders a trip
to Mars as a secret agent, he begins to be attacked first by co-workers,
then his wife and he realizes no one is really who they were.  He was
really a secret agent from Mars who was sent to Earth to help Mars out
because they are not getting the air they need to survive from evil
dictator Cohaggen and his sidekick, Richter (Cox and Ironside).  Soon it
becomes total war, total action, TOTAL RECALL, wow that sounded like a
promo....

Author
David Wilcock
The booming introduction music finishes, and the camera sweeps over red
mountains. We see two figures looking over a barren, and very red
landscape. They kiss, then walk on. One of the characters (Schwarzenegger)
slips, and falls. The glass on his mask cracks. His face scruches up, and
his eye's begin to pop.....
Then Doug Quaid, played by Schwarzenegger, wakes up. It's all been a dream.
He wakes up next to his beautiful wife, played by Stone, and the film
begins...
TOTAL RECALL is a typical sci-fi film wrapped around an intresting (if far
fetched) plot. Quaid, who has never been to Mars, keeps on having dreams of
the planet, which has now been colanised. One day, while riding on a train,
he's see's a ad for a company called 'Rekall', which implants memories of a
holiday, instead of you actually going there yourself. Quaid chooses the
'Secret Agent on Mars' memory, and then the s*** really hits the fan.
The implant goes wrong, and Quaid really thinks he is an agent on Mars for
about two minutes, until he goes back to normal and can't remember a thing.
However, everyone he knows (his workmates, his wife) turn against him,
saying how 'blabbed about Mars' and 'blew his cover on the mission' A
strange man, called Richter, played by Ironside, wants to kill him. Quaid,
now hopelessly confused, follows the advice given to him, by a 'friend'. He
get's his ass to Mars.
Mars is ruled by Cohagen, played by Cox, who charges people for air.
Against him are the rebels, who are mainly mutants. The rebel's need Quaid
to defeat Cohagen, because Quaid knows (but can't remember yet) about a
reactor that produces air. Eventually, Quaid kills Cohagen, turns on the
reactor, saves the planet, and goes away with a beautiful girl, just like
the guy at Rekall promised him.
Throughout this plot, there is huge explosions, thousands of deaths (and I
mean a LOT of death) swearing, sex, and everything else that make's a good
Verhoeven (director of Basic Instinct and Starship Troopers) movie.
Naturally, there's some pretty imaginative deaths, with arms getting ripped
off, someone getting drilled, and heads exploding. As you can tell, it's
violent stuff. But it's done so stylishly, and of course Arnie tones it
down with a one liner, that's it excusable.
The acting is variable. Arnie, of course, is useless, but he goes has some
good lines, and in the first twenty minutes, he even act's like a normal
bloke, not like some action hero. Stone, of course, is useless, making a
pretty poor wife, and a pretty poor action hero. But, she does sex scenes
alright. Ticoton (most recently seen in CON AIR), again, is OK, doing some
good action, but getting her emotions all wrong. One minute she hates
Quaid, the next she loves him, and she never gets this tranisition right.
So, the good guys are awful. But, the bad guy's are excellent. Cox is
basically reprising ROBOCOP, but he's still great in this, and he delivers
the best line in the whole film near the end. Ironside is superbly evil,
with an utterly emotionless face. The supporting cast are fine, and not
even the comedy sidekick (this time in the form of a taxi driver) is annoying.
One disappointing aspect, though, are the special effects. ILM and
Dreamquest do some good work (such as a subway station scene) but the model
work is not so good. Some of the model heads look appaling fake, and Quatto
is a major disappointment. Another irritating thing is the product
placement. There are a lot of plugs (and a  good Mars Today gag) However,
the sets look great, and the special effects at the end of the film aren't
too bad either. There's also a good soundtrack running through, by Jerry
Goldsmith (THE OMEN, POLTERGEIST, STAR TREK: THE MOTION PICTURE) 
Overall, then, TOTAL RECALL is a hugely violent, yet hugely enjoyable,
action fest, with a reasonable plot thrown in there too, some great bad
guys, and some imaganitive death. For a Schwarzenegger movie, this is not
bad at all. In fact, it's very good. 
