Title
Review for Naked Gun: From the Files of Police Squad!, The (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Anton J. Panagos
Movie Review 1 - "A Fish Called Wanda" (R) - (Comedy)
**************   ------------------------------------
     This movie has to be the funniest comedy I have seen in 4 or 5 years.  The
movie stars John Cleese, of Monty Python fame, Jaime Lee Curtis, and Kevin
Kline.  A FISH CALLED WANDA has sick jokes, dirty jokes, dead animal jokes,
and a very good plot.  The plot concerns a gang of thieves who decide to rob a
bank of 10 million dollars worth of diamonds and jewels.  All of the hoodlums
get away from the police from the robbery except one of them.  Deciding he will
probably go to jail never to see his reward, the caught hoodlum hides the loot
in a train station pay locker and hides the key to the locker in the treasure
chest located in the bottom of a goldfish aquarium!!!  Never mind that all of
the above occurs in the first ten minutes of the film!!!  John Cleese is
hilarious as the stiff-necked attorney who ends up getting involved in this
mess.  Jaime Lee Curtis and Kevin Kline, as two of the thieves, portray a
strange "sister-brother" relationship.  This wicked comedy is funny, funny,
funny.  The movie will soon be available on video.  It has played for a long
run in many movie theatres.  I rate it ***1/2 out of a possible four.
Mini Reviews  - "The Naked Gun" (PG) - Comedy
                 ---------------------------- 
     The movie stars Leslie Nielsen in an "Airplane"-type comedy filled with
slapstick, sight sags, and generally silly humor.  Priscilla Presley plays the
femme fatale to Nielsen's attempted straight-face approach to his role as a
bumbling police detective about to solve his biggest case.  The movie has
cameos from actors and sports heros including O.J. Simpson, Reggie Jackson,
and a look-alike to Queen Elizabeth.  This movie, though, is not *half* as
funny as A FISH CALLED WANDA.  THE NAKED GUN is still worth a see.  I rate
THE NAKED GUN ** out of four.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     You are going to have to stick with the old arm-chair historian on this
one.  THE NAKED GUN has a long history.  In 1974 a film was made that was
sort of a radical experiment in comedy films.  THE GROOVE TUBE was a sort of
satire on television that was not a single story but a set of black-out
sketches lampooning all aspects of television.  It spawned a host of
imitators, one of the best being KENTUCKY FRIED MOVIE, which was written in
large part by three men, Jim Abrahams, David Zucker, and Jerry Zucker.  Like
THE GROOVE TUBE, KENTUCKY FRIED MOVIE was mostly made up of very short
sketches but it included "A Fistful of Yen," a very extended satire on the
Bruce Lee film ENTER THE DRAGON.  It was clear that someone felt the same
madcap style could be applied to longer satires.  Meanwhile, in another part
of the forest, a production company called Quinn-Martin was making a set of
popular television series including THE F.B.I., THE FUGITIVE, RUN FOR YOUR
LIFE, THE INVADERS, and a police show or two, all using much the same style
of story-telling, making them an easy target for satire.  But television was
not yet ready for the Abrahams/Zucker/Zucker style of comedy.  What made all
the difference was when the Abrahams/Zucker/Zucker took a mediocre but
popular television movie TERROR IN THE SKY (which was in itself a remake of
ZERO HOUR) and remade it using the same three-joke-a-minute style they had
used in "A Fistful of Yen."  The result was AIRPLANE!  It proved to the
networks that there was a viable market for satire--or at least the
Abrahams/Zucker/Zucker brand of satire.  But could the
Abrahams/Zucker/Zucker style of humor be applied to a regular television
series and could it garner an audience big enough to sustain it.  In a word:
no.  While POLICE SQUAD! was certainly one of the most inventive comedy
programs ever on network television, outside of a loyal core of fans (my
wife among them), people saw it once or twice and then felt they had seen
it.  By the time it was on there were fewer Quinn-Martin productions on
television anyway so perhaps fewer people even remembered the Quinn-Martin
cliches like the dramatic voice reading the title of the episode.  After one
season of six shows the series was apparently no longer profitable enough to
continue and was relegated to the ranks of cult television.
Abrahams/Zucker/Zucker have since made two more theatrical films: TOP SECRET
and now the POLICE SQUAD! movie, THE NAKED GUN.
     While Police Lieutenant Drebbin (played by Leslie Nielsen) is off in
Lebanon beating up every anti-American world and leader and warning them to
keep out of America, one of his own undercover agents is shot, left for
dead, and framed for heroin running.  Drebbin investigates and finds at the
heart of the matter a drug kingpin (played by Ricardo Montalban, in his
second film adaptation of a cult television show) with a plan to kill Queen
Elizabeth.  I will not spend a lot of time on the plot since it is clear the
filmmakers did not either.  I will say that notably missing are some of the
best running gags like the omniscient shoeshine boy and the frozen-scene end
titles.
     The real problem with the POLICE SQUAD! movie is that it is not really
a POLICE SQUAD! movie.  While it has a touch of the old style of three jokes
a minute, it segues into the Inspector Clouseau style in which the jokes are
as funny, probably, but each one lasts longer, and there are fewer.
Clouseau humor relied on the personality that Peter Sellers was able to put
into the character while the original POLICE SQUAD!'s jokes were a steady
barrage from all directions.  Leslie Nielsen's Drebbin does not have the
personal appeal that Sellers gave Clouseau.  As a lampoon of police shows
POLICE SQUAD! took every cliche it could find and turned each one on its
head.  It took place in a uniformly insane world.  THE NAKED GUN, like the
Clouseau films, takes place in a sane world with one insane man.  This leads
to a different character of film altogether.  It is slower and less
interesting.  I would think it would be unlikely people would want to see
Nielsen reprise his role again and again the way Sellers was able to.
     In spite of a number of funny moments, quite a number in fact, THE
NAKED GUN is a misfire and will probably be a one-shot.  Rate it a 0 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
Randy Parker
        A powerful business tycoon dreams up an ingenious scheme to
assassinate the Queen of England at a baseball game.  And only one man can
stop him.  James Bond?  Guess again.  The Equalizer?  Nope!  Give up?  Try
Leslie Nielsen, a.k.a. Frank Drebin, the bumbling cop from the short-lived
TV series "Police Squad."  That's right, "Police Squad" is back and ready
for action, this time as a movie from the team that brought us AIRPLANE,
TOP SECRET, RUTHLESS PEOPLE, and--of course--"Police Squad."  Their movie
THE NAKED GUN: FROM THE FILES OF POLICE SQUAD! reunites most of the
original cast from the TV series and features the type of madcap, slapstick
humor we've come to expect from Jerry Zucker, Jim Abrahams, and David
Zucker.
        Although THE NAKED GUN has more laughs than most comedies would
dream of, it fails to duplicate the magic of the team's previous efforts.
Since AIRPLANE, Abrahams and the Zucker brothers have used the same formula
so many times now that it has lost its novelty and become cliched.  Many of
the jokes in THE NAKED GUN not only lack originality, but also get repeated
over and over and over again.  The first time Leslie Nielsen pulls up to
the curb and crashes into something is mildly amusing, if uninspired; by
the seventh time, the gag has grown so stale it makes you want to ... gag.
        The first half of the movie strings together a series of non-stop
gags one after another, half of which fizzle.  The second half, to its
credit, slows down and has some extremely inventive and hysterical
sequences.
        The actors in THE NAKED GUN deserve credit for their solid comic
performances in the face of an uneven script.  Leslie ("Don't call me
Shirley") Nielsen is as loveable and inept as ever as Officer Drebin,
Ricardo Montalban is appropriately despicable as the conniving tycoon, and
Priscilla Presley as Nielsen's love-interest lights up the screen with her
humor and sex appeal.  The movie's clever cameos also keep things rolling.
        Although it may pale in comparison to a masterpiece such as
AIRPLANE, THE NAKED GUN is by no means a failure.  The movie easily has
enough successful gags and honest laughs for me to recommend it to any fan
of the Zuckers/Abrahams sense of humor.
