Title
Review for Holy Man (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Steve Rhodes
As G (Eddie Murphy), the mysterious guru dressed in ubiquitous white
robes, has his first moments before the cameras at the Good Buy Shopping
Network (GBSN), he says nothing for what seems like an eternity.  The
audience for HOLY MAN will undoubtedly be just as nonplussed as G's
fictional television viewers since little happens for interminably long
periods of time in the movie.
After successes as widely varied as MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS and THE MIGHTY
DUCKS, director Stephen Herek has a losing hand in HOLY MAN.  The script
by Tom Schulman doesn't know where it wants to take the movie.  There
isn't nearly enough humor for a comedy, and the attempts at poignancy
are awkward at best.  Schulman's last script, 8 HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG,
was awful enough to earn the picture prominent positions on many of last
year's lists of the worst films.  Still, Schulman has had his successes
too, including HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS and THE DEAD POETS SOCIETY.
The story starts with GBSN producer Ricky Hayman (Jeff Goldblum) down on
his luck.  The head of the network, played by Robert Loggia, is
threatening to fire him for GBSN's 27 months of flat sales.  As is
popular today, Ricky argues word definitions in an attempt to keep his
job.  "It depends on what you call 'flat,'" he reasons.
The network chief brings in a hotshot new producer named Kate Newell,
played by Kelly Preston from JERRY MAGUIRE, to work alongside him.  The
movie tries to create a romantic angle between the two of them, but this
subplot goes up a dead-end street like the rest of the story.
Through a lucky breakdown on the highway, Ricky and Kelly meet G.  Later
G manages to walk into a shopping network show with instant positive
results.  Product sales skyrocket.  Before long he has his own program
named -- what else -- "The G Spot," whose tag line is "a higher state of
consciousness and non-stop shopping."  His mixture of pop religion and
soft-sale capitalism fascinates viewers.  Would you rather be a "Bay
Watch" babe or the Dalai Lama? is one of the tough questions he poses to
his audience.
The movie is peppered with a series of cameos by everyone from football
players to old stars in television shopping parodies.  These comedic
softballs are missed left and right.  Only the one with Morgan Fairchild
is anything thing close to a homerun.  As G walks onto the set, Morgan
is demonstrating the "Insta Touch" which consists of a car battery and a
dozen probes attached to her face.  When he turns up the juice, her
toothy smile gets eight inches wide, thanks to special effects.
Eddie Murphy, although he is given some raunchy lines totally
inappropriate in a PG rated movie, is remarkably restrained.  He creates
a smiling Buddha of a figure with the liveliness of stone.  One can have
vigor in a role without being obscene, but Eddie's brand of humor seems
to work best only if it is relatively unhampered.
In a movie that is generally as mild as milquetoast, there are
nevertheless many parts that parents will find objectionable.  The
frequent profanity and sexual humor are not appropriate in a PG movie
likely to attract kids.  And why do we have a joke with the word "penis"
mentioned three times in about as many sentences?
Since most of the jokes are laced with sexual innuendo, the movie really
isn't for kids.  On the other hand, there isn't enough humor in the
movie for teenagers or adults so the target audience is questionable.
Sometimes, as in Jeff Goldblum's long monologue on his father's failure
as a salesman, the movie tries hard, too hard, to be touching.  Never
does it succeed as anything other than a comedy, but it is a comedy with
remarkably little laughter.
Although the movie has a long elapsed time of almost two hours, the
director spends most of it trying to run out the clock.  When the film's
corny ending finally arrives, it is as unbelievable as it is
predictable.
Surely, the test screening audiences must have warned them that the
movie contained long stretches of humorless and pointless material.  Why
didn't they do massive surgery to trim this celluloid fat?  In its place
some truly funny home shopping sequences could have easily been added.
HOLY MAN runs 1:54.  It is rated PG for profanity and sexual humor, but
parents should treat it as PG-13.  The film is acceptable for kids
around 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 9, gave the movie ** ˝.  He liked the television
commercials and the "cute" woman who played Kate.  His buddy Alan, age
9, gave it **.  His favorite part was Morgan Fairchild's "electrocution"
scene.  Both boys seemed restless and relatively uninterested during the
movie.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
HOLY MAN * 1/4  Directed by Stephen Herek. Written by Tom Schulman.
Photography, Adrian Biddle. Editing,Trudy Ship. Production design, Andrew
McAlpine. Music by Alan Silvestri. Cast:  Eddie Murphy ("G"), Jeff Goldblum
(Ricky), Kelly Preston (Kate), Robert Loggia (McBainbridge), Jon Cryer
(Barry), Eric McCormack (Scott Hawkes) et al. A Touchstone release. 114
minutes. PG (references to body parts and functions)
Nothing holy about this flick, but plenty that's hokey. Ricky is a hustling
producer in the Good Buy Shopping Network (GBSN), located in Miami's South
Beach and lately acquired by crass capitalist McBainbridge. The boss, made
furious by 27 months of "flatness" gives Ricky an ultimatum: "You have two
weeks to bring the sales up 8% or you're fired."
Ricky, at his wits (such as they are) end, thinks only a miracle can save
him. He also falls for Kate, newly hired as a gee-whiz marketer. While
changing a tire on the highway, these two meet Eddie Murphy, a cheerful,
shaved-head eccentric garbed in a vaguely Indian-Asian two-piece outfit. He
will (how did you guess?!) turn out to be the prayed-for miracle.
The encounter is most artificial. So is everything that follows. Somehow
(don't ask) all three people make friends. Somehow (PLEASE don't ask
again), Murphy, mysterious down to his name (just "G"), becomes the
instrument of making the GBSN a hit, and promoting the love affair between
Ricky and Kate, an affair that follows the tired cliche of antagonism
becoming love.
A protracted, dull  introduction and inane fast talk impede rather than
help the story. It picks up a bit when, at Rick's reception for potential
sponsors, G (by now Rick's house-guest) shows up and spices up things
somewhat. Vaguely guru-ish, certainly upbeat and humorous, he hypnotizes
Nino Cerruti (the Italian tycoon, played by himself), cures him of his fear
of flying, and performs magic (prestidigitation) with a Rolex. All this
simply postpones the action for about three-quarters of an hour.
When G is somehow (thanks for not asking) made to go on the network to
increase sales, he debunks the products and the customers, but spouts
"wisdom" and true values that somehow (don't ask) send the sales
skyrocketing. It's all silliness and inanity.
How sad. At his best Murphy can be wildly funny with his distinctive
ebullience, his infectious, toothy grin, his patter. Not here. The film
does have the novelty of a "new," quiet, presumably thoughtful Murphy, but
does little to exploit it. The movie has no bite, no zip, no energy.
Its elements are disconnected, illogical and incredible. Murphy, even in
this bummer, is nice to watch, but  he overspouts platitudes and cliche
"morality." The Goldblum-Preston couple --who, take up half of the film and
weaken Murphy's moments-- have zero personality. (Goldblum's deep tan seems
to indicate more time spent at the beach than at work -- but it still
cannot rival George Hamilton's and the champion's, Douglas Fairbanks' Sr.).
Loggia is a caricature. The balance of the supporting cast (including an
ill-conceived, unreal villain) were written in with the
Press-this-Key-for-Reaction 2 method.
Satirizing TV shopping, its hucksters and its public, ought to be a golden
subject. But here, it becomes a toothless dud in script and execution.
This, for a host of reasons, from phony attempts at being farcical,
peddling products that are outlandish and ridiculous, overall incoherence,
ineffectual morality, sluggishness, lack of humor and effective dialogue,
the absence of a real focus and point of view... This makes the movie a
yawner with just a handful of amusing moments.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Robert Workman
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
More like Holy Crap.  The film stars Eddie Murphy as a mystical-ish
figure named G on a strange journey of some sort when he comes across
two network execs (Jeff Goldblum and Kelly Preston) with a flat tire on
their hands.  Somehow he ends up in their car and on their channel, a
line-up of infomercial programs featuring the likes of Betty White,
Morgan Fairchild, and a slew of other celebrities and nameless figures.
It's here that he seems to hit his stride, speaking of life instead and
somehow boosting sales.  At this point in the movie, of course, morality
comes into play, particularly on Goldblum, who suddenly feels he can
market the magical G into megabucks to get in good with his boss (Robert
Loggia).
It doesn't take long for the movie to unfold into sappy mush, with
realizations taking place left and right and poor plot points.  Only a
real zippy sequence involving frying Morgan Fairchild's face seems to
have any interest in the movie.  Murphy lends nothing to his character
and poor Goldblum looks as if he'd rather be someplace else.
Some may argue that the movie has a message, but all that came across to
me is that I could probably get more entertainment watching that
informercial with the guy in the question mark coat.  At least he has
something for us to laught at...

Author
James Sanford
 It offers up Eddie Murphy in his most endearing characterization in
years, then keeps him on the sidelines for what seems like ages. Forget the
placement of his name above the title; as he was in the infamous "Best
Defense," Murphy should have been billed in this picture as "Strategic Guest
Star."
 He's also the only conceivable reason for anyone to sit through
"Holy Man," an otherwise cardboard comedy which spends far too much of its
running time giving us updates on the budding love affair between ambitious
TV producer Ricky (Jeff Goldblum, behaving like Woody Allen after a few
doses of Ecstacy) and media analyst Kate (Kelly Preston, whose stiff and
charmless performance guarantees she'll continue to be identified primarily
for her real-life role as Mrs. John Travolta). This will please the dozen or
so people nationwide who came to see Goldblum do his standard yammering and
yelping and will greatly frustrate the rest of us who'd rather watch Murphy
skewer the home-shopping craze.
 "Holy Man" takes place in the high-pressure Good Buy Shopping
Network, where hard-up celebrities desperately try to unload useless
merchandise -- Betty White pitches an aphrodisiac perfume called Clam, James
Brown shills for the Soul Survivor System, etc. Ricky's job is on the line
after 27 consecutive months of unimpressive sales; Kate is hunting for
someone who can give the channel an identity.
 Their prayers are answered when the enigmatic, soul-searching
wanderer G (Murphy) crashes the studio, letting viewers know the truth about
the lousy products GBSN touts; typical of their wares is an in-toilet bidet
called Lil' Squirt which dispenses "a refreshing kiss of mist" to the
derriere. G quickly becomes "the biggest thing to hit home-shopping since
the cubic zirconium," although why customers would purchase any of this junk
after G has shown its worthlessness is one of the many questions left unansw
ered by Tom Schulman's half-baked screenplay.
 There's a terrific movie to be made about home-shopping and the
folks addicted to it, but "Holy Man" is not that film. Murphy's interactions
with GBSN salespeople like Florence Henderson are truly funny, and his
encounter with a terminally vain Morgan Fairchild would be hilarious had we
not seen it in the film's commercials.
 Unfortunately Schulman decided to make these satiric swipes a
subplot, and the Murphy-less scenes with Kate and Ricky seem to drone on
interminably. Goldblum is irritatingly manic while Preston seems utterly
hollow; her smiles look like someone slapped a pair of wax lips on her face.
The only notable directorial touch provided by Stephen Herek is the ending
of every third or fourth scene with a long fade to black, which will make
programmers happy when "Holy Man" debuts on TV a couple of years from now.
 After a serious career lull in the first half of the '90s, Murphy
seems unsure of his ability to carry a picture, playing second fiddle to
wise-cracking animals in "Doctor Dolittle" and hiding behind special-effects
in "The Nutty Professor." His winning performance here suggests it's time to
drop that modesty and take control of his projects again. Certainly "Holy
Man" would be infinitely easier to sit through if it had larger helpings of
its supposed star; how sadly fitting a movie that warns against believing in
advertising turns out to have been promoted deceptively.
James Sanford

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: October 9, 1998
Starring: Eddie Murphy, Jeff Goldblum, Kelly Preston, Robert Loggia, Jon
Cryer, Eric McCormack
Directed by: Stephen Herek
Distributed by: Buena Vista Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG (some language) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/holyman.htm
There's a certain category of romantic comedies that critics and
commentators like to call "feel-good" movies. (Some might say that
feel-good movies are the only romantic comedies which ever achieve any
measure of success; the rest are typically passed on by audiences and
deep-sixed by critics.) These spirited flicks have a moderate amount of
emotion involved - more than your average film but not as much as a
tearjerker; the cast of characters is usually a fun-filled bunch that's
very sympathetic to the audience; and the plot is a formulaic rag that
has us cheering for the characters by movie's end. And although it's
certainly nowhere near the caliber of last year's Academy Award
feel-gooders (e.g. AS GOOD AS IT GETS and GOOD WILL HUNTING), HOLY MAN
might rightly be termed the first feel-good movie of '98. 
The casting is not spectacular, and really, Jeff Goldblum is the only
one at least semi-suited to the job. He - like David Duchovny - does the
straight-faced humor with talent and in HOLY MAN he works the crowd
well. Unfortunately, he never manages to land a solid baseline for the
role and it comes off feeling unfulfilling. That's unfortunate, because
his role is central to the success of the entire movie and without
gravity, both Kelly Preston and Eddie Murphy have a tough time deciding
where to go. It's not entirely Goldblum's fault, because the Tom
Schulman (DEAD POETS SOCIETY) script isn't particularly well-written.
Preston and Goldblum also can't develop any romantic chemistry, and that
side of the movie doesn't really shine either. If not for Goldblum's
ability to adapt well and Murphy's mirthful countenance, the acting
corps would be in the red for this movie. 
With what they've got, however, they managed to pull off a darn cute
movie. Goldblum plays shopping network exec Ricky Hayman, a man who's
under constant pressure from the boss to boost sales. He's teamed up
with attractive co-worker Kate Newell (Preston), who, although initially
cold to Ricky's not-so-suave advances, eventually comes to like the
fellow. The two discover latter-day prophet "G," a grinning,
good-natured dude played with skill by Eddie Murphy. G does many things
well, including making people feel good about buying things off of a
shopping network. Ricky and Kate exploit this until Kate gets second
thoughts; she backs out and eventually leaves Ricky because he's too
power-minded. It's up to Ricky, then, to do the right thing and try to
get the girl back. (And, since it's a romantic comedy, the ending is
never really in doubt.) 
The humor content is not outrageously hilarious, as it was in the action
comedy RUSH HOUR. Most of the one-liners are average, and there's no
extended comedic setups to speak of. But Schulman and Director Stephen
Herek (MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS) manage to overcome the quality problem with
quantity. The jokes are at least semi-funny, and the whole lot promotes
a sort of tongue-in-cheek atmosphere that makes the movie more
watchable. None of the specific elements really work in HOLY MAN on an
individual basis, but as a whole they come together nicely and make this
movie worth the price of the ticket. The only people who'll have
problems with it are those that expect an outright laugh-fest and don't
watch the movie for its more humanitarian qualities. Indeed, watching
this movie should end up being a very enjoyable experience for all who
attend.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
Back in the early years of his career, Eddie Murphy was afflicted with what
Roger Ebert termed "Star Magic Syndrome", where a hot young star is shoved
blindly into one ill-conceived production after another, in the hopes that
name-brand recognition will make up for shoddy writing or inept concepts.
After the surefooted fun of DOCTOR DOOLITTLE and THE NUTTY PROFESSOR, HOLY
MAN is a step back to THE GOLDEN CHILD for Murphy.
Murphy plays a guru/swami-type figure named G (yes, just "G" -- [G]andhi?
[G]autama? we never find out), whose idea of mysticism is parlor tricks and
whose expoundings on philosophy are torn wholesale from sub-Robert Bly
self-help books.  He's the kind of character that desperately needs an edge,
a twist.  I kept thinking back to my own readings on Zen Buddhism, in which
the masters slapped their disciples around mercilessly, insulted them, posed
impossible riddles, and did all kinds of other off-the-wall things in the
name of enlightenment.  No two ways about it: G is boring.
G wanders into the lives of two TV execs (Jeff Goldblum and Kelly Preston),
who are the manufactured romance for the movie.  They're a little unnerved
by this guy, even when he repairs the flat tires on their car.  Every time
they look at G, their faces seem to say something like: "What if he's one of
those wackos who insinuates themselves into your life and kills your dog?"
Now right there is something more interesting than anything that actually
happens in the movie.
See, the execs are in charge of a rapidly-failing home shopping network
which hawks various utterly unsellable products.  They desperately need to
revamp things.  One day, on a whim, G wanders onto the set and does his
thing -- and suddenly, merchandise is blowing out the door!  This guy's a
kick-butt salesman!  This leads to him getting his own show (named, with
agonizing predictability, "The G Spot").
Why isn't any of this funny?  Probably because we can see it coming a
billion miles away.  Nothing happens in this movies because it's human
nature -- certainly not the cardboard romance, which has Preston and
Goldblum fighting, making up and getting back together in scenes of leaden
predictability.  And G isn't a counterpoint to anything: he's his own
straight man.  He has a bunch of unedifying little speeches and one long one
that's not only unedifying, but dishonest, because it's a parable that we've
heard way too many times before.
The writer, Tom Schulman, has indulged in this kind of sappiness before.  He
penned the insufferable DEAD POETS SOCIETY, which indulged in the insincere
fiction that poetry and writing need to be "sold" to students with flashy
technique instead of cherished on their own.  Here, he's no better: he gives
G nothing of importance to do, surrounds him with a setup that's bloodless
and uninvolving, and fills his mouth with thimble-deep pop-psych blather.
Suggestions for the rewrite: Either ditch the romance or make it more
bloodthirsty.  And as for G, give him some actual attitude instead of just
a smile.  Here's one role where Eddie Murphy should actually have let the
more scatological, scabrous side of his personality out of the closet.
Failing that, maybe they should have case Chris Tucker.  He would have been
funny just standing there in swami pajamas.

Author
Michael Redman
Birthdays often cause individuals to access their lives. Are we doing what we
want to be doing? What happened to our dreams? With the new millennium, our
collective big birthday, just around the corner, some people are sensing a
certain dissatisfaction with their existence.
The old standbys of traditional religion and science aren't doing it for many
anymore and they're looking for something else. We'll be seeing more and more
films with a metaphysical theme over the next few years.
Ricky Hayman (Jeff Goldblum) is having a career crisis. The programming
director for the Good Buy Home Shopping Network, he's going to be fired unless
sales increase dramatically . New producer Kate Newell (Kelly Preston) is
supposed to whip things into shape.
When the two are fixing a flat, they almost run down new age pilgrim "G"
(Murphy). G wanders onto the television set and connects with the viewers by
telling them that they don't really want all that commercial crap. In some
unexplained manner, this causes sales to sour. Ricky is saved.
The movie tries to be too much at once and fails at it all. It's not an
over-the-top comedy or a heart-warming message of humanity. It _is_ a
mish-mosh of poorly directed scenes made even worse by insipid dialog.
I am willing to put up with preaching from a film, but the messages here are
old hat. You should take time to smell the roses. Selling your soul for cash
is a bad idea. Golly. I'm glad I saw the movie. I never would have thought of these.
The opportunity to poke fun at the goofy products is mostly missed. When G
takes a chainsaw to the set, there's an obvious chance for Murphy to be
hilarious. It doesn't happen. The bits are so subdued and overly-long that
there's only a hint of laughter from the audience.
Murphy has changed his roles in recent years and not for the better. There are
hints of promise in this one. The only time the film picks up even a little is
when his shaved-headed character in the long flowing white caftan shows up on screen.
The others are horrendous. Goldblum has episodes of brilliance in his career,
but here he seems to have been replaced with a lifeless pod from his "Invasion
Of The Body Snatchers". His relationship with Kate makes no sense. They move
from antagonism to love somewhere off screen. Preston is as uninteresting as
she could possibly be.
Somewhere hidden deep inside of this film is about ten minutes of value. An
attempt to satirize stupid television, we get a self-parody instead.
[This appeared in the 10/15/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If your land has no rain and the soil is dry, you spend your
days irrigating it.  If your land grows olive trees, you harvest
olives.  If your land is rich beyond history's wildest dreams,
you go shopping.  "Holy Man" takes on America's favorite
pastime, gently rather than bitingly suggesting that happiness
cannot be gained through this activity, the title character
insisting that material things are merely a substitute for what
we really want.  The idea is not a new one.  We fireside
philosophers have pondered whether wealth beyond a certain
point contributes all that much to our joy and, in fact, whether
compulsive collecting is really a sign of inner, insatiable
needs.  In "Holy Man," Eddie Murphy, in the role of "G,"
favors the simple life without material possessions and walks
away from a lucrative contract to continue a pilgrimage to
places and people unknown.  Before he flees from the world
of things, he provides us with a portrait of a man who
connects with us because of his uncomplicated, homespun
warmth, beaming smile, and selfless devotion to people he
has grown to love.  
   But the 37-year-old, Brooklyn-born Mr. Murphy is not as
amusing as he was in his previous pictures, especially the
"Beverly Hills Cop" series, nor does his performance show
the depth he displayed in "The Nutty Professor."  The movie
is far blander than his concert performance in "Eddie Murphy
Raw," and though it contains moments of caustic wit, this PG-
rated picture is so namby-pamby, so confused about its view
of frenzied shopping, that when you leave the theater you
may want to tune into QVC or other cable network on your 35
inch TV and start ordering.  Tom Schulman's plot, as directed
by Stephen Herek, gives us a mixed message.  "G" is
supposed to dissuade his audience from their frantic pursuit
of material goods, yet his appearance on the TV shopping
channel, where he pleads for better human relations and love
of nature, nets the producer the biggest boost in sales in his
history.  What's more "G"'s promotion of the spiritual lifts the
income of the advertisers not only through the sly
manipulation of the TV cameras but by "G's" own
endorsement of products like chain saws, gadgets that use
your car's motor to cook food, and straw welcome mats.
   The story opens on Ricky (Jeff Goldblum), a TV executive
whose job is threatened by his boss, producer McBainbridge
(Robert Loggia), because the shopping channel is suffering
from a flatness in sales.  Driving along a Miami highway with
an attractive but businesslike marketing manager, Kate (Kelly
Preston), he suffers a blowout which "G," a holy man on a
pilgrimage, offers to fix.  When "G" is almost run down by
Ricky's car, Ricky and Kate take him to a hospital and pay
his medical bills, while Ricky invites him to stay at his home
during his recuperation.  Insinuating himself onto the stage of
the shopping channel during a live broadcast, he imparts
advice to a young woman demonstrating a battery-operated
facial toner that "You don't need that to be beautiful: you're
beautiful already," but does not leave the platform without
turning up the current and propelling her face into unearthly
contortions.  Picking up another actor's chainsaw, he asks his
audience what they would rather see: the studio trashed by
this advertiser's product or G's carving a statue of the Venus
de Milo with his own hands.  To see destruction is the implied
answer, and G provides us with just that.
   After a series of skits of varying merit, G is offered a
lucrative job on the station with the proviso that his agreeing
to a contract would save Ricky's job.  G's ultimate decision
flies in the face of sentiment, implying that it's better for an
individual to seek his own happiness than to better the lives
of others through preaching and charitable donations.
   The movie is dominated not by Eddie Murphy but by Jeff
Goldblum, a versatile actor indeed, who can flesh out a comic
performance as easily as he can horrify us in the role of a fly. 
The romantic scenes which are superimposed on the ad
satire appear contrived but more than that they distract our
focus from the primary point of the story: that spiritual
goodness leads to contentment far more readily than material
engorgement.  The age difference between Kelly Preston and
Jeff Goldblum does not help their chemistry together, their
tearful reconciliation coming across as merely sticky and
hackneyed.  For a more pungent, loopier send-up of
America's slavery to goods, try to catch a revival of Percy
Adlon's "Rosalie Goes Shopping," featuring the obsession of
Bavarian-born Marianne Sagebrecht, who has settled into an
Arkansas town and spends whole days phoning the shopping
channel while lying in bed.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Holy Man (1998)
Eddie Murphy, Jeff Goldblum, Kelly Preston, Robert Loggia, Jon Cryer, 
Eric McCormack, Edie McClurg, Morgan Freeman, Betty White, Florence 
Henderson, James Brown, Soupy Sales, Dan Marino, Willard Scott, Nino 
Cerruti. Written by Tom Schulman. Directed by Stephen Herek. 114 minutes.
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
"Holy Man" boasts a sweet, gentle, comic performance from an unusually 
subdued Eddie Murphy and a few moderately funny skits. Unfortunately, to 
get to the good stuff you have to sit through a painfully long set-up, 
loads of tedious filler, interminable shots of Jeff Goldblum stammering 
and twitching, a superfluous romantic subplot and quite possibly the most 
annoying performance of Robert Loggia's career. If ever a movie screamed 
"Wait for video so you can fast-forward through all the dull and annoying 
parts," this is it. 
Eddie Murphy plays G, a robed nomadic pilgrim wandering the land enjoying 
the moment and spreading his spiritual message. A chance meeting with 
Ricky Hayman (Goldblum), a stressed-out executive of a home-shopping 
channel, and Kate Newell (Kelly Preston), a no-nonsense media analyst, 
results in physical injury to G. Quicker than you can say "The Odd Couple,
" G ends up rooming with an extremely leery Ricky. After some script 
gymnastics, G appears live on the air at the Good Buy Shopping Network, 
wreaking havoc on the cheesy product demonstrations, enraging network 
owner Mr. McBainbridge (Loggia), and becoming a national media sensation. 
"Holy Man" attempts to be several things at once. It tries to satirize 
home shopping networks, but it's difficult to effectively make fun of 
something that is already a self-parody. The film attempts to teach us 
that collecting material possessions is merely a futile attempt to fill 
the spiritual holes in our hearts, but that's common knowledge already. 
"Holy Man" also tries to present a story of redemption, as Ricky Hayman 
tries to decide whether to exploit G's good will to achieve financial 
security or do the right thing at the expense of his career. Anyone want 
to place a wager on his final decision?
The one genuine asset in "Holy Man" is Eddie Murphy, who gives a charming 
performance, sharing love, good will and relevant advice to all those 
around him, while beaming his million dollar smile at just the right 
moments. Murphy is delightful and the film takes off whenever he's 
onscreen. 
Unfortunately, he's not onscreen enough. Jeff Goldblum gets the lion's 
share of screen time and his tired storyline weighs the proceedings down. 
As his potential love interest, Kelly Preston tries to brighten things up,
 but she transforms from an all-business media shark to an empathic softy 
far too quickly and the abrupt change reeks of contrivance. The other 
principal actor, Robert Loggia, wastes his talents in a one-note turn as 
a ruthless, screaming monster.
Structurally unsound and way too long, "Holy Man" is appealing when 
Murphy is onscreen and dull when he isn't. Instead of dropping your money 
at the theater for this trifle, wait until it hits video and fast-forward 
past everything except the Murphy scenes. G suggests that we focus on 
enjoying the moment and that's the best way to do so.

Author
Michael Dequina
Who knew that in 16 years Eddie Murphy, who made such a brash, raucous
big-screen splash in _48_Hrs._, would become... cuddly.  The disconcerting
trend begun in this summer's cutesy, largely laugh-free _Doctor_Dolittle_
continues with this earnest-to-a-fault dramedy.
Although he is top-billed, here Murphy is merely support for Jeff
Goldblum, who plays Ricky Hayman, the programming director at a home
shopping network.  Sales are way down, and Ricky's job hangs by a thread
until he meets G (Murphy), a mysterious spiritual guru whom a desperate
Ricky puts on the air.  While sales skyrocket and G becomes an overnight
sensation, the reinvigorated Ricky's greed grows, endangering his budding
romance with a goodhearted media research consultant (Kelly Preston).
Writer Tom Schulman has some promising ideas, satirizing home shopping and
infomercials and the nature of instant celebrity.  But these ideas would
have more bite if Stephen Herek had invested any energy into the direction
of the film.  The sluggishly paced _Holy_Man_ is not only slow and overlong
(113 minutes), but an unfunny bore, and Murphy can do little to juice up
the proceedings; cleansed of both the attitude _and_ comic sensibility that
made him a star (G is, for the most part, a straight man), he is a
curiously lifeless presence.  Goldblum is actually quite good, but it's
hard for the audience to sustain much interest in his character and
spiritual journey when the director doesn't seem to be much interested,
either.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     One of the things you've gotta love about Hollywood marketing people
is their occasional bouts with irony deficiency.  If you trusted
television advertisements for HOLY MAN, you'd probably suspect that it was
a raucous Eddie Murphy comedy where the star spends most of the film
mocking and deflating uptight media types.  That's because Touchstone
Pictures' marketing department knew it'd have one hellacious time trying
to sell HOLY MAN for what it really is:  a somber, sincere
satire-cum-cautionary tale in which Eddie Murphy, despite his lead
billing, generally plays second fiddle to Jeff Goldblum.
     The wonderful, awful irony comes from the "message" of HOLY MAN.
Goldblum plays Ricky Hayman, the programming director for Miami-based Good
Buy Shopping Network.  Faced with lagging sales at the network and
mounting personal debt, Ricky realizes he has to do something to turn
things around fast.  Fate intervenes when Ricky and colleague Kate Newell
(Kelly Preston) nearly run over an apparently homeless man calling himself
"G" (Murphy).  A few plot contrivances later, G wanders onto the Good Buy
set and on the air, becoming an instant phenomenon by lending his New Age
philosophizing to the hawking of chainsaws and electronic beauty aids.  As
G's success reinvigorates Ricky's career, Ricky begins to wonder whether
it's more important to be honest with people than to use any means
available to sell to them.
     Pretty good gag, huh?  Only the joke will be on viewers who expect to
have their funny bones tickled, but instead get a nearly two-hour lecture
on the evils of consumerism.  And what an achingly strident lecture at
that, with Goldblum twitching and furrowing his brow every few seconds to
make sure we understand he's in the middle of a Jerry Maguire-sized crisis
of conscience, caught between Preston as the angel on one shoulder and
Robert Loggia as the devilish network boss on the other.  Murphy,
meanwhile, gets a few devilish moments of his own -- you know, the ones in
the commercials -- but essentially spends the film's running time smiling
beatifically and waxing profound on the importance of love and connection
with the earth.  It's all very well-intentioned, and deadly dull.
     The sad part is that HOLY MAN could have been an effective piece of
satire.  The script by Tom Schulman presents G as a latter-day Howard
Beale or Chance the Gardener unknowingly tapping into some zeitgeist
malaise.  Unfortunately, if you're going to go for NETWORK or BEING
THERE-style stabs at modern media, you need someone a bit more cutting
edge at the helm than Stephen Herek (THE MIGHTY DUCKS, MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS,
101 DALMATIANS), Disney's crowd-pleaser-in-residence.  Herek wraps
everything in a warm-n-fuzzy package guaranteed not to offend, a pointless
perspective for a social satire.  Even the few token pokes at
infomercialism, including cameo pitch-meisters like Morgan Fairchild,
Betty White and Soupy Sales, are too feather-light to amount to much.
Wasting a chance to savage as ripe a target as home shopping should be a
criminal offense.
     It's similarly criminal wasting the presence of Eddie Murphy.  I
understand Murphy's recent move toward kinder, gentler, family-friendly
roles, since there are only so many ways to play the wise-cracking rebel
with the honking laugh.  The problem isn't his performance in HOLY MAN,
which is quite adequate for the minimal work he's actually required to do.
The problem is that no matter how hard Murphy tries to be a "versatile
actor," he's going to be in trouble with audiences if marketing geniuses
keep suckering his fans into watching a Murphy they don't really care to
see.  I'm glad Murphy felt strongly enough about HOLY MAN's message of
integrity to take a chance playing against type, but he could have picked
a less tedious vehicle.  It's even worse when Touchstone makes him look
like a certain Pot referring to a certain Kettle's ebony shading.

Author
David Wilcock
Eddie Murphys success continues to baffle. The vulgar and crass The Nutty
Professor (1996) managed to pull in a fortune. The vulgar and desperately
unfunny Doctor Dolittle (1998) again pulled in a huge gross. But Holy Man is
a departure from these films, containing an actual plot and not one fart
joke in sight. Sadly, though, it's not a complete success. Jeff Goldblum is
Ricky Hayman, who tries to sell products through the Good Buy shopping
network, and is failing miserably. Teamed up with Kate Newall (Kelly
Preston) he has to get 8% rise in sales otherwise he's out of the job. At
this time of woe, 'G'  (Murphy) enters his life a religious man who slowly
gets more and more into Ricky's life. Ricky eventually decides that G should
host his own show on the network, and G's religious rantings make an impact
on America saving both the network and Ricky. However, Ricky soon has to
make some moral decisions later on in the film.
I very much doubt writer Tom Schulman was intending an laugh out loud
comedy, but I hope he was going for a below average meandering tale. While
Holy Man has an interesting plot idea, it's badly executed and far too wrung
out. The films ideas run out long before the film itself does. Although
there are some light jabs at existing home shopping networks, and Eddie gets
some good lines, there's something missing to make this amusing. Stephen
Herek is almost lazy with the direction, which doesn't really help. And I
found it difficult to believe that G's talks would get the American public
to buy goods. Their was just no logical explanation for any of it, the
audience is expected to believe that this religious nut would become an
American hero. Still, that's the Wacky WorldŽ of Hollywood.
Eddie Murphy delivers a nice performance as G, and it's nice to see a calmer
side to Axel Foley. Sadly, he's a bit too calm, and is almost significant in
the movie. Kelly Preston seems to exist as eye candy, with a hopelessly
underwritten role which she gives a far too good performance for. Robert
Loggia turns up as the flustered network boss, and is quite good fun.
There's also celebrity cameos from James Brown and Morgan Fairchild, amongst
others.
But there's one redeeming feature of the whole film, a feature that makes it
impossible to give this movie less than a 2 1/2 star rating. And that
feature is....
Jeff delivers an incredible performance in this movie, heartfelt and very
human. He's natural, witty and just really, really good. Every line he says
has perfect delivery, and his comical face is great. He really deserves the
starring credit in this feature, as he carries the whole film along. In
fact, while my seat was being kicked by impatient 12 year olds who were
expecting another Eddie Murphy fart fest and talking about boys who 'fancy
them' very loudly, I began thinking of films Jeff should of starred in. Just
imagine...
Jeff in The Truman Show (1998): "And, er...if...if..I don't _see_ you, good
afternoon, good..er..evening, and...er..uh-huh.....good...._night._"
Jeff in Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981): "Chewy...there's...there's a _snake_
in here. I..er..I hate..snakes."
Holy Man is only really worth watching if (a) you're hopelessly bored or (b)
you're a BIG Eddie Murphy or Jeff Goldblum fan. Other than that, there's
little to recommend about this film, which misses the mark.

Author
Steve Kong
Much like the goods pushed on Holy Man's Good Buy Shopping Network, what
you see is not what you get with Holy Man. On TV, Holy Man is sold as a
hilarious film starring Eddie Murphy, but onscreen it is a romantic comedy
with Murphy as one of the supporting players. If you can get over the fact
that what you get is not what you were sold, Holy Man is quite an enjoyable
film.
Ricky Hayman (Jeff Goldblum) is the program director at the low-rated Good
Buy Shopping Network. The ratings and sales are so low that his boss,
McBainbridge (Robert Loggia), gives him two weeks to increase the sales. If
sales don't go up, then Hayman is out. The ultimatum is not the only thing
that McBainbridge gives Hayman; he also gives Hayman a marketing manager
Kate Newell (Kelly Preston).
Off the bat Hayman is in love with Kate. But, Kate finds nothing to like
about Hayman. Hayman is a self-centered and self-serving person. Can you
see what kind of person Hayman is going to be by the end of the film? On
their way to a meeting, Hayman's car blows a tire and they are stuck. Here
is where they meet G (Eddie Murphy). G is a man on a pilgrimage that takes
any given moment to say something spiritual. G is a smiling loveable guy,
and Kate picks up on this immediately. Hayman, though, is not as accepting.
In a freak accident, Hayman almost runs G over. Hayman, under pressure from
Kate, takes G in as a houseguest until G's all healed up. Hayman finds a
good salesperson in G and persuades G to sell for GBSN. G is a hit on GBSN
and sales increase sharply. G's mix of spirituality and good humor bring
viewers in, even though G isn't pushing the product. Can all be so good? Of
course not.
Murphy is surprisingly sedate as G. This doesn't mean that he's not funny.
Murphy steals every scene he's in. Take, for example, an early scene when G
is walking down a highway and a group of teens throws a Slurpee at G.
Instead of scolding the teens or getting angry, G thanks them for not
throwing a canned soda. Only Murphy could pull off such a line and make it
a laugh-out-loud moment. The character G has a lot of pontential that is
squandered by writer Tom Schulman.
Goldblum is serviceable as Hayman. Playing against the type of character he
played in Jurassic Park and Lost World, Goldblum was able to make me like
his character even though he was a slime ball.
Preston plays the "good girl" this time around. In Jerry Maguire, which is
the same type of story, she played the "bad girl." Preston injects much
life into the flat and boring character of Kate. She brings freshness to
the mediocre and cliched script. Preston and Murphy both hold the film up.
For a horrible performance, look for Robert Loggia. He plays his part as if
he were a cigar-chewing sergeant straight out of an old World War II film.
The script by Tom Schulman is a skimpier version of Jerry Maguire. The
story is about a guy who loses himself to the pursuit of money and
struggles to find his soul again. Preston and Murphy lift the thin script
above mediocrity.
I liked Holy Man in many ways. The primary one is that it's a feel-good
film, and I walked out of the theatre with a smile. There are small things
about the film that just make you smile, such as anything that Murphy's G
does. Then other things make you laugh out loud take, for instance, G's
disappearing-Rolex trick.
I recommend Holy Man. Catch it in the theatres or on video. You won't be
disappointed as long as you keep in mind that this is not an Eddie Murphy
comedy, but a romantic comedy. Maybe the producers of Holy Man will do a
sequel with just G, since he is the most likeable character in Holy Man.
"Your good is better and better is blessed." - G.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 visit the hard boiled movie page.

Author
Jamie Peck
HOLY MAN
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Forgive Murphy but not the movie. The comedian's turn as a bald, 
homeless, robe-clad purveyor of peace, love and happiness is a beatific 
breath of fresh air, especially on the heels of some delightfully 
unhinged work in summer's stirring "Mulan" and scatological "Dr. 
Dolittle." His character is simply called G, and the letter might as 
well be his rating, too - waiting for Murphy to cut loose in the wild 
ways that post-"Nutty Professor" crowds crave is ultimately fruitless. 
In "Holy Man," he doesn't get to fart or cuss or crack wise about sexual 
functions. It must be that higher plain. 
A near-auto mishap puts G's spiritual pilgrimage on hold when, while 
wandering the highways of Miami, he's almost hit by a Jaguar belonging 
to harried television executive Ricky Hayman (Jeff Goldblum). Ricky, who 
works for the struggling, QVC-esque Good Buy Shopping Network, 
reluctantly allows G to convalesce at his beach-side home, and it's only 
a matter of time before the recovered prophet winds up on the small 
screen, hawking junky goods like seasonal doormats and a bidet that 
sprays its user with "a kiss of refreshing mist." 
Here's the twist: G preaches as he pitches, assuring viewers that they 
would probably be better off _not_ giving into materialistic whims, but 
people buy big time anyhow. Too bad Murphy's Zenistic life lessons are 
completely transparent and often play like long-winded set-ups for 
punchlines that never arrive. The pokes at consumer culture are dead-on, 
but too often the film brushes aside the funny stuff for surprisingly 
straight-faced subplots, the eye-rolling pinnacle of which is a romantic 
sidetrack between Ricky and a cute media analyst (Kelly Preston). 
"Holy Man" gets so loaded down with all this unnecessary bunk that it 
completely loses track of what it set out to spoof - even Murphy 
disappears for large chunks of the movie's second hour so the focus can 
be turned to heavy-handed drama, complete with a schmaltzy soundtrack 
and slow fade-outs. But all is not lost; Murphy and Goldblum make 
fantastic foils during the limited time they have together, and the film 
trots out a galaxy of self-depreciating stars to poke some sly fun at 
celebrity image as they push their products on Good Buy. 
There's Morgan Fairchild's fabulous facelift machine and James Brown's 
ambulance-alerting medical belt that screams, "Help me, help me! Good 
God!" But the best bit finds ex-Golden Girl Betty White peddling an 
aphrodisiac scent that makes her climax right there on the air. As for 
most everything else, buyer - and viewer - beware.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Holy Man prompts me to ask the question, "Do shopping networks
broadcast live?"  The film, which stars Eddie Murphy as a strange and
spiritual individual, hinges entirely on the assumption (or is it a
fact?) that shopping networks broadcast everything live.  If this is a
fallacy, then nothing in this film is even remotely possible, for every
plot development lies on the shoulders of scenes that have Eddie Murphy
spewing "insightful" nonsense on a live shopping network.  If the
network didn't broadcast live, then the producers could have edited out
everything he says, or kicked him off, and he would've been nothing more
than a crazy Peter Finch-wannabe who likes talking into the camera. 
You may be wondering why I'm asking such a silly question.  It's
because this is such a silly film.  Holy Man a movie that wants to be
deep and satirical, but is neither one.  It's unintentionally ironic,
though, which is a quality that's fun to mock.  What really bothers me,
aside from the dumb script, is that Holy Man doesn't really know what
it's about  -- it's a satire that unconsciously satirizes itself.  So,
due to inept production values, the film's appeal rests on the appeal of
the three lead actors:  Murphy, Jeff Goldblum, and Kelly Preston.  They
carry it to a point, but they can't hide the fact that the film just
isn't well-conceived.  
Goldblum actually has the main role as Ricky Hayman, a producer of the
shopping network.  The film begins with Ricky's career in trouble --
sales have been going down, and the boss, McBainbridge (Robert Loggia),
is breathing down his neck to do something, and quick!  McBainbridge
brings in Kate Newell (Kelly Preston), who has some bright ideas about
where they should take the image of the network.  Just when things start
going really bad for Ricky, he meets an odd, serene individual named G
(Murphy).  Kate is instantly entranced with G, but Ricky finds him
annoying.
At this point, I figured the film would be pretty straightforward: 
they put G on air, ratings soar, conflicts arise, happy ending, blah
blah blah.  I was right, but only partially so:  everything happens as I
said, but there are about forty-five minutes of down time in the middle,
featuring scenes in which G stumbles onto the live shopping network sets
and speaks to the salespeople who are trying to sell laundry detergent
balls and chainsaws.  Then, of course, Ricky has to struggle to get him
off the stage so he doesn't make a fool of himself.  It's only after
this happens for half the film that the ratings and sales finally
increase, and then we're allowed to watch the plot trudge through all
the bland banalities of the Happy Family Film formula.
It's not really an awful film, but it reminds me that Hollywood, for
the most part, can't articulate a theme in even the most pathetically
misguided way.  It also reminds me that talented actors are often forced
to take certain roles to keep their careers alive.  Now, I probably
would have really disliked this film if it weren't for Goldblum -- the
guy is very funny, even when his lines aren't that good.  He's a
commanding screen presence, but he's also a good actor; he wrings at
least a little bit of feeling out of the obligatory "touching" scenes
towards the end.  Preston is also appealing, but, expectedly, the token
female role in this particular film isn't exactly fleshed-out.  Loggia
is good but annoying, while Jon Cryer, as Ricky's assistant, is
surprisingly funny.
That leaves us with Murphy, who has clearly made this movie because it
has some kind of message.  What, exactly, is that message?  Well, he
spends most of the film delivering trite, underdeveloped sentences like,
"Don't rely on material goods for happiness!" and "Admire the beauty of
grass!"  (By the way, I read somewhere that grass is one of the most
unnatural environments; it can not exist freely in nature, and is
basically nothing more than controlled weeds.  This makes me wonder how
"in touch" G really is with his surroundings.)  When G gets on TV, he
urges people *not* to buy things, and this leads to two things:  1) 
massive increase in sales, and 2) a nationwide G-craze.  The film
therefore implies that everyone watches shopping networks, which is also
a pretty silly thing to say.
Hey, satire is a great thing.  Failed satire, however, is pitiful. 
Holy Man is just another Hollywood movie, made specifically to rake in
cash with its big-name stars.  The fact that Hollywood tries to satirize
an industry that closely resembles itself is pretty odd, especially when
it fails to realize the irony in doing so.  There's a big difference
between a film like this and one like The Truman Show (which, by the
way, succeeds), because Holy Man isn't bold or biting -- it fits a
formula down to the last detail.  A formula film that says, "Don't fall
prey to consumerism!" is, in effect, saying, "Don't watch the film
you're watching!"  For a film that wants to make money, I fail to see
the logic in all of this.
On top of everything, the story is just so bland.  And, if you want to
know the history behind G -- his name, religion, why the hell he acts
the way he does -- you won't find it here.  Holy Man provides absolutely
no insight into its namesake, which creates a big problem when the
producers are expecting audiences to understand this man and believe
what he says.  This simply adds to the dominating flimsiness of the
film's claims.
It's not all bad though; aside from the amusing acting, there are some
pretty funny scenes (the two ladies with the laundry detergent balls is
pretty good).  Director Stephen Herek, although relentlessly
heavy-handed (his tactics worked better in Mr. Holland's Opus) at least
keeps the film interesting to look at.  It also got me to ask some
pretty challenging questions about the shopping network industry (do
they really broadcast live?).  Overall, I'm left as a fantastically
confused viewer:  didn't anyone notice that Holy Man is a self-defeating
endeavor?  A film that really wants to take a shot at satire should
first take a good look at itself, just to make certain that it's not at
the butt of its own joke.  

Author
David E. Smith
Holy Man (1998) - Eddie Murphy, Jeff Goldblum, Kelly Preston
   The poster for "Holy Man" shows a serene, Zen-like Eddie Murphy
   sitting atop a giant bar code. The movie is a lot like the poster -
   gentle, soft-spoken and nowhere near as funny as you might hope. But
   behind this simple packaging lies a subtle film that's not perfect,
   but still a better entertainment value than most.
   Jeff Goldblum stars as Ricky Hayman, an executive for a home-shopping
   network. His life isn't quite perfect - his tailored suits can't quite
   hold his work-induced ulcer, and his sportscar is about to be
   repossessed. The whole network is on the verge of going under, and
   media analyst Kate Newell (Kelly Preston) is brought in as their last
   resort.
   On their way to a meeting, Ricky and Kate run into G (Murphy), a
   wandering holy man on a spiritual pilgrimage. Literally. With the
   sportscar. In an uncharacteristic show of guilt, Ricky invites G to
   stay in his apartment while G waits for the doctor's OK to continue
   his quest.
   A few nonsensical contrivances later, G is an on-air personality,
   mixing Deepak Chopra-ish sound bites with hawking bizarre products
   like the "Hood Buddy" (it cooks while you drive) and "L'il Squirt" (it
   goes in the toilet; use your imagination). "Spirituality on a home
   shopping network?" execs cry, but sales are up - way up.
   Murphy is remarkably subdued in "Holy Man," and it's both appropriate
   and successful. His famous laugh is absent, as is his traditional
   scene-stealing. He's finally learned the valuable lesson that he
   doesn't have to constantly be the center of attention to turn in a
   memorable performance.
   Unfortunately, Goldblum and Preston seem to still think of him as
   "the" star. They turn in adequate, but not stellar, performances.
   Playing off his normal status as center of attention, they rarely
   allow their acting talents to shine. In addition, the producers'
   apparent need to put Preston in unnecessarily tight clothes merely
   because she is the female lead had to be distracting at some point.
   Their characters' romance seems forced, as they have remarkable little
   chemistry with each other. The presence of Murphy can cover a lot of
   flaws, though; everyone who interacts with G seems just a bit more
   relaxed. If only there were more of him in this film.
   Throughout "Holy Man" the humor is subtle and dry, and all too often
   whitewashed to near invisibility by the preachy anti-consumerism
   message. Even infomercial stars like Morgan Fairchild have trouble
   selling this movie, but you shouldn't have much trouble renting it.

Author
Susan Granger
This is not your usual boisterous, outrageous Eddie Murphy
comedy - instead, it's a gentle contemporary fable about America's
shop-around-the-clock consumer mentality, starring Jeff Goldblum with
Murphy in a supporting role. Goldblum plays a fast-talking,
unscrupulous, self-absorbed executive at the Good Buy Network, a
Miami-based home-shopping channel whose sales are plummeting when the
venal owner (Robert Loggia) brings in an Ivy League media analyst
(Kelly Preston) to fix things. Goldblum makes a pass at Preston who is
totally unresponsive until they inadvertently encounter a smiling,
dashiki-clad pilgrim (Murphy) walking along the causeway. Preston
befriends the beatific, self-styled holy man - who calls himself "G" -
and Goldblum discovers G's got a natural aptitude for convincing
people to listen to his spiritual platitudes. Soon G's on the air as a
guru pitchman, mixing sermons with sales, hawking with Betty White,
Morgan Fairchild, Soupy Sales, Willard Scott, and Florence
Henderson. Profits soar and soon G's a hot commodity, entrancing
everyone. A rabbi claims he's talking from the Talmud, a Christian
scholar insists he's invoking the New Testament, and an imam says he's
speaking for the Muslims. The problem with "Holy Man" is that it's
being hyped as a high-octane Eddie Murphy comedy and it's not. It's
also not a cutting-edge, scathing satire. Perhaps that what the studio
wanted but that's not what writer Tom Schulman ("Dead Poets Society")
and director Stephen Herek ("Mr. Holland's Opus") delivered. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Holy Man" is an amusing if subdued 6
- but it's not the Eddie Murphy you might expect.

Author
Brian Takeshita
Did I do something bad?  I must have, because sitting through this movie was
sheer punishment.
Here's the plot.  Ricky (Jeff Goldblum) is producer of The Good-Buy Network,
one of those 24-hour home shopping channels.  The new boss (Robert Loggia)
plans to can Ricky's behind if he doesn't turn the previous months' flat
sales numbers around, and to add to his problems, Ricky also has to work
with Kate (Kelly Preston), the ivy league wunderkind whom the boss has
brought with him.  Kate and Ricky don't get along and don't have any great
ideas until they meet G (Eddie Murphy), a spiritualist who sees something
positive in everything.  His soothing voice and simple logic makes people
feel good, and it's this quality that will make G the new GBN television
star and the key to the network's success.
The first problem is a flaw in the plot.  Sure, G makes people feel good.
Sure, we're told that most people feel guilty after buying an impulse item,
no matter how wealthy they might be, and I'll even believe that G talks a
talk that allows people to feel good about what they've bought.  But, hey,
that's after they've bought it.  Why do sales skyrocket the first time G is
on camera?  Far from trying to sell the product, G instead blathers on about
how you don't even need the thing.  Someone please tell me how this is
supposed to move merchandise in the first place.  You might say that people
feel good about what they've bought, so they come back and by more, but due
to the simple fact that the first round of sales in inexplicable, I'm not
convinced this is what the filmmakers had in mind.  The whole movie is
therefore seriously undermined because the key point in the plot is never
credible.
Another problem is in the humor.  You know, if you see that Eddie Murphy is
in a movie, I think it is not unreasonable for you to expect that the film
is a comedy.  Whoa, partner, are you in for a surprise.  HOLY MAN is not
funny.  Murphy, the one asset you'd think this movie has (remember how they
brought him in at the last minute to save BEST DEFENSE? - then again, maybe
you don't) is seriously reigned in.  The script gives him almost nothing to
work with, and it seems as though director Stephen Herek kept him toned down
so that the other actors in the film wouldn't be left as window dressing.
There's only one moment in the film where Murphy is allowed to let loose,
and it lasts for three shouted words, which seem totally out of place as a
result.  Pathetic.  In all, there are about three jokes that work in the
entire picture, and they're not even that great.  As a side note, there are
some cameo appearances such as Dan Marino pitching a contraption which
allows you to cook off of your car engine, and James Brown introducing a
medic-alert device that shouts "help me!" just like the Hardest Working Man
in Show Business at the push of a button, but these never cause your
personal laugh-o-meter to rise above the level of mild bemusement.
"Well," you ask, "surely there must be some convincing performances to make
up for the lack of humor."  Think again, Buckwheat.  Jeff Goldblum
disappoints.  Kelly Preston is flat (but not like that).  Robert Loggia, in
the kind of role for which he has been virtually typecast, can't do anything
with it.  The script is part of the problem, but these actors don't even
look like they believe in the move they're making.  They look a lot like
they're bored.  Just like the audience.
So what do you have when the humor is absent from your comedy, and the
acting is like the Siberian steppes?  A film that drags more than a dropped
anchor.  But wait!  As if these problems don't make the film slow enough,
the screenplay's pacing makes the movie even slower!  It takes the entire
first half hour to establish the movie's premise, then more time as the film
wades through a tortuous (and seemingly mandatory) romance between Ricky and
Kate, and a sub-plot involving a conniving PR man (Eric McCormack) who wants
to discredit G and take over Ricky's job as producer.  When the PR guy's
plan is foiled, the film is climaxes, we're treated to that little epilogue,
and then we can all go home, right?  Wrong.  The movie goes on for another
half hour!  Continental drift is the Indy 500 compared to the pace of HOLY
MAN!  
The only thing holy about HOLY MAN will surely be the number of people
exclaiming "Holy !@#% that movie was awful!"  This one is for the truly pious.

Author
Matt Williams
Billed as an Eddie Murphy comedy, viewers should beware of Holy Man.
Though it does feature Eddie Murphy, there's precious little comedy
herein this tired romantic comedy set amid a television-age satire.
GBSN (The Good Buy Shopping Network) is in trouble.  It's routine
infomercials and pathetic products just aren't selling anything. This
causes headaches for Ricky (Jeff Goldblum), the program director at
GBSN, who is given an ultimatum by his boss (Robert Loggia): improve
GBSN or be fired.
Kate (Kelly Preston), an analyst for the station, has a few ideas of how
a distinctive image could help the network.  But Ricky is more
interested in getting a date with her than with following her advice.
Enter G (Eddie Murphy), a bald, pajama-wearing, ground kissing, new-age
mystic.  He literally wanders into Ricky's life, initially an extreme
annoyance.  But Ricky is hit with a brainstorm:  why not put G on the
network.  Viewers will be able to enrich their lives while emptying
their pockets.
Unfortunately, the whole concept is about as interesting as watching an
infomercial.  The film tries to pack in a few product gimmicks, but most
of the humor is either mundane or missing.
Eddie Murphy is rarely given a chance to cut loose here.  Instead, he
spends most of the film reciting New Agey platitudes.  There are a
couple of fun moments (if you've seen the trailer...you've seen all of
them) where he starts to steal the show.  But, most of the time he is
curiously restrained.
That leaves us with the romance between Goldblum and Preston, a pair who
have zero chemistry together.  Goldblum isn't remotely likeable as the
lead, and Preston, though more sympathetic, has no defined character at
all.
There are moments of Holy Man where the filmmakers seem to be striving
toward some sort of social message about the power of television.
However, Holy Man is no Network...it's barely to the standards of Eddie
Murphy's career-derailing flop The Golden Child.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases
