Title
Review for Magic in the Mirror: Fowl Play (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1996. Director - Ted Nicolaou, Screenplay - Ken Carter Jr & Frank 
Dietz, Producers - Kevin Hyman & Vlad Paunescu, Photography - Adolfo 
Bartoli, Music - Richard Kosinski, Visual Effects Supervisor - MacKenzie 
Waggaman, Digital Visual Effects - OCS, Freeze Frame & Pixel Magic 
(Supervisor - Ray McIntyre Jr), Creature Effects - Mark Rappaport, 
Production Design - Cristian Niculescu. Production Company - Bibi 
Productions.
Jamie Renee Smith (Mary Margaret Dennis), Eileen T'Kaye (Dragora), Saxon 
Trainor (Sylvia Dennis/Queen Hysop), David Brooks (Gilbert Dennis), 
Godfrey James (Melilot), Kevin Wixted (Tansy), Gerrit Graham (Bloom), 
Ion Haiduc (Admiral Dabble), Cristian Motriuc (Swanson), Bryan J. 
Terrill (Rudy Mertz), Brent Morris (Boynton Mertz), Julia Gavril 
(Nicolette Mertz)
Plot: The scheming Dr Laszlo Tuttle manages to open a dimensional 
doorway between our world and a mirror in Queen Dragora's throne room. 
Dragora persuades Tuttle to aid her and emerges, along with her minions, 
through the mirror to invade a costume party thrown by Mary Margaret's 
mother and seek revenge.
This is a sequel to the delightfully surreal `Magic in the Mirror' 
(1996). Both films give the impression of having been shot back-to-back 
(as have several other of executive producer Charles Band's series' of 
films) - they share almost entirely the same production credits and 
several of the same sets. `Magic in the Mirror', with its visions of 
flying duck armies and a demented mallard queen obsessed with cups of 
tea made with humans dipped in boiling water, proved a mind-spinning 
discovery not unakin to the surreal fabulations of an `Alice in 
Wonderland' or a `Willie Wonka and the Chocolate Factory'. Unfortunately 
`Fowl Play' lacks any of its predecessor's imaginative delights. It 
merely uses - rather than builds - on the existing elements and 
characters and does nothing new with them. The major spin on the 
original here is to transport three of the ducks from the other world 
through into our world. But such, in comparison to the original with its 
journey into a complete secondary world, is a disappointment - here most 
of the first film's surreal delights have been merely replaced by 
characters in funny suits running around in slapstick situations. 
Director Ted Nicolaou has an enjoyably light knockabout touch with the 
slapstick but in comparison to its predecessor the film is a 
disappointment. The film is made on a low budget with the majority of 
the action having been economically confined to four rooms within a 
single house.

