Title
Review for Babylon 5: Thirdspace (1998) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Michael Turton
Reviewed by Michael Turton (turton@cc.fy.edu.tw)
The marked superiority of B5 to every other current SF TV show is not
reflected in this made-for-TV film that suffers from major defects of
scripting, continuity, and story.  Only B5's traditionally on-the-cheap but
excellent special effects are up to snuff in _Thirdspace_.
_Thirdspace_ is the story of the discovery of an alien artifact which, when
activated, brings forth a race from another dimension bent on eliminating all
life in this galaxy. The B5 team races to destroy the artifact as it takes
over the minds of station denizens, draws the power from the station and
transits a fleet into B5 local space.  The story takes place during the
period after the space station has declared independence from Earth under the
leadership of Captain John Sheridan, and after he led the Alliance against
the Shadows to victory.
To begin with, the story is an old SF cliche.  All this money spent, and
that's the best idea the writers could come up with?  After the artifact is
hauled over to B5, Interplanetary Expeditions (IPX), a corporation which
makes a living excavating for ancient artifacts, shows up demanding access to
the artifact. IPX's connections to the Shadows and the facist dictatorship on
Earth (both Sheridan's enemies), are well-known, yet they are not even
mentioned in the story.  Instead a deal is struck.
Predictably, the artifact wakes up and wreaks the inevitable havoc.  Yawn. 
It controls minds inside the station and many come to worship it (can anybody
say "_Berserker_ series?").  Alliance weapons are almost useless against it,
so Sheridan suits up and jets over through raging battle between the Alliance
fleet and the artifact fleet, carrying a nuclear weapon.  He sneaks into the
artifact and plants the bomb, then slips out past the bloodthirsty aliens
grabbing for him like Barry Sanders darting through the Chicago Bears'
secondary.  The bomb sits for five minutes inside the artifact, but the
aliens remain unaware of it. The idea that Sheridan must hand-deliver a
nuclear weapon (or can get out of range in time) is absurd.  Are there no
missiles or robots handy to carry the weapon in?  The concept of a "power
drain" is also iffy.  How and in what form is the energy converted and
transmitted through a vacuum from the station to the artifact?
Then there are the usual problems of B5.  Measurements are in "feet" and
"miles."  Apparently the UN government has converted the world from metric to
English.  Speeches are overly long and have an unrealistic flavor.  Nobody
speaks in monosyllables or grunts in the B5 universe.  Zack, the security
chief in Garibaldi's absence, takes on some of his mannerisms and
expressions. Like his mentor, he even falls in love with a telepath, pouring
out his feelings while the two are trapped in a busted elevator.  The speech
is long and hideously embarrassing; moreover, he doesn't even notice that
Lyta, the object of his affection, is staring into space and muttering to
herself in a bout of temporary psychosis triggered by the artifact. 
Impossible.  B5 has been conscientious (for TV) in depicting the awful price
of combat, but no mention is made of the losses in the fighting around the
artifact.
At least some of the elements that make B5 so popular are present.  There are
recurring characters from previous episodes in _Thirdspace_.  The special
effects are magnificent. Delenn, as always, is a delight.
Still, with so much blood and treasure expended, _Thirdspace_ is a massive
disappointment.  Why wasn't a competent and imaginative outside sci-fi writer
hired to give the show a gritty SF feel?  Why was such a hackneyed storyline
chosen, with so many to chose from?  B5 has made its repution by setting new
directions for SF on TV.  It's a shame it had to take a step back toward
Hollywood with _Thirdspace_.  I give it 1.5 stars out of 5.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
