Title
Review for Lantana (2001)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Lions Gate Films 
 Director:  Ray Lawrence
 Writer:  Andrew Bovell, from play "Speaking in Tongues"
 Cast: Anthony LaPaglia, Geoffrey Rush, Barbara Hershey, Kerry
Armstrong, Rachael Blake, Vince Colosimo, Daniella Farinacci,
Peter Phelps, Leah Pucell, Glenn Robbins, Russell Dykstra,
Nicholas Cooper, Marc Dwyer
 Screened at: Disney Screening Rm NYC 9/24/01
   With a crime's serving as a vehicle to explore its characters
deeply, Ray Lawrence's "Lantana," which is adapted by playwright
Andrew Bovell from his own theater piece "Speaking in Tongues,"
shares a common theme with the Coen Brothers' "The Man Who
Wasn't There"--released shortly before the Lawrence picture. 
"The Man Who Wasn't There" featured Billy Bob Thornton as a
barber who goes through the story numb, believing himself
metaphorically to be invisible not only to others but even to
himself--perhaps the essence of the modern, alienated man.  
"Lantana," which gets its name from an exotic flower which is
smooth and lovely on the outside but which hides a thick, thorny
growth (therefore the opposite of a sabra, or prickly pear), focuses
on people who are undergoing mid-life crises, albeit at various
ages, folks who think they are becoming invisible--taking leave of
the lives they dreamed of having when they were kids.  Though
the story takes place in a suburb of Sydney, Australia, many of the
people react in similar ways to Americans who undergo that
psychological phenomenon.  Some carry on affairs, others, lonely
and perhaps not even interested in testing the sexual waters,
become masochistic, make trouble, or grow suicidal.
   Structured by Ray Lawrence like a Robert Altman film, featuring
stories of families of strangers who become connected to one
another through circumstance, "Lantana" avoid the pitfalls of soap
opera by the authenticity of the acting and the maturity of the
narrative.   At no point does Lawrence allow the audience to take
their eyes away from the screen: these Australians play characters
who probably inhabit all our fears and desires as we grow older
and surrender our illusions.
   The principal target of Lawrence's probing lens, Leon Zat
(Anthony LaPaglia),  is a troubled police officer who, were he to
patrol the streets of New York, might turn into what we here call a
rogue cop.  Partnered to a woman who seeks a mate and who
looks to him for counsel, Claudia Weis (Leah Purcell), Leon is
married to Sonja (Kerry Armstrong) long enough to feel the need
to go astray.  Carrying on what estranged Jane O'May (Rachael
Blake) considers an affair but which is really just "a one-night
stand done twice" (as Leon cruelly explains to her), he undergoes
some enlightenment while pursuing the suspicious death of
psychiatrist Dr. Valerie Somers (Barbara Hershey), whose
daughter Eleanor had been murdered two years earlier, causing a
rift in Valerie's marriage to John Knox (Geoffrey Rush).  Leon's
investigation leads him to suspect both Valerie's husband, John,
and a father of three, Nik D'Amato (Vince Colosimo)--married to
Paula (Daniella Farinacci)--who had given Valerie a nocturnal lift
when the latter's car broke down.
   One of the more interesting aspects of this complex, yet easy-to-
follow plot, is that Nik and Paula, the most financially challenged
and perhaps least educated couple in the story, are the happiest
people around.  They are undergoing no crises, do not consider
themselves invisible, are not emotionally numb, and do not have
to profess their love for each other: the audience goes away
believing that they are the only twosome in the drama who retain
their mutual chemistry.  Anthony LaPaglia, interestingly cast as an
Australian though known to New York theatergoers for his role in
Arthur Miller's very American "A View from the Bridge" (which I
saw some years back at the Circle in the Square)  and to
moviegoers for Spike Lee's "Summer of Sam" among other
productions, conveys his tension throughout.  You don't want to
be arrested by this guy.  Seething with frustration because of his
inability to get turned on by his wife, he beats the stuffing out of a
drug pusher, viciously grounds his own teenage son for doing
weed, and shouts down a fellow he literally runs into on the street
as he jogs in an attempt to convince himself that he's still youthful. 
Barbara Hershey is also terrific as a shrink who is oh-so-confident
while gently questioning a client but who demonstrates Freud's
theory of counter-transference in his dislike for a gay patient,
Patrick (Peter Phelps), whose dilly-dallying with a married man
forces her to confront her own paranoia about her marriage to
John.
   "Lantana" is for a mature audience, people who go to the
theater to learn more about themselves rather than to escape from
their daily problems.  Ray Lawrence wonderfully mines territory
similar to what he dug into with the underappreciated "Bliss"--
capturing the same, almost clinical dimensions of a therapist
(played by Terence Stamp) who in treating a man with emotional
problems unlocks the door to his wife's forgotten past.
Rated R.  Running time: 121 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Rachel Gordon
Men have feelings too.  Men cry, despite the stigma attached to their
gender, or at least they want to more than they let on.  It's all
societal conditioning.  That's the pretentious premise of this
never-ending, two-hour look at couple dysfunction.
With a highly acclaimed cast that includes Anthony LaPaglia, Barbara
Hershey, and Geoffrey Rush you would hope this idea would provide great
material for such illustrious actors to sink their teeth into. 
Unfortunately, having been adapted for the screen from a play, by the
playwright himself, much of the emotional impact is lost in
overwhelmingly dramatic dialogue.
Valerie (Hershey), married to John (Rush), is a therapist, and her
patients' lives are starting to intrude on her own mental state.  Her
daughter was horribly murdered two years before and her marriage has
been stagnant ever since.  She and John love each other but cannot
connect.  One of Valerie's patients, Patrick, is a homosexual who
continually talks of an affair with a married man.  Slowly, Valerie
becomes convinced that the divide between she and John is larger than
she thought, possibly as a result of Patrick.
Then there's Leon (LaPaglia) a cop married to the beautiful and vibrant
Sonja (Kerry Armstrong), who is secretly going to Valerie for therapy. 
Leon is having an affair with Jane (Rachael Blake), though he is still
in love with his wife, as an attempt to feel something.  Jane herself is
consistently lonely after separating from her husband and often spies on
the family next door.
These circles become claustrophobic because Valerie suddenly disappears
one evening.  Leon is put on the case as a detective and breaks off his
affair with Jane, but still can't get his life in order.  These factors
combine to create many a scene in which men are trying to express
emotions and mistakes to one another, and fail miserably.
To give the film some credit, it is able to portray masculine anxiety in
reacting to a situation too much like a stereotypical woman would.  The
real problem is that during sympathetic moments, emotive speeches seem
forced on all the characters that are uttering them.  While the acting
is basically impeccable, the conversations are unreal and difficult to
accept, even at their most dramatic climaxes.  It doesn't help that,
when these men are trying to talk to one another, there is repetitive
whining about how men aren't suppose to cry or show emotion.
Still, what keeps things interesting is that every person involved is
heavily flawed.  They lie and cheat and find it difficult to learn from
their mistakes.  There's always hope, in a new scene filled with
tension, that some kind of new barrier will be breached, that some
catharsis will come through.  The plot is hazy enough, as are its
characters, that any growth or change is unpredictable.  To see the
little details that spring from the characters' effects on each other
rings true enough.
What also works are the dysfunctional marriage scenes between husband
and wife.  Communication comes through looks and stares instead of
accusatory speeches.  The annoying chatter present when it's two
movie-character men talking is thankfully left out.
Lantana's strengths and weaknesses, like its characters, balance each
other out.  Not a flaw can be found in how it articulates difficulty
within a marriage.  If only it would stop complaining about how men are
raised.
Director: Ray Lawrence
Producer: Jan Chapman
Writer: Anthony Bovell
Starring: Anthony LaPaglia, Geoffrey Rush, Barbara Hershey, Kerry
Armstrong, Rachael Blake, Vince Colosimo
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
