Title
Review for Evolution (2001)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Ivan Reitman. Screenplay by David Diamond, David Weissman and
Don Jakoby, based on a story by Jakoby. Starring David Duchovny, Orlando
Jones, Julianne Moore. Running time: 104 minutes. Rated PG for frightening
scenes by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 27th, 2001.
Synopsis: When a meteorite crashlands in the Arizona desert, community 
college professors Ira Kane (Duchovny) and Harry Block (Jones) are first 
on the scene. They discover that an alien lifeform has arisen from the 
rock and is evolving at an amazing rate. Soon the army, advised by Dr 
Allison Reed (Moore), moves in and forces Kane and Block out. But when the 
aliens begin to menace society, it may take the scientists' combined 
efforts to stop them before they terminate the evolution of another 
lifeform: humanity.
Review: "Evolution" certainly has the ingredients for a decent comedy. 
It's directed by Reitman, clearly trying to parlay his "Ghostbusters" 
success into a twenty-first-century counterpart. It stars Duchovny, and 
although one might question his judgment in lampooning his "X-Files" 
character so soon after leaving the TV series, it should certainly provide 
him with plenty of ammunition. And then there's Moore, who may not have 
much prior experience in comedy, but who has certainly proven her ability 
as an actress. A shame, then, that it all deteriorates into such a 
hopelessly unfunny morass. "Evolution" is a movie more concerned with its 
special effects (which are quite good) than anything resembling a 
consistently funny script. It has its moments (a scene in which Jones' 
body is invaded by an alien is particularly entertaining), but there are 
embarrassingly long stretches that are utterly devoid of humour. Moore is 
totally wasted, her clumsy shtick getting very old, very fast. Duchovny 
has stunningly little in the way of material to work with. And the story 
is so formulaic, it could have been written by monkeys. Part of what made 
"Ghostbusters" so wonderful was a combination of a great script and 
characters the audience could root for. "Evolution" is so mind-numbingly 
tedious that it's difficult not to start cheering for the aliens.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Evolution (2001)
David Duchovny, Orlando Jones, Julianne Moore, Seann William Scott, Ty
Burrell, Ted Levine, Dan Ackroyd, Michael Bower, Wendy Braun, Wayne
Duvall, Sarah Silverman, Ethan Suplee. Screenplay by David Diamond,
David Weissman and Don Jakoby. Directed by Ivan Reitman. 92 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
I saw "Evolution" last night at a sneak preview sponsored by a radio
station. The response from the capacity crowd was overwhelmingly
positive. They howled at the jokes and sections of the audience broke
into applause several times. As the closing credits rolled, I heard more
than one person exclaim "That was the best comedy I've seen in a long
time!"
The general reaction left me mystified, because "Evolution" is pretty
mediocre fare. Clearly patterned after "Ghostbusters," which was also
directed by hit-and-miss filmmaker Ivan Reitman, the sci-fi comedy pits
wisecracking academics against bizarre creatures and petty government
officials, but the similarities between the films end there.
"Ghostbusters" was a true original, while "Evolution" is, at best, a
moderately entertaining variation on a theme.
Set in Glen Canyon, Arizona, "Evolution" opens with would-be fire
fighter Wayne Green (Seann "what's the deal with that extra 'n'?"
William Scott) practicing rescue techniques in the desert when a meteor
screams down from the sky, wrecking his car before it crash-lands in a
cavern. Two local college professors come to study the rock:
geologist/volleyball coach Harry Block (Orlando Jones) and biologist Ira
Kane (David Duchovny).
They discover that the meteor is teeming with one-celled alien organisms
with the ability to reproduce and adapt at amazing speed. When Ira leads
a field trip to the site, he learns that the evolution is happening even
faster than he and Harry believed; the ground is covered with
extraterrestrial flatworms.
Soon, the government takes over the crash site, with a snide general
(Ted Levine) banning the locals. Working alongside the general is Dr.
Allison Reed (Julianne Moore) from the Centers for Disease Control. Ira
and the comely doc initially butt heads, but quicker than you can say
"formula flick" she hooks up with the good guys.
Just in time, too, as the little alien critters are multiplying and
mutating like crazy. One mosquito-like creature invades Harry's body,
throwing the geologist into panic mode as an examining physician states
"It's headed toward his testicles!" Note: In the trailers for the film,
the destination is changed to "crotch," while "bottom" is used in the TV
ads. Hmmm. Regardless, the whole thing builds to an anal rescue scene
that had the audience in hysterics.
Initially, the aliens die as soon as they are exposed to our atmosphere,
but they quickly adapt and grow even more aggressive. A sad-eyed
creature absurdly misidentified as a dog (wow  just like in
"Ghostbusters." What a coincidence!) demonstrates its jaw power in front
of a group of housewives. A winged lizard swoops through a mall with a
shoplifter in its talons. Ira, Harry, Allison and Wayne team up to stop
the invasion, leading to the obligatory battle royale. In this case, the
insipid finale involves yet another anal procedure, coupled with one of
the most blatant product placements in movie history.
While "Evolution" is mildly entertaining, its lazy screenplay (which
began as a drama) insures that the movie will never rise above tepid.
There are a number of good one-liners (Duchovny gets off a nice joke
based on his former "X-Files" persona), but for the most part, the
filmmakers simply lean on the special effects, which are not all that
special. Sorry, boys, but a parade of monsters isn't enough anymore.
The cast is saddled with characters as unimaginative as the script.
Seann William Scott, Stifler from "American Pie," says "Wow!" a lot,
Orlando Jones, best known as the star of a dreadful series of 7-Up ads,
makes black jokes, Julianne Moore stumbles over everything and David
Duchovny does his usual deadpan shtick. Oh, and he moons the general.
Speaking of the general, you might remember Ted Levine from "The Silence
of the Lambs," where he played Buffalo Bill, the serial-killing lunatic.
I kept hoping Levine would turn up in front of the aliens nude, with his
genitals tucked behind his legs, saying "It doesn't come to Earth
without an invitation."
But that would have been nervy, and "Evolution" isn't about taking
chances. About two-thirds of the way through the story, some of the
aliens evolve into quasi-human form. What if they had evolved further?
They could have developed language skills and negotiated with the
government for citizenship. Or they could have done to us what we did to
the Native Americans, dumping our heroes into low-income housing on a
Human Reservation. At the very least, they should have developed their
writing skills and turned out a better screenplay than this one.

Author
Homer Yen
There are some film's that have long running times but
seem relatively short (like "Titanic").  Then, there
are some films with short running times but seem
really lo-o-ong.  This is how you'll feel after
watching "Evolution", a 100-minute film that seems to
take as much time to resolve itself as it took for man
to evolve from ape.  
This never-ending feeling occurs because there just
isn't enough for the talented cast of characters to
do.  The film introduces a world-ending dilemma and
resolves the issue by administering an enema.   Pardon
my bad poetry.  But in between, there is no excitement
and only a little drama.  However, there are lots of
creepy critters and a disproportionate amount of ass
jokes if that strikes your fancy.
"Evolution" is about a meteor that crash-lands on
Earth.  Within this rock, there oozes primordial
liquid.   Two local community college professors, Ira
Kane (David Duchovny) and Harry Block (Orlando Jones),
are the first scientists to make this fascinating
discovery.  This could elevate them from adjunct
status at their college to Nobel Prize winners.  "Do
they pay the Nobel Prize in installments or one lump
sum," Harry asks excitedly.  Ira, however, is more
concerned with the astounding rate in which the
organisms are evolving.
Soon, a new species of extra-terrestrial critters
emerge, which range from the scary kind you might see
in "Aliens" to the menacing types in "Jurassic Park"
to the huggable kinds that remind you of "ET".  While
imaginative, they don't amount to much more than
colorful special effects for the summer movie-going
audience and a target for our alien-busters to chase
down.  They have to be eradicated, you know, for the
growing alien ecosystem threatens to cover the
continent within months.
To complement this duo, they are joined in their
battle by a fireman-in-training (Seann William Scott,
whose inclusion is puzzling up until the final moments
of the film) and a frostbitten doctor from the Center
for Disease Control (Julianne Moore).  But this
foursome doesn't really exist to do battle against the
alien infestation; rather, they are there to flex
their individual comic muscles.  After all, this is
supposed to be a comedy.
Duchovny is actually a fairly amusing guy who speaks
with deadpan earnestness.  Moore's contribution seems
to involve tripping and pratfalls.  Scott, who's
making a living as pothead characters, provides the
puerile humor.  While they'll elicit a chuckle or two,
their comedic efficacy pales in comparison to Jones's
comedic performance, who provides the funniest
moments.  For example, when a space bug somehow
infiltrates his large intestines, they wheel him into
the operating room.  "Cheek spreader," says the
doctor, "there's no time for lubricant."  Jones yells
back, "There's ALWAYS time for lubricant!"   His
fast-talking, head-bobbing, manic brand of comedy made
him the most enjoyable of the characters.  Overall,
however, we are starved for more laughter.
While our intrepid group runs around, hunts down
aliens, squishes bugs, and looks for answers,
surprisingly, they never really go anywhere.  And thus
neither does the film.  "Who ya gonna call?"  Don't
even bother picking up that phone.


Author
Robin Clifford
What if life on Earth did NOT come out of the primordial ooze hundreds of 
millions of years ago? What if the building blocks of life came from deep 
outer space instead? And, what if the first struggling cells needed only 
days to evolve into full-blown monsters? This is the premise for Ivan 
Reitman's latest goofball comedy starring David Duchovny, Orlando Jones and 
two-time Oscar nominee Julianne Moore in "Evolution." 
Just watching the first promotional bits, over the past couple of months, 
for "Evolution," I was taken by the obvious parallels to Reitman's 1984 
smash hit, "Ghostbusters." What saved that mostly silly movie was a 
performance by Bill Murray that capitalized on the actor's comedic talent 
and sarcastic wit. Unfortunately, "Evolution" does not have Bill Murray, 
nor anyone approaching his one-man-show talent, to bear the burden of a 
mediocre comedy that has its requisite special F/X, but little humor in its 
routine sci-fi tale. 
A mysterious object crashes into the Earth. A team of scientists 
investigates. The object not only turns out to carry living organisms, 
they're hostile to humans and growing in number - fast. It's up to the 
intrepid team of boffins to stop the alien invasion before the Earth is 
lost. This formula has worked well for decades, since "The Thing" (1951) 
and "War of the Worlds" (1954), and screenwriters David Diamond, David 
Weissman and Don Jakoby, dust it off one more time for "Evolution." This 
time, though, the alien invasion is played for laughs. Well, some laughs, 
anyway. 
The problem with "Evolution" stems from trying to force the comedy into the 
original sci-fi drama developed by Don Jakoby. Unlike "Ghostbusters," which 
came from years of comic ghost stories like "The Ghost Breakers" (1940) and 
"Ghost Catchers" (1944), "Evolution" spawned from more serious fare. This 
is a problem as the film tries to force humor into scenes that borrow from 
flicks like "Alien" and "Tremors." The cast does its best to inject comedy 
into the scenes, but it is hard work and forced. 
David Duchovny and Orlando Jones do yeomen's work as a pair of junior 
college professors who see the discovery of the alien object - a meteor 
that seeps slime - as their ticket to the big times. When Ira Kane 
(Duchovny) and Harry Block (Jones) take the sample of ooze back to their 
lab, Ira discovers it contains single-celled organisms from outer space! 
Even more exciting is the fact that they reproduce at a fantastic rate! 
When they take some students on a field trip to the site - an underground 
cavern the rock crashed into - they discover that, in few hours, the 
single-celled creatures had evolved into mushrooms and mitosis-reproducing 
flatworms. Visions of Nobel prizes dance in the scientist's heads. That is, 
until the military, led by Ira's old boss, General Woodman (Ted Levine), 
takes over the operation. Little do they all know that the alien invader is 
developing at a rate where millions of years of evolution takes only hours. 
The flatworms eventually become dinosaur-like creatures and, soon, the 
first primates evolve. As the flora and fauna from another world adapt to 
Earth's atmosphere it becomes apparent that, at their rate of evolution, 
they will completely take over the world in a matter of months. Of course, 
the military blunders big when the general decides to burn the creatures to 
hell - the exact wrong thing to do. It's up to Ira and Harry, with a little 
help from CDC investigator Allison Reed (Julianne Moore) and firefighter 
wannabee Wayne (Seann William Scott), to stop the spread of alien varmints 
and save the world - with Head & Shoulders shampoo, no less. 
As I think about it, this really is a serious sci-fi story (except for the 
shampoo bit). It doesn't lend itself to comedy, which is why, I guess, 
there are so few laughs. Most of the humor is geared to the slapstick, with 
lots of set scenes of human confronting alien - much like "Ghostbusters." 
Duchovny plays it all tongue-in-cheek, with the required poke at his "The 
X-Files" past. Orlando Jones gets some mileage out of his oppressed (but 
not, really) black man. Julianne Moore - what was she thinking when she 
took this role - does numerous pratfalls and klutzy stuff, most of which is 
not funny and almost embarrassing for the twice-nominated Oscar contender. 
Seann William Scott ("Road Trip," "Dude, Where's My Car?") is locked into 
playing the doofus, yet again, adding nothing to the proceeds. Ted Levine 
plays the inept, overbearing general in a cookie cutter perf. 
F/X are adequate but not outstanding. The film seemed murky and audio was 
poor at times, but this may have been the product of the theater projector 
and not the film. 
"Evolution," I'm afraid, is the kind of comedy flick that exemplifies our 
summer movie entertainment. It's a popcorn flick that uses toilet humor, 
anus jokes and lots of slime 
that will entertain the younger audiences. It leaves me craving more 
intelligent fare - like "Shrek." I give it a C. 
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com 

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Director Ivan Reitman has a checkered filmography that contains some
classics (Meatballs, Dave), some unwatchable flops (Junior, Father's Day)
and some hits that I never really understood (Six Days Seven Nights, Twins).
His latest - Evolution - looks like a cross between Men in Black and
Ghostbusters, the latter being the film for which Reitman is best known.
Evolution is a sci-fi comedy with good special effects, a fairly funny
script and a really dopey ending.
Evolution is set in Glen Canyon, Arizona and begins with a wannabe fireman
named Wayne Green (Seann William Scott, Road Trip) practicing rescue
techniques in an abandoned shack in the desert.  A meteor the size of an NBA
star falls out of the sky and demolishes his car, and the following day, the
local police call the area's representative of the United States Geological
Survey to the scene.  He is Harry Block (Orlando Jones, Say It Isn't So), a
geology professor at Glen Canyon Community College, and he brings along his
friend and colleague, Ira Kane (David Duchovny, Return to Me), who teaches
biology at the school.
When they arrive at the crash site, Ira and Harry find an extremely well-lit
meteor that has buried itself 80 feet underground.  It's also teeming with
one-cell organisms that, upon closer examination back in their lab, seem to
be multiplying at an incredible rate via mitosis.  Further tests reveal the
little critters to contain alien DNA, and the two professors try to keep
their find a secret as they giggle about winning fame, riches and
prestigious science awards.
Before long, the creatures start getting bigger and bigger, forming dozens
of different mutations in an attempt to adapt to their new surroundings (or
"evolving," if you will) and spreading faster than Haley Joel Osment's
do-gooder plan in Pay it Forward.  The government eventually gets involved
and takes control of the project, giving Ira and Harry the boot in favor of
a clueless General (Ted Levine) and Allison Reed (Julianne Moore, Hannibal),
the assistant director of the Centers for Disease Control.
While Evolution's ending is a bit of a disappointment (it offers the
goofiest solution to ridding the Earth of aliens since the whole Slim
Whitman thing in Mars Attacks!), the film is consistently funny, which comes
as quite a surprise considering the writers involved.  Don Jakoby penned the
laughably bad John Carpenter's Vampires, while David Diamond and David
Weissman were responsible for the ooey-gooey crapfest called The Family Man.
They even manage to throw in a funny crack at the Feds, which, of course,
was written for Duchovny.  Evolution's two biggest gags involve the
sphincter, but since Tom Green isn't involved with the film, and it isn't
marketed specifically toward teenagers, look for most press to overlook this
fact.
Reitman isn't a flashy director.  With his films, it's the little things
that make them more entertaining.  Every line is delivered with impeccable
timing, every double-take is perfect, and some of the best zingers are
barely audible gems said under the breath of his three male leads.  And he
even gets Oscar-nominee Moore to play a klutz who wears garter belts - a
dangerous combination.
1:42 - PG-13 for crude and sexual humor, and for sci-fi action

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     Inside the business these days movies are referred to as "product," 
and Evolution is a prime example of why.  It has been assembled with the 
wit and artistry of vegetarian sausage, and it delivers about the same 
amount of entertainment value. 
Apparently the idea was originally for a serious/scary sci-fi 
flick, but when it reached director Ivan Reitman it reminded him just 
enough of his '84 hit Ghostbusters that he decided to make it into a 
comedy, and now it will remind you too of Ghostbusters, but not in a 
good way.  For actors, they began with David Duchovny, because it was a 
space alien story.  They matched him up with black comic Orlando Jones 
so they could do witty racial repartee ("Dark meat or white?"  "What do 
you think?"), and fleshed it out with zingers like "Are you going to 
finish that bacon?"  "Of course I'm going to finish it.  I ordered it, 
didn't I?"  They found Oscar nominee Julianne Moore with time on her 
hands and used her talents to play a CDC scientist who bumps into things 
and does pratfalls. 
When they were though chuckling over that, they turned it over to 
the special effects wizards to create some digital alien and prehistoric 
creatures, ranging from cute to scary, and then they polished the whole 
thing up with flatulence jokes and anus probe jokes and, just in case it 
was getting too highbrow, they let Duchovny pull down his trousers and 
flash a moon through a car windshield.  I can't remember when I've 
laughed like that. 
Duchovny plays Dr. Ira Kane, head of an Arizona community college 
science department.  He used to be a top army scientist, till he 
administered an experimental anthrax vaccine to troops which had some 
bad side effects (like diarrhea and uncontrollable flatulence!)  He and 
fellow community college scientist Harry Block (Jones) are called to the 
site of a meteor that has burrowed into the Arizona desert, and they 
soon find that it contains an alien life form that starts as primal ooze 
but evolves at breathtaking speed into higher and higher orders of 
creature. 
The military takes over.  The officer in charge (Ted Levine) turns 
out to be Kane's old army colleague and nemesis, and starts sabotaging 
him.  Julianne Moore turns up as a CDC scientist and bumps into things.  
Danny Ayckroyd arrives as the Governor of Arizona.  The human race is 
threatened with extinction. The army screws up and creates a giant 
monster, and Kane and his pals have to save the earth by spraying a Head 
& Shoulders enema up the monster's anal sphincter - surely one of the 
worst product placement choices in history. 

Author
SSG Syndicate
Susan Granger's review of "EVOLUTION" (DreamWorks)
 "Let's shampoo some aliens," shouts David Duchovny to the Glen Canyon Fire Department as they set off to save the world from total destruction by phantasmagorical creatures from another planet. Absurd?  Totally - and that's the key this goofy sci-fi comedy from Ivan Reitman, who heists the idea from his own "Ghostbusters."  The story begins when meteor crashes in the Arizona desert, narrowly missing a dense wannabe fireman, Seann William Scott, practicing for his fire-fighting test. He alerts a local geologist, Orlando Jones, who recruits Duchovny, a former government scientist now teaching at a community college, and they discover one-cell organisms that are evolving at an exponential rate. "Snag one and put him in the bucket," says Duchovny, envisioning a Nobel Prize. "I've seen this movie," Jones wise-cracks. "The black dude dies first. You snag it!"  There's the inevitable government interference in the form of Julianne Moore, a brainiac epidemiologist from the CD!
C (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), who soon realizes there's a bigger danger than the military. And I'm not referring to Jones's anal probe, Scott's serenade in a suburban shopping mall, or "Ghostbuster" veteran Dan Aykroyd as the undignified Governor of Arizona. Ivan Reitman and screenwriter Don Jakoby's satirical, cliche-laden, four-misfits-save-the-universe formula is outlandish as Duchovny plays preposterously off his wry, deadpan "X-Files" persona, while Jones provides fast-paced comic relief - but not as effectively as Tommy Lee Jones and Will Smith in "Men in Black." Moore's the klutzy, slapstick eye-candy and Scott's there for the teeny-boppers. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Evolution" is a zany, silly 6. Rated PG-13, it's a cockamamie summer comedy.

Author
Faust668@aol.com
The beauty of comedy is that there are no rules and, quite simply, rules are made to be broken in the comedic arena. Director Ivan Reitman is often aware of this, as evidenced by his crude though subtly funny "Junior" and, his biggest hit, "Ghostbusters." Both films redefined the boundaries of good taste by imbuing crudeness with cleverness rather than cheap, desperate gags a' la "Austin Powers" that only serve to make the audience puke. Consider Arnold Schwarzeneger as a pregnant man in "Junior," a premise that is otherwise ripe for gross-out humor.  Instead that film built its premise with wit and engaging repartee between Schwarzeneger and Danny DeVito. 
"Evolution" does the same thing, imbuing crudeness with cleverness. The premise deals with a community college science teacher (and former scientist), Ira Kane (David Duchovny), who partners with a sharp, jocose scientist, Harry Block (Orlando Jones), to investigate a flaming meteor that has burned a hole through the ground into an underground cavern. Kane's class goes on a field trip to discover and study this meteor only to find some strange atmosphere has developed at an accelerated rate, not to mention some expanding and evolving wormlike creatures. Kane and Block realize this is no ordinary meteor - it is a fertile ground for alien creatures. At first, the creatures seem harmless in the form of butterflies until they later evolve into flying dinosaurs, raging blue monkeys and some shapeless matter in the form of large intestines.
The only way to approach "Evolution" is by checking your brain at the entrance door of the cinema before the first reel is projected. It is a one-note joke movie to be sure but it has moments of eye-opening special-effects, shrewd one-liners and moments where you will literally jump out of your seat. It mostly pokes fun at "Independence Day" right down to the climax involving those humongous intestines where a central digestive tract is the target for destruction - the expansive mass even looks like a spaceship. Mostly, the screenplay by David Diamond, David Weissman and Don Jakoby focuses on bodily functions and sexual entendres, as well as creepy monsters hiding inside harmless looking alien slugs and such. Many of the sexual entendres center around Julianne Moore as an assistant to a soldier-scientist (Ted Levine) - she is regarded at one point as an "icy goddess in desperate need of some humping." Speaking of the ravishing Moore, it is nice to see her as a clumsy woman who!
!
 keeps tripping over objects eve
ry once in a while. 
"Evolution" is cutesy nonsense and often quite funny and engaging. It is actually a breath of fresh air as compared to the gross-out humor so reminiscent of most comedies nowadays - wit and some dry humor are this film's virtues. As for performances, Duchvony and Jones make a delightful pair and Moore is lots of fun to watch - nice to see her handle comedy for a change in contrast with her dramatic roles. Only Ted Levine seems a little out of his element as the straight-faced soldier scientist, Dr. Woodman, who doesn't want Kane anywhere near these aliens. 
"Evolution" is not as frantically funny or as visually inventive as Reitman's "Ghostbusters,"  but it will suffice in what has been a dry couple of years of laughless comedies. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust668@aol.com or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com 

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Ivan Reitman.
Cast: David Duchovny, Orlando Jones, Seann William Scott, Julianne Moore, Ted 
Levine, Dan Aykroyd, Ethan Suplee, Michael Ray Bower, Katharine Towne, Sarah 
Silverman.
2001 - 97 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 8, 2001.
In an attempt to rehash the formula he hit gold with in 1984, director Ivan 
Reitman's "Evolution" plays out like a present-day version of "Ghostbusters," 
replacing ghosts with fast-evolving aliens. While all of the stock characters 
are present, as well as similar plot developments, the film is absent of 
anything remotely witty or original. Tellingly, the jokes fly fast and 
furious throughout, but the number of comedic moments that actually work can 
be counted on one hand. 
The movie opens with slacker Wayne Green (Seann William Scott) out in the 
middle of the Arizona desert practicing for his impending test to become a 
firefighter, when a giant meteor crashes to earth. Hot on the case is college 
professors Ira Kane (David Duchovny) and Harry Block (Orlando Jones), who 
discover that the meteorite has unleashed a number of single-celled alien 
organisms that are growing, and multiplying, at a rapid rate. Before long, 
these gradually growing creatures have begun to take over the sleepy town, 
and if Ira, Harry, and Wayne, with the added help of clumsy Dr. Allison Reed 
(Julianne Moore), don't find a way to stop them, it will mean the extinction 
of mankind within two months.
The idea behind "Evolution"--that of quick-producing aliens irresolutely 
taking over earth--is not a particularly new one ("Gremlins," anyone?), but 
it has enough promise that it's too bad screenwriters David Diamond, David 
Weissman, and Don Jakoby botch the results. Originally conceived as a serious 
sci-fi picture, my guess is once director Reitman came aboard, he had a 
little something to do with its switch in genres.  On the basis of what has 
shown up onscreen, it was the wrong choice. While "Ghostbusters" was able to 
mix scares with laughs, "Evolution" falls flat on both counts, and ends up 
being uninspired.
Reitman has appointed an impressive cast, but all of the actors have done far 
stronger work. In fact, most of the performances leave something to be 
desired. David Duchovny (2000's "Return to Me") toplines the film as Ira 
Kane, a science professor who once worked with the government, and he's a 
genuine bore. In too many of Duchovny's big-screen roles, he is a 
good-looking face vacant of a personality. Seann William Scott (2000's "Dude, 
Where's My Car?") repeats the same type of character he has played in every 
movie on his resume (including 1999's "American Pie"), and does little else. 
And Julianne Moore (2001's "Hannibal") is woefully misused as Dr. Allison 
Reed, a cute klutz whose main character trait is that she falls down and runs 
into doors a lot. Moore is so much better than what this weak material 
provides. Only Orlando Jones (2001's "Say It Isn't So") stands out as Harry 
Block, who knows very well when things get dangerous that black men are the 
first to go in these situations. Jones is a comic delight, and his appearance 
is superior to anything else here.
"Evolution" isn't a total washout, but it is an overall waste of time. There 
is nothing offered that hasn't been done better in other movies, and at 97 
minutes (including credits), it's over just as its momentum has begun to 
build. Not helping matters is that the entire first half is slow and 
generally monotonous, as tension escalates--to nothing. Reitman may have 
wanted to make a "Ghostbusters" for the new millennium, but what he has done 
with "Evolution," instead, is made a low-rent version of "Men in Black."
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/reviewsby?Dustin+Putman
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/dustinputman.htm
http://www.atnzone.com
--part1_8c.7d4ae73.2852fb68_boundary

Evolution      * * (out of * * * * )

Directed by Ivan Reitman.
Cast: David Duchovny, Orlando Jones, Seann William Scott, Julianne Moore, Ted 
Levine, Dan Aykroyd, Ethan Suplee, Michael Ray Bower, Katharine Towne, Sarah 
Silverman.
2001 - 97 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 8, 2001.

In an attempt to rehash the formula he hit gold with in 1984, director Ivan 
Reitman's "Evolution" plays out like a present-day version of "Ghostbusters," 
replacing ghosts with fast-evolving aliens. While all of the stock characters 
are present, as well as similar plot developments, the film is absent of 
anything remotely witty or original. Tellingly, the jokes fly fast and 
furious throughout, but the number of comedic moments that actually work can 
be counted on one hand. 

The movie opens with slacker Wayne Green (Seann William Scott) out in the 
middle of the Arizona desert practicing for his impending test to become a 
firefighter, when a giant meteor crashes to earth. Hot on the case is college 
professors Ira Kane (David Duchovny) and Harry Block (Orlando Jones), who 
discover that the meteorite has unleashed a number of single-celled alien 
organisms that are growing, and multiplying, at a rapid rate. Before long, 
these gradually growing creatures have begun to take over the sleepy town, 
and if Ira, Harry, and Wayne, with the added help of clumsy Dr. Allison Reed 
(Julianne Moore), don't find a way to stop them, it will mean the extinction 
of mankind within two months.

The idea behind "Evolution"--that of quick-producing aliens irresolutely 
taking over earth--is not a particularly new one ("Gremlins," anyone?), but 
it has enough promise that it's too bad screenwriters David Diamond, David 
Weissman, and Don Jakoby botch the results. Originally conceived as a serious 
sci-fi picture, my guess is once director Reitman came aboard, he had a 
little something to do with its switch in genres.  On the basis of what has 
shown up onscreen, it was the wrong choice. While "Ghostbusters" was able to 
mix scares with laughs, "Evolution" falls flat on both counts, and ends up 
being uninspired.

Reitman has appointed an impressive cast, but all of the actors have done far 
stronger work. In fact, most of the performances leave something to be 
desired. David Duchovny (2000's "Return to Me") toplines the film as Ira 
Kane, a science professor who once worked with the government, and he's a 
genuine bore. In too many of Duchovny's big-screen roles, he is a 
good-looking face vacant of a personality. Seann William Scott (2000's "Dude, 
Where's My Car?") repeats the same type of character he has played in every 
movie on his resume (including 1999's "American Pie"), and does little else. 
And Julianne Moore (2001's "Hannibal") is woefully misused as Dr. Allison 
Reed, a cute klutz whose main character trait is that she falls down and runs 
into doors a lot. Moore is so much better than what this weak material 
provides. Only Orlando Jones (2001's "Say It Isn't So") stands out as Harry 
Block, who knows very well when things get dangerous that black men are the 
first to go in these situations. Jones is a comic delight, and his appearance 
is superior to anything else here.

"Evolution" isn't a total washout, but it is an overall waste of time. There 
is nothing offered that hasn't been done better in other movies, and at 97 
minutes (including credits), it's over just as its momentum has begun to 
build. Not helping matters is that the entire first half is slow and 
generally monotonous, as tension escalates--to nothing. Reitman may have 
wanted to make a "Ghostbusters" for the new millennium, but what he has done 
with "Evolution," instead, is made a low-rent version of "Men in Black."

   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/reviewsby?Dustin+Putman
     http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/dustinputman.htm
     http://www.atnzone.com



--part1_8c.7d4ae73.2852fb68_boundary--

Author
Steve Rhodes
EVOLUTION, by director Ivan Reitman (GHOSTBUSTERS), is a silly sci-fi 
flick that's a fun blend of your favorites including JURASSIC PARK, MARS 
ATTACKS and GALAXY QUEST.  Although it starts slow, once it gets in gear 
the laughs start to fly.
It all starts when a meteorite strikes the earth and unleashes a rapidly 
evolving alien race.  From single cell organisms, they quickly change 
into world-class menaces.  
The two-person scientific team initially investigating the big incident 
comes from the local community college.  Ira Kane (David Duchovny, "The 
huge botched experiment on humans.  His doofus assistant is fellow 
instructor Harry Block (Orlando Jones, THE REPLACEMENTS), who coaches 
the girl's volleyball team when he isn't teaching science.  Harry's main 
concern is about the payout schedule and tax implications of a Nobel 
Prize.  
This rag-tag team of subpar scientists is aided by Wayne Green (Seann 
William Scott, ROAD TRIP), a pool boy who'd like to be a fireman.  His 
qualifications, other than almost getting smushed by the rock from 
space, are that he "took some chemistry in high school."  Later they are 
joined by Allison Reed (Julianne Moore, HANNIBAL), a klutzy researcher 
from the CDC, who can't walk without falling.
The science behind the story has equal measure of fascinating 
imagination and needlessly troublesome logical holes.  As the aliens 
evolve, Phil Tippett's models are a mixture of the creative and the 
mundane as if the production were hurried.  A typical "monster" is a 
cute little baby Jabba the Hutt that turns out to have an ALIEN-like 
creature in its throat.  The film, which is rated PG-13, will make you 
jump more than once.  Don't even think about bringing kids of any age 
that are easily frightened.
The comedy, both physical and verbal, is a real treat, but the actors' 
ability to pull it off varies widely.  Orlando Jones and Seann William 
Scott are definitely the best.  Jones has great fun chewing up the 
scenery, and Scott never played dumb better.  Duchovny's performance is 
uneven, and Moore seems miscast.
In a picture that pulls no comedic punches, it is one of the few so 
brazen as to have not only a major product placement but an outright 
commercial as well.  But, never fear, it's all in the service of the 
comedy and turns out to be quite funny.  I'm sure that the placement 
fees had no influence whatsoever.
EVOLUTION runs 1:42.  It is rated PG-13 for crude and sexual humor, and 
for sci-fi action and would be acceptable for not easily frightened kids 
10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, found the film quite funny and gave it *** 1/2.  
With a scientist mind, he had complaints about a logical gap in the 
evolution progression that troubled him.  His friend Sam, also 12, gave 
the movie a full ****, saying that it was very clever and funny.  He had 
similar concerns to Jeffrey's about some of the science.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 8, 2001.  
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century 
theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Two teachers at a local community college discover a meteor fallen to 
earth which may contain a growing alien organism. They try to keep it 
secret, but it isn't long before the government is all over it and 
Mulder, oops, I mean the two teachers, must work alongside a goofy 
teenager and a klutzy scientist in order to get to the bottom of things.
CRITIQUE:
An "okay" movie with some very cool, colorful alien creatures, a few 
laughs here and there, good performances from its leads, but ultimately 
nothing to go nuts over. I'm guessing that they were going for a MEN IN 
BLACK-type of thing here, but this film isn't as funny or as original as 
the latter. It does however feature a more interesting mE9lange of =
actors. Duchovny playing the straight man to perfection as usual. 
Orlando Jones finally getting a semi-decent role in which to showcase 
his obvious comedic talents. Seann William Scott, well, just acting like 
he does in all of his roles and doing it in a very funny way! And 
Julianne Moore...good for you, girl, stretching those acting muscles as 
a goofy scientist. All four worked very well in their respective roles, 
as well as their camaraderie (especially Duchovny and Jones). In fact, 
their chemistry is probably the main reason why I wasn't too bored with 
the first half of this film, which lacked a certain energy and moved a 
little too slow, in my opinion. Once the aliens got into the picture 
(literally), things did jazz up during the film's second half, but even 
then, it was never to a point where I was blown away or anything.
The movie also delivers some B-movie elements, like its last 15 minutes, 
which just screamed THE BLOB and films of that sort. A little 
blue-screen action was also a little obvious. It's the kind of movie 
that you will most likely enjoy while watching and then completely 
forget about an hour after you leave the theater. Which isn't 
necessarily a bad thing, just an observation. It will definitely not 
crack the pop-culture barometer as GHOSTBUSTERS did all those years ago, 
but you can certainly do worse with other films playing out there right 
now (now is that a solid recommendation or what?!? :) The film's also 
got some pretty neat "boo" scare moments and even a shot of Duchovny's 
ass (God knows that I've been waiting years for that!). In the end, I 
guess that I was expecting a "meatier" script with bigger laughs, more 
action and more moments of suspense, but ended up with something a 
little less ambitious. This is a simple movie, with sci-fi and comedic 
elements mixed within a little story and great performances. Not the 
best movie that you'll see this year, but certainly not the worst. 
Wow...I'm really "selling" this one, eh? Sheesh...what can I say, the 
film was somewhat entertaining while I was there, but not all that 
memorable looking back. In others words, it's a toss-up boys and 
girls...!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Ghostbusters (8/10) - Mars Attacks (4/10) - Men in Black (7/10) - Road 
Trip (7/10) - X-Files (7/10)

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring David Duchovny, Orlando Jones, Julianne
Moore, Seann William Scott. Directed by Ivan Reitman.
Rated PG-13.
Evolution, the snarky new alien invasion comedy from
Ghostbusters' Ivan Reitman, resembles the ever-popular
Men in Black in plot and structure, but that's where
the similarities end. It won't make as much money as
the Will Smith blockbuster, but it's a much better
movie: less arrogant, less enamored with its special
effects, and infinitely more clever. The advertising
for the film announced that the aliens are coming to
"wipe that silly smile off [our] planet;" quite the
contrary, though I suspect that some critics are
giving Evolution negative reviews just so they can
oh-so-cleverly twist the tagline to apply to the
movie.
David Duchovny heads up the winning cast as science
Professor Ira Kane of the Glen Canyon community
college. He is called to investigate when local
aspiring firefighter (Seann William Scott) sees a
meteor crash down from the sky and make a big hole in
the ground. With him comes Harry Block (Orlando
Jones), a geology professor from Glend Canyon and a
member of the US Geological Survey. They make an
amazing discovery -- millions of single-celled
organisms that could only have come from another
world. They take a sample back, only to find that the
single-celled organisms have turned multicellular
without so much as a warning, and are continuing to
grow and divide.
When Ira and Harry return to the scene, they discover
that the US army has appropriated the meteor. Among
the men and women in uniform is Dr. Allison Reed
(Julianne Moore), a government scientist in charge of
the investigation. Ira and Harry get short-shrifted,
with a perfuctory promise to "keep them in the loop."
But when they see that the aliens are evolving into
bigger and more menacing creatures -- some of them
looking like dinosaurs, others like sad E.T.'s, but
all equally dangerous -- and that all the government
wants to do is wipe them out, they decide to take
matters into their own hands.
Duchovny, who bit the hand that fed him by making a
showy exit from the alien-themed tv show The X-Files,
is again dealing with extra-terrestrials and an
obsessively secretive government, though, of course,
in a very different context. He's the best thing about
this movie; his deadpan style humor fits perfectly
into the general tone of the proceedings, and there is
genuine chemistry between him and his co-stars. I'm
not convinced of Duchovny's range (though Return to Me
was an impressive start), but there's no question that
he and otherworldly beings always make a good
match-up.
The movie was directed by Ivan Reitman, the veteran
who has done nothing but comedies (with the possible
exception of Six Days, Seven Nights), and it has a
penchant for the gleefully weird as well as the
vulgar. There is no other way explain a scene in which
an alien worm implants itself in Orlando Jones's body
and the doctor, planning to take it out through the,
um, anal cavity, says offhandedly that "there's no
time for lubricant." The response by the beleaguered
patient? "There's always time for lubricant!"
Evolution is not terribly consistent: there are
cliches and failed gags, and the ending is
disappointing. But when it works, it works. It looks
like the movie has failed at the box-office -- not
terribly surprising considering the lack of
name-above-the-title stars and the bizarro marketing
campaign -- and it's a real shame. 

Author
Jerry Saravia
The beauty of comedy is that there are no rules and, quite simply, rules are
made to be broken in the comedic arena. Director Ivan Reitman is often aware
of this, as evidenced by his crude though subtly funny "Junior" and, his biggest
hit, "Ghostbusters." Both films redefined the boundaries of good
taste by imbuing crudeness with cleverness rather than cheap, desperate gags
a'la "Austin Powers" that only serve to make the audience puke. Consider
Arnold Schwarzeneger as a pregnant man in "Junior," a premise that is otherwise
ripe for gross-out humor.  Instead that film built its premise with wit and
engaging repartee between Schwarzeneger and Danny DeVito. 
"Evolution" does the same thing, imbuing crudeness with cleverness. The premise
deals with a community college science teacher (and former scientist), Ira Kane
(David Duchovny), who partners with a sharp, jocose
scientist, Harry Block (Orlando Jones), to investigate a flaming meteor that has
burned a hole through the ground into an underground cavern. Kane's class
goes on a field trip to discover and study this meteor only to find some strange
atmosphere has developed at an accelerated rate, not to mention some expanding
and evolving wormlike creatures. Kane and Block realize this is no ordinary
meteor - it is a fertile ground for alien creatures. At first, the creatures
seem harmless in the form of butterflies until they later evolve
into flying dinosaurs, raging blue monkeys and some shapeless matter in the form
of large intestines.
The only way to approach "Evolution" is by checking your brain at the entrance
door of the cinema before the first reel is projected. It is a one-note joke
movie to be sure but it has moments of eye-opening
special-effects, shrewd one-liners and moments where you will literally jump out
of your seat. It mostly pokes fun at "Independence Day" right down to the
climax involving those humongous intestines where a central digestive tract is
the target for destruction - the expansive mass even looks like a spaceship.
Mostly, the screenplay by David Diamond, David Weissman and Don
Jakoby focuses on bodily functions and sexual entendres, as well as creepy
monsters hiding inside harmless looking alien slugs and such. Many of the
sexual entendres center around Julianne Moore as an assistant to a
soldier-scientist (Ted Levine) - she is regarded at one point as an "icy goddess
in desperate need of some humping." Speaking of the ravishing Moore,
it is nice to see her as a clumsy woman who keeps tripping over objects every
once in a while. 
"Evolution" is cutesy nonsense and often quite funny and engaging. It is
actually a breath of fresh air as compared to the gross-out humor so reminiscent
of most comedies nowadays - wit and some dry humor are this
film's virtues. As for performances, Duchvony and Jones make a delightful pair
and Moore is lots of fun to watch - nice to see her handle comedy for a
change in contrast with her dramatic roles. Only Ted Levine seems a little out
of his element as the straight-faced soldier scientist, Dr. Woodman, who
doesn't want Kane anywhere near these aliens. 
"Evolution" is not as frantically funny or as visually inventive as Reitman's
"Ghostbusters,"  but it will suffice in what has been a dry couple of years
of laughless comedies. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust668@aol.com
or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Glen Canyon Community College's biology students are thrilled to be getting A's
from their disillusioned professor, Dr. Ira Kane (David Duchovny).  
(Unbeknownst to all, Kane's a former Army scientist, fired and disgraced over 
an experimental anthrax vaccine he administered to troops with dire results.)
When Kane's friend and colleague, geology professor and women's volleyball coach
Harry Block (Orlando Jones, "The Replacements") gets called to investigate a
meteor crash site, Kane goes along for the ride.  Kane begins to smell a 
nobel when he finds ooze coming from the meteor.  Twenty-four hours later,
though, what they have on their hands is a serious case of extraterrestrial
"Evolution."
Three writers (David Diamond & David Weissman and Don Jakoby) are creditted
with coming up with this unfunny, totally unoriginal piece of screen fodder
which creates a danger that pits the military against our inept heroes
in their efforts to overcome it.  The special effects team, led by Phil
Tippett ("Jurassic Park," "Starship Troopers"), provide a bunch of creatures
ripped right out of director Reitman's overrated "Ghostbusters."
"Evolution" is made almost tolerable by the easy chemistry between stars
Duchovny and Jones, a terrific pairing offunny guys with very different
styles in search of a funny script.  Julianne Moore, however, should be ashamed 
of herself for playing a character who's supposed to be funny because she falls 
down and walks into doors a lot.  Seann William Scott ("Road Trip") is a third
wheel aspiring fireman dumbell who exists to be made fun of.  Ethan Suplee,
so fine in the recent "Blow," does stupid fat schtick as one of Kane's 
students.
Director Reitman, creditted by star Jones as "one of the great comedy directors
of all time" in the press notes, has made exactly one good movie ("Dave")
and a few semi-amusing ones ("Stripes," "Meatballs," "Ghostbusters") largely
due to the talents of the likes of Kevin Kline and Bill Murray.  "Evolution" 
bottom feeds with his "Legal Eagles," "Twins" and "Junior" oeuvre.
The film's insulting climax features our mismatched team of misfits underneath
what looks like a painted dropcloth (it's supposed to be the underbelly of an
alien) to insert a product placement enema via firehose.  Enough said.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christian Pyle
Evolution
Reviewed by Christian Pyle
Directed by Ivan Reitman
Written by David Diamond, David Weissman, and Don Jakoby
Starring David Duchovny, Julianne Moore, Orlando Jones, and Seann William 
Scott
Official Site:  http://www.countingdown.com/evolution/index2.html
Grade: C-
Movie concepts are often pitched to producers with mathematical formulas 
involving successful films of the past.  So, undoubtedly one day someone 
said, "'Evolution?'  It's 'Ghostbusters' plus 'Men in Black' plus 'Tremors.'" 
 And so it is.  Sum total none.  
The alienbusting begins when a meteor lands in Glen Canyon, Arizona.  
Community college science profs Ira Kane (David Duchovny) and Harry Block 
(Orlando Jones) take some samples from the meteor and discover that 
one-celled organisms from inside it are evolving rapidly, doing in hours what 
took millions of years for life on earth.  Just about the time I was 
wondering, "Hey, doesn't the government usually come in and take over the 
whole area in these movies," the government came in and took over the whole 
area.  The leader of the pack, Gen. Woodman (Ted Levine), turns out to be an 
old nemesis of Ira's, and Ira and Harry are blocked from doing further 
research.  
Meanwhile, the organisms continue to grow until they are large enough to 
start attacking people.  By this time, Ira and Harry have gained a friend in 
Dr. Allison Reed (Julianne Moore) of the Center for Disease Control.  A 
country club poolboy, Wayne Green (Seann William Scott), has also attached 
himself to the merry band.  But can they find the means to stop the aliens in 
time?
Director Ivan Reitman seems to be revisiting his biggest hit, 1984's 
"Ghostbusters," but "Evolution" falls miserably short.  One reason is readily 
apparent.  "Ghostbusters" had three really funny guys as its scientists (Bill 
Murray, Dan Aykroyd, and Harold Ramis), but "Evolution" has ONE really funny 
guy (Orlando Jones) who can adlib and milk the comic potential of lines that 
prove useless in anyone else's hands.  For good measure, "Ghostbusters" had 
the comic talents of Rick Moranis; "Evolution" offers Seann William Scott, 
who was much funnier in "American Pie" and "Road Trip" than he is here.  
Scott has one amusing scene where he sings "You Are So Beautiful to Me" to a 
dragon-like alien to draw it into a trap.  Other than that, Scott seems 
unable to make much of the thin material the writers gave him.
An actor in search of a forte, David Duchovny looked for his gritty action 
hero side in "Playing God" and his romantic side in "Return to Me."  Now he 
wants to find his wacky comedic talent; what we all find is that he doesn't 
have any.  Look for him to be back on TV in five years or so.
Another sad case is Julianne Moore, who needs to be more selective about the 
offers she accepts.  She's a talented actress with an impressive list of 
credits and award nominations, so why is she trying to do slapstick comedy?  
Her character has a tendency to trip over and bump into things, but the trait 
comes off as a pathetic plea for laughs.
The sole saving grace of the film is Jones.  He's at the center of the 
movie's funniest scene -- where an alien bug invades Harry's body and has to 
be pulled out through his ass.  Jones is the only cast member who can take 
the comedic ball and run with it, but he can't carry the whole movie by 
himself.  He found himself in a similar situation in "The Replacements," 
where he was also the only comic talent in an ensemble cast.  Jones will 
eventually find the project that will make him a major comedy star, but this 
isn't it.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html
