Title
Review for Sprung (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Trimark)
Starring:  Tisha Campbell, Rusty Cundieff, Paula Jai Parker, Joe Torry.
Screenplay:  Rusty Cundieff and Darin Scott.
Producer:  Darin Scott.
Director:  Rusty Cundieff.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, adult themes, drug use)
Running Time:  107 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Rusty Cundieff is on his way to establishing a new film-making
record:  Most Genres Covered by a Director in a Career.  In 1993, Cundieff
made his debut with a clever mock-documentary satire of the rap music
scene called FEAR OF A BLACK HAT.  Then, in 1995, he turned his attention
to anthology horror for the darkly comic TALES FROM THE HOOD.  The two
films established Cundieff as a distinctive voice among young
African-American film-makers, a writer/director unwilling to settle into
limited notions of what "black films" could be about.  With SPRUNG, it
appears that Cundieff has decided that he's not willing to wait until the
next film to change genres -- he'll change genres right in the middle of a
film.  Unfortunately, it's more of a collision than a fusion, with both
halves getting dented in the process.
     Cundieff, who also co-wrote SPRUNG, stars as Montel, a single man
preparing for a night of girl-hunting with his buddy Clyde (Toe Torry).
They end up at a party, where Clyde puts the moves on Adina (Paula Jai
Parker), a gold-digger whom Clyde convinces that he has cash money to
spare.  The con gets Adina into Clyde's bed, but she is not happy when she
discovers that she has been played.  Montel, meanwhile, has spent the
night talking with Adina's friend Brandy (Tisha Campbell).  That
conversation eventually grows into a relationship, which does not sit well
with Clyde and Adina.  Disgusted by the idea that they may have to spend
time around each other just because their friends are a couple, Clyde and
Adina decide they have only one choice:  to join forces for the mutually
beneficial purpose of breaking up Montel and Brandy.
     For over half an hour, SPRUNG bears a startling resemblance to
another 1997 film about middle-class African-Americans lookin' for a
little somethin':  BOOTY CALL.  Both films begin with the main characters
preparing for their night out, both films make couples out of the
respective pairs' "good" and "bad" boys and girls, and both include plenty
of wild happenings inappropriate for younger viewers.  SPRUNG may be a bit
more focused thanks to a more condensed time frame, but the familiarity
is inescapable.  In some cases, like a hilarious moment based on facial
expressions of pleasure, that familiarity is welcome.  In others, like the
depressingly predictable appearance of a mincing gay stereotype for a
cheap laugh, it is entirely unwelcome.
     Of course, BOOTY CALL was out too recently for Cundieff to be guilty
of intentionally stealing BOOTY.  The same situation applies when SPRUNG
suddenly takes a radical shift in tone to resemble a different 1997 film
about middle-class African-Americans lookin' for a different kind of
somethin':  LOVE JONES.  As the relationship between Montel and Brandy
turns into a combination of soft-focus montage and tasteful 
black-and-white photography, SPRUNG becomes an attempt at a straight-up
love story which generally falls flat.  Montel and Brandy aren't exactly
characters -- they're just nice people who exist primarily to give the
colorful Clyde an Adina targets for their mischief.  Though Cundieff
doesn't abandon the broad comedy entirely, he cuts back radically enough
that you realize the broad comedy was the best thing SPRUNG had going for
it.  As a love story, it's pretty limp stuff.
     SPRUNG also shows that Cundieff still prefers not to stray far from
the satirical ground of FEAR OF A BLACK HAT and TALES FROM THE HOOD.
Cundieff employs his pop culture sensibility for pokes at a variety of
targets, including THE TERMINATOR and WHEN HARRY MET SALLY.  When working
with the boundaries of a specific genre's conventions, Cundieff knows just
where to step to get a laugh.  SPRUNG just isn't tightly structured enough
to allow him to show his stuff.  It also requires him to create
three-dimensional characters for the first time, a task at which he
doesn't seem particularly adept; he's more comfortable with the ridiculous
than with the sublime.  There will be other opportunities for the young
and talented Cundieff to master the more subtle skills of film-making,
however.  After all, he still has to do a historical epic, a violent caper
film and an intimate family drama.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tisha Campbell, Rusty Cundieff, Paula Jai Parker, Joe Torry
Director: Rusty Cundieff
Producer: Darin Scott
Screenplay: Rusty Cundieff and Darin Scott
Cinematography: Joao Fernandes
Music: Stanley Clarke
U.S. Distributor: Trimark Pictures
     If you take WHEN HARRY MET SALLY and cross it with BOOTY CALL, then=20
throw in a little STRICTLY BALLROOM for good measure, what do you end up=20
with?  Improbably, Rusty Cundieff's first attempt at a romantic comedy,=20
called SPRUNG.  With this, his third directorial effort, Cundieff=20
reinforces an impression that he has given viewers in his two previous=20
movies (FEAR OF A BLACK HAT, TALES FROM THE HOOD):  he knows how to make=20
audiences laugh but is unwilling to try something truly ambitious. =20
     SPRUNG starts out like any number of raunchy sex comedies, with a=20
couple of horny guys (Cundieff as Montel and Joe Torry as Clyde) on the=20
make at a party.  The women they eventually zone in on are a fine pair=20
of specimens:  Brandy (Tisha Campbell) and Adina (Paula Jai Parker). =20
Clyde quickly gets Adina into his Porsche, then into his bed.  And,=20
while the two are engaged in a bawdy night of sex, Brandy and Montel are=20
doing everything possible to prove how much they despise each other. =20
Next up, Clyde and Adina have big fight, and he ends up under arrest for=20
deviant behavior.  What follows is a hilariously outrageous (not to=20
mention homophobic and potentially-offensive) lineup scene that promotes=20
all sorts of unsavory stereotypes.
     It's then that Cundieff rather abruptly alters his film's=20
direction.  Suddenly, SPRUNG shifts gears and becomes an unexpectedly=20
sweet romantic comedy.  Stereotypes start to give way to real (if only=20
partially-developed) characters.  The brashness and least common=20
denominator humor are replaced by kisses, ballroom dancing, and romantic=20
music.  Brandy and Montel fall hard for each other and Clyde and Adina=20
call a truce in order to figure out a way to break them up. =20
Predictably, in the process, those two discover just how fine a line it=20
is between love and hate.
     It's impossible to deny that parts of SPRUNG are very funny, but=20
the jokes really don't amount to much.  Likewise, the formulaic=20
romances, developed in parallel, are a little flat (Clyde and Adina's=20
moreso than Montel and Brandy's).  Cundieff seems to believe that if he=20
puts together two attractive couples with decent chemistry that we'll=20
readily accept all of the clich=E9s that litter the road to the obvious=20
conclusion.  There aren't any of those special, little "character=20
moments" that elevate many similarly unoriginal romances, primarily=20
because SPRUNG has to juggle two relationships.  Each leeches time from=20
the other, and, as a result, neither gets the development it deserves.=20
     The actors, who are all appealing, arguably do better jobs than the=20
material warrants.  Cundieff and Campbell are effective as the low-key=20
couple, even though they're saddled with a falling-in-love music montage=20
at the heart of their romance.  Meanwhile, Torry and Parker are lively=20
enough on their own or together to make the pairing of Clyde and Adina=20
work.  Clarence Williams III, Sherman Hemsley, and a few other familiar=20
faces dot the casting landscape with amusing cameos.
     At one point, Montel, who is a photographer with aspirations of=20
becoming a director, states that he would like to make a movie with "no=20
gangstas, no drugs, and nobody getting shot=85 A love story, because=20
everyone loves a love story."  This is, of course, exactly what Cundieff=20
has done, and it's easy to hear the director speaking through his=20
character's mouth.  Ultimately, SPRUNG is probably a little too uneven=20
and familiar to be worth taking a trip to a movie theater for, but it is=20
solid enough to provide an evening's diversion once it makes its way to=20
your neighborhood video store.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
