Title
Review for Walk in the Clouds, A (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Joan Ellis
     A WALK IN THE CLOUDS is a little brother of LIKE WATER FOR
CHOCOLATE--full of admiration for the big guy, not quite strong enough
to go it alone.  Director Alfonso Arau has brought the golden light,
the family kitchen, and even some chocolate from his earlier film, but
he lost some of its spirit on the journey from Mexico to America.
     Paul Sutton (Keanu Reeves) returns from World War II to a wife who
is obsessed with material success.  Stunned at the gulf between them,
Paul bolts for a cross-country journey of self-discovery and
immediately meets Victoria (Aitana Sanchez-Gijon), who is returning to
her family vineyard pregnant and abandoned.
     Posing as newlyweds in order to dim her father's anger, the couple
goes home together.  As they come over the hill, the vineyard
materializes in the amber glow of fairy tales.  The world is suddenly
awash in the sights and sounds of pretend.  Crickets, moonbeams, and
acres of grapes appear in a rush of music.  When the bells ring the
warning of impending frost, the family dons butterfly wings and, in a
graceful ballet, fans the heat from the frost fires downward to the
endangered fruit.
     Paul suffers a torrent of abuse from Alberto (Giancarlo Giannini),
who, like all the people and events in this movie, is painted in
extremes of gruffness and love.  Ms. Sanchez-Gijon is just right as
the spirited Victoria, but Keanu Reeves is an enigma as Paul.
     Whenever he keeps his mouth shut, which is most of the time, he
has the innocent air of a soldier/idealist, but when he talks, his
voice and emotions are flat.  Speaking, he undermines the tale; in
silence, he enhances it.  But let's not quibble.  We have decided to
surrender.
     Don Pedro, the patriarch of this Mexican-American clan, propels
himself on a diet of cigars, chocolate, and bread, and watches over the
Only Daughter, the Angry Son, the Harvest, the Fire, and Demon Drink.
Anthony Quinn has an emotional field day.
     Be warned that you must hold fast to your mood when Victoria, for
example, says, "It's not your problem."  At times like these, we
remember reluctantly that we are in California, not Mexico; that it is
1945, not today.  But you'll recover.
     You have choices to make.  You can choose to see Keanu Reeves as a
wooden totem, or you can see him as the sweet innocence of World War
II.  You can choose to be annoyed by the cliche or to smile when a
sleeping populace is roused and brought to the windows by a love song.
You can choose to see the fire as ludicrous or as a labored metaphor
for family pain.  The family and its vineyard spring to life like a
pop-up book suddenly opened, which isn't necessarily bad in a movie
that begs us, unashamedly, for willing surrender.  Considering the
world outside this fairy tale, it's quite a fine way to spend an
evening.
For all Ellis reviews, see http://movie.infocom.net (which has a search engine)
or send any email to: movie@telecomp.com
Feel free to reuse as long as source acknowledged.
Please send information regarding reuse to 'nebbadoon@telecomp.com'

Author
Michael J. Legeros
There's actually a pretty good plot device at the center of this
overblown, undercooked vineyard romance.  Keanu Reeves stars as the
phony husband of an unwed, pregnant stranger (Aitana Sanchez-Gijon).
They meet on a train, and, later, a bus, where he learns that she's a
college student in need of an explanation for her Mexican-American
family.  He's a returned WWII GI who's already hitched, so he agrees to
play the "gringo" for just one night.  The plan, for him, is to leave
the next morning, but, ah, well, the rest is history.
The comic potential in this set-up is great, as producers Jerry and
David Zucker surely must have noticed, but director Alfonso Arau (LIKE
WATER FOR CHOCOLATE) has been saddled with two burdens:  a weak script,
and a stiff lead.  The dialogue is extra-bad, especially when overdoing
it on the life lessons.  (Most of which come from the mouth of Anthony
Quinn, also overdoing it as the lusty grandfather.) Then there's Keanu.
Well.. he tries.  He's just too stiff to be taken seriously.  And don't
call him Shirley.
Both of these demerits do wonders to cancel out the more appealing
aspects of the movie.  Sure, it's overdone-- the music, the drama, even
the golden-hued photography of Emmanuel Lubezki-- but the more playful
parts of this story suggest that, with a stronger core, A WALK IN THE
CLOUDS could've been heavenly.
Twain keeps a-rollin' with this CONNECTICUT YANKEE update that sends a
14-year-olde little-leaguer (the charmless Thomas Ian Nicolas) back to
the 12th Century, via an earthquake.  He's there at the request of
Merlin (Ron Moody!), who has sent for a "great warrior" to aid King
Arthur and Camelot.  The King (Joss Ackland) needs help because he has
two royal daughters who need wooing-- as well as a scheming aide who
isn't (Art Malik, in the Frank Langella role).  Imagine the sorcerer's
surprise when somebody *other* than Richard Gere shows up.
This is dumb, inoffensive kid's stuff with hardly a whiff of innovation
about it.  The plot is the worst-- come on, how many teens carry a
flashlight (and a cd player.. and rollerblades.. and superglue..) in
their backpack?  And are those rubber tips at the end of their lances?
Surely you joust.  The whole thing is overscored and overlong, the
latter by at least twenty minutes.  But, hey, this is Disney, where
fluff is stuff and lame makes millions.
(To be fair, there are a few laughs, usually from the kid's reworking of
the Kings English.  Sample dialogue:  "Your chain has been royally
pulled."  The cast is also quite nice, though underused.  Look for
HEAVENLY CREATURES' Kate Winslet as Arthur's older daughter.)
In SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT, aka A SOUTHERN WOMAN'S GUIDE TO INFIDELITY,
the characters don't really talk at all.  Sure, there's a confession
here, and a frank comment there-- the latter usually coming from Kyra
Sedgwick, smartly cast as Julia Robert's lookalike sister.  Instead,
most of the story time is spend on jokey outbursts, such as when Roberts
stands up in the middle of a meeting to ask if anyone *else* has slept
with her husband (Dennis Quaid, having a had hair day).
Scenes like these are too cutesy for what writer Callie Khouri (THELMA
AND LOUISE) is trying to dig at.  They disrupt the tone, much in the
same way that slapstick diminished the delivery of NINE MONTHS.  (Of
course, Hugh Grant wasn't married.  Oh, wait, that was real life.) By
the second hour, Khouri's point is lost as she inexplicably points her
characters toward a happily-ever-after finale that you can see coming
from a mile off.  Maybe *that's* her point.
Also check out CRUDE OASIS, the remarkable debut of writer/director/
producer/editor Alex Graves.  The story-- which centers on a depressed
Kansas housewife, and plays like an inverted BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY--
was shot in 14 days for a mere $25K.  Even blown up from 16mm, there's
still more dramatic potency here than almost all the other summer stock
combined.  An oasis, *indeed*.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Given how much I loved and was enchanted by LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, I
went to see A WALK IN THE CLOUDS with much excitement.  The same director
(Alfonso Arau) and the same cinematographer (Emmanuel Lubezki) did both
pictures so my expectations were not unrealistic.  Both pictures have a look
and a beauty that is almost unsurpassed, but more on that later.
     A WALK IN THE CLOUDS tells the story of serviceman, Paul Sutton (Keanu
Reeves), returning at the end of World War II.  His wife rejects him, and he
leaves home.  He then comes to the aid of Victoria Aragon (Aitana
Sanchez-Gijon) who is newly pregnant and has never been married.  Paul
agrees to pretend to be her husband for only a night.  Most of the movie
then consists of the proud, old, and extremely rich Mexican-American family
of vintners trying to find out if they are really married or not.  The
Aragons live in great spender in the Napa Valley where the movie was
actually filmed.  The ethnic heritage and their great wealth made me think
of the Gallo family albeit the Gallos are Italian-Americans.
     The father, Alberto Aragon (Giancarlo Giannini), takes care to remind
Paul frequently that he is "a nobody" and that "my daughter can trace her
roots back 400 years to the best families in Mexico".  Her grandfather, Don
Pedro (Anthony Quinn), is much kinder to Paul and tells him "welcome to our
happy family" after the father has insulted him again.  This continuing
family banter followed by brief scenes between Paul and Victoria is what the
movie is all about.
     Okay, let's cut to the chase.  This movie was a huge disappointment for
me.  Keanu Reeves for all of his terrific looks can do only one thing well,
action films.  He was super in SPEED, and that is about it.  He was pathetic
in MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING and in LITTLE BUDDHA.  Her again, he proves he
needs more acting lessons and less modeling ones.
     The biggest problem in the movie is that there is no chemistry between
the two stars.  Their lines by the writer (Robert Mark Kamen) of all the
Karade Kid movies fall flat.  It is as if they are speaking to separate
walls rather than to each other.  Unlike LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, there is
no magic here.  I tried as hard as I could to like this movie, but other
than the scenic beauty, it is like a meringue.  There is nothing there when
you bite into it.  Alberto sums up the problem with the movie when he says
"There is something wrong here.  The whole thing is wrong." Finally, the
ending is ridiculous and worthy of someone who blessed the world with the
realism and the wisdom of the Karade Kid movies.
     Although it was hard to tell given the lines she was given, I believe
that Aitana Sanchez-Gijon has a lot of potential.  She is certainly one of
the most beautiful new actresses I have seen lately.  She has a compelling
look to her in every scene.  The one of her dancing in the grapes is
incredible.  You become obsessed with leaving your seat in the theater and
jumping in.
     Going to this movie is not a waste.  This movie deserves at least an
Academy Award nomination for cinematography and another for set design
(David Gropman).  The look of the yellow and greens of the leaves, the
golden amber of sunsets on everything, and the constant backlighting of all
of the characters are all worthy of Monet.  I could go on and on about how
gorgeous this picture is.  Perhaps the best scene is the one of the people
"flying" in the field at night with alabaster colored wings to keep the
frost off of the grapes.  You have to see this scene to grasp its serenity
and beauty.  The infrequent black and white flashbacks and flashforwards
provide an effective contrast.  Visually, not some, but every scene is a
masterpiece.  The music (Leo Brower) is quite dramatic and fits the mood of
the show and the images very well.
     A WALK IN THE CLOUDS runs too long at 1:45 thanks to poor pacing and a
lack of stronger editing by Don Zimmerman.  The movie is rated PG-13 since
it is an adult drama I guess.  It is a mild PG-13 since there is no
profanity that I can remember, no violence, no nudity, and no sex.  Any kid
older than 9 should be able to see this show with no problems.  On the other
hand, I recommend this show only to people studying cinematographic
techniques.  For others, you are liable to leave the show bored and
disappointed, and I recommend you pass on it.  I give the movie * 1/2 only
for the Academy Award quality cinematography.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
David Katz
     Paul [Keanu] ships home after the war.  On the gangplank he admits
to a fellow soldier that he doesn't know what his wife looks like
because he met and married her just before shipping out.
     Fortunately, his memory is soon refreshed when he gets home and
finds her practicing remedial speech for the sophisticated while
sitting around in her undies.
     It turns out that she never read most of letters that he wrote to
her so she doesn't know that he doesn't want to sell chocolates any
more, so the next morning he leaves to sell chocolates.
     On the train to his chocolate-selling territory, he meets Victoria
[Aitana] who barfs on him and then accidentally swaps train tickets
with him.  But, as luck would have it, when he gets on the bus because
he was kicked off the train because he had the wrong ticket, there she
is so she can apologize, which she obviously forgot to do earlier, but
they are distracted by the two guys that get on the bus and try to
hassle her until Paul [Keanu] says "The lady isn't interested" or
something like that and then he has to punch them out so they get
kicked off the bus.  Of course, being the understanding, polite and
caring sorts, they don't decide to pound the .... out of him, which is
good because that way he can walk down the road and find Victoria
[Aitana] sitting on her suitcase crying.
     It turns out that she is knocked up and since her Dad said that he
would kill anyone who disgraced the family, she figured that she better
go home.  Since Paul [Keanu] doesn't want her killed, maybe because she
is the only woman who ever barfed on him, he agrees to pretend that
they're married to keep her father off her back and he seals the deal
with a couple of tin foil bands from around some of the chocolates in
his sampler case.
     Now her dad can't kill her if he finds out she's pregnant but he's
real pissed that she married a Gringo because his family came from
Mexico to start this vineyard.
     The plan is that Paul [Keanu] will sneak out in the middle of the
night and leave a note saying he couldn't take it and then she can be
single and pregnant and legitimate.  The family fight at the dinner
plays into their hands well for the leaving part, except that frost
comes and everyone has to save the grapes in the vineyard by running
around smokepots flapping silk wings.
     Too bad for Paul [you guessed!!!], just as he is sneaking out the
grandfather Dom Pedro [Anthony Quinn] catches up to him and convinces
him not to leave until after the harvest so that the Dad won't be
really P.O.'ed and hassle Victoria for the rest of her life.  They go
for a walk and Dom Pedro eats all of the sample chocolates and nearly
recognized the tinfoil band as Victoria's wedding ring.  They go up to
the shrine where the original vine that Dom Pedro brought from his
father's vineyard in Mexico is still growing.
     So Paul stays and helps with the harvest.  Just before they start
picking Pedro Jr. shows up and hugs everyone and, as it later turns
out, its a good thing he is only 5'2" and weighs maybe 105 pounds with
his glasses on.  Paul gets into a grape plucking contest with the Dad
and then the married women stomp some grapes and since everyone thinks
that Victoria is married, she goes ahead and stomps grapes which allows
her to do this great seductress scene until the other guys throw Paul
in too.  Fortunately, they take off his army boots and socks before he
actually steps in the grapes.
     Now Paul and Victoria get all covered with grape juice which
obviously makes them horny because the next scene they're in the
bedroom getting kind of serious, only just at the last moment Paul
decides he can't because he's a married man and so he goes to leave
again and Dom Pedro catches him again and this time they drink a bunch
of brandy and sing and get drunk.  Dom Pedro convinces Paul to go and
serenade Victoria only she doesn't come to the window until its too
late so Paul really leaves this time, only to run into her the next day
at the wine celebration where the priest drinks some of the Dad's wine,
which seems to have fermented, cleared, and been bottles and labeled in
just 24 hours and he says its good.  The Dad introduces Paul to the
priest and the priest says the he wanted to marry Victoria (in the
church!!!) and so the Dad announces that they will get married again
that evening.
     Victoria can't take the tension any more and tells her father they
weren't married and a big argument happens where Paul tells the Dad
that he really doesn't consider himself married to his first wife.
     The Dad goes and gets drunk under the trees at the edge of the
vineyard while Paul goes home and finds his wife in bed, bonking the
guy who made the speech lesson recordings she was listening to at the
start and Paul doesn't hit him so she gives Paul the annulment papers
that happen to be on the kitchen table.
     Paul rushes back to the vineyard to wake up the Dad who is still
drunk at the table under the trees and they have a fight where the Dad
throws an oil lamp into the grape vines and they start on fire.  This
is where its good that Pedro Jr. is so small because when his pajamas
catch on fire while he is fighting the blaze, Paul [Keanu] can teach
him how to Stop, Drop and Roll and then carry him out of the burning
fields.  Meanwhile, the fire spreads along the espaliered vines fast
enough to make Mario Andretti envious.  Since they didn't have any
service roads to truck the grapes out of the fields, the whole world,
from horizon to horizon is on fire in just moments.
     The next morning, after they have all finger-painted themselves
with wet ashes and the entire vineyard is destroyed, Paul goes up to
the shrine and, after some Herculean tugging, pulls up the original
vine and takes it back down the mountain.  Rather than smack Paul for
consecrating the shrine or killing the only living root by tearing it
out of the soil, the Dad cuts off a chuck and decides that it will
still grow so they start all over.
     The credits roll, the lights go up, and we see someone who looks
vaguely like Roger Ebert sleeping in the sixth row.  Somewhere a props
person is returning the surrealistic scenery paintings to archives.

Author
Roy Muller
Starring: (among others) Keanu Reeves
     Last Saturday some friends and I went to A WALK IN THE CLOUDS.  I
had seen the making of the film, seen interviews with both actors and
director, gee, it looked kinda sweet.  I, being a mega-fan of schmaltz,
firmly believed that this film would become one of my favourites.  Gee,
I was wrong.
     The vaseline of the lens is something I've seen millions of times
before.  I even like it.  Seen Mr Jones?  Same idea, different actors.
It worked.  This was a little less, shall I say, successful.  Mr
Director (sue me for not remembering his name although I can picture
him in my mind, remembering ROMANCING THE STONE, of course) shot
landscapes that looked like bad paintings.  In fact, they were the kind
of scenes that even painters wouldn't dare paint for fear of being
called "Kitsch."  The actors, in this filmy light, and in front of these
falsetto scenes (or so they looked) resembled a fairytale drawing on a
bad day.
     Keanu, at his usual acting peak (as much acting as that of a dead
prawn), was gorgeous.  I mean, I'll give him that.  Every time he smiled
my knees turned to Jello.  He smiled a lot in this film so Mr Director
obviously knew which Keanu-talents to make use of.  The woman was
lovely.  My sympathy was with her about her pregnancy and no daddy, but
hey, she couldn't wait to jump Keanu.  Now, I know I said he's
gorgeous, but let's practice a little restraint okay.  At that point my
sympathy began to change.
     Although I have to say that they made Keanu's character into this
"Mr Good Guy" type which really irritates me.  Men like that must have
something wrong with them.  No human being can be all "let's all get
together and save the world."  His flashbacks of the war consisted of
differently angled shots of the same scene.  An orphanage and poor, "Mr
Good Guy" was an orphan.  Hey, I'm beginning to make the connection.
Give me a break.
     Some of the scenes were somewhat old, like Keanu falling on top of
the poor lass on the train.  A serious case of deja vu.  Of course, the
last scene really did it for me.  The whole family howling like a pack
of dogs in a Walt Disney cartoon, the father pleading with his daughter
to teach him to love and Keanu, "my hero," going to wrench up the root
on the burning plantation.
     If you're looking for something even slightly interesting,
moderately entertaining, a bit enjoyable, this is not that film.

Author
Eric Grossman
     Wow, what a surprise!  A WALK IN THE CLOUDS, starring Keanu Reeves
and directed by Alfonso Arau (LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE), is a magical
film with tremendous heart that offers a much needed change of pace for
summer movie-goers who are tired of Internet thrillers and over budget
action flicks.
     Set in Napa Valley, just after World War II, Reeves plays Paul
Sutton, an idealistic soldier who returns home only to find that what
he wants and what his less than faithful wife want are two separate
things.  A chocolate salesman before the war, Paul sets out for
Northern California with a suitcase and a box of sweets.  On the way,
he meets a beautiful, young woman, Victoria Aragon (Aitana
Sanchez-Gijon), who is pregnant and without a husband.  A tearful
Victoria tells Paul that she dreads returning to her father's vineyard
because he will "kill her."  Paul cannot believe she is serious but
Victoria stresses that her father is old fashioned and will not take
kindly to her not being married.
     Being the chivalrous type, Paul offers to act as her husband for a
day so that her father will not do anything rash.  As he spends more
time on the vineyard, Paul becomes seduced by Victoria's warmth and
beauty and he continues to stay, despite her father's protests.  What
follows is a charming story that emphasizes the importance of tending
to one's family, and of course, love.
     A WALK IN THE CLOUDS is filled with superb performances.  Reeves,
while he still has the taint of Bill and Ted, is restrained enough to
just let the picture sweep him along in all of its glory.  His lack of
range is more than compensated by his sheer likability.  Aitana
Sanchez-Gijon is enchanting as Victoria and plays her with a expert
mixture of strength and vulnerability.  Giancarlo Giannini portrays the
patriarch, Alberto Aragon with tremendous ferocity while adjusting
nicely for his few but crucial tender moments.  And of course, Anthony
Quinn once again gives a brilliant, eccentric performance as Don Pedro,
the grandfather who helps engineer Paul and Victoria's romance.
     Visually, A WALK IN THE CLOUDS is the most unique film of the
year.  Director Arau and cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki give us one
dazzling image after another.  Lubezki should certainly be nominated
for his work on this picture as there is not a single frame that is not
special.  Production designer David Gropman has created a rich
environment for Arau to place his action.  The Aragon house, the
vineyard, are so alluring that I wished I could go visit.
     A fine script by Robert Mark Kamen, Mark Miller and Harvey
Weitzman and another superb score by Maurice Jarre (LAWRENCE OF ARABIA,
DOCTOR ZHIVAGO) add the final touches to a truly special film.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Keanu Reeves, Aitana Sanchez-Gijon, Giancarlo Giannini, 
            Anthony Quinn, Angelica Aragon
Director: Alfonso Arau
Producers: Gil Netter, David Zucker, and Jerry Zucker
Screenplay: Robert Mark Kamen, Mark Miller, and Harvey Weitzman, adapted
            from Alessandro Blasetti's 1942 Italian film, FOUR STEPS IN
            THE CLOUDS
Cinematography: Emmanuel Lubezki
Music: Maurice Jarre
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     Of all the different kinds of movies, love stories are likely to
provoke the widest variety of reaction, since personal preference is such a
crucial element in evaluating these films.  It's far easier to agree on what
constitutes a solid drama or enjoyable comedy than an effective romance.
Scenes which melt some hearts will churn the stomachs of others.  A WALK IN
THE CLOUDS, director Alfonso Arau's followup to LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, is
such a picture.  There are moments when this movie is absolutely magical,
but the ending lays it on much too thick.
     For more than an hour, A WALK IN THE CLOUDS is thoroughly enchanting.
With spectacular visuals and a script laced with little romantic touches,
the first seventy-five minutes weave a spell that will dissipate the
cynicism of even the grumpiest viewer.  But then the melodrama, which is
initially light and innocuous, asserts its presence and draws the film into
a ponderously silly climax.  Even the most beautifully-realized love story
can't camouflage this kind of flaw.
     The story opens in 1945 San Francisco.  Paul Sutton (Keanu Reeves) has
just returned from the war, where he received a medal for courage under
fire.  He has a wife waiting for him -- a woman he barely knows, but whom he
married on the eve of his departure to give him someone to write to and
dream about.  Raised in an orphanage, Paul doesn't know what it means to be
part of a family, although he has fantasies.  His reunion with his wife
shatters those.  The match which seemed so right when it happened turns out
to be a horrible mistake.
     Needing to clear his mind and re-think his future, Paul boards a train
bound for Sacramento.  There, he meets Victoria Aragon (Aitana Sanchez-
Gijon), a young woman with a beautiful smile and a sad story.  Pregnant as a
result of an ill-advised dalliance with a college professor, Victoria is
returning to her family's vineyard to help with the annual grape harvest.
Once there, she will have to reveal her condition, and she is frightened
that her father, Don Pedro (Giancarlo Giannini), a man whose beliefs are
deeply rooted in tradition and "the old ways", will react violently to the
prospect of an unwed daughter expecting a baby.  Paul, ever the gentleman,
proposes a solution: he will pretend to be her husband for one day, then
abandon her.  She agrees, but things go farther than either of the
participants anticipated.  Victoria and Paul fall in love, and suddenly his
marital status becomes an albatross.
     With this, his first big-budget, English language picture, Arau
outlines a classic case of cultural and generational conflict.  Victoria has
a pedigree that goes back more than four-hundred years, while Paul has no
family, no past, and, in Don Pedro's opinion, no future.  Roots and
blood-ties are critically important in A WALK IN THE CLOUDS.  Arau goes out
of his way to illustrate that community and a sense of belonging are at
least as important to the story as falling in love.  Somehow, however, a
similar message came across more clearly in Sandra Bullock's WHILE YOU WERE
SLEEPING.
     Newcomer Aitana Sanchez-Gijon has a luminance that lights up the
screen.  Even paired with the rather remote and unresponsive Keanu Reeves,
she makes the most of each scene.  As for Reeves, he admittedly does a more
credible job here than in most of his other work, but, for the most part,
that's barely adequate.  Screen veterans Giancarlo Giannini and Anthony
Quinn both turn in virtuoso performances, the latter as the kind-hearted and
helpful grandfather of the troubled Victoria; the former as her angry,
inflexible father.  Along with Sanchez-Gijon, they compensate for the
weaknesses of the star with top billing.
     As was true of LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, A WALK IN THE CLOUDS has an
ethereal feel.  Shots of the vineyard, enhanced by post-production visual
effects, are breathtaking.  Arau has molded a world of romance and fantasy.
One scene in particular stands out as a reflection of all that's right about
the movie: the women, including the "newly married" Victoria, dance around
in a giant tub of newly-harvested grapes, crushing the fruit with their
feet.  It is sensual, erotic, and joyous.
     The most disconcerting thing about A WALK IN THE CLOUDS' tendency
towards overt melodrama is that almost all of it is totally unnecessary.
Minor script changes could have eliminated huge chunks of this, leaving
behind an uplifting love story.  Even as it is, however, there's still
something special about the motion picture.  I just wish the final half-
hour hadn't been such a bloated disappointment.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
