Title
Review for Wrong Box, The (1966)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Wrong Box" is a British comedy with an excellent
cast, and with colorful Victorian-era costumes and sets.
The script was based on a novel written by Robert Louis
Stevenson and Lloyd Osbourne.  The film was directed
by Bryan Forbes, who also produced.
The ensemble cast is led by John Mills and Ralph Richardson.
They play elderly brothers who are the last survivors
of a tontine, which is a trust fund in which each participant
contributes an equal share.  The tontine was set up by their
parents when they were children.  Over the years, it has
grown into a considerable fortune.
Cantankerous Masterman (Mills) plans to win the tontine by
murdering his brother Joseph (Richardson).  This comes as
a shock to Masterman's aged butler (Wilfrid Lawson)
and his naive adopted son Michael (Michael Caine).  Joseph
is a clueless, hilariously insufferable windbag with three
adopted children, Julia, John and Morris, now grown.  Julia
(Nanette Newman, wife of director Forbes) is poised and lovely
but empty-headed.  John (Dudley Moore) is a good-for-nothing
skirtchaser.  Morris (Peter Cook) is a relentless schemer
who plots with John to win the tontine by producing a fake
death certificate for Masterman.  This certificate can be
obtained from the eccentric Dr. Pratt (Peter Sellers, who alas
has only a small part) whose office is overrun by cats.
Michael Caine also made "Alfie" that same year, 1966.
His role in "Alfie" would receive Best Actor nominations
from both the British and American Academies.  "Alfie"
was a cynical swinger, and completely the opposite character
from his role in "The Wrong Box".  In this film, he worships
Julia from afar, who fortunately and unbeknowst to him
worships him in return.  Their Victorian romance, complete
with unnatural, stilted conversation and a slow motion makeout
scene, is played strictly (and successfully) for laughs.
Cook's character is stuffy and hypocritically moralistic,
making his boldly larcenous schemes all the more comical.
Cook and Moore were often paired in 1960s British comedies,
beginning with the television show "Not Only... But Also".
The most notorious of these films is "Bedazzled", in which
Moore sells his soul to the devil, who is of course played
by Cook.
"The Wrong Box" was nominated for several British Academy
Awards.  Julie Harris (no, not the actress) won for
Best Costumes, while Richardson was nominated for Best Actor.
Ray Simm was nominated for Best Art Direction, which
assumedly did not include the television attennae visible
atop the roofs of the Victorian-era homes.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
http://www.epinions.com/user-briankoller
