Title
Review for Habit (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Douglas P Mosurak
written, directed, and edited by Larry Fessenden
Runtime: 112 minutes.  
MPAA rating: none (contains explicit sexual situations, frontal nudity,
some violence and gore, and profanity)
reviewed by Douglas P. Mosurak (c) 1998.
Right before I saw "Habit" this past weekend, a friend of mine and I
were having a heated argument about whether or not any more vampire
movies needed to be made - ever.  Said friend said that he had been let
down by far too many vampire movies to care about either the concept of
vampires or any cultural product geared towards (or stemming from) their
legacy.  I, on the other hand, have admittedly seen more vampire movies
than he has, and told him that, while I definitely agree that there's a
definite quantity-to-quality discrepancy in the genre, then that's
hardly a reason to give up on them entirely.  For example, he had
written off the whole concept of sex in vampire movies, saying that it
was another genre of film entirely.  Whatever -- the concept of romance,
and physicality, and especially sex, has always been closely intertwined
with the concept of vampires, going all the way back to Bram Stoker's
original characterization of the Dracula legend.  Long regarded as a
symbol of unrequited love, it is the vampire's power to seduce its
victims that keeps their relationships on such an agonizingly surface
level.  You can't buy love; you have to earn it, along with the respect
and responsibility that goes along with it.  Draining someone's blood is
not a solution for this issue by any means.
This point is hammered in fairly solidly in Larry Fessenden's debut,
"Habit".  Clearly a two-man operation (Fessenden and producer Dayton
Taylor handled almost all of the direction, production and post-op
responsibilities themselves), it's as strong a debut as I think I'll see
in a while, but for some reason that's not enough.  An extremely
intriguing portrayal of ambiguity is carefully created in the first 90
minutes of the film, and in the final reel, he almost blows it with
cliches ripped out of "Fatal Attraction" and the countless
direct-to-video knockoffs that followed.
"Habit" centers around Sam (Fessenden, who looks like a cross between
Keith Carradine and Nick Cave), whose life has hit a pretty big wall. 
His father, a renowned historian, has recently passed on, and his
patient girlfriend Liza (Heather Woodbury) has moved out of their place,
in the hopes that Sam will take stock of his life and get a grip on his
alcoholism.  But he's a fun guy, and well-meaning, if a little unkempt
and disoriented.  All of his friends seem to recognize that he has a
problem, but never really confront him on the issue.  His moments of
true clarity shine when he's drunk, and it seems that this is the way
that he's remembered.
At a Halloween party hosted by his friends Nick (Aaron Beall, who should
rename himself "Mr. Drama") and Rae (Patricia Coleman), a particularly
plastered Sam is approached by a girl named Anna (Meredith Snaider). 
Her pixie-like frame, close-cropped black hair, and semi-goth Italian
model visage frame her as someone who wouldn't normally cross the street
to pee on a guy like Sam if he were on fire.  Nevertheless, they leave
the party together.  When he realizes he's taken someone else's coat,
Sam asks Anna to wait for him.  When he returns, she's gone, and later
he loses the phone number she gives to him.
A few days pass, and Sam can't stop thinking about Anna.  At his work
(he manages a small bar and restaurant in Greenwich Village), his friend
Lenny recounts a similar experience from the party, in which he met a
girl who lives on a boat, and they has hot sex on the poop deck all
night long.  Lenny looks a little ill, though, probably due to being
naked on a boat in a NYC autumn.
Anna predictably drifts back into Sam's life at a neighborhood street
fair.  Leaving his friends, he follows her to Battery Park, where they
engage in some sort of unspecified sexual activity.  Sam wakes up
outside, half-naked and with a bloody lip, and thinks nothing of it -
probably feeling like of of the luckier guys in the city.
Repeated visits to Sam's apartment and his work find Anna becoming an
integral part of his life.  His health is slowly deteriorating, and his
injured relationship with Liza is almost broken off completely.  All the
while, the audience is led to believe that Anna is a vampire, and that
Sam is really dumb for not realizing it earlier.  She only comes over at
night, won't eat or drink anything, won't reveal to Sam what she does
for a living.  She won't enter Sam's apartment until invited in, stands
out in the hallway when she smells garlic, and, most importantly, likes
to bite him and drink his blood, a little at a time, during sex.  Sam
just assumes it's her kink.  But there's a rational explanation to all
of her appearances and disappearances, and Snaider plays her role with
determination undercut with an honesty not often found in screen
vampires.  Her character slinks through "Habit" explicitly on her own
terms, and for the most part, avoids the cliches you might anticipate.
As for Sam, his blindness to the situation around him lends itself to
his internal stability, and how much of a toll life has exacted from
him.  He doesn't open up his personality but a little bit; it's
refreshing to see a character we can draw conclusions from, and feel for
without feeling sorry for.  In one of the film's stronger moments, Sam
reveals to Anna the numerous scars he's made on his arms over the years
"at parties".  Whether it was an attempt at suicide, an attempt to
impress people, or just Sam trying to set himself apart from everyone
else, he describes them to the camera with loving detail, admiring their
designs with an objectivity that belies the entire narrative style of
the film.  Fessenden obviously thought about this character for a long
time, and in writing, directing, and starring in the role, we get a
sense of completeness that might have otherwise escaped us.  With his
mussed up long hair and missing front tooth, he resembles an overgrown
child whose parents have long given up trying to raise him.  But Sam's
too old to be taken care of, and by instilling that function in Anna,
and to a more fine point, deriving it from naughty sex acts, he loses
his way even further.
There are no weak links in the cast; even the most flawed character,
Nick, brings his sense of overacting with a zeal that provides
much-needed comic relief.  The direction is well-crafted and paced, and
Frank DeMarco's grainy color cinematography borders on stunning.  In
particular, a scene where Anna takes Sam, who suffers from vertigo, on a
ferris wheel, is extremely memorable; using a hand-held camera mounted
on the wheel itself, the scene creates a sort of on-screen nausea that
perfectly foreshadows the instability of the events that will unfold.
Was it scary?  Somewhat, in the same way that "Jacob's Ladder" was
effective - in chronicling a character's descent into madness, though
the terms set in "Habit" are much more conventional, and unfortunately,
that much more obvious.  If Anna is a vampire, like we're led to
believe, what's her motivation?  Why is she so afraid to tell Sam, who's
obviously ensnared within her, anything at all?  B-movie kitsch is
something that, while noble in its own right, is more "Habit"'s copout
than anything else.  Subtlety is key here, and the film's gory ending is
a complete sledgehammer.
Made for a budget of under $200,000, "Habit" shows a promising new
filmmaker in Fessenden and, for the most part, a compelling narrative
restructuring of a modern vampire movie, the likes of which I haven't
seen since Kathryn Bigelow's "Near Dark".  Let's hope that he's able to
keep it up in the leg stretching period of his next few films, whatever
they may be.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
HABIT (director: Larry Fessenden; cast: Larry Fessenden (Sam), Meredith
Snaider (Anna), Aaron Bell (Nick), Heather Woodbury(Rae), 1995)
HABIT, supposedly a vampire movie, but, perhaps, it is more like a
psychological thriller/love story. In the opening scene, we see the
director, writer, and star of the movie, Sam (Larry Fessenden), walking
down Greenwich Village in his Halloween costume, on his way to a
friend's Halloween party. He looks out of it as he stumbles along, and
as he looks around in disbelief, he sees the other celebrants in their
costumes, and just goes stumbling on, not quite so sure if the scary
creatures he is seeing are for real or induced from his inebriated
state. We learn at the party that he has a serious drinking problem. Yet
he has no trouble hooking up with an uninvited guest, Anna (Meredith),
with whom he is sexually attracted to; while, at the same party, his
ex-girlfriend Rae (Heather) arrives late, and she appears to be upset
that he pays very little attention to her.
We see that Larry is a "hip" NYC type of a person, who acts nonchalant
about getting robbed on the subway. His fast-paced urban lifestyle shows
that he both parties and works hard, employed as a manager in a Mexican
restaurant, who just happens to be at a difficult stage of his life at
the present moment, undergoing severe physical and mental changes, and
is saddened by the recent death of his father, whom he keeps seeing
visions of. On top of that, his live-in girlfriend, Rae, has just split
from him because she found it difficult to communicate with him because
of his drinking problems and she wasn't sure if he could ever commit
himself to loving her.
His relationship with Anna starts off on the fast track, as she is
fiercely sexual, she loves to bite into him, drawing some blood from him
and sucking on it. They make love at the drop of a hat: on the roof of
his building, in Battery Park, and even on his bed. But their
relationship is odd, she won't tell him anything about herself, and
chooses to surprise him, by showing up to meet him when he doesn't
expect it, never staying with him during the day. He soon becomes
violently sick after their sexual encounters, and begins having
troubling visions of her, as if she were a vampire battling to suck his
blood. He tries to call out for help to his ex-girlfriend and to his
best friend Nick (Aaron), but they can't understand him. The one person
who he probably should have contacted, whom he doesn't, is his father's
intellectual friend, who leaves him a message on his answering machine
telling him that he wants to talk to him about the girl (Anna) he
brought to the speech he gave, honoring his father.
You feel Sam's agony of living in such a crowded city as N.Y.,
constantly hearing its pulsating city rhythms, experiencing its dark
fears, and you are always aware of the noise and many distractions there
are, especially when you need space to think. Sam is cracking up and he
is scared, and though he has friends, he can't reach them. Now, whether
these are psychotic attacks, or if he is being attacked by a vampire,
the film only provides you with elusive answers. But one thing is
certain, something bad is happening to him.
What makes this vampire type of film different than the others, is that
it is very personal, more about the psychological state of a guy who
doesn't seem to be a psychotic, but is very confused about the new
direction his life is taking him. Most of the other films of this kind
seem so unreal in regards to any kind of personal underpinnings that are
frightening to them, that the fright in them appears to be from watching
good filmmaking, not from something that can possibly crop up in their
daily lives or invade their inner being.
Fessender has fully thought out the details of how a person can break
down in front of us and not have any recourse in putting a stop to it,
making the story as plausible and far-reaching as possible. There are a
lot of things that happened involving relationships and inner
perceptions, that you need time and peace of mind to think about, just
as Sam needed, that might never make sense. But that isn't the point...
it is usually the things that don't make sense, that bother us the most.
The film has a captivating style and playful mood to it, that keeps you
involved in the intelligently told story, which is rare for this genre.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Two tickets for the ride of your life," Anna says to her newfound
lover Sam.  The tickets she bought him are just for the Ferris wheel,
but she is indeed about to take him on the ride of his life.
     The confident and creepily sexy Anna, played perfectly by
cinematic newcomer Meredith Snaider, is a mysterious seducer and an
erotic lover.  "I suspect that the less you know about me, the longer
you'll stay interested," she tells Sam after refusing to tell him what
she does for a living - she says she doesn't think it's relevant to
their relationship.
     The likeable but alcoholic Sam, played with fascinating complexity
by Larry Fessenden, the film's director and editor, is an unlikely
romantic lead with his unkempt hair and his missing front tooth - he
lost it in a bar fight.
     "You're very compulsive," Anna tells Sam soon after she meets him.
"Actually, I'm committing suicide on the installment plan," replies the
always soused Sam.
     Most movies telegraph their punches from the beginning, but in
this one it isn't clear for quite a while where it's heading or even
what genre it belongs to.  Although made for just $60,000, the high
levels of the acting and the realistic location sets have the look of a
much bigger budget film.  This is indie film making at its best.  It is
a high quality production but willing to take the risk you expect
outside of the Hollywood system.
     Frank De Marco's cinematography is full of somber, nocturnal
shadows, and its frantic pace captures well Sam's anxiety.  His filming
of the Ferris wheel scene turns a generally harmless ride into one
terrifying experience for a man like Sam with a fear of heights.  He
hunches over to one side as Anna views his fear with quizzical
disbelief.
     The director said that he was making a film about "the ambiguity
of life."  Certainly the love affair at the picture's center has almost
more ambiguity that Sam can bear.  "Men fall in love," the calmer of
the two, Anna, reflects.  "They don't stay in love."
     The two leads have genuine but unhealthy chemistry.  Even as Sam
becomes increasingly scared of Anna, she, like his drinking, is a bad
habit he cannot shed.  Their sex scenes are graphically erotic albeit
sometimes quite bizarre, and Sam keeps going back for more even when he
begins to understand the consequences.
     The slow yet always mesmerizing film has few faults.  Only the
ending, which turns a bit schlocky, disappoints.
     HABIT runs 1:40.  It is not rated but should be NC-17 for graphic
sex, full-frontal nudity, violence, and drug usage and would be
suitable for teenagers only if they are older and mature.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) "Vampirism is everywhere," according to Nick (Aaron Beall).
"It is at the bottom of a bottle or a needle in the arm. It is five hundred
channels of insipid cultural drivel... It is the insidious Faustian bargains
we make every day, the little compromises that eat at our soul." This is the
insight from a thoughtful new vampire movie called HABIT, a movie with one
of the highest quality-to-price ratios around. 
Nick is the best friend of Sam (played very well by director Fessenden). Sam
meets a great girl, Anna (Meredith Snaider), at a Halloween party. Drunk as
usual, he leaves with her, the perfect escape from his ex, with whom he has
just broken up. He realizes he grabbed the wrong coat and dashes back to the
party to change. When he gets back out, Anna is gone. 
Anna haunts his thoughts for a couple of days while he finishes moving his
girlfriend out. He never got Anna's phone number so all he can do is think
about her in-between drinks. 
She shows up again a couple of nights later and they hit it off. After a
wild night of semi-exhibitionist pleasures, Sam wakes up in a strange part
of town with a bloody lip. At least he's got her phone number, and they seem
to have a thing going. 
Sam feels good, but a little weak. His relationship with Anna seems to be
recharging his life. He still drinks, but he's more conscious of it. One
senses that with a few lucky breaks, Sam could get himself out of his
current rut and make it work with Anna. Her strength is just what he needs.
The sex is interesting, if a bit strange. Anna is something of an
exhibitionist and she likes to bite Sam, but he enjoys her vigor. 
Their relationship continues for several weeks, while Sam keeps feeling
sicker and weaker. Eventually Sam decides he needs some time away from Anna
and with his old friends. He recalls another friend from earlier in the
movie who mentioned something about feeling sick in spite of all the sex he
was getting, and THAT friend disappeared. And the strange bloodsucking
behavior during sex... it's almost as though Anna were a... well, of course
not LITERALLY, there is no such thing, but if there were.... 
Several things make this film a surprisingly good sleeper. 
The cinematography was surprisingly good, considering the film's low budget.
Frank DeMarco shot the film on 16mm stock using natural, preexisting, and
other inexpensive light sources. Habit was nominated for the Spirit Award
for best cinematography in 1998. 
For the most part, the acting was also surprisingly good. Fessenden in
particular was great as the man struggling against the drain on his
energies. His intense icy blue eyes, missing front tooth, and greasy stringy
hair add a lot to the credibility of his performance. Snaider had the
next-biggest role, and though not as strong a performer as Fessenden, she
held her own. Only a few performances, and in thankfully minor roles, had
the sour taste of amateur actors. 
The thing that makes this film really good is Fessenden's script. The
dialogue is natural and well written, but the best thing about it is the
insightful story. In this story, modern vampires aren't gothic wraiths who
feed on human blood. They are the embodiment of the mental stresses of
alcoholism, loneliness, and city life. Or rather, they are both. This fresh
perspective is a welcome change from more traditional treatments of the
vampire story, and is the thing that makes this movie deserve to be seen in
wider release. 
This film was reportedly made for a mere $190,000 by unpaid actors and
filmmakers over a period of three months in New York. Other films have been
made as cheaply but few have been made as well for that price.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/
