Title
Review for Crackers (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Australian theatrical release date: July 9
As partly a drama, partly a comedy and partly a ridiculous sitcom, how
Crackers got the go-ahead is anybody's guess.  No doubt last years The
Castle gave inspiration to this Aussie backyard adventure, and whilst it
is nice to see another Australian comedy wrestling with the big guys,
Crackers fails to have the low brow, witty sense of humor that its
predecessor was loved for.
Although I'm a little sick of seeing cliché Australian "blokes and
sheilas", I couldn't help but enjoy the line up of characters that
Crackers delivers.  You've got your misinterpreted young lad, Joey
(Daniel Kellie), his eccentric great grandfather Albert (Warren
Mitchell), Joey's mum Hilary (Susan Lyons) and her boyfriend Bruno
(Peter Rowsthorn).  There's also Bruno's bully son, Angus (Christopher
Chapman), plus a dog, Joey's grandfather, grandmother, great aunt, and a
rooster.
Sound interesting?  Well it issort of.  These characters are fairly
enjoyable to watch, but not enough development is given to any one of
them.  We can never fully understand the troubled mind of Joey - the
script leaves us behind locked doors with no key to get inside.  Albert
is without a doubt the film's most fun character to watch, as he prances
around the screen driving recklessly, drinking whiskey, and even
creating a brawl in a local pub.  When he is not on the screen, Crackers
searches desperately for other gags to use, and ends up resorting to
ridiculous situations including barbecuing a dog and creating an offbeat
affair between two family members.
The screenplay is confused and flirts between genre to genre,
consequently being funny without being entirely a comedy, and dramatic
without being entirely a drama.  Whether or not that is good or bad is
not entirely relevant, because director David Swann has made sure that,
although sometimes at sparse occasions, there is a laugh included for
most audiences.  I guess that's the difference between The Castle and
Crackers - The Castle stuck to the same hilarious style of gags, but
Crackers tries to suit too many people and ends up losing out in the
end.  At times, we can laugh ourselves silly in recognition that we have
experienced something that the characters are doing, and at other times
we shake our heads in disbelief, amazed at how sick the jokes are.
Swann seems to have had lots of fun in creating this loose,
extraordinary comedy.  Both the film and its characters appear so
offbeat that it's perhaps reasonable to dub them as a weird, distorted
family portrayed in a weird, distorted film.
Enjoyable at many occasions but far too loose and inconsistent, Crackers
may be able to wrestle with the big guys, but it's likely to be pinned
down for its obvious flaws, and no doubt will be beaten by more
satisfying ventures.
-----------------------------------
Review Š copyright Luke Buckmaster
Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au
