Title
Review for Carry On Abroad (1972)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Graeme Huggan
   This is the last Carry on film with its full regular cast in 
attendance, and a sense of fun is still evident in this movie.
   'Wundatours Holidays' take a group of holidaymakers to the 'lovely' 
resort of Elsbels in Spain. In charge of the tour is Stuart Farquhar 
(Kenneth Williams) and his assistant Moira (Gail Granger). When they 
arrive, they find a shoddy and half-built hotel. The hotel manager Pepe 
(Peter Butterworth) takes on a number of different roles, as the butler, 
the manager and the porter. Meals are sub-standard due to the put-upon 
cook Floella (Hattie Jacques), who cannot handle her old stove. 
   Various storylines include the prude Evelyn Blunt (June Whitfield) and 
her husband Stanley's (Kenneth Connor) attempt to 'enlighten' her, the 
complications for Vic Flange (Sid James) as he is on holiday with his 
wife Cora (Joan Sims) and his love interest Miss Sadie Tomkins (Barbara 
Windsor), and Brother Bernard's (Bernard Bresslaw) attempt to leave his 
order (who are on holiday) as he has become increasingly attracted to 
Lily (Sally Geeson). 
   The motley bunch leave the hotel for a day in town. However, when they 
get there, Eustace Tuttle (Charles Hawtrey) wanders into the brothel 
wanting to play piggy-back! When Madame Fifi throws him out, a fight 
ensues involving all the holidaymakers. They are thrown in prison but are 
let out when Moira uses her special charms. Back at the hotel, they enjoy 
a farewell party. Little do they know that Pepe has built his hotel on a 
riverbed and the recent torrential rain is flowing down in streams!
   A good Carry on film because of its regular cast and its interesting 
characterisations, but the jokes are waring thin and some comical moments 
do not work such as the fight sequence. Sid James is as lecherous as 
ever, Joan Sims is good as the downtrodden wife (again!) and Barbara 
Windsor goes through the motions as Sadie. Peter Butterworth expertly 
plays the crazy Spanish hotel manager and Hattie Jacques shows that she 
can be comical in a small but very different part (not as a Matron-type 
figure again). Furthermore, the performances of Kenneth Connor and June 
Whitfield are very memorable.
   On the other hand, Kenneth Williams takes a back seat in the 
proceedings, Carol Hawkins is annoying as Marge (Lily's friend), and 
David Kernan as Nicholas and John Clive as Robin provide us with two 
irritating and annoying performances. Also, we are subjected to the 
abysmal performances of Jimmy Logan as Bert Conway (Sadie's eventual love 
interest) and a cameo by Jack Douglas as Harry. I would suggest you press 
the mute button on your remote control when these two appear!
   Carry on Abroad was the last Carry on film with Charles Hawtrey. This 
was probably due to him being drunk on set. His performance as Eustace is 
very amusing, especially his scenes with his mother and on the bus. The 
final scene, which alludes to Eustace's alcoholism, is rather poignant.
   There are many good aspects and flaws in this Carry on film. The story 
is okay, the regular cast are entertaining as usual, but the supporting 
cast of non-regulars leave a lot to be desired.
