Title
Review for On Hostile Ground (2000) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Rachel Gordon
Abortion is a hot political topic no matter which side of the fence
someone is on.  Those that lobby for and against a patient's right to
choose concentrate on the pregnant women who walk into clinics.  But
what about those who perform the actual procedures?  How are their lives
affected?
On Hostile Ground takes a closer look at the lives of three doctors who
provide abortions in Montana, Alabama, and upstate New York.  They vary
in background but have one thing in common: They are picketed and
persecuted by their community for the services they perform.  After
seven abortionist killings (and many more injured), shockwaves have
shuddered through this decreasing sect of the medical community.
This documentary puts a human face on an issue rife with extremes, and
from an angle seldom considered.  The focus shifts from doctor to
archival news footage to what members of the community have to say. 
Unfortunately, this exact cycle repeats monotonously throughout the 73
minutes.  News footage of violence becomes repetitive, especially when
it is related to the same case.  Every now and then these dragging
stretches of scenes are punctuated by statistics on a black screen or
shots of protesters in front of clinics.
Admirably, while the documentary is staunchly pro-choice, this is
captured through the movie's subjects instead of heavy-handed
photography.  Because the doctors talk directly to the camera and not to
a narrator, connection is a little easier with the audience, no matter
the stance.  The statistics that are utilized aren't trying to prove or
disprove the right to choose.  The number of women who have abortions in
any given year isn't important to the argument.  The numbers concentrate
solely on the number of professionals in the field of abortionism and
those that have suffered due to their profession.
Unfortunately, though the doctors profiled have compelling personalities
and views, to hear them say that a woman should have the right to choose
several times during any given 10 minute span tries anyone's attention,
whether you agree or not.  There is also a great deal of extraneous
footage that isn't quite captivating enough to sustain focus.  This may
be due to the filmmakers having more interesting discussions than
visuals to work with.
Surprisingly, there is only a brief mention the shooting of Dr. Gunn in
Florida, though the entire basis of the film is how these doctors are in
danger.  Dr. Gunn was one of the first abortionist victims to make
national news.  His death occurred well before the shooting of Dr.
Slepian, of whom so much is heard during the course of On Hostile
Ground.
On the other hand, On Hostile Ground provides a complete, and fairly
objective, portrait of the communities these doctors serve.  The
Christians that picket the offices but don't get violent are not judged
for their convictions, either by the filmmakers or the doctors' staffs. 
Patients' opinions are juxtaposed against other local residents, staff
who work with clients, and families of the professionals.  A viewer can
get the feel of what it's like to live in that town, without political
ideas thrown in your face.
The documentary seeks, and succeeds, in putting a human face on the
medical practitioners providing health services to those who choose to
have an abortion.  It edges on preaching -- wondering if the extremists
that shoot such people are any better than those they harm -- but
considering the severity of violence, this is easily excused.  It could
have been shorter, but the lives of these doctors are intriguing enough
to warrant a document of their stories.
Director: Liz Mermin, Jenny Raskin
Producer: Catherine Gund
Starring: Richard Stuntz, Susan Cahill, Morris Wortman
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
